THE HISTORY OF ENGLISH POETRY, FROM THE CLOSE of the ELEVENTH TO THE
COMMENCEMENT of the EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. TO WHICH ARE PREFIXED TWO
DISSERTATIONS. I. ON THE ORIGIN OF ROMANTIC FICTION IN EUROPE. II. ON THE
INTRODUCTION OF LEARNING INTO ENGLAND.

VOL. III.

TO THIS VOLUME IS PREFIXED A THIRD DISSERTATION ON THE GESTA ROMANORUM.

By THOMAS WARTON, B. D. FELLOW of TRINITY COLLEGE, OXFORD, and of the SOCIETY
of ANTIQUARIES, and late PROFESSOR of POETRY in the UNIVERSITY of OXFORD.

LONDON: Printed for, and sold by, J. DODSLEY, Pall Mall; J. WALTER,
Charing Cross; J. ROBSON, New Bond-Street; G. ROBINSON, and J. BEW,
Paternoster Row; and Messrs. FLETCHER, at Oxford. M. DCC. LXXXI.

CONTENTS OF THE SECTIONS in the THIRD VOLUME.
SECTION XIX. p. 1. PETRARCH'S sonnets. Lord Surrey. His education, travels,
mistress, life, and poetry. He is the first writer of blankverse. Italian
blank-verse. Surrey the first English classic poet. SECTION XX. p. 28. Sir
Thomas Wyat. Inferior to Surrey as a writer of sonnets. His ^^fe. His genius
characterised. Excels in moral poetry. SECTION XXI. p. 41. The first printed
Miscellany of English poetry. Its contributors. Sir Francis Bryan, Lord
Rochford, and Lord Vaulx. The first true pastoral in English. Sonnet-writing
cultivated by the nobility. Sonnets by king Henry the eighth. Literary
character of that king. SECTION XXII. p. 60. The second writer of blank-verse
in English. Specimens of early blank^verse. SECTION XXIII. p. 70. Andrew Board.
Bale. Anslay. Chertsey. Fabyll's ghost a poem. The Merry Devil of Edmonton.
Other minor poets of the reign of Henry the eighth. SECTION XXIV. p. 87. John
Heywood the epigrammatist. His works examined. Ancient unpublished burlesque
poem of Sir Penny. SECTION XXV. p. 97. Sir Thomas More's English poetry.
Tournament of Tottenham. Its age and scope. Laurence Minot. Alliteration.
Digression illustrating comparatively the language of the fifteenth century, by
a specimen of the metrical Armoric romance of Ywayn and Gawayn. SECTION XXVI.
p. 135. The Notbrowne Maid. Not older than the sixteenth century. Artful
contrivance of the story. Misrepresented by Prior. Metrical romances, Guy, sir
Bevys, and King Apolyn, printed in the reign of Henry. The Scole house, a
satire. Christmas carols. Religious libels in rhyme. Merlin's prophesies.
Laurence Minot. Occasional disquisition on the late continuance of the use of
waxen tablets. Pageantries of Henry's court. Dawn of taste. SECTION XXVII. p.
161. Effects of the Reformation on our poetry. Clement Marot's Psalms. Why
adopted by Calvin. Version of the Psalms by Stern^old and Hopkins. Desects of
this ver^ion, which is patronised by the puritans in opposition to the Choral
Service. SECTION XXVIII. p. 180. Metrical versions of scripture. Archbishop
Parker's Psalms in meter. Robert Crowley's puritanical poetry. SECTION XXIX. p.
190. Tye's Acts of the Apostles in rhyme. His merit as a musician. Early piety
of king Edward the sixth. Controversial ballads and plays. Translation of the
Bible. Its effects on our language. Arthur Kelton's Chronicle of the Brutes.
First Drinkingsong. Gammar Gurton's Needle. SECTION XXX. p. 209. Reign of queen
Mary. Mirror of Magistrates. Its inventor, Sackville lord Buckhurst. His life.
Mirror of Magistrates continued by Baldwyn and Ferrers. Its plan and stories.
SECTION XXXI. p. 220. Sackville's Induction to the Mirror of Magistrates.
Examined. A prelude to the Fairy Queen. Comparative view of Dante's Inferno.
SECTION XXXII. p. 256. Sackville's Legend of Buckingham in the Mirror of
Magistrates. Additions by Higgins. Account of him. View of the early editions
of this Collection. Specimen of Higgins's Legend of Cordelia, which is copied
by Spenser. SECTION XXXIII. p. 269. View of Niccols's edition of the Mirror of
Magistrates. High estimation of this Collection. Historical plays, whence.
SECTION XXXIV. p. 283. Richard Edwards. Principal poet, player, musician, and
buffoon, to the courts of Mary and Elisabeth. Anecdotes of his life.
Cotemporary testimonies of his merit. A contributor to the Paradise of dainty
Devises. His book of comic histories, supposed to have suggested Shakespeare's
Induction of the Tinker. Occasional anecdotes of Antony Monday and Henry
Chettle. Edwords's songs. SECTION XXXV. p. 298. Tusser. Remarkable
circumstances of his life. His Husbandry, one of our earliest didactic poems,
examined. SECTION XXXVI. p. 311. William Forrest's poems. His Queen Catharine,
an elegant manuscript, contains anecdotes of Henry's divorce. He collects and
preserves ancient music. Puritans oppose the study of the classics. Lucas
Shepherd. John Pullayne. Numerous metrical versions of Solomon's Song. Censured
by Hall the satiri^t. Religious rhymers. Edward More. Boy-bishop, and
miracle-plays, revived by queen Mary. Minute particulars of an ancient
miracle-play. SECTION XXXVII. p. 329. English language begins to be cultivated.
Earliest book of Criticism in English. Examined. Soon followed by others. Early
critical systems of the French and Italians. New and superb editions of Gower
and Lydgate. Chaucer's monument erected in Westminsterabbey. Chaucer esteemed
by the reformers. SECTION XXXVIII. p. 355. Sackville's Gordobuc. Our first
regular tragedy. Its fable, conduct, characters, and style. Its defects.
Dumb-show. Sackville not assisted by Norton. SECTION XXXIX. p. 372. Classical
drama revived and studied. The Phoenissae of Euripides translated by Gascoigne.
Seneca's Tragedies translated. Account of the translators, and of their
respective versions. Queen Elisabeth translates a part of the Hercules Oetaeus.
SECTION XL. p. 395. Most of the classic poets translated before the end of the
sixteenth century. Phaier's Eneid. Completed by Twyne. Their other works.
Phaier's Ballad of Gad's-hill. Stanihurst's Eneid in English hexameters. His
other works. Fleming's Virgil's Bucolics and Georgics. His other works. Web
and France translate some of the Bucolics. Fraunce's other works. Spenser's
Culex. The original not genuine. The Ceiris proved to be genuine. Nicholas
Whyte's Story of Jason, supposed to be a version of Valerius Flaccus. Golding's
Ovid's Metamorphoses. His other works. Ascham's censure of rhyme. A translation
of the Fasti revives and circulates the story of Lucrece. Euryalus and
Lucretia. Detached fables of the Metamorphoses translated. Moralisations in
fashion. Underdowne's Ovid's Ibis. Ovid's Elegies translated by Marlowe. Remedy
of Love, by F. L. Epistles by Turberville. Lord Essex a translator of Ovid. His
literary character. Churchyard's Ovid's Tristia. Other detached versions from
Ovid. Ancient meaning and use of the word Ballad. Drant's Horace. Incidental
criticism on Tully's Oration pro Archia. SECTION XLI. p. 432. Kendal's Martial.
Marlowe's versions of Coluthus and Museus. General character of his Tragedies.
Testimonies of his cotemporaries. Specimens and estimate of his poetry. His
death. First Translation of the Iliad by Arthur Hall. Chapman's Homer. His
other works. Version of Clitophon and Leucippe. Origin of the Greek erotic
romance. Palingenius translated by Googe. Criticism on the original. Specimen
and merits of the translation. Googe's other works. Incidental stricture on the
philosophy of the Greeks. SECTION XLII. p. 461. Translation of Italian novels.
Of Boccace. Paynter's Palace of Pleasure. Other versions of the same sort.
Early metrical versions of Boccace's Theodore and Honoria, and Cymon and
Iphigenia. Romeus and Juliet. Bandello translated. Romances from Bretagne. Plot
of Shakespeare's Tempest. Miscellaneous Collections of translated novels before
the year 1600. Pantheon. Novels arbitrarily licenced or suppressed. Reformation
of the English Press. SECTION XLIII. p. 490. General view and character of the
poetry of queen Elisabeth's age.
A DISSERTATION ON THE GESTA ROMANORUM.
TALES are the learning of a rude age. In the p^og^ess of letters, speculation
and enquiry commence with refinement of manners. Literature becomes sentimental
and discursive, in proportion as a people is polished: and men must be
instructed by facts, either real or imaginary, before they can apprehend the
subtleties of argument, and the force of ref^ection.

Vincent of Beauvais, a learned Dominican of France, who flourished in the
thirteenth century, observes in his MIRROR of HISTORY, that it was a practice
of the preachers of his age, to rouse the indifference and relieve the languor
of their hearers, by quoting the fables of Esop: yet, at the same time, he
recommends a sparing and prudent application of these profane fancies in the
discussion of sacred subjects SPECUL. HIST. Lib. iii. c. viii. ^ol. 31. b.
edit. Ven. 1591.
. Among the Harleian manuscripts in the British Museum we find a very ancient
collection of two hundred and fifteen stories, romantic, allegorical,
religious, and legendary, which were evidently compiled by a professed
preacher, for the use of monastic societies. Some of these appear to have been
committed to writing from the recitals of bards and minstrels: others to have
been invented and written by troubadours and monks MSS. HARL. 463. membran. fol.
. In the year 1389, a grand system of divinity appeared at Paris, afterward
translated by Caxton under the title of the COURT OF SAPYENCE, which abounds
with a multitude of historical examples, parables, and apologues; and which the
writer wisely supposes, to be much more likely to interest the attention and
excite the devotion of the people, than the authority of science, and the
parade of theology. In consequence of the expediency of this mode of of
instruction, the Legends of the Saints were received into the ritual, and
rehearsed in the course of public worship. For religious romances were nearly
allied to songs of chivalry; and the same gross ignorance of the people, which
in the early centuries of christianity created a necessity of introducing the
visible pomp of theatrical ceremonies into the churches, was taught the duties
of devotion, by being amused with the achievements of spiritual
knight-errantry, and impressed with the examples of pious heroism. In more
cultivated periods, the DECAMERON of Boccace, and other books of that kind,
ought to be considered as the remnant of a species of writing which was founded
on the simplicity of mankind, and was adapted to the exigencies of the infancy
of society.

Many obsolete collections of this sort still remain, both printed and
manuscript, containing narratives either fictitious or historical,

-- Of king and heroes old,
Such as the wise Demodocus once told
In solemn songs at king Alcinous' feast Milton. AT A VACATION EXERCISE, etc.
.
But among the ancient story-books of this character, a Latin compilation
entitled GESTA ROMANORUM seems to have been the favorite.

This piece has been before incidentally noticed: but as it operated powerfully
on the general body of our old poetry, affording a variety of inventions not
only to Chaucer, Gower, and Lydgate, but to their distant successors, I have
judged it of sufficient importance to be examined at large in a separate
dissertation: which has been designedly reserved for this place, for the
purpose both of recapitulation and illustration, and of giving the reader a
more commodious opportunity of surveying at leisure, from this intermediate
point of view, and under one comprehensive detail, a connected display of the
materials and original subjects of many of our past and future poets.

Indeed, in the times with which we are now about to be concerned, it seems to
have been growing more into esteem. At the commencement of typography, Wynkyn
de Word published this book in English. This translation wasre printed, by one
Robinson, in 1577. And afterward, of the same translation there were six
impressions before the year 1601 See supr. vol. ii. p. 18. seq.
. There is an edition in black letter so late as the year 1689. About the year
1596, an English version appeared of "Epitomes des cent HISTOIRES TRAGIQUES,
party extraictes des ACTS DE^ ROMANS et autres, etc." From the popularity,
or rather familiarity, of this work in the reign of queen Elisabeth, the title
of GESTA GRAYORUM was affixed to the history of the acts of the Christmas
Prince at Gray's Inn, in 1594 Printed, or reprinted, in 1688. 4to.
. In Sir GILES GOOSECAP, an anonymous comedy, presented by the Children of the
Chapel in the year 1606, we have, "Then for your lordship's quips and quick
jests, why GESTA ROMANORUM were nothing to them Land. Printed for John Windet.
1606. 4to.
." And in George Chapman's MAY DAY, a comedy, printed at London in 1611, a man
of the highest literary taste for the pieces in vogue is characterised, "One
that has read Marcus Aurelius, GESTA ROMANORUM, the Mirror of Magistrates,
etc. -- to be led by the nose like a blind bear that has read nothing Act iii.
page 39.
!" The critics and collectors in black-letter, I believe, could produce many
other proofs.

The GESTA ROMANORUM were first printed without date, but as it is supposed
before or about the year 1473, in folio, with this title, Incipiunt HISTORY
NOTABILES collecte ex GESTIS ROMANORUM et quibusdam aliis libris cum
applicationibus eorundem Much the same title occurs to a manuscript of this
work in the Vatican, "Historiae Notabiles collectae ex Gestis Romanorum et
quibusdam aliis libris cum explicationibus ^orundem." Montfauc. Bibl. MANUSCR.
tom. i. page 17. Number. 172.
. This edition has one hundred and fifty-two chapters, or GESTS, and one
hundred and seventeen leaves Without initials, paging, signatures, or
catch-words.
. It is in the Gothic letter, and in two columns. The first chapter is of king
Pompey, and the last of prince, or king, Cleonicus. The initials are written in
red and blue ink. Thi^ ^dition, slightly mutilated, is among bishop Tanner's
printed books in the Bodleian library. The reverend and learned doctor Farmer,
master of Emanuel college in Cambridge, has the second edition, as it seems,
printed at Louvain, in quarto, the same or the subsequent year, by John de
Westfalia, under the title, Ex GESTIS ROMANORUM HISTORY NOTABILES de viciis
virtutibusque tractantes cum applicationibus moralisatis et mysticis. And with
this colophon, GESTA ROMANORUM cum quibusdam aliis HISTORIIS eisdem annexis ad
MORALITATES dilucide redacta hic finem habent. Quae, diligenter correctis
aliorum viciis, impressit Joannes de Westfalia in alma Vniversitate
Louvaniensi. It has one hundred and eighty-one chapters The first is of king
Pompey, as before. The la^t is entitled De ADULTERIO.
. That is, twenty-nine more than are contained in the former edition: the first
of the additional chapters being the story of Antiochus, or the substance of
the romance of APOLLONIUS of TIRE. The initials are inserted in red ink It h^s
signatures to K k.
. Another followed soon afterward, in quarto, Ex GESTIS ROMANORUM History
notabiles moralizatae, per Girardum Lieu, GOUDAE, 1480. The next edition, with
the use of which I have been politely favored by George Mason esquire, of
Aldenham-Lodge in Hertfordshire, was printed in folio, and in the year 1488,
with this title, GESTA RHOMANORUM cum Applicationibus moralisatis et misticis.
The colophon is, Ex GESTIS ROMANORUM cum pluribus applicatis Historiis de
virtutibus et viciis mystice ad intellectum transsumptis Recollectorii finis.
Anno nre salutis MCCCCLXXX viij kalendas vero februarii xviij. A general, and
alphabetical, table, are subjoined. The book, which is printed in two columns,
and in the Gothic character, abounding with abbreviations, contains
ninety-three leaves. The initials are written or flourished in red and blue,
and all the capitals in the body of the text are miniated with a pen. There
were many other later editions For which see supr. vol. ii. p. 15.
. I must add, that the GESTA ROMANORUM were translated into Dutch, so early as
the year 1484. There is an old French version in the British Museum.

This work is compiled from the obsolete Latin chronicles of the later Roman or
rather German story, heightened by romantic inventions, from Legends of the
Saints, oriental apologues, and many of the shorter fictitious narratives which
came into Europe with the Arabian literature, and were familiar in the ages of
ignorance and imagination. The classics are sometimes cited for authorities;
but these are of the lower order, such as Valerius Maximus, Macrobius, Aulus
Gallius, Seneca, Pliny, and Boethius. To every tale a MORALISATION is
subjoined, reducing it into a christian or moral lesson.

Most of the oriental apologues are taken from the CLERICALIS DISCIPLINA, or a
latin Dialogue between an Arabian Philo^opher and Edric EDRIC was the name of
ENOCH among the Arabians, to whom they attribute many fabulous compositions.
Herbelot, in V. Lydgate's CHORLE and THE BIRD, mentioned above, is taken form
the CLERICALIS DISCIPLINA of Alphonsus.
his son, never printed MSS. HARL. 3861. And in many other libraries. It occurs
in old French vers^, MSS. DI^^. 86. membran. "L^ Romaunz de Peers Aunfour
coment il aprist et chastia son fills belement." [See supr. vol. ii. EMEND. and
ADD. at page 103.]
, written by Peter Alphonsus, a baptized Jew, at the beginning of the twelfth
century, and collected from Arabian fables, apothegms, and examples See
Tyrwhitt's CHAUCER, vol. iv. p. 325. seq.
. Some are also borrowed from an old Latin translation of the CALILAH U DAMNAH,
a celebrated set of eastern fables, to which Alphonsus was indebted.

On the whole, this is the collection in which a curious enquirer might expect
to find the original of Chaucer's Cambuscan:

Or, -- if aught else great bards beside
In sage and solemn tunes have sung,
Of turneys and of trophies hung,
Of forests and enchantments drear,
Where more is meant than meets the ear Milton's IL PENSEROSO.
.
Our author frequently cites GESTA ROMANORUM, the title of his own work. By
which I understand no particular book of that name, but the Roman History in
general. Thus in the title of the SAINT ALBANS CHRONICLE, printed by Caxton,
Titus Livyus de GESTIS ROMANORUM is recited. In the year 1544, Lucius Florus
was printed at Paris under the same title Apud Vascosan. 4to.
. In the British Museum we find "LES FAIS DE ROMANS jusques a la ^in de l'
empire Domician, selon Orose, Justin, Lucan, etc." A plain historical deduction
MSS. RE^. 20 C i.
. The ROMULEON, an old manuscript history of Rome from the foundation of the
city to Constantine the Great, is also called de GESTIS ROMANORUM. This
manuscript occurs both in Latin and French: and a French copy, among the royal
man^scripts, has the title, "ROMULEON, ou des FAIS DE ROMANS MS. 19 E. v.
." Among the manuscript books written by Lapus de Castellione, a Florentine
civilian, who flourished about the year 1350, there is one, De Origin URBIS
ROMAE et de GESTIS ROMANORUM See supr. vol. ii. p. 19.
. Gower, in the CONFESSIO AMANTIS, often introduces Roman stories with the
Latin preamble, Hic secundum GESTA. Where he certainly means the Roman History,
which by degrees had acquired simply the appellation of GESTA. Herman Korner,
in his CHRONICA NOVELLA, written about the year 1438, refers for his vouchers
to Bid, Orosius, Valerius Maximus, Josephus, Eusebius, and the Chronicon et
GESTA ROMANORUM. Most probably, to say no more, by the CHRONICON he means the
later writers of the Roman affairs, such as Isidore and the monkish compilers;
and by GESTA the ancient Roman history, as related by Livy and the more
established Latin historians.

Neither is it possible that this work could have been brought as a proof or
authority, by any serious annalist, for the Roman story.

For though it bears the title of GESTA ROMANORUM, yet this title by no means
properly corresponds with the contents of the collection: which, as has been
already hinted, comprehends a multitude of narratives, either not historical;
or, in another respect, such as are either totally unconnected with the Roman
people, or perhaps the most preposterous misrepresentations of their history.
To cover this deviation from the promised plan, which, by introducing a more
ample variety of matter, has contributed to increase the reader's
entertainment, our collector has taken care to preface almost every story with
the name or reign of a Roman emperor; who, at the same time, is often a monarch
that never existed, and who seldom, whether real or suppositious, has any
concern with the circumstances of the narrative.

But I hasten to exhibit a compendious analysis of the chapters which form this
very singular compilation: intermixing occasional illustrations arising from
the subject, and shortening or lengthening my abridgement of the stories, in
proportion as I judge they are likely to interest the reader. Where, for that
reason, I have been very concise, I have yet said enough to direct the critical
antiquarian to this collection, in case he should find a similar tale occurring
in any of our old poets. I have omitted the mention of a very few chapters,
which were beneath notice. Sometimes, where common authors are quoted, I have
only mentioned the author's name, without specifying the substance of the
quotation. For it was necessary that the reader should be made acquainted with
our collector's track of reading, and the books which he used. In the mean
time, this review will serve as a full notification of the edition of 1488,
which is more comprehensive and complete than some others of later publication,
and to which all the rest, as to a general criterion, may be now comparatively
referred.

CHAP. i. Of a daughter of king Pompey, whose chamber was guarded by five armed
knights and a dog. Being permitted to be present at a public show, she is
^educed by a duke, who is afterward killed by the champion of her father's
court. She is reconciled to her father, and betrothed to a nobleman: on which
occasion, she receives from her father an embroidered robe and a crown of gold,
from the champion a gold ring, another from the wise man who pacified the
king's anger, another from the king's son, another from her cousin, and from
her spouse a seal of gold. All these presents are inscribed with proverbial
sentences, suitable to the circumstances of the princess.

The latter part of this story is evidently oriental. The feudal manners, in a
book which professes to record the achievements of the Roman people, are
remarkable in the introductory circumstances. But of this mixture we shall see
many striking instances.

CHAP. ii. Of a youth taken captive by pirates. The king's daughter falls in
love with him; and having procured his escape, accompanies him to his own
country, where they are married.

CHAP. vi. An emperor is married to a beautiful young princess. In case of
death, they mutually agree not to survive one other. To try the truth of his
wife, the emperor going into a distant country, orders a report of his death to
be circulated. In remembrance of her vow, and in imitation of the wives of
India, she prepares to throw herself headlong from a high precipice. She is
prevented by her father; who interposes his paternal authority, as
predominating over a rash and unlawful promise.

CHAP. vii. Under the reign of Dioclesian, a noble knight had two sons, the
youngest of which marries a harlot.

This story, but with a difference of circumstances, ends like the beautiful
apologue of the Prodigal Son.

CHAP. viii. The emperor Leo commands three female statues to be made. One has
a gold ring on a finger pointing forward, another a beard of gold, and the
third a golden cloak and purple tunic. Whoever steals any of these ornaments,
is to be punished with an ignominious death.

This story is copied by Gower, in the CONFESSIO AMANTIS: but he has altered
some of the circumstances. He supposes a statue of Apollo.

Of plate of gold a berde he had,
The wiche his breast all ovir spradde:
Of gold also, without fail,
His mantell was, of large entayle,
Besette with perrey all about:
Forth right he straught his finger out,
Upon the which he had a ring,
To seen it was a rich thing,
A fine carbuncle for the nones
Most precious of all stones Lib. v. fol. 122. b.
.
In the sequel, Gower follows the substance of our author.

CHAP. x. Vespasian marries a wife in a distant country, who refuses to return
home with him, and yet declares she will kill herself if he goes. The emperor
ordered two rings to be made, of a wondrous efficacy; one of which, in the
stone, has the image of Oblivion, the other the image of Memory: the ring of
Oblivion he gave to the empress, and returned home with the ring of Memory.

CHAP. xi. The queen of the south sends her daughter to king Alexander, to be
his concubine. She was exceedingly beautiful, but had been nourished with
poison from her birth. Alexander's master, Aristotle, whose sagacity nothing
could escape, knowing this, entreated, that before she was admitted to the
king's bed, a malefactor condemned to death might be sent for, who should give
her a kiss in the presence of the king. The malefactor, on kissing her,
instantly dropped down dead. Aristotle, having explained his reasons for what
he had done, was loaded with honors by the king, and the princess was
dismissed to her mother.

This story is founded on the twenty-eighth chapter of Aristotle's SECRETUM
SECRETORUM: in which, a queen of India is said to have treacherously sent to
Alexander, among other costly presents, the pretended testimonies of her
friendship, a girl of exquisite beauty, who having been fed with serpents from
her infancy, partook of their nature [See supr. vol. i. p. 132.] This I now
cite from a Latin translation, without date, but evidently printed before 1500.
It is dedicated to Guido Vere de Valencia bishop of Tripoly, by his most humble
Clerk, Philippus: who says, that he found this treatise in Arabic at Antioch,
quo ^ar^bant L^^ini, and that therefore, and because the Arabic copies were
scarce, he translated it into Latin^

This printed copy does not exactly correspond with MS. BODL. 495. membr. 4to.
In the last, Alexander's miraculous horn is mentioned at fol. 45. b. In the
former, in chapter lxxii. The dedication is the same in both.


. If I recollect right, in Pliny there are accounts of nations whose natural
food was poison. Mithridates, king of Pontus, the land of venomous herbs, and
the country of the sorceress Medea, was supposed to eat poison. Sir John
Maundeville's Travels, I believe, will afford other instances.

CHAP. xii. A profligate priest, in the reign of the emperor Otto, or Otho,
walking in the fields, and neglecting to say mass, is reformed by a vision of a
comely old man.

CHAP. xiii. An empress having lost her husband, becomes so doatingly fond of
her only son, then three years of age, as not to bear his absence for a moment.
They sleep together every night, and when he was eighteen years of age, she
proves with child by him. She murders the infant, and her left hand is
immediately marked with four circles of blood. Her repentance is related, in
consequence of a vision of the holy virgin.

This story is in the SPECULUM HISTORIALE of Vincent of Beauvais, who wrote
about the year 1250 Lib. vii. cap. 93. seq. f. 86. b. edit. Ven.
.

CHAP. xiv. Under the reign of the emperor Dorotheus, a remarkable example of
the filial piety of a young man, who redeems his father, a knight, from
captivity.

CHAP. xv. Eufemian, a nobleman in the court of the emperor of Rome, is
attended by three thousand servants girt with golden belts, and clothed in
silken vestments. His house was crowded with pilgrims, orphans, and widows, for
whom three tables were kept every day. He has a son, Allexius; who quits his
father's palace, and lives unknown seventeen years in a monastery in Syria. He
then returns, and lives seventeen years undiscovered as a pilgrim in his
father's family, where he suffers many indignities from the servants.

Allexius, or Alexis, was canonised. This story is taken from his Legend See
Caxton, GOLD. LEG. f. ccclxiii. b.
. In the metrical Lives of the Saints, his life is told in a sort of measure
different from that of the rest, and not very common in the earlier stages of
our poetry. It begins thus.

Lesteneth all and herkeneth me,
onge and old, bond and fre,
And ich ow tell sone,
How a ought man, gent and fre,
By began this worldis well to fle,
Y born he was in Rome.
In Rome was a doty man
That was y cleped Eufemian,
Man of much myte;
Gold and seluer he had ynou,
Hall and boures, oxse and plou,
And swith well it dyte.
When Alexius returns home in disguise, and asks his father about his son, the
father's feelings are thus described.

So sone so he spoke of his sone,
The guode man, as was his wone,
Began to sike sore Sigh.
;
His heart fell Felt.
so cold so ston,
The teres fell to his ton Feet.
,
On her berd hoar.
At his burial, many miracles are wrought on the sick.

With mochel sit Sig^s.
, and mochel song,
That holy cors, hem all among,
Bischoppis to cherche bear.
Amyddes rit the he street High Street.
,
So much folk him gone mete
That they resten a stand,
All the sike They sighed.
that to him come,
I heled were swithe sone
Of fet Feet.
and eke of hand:
The blind come to hare Their.
sit,
The crooked gonne sone rit Strait.
,
The lame for to go:
That dombe were fonge Found.
speech,
The herede The true physician.
god the sothe leche Heried. Blessed.
,
And that halwe Hallowed.
also.
The day ede and drou to nyt,
No longer dwell Tarry.
they ne myt,
To cherche they most wend;
The bellen they gonne to ring,
The clerks he High.
to sing,
Everich in his end At his seat in the choir.
.
Tho the corse to cherche com
Glad they were everichon
That there ycure were,
The pope and the emperor
By fore an auter of saint Savor
There set they the bear.
About the bear was much lit
With proud palle was bedit,
I beten al with gold MSS. Coll. Trin. Oxon. Cod. 57. supr. citat.
.
The history of Saint Alexius is told entirely in the same words in the GESTA
ROMANORUM, and in the LEGENDA AUREA of Jacobus de Voragine HYSTOR. lxxxix. f.
clviii. edit. 1479. fol. And in Vincent of Beauvais, who quotes GESTA ALLEXII.
SPECUL. HIST. Lib. xviii. cap. 43. seq. f. 241. b.
, translated, through a French medium, by Caxton. This work of Jacobus does not
consist solely of the legends of the saints, but is interspersed with multis
aliis pulcherrimis et peregrinis historiis, with many other most beautiful and
strange histories In the Colophon.
.

CHAP. xvi. A Roman emperor in digging for the foundation of a new palace,
finds a golden sarcophagus, or coffin, inscribed with mysterious words and
sentences. Which being explained, prove to be so many moral lessons of
instruction for the emperor's future conduct.

CHAP. xvii. A poor man named Guido, engages to serve an emperor of Rome in six
several capacities, or employments. One of these services is, to show the best
way to the holy land. Acquitting himself in all with singular address and
fidelity, he is made a knight, and loaded with riches.

CHAP. xviii. A knight named Julian is hunting a stag, who turns and says, "you
will kill your father and mother." On this he went into a distant country,
where he married a rich Lady of a castle. Julian's father and mother traveled
into various lands to find their son, and at length accidentally came to this
castle, in his absence; where telling their story to the lady, who had heard it
from her husband, she discovered who they were, and gave them her own bed to
sleep in. Early in the morning, while she was at mass in the chapel, her
husband Julian unexpectedly returned; and entering his wife's chamber,
perceived two persons in the bed, whom he immediately slew with his sword,
hastily supposing them to be his wife and her adulterer. At leaving the
chamber, he met his wife coming from the chapel; and with great astonishment
asked her, who the persons were sleeping in her bed? She answered, "They are
your parents, who have been seeking you so long, and whom I have honored with
a place in our own bed." Afterward they founded a sumptuous hospital for the
accommodation of travelers, on the banks of a dangerous river.

This story is told in Caxton's GOLDEN LEGENDE Fol. 90. edit. 1493.
, and in the metrical Lives of the Saints MSS. BODL. 1596. f. 4.
. Hence Julian, or Saint Julian, was called hospitator, or the good herberjour;
and the Pater Noster became famous, which he used to say for the souls of his
father and mother whom he had thus unfortunately killed Ibid.
. The peculiar excellencies of this prayer are displayed by Boccace DECAM. D.
ii. N. 2.
. Chaucer speaking of the hospitable disposition of his FRANKELEIN, says, Saint
Julian he was in his own country PROL. v. 342. See supr. vol. i. S^CT. xvii. p.
438.
.


This history is, like the last, related by our compiler, in the words of
Julian's Legend, as it stands in Jacobus de Voragine HYSTOR. xxxii. f. lxii. a.
. Bollandus has inserted Antoninus's account of this saint, which appears also
to be literally the same ACT. SANCTOR. tom. ii. JANUAR. p. 974. Antv. 1643.
. It is told, yet not exactly in the same words, by Vincent of Beauvais SP^CUL.
HIST. Lib. ix. c. 115. f. 115. Venet. 1591.
.

I take this opportunity of observing, that the Legends of the the Saints, so
frequently referred to in the GESTA ROMANORUM, often contain high strokes of
fancy, both in the structure and decorations of the story. That they should
abound in extravagant conceptions, may be partly accounted for, from the
superstitious and visionary cast of the writer: but the truth is, they derive
this complexion from the east. Some were originally forged by monks of the
Greek church, to whom the oriental fictions and mode of fabling were familiar.
The more early of the Latin lives were carried over to Constantinople, where
they were translated into Greek with new embellishments of eastern imagination.
These being returned into Europe, were translated into Latin, where they
naturally superseded the old Latin archetypes. Others of the Latin lives
contracted this tincture, from being written after the Arabian literature
became common in Europe. The following ideas in the Life of Saint Pelagian
evidently betray their original. "As the bishop sange mass in the cite of
Usanance, he saw three dropes right clear all of one gratenesse which were
upon the altar, and al three ran to gyder in to a precious gemme: and when
they had set this gemme in a cross of gold, all the other precious stones that
were there, fyllen Fell out.
out, and this gemme was clear to them that were clean out of sin, and it was
obscure and dark to sinners Caxton's GOLD. LEG. f. ccclxxxxviii.
, etc." The peculiar cast of romantic invention was admirably suited to serve
the purposes of superstition.

Possevin, a learned Jesuit, who wrote about the close of the sixteenth
century, complains, that for the last five hundred years the courts of all the
princes in Europe had been infatuated by reading romances: and that, in his
time, it was a mark of inelegance, not to be familiarly acquainted with
Lancelot du Lake, Perceforest, Tristan, Giron the Courteous, Amadis de Gaul,
Primaleon, Boccace's Decameron, and Ariosto. He even goes so far as to say,
that the devil instigated Luther to procure a translation of Amadis from
Spanish into French, for the purpose of facilitating his grand scheme of
overthrowing the catholic religion. The popularity of this book, he adds,
warped the minds of the French nation from their ancient notions and studies;
introduced a neglect of the scriptures, and propagated a love for astrology,
and other fantastic arts BI^LIOTH. SELECT. Lib. i. cap. 25. p. 113. edit. 1593.
. But with the leave of this zealous catholic I would observe, that this sort
of reading was likely to produce, if any, an effect quite contrary. The genius
of romance and of popery was the same; and both were strengthened by the
reciprocation of a similar spirit of credulity. The dragons and the castles of
the one, were of a piece with the visions and pretended miracles of the other.
The ridiculous theories of false and unsolid science, which, by the way, had
been familiarised to the French by other romances, long before the translation
of Amadis, were surely more likely to be advanced under the influence of a
religion founded on deception, than in consequence of Luther's reformed system,
which aimed at purity and truth, and which was to gain its end by the
suppression of ancient prejudices.

Many of the absurdities of the catholic worship were perhaps, as I have
hinted, in some degree necessary in the early ages of the church, on account of
the ignorance of the people; at least, under such circumstances they were
natural, and therefore excusable. But when the world became wiser, those
mummeries should have been abolished, for the same reason that the preachers
left off quoting Esop's fables in their sermons, and the stage ceased to
instruct the people in the scripture-history by the representation of the
MYSTERIES. The advocates of the papal communion do not consider, that in a
cultivated age, abounding with every species of knowledge, they continue to
retain those fooleries which were calculated only for christians in a condition
of barbarism, and of which the use now no longer subsists.

CHAP. xix. When Julius Caesar was preparing to pass the Rubicon, a gigantic
spectre appeared from the middle of the river, threatening to interrupt his
passage, if he came not to establish the peace of Rome. Our author cites the
GESTA ROMANORUM for this story.

It was impossible that the Roman history could pass through the dark ages,
without being infected with many romantic corruptions. Indeed, the Roman was
almost the only ancient history, which the readers of those ages knew: and what
related even to pagan Rome, the parent of the more modern papal metropolis of
christianity, was regarded with a superstitious veneration, and often magnified
with miraculous additions.

CHAP. xx. The birth of the emperor Henry, son of earl Leopold, and his
wonderful preservation from the stratagems of the emperor Conrade, till his
accession to the imperial throne.

This story is told by Caxton in the GOLDEN LEGENDE, under the life of Pelagian
the pope, entitled, Here follows the life of Saint Pelagyen the pope, with many
other hystoryes and gestys of the Lombardes, and of Machomete, with other
chronicles Fol. ccclxxxxvii. b.
. The GESTA LONGOBARDORUM are fertile in legendary matter, and furnished
Jacobus de Voragine, Caxton's original, with many mavelous histories See his
LEGEND. AUR. fol. cccxv.
. Caxton, from the gestes of the Lombardis, gives a wonderful account of a
pestilence in Italy, under the reign of king Gilbert Ubi supr. f. lxxvi.
.

There is a LEGENDA SANCTORUM, ^ive HISTORIA LOMBARDICA, printed in 1483. This
very uncommon book is not mentioned by Maittaire. It has this colophon.
"Expliciunt quorundam Sanctorum Legende adjuncte post Lombardicam historiam.
Impressa Argentine, M. CCCC. LXXXIII Fol.
." That is, the latter part of the book contains a few Saints not in the
history of the Lombards, which forms the first part. I have neither time nor
inclination to examine whether this is Jacobus's LEGENDA: but I believe it to
be the same. I think I have seen an older edition of the work, at Cologne 1470
Fol. See also "Legenda Sanctorum quae et LOMBARDICA dicitur." Lugd. 1509. fol.
.

I have observed that Caxton's GOLDEN LEGENDE is taken from Jacobus de
Voragine. This perhaps is not precisely true. Caxton informs us in his first
preface to the first edition of 1483 Fol^ at Westminster. This is one of the
^^nest of Caxton's publications.
, that he had in his possession a Legend in French, another in Latin, and a
third in English, which varied from the other two in many places: and that MANY
HISTORIES were contained in the English collection, which did not occur in the
French and Latin. Therefore, says he, "I have wryton ON^ OUT of the said three
books: which I have orderyd otherwise than in the said English Legende,
which was so to fore made." Caxton's English original might have been the old
METRICAL LIVES OF THE SAINTS.

CHAP. xxi. A story from Justin, concerning a conspiracy of the Spartans
against their king.

CHAP. xxii. How the Egyptians deified Isis and Osiris. From saint Austin. As
is the following chapter.

CHAP. xxiv. Of a magician and his delicious garden, which he shows only to
fools and to his enemies.

CHAP. xxv. Of a lady who keeps the staff and scrip of a stranger, who rescued
her from the oppressions of a tyrant: but being afterward courted by three
kings, she destroys those memorials of her greatest benefactor.

CHAP. xxvi. An emperor, visiting the holy land, commits his daughter and his
favorite dog, who is very fierce, to the custody of five knights, under the
superintendance of his seneshall. The seneshall neglects his charge: the
knights are obliged to quit their post for want of necessaries; and the dog,
being fed with the provisions assigned to the knights, grows fiercer, breaks
his three chains, and kills the lady who was permitted to wander at large in
her father's hall. When the emperor returns, the seneshall is thrown into a
burning furnace.

CHAP. xxviii. The old woman and her little dog.

CHAP. xxx. The three honors and three dishonours, decreed by a certain king
to every conqueror returning from war.

CHAP. xxxi. The speeches of the philosophers on seeing king Alexander's golden
sepulcher.

CHAP. xxxiii. A man had three trees in his garden, on which his three wives
successively hanged themselves. Another begs an offset from each of the trees,
to be planted in the gardens of his married neighbors. From Valerius Maximus,
who is cited.

CHAP. xxxiv. Aristotle's seven rules to his pupil Alexander.

This, I think, is from the SECRETA SECRETORUM. Aristotle, for two reasons, was
a popular character in the dark ages. He was the father of their philosophy:
and had been the preceptor of Alexander the Great, one of the principal heroes
of romance. No^ was Aristotle himself without his romantic history; in which he
falls in love with a queen of Greece, who quickly confutes his subtlest
syllogisms.

CHAP. xxxv. The GESTA ROMANORUM cited, for the custom among the ancient Romans
of killing a lamb for pacifying quarrels.

CHAP. xxxvi. Of a king who desires to know the nature of man. Solinus, de
MIRABILIBUS MUNDI, is here quoted.

CHAP. xxxvii. Pliny's account of the stone which the eagle places in her nest,
to avoid the poison of a serpent.

CHAP. xxxix. Julius Cesar's mediation between two brothers. From the GESTA
ROMANORUM.

We must not forget, that there was the Romance of JULIUS CAESAR. And I believe
Antony and Cleopatra were more known characters in the dark ages, than is
commonly supposed. Shakespeare is thought to have formed his play on this story
from North's translation of Amyot's unauthentic French Plutarch, published at
London in 1579. Montfaucon, among the manuscripts of monsieur Lancelot, recites
an old piece written about the year 1500, "LA VIE ET FAIS DE MARC ANTOINE le
triumvir et de sa mie CLEOPATRA, translate de l' historien Plutarque pour tres
illustre haute et puissante dame Madame Francoise de Fouez Dame de
Chateaubriand Bibl. MANUSCR. tom. ii. p. 1669. col. 2.
." I know not whether t^is piece was ever printed. At least it shows, that the
story was familiar at a more early period than is imagined; and leads us to
suspect, that there might have been other materials used by Shakespeare on this
subject, than those hitherto pointed out by his commentators.

That Amyot's French version of Plutarch should contain corruptions and
innovations, will easily be conceived, when it is remembered that he probably
translated from an old Italian version See BIBL. FR. de la Croix, etc. tom. i.
p. 388. Amyot was a great translator of Greek books; but I fear, not always
from the Greek. It is remarkable, that he wa^ rewarded with an abba^y for
translating the THEAGENES and CHARICLEA of Heliodorus: for writing which, the
author was deprived of ^ bishopric. He died about 1580.
. A new exhibition in English of the French caricature of this most valuable
biographer by North, must have stil^ more widely extended the deviation from
the original.

CHAP. xl. The infidelity of a wife proved by feeling her pulse in
conversation. From Macrobius.

CHAP. xlii. Valerius Maximus is cited, concerning a column at Rome inscribed
with four letters four times written.

CHAP. xliv. Tiberius orders a maker of ductile glass, which could not be
broken, to be beheaded, le^t it should become more valuable than silver and
gold.

This piece of history, which appears also in Cornelius Aggrippa DE VANITATE
SCIENTIARUM Sandford's English TRANSLAT. cap. 90. p. 159. a. edit. Land. 1569.
4to.
, is taken from Pliny, or rather from his transcriber Isidore ORIG. lib. xvi.
cap. xv. p. 1224. Apud Auct. LING. LAT. 1602.

Isidore's was a favorite R^PERTORY of the middle age. He is cited for an
account of the nature and qualities of the Falcon, in the Prologue to the
second or metrical part of the old Phoebus de deduiz de la chass^ des B^stes
sauvages et des oyseaux d^ Proye, printed early at Paris without date, and
written, as appears by the rubric of the last section, by Le Comte de
Tankarville.


. Pliny, in relating this story, says, that the temperature of glass, so as to
render it flexible, was discovered under the reign of Tiberius.

In the same chapter Pliny observes, that glass is susceptible of all colors.
"Fit et album, et murrhinum, aut hyacinthos sapphirosque imitatum, et omnibus
aliis coloribus. Nec est alia nunc materia sequacior, aut etiam PICTURAE
ACCOMMODATIOR. Maximus tamen honor in candido NOT. HIST. Lib. xxxvi. cap. xvi.
p. 725. edit. Lugd. 1615.
." But the Romans, as the last sentence partly proves, probably never used any
colored glass for windows. The first notice of windows of a church made of
colored glass occurs in chronicles quoted by Muratori. In the year 802, a pope
built a church at Rome, and, "fenestras ex vitro diversis coloribus conclusit
atque decoravit DISSERT. ANTICHIT. ITAL. tom. i. c. xxiv. p. 287.
." And in 856, he produces "fenestras vero vitreis coloribus, etc Ibid. p. 281.
." This however was a sort of mosaic in glass. To express figures in glass, or
what we now call the art of painting in glass, was a very different work: and,
I believe, I can show it was brought from Constantinople to Rome before the
tenth century, with other ornamental arts. Guiccardini, who wrote about 1560,
in his Descrittione de tutti Paesi Bassi, ascribes the invention of baking
colors in glass for churchwindows to the Netherlanders Antw. Plantin. 1580.
fol.
: but he does not mention the period, and I think he must be mistaken. It is
certain that this art owed much to the laborious and mechanical genius of the
Germans; and, in particular, their deep researches and experiments in
chemistry, which they cultivated in the dark ages with the most indefatigable
assiduity, must have greatly assisted its operations. I could give very early
anecdotes of this art in England. But, with the careless haste of a lover, I am
anticipating what I have to say of it in my HISTORY OF GOTHIC ARCHITECTURE IN
ENGLAND.

CHAP. xlv. A king leaves four sons by his wife, only one which is lawfully
begotten. They have a contest for the throne. The dispute is referred to the
deceased king's secretary, who orders the body to be taken from the tomb; and
decrees, that the son who can shoot an arrow deepest into it shall be king. The
first wounds the king's right hand: the second his mouth: the third his heart.
The last wound is supposed to be the successful one. At length the fourth,
approaching the body, cried out with a lamentable voice, "Far be it from me to
wound my father's body!" In consequence of this speech, he is pronounced by the
nobles and people present to be the true heir, and placed on the throne.

CHAP. xlviii. Dionysius is quoted for the story of Perillus's brazen bull.

Gower in the CONFESSIO AMANTIS has this story; which he prefaces by saying
that he found it in a Cronike Lib. vii. f. 161. b. col. 1.
. In Caxton's Golden Legende, Macrobius is called a chronicle. "Macrobius says
in a cronike Fol. lxii. b.
." Chronicles are naturally the first efforts of the literature of a barbarous
age. The writers, if any, of those periods are seldom equal to any thing more
than a bare narration of facts: and such sort of matter is suitable to the
taste and capacity of their cotemporary readers. A further proof of the
principles advanced in the beginning of this Dissertation.

CHAP. xlix. The duchess Rosmilla falls in love with Conan, king of Hungary,
whom she sees from the walls of the city of Foro-Juli, which he is besieging.
She has four sons and two daughters. She betrays the city to Conan, on
condition that he will marry her the next day. Conan, a barbarian, executed the
contract; but on the third day exposed her to his whole army, saying, "such a
wife deserves such a husband."

Paulus, that is, Paulus Diaconus, the historian of the Longobards is quoted.
He was chancellor of Desiderius, the last king of the Lombards; with whom he
was taken captive by Charlemagne. The history here referred to is entitled
GESTA LONGOBARDORUM See Lib. iv. cap. xxviii. Apud Muratorii SCR^PTOR. ITAL. i.
p. 465. edit. Mediolan. 1723. Where she is called Romilda. The king is Cacan,
or Cacanus, a king of the Huns. There are some ^ine circumstances of distress
in Paulus's description of this siege.
.

CHAP. l. From Valerius Maximus.

CHAP. li. From Josephus.

CHAP. lii. From Valerius Maximus.

CHAP. liii. From the same.

CHAP. live. The emperor Frederick's marble portico near Capua.

I wonder there are not more romances extant on the lives of the Roman emp^rors
of Germany; many of whom, to say no more, were famous in the crusades. There is
a romance in old German rhyme, called TEUERDANK, on Maximilian the first,
written by Melchior Pfinzing his chaplain. Printed at Nuremberg in 1517 Fol. on
vellum. It is not printed with moveable types: but every page is graved in wood
or brass. With wooden cuts. It is a most beautiful book.
.

CHAP. lv. Of a king who has one son exceedingly beautiful, and four daughters,
named Justice, Truth, Mercy, and Peace.

CHAP. lvi. A nobleman invited a merchant to his castle, whom he met
accordingly upon the road. At entering the castle, the merchant was astonished
at the magnificence of the chambers, which were overlaid with gold. At supper,
the nobleman placed the merchant next to his wife, who immediately showed
evident tokens of being much struck with her beauty. The table was covered with
the richest dainties; but while all were served in golden dishes, a pittance of
meat was placed before the lady in a dish made out of a human scull. The
merchant was surprised and terrified at this strange spectacle. At length he
was conducted to bed in a fair chamber^ where, when left alone, he observed a
glimmering lamp in a nook or corner of the room, by which he discovered two
dead bodies hung up by the arms. He was now filled with the most horrible
apprehensions, and could not sleep all the night. When he rose in the morning,
he was asked by the nobleman how he liked his entertainment? He answered,
"There is plenty of every thing; but the scull prevented me from eating at
supper, and the two dead bodies which I saw in my chamber from sleeping. With
your leave therefore I will depart." The nobleman answered, "My friend, you
observed the beauty of my wife. The scull which you saw placed before her at
supper, was the head of a duke, whom I detected in her embraces, and which I
cut off with my own sword. As a memorial of her crime, and to teach her modest
behavior, her adulterer's scull is made to serve for her dish. The bodies of
the two young men hanging in the chamber are my two kinsmen, who were murdered
by the son of the duke. To keep up my sense of revenge for their blood, I visit
their dead bodies every day. Go in peace, and remember to judge nothing without
knowing the truth."

Caxton has the history of Albione, a king of the Lombards, who having
conquered another king, "lade away with him Rosamounde his wife in captyvyte,
but after he took her to his wife, and he did do make a cup of the skulle of
that king and closed in fine gold and sylver, and drank out of it GOLDEN
LE^. f. ccclxxxxvii. a. edit. 1493. The compilers of the SANCTILOG^ probably
took this story from Paulus Diaconus, GE^T. LON^OBARD. ut supr. Lib. ii. cap.
xxviii. p. 435. seq. It has been adopted, as a romantic tale, into the
HISTOIRES TRAGIQUES of Bellef^rest, p. 297. edit. 1580. The English reader may
find it in Heylin's COSMOGRAPHI^, B. i. col. i. p. 57. And in Machiavel's
HISTORY OF FLORENCE, in English, Land. 1680. B. i. p. 5. seq. See also
Lydgate's BOCHAS, B. ix. chapter xxvii.
." This, by the way, is the story of the old Italian tragedy of Messer Giovanni
Rucellai planned on the model of the ancients, and acted in the Rucellai
gardens at Florence, before Leo the tenth and his court, in the year 1516 See
supr. vol. ii. p. 411.
. Davenant has also a tragedy on the same subject, called ALBOVINE king of the
Lombards his Tragedy.

A most sanguinary scene in Shakespeare's TITUS ADRONICUS, an incident in
Dryden's, or Boccace's, TANCRED and SIGISMONDA, and the catastrophe of the
beautiful metrical romance of the LADY of FAGUEL, are founded on the same
horrid ideas of inhuman retaliation and savage revenge: but in the two last
pieces, the circumstances are so ingeniously imagined, as to lose a
considerable degree of their atrocity, and to be productive of the most
pathetic and interesting situations.

CHAP. lvii. The enchanter Virgil places a magical image in the middle of Rome
For the necromancer Virgil, see supr. vol. ii. p. 229.
, which communicates to the emperor Titus all the secret offenses committed
every day in the city In the CENTO NOVELLE ANTICHE. Nov. vii.
.

This story is in the old black-lettered history of the necromancer Virgil, in
Mr. Garrick's collection.

Vincent of Beauvais relates many wonderful things, mirabiliter actitata, done
by the poet Virgil, whom he represents as a magician. Among others, he says,
that Virgil fabricated those brazen statues at Rome, called Salvacio Romae,
which were the gods of the Provinces conquered by the Romans. Every one of
these statues held in its hand a bell framed by magic; and when any province
was meditating a revolt, the statue, or idol, of that country struck his bell
SPECUL. HISTOR. Lib. iv. cap. 61. f. 66. a.
. This fiction is mentioned by the old anonymous author of the MIRABILIA ROMAE,
written in the thirteenth century, and printed by Montfaucon DIAR. ITAL. cap.
xx. p. 288. edit. 1702. Many wonders are also related of Rome, in an old
metrical romance called THE STACYONS OF ROME, in which Romulus is said to be
born of the duches of Troy. MSS. Cotton. CALIO. A. 2. fol. 81.
. It occurs in Lydgate's BOCHAS. He is speaking of the Pantheon.

Which was a temple of old foundation,
Full of ydols, up set on hye stages;
There through the world of every nation
Were of their gods set up great images,
To every kingdom direct were their visages,
As poets and Fulgens Fulgen^ius.
by his live
In books old plainly does dyscrive.
Every image had in his hand a bell,
As apperteyneth to every nation,
Which, by craft some token should tell
When any kingdom fill in rebellion, etc Tragedies of BOCHAS, B. ix. chapter i. ^t.
4. Compare supr. vol. ii. p. 69.
.
This fiction is not in Boccace, Lydgate's original. It is in the above cited
Gothic history of Virgil. Gower's Virgil, I think, belongs to the same romance.

And eke Virgil of acqueintance
I sigh, where he the maiden prayed,
Which was the daughter, as men said,
Of the emperor whilom of Rome CONFESS. AMANT. L. viii. f. clxxxix. a. col. 2.
.
CHAP. lviii. King Asmodeus pardons every malefactor condemned to death, who
can tell three indisputable truths or maxims.

CHAP. lix. The emperor Jovinian's history.

On this there is an ancient French MORALITE, entitled, L'Orgueil et
pre^omption de l'Empereur JOVINIAN See EMEND. and ADD. to vol. i. at p. 197.
. This is also the story of ROBERT king of Sicily, an old English poem, or
romance, from which I have given copious extracts Vol. i. p. 184.
.

CHAP. lx. A king has a daughter named Rosimund, aged ten years; exceedingly
beautiful, and so swift of foot, that her father promises her in marriage to
any man who can overcome her in running. But those who fail in the attempt are
to lose their heads. After many trials, in which she was always victorious, she
loses the race with a poor man, who throws in her way a silken girdle, a
garland of roses, and a silken purse enclosing a golden ball, inscribed, "whosoever
plays with me will never be satiated with play." She marries the poor man, who
inherits her father's kingdom.

This is evidently a Gothic innovation of the classical tale of Atalanta. But
it is not impossible that an oriental apologue might have given rise to the
Grecian fable.

CHAP. lxi. The emperor Claudius marries his daughter to the philosopher
Socrates.

CHAP. lxii. Florentina's picture.

CHAP. lxiii. Vespasian's daughter's garden. All her lovers are obliged to
enter this garden before they can obtain her love, but none return alive. The
garden is haunted by a lion; and has only one entrance, which divides into so
many windings, that it never can be found again. At length, she furnishes a
knight with a ball or clue of thread, and teaches him how to foil the lion.
Having achieved this adventure, he marries the lady.

Here seems to be an allusion to Medea's history.

CHAP. lxiv. A virgin is married to a king, because she makes him a shirt of a
piece of cloth three fingers long and broad.

CHAP. lxv. A cross with four inscriptions.

CHAP. lxvi. A knight offers to recover a lady's inheritance, which had been
seized by a tyrant; on condition, that if he is slain, she shall always keep
his bloody armor hanging in her chamber. He regains her property, although he
dies in the attempt; and as often as she was afterward fued for in marriage,
before she gave an answer, she returned to her chamber, and contemplating with
tears her deliverer's bloody armor, resolutely rejected every solicitation.

CHAP. lxvii. The wise and foolish knight.

CHAP. lxviii. A woman understands the language of birds. The three cocks.

CHAP. lxix. A mother gives to a man who marries her daughter a shirt, which
can never be torn, nor will ever need washing, while they continue faithful to
each other.

CHAP. lxx. The king's daughter who requires three impossible things of her
lovers.

CHAP. lxxii. The king who resigns his crown to his son.

CHAP. lxxiv. The golden apple.

CHAP. lxxv. A king's three daughters marry three dukes, who all die the same
year.

CHAP. lxxvi. The two physicians.

CHAP. lxxix. The fable of the familiar ass.

CHAP. lxxx. A devout hermit lived in a cave, near which a shepherd folded his
flock. Many of the sheep being stolen, the shepherd was unjustly killed by his
master as being concerned in the theft. The hermit seeing an innocent man put
to death, began to suspect the existence of a divine Providence; and resolved
no longer to perplex himself with the useless seveties of religion, but to mix
in the world. In traveling from his retirement, he was met by an angel in the
figure of a man; who said, "I am an angel, and am sent by God to be your
companion on the road." They entered a city; and begged for lodging at the
house of a knight, who entertained them at a splendid supper. In the night, the
angel rose from his bed, and strangled the knight's only child who was asleep
in the cradle. The hermit was astonished at this barbarous return for so much
hospitality, but was afraid to make any remonstrance to his companion. Next
morning they went to another city. Here they were liberally received in the
house of an opulent citizen; but in the night the angel rose, and stole a
golden cup of inestimable value. The hermit now concluded, that his companion
was a Bad Angel. In traveling forward the next morning, they passed over a
bridge; about the middle of which they met a poor man, of whom the angel asked
the way to the next city. Having received the desired information, the angel
pushed the poor man into the water, where he was immediately drowned. In the
evening they arrived at the house of a rich man; and begging for a lodging,
were ordered to sleep in a shed with the cattle. In the morning the angel gave
the rich man the cup which he had stolen. The hermit, amazed that the cup which
was stolen from their friend and benefactor should be given to one who refused
them a lodging, began to be now convinced that his companion was the devil; and
begged to go on alone. But the angel said, "Hear me, and depart. When you lived
in your hermitage a shepherd was killed by his master. He was innocent of the
supposed offense: but had he not been then killed, he would have committed
crimes in which he would have died impenitent. His master endeavors to atone
for the murder, by dedicating the remainder of his days to alms and deeds of
charity. I strangled the child of the knight. But know, that the father was so
intent on heaping up riches for this child, as to neglect those acts of public
munificence for which he was before so distinguished, and to which he has now
returned. I stole the golden cup of the hospitable citizen. But know, that from
a life of the ^trictest temperance, he became, in consequence of possessing
this cup, a perpetual drunkard; and is now the most abstemious of men. I threw
the poor man into the water. He was then honest and religious. But know, had he
walked one half of a mile further, he would have murdered a man in a state of
mortal sin. I gave the golden cup to the rich man who refused to take us within
his roof. He has therefore received his reward in this world; and in the next,
will suffer the pains of hell for his inhospitality." The hermit fell prostrate
at the angel's feet; and requesting forgiveness, returned to his hermitage,
fully convinced of the wisdom and justice of God's government.

This is the fable of Parnell's HERMIT, which that elegant yet original writer
has heightened with many masterly touches of poetical coloring, and a happier
arrangement of circumstances. Among other proofs which might be mentioned of
Parnell's genius and address in treating this subject, by reserving the
discovery of the angel to a critical period at the close of the fable, he has
found means to introduce a beautiful description, and an interesting surprise.
In this poem, the last instance of the angel's seeming injustice, is that of
pushing the guide from the bridge into the river. At this, the hermit is unable
to suppress his indignation.

Wild sparkling rage inflames the Father's eyes,
He bursts the bonds of fear, and madly cries,
"Detested wretch!" -- But scarce his speech began,
When the strange partner seemed no longer man:
His youthful face grew more serenely sweet,
His robe turned white, and flowed upon his feet;
Fair rounds of radiant points invest his hair;
Celestial odours fill the purple air:
And wings, whose colors glittered on the day,
Wide at his back their gradual plumes display.
The form ethereal bursts upon his sight,
And moves in all the majesty of light.
The same apologue occurs, with some slight additions and variations for the
worse, in Howell's LETTERS; who professes to have taken it from the speculative
sir Philip Herbert's CONCEPTIONS to his Son, a book which I have never seen
Vol. iv. LE^. iv. p. 7. edit. 1655. 8vo^
. These Letters were published about the year 1650. It is also found in the
DIVINE DIALOGUES of doctor Henry More PART i. p. 321. DIAL. ii. edit. Land.
1668. 12mo. I must not forget that it occurs, as told in our GESTA, among a
collection of Latin Apologues, quoted above, MSS. HARL. 463. fol. 8. a. The
rubric is, D^ Angelo qui duxit Heremitam ad diversa Hospitia.
, who has illustrated its important moral with the following fine reflections.
"The affairs of this world are like a curious, but intricately contrived
Comedy; and we cannot judge of the tendency of what is past, or acting at
present, before the entrance of the last Act, which shall bring in
Righteousness in triumph: who, though she has abided many a brunt, and has
been very cruelly and despightfully used hitherto in the world, yet at last,
according to our desires, we shall see the knight overcome the giant. For what
is the reason we are so much pleased with the reading romances and the fictions
of the poets, but that here, as Aristotle says, things are set down as they
should be; but in the true history hitherto of the world, things are recorded
indeed as they are, but it is but a testimony, that they have not been as they
should be? Wherefore, in the upshot of all, when we shall see that come to
pass, that so mightily pleases us in the reading the most ingenious plays and
heroic poems, that long afflicted virtue at last comes to the crown, the mouth
of all unbelievers must be for ever stopped. And for my own part, I doubt not
but that it will so come to pass in the close of the world. But impatiently to
call for vengeance upon every enormity before that time, is rudely to overturn
the stage before the entrance into the fifth act, out of ignorance of the plot
of the comedy; and to prevent the solemnity of the general judgment by more
paltry and particular executions Ibid. p. 335.
."

Parnell seems to have chiefly followed the story as it is told by this
Platonic theologist, who had not less imagination than learning. Pope used to
say, that it was originally written in Spanish. This I do not believe: but from
the early connection between the Spaniards and Arabians, this assertion tends
to confirm the suspicion, that it was an oriental tale.

CHAP. lxxxi. A king violates his sister. The child is exposed in a chest in
the sea; is christened Gregory by an abbot who takes him up, and after various
adventures he is promoted to the popedom. In their old age his father and
mother go a pilgrimage to Rome, in order to confess to this pope, not knowing
he was their son, and he being equally ignorant that they are his parents: when
in the course of the confession, a discovery is made on both sides.

CHAP. lxxxix. The three rings.

This story is in the DECAMERON i. 3.
, and in the CENTO NOVELLE ANTICHE Nov. lxxi.
: and perhaps in Swift's TALE OF A TUB.

CHAP. xcv. The tyrant Maxentius. From the GESTA ROMANORUM, which are cited.

I think there is the romance of MAXENCE, Constantine's antagonist.

CHAP. xcvi. King Alexander places a burning candle in his hall; and makes
proclamation, that he will absolve all those who owe him forfeitures of life
and land, if they will appear before the candle is consumed.

CHAP. xcvii. Prodigies before the death of Julius Caesar, who is placed in the
twenty-second year of the city. From the CRONICA, as they are called.

CHAP. xcix. A knight saves a serpent who is fighting in a forest with a toad
The stories, perhaps fabulous, of the serpent fighting with his inveterate
enemy the weazel, who eats rue before the attack begins, and of the serpent
fighting with and being killed by the spider, originate from Pliny, NOT. HIST.
x. 84. xx. 13.
, but is afterward bit by the toad. The knight languishes many days: and when
he is at the point of death, the same serpent, which he remembers, enters his
chamber, and sucks the poison from the wound.

CHAP. ci. Of Ganterus, who for his prowess in war being elected a king of a
certain country, is on the night of his coronation conducted to a chamber,
where at the head of the bed is a fierce lion, at the feet a dragon, and on
either side a bear, toads, and serpents. He immediately quitted his new
kingdom; and was quickly elected king of another country. Going to rest the
first night, he was led into a chamber furnished with a bed richly embroidered,
but stuck all over with sharp razors. This kingdom he also relinquishes. At
length he meets a hermit, who gives him a staff, with which he is directed to
knock at the gate of a magnificent palace, seated on a lofty mountain. Here he
gains admittance, and finds every sort of happiness unembittered with the laest
degree of pain.

The king means every man advanced to riches and honor, and who thinks to
enjoy these advantages without interruption and alloy. The hermit is religion,
the staff penitence, and the palace heaven.

In a more confined sense, the first part of this apologue may be separately
interpreted to signify, that a king, when he enters on his important charge,
ought not to suppose himself to succeed to the privilege of an exemption from
care, and to be put into immediate possession of the highest pleasures,
conveniences, and felicities of life; but to be sensible, that from that
moment, he begins to encounter the greatest dangers and difficulties.

CHAP. cii. Of the lady of a knight who went to the holy land. She commits
adultery with a clerk skilled in necromancy. Another magician discovers her
intrigues to the absent knight by means of a polished mirror, and his image in
wax.

In Adam Davie's GEST or romance of ALEXANDER, Nectabanus, a king and magician,
discovers the machinations of his enemies by embattelling them in figures of
wax. This is the most extensive necromantic operation of the kind that I
remember, and must have formed a puppet-shew equal to the most splendid
pantomime.

Barounes weore whilom wys and good,
That this ars Art. Necromancy.
well undurstode:
Ac on there was Neptanamous
Wis Wise.
in this ars and malicious:
When king other eorl Or earl.
came on him to weorre War.

Quyk he looked in the steorre Stars.
;
Of wax made him popetts Puppets.
,
And made heom fyhte with battes:
And so he learned, je vous die,
Ay to aquelle Conquer.
his enemy,
With charms and with conjurisons:
Thus he asaied the regiouns,
That him came for to asaile,
In puyr Very. Re^l.
manyr of bataile See Mr. Tyrwhitt's Chaucer's CANT. T. ver. 1281.
;
By cler candel in the nyt,
He mad uchon Each one.
with other to fyt,
Of all manner nacyouns,
That comen by schip or dromouns.
At the last, of money land
Kings thereof haden great onde Had great jealousy or anger.
,
Well thritty y gadred beoth Near thirty were gathered, or confederated.
,
And by spekith al his death All resolved to destroy him.
.
King Philipp Philip of Macedon.
of great thede
Master was of that feed Field, Field. Army.
:
He was a mon of myty hond,
With hem broute, of diverse land,
Nine and twenty rich kings,
To make on him bataylynges:
Neptanamous hit understod;
Ychaunged was al his mod;
He was aferde sore of harm:
Anon he deed He did.
cast his charme^
His image he mad anon,
And of his barounes everychon,
And afterward of his fone Enemies.
;
He dude hem to gedere to gone He made them ^ight.

In a basyn al by charm:
He sah on him He saw the harm fall on, or against, Himself.
fell theo harm;
He sey fly Saw fly.
of his barounes
Of al his land distinctiouns,
He lokid, and kneow in the sterre,
Of all this kings theo great werre The great war of all these kings.
, etc. MSS. (Bod. Bibl.) LAUD. I. 74. f. 54.

Afterward he frames an image of the queen Olympias, or Olympia, while
sleeping, whom he violates in the shape of a dragon.

Theo lady lyt on Laid.
hire bed,
Yheoled Covered.
well with silken web,
In a chaysel In the romanc^ of ATI^ et PORPHILION. Cod. Reg. Par. 7191. Un
chemi^ de chaisil
De ^il, et d'oevre moult soutil.

smok scheo lay,
And in a mantell of doway:
Of theo brytnes of hire face
Al about schone the place Perhap^ in SIR LAUNFAL, the same ^tuation is more
eleg^ntly touched. MSS. Cotton. CALI^. A. 2. fol. 35. a. In the pavyloun he
found a bed of prys,
Y heled with purpure bys
That semyly was of syte;
With inn lay that lady gent^,
That aft^r sir Launfal had sent,
That lefsom beamed bryt:
For hete her clothes down she de^^.
Almost to her gerdylstede;
Than lay she uncovert:
Sche was as whyt as lyly^ in May^,
Or snow that snoweth in wynterys day^^
He seygh nevir non so pert,
The read rose when sche is new^
Aen^ her rode n^s naut of hew^,
Y dar say in sert
Her hare schon as gold wyre, etc.

. --
Herbs he tok in an herber,
And stamped them in a mortar,
And wrong Wrung.
hit in a box:
After he tok virgyn wox
And made a popet after the queen,
His ars-tabl^ This is described above, f. 55^ Of gold he made a table
Al full of steorron [stars]. --
An astrolable is intended.
he can unwrene;
The queen's name in the wax he wrot^
Whil hit was sumdel hot:
In a bed he hit dyt
Al about with candel lyt,
And spreynd Sprinkled.
thereon of the herbus^
Thus charmed Neptanabus.
The lady in her bed lay
About mydnyt, ar the day Before day.
,
Whiles he made conjuryng,
Scheo She.
saw fle Fly.
, in her metyng Dream.
,
Hire thought, a dragoun lyt,
To hire chaumbre he made his flyt,
In he came to her bour
And crept undur her covertour,
Money sithes Times.
he hire kust Kissed her.

And fast in his arms prust,
And went away, so dragon wyld,
And great he left hire with child Fol. 57. The text is here given from MSS.
BODL. ut supr. Compared with MSS. HOSPIT. LINCOLN. 150. See Gower's CON^ESS.
AMANT. Lib. vi. fo^^ cxxxviii. a. col. 1. seq. And through the craft of
artemage,
Of wax he forged an image, etc.
Gower's dragon, in approaching the queen^ is courteis and debonaire. With all
the cher^ that he may,
Toward the bed there as she lay,
Till he came to her the beds side
And she lai^ still, and nothing cride;
For he did all his things fair,
And was curteis and debonaire.
Ibid. col. 2. I could not resist the temptation of transcribing this gallantry
of a dragon. Gower's whole description of this interview, as will appear on
comparison, seems to be taken from Beauvais, "Nectabanus se transformat in
illum draconis seductiorem tractum, tricliniumque penetrat reptabundus, specie
spectabilis, tum majestate totius corporis, tum etiam sibilorum acumine adeo
terribilis, ut pariete^ etiam ac fundamenta domus quati viderentur, etc." HIST.
S^ECUL. fol. 41. b. ut supr. S^^ Aul. Gell. NOCT. AT. ^ii. 1.
.
Theocritus, Virgil, and Horace, have left instances of incan^ations conducted
by figures in wax. In the beginning of the last century, many witches were
executed for attempting the lives of persons, by fabricating representations of
them in wax and clay. King James the first, in his DAEMONOLOGIE, speaks of this
practice ^s very common; the efficacy of which he peremptorily ascribes to the
power of the devil Edit. 1603. 4to. B. ii. chapter iv. p. 44^ seq.
. His majesty's arguments, intended to prove how the magician's image operated
on the person represented, are drawn from the depths of moral, theological,
physical, and metaphysical knowledge. The Arabian magic abounded with these
infatuations, which were partly founded on the doctrine of sympathy.

But to return to the GESTA ROMANORUM. In this story one of the magicians is
styled Magister peritus, and sometimes simply Magister. That is, a cunning-man.
The title Magister in our universities has its origin from the use of this word
in the middle ages. With what propriety it is now continued I will not say.
Mystery, anciently used for a particular art For instance, "the Art and Mystery
of Printing."
, or skill in general, is a specious and easy corruption of Maistery or
Mastery, the English of the Latin MAGISTERIUM, or Artificium; in French
Maistrise, Mestier, Mestrie, and in Italian Magisterio, with the same sense In
a statute of Henry the eighth, instead of the words in the last note, we ^ave
"The Science and Craft of Printing." Ann. reg. 25. A. D. 1533. For many
reasons, My^^^ry answering to the Latin Myst^rium, never could have been
originally applied in these cases.
. In the French romance of CLEOMEDES, a physician is called simply Mait^e MSS.
Cod. Reg. Paris. 7539.
.

Lie sont de chou qu'il n'y a
Peril et que bien garira:
Car il li MAISTRE ainsi dit leur ont.
And the medical art is styled Mestrie. "Quant il (the surgeon) apercut que
c'estoit malady non mie curable par nature et par MESTRIE, et par medicine,
etc MIRAC. S. Ludov. edit. reg. p. 438.
." Maistrise is used for art or workmanship, in the CHRONICON of Saint Denis,
"Entr^ ^es autres presens, li envoia une horologe de laton, ouvrez par
marveilleuse MAISTRISE Tom. v. Collect. Histor. Franc. page ^54. Thus expressed
in the Latin ANNALS FRANCIAE, ibid. p. 56. "Horologium ^x aurichalco art^
mechanica mirifice compositum."
." That the Latin MAGISTERIUM has precisely the same sense appears from an
account of the contract for building the conventual church of Casino in Italy,
in the year 1349. The architects agree to build the church in the form of the
Lateran at Rome. "Et in casu si aliquis [defectus] in eorum MAGISTERIO
appareret, promiserunt resarcire HI^T. CASI^. tom. ii. page 545. col. ii.
Chart. ^nn. 1349.
." Chaucer, in the ROMAUNT OF THE ROSE, uses MAISTRIS^ ^or artifice and
workmanship.

Was made a toure of great maistrise,
A fairer saugh no man with sight,
Large, and wide, and of great might, etc R. R. v. 4172.
.
And, in the same poem, in describing the shoes of MIRTH. And shode he was,
with gr^te maistrie,
With shone decopid and with lace Ibid. v. 842.
.
MAYSTRYE occurs in the description of a lady's saddle, in SIR LAUNFAL'S
romance.

Her sadell was semely set,
The sambus I know not what ornament or implement of the ancient
horse-furnitur^ is here intended, unless it is a saddle-cloth; nor can I find
this word in any glossary. But Sambu^ occurs, evidently under the very same
signification, in the beautiful manuscript French romance of GARIN, written in
the twelfth century. Li palefrois sur coi la dame ^i^t
Estoit plus blanc qu^ nule ^lor d^ li^^
Le loreins vaut mils ^ols pari^^s,
Et la SAU^U^ null pl^^ rich^ n^ vist.
"The palfrey on which the lady sat, was whiter than any flower de lis: the
bridle was worth a thousand Parisian sols, and a richer Saubue never was seen."
The French word however, is properly written Sambu^, and is not uncommon in old
French wardro^e rolls, where it appears to be a female sadd^e-cloth, or
housing. So in Le ROMAN DE LA ROSE. Comme royne fust vestue,
Et chevauchast a grand SAMBUE.
The Latin word, and in the same restrained sense, is sometimes SAMBUA, but
most commonly SAMBUCA. Ordericus Vitalis, Lib. viii. p. 694. edit. Par. 1619.
"Mannos et mulas cum SAMBUCI^ muliebribus prospexit." Vincent of Beauvais says,
that the Tartarian women, when they ride, have CAMBUCAS of painted leather,
embroidered with gold, hanging down on either side of the horse. SPECUL. HIST.
x. 85. But Vincent's CAMBUCAS was originally written cambucas, or Sambucas. To
such an enormity this article of the trappings of female horsemanship had
arisen in the middle ages, that Frederick king of Sicily restrained it by a
sumptuary law; which enjoined, that no woman, even of the highest rank, should
presume to use a Sambu^a, or saddle-c^oth, in which were gold, silver, or
pearls, etc. CONSTITUT. cap. 92. Queen Olympias, in Davie's G^ST of Alexander,
ha^ a Samb^e of silk^ fol. 54. [Supr. vol. i. 221.] A mule also white so milk,
With sadel of gold, sambue of sylke, etc.

were grene felvett,
I painted with ymagerye;
The bordure was of belles Of this fashion I have already given many instances.
The latest I remember is in the year 1503, at the marriage of the princess
Margaret. "In special the Earl of No^thumberlannd ware on a goodly gown of
tynsill, ^ourred with hermynes^ He was mounted upon a fair courser, his
harnays of goldsmyth work, and thorough that sam was sawen small belles, that
maid a mellodyous noise." Leland. COLL^ ad calc. tom. iii. p. 276.

In the NONNES PRIESTS PROLOGUE, Chaucer from the circumstance of the Monke's
bridle being decorated with bells, takes occasion to pu^ an admirable stroke of
humor and satire into the mouth of the HOST, which at once ridicules that
inconsistent piece of affectation, and censures the monk for the dullness of
his tale. Ver. 14796.

Swiche talking is not worth a boter^^ie,
For therein is there no disport ne game:
Therefore ^ire monk, dan Piers by your name,
I pray you hert^ly tell us somewhat ^lles,
Forsikerly, n'ere clinking of your belles
That on your bridel ha^ge on every side,
By heven king that for us all did,
I should or this have fallen down for sleep,
Although the slough had been never so deep.


Of rich gold and nothing else
That any man myt aspie:
In the arsounis Saddle-bow. See supr. vol. i p. 165.
before and behind
Were ^wey stones of Ynde
Gay for the maystrye.
The paytrell Breast^plate.
of her palfraye
Was worth an earldom, etc.
"In the saddle-bow were two jewels of In^ia, very beautiful to be seen, in
consequence of the great art with which they were wrought MS. fol. 40. a.
." Chaucer calls his Monk, -- fair for the Maistrie,
An outrider, that lovid venery PROL. v. 165.
.
Fair for the Maistrie means, skilled in the Maistrie of the game, La
Maistrise du Venerie, or the science of hunting, then so much a favorite, as
simply and familiarly to be called the maistrie. From many other instances
which I could produce, I will only add, that the search of the Philosopher's
Stone is called in the Latin Geber, INVESTIGATIO MAGISTERII.

CHAP. ciii. The merchant who sells three wise maxims to the wife of Domitian.

CHAP. ^iv. A knight in hunting meets a lion, from whose foot he extracts a
thorn. Afterward he becomes an outlaw; and being seized by the king, is
condemned to be thrown into a deep pit to be devoured by a hungry lion. The
lion fawns on the knight, whom he perceives to be the same that drew the thorn
from his paw. Then said the king, "I will learn forbearance from the beasts. As
the lion has spared your life, when it was in his power to take it, I therefore
grant you a free pardon. Depart, and be admonished hence to live virtuously."

The learned reader must immediately recollect a similar story of one
Androclus, who being exposed to fight with wild beasts in the Roman
amphitheatre, is recognized and unattacked by a most savage lion, whom he had
formerly healed exactly in the same manner. But I believe the whole is nothing
more than an oriental apologue on gratitude, written much earlier; and that it
here exists in its original state. Androclus's story is related by Aulus
Gellius, on the authority of a Greek writer, one Appion, called Plistonices,
who flourished under Tiberius. The character of Appion, with which Gellius
prefaces this tale, in some measure invalidates his credit; notwithstanding he
pretends to have been an eye witness of this extraordinary fact. "Ejus libri,
says Gellius, non incelebres feruntur; quibus, omnium ferme quae mirifica in
Aegypto visuntur audiunturque, historia comprehenditur. Sed in his quae
audivisse et legisse ^ese dicit, fortasse a vitio studioque ostentationis ^it
loquacior, etc NOCT. ATT^C. Lib. v. cap. xiv. See another fabulous story, of
which Appio^ was an eye witness, ibid. L. vii. cap. viii. It is of a boy
beloved by a dolphin.
." Had our compiler of the GESTA taken this story from Gellius, it is probable
he would have told it with some of the same circumstances: especially as
Gellius is a writer whom he frequently follows, and even quotes; and to whom,
on this occasion, he might have been obliged for a few more strokes of the
mavelous. But the two writers agree only in the general subject. Our
compiler's narrative has much more simplicity than that of Gellius; and
contains marks of eastern manners and life. Let me add, that the oriental
fabulists are fond of illustrating and enforcing the duty of gratitude, by
feigning instances of the gratitude of beasts toward men. And of this the
present compilation, which is strongly tinctured with orientalism, affords
several other proofs.

CHAP. cv. Theodosius the bl^^d emperor ordained, that the cause of every
injured person should be heard, on ringing a bell placed in a public part of
his palace. A serpent had a nest near the spot where the bell-rope fell. In the
absence of the serpent, a toad took possession of her nest. The serpent
twisting herself round the rope, rang the bell for justice; and by the
emperor's special command the toad was killed. A few days afterward, as the
king was reposing on his couch, the serpent entered the chamber, bearing a
precious stone in her mouth. The serpent creeping up to the emperor's face,
laid the precious stone on his eyes, and glided out of the apartment.
Immediately the emperor was restored to his sight.

This circumstance of the Bell of Justice occurs in the real history of some
eastern monarch, whose name I have forgot.

In the Arabian philosophy, serpents, either from the brightness of their eyes,
or because they inhabit the cavities of the earth, were considered as having a
natural, or occult, connection with precious stones. In Alphonsus's CLERICALIS
DISCIPLINA, a snake is mentioned, whose eyes were real jacinths. In Alexander's
romantic history, he is said to have found serpents in the vale of Jordian,
with collars of huge emeralds growing on their necks Vincent Beauvais, SPECUL.
HIST. Lib. iv. c. 58. fol. 42. a.
. The toad, under a vulgar indiscriminating idea, is ranked with the reptile
race: and Shakespeare has a beautiful comparison on the traditionary notion,
that the toad has a rich gem enclosed within its head. Milton gives his serpent
eyes of carbuncle PARAD. L. ix. 500.
.

CHAP. cvi. The three fellow-travellers, who have only one loaf of bread.

This apologue is in Alphonsus.

CHAP. cvii. There was an image in the city of Rome, which stretched forth its
right hand, on the middle finger of which was written STRIKE HERE. For a long
time none could understand the meaning of this mysterious inscription. At
length a certain subtle Clerk, who came to see this famous image, observed, as
the sun shone against it, the shadow of the inscribed finger on the ground at
some distance. He immediately took a spade, and began to dig exactly on that
spot. He came at length to a flight of steps which descended far under ground,
and led him to a stately palace. Here he entered a hall, where he saw a king
and queen sitting at table, with their nobles and a multitude of people, all
clothed in rich garments. But no person spoke a word. He looked toward one
corner, where he saw a polished carbuncle, which illuminated the whole room See
supr. vol. ii. p. 229. So in the romance, or LAY, of SIR LAUNFAL. MSS. Cotton.
CALIG. A. 2. ^ol. 35. a. And when he come to the forest on hy,
A pavyloun y teld he sy:
The pavyloun was wrouth forsothe ywys
All of werk of Sarsynys Saracen-work.
,
The pomells Balls. Pinnacl^s.
of crystal. --
On the top was a beast, Of bournedde gold, rich and good,
I^lorysched with rich amall Enamel.
;
His eyes were carbonkeles bryt,
As the mon Moon.
they schon anyt,
That spreteth out ovir all:
Alysaundre the conqueror,
Ne king Artour in his most hend
Ne had non scwych quell.
He found in the pavyloun,
The kings douter of Olyroun,
Dame Triamour that hyte,
Her fadyr was king of Fair.
And in the alliterative romance, called the SEGE OF JERUSALEM. MSS. Cott.
CALIG. A. 2. fol. 122. b. Tytus tarriedde note Naught.
for that, but to the tempul rode.
That was rayled in the roof with rubyes rich,
With perles and with perytotes On the ^inger of Becket, when he wa^ killed,
wa^ a jewel called Peretot^ MONA^T^ ANGL. i. 6^
all the place set,
That glystered as coals in the fire, on the gold rich;
The doors with dyamondes dryven were thykke,
And made also marveylously with margery Margarit^s.
perles,
That ever lemede the lyt, and as a lamp showed:
The clerks had none other lyte. --

. In the opposite corner he perceived the figure of a man standing, having a
bended bow with an arrow in his hand, as prepared to shoot. On his forehead was
written, "I am, who am. Nothing can escape my stroke, not even yonder carbuncle
which shines so bright." The Clerk beheld all with amazement; and entering a
chamber, saw the most beautiful ladies working at the loom in purple The
original is, " mulieres pulcherrimas in purpura et pallo operantes invenit."
fol. L. a. col. 1. This may mean either the sense in the text, or that the
ladies were clothed in purpura et pallo, a phrase which I never saw before in
barbarous latinity: but which tallies with the old English expression purple
and pall. This is sometimes written purple pall. As in SIR LAUNFAL, ut supr.
fol. 40. a. The lady was clad in purpure palle.
Anciently Pallium, as did Purpura, signified in general any rich cloth. Thus
there were saddles, de pallio et ebore; a bed, de pallio; a cope, de pallio,
etc etc. See Dufresne, LAT. GLOSS. V. PALLIUM. And PELLUM, its corruption. In
old French, to cover a hall with tapestry was called paller. So in SIR LAUNFAL,
u^ supr. fol. 40. a. Thyn halle agyrde, and hele [cover] the walls
With ^lodes [clothes], and with rich palles,
A ens [against] my Lady Tryamour.
Which also illustrates the former meaning. In A. Davie's GEST of Alexander we
have, Her bed was made forsothe
With pallis and with rich clothe,
The chamber was hangid with clothe of gold. fol. 57.

. But all was silence. He then entered a stable full of the most excellent
horses and asses: he touched some of them, and they were instantly turned into
stone. He next surveyed all the apartments of the palace, which abounded with
all that his wishes could desire. He again visited the hal^, and now began to
reflect how he should return; "but, says he, my report of all these wonders
will not be believed, unless I carry something back with me." He therefore took
from the principal table a golden cup and a golden knife, and placed them in
his bosom. When, the man who stood in the corner with the bow, immediately shot
at the carbuncle, which he shattered into a thousand pieces. At that moment the
hall became dark as night. In this darkness not being able to find hi^ way, he
remained in the subterraneous palace, and soon died a miserable death.

In the MORALISATION of this story, the steps by which the Clerk descends into
the earth are supposed to be the Passions. The palace, so richly stored, is the
world with all its vanities and temptations. The figure with the bow bent is
Death, and the carbuncle is Human Life. He suffers for his avarice in coveting
and seizing what was not his own; and no sooner has he taken the golden knife
and cup, that is, enriched himself with the goods of this world, than he is
delivered up to the gloom and horrors of the grave.

Spenser in the FAERIE QUEEN, seems to have distantly remembered this fable,
where a fiend expecting sir Guyon will be tempted to snatch some of the
treasures of the subterraneous HOUSE OF RICHESSE, which are displayed in his
view, i^ prepared to fasten upon him.

Thereat the fiend his gnas^ing teeth did grate,
And grieved so long to lack his greedy pray;
For well he weened that so glorious bayte
Would tempt his guest to take thereof assay:
Had he so done, he had him snatched away
More light than culver in the faucon's fist B. ii. C. vii. st^ 34.
.
This story was originally invented of pope Gerbert, or Sylvester the second,
who died in the year 1003. He was eminently learned in the mathematical
sciences, and on that account was styled a magician. William of Malmesbury is,
I believe, the first writer now extant by whom it is recorded: and he produces
it partly to show, that Gerbert was not always successful in those attempts
which he so frequently practiced to discover treasures hid in the earth, by the
application of the necromantic arts. I will translate Malmesbury's narration of
this fable, as it varies in some of the circumstances, and has some
heightenings of the fiction. "At Rome there was a brazen statue, extending the
forefinger of the right hand; and on its forehead was written Strike here.
Being suspected to conceal a treasure, it had received many bruises from the
credulous and ignorant, in their endeavors to open it. At length Gerbert
unriddled the mystery. At noonday observing the reflection of the forefinger
on the ground, he marked the spot. At night he came to the place, with a page
carrying a lamp. There by a magical operation he opened a wide passage in the
earth; through which they both descended, and came to a vast palace. The walls,
the beams, and the whole structure, were of gold: they saw golden images of
knights playing at chess, with a king and queen of gold at a banquet, with
numerous attendants in gold, and cups of immense size and value. In a recess
was a carbuncle, whose luster illuminated the whole palace: opposite to which
stood a figure with a bended bow. As they attempted to touch some of the rich
furniture, all the golden images seemed to rush upon them. Gerbert was too wise
to attempt this a second time: but the page was bold enough to snatch from the
table a golden knife of exquisite workmanship. At that moment, all the golden
images rose up with a dreadful noise; the figure with the bow shot at the
carbuncle; and a total darkness ensued. The page then replaced the knife,
otherwise, they both would have suffered a cruel death." Malmesbury afterward
mentions a brazen bridge, framed by the enchantments of Gerbert, beyond which
were golden horses of a gigantic size, with riders of gold richly illuminated
by the most serene meridian sun. A large company attempt to pass the bridge,
with a design of stealing some pieces of the gold. Immediately the bridge rose
from its foundations, and stood perpendicular on one end: a brazen man appeared
from beneath it, who struck the water with a mace of brass, and the sky was
overspread with the most horrible gloom. Gerbert, like some other learned
necromancers of the Gothic ages, was supposed to have fabricated a brazen head
under the influence of certain planets, which answered questions. But I forbear
to suggest any more hints for a future collection of Arabian tales. I shall
only add Malmesbury's account of the education of Gerbert, which is a curious
illustration of what has been often inculcated in these volumes, concerning the
introduction of romantic fiction into Europe See DISS. i. And vol. i. 400. seq.
. "Gerbert, a native of France, went into Spain for the purpose of learning
astrology, and other sciences of that cast, of the Saracens; who, to this day,
occupy the upper regions of Spain. They are seated in the metropolis of
Seville; where, according to the customary practice of their country, they
study the arts of divination and enchantment. -- Here Gerbert soon exceeded
Ptolemy in the astrolabe, Alchind in astronomy, and Julius Firmicus in
fatality. Here he learned the meaning of the flight and language of birds, and
was taught how to raise specter from hell. Here he acquired whatever human
curiosity has discovered for the destruction or convenience of mankind. I say
nothing of his knowledge in arithmetic, music, and geometry; which he so fully
understood as to think them beneath his genius, and which he yet with great
industry introduced into France, where they had been long forgotten. He
certainly was the first who brought the algorithm from the Saracens, and who
illustrated it with such rules as the most studious in that science cannot
explain. He lodged with a philosopher of that sect De GEST. REG. ANGL. lib. ii.
cap. 10. p. 36. a. b. 37 a. b. edit. Savil. Land. 1596. fol. Afterward
Malmesbury mentions his horologe, which was not of the nature of the modern
clock: but which yet is recorded as a wonderful invention by his cotemporary
Ditmar, CHRON. Lib. vi. fol. 83. edit. 1580. Vincent of Beauvais has
transcribed all that William of Malmesbury has here said about Gerbert, SPECUL.
HISTOR. Lib. xxiv. c. 98. seq^ f. 344. a. Compare Platina, VIT. PONTIF. fol.
122. edit. 1485. See also L'Histoire Literaire de France^ by the Benedictines,
tom. vi. ad calc.
, etc."

I conclude this chapter with a quotation from the old metrical romance of SIR
LIBEAUX DIASCONIOS, where the knight, in his attempt to disenchant the Lady of
Sinadone, after entering the hall of the castle of the necromancers, is almost
in similar circumstances with our subterraneous adventurers. The passage is
rich in Gothic imageries; and the most striking part of the poem, which is
mentioned by Chaucer as a popular romance.

Sir Lybeaus, knyt corteys Courteous.
,
Rode ynto the palys,
And at the halle alyte Alighted.
:
Trompes, shalmuses Instruments of music.
,
He sey, be fore the hey deys He saw at the high table.
,
Stand in his syte.
A mydde the halle flore,
A fere, sterke and store A Fire, large and strong. Stor^ is flour.
,
Was lyt, and brende bryt Lighted, and burned bright.
.
Ner the dor he ede Yede. Went into the door of the hall, with his horse.
,
And ladde Led.
in his stead
That wont was help him in fyt.
Lybeaus inner Farther in.
began pace
To se each a place To see, to view, every place or thing.
,
The hales Perhaps, Holes, i. e. corners.
in the halle,
Of main mor ne less
Ne saw he body ne face He saw no man.
,
But menestrelles yclothen in palle, etc. Clothed in rich attire.

So much melodye
Was never with ynne wall.
Before each menstrell stood
A torche fer A torch fair and good.
and good,
Brennynge fair and bryt.
Inner more he ede,
To wit, with egre mode
Who scholde To know, in angry mood what knight would, etc.
with him fyt:
He ede ynto the corneres,
And looked on the pileres,
That selcouth were of sit,
Of jasper and of fyn crystal, etc.
The doors were of bras;
The windows were of glass
Ffloryssed with imagerye Painted glass.
^
The halle ypaynted was The walls were painted with histories.
^
No rycher never there was
That he had seye with eye Had seen.
.
He set him on the hye deys He sat down in the principal seat.
,
The mynstrelles were in pes Were suddenly silent.
,
That were so good and try Tried. Excellent. Chaucer, RIM. SIR THOP. p. 146.
Urr. v. 3361. With singer that is tri^.

.
The torches that brende bryt Burned so bright.
.
Quenched anon ryt Were instantly quenched, or extinguished.
;
The menstrelles were away Vanished away^
:
Doors, and wyndowes all,
Beten in the halle
As hit were voys of thunder, etc. --
As he sat tho dismayde,
And held himself betrayde,
Steedes herd he nay, etc MSS. Cotton. CALIG. A. 2. fol. 52. b. seq.
.
This castle is called, "A paleys queynt of gynne," and, "by negremancye
ymaketh of fayrye Ibid. f. 52. b.
."

CHAP. cviii. The mutual fidelity of two thieves.

CHAP. cix. The chest and the three pasties.

A like story is in Boccace's DECAMERON x. 1.
, in the CENTO NOVELLE ANTICHE Nov. lxv.
, and in Gower's CONFESSIO AMANTIS Lib. v. fol. 96. a.
.

The story, however, as it stands in Gower, seems to be copied from one which
is told by the hermit Barlaam to king Avenamore, in the spiritual romance,
written originally in Greek about the year 800, by Joannes Damascenus a Greek
monk See Joan. Damasceni OPERA nonnul. HISTOR. ad calc. page 12. Basil. 1548.
fol. The chests are here called Arcellae.
, and translated into Latin before the thirteenth century, entitled, BARLAAM
and JOSAPHAT See supr. vol. ii. p. 17. And ibid. EM. and ADDIT. to page 342.
. But Gower's immediate author, if not Boccace, was perhaps Vincent of
Beauvais, who wrote about the year 1290, and who has incorporated Damascenus's
history of Barlaam and Josaphat It is extant in Surius, and other collections.
, who were canonised, into his SPECULUM HISTORIALE DE REGE AUEMUR, etc. Lib.
xiv. f. 196. Ven. 1591. It contains sixty-four chapters.
. As Barlaam's fable is probably the remote but original source of
Shakespeare's CASKETTS in the MERCHANT OF VENICE, I will give the reader a
translation of the passage in which it occurs, from the Greek original, never
yet printed. "The king commanded four chests to be made: two of which were
covered with gold, and secured by golden locks, but filled with the rotten
bones of human carcasses. The other two were overlaid with pitch, and bound
with rough cords; but replenished with precious stones and the most exquisite
gems, and with ointments of the richest odor. He called his nobles together;
and placing these chests before them, asked which they thought the most
valuable. They pronounced those with the golden coverings to be the most
precious, supposing they were made to contain the crowns and girdles of the
king In doctor Johnson's abridgement of a tale like this from Boccace, which he
supposes to have been Shakespeare's original, the king says, that in one of the
Caskets was "contained his crown, scepter and jewels, etc." See Steeven^'s
SHAKESPEARE, vol. iii. p. 255. edit. 1779.
. The two chests covered with pitch they viewed with contempt. Then said the
king, I presumed what would be your determination: for ye look with the eyes of
sense. But to discern baseness or value, which are hid within, we must look
with the eyes of the mind. He then ordered the golden chests to be opened,
which exhaled an intolerable stench, and filled the beholders with horror MSS.
LAUD. C. 72. Bibl. Bodl. Compare Caxton's GOLDEN LEGEND^^ fol. ccclxxxxiii. b.
And Surius, VIT. SANCTOR. Novembr. 27. Ann. 383. page 560. Colon. Agrippin.
1618.
." In the METRICAL LIVES OF THE SAINTS, written about the year 1300, these
chests are called four fates, that is, four vats or vessels MSS. BODL. 779. f.
292. b.
.

I make no apology for giving the reader a translation from the same Greek
original, which is now before me, of the story of the Boy told in the
DECAMERON. "A king had an only son. As soon as he was born, the physicians
declared, that if he was allowed to see the sun, or any fire, before he arrived
at the age of twelve years, he would be blind. The king commanded an apartment
to be hewed within a rock, into which no light could enter; and here he shut up
the boy, totally in the dark, yet with proper attendants, for twelve years. At
the end of which time, he brought him abroad from his gloomy chamber, and
placed in his view, men, women, gold, precious stones, rich garments, chariots
of exquisite workmanship drawn by horses with golden bridles, heaps of purple
tapestry, armed knights on horseback, oxen and sheep. These were all distinctly
pointed out to the youth: but being most pleased with the women, he desired to
know by what name they were called. An esquire of the king jocosely told him,
that they were devils who catch men. Being brought to the king, he was asked
which he liked best of all the fine things he had seen. He replied, the devils
who catch men, etc." I need not enlarge on Boccace's improvements Thi^ fabl^
occur^ in an old Collection of Apologue^ above cited, MSS. HA^L. 463. fol. 2. a.
.

This romantic legend of Barlaam and Josaphat, which is a history of
considerable length, is undoubtedly the composition of one who had an
intercourse with the east: and from the strong traces which it contains of the
oriental mode of moralizing, appears plainly to have been written, if not by
the monk whose name it bears, at least by some devout and learned ascetic of
the Greek church, and probably before the tenth century.

Leland mentions DAMASCENUS DE GESTIS BARLAAM ET JOSAPHAT, as one of the
manuscripts which he saw in Nettleyabbey near Southampton COLL^CTAN. tom. iii.
p. 149. edit. 1770.
.

CHAP. cx. The life of the knight Placidus, or Placidas Sir Placidas i^ the
name of a knight in the FA^RIE QUE^NE.
, afterward called Eustacius.

It occurs in Caxton's GOLDEN LEGENDE Fol. cccxxiii. b. S^^ vol. ii. p. 190.
And METRIC. LIVES S. MSS. Bodl. 779. f. 164. a.
. Among the Cotton manuscripts there is a metrical legend or romance on this
story CALIG.^ A. 2. fol. 135. b. Thi^ is a translation from the French. MSS.
Reg. Paris. Cod. 3031.
.

CHAP. cxi. The classical story of Argus and Mercury, with some romantic
additions. Mercury comes to Argus in the character of a minstrel, and lulls him
to sleep by telling him tales and singing, incepit more histrionico fabulas
dicere, et plerumque cantare.

CHAP. cxii. The son of king Gorgonius is beloved by hi^ stepmother. He is
therefore sent to seek his fortune in a foreign country, where he studies
physic; and returning, heals his father of a dangerous disease, who recovers at
the sight of him. The stepmother, hearing of his return, falls sick, and dies
at seeing him.

CHAP. cxiii. The tournaments of the rich king Adonias^ A party of knights
arrive the first day, who lay their shields aside, in one place. The same
number arrives the second day, each of whom chooses his antagonist by touching
with his spear the shield of one of the first day's party, not knowing the
owner.

The most curious anecdote of chivalry, now on record, occurs in the
ecclesiastical history of Spain. Alphonsus the ninth, about the year 1214,
having expelled the Moors from Toledo, endeavored to establish the Roman
missal in the place of saint Isidore's. This alarming innovation was
obstinately opposed by the people of Toledo; and the king found that his
project would be attended with almost insuperable difficulties. The contest at
length between the two missals grew so serious, that it was mutually resolved
to decide the controversy, not by a theological disputation, but by single
combat; in which the champion of the Toletan missal proved victorious See the
MOZARA^ES, or Missal of saint Isidore, p^inted at Toledo, by the command of
Cardinal Ximenes, A. D^ 1500. fol.
.

Many entertaining passages relating to trials by single combat may be seen in
the old Imperial and Lombard laws. In Caxton's BOOK OF THE FAYTTES OF ARMS AND
OF CHIVALRYE, printed at Westminster in the year 1489, and translated from the
French of Christine of Pisa, many of the chapters toward the end are compiled
from that singular monument of Gothic legislation.

CHAP. cxv. An intractable elephant is lulled asleep in a forest by the songs
and blandishments of two naked virgins. One of them cuts off his head, the
other carries a bowl of his blood to the king. Rex vero gavisus est valde, et
statim fecit fieri PURPURAM, et multa alia, de eodem sanguine.

In this wild tale, there are circumstances enough of general analogy, if not
of peculiar parallelism, to recall to my memory the following beautiful
description, in the manuscript romance of SIR LAUNFAL, of two damsels, whom the
knight unexpectedly meets in a desolate forest.

As he sat in sorrow and sore,
He saw come out of holtes hoar
Gentle maydenes two;
Thar kertelles were of Inde sandel Indian silk. Cendal. Fr. See Dufresne, LAT.
GL. V. CENDALUM.

I lassed Laced.
small, jolyf and well;
Thar myt There might.
noon gayer go.
Thar manteles were of grene felwette Velvet.

Ybordured with gold ryte well ysette,
I pelured Furred. Pelura. Pellis.
with gris and gro Gris is fur. Gris and gray is common in the metrical
romances.
;
Har heddys Their heads.
were dyt well withal,
Everych had on a jolyf coronall,
With sixty gemmys and mo More.
.
Har faces was white as snow on down,
Har rode Ruddiness.
was red, har eyn were broune,
I saw never none swyche Such.
.
The oon bar of gold a basyn,
That other a towayle whyt and fyn,
Of sylk that was good and rich.
Har kercheves were well schyre Cut.

Arayd with rich gold wyre, etc. MSS. Cotton. CALI^. A. 2. fol. 35. a.

CHAP. cxvi. The queen of Pepin king of France died in childbed, leaving a son.
He married a second wife, who bore a son within a year. These children were
sent abroad to be nursed. The surviving queen, anxious to see her child,
desired that both the boys might be brought home. They were so exceedingly
alike, that the one could not be distinguished from the other, except by the
king. The mother begged the king to point out her own son. This he refused to
do, till they were both grown up; left she should spoil him by too fond a
partiality. Thus they were both properly treated with uniform affection, and
without excess of indulgence.

A favorite old romance is founded on the indistinctible likeness of two of
Charlemagne's knights, Amys and Amelion; originally celebrated by Turpin, and
placed by Vincent of Beauvais under the reign of Pepin SPECUL. HIST. xxiii. c.
162. f. ^29. b.
.

CHAP. cxvii. The law of the emperor Frederick, that whoever rescued a virgin
from a rape might claim her for his wife.

CHAP. cxviii. A knight being in Egypt, recovers a thousand talents which he
had entrusted to a faithless friend, by the artifice of an old woman.

This tale is in Alphonsus. And in the CENTO NOVELLE ANTICHE Nov. lxx^v.
.

CHAP. cxix. A king had an oppressive Seneshall, who passing through a forest,
fell into a deep pit, in which were a lion, an ape, and a serpent. A poor man
who gathered sticks in the forest hearing his cries, drew him up: together with
the lion, the ape, and the serpent. The Seneshall returned home, promising to
reward the poor man with great riches. Soon afterward the poor man went to the
palace to claim the promised reward; but was ordered to be cruelly beaten by
the seneshall. In the mean time, the lion drove ten asses laden with gold to
the poor man's cottage: the serpent brought him a precious stone of three
colors: and the ape, when he came to the forest on his daily business, laid
him heaps of wood. The poor man, in consequence of the virtues of the serpent's
precious stone, which he sold, arrived to the dignity of knighthood, and
acquired ample possessions. But afterward he found the precious stone in his
chest, which he presented to the king. The king having heard the whole story,
ordered the seneshall to be put to death for his ingratitude, and preferred the
poor man to his office.

This story occurs in Symeon Seth's translation of the celebrated Arabian
fable-book called CALILAH U DUMNAH P. 444. This work was translated into
Engli^^ under the title of "Donies MORAL PHILOSOPHY, translated from the
Indian tongue, 1570." Black Letter with wooden cuts. 4to. But Doni was the
Italian translator.
. It is recited by Matthew Paris, under the year 1195, as a parable which king
Richard the first, after his return from the east, was often accustomed to
repeat, by way of reproving those ungrateful princes who refused to engage in
the crusade HIST. MAN. p. 179. Edit. Wats.
. It is versified by Gower, who omits the lion, as Matthew Paris does the ape,
in the fifth book of the CONFESSIO AMANTIS fol. 110. b.
. He thus describes the services of the ape and serpent to the poor man^ who
gained his livelihood by gathering sticks in a forest.

He began his ape anon behold,
Which had gadred al about,
Of sticks here and there a route,
And leyde hem ready to his hand,
Whereof he made his trusse and ^ond
From day to day. --
Upon a time and as he drough
Toward the woodde, he sigh beside
The great ghastly serpent glide,
Till that she came in his presence,
And in her kind a reverence
She has him do, and forthwith all
A stone more bright than a crystal
Out of her mouth to fore his way
She let down fall. --
In Gower also, as often as the poor man sells the precious stone, on returning
home, he finds it again among the money in his purse.

The acquisition of riches, and the multiplication of treasure, by invisible
agency, is a frequent and favorite fiction of the Arabian romance. Thus, among
the presents given to Sir Launfal by the Lady Triamore, daughter of the king of
Faerie.

I will the eve Give thee.
an Alver Perhaps Almer, or Almere, a cabinet or chest.
,
I mad of sylver and gold cler,
With fair images three:
As often thou put thy hand there ynne,
A mark of gold thou shall win Get. Find.
,
In wat place shall thou be SIR LAUN^AL. MSS. Cott. CALI^. A. 2. fol 35. b.
.
CHAP. XX. King Darius's legacy to his three sons. To the eldest he bequeathes
all his paternal inheritance: to the second, all that he had acquired by
conquest: and to the third, a ring and necklace, both of gold, and a rich
cloth. All the three last gifts were endued with magical virtues. Whoever wore
the ring on his finger, gained the love or favor of all whom he desired to
please. Whoever hung the necklace over his breast, obtained all his heart could
desire. Whoever sat down on the cloth, could be instantly transported to any
part of the world which he chose.

From this beautiful tale, of which the opening only is here given, Occleve,
commonly called Chaucer's disciple, framed a poem in the octave stanza, which
was printed in the year 1614, by William Brown, in his set of Eclogues called
the SHEPHERDS PIPE. Occleve has literally followed the book before us, and has
even translated into English prose the MORALISATION annexed Viz. MSS. S^LD.
Sup. 53. Where is a prologue of many stanzas not printed by Brown. See also
MSS. Dio^. 185. MSS. LAUD. K. 78. [See supr. vol. ii. 38.]
. He has given no sort of embellishment to his original, and by no means
deserves the praises which Brown in the following elegant pastoral lyrics has
bestowed on his performance, and which more justly belong to the genuine
Gothic, or rather Arabian, inventor.

Well I wot, the man that first
Sung this lay, did quench his thirst
Deeply as did ever one
In the Muses Helicon.
Many times he has been seen
With the faeries on the green,
And to them his pipe did sound
As they danced in a round;
Mickle solace would they make him,
And at midnight often wake him,
And convey him from his room
To a field of yellow broom,
Or into the meadows where
Mints perfume the gentle air,
And where Flora spreads her treasure
There they would beginn their measure.
If it chancd night's sable shrowds
Muffled Cynthia up in clouds,
Safely home they then would see him,
And from brakes and quagmires free him.
There are few such swains as he
Now a days for harmony EGL. i.
.
The history of Darius, who gave this legacy to his three sons, is incorporated
with that of Alexander, which has been decorated with innumerable fictions by
the Arabian writers. There is also a separate romance on Darius. And on Philip
of Macedon Bibl. REG. Paris. MSS. Cod. 3031.
.

CHAP. cxxiv. Of the knights who intercede for their friend with a king, by
coming to his court, each half on horse back and half on foot.

This is the last novel in the CENTO NOVELLE ANTICHE.

CHAP. cxxvi. Macrobius is cited for the address and humor of an ingenuous boy
named Papirius.

This is one of the most lively stories in Macrobius SATURNAL. Lib. i. c. 6.
page 147. Londin. 1694.
.

CHAP. cxxviii. The forged testament of the wicked knight, under the reign of
Maximian.

CHAP. cxxix. A young prince is sent on his travels. His three friends.

CHAP. cxxxii. The four physicians.

CHAP. cxxxiii. The king and his two greyhounds.

CHAP. cxxxiv. A story from Seneca.

CHAP. cxxxv. The story of Lucretia, from saint Austin's CITY OF GOD.

A more classical authority for this story, had it been at hand, would have
been slighted for saint Austin's CITY OF GOD, which was the favorite spiritual
romance; and which, as the transition from religion to gallantry was anciently
very easy, gave rise to the famous old French romance called the CITY OF LADIES.

CHAP. cxxxvii. The Roman emperor who is banished for his impartial
distribution of justice. From the CRONICA of Eusebius.

CHAP. cxxxviii. King Medro.

CHAP. cxxxix. King Alexander, by means of a mirror, kills a cockatrice, whose
look had destroyed the greatest part of his army.

Aelian, in his VARIOUS HISTORY, mentions a serpent which appearing from the
mouth of a cavern, stopped the march of Alexander's army through a spacious
desert. The wild beasts, serpents, and birds, which Alexander encountered in
marching through India, were most extravagantly imagined by the oriental
fabulists, and form the chief wonders of that monarch's romance In Vincent of
Beauvais, there is a long fabulous History of Alexander, transcribed partly
from Simeon Seth. SPEC. HIST. Lib. iv. c. i. f. 41. a. seq. edit. Ven. 1591.
fol.
.

CHAP. cxl. The emperor Eraclius reconciles two knights.

This story is told by Seneca of Cneius Piso De IR A. Lib. i. c. 8.
. It occurs in Chaucer's SOMPNOUR'S TALE, as taken from Senec, or Seneca Ver.
7600. Tyrwh.
.

CHAP. cxli. A knight who had dissipated all his substance in frequenting
tournaments, under the reign of Fulgentius, is reduced to extreme poverty. A
serpent haunted a chamber of his house; who being constantly fed with milk by
the knight, in return made his benefactor rich. The knight's ingratitude and
imprudence in killing the serpent, who was supposed to guard a treasure
concealed in his chamber.

Medea's dragon guarding the golden fleece is founded on the oriental idea of
treasure being guarded by serpents. We are told in Vincent of Beauvais, that
there are mountains of solid gold in India guarded by dragons and griffins
SPECUL. HIST. Lib. i. c. 64. fol. 9. b.
.

CHAP. cxliii. A certain king ordained a law, that if any man was suddenly to
be put to death, at sunrising a trumpet should be sounded before his gate. The
king made a great feast for all his nobles, at which the most skilful musicians
were present In the days of chivalry, a concert of a variety of instruments of
music constantly made a part of the solemnity of a splendid feast. Of this many
instances have been given. I will here add another^ from the unprinted metrical
romance of EMAR^. MSS. Cott. CALI^. A. 2. fol. 71. ^. Sire Ladore latte make a
feste,
That was sayre and honest,
With his lord the king;
There was myche minstralse,
Trompus, tabors, and sawtre,
Both harp, and fydyllynge:
The lady was gentle and small,
In kurtell alone served in hall
By fore that nobull king;
The cloth upon her schone so bryth,
When she was th^r in dyth,
She seemed non erdly thing, etc.
And in Chaucer, JAN. AND MAY, v. 1234. At every course came the loud
minstralsie.

. But amidst the general festivity, the king was sad and silent. All the guests
were surprised and perplexed at the king's melancholy; but at length his
brother ventured to ask him the cause. The king replied, "Go home, and you
shall hear my answer to morrow." The king ordered his trumpeters to sound early
the next morning before his brother's gate, and to bring him with them to
judgment. The brother, on hearing this unexpected dreadful summons, was seized
with horror, and came before the king in a black robe. The king commanded a
deep pit to be made, and a chair composed of the most frail materials, and
supported by four slight legs, to be placed inclining over the edge of the pit.
In this the brother, being stripped naked, was seated. Over his head a sharp
sword was hung by a small thread of silk. Around him four men were stationed
with swords exceedingly sharp, who were to wait for the king's word, and then
to kill him. In the mean time, a table covered with the most costly dishes was
spread before him, accompanied with all sorts of music. Then said the king, "My
brother, why are you so sad? Can you be dejected, in the midst of this
delicious music, and with all these choice dainties?" He answered, "How can I
be glad, when I have this morning heard the trumpet of death at my doors, and
while I am seated in this tottering chair? If I make the smallest motion, it
will break, and I shall fall into the pit, from which I shall never arise
again. If I lift my head, the suspended sword will penetrate my brain; while
these four tormentors only wait your command to put me to death." The king
replied, "Now I will answer your question, why I was sad yesterday. I am
exactly in your situation. I am seated, like you, in a frail and perishable
chair, ready to tumble to pieces every moment, and to throw me into the
infernal pit. Divine judgment, like this sharp sword, hangs over my head: and
I am surrounded, like you, with four executioners. That before me is Death,
whose coming I cannot tell; that behind me, my Sins, which are prepared to
accuse me before the tribunal of God; that on the right, the Devil, who is ever
watching for his prey; and that on the left, the Worm, who is now (...) after
my flesh. Go in peace, my dearest brother: and never ask me again why I am sad
at a feast."

Gower, in the CONFESSIO AMANTIS, may perhaps have copied the circumstance of
the morning trumpet from this apologue. His king is a king of Hungary.

It so befell, that on a dawe
There was ordained by the law
A Trompe with a stern breathe,
Which was cleped the Trompe of death:
And in the court where the king was,
A certain man, this trompe of brass
Has in keeping, and thereof serves,
That when a lord his death deserves,
He shall this dreadful trompe blow
To fore his gate, to make it know,
How that the jugement is yeve
Of death, which shall not be foryeve.
The king when it was night anon,
This man assent, and bad him gone,
To trompen at his brothers gate;
And he, which mote done algate,
Goth forth, and does the kyng's heste.
This lord which herd of this tempest
That he tofore his gate blewe,
Tho wist he by the law, and knew
That he was schurly dead, etc Lib. i. fol. xix. b. col. i.
.
But Gower has connected with this circumstance a different story, and of an
inferior cast, both in point of moral and imagination. The truth is, Gower
seems to have altogether followed this story as it appeared in the SPECULUM
HISTORIALE of Vincent of Beauvais Ubi supr. p. xlix.
, who took it from Damascenus's romance of BARLAAM AND JOSAPHAT OPP. ut supr.
page 12.
. Part of it is thus told in Caxton's translation of that legend See Caxton's
GOLDEN LE^^NDE, fol. ccclxxxxiii. b. See also METRICAL LIVES OF THE SAINTS,
MSS. BODL. 779. f. 292. a.
. "And the king had such a custom, that when one should be delyvered to
death, the king should send his cryar with his trompe that was ordained
thereto. And on the even he sent the cryar with the trompe tofore his brother's
gate, and made to soune the trompe. And when the kings brother herd this, he
was in despayr of saving of his life, and could not sleep of all the night,
and made his testament. And on the morn erly, he cladde him in black: and
came with weeping with his wife and children to the kings paleys. And the king
made him to com tofore him, and said to him, a fooll that thou art, that thou
have herd the messager of thy brother, to whom thou know well thou have not
trespaced and doubtest so mooche, how ought not I then ne doubt the
messageres of our lord, against whom I have so often sinned, which signef^ed
unto me more clearly the death then the trompe?"

CHAP. cxlv. The philosopher Socrates shows the cause of the insalubrity of a
passage between two mountains in Armenia, by means of a polished mirror of
steel. Albertus is cited; an abbot of Stade, and the author of a Chronicle from
Adam to 1256.

CHAP. cxlvi. Saint Austin's CITY OF GOD is quoted for an answer of Diomedes
the pirate to king Alexander.

CHAP. cxlviii. Aulius Gellius is cited.

Aulus Gellius is here quoted, for the story of Arion It is printed Amon.
, throwing himself into the sea, and carried on the back of a dolphin to king
Periander at Corinth NOCT. ATTIC. Lib. xvi. cap. xix.
. Gellius relates this story from Herodotus, in whom it is now extant Lib. viii.
.

CHAP. cliii. The history of Apollonius of Tire.

This story, the longest in the book before us, and the groundwork of a
favorite old romance, is known to have existed before the year 1190.

In the Prologue to the English romance on this subject, called KING APOLYNE
OF THYRE, and printed by Wynkyn de Word in 1510, we are told. "My worshypfull
master Wynkyn de Word, havynge a little book of an ancient hystory of a
king sometime reygnyne in the country of Thyre called Appolyn, concerning his
malfortunes and peryllous adventures right espouventables, bryefly compyled and
pyteous for to here; the which book, I Robert Coplande The printer of that
name. He also translated from the French, at the desire of Edward duke of
Buckingham, the romance of the KNIGHT OF THE SWANNE. See his PROLOGUE.
have me applied for to translate out of the Frensshe language into our
maternal English tongue, at the exhortacyon of my foresaid master, according
dyrectly to mine auctor: gladly followynge the trace of my master Caxton,
beginning with small stories and pamf^etes and so to other." The English
romance, or the French, which is the same thing, exactly corresponds in many
passages with the text of the GESTA. I will instance in the following one only,
in which the complication of the fable commences. King Appolyn dines in
disguise in the hall of king Antiochus. -- "Came in the kings daughter,
accompanied with many ladies and damoyselles, whose splendente beauty were too
long to endyte, for her rosacyate color was meddled with great favor. She
drank unto her fader, and to all the lords, and to all them that had been at
the play of the Shield The tournament. To tourney is often called simply to
play. As thus in SIR LAUNFAL, MSS. Cott. CALIG. A. 2. fol. 37. Him thote he
burnt bryte
But he my^te with Launfal pleye
In the field be tweene ham twey
To justy or to fyte.
And in many other places.
. And as she beheld here and there, she espied king Appolyn, and then she
said unto her fader, Sir, what is he that sytteth so hye as by you, it seems
by him that he is angry or sorrowful? The king said, I never saw so nimble
and pleasant a player at the shield, and therefore have I made him to come and
soupe with my knights. And if ye will know what he is, demand him; for
peradventure he will tell you sooner than me. Methynke that he is departed from
some good place, and I think in my mind that somethynge is befallen him for
which he is sorry. This said, the noble dameysell went unto Appolyn and said,
"Fair Sir, grant me a boon. And he granted her with good heart. And she
said unto him, albeyt that your vysage be tryst and hevy, your behavour shows
noblesse and facundyte, and therefore I pray you to tell me of your affayre and
estate. Appolyn answered, If ye demand of my rychesses, I have lost them in
the sea. The damoysell said, I pray you that you tell me of your adventures
CAP. xi.
." But in the GESTA, the princess at entering the royal hall kisses all the
knights and lords present, except the stranger Fol. lxxii. b. col. 2.
. Vossius says, that about the year 1520, one Alamanus Rinucinus a Florentine,
translated into Latin this fabulous history; and that the translation was
corrected by Beroaldus. Vossius certainly cannot mean, that he translated it
from the Greek original HIST. LAT. Lib. iii. c. 8. page 552. edit. 1627. 4to.
.

CHAP. cliv. A story from Gervase of Tilbury, an Englishman, who wrote about
the year 1200, concerning a miraculous statue of Christ in the city of Edessa.

CHAP. clv. The adventures of an English knight named Albert in a subterraneous
passage, within the bishopric of Ely.

This story is said to have been told in the winter after supper, in a castle,
cum familia divitis ad focum, ut Potentibus moris est, RECENSENDIS ANTIQUIS
GESTIS operam daret, when the family of a rich man, as is the custom with the
Great, was sitting round the fire, and telling ANCIENT GESTS. Here is a traite
of the private life of our ancestors, who wanted the diversions and engagements
of modern times to relieve a tedious evening. Hence we learn, that when a
company was assembled, if a jugler or a minstrel were not present, it was their
custom to entertain themselves by relating or hearing a series of adventures.
Thus the general plan of the CANTERBURY TALES, which at first sight seems to be
merely an ingenious invention of the poet to serve a particular occasion, is in
great measure founded on a fashion of ancient life: and Chaucer, in supposing
each of the pilgrims to tell a tale as they are traveling to Becket's shrine,
only makes them adopt a mode of amusement which was common to the conversations
of his age. I do not deny, that Chaucer has shown his address in the use and
application of this practice.

So habitual was this amusement in the dark ages, that the graver sort thought
it unsafe for ecclesiastics, if the subjects admitted any degree of levity. The
following curious injunction was deemed necessary, in a code of statutes
assigned to a college at Oxford in the year 1292. I give it in English. "CHAPTER
xx. -- The fellows shall all live honestly, as becomes Clerks. -- They shall
not rehearse, sing, nor willingly hear, BALLADS or TALES of LOVERS, which tend
to lasciviousness and idleness CANTILENA^ VEL FABULAS DE AMASIIS, etc. MS.
Registr. Univ. Oxon. D. b. f. 76. See supr. vol. i. 92.
." Yet the libraries of our monasteries, as I have before observed, were filled
with romances. In that of Croyland-abbey we find even archbishop Turpin's
romance, placed on the same shelf with Robert Tumbeley on the Canticles, Roger
Dymock against Wickliffe, and Thomas Waleys on the Psalter. But their apology
must be, that they thought this a true history: at least that an archbishop
could write nothing but truth. Not to mention that the general subject of those
books were the triumphs of christianity over paganism Leland. COLL. iii. p. 30.
.

CHAP. clvi. Ovid, in his TROJAN WAR, is cited for the story of Achilles
disguised in female apparel.

Gower has this history more at large in the CONFESSIO AMANTIS: but he refers
to a Cronike, which seems to be the BOOK OF TROIE, mentioned at the end of the
chapter Lib. v. fol. 99. b. col. 2. See fol. 101. a. col. 1. 2.
.

CHAP. clvii. The porter of a gate at Rome, who taxes all deformed persons
entering the city. This tale is in Alphonsus. And in the CENTO NOVELLE ANTICHE
Nov. 50.
.

CHAP. clviii. The discovery of the gigantic body of Pallas, son of Evander, at
Rome, which exceeded in height the wa^^s of the city, was uncorrupted, and
accompanied with a burning lamp, two thousand two hundred and forty years after
the destruction of Troy. His wound was fresh, which was four feet and a half in
length.

It is curious to observe, the romantic exaggerations of the classical story.

CHAP. clix. Josephus, in his book de Causis rerum naturalium, is quoted, for
Noah's discovery of wine.

I know not any book of Josephus on this subject. The first editor of the Latin
Josephus was Ludovicus Cendrata of Verona, who was ignorant that he was
publishing a modern translation. In the Dedication he complains, that the
manuscript was brought to him from Bononia so ill-written, that it was often
impossible even to guess at Josep^us's words. And in another place he says,
Josephus first wrote the ANTIQUITATES in Hebrew, and that he afterward
translated them from Hebrew into Greek, and from Greek into Latin At Verona.
1480. By Peter Mauffer a Frenchman. It is a most beautiful and costly book,
printed on vellum in folio.
.

The substance of this chapter is founded on a Rabbinical tradition, related by
Fabricius COD. PSEUD^^IGR. VET. TESTAM. vol. i. p. 275.
. When Noah planted the vine, Satan attended, and sacrificed a sheep, a lion,
an ape, and a sow. These animals were to symbolise the gradations of ebriety.
When a man begins to drink, he is meek and ignorant as the lamb, then becomes
bold as the lion, his courage is soon transformed into the foolishness of the
ape, and at last he wallows in the mire like the sow. Chaucer hence says in the
MANCIPLES PROLOGUE, as the passage is justly corrected by Mr. Tyrwhitt, I trow
that ye have dronken wine of ape,
And that is when men plaien at a straw Ver. 16993. Tyrwh.
.
In the old KALENDRIER DES BERGERS, as Mr. Tyrwhitt has remarked, Vin de singe,
vin de mouton, vin de lion, and vin de porceau, are mentioned, in their
respective operations on the four temperaments of the human body.

CHAP. clxi. Of a hill in a forest of England, where if a hunter sat after the
chase, he was refreshed by a miraculous person of a mild aspect, bearing a
capacious horn, adorned with gems and gold The text says, "Such a one as is
used at this day."
, and filled with the most delicious liquor. This person instantly disappeared
after administering the draught; which was of so wonderful a nature, as to
dispel the most oppressive lassitude, and to make the body more vigorous than
before. At length, a hunter having drank of this horn, ungratefully refused to
return it to the friendly apparition; and his master, the lord of the forest,
lest he should appear to countenance so atrocious a theft, gave it to king
Henry the elder That is, Henry the First, king of England.
.

This story, which seems imperfect, I suppose, is from Gervase of Tilbury.

CHAP. clxii. The same author is cited for an account of a hill in Castile, on
which was a palace of demons.

Whenever our compiler quotes Gervase of Tilbury, the reference is to his OTIA
IMPERIALIA: which is addressed to the emperor Otho the fourth, and contains his
Commentarius de regnis Imperatorum Romanorum, his Mundi Descriptio, and his
Tractatus de Mirabilibus Mundi. All these four have been improperly supposed to
be separate works.

CHAP. clxiii. King Alexander's son Celestinus.

CHAP. clxvii. The archer and the nightingale.

This fable is told in the Greek legend of BARLAAM AND JOSAPHAT, written by
Johannes Damascenus OPP. ut supr. p. 22. See also Suriu^, ut supr. Novembr. 27.
page 565.
. And in Caxton's GOLDEN LEGENDE Fol. ccclxxxxii. b.
. It is also found in the CLERICALIS DISCIPLINA of Alphonsus.

CHAP. clxviii. Barlaam is cited for the story of a man, who, flying from a
unicorn, and falling into a deep and noisome pit, hung on the boughs of a lofty
tree which grew from the bottom. On looking downward, he saw a huge dragon
twisted round the trunk, and gaping to devour him. He also observed two mice
gnawing at the roots of the tree, which began to totter. Four white vipers
impregnated the air of the pit with their poisonous breath. Looking about him,
he discovered a stream of honey distilling from one of the branches of the tree,
which he began eagerly to devour, without regarding his dangerous situation.
The tree soon fell: he found himself struggling in a loathsome quagmire, and
was instantly swallowed by the dragon.

This is another of Barlaam's apologues in Damascenus's romance of BARLAAM AND
JOSAPHAT: and which has been adopted into the Lives of the Saints by Surius and
others See Caxton's GOLDEN L^GEND^ ^ol. cccclxxxxiiii. a.
. A MORALISATION is subjoined, exactly agreeing with that in the GESTA See
Damascenus, ut supr. page 31. And METRICAL LIVES OF SAINTS, MSS. BODL. 779. f.
293. b.
.

CHAP. clxix. Trogus Pompeius is cited, for the wise legislation of Ligurius, a
noble knight.

Our compiler here means Justin's abridgement of Trogus; which, to the
irreparable injury of literature, soon destroyed its original. An early epitome
of Livy would have been attended with the same unhappy consequences.

CHAP. clxx. The dice player and saint Bernard.

This is from saint Bernard's legend See Caxton's GOLD. LEG. f. cxxix. b^
.

CHAP. clxxi. The two knights of Egypt and Baldach.

This is the story of Boccace's popular novel of TITO AND GISIPPO, and of
Lydgate's T^le of two Merchants of Egypt and of Baldad, a manuscript poem in
the British Museum, and lately in the library of doctor Askew R. Edwards has a
play on this story, 1582.
. Peter Alphonsus is quoted for this story; and it makes the second Fable of
his CLERICALIS DISCIPLINA.

I take the liberty of introducing a small digression here, which refers to two
pieces of the poet last-mentioned, never enumerated among his works. In the
year 1483, Caxton printed at Westminster, " The PYLGREMAGE^ OF THE SOUL
translated out of Frensshe into Englisshe. Full of devout matters touching the
soul, and many questyons assoyled to cause a man to lyve the better, etc.
Emprinted at Westminster by William Caxton the first year of king Edward V.
1483." The French book, which is a vision, and has some degree of imagination,
is probably the PELERIN DE L'AME, of Guillaume prior of Chaulis See supr. vol.
ii. p. 120.
. This translation was made from the French, with additions, in the year 1413.
For in the colophon are these words. "Here ends the dreme of the PYLGREMAGE
OF THE SOUL translated out of Frensche into Englisshe, with somewhat of
Addicions, the year of our lord M. CCCC. and thyrteen, and endethe in the
vigyle of seint Bartholomew." The translator of this book, at least the author
of the Addicions, which altogether consist of poetry in seven-lined stanzas, I
believe to be Lydgate. Not to insist on the correspondence of time and style, I
observe, that the thirty-fourth chapter of Lydgate's metrical LIFE OF THE
VIRGIN MARY is literally repeated in the thirtyfourth chapter of this
Translation. This chapter is a digression of five or six stanzas in praise of
Chaucer; in which the writer feelingly laments the recent death of his master
Chaucer, poet of Britain, who used to amend and correct the wrong traces
of my rude pen. No writer besides, in Lydgate's own lifetime, can be
supposed, with any sort of grace or propriety, to have mentioned those personal
assistances of Chaucer, in Lydgate's own words. And if we suppose that the
Translation, or its Addicions, were written by Lydgate before he wrote his LIFE
OF THE VIRGIN, the proof will be the same Stowe mentions Lydgate's "PILGRIMAGE
OF THE WORLD by the commandment of the earl of Salisburie, 1426." But this
must be a different work. Ad calc. Opp. Chauc. fol. 376, col. 1.
.

Another piece probably written by Lydgate, yet never supposed or acknowledged
to be of his composition, is a poem in the octave stanza, containing
thirty-seven leaves in folio, and entitled LABEROUS AND MARVEYLOUS WORK OF
SAPIENCE. After a long debate between MERCY and TRUTH, and JUSTICE and PEACE,
all the products of nature and of human knowledge are described, as they stand
arranged in the palace and dominions of WISDOM. It is generally allowed to have
been printed by Caxton: it has not the name of the printer, nor any date. Had
it been written by Caxton, as I once hastily suspected, or by any of his
cotemporaries, the name of Lydgate would have appeared in conjunction with
those of Gower and Chaucer, who are highly celebrated in the Prologue as
erthely gods expert in poesy: for these three writers were constantly joined
in panegyric, at least for a century, by their successors, as the distinguished
triumvirate of English poetry. In the same Prologue, the author says he was
commanded to write this poem by the king. No poet cotemporary with Caxton was
of consequence enough to receive such a command: and we know that Lydgate
compiled many of his works by the direction, or under the patronage, of king
Henry the fifth. Lydgate was born in Suffolk: and our author from the
circumstance of having lived in a part of England not of a very polished
dialect, apologizes for the rudeness of his language, so that he cannot
delycately endyte. It is much in the style and manner of Lydgate: and I believe
it to have been one of his early performances See supr. vol. ii. p. 194. I know
not if this is the poem recited by Stowe and called, "The Court of Sapience in
heaven for redemption of mankind." Ubi supr. col. i.
.

CHAP. clxxii. A king of England has two knights, named Guido and Tirius. Guido
having achieved many splendid exploits for the love of a beautiful lady, at
length married her. Three days after his marriage he saw a vision, which
summoned him to engage in the holy war. At parting she gave him a ring; saying,
"as often as you look on this ring, remember me." Soon after his departure she
had a son. After various adventures, in which his friend Tirius has a share, at
the end of seven years he returned to England in the habit of a pilgrim. Coming
to his castle, he saw at the gate his lady sitting, and distributing alms to a
crowd of poor people; ordering them all to pray for the return of her lord
Guido from the holy land. She was on that day accompanied by her son a little
boy, very beautiful, and richly apparelled; and who hearing his mother, as she
was distributing her alms, perpetually recommending Guido to their prayers,
asked, if that was his father? Among others, she gave alms to her husband
Guido, not knowing him in the pilgrim's disguise. Guido, seeing the little boy,
took him in his arms, and kissed him: saying, "O my sweet son, may God give you
grace to please him!" For this boldness he was reproved by the attendants. But
the lady, finding him destitute and a stranger, assigned him a cottage in a
neighboring forest. Soon afterward falling sick, he said to his servant,
"Carry this ring to your lady, and tell her, if she desires ever to see me
again, to come hither without delay." The servant conveyed the ring; but before
she arrived, he was dead. She threw herself on his body, and exclaimed with
tears, "Where are now my alms which I daily gave for my lord? I saw you receive
those alms, but I knew you not. -- You beheld, embraced, and kissed your own
son, but did not discover yourself to him nor to me. What have I done, that I
shall see you no more?" She then interred him magnificently.

The reader perceives this is the story of Guido, or Guy, earl of Warwick; and
probably this is the early outline of the life and death of that renowned
champion.

Many romances were at first little more than legends of devotion, containing
the pilgrimage of an old warrior. At length, as chivalry came more into vogue,
and the stores of invention were increased, the youthful and active part of the
pilgrim's life was also written, and a long series of imaginary martial
adventures was added, in which his religious was eclipsed by his heroic
character, and the penitent was lost in the knight errant. That which was the
principal subject of the short and simple legend, became only the remote
catastrophe of the voluminous romance. And hence by degrees it was almost an
established rule of every romance, for the knight to end his days in a
hermitage. Cervantes has ridiculed this circumstance with great pleasantry,
where Don Quixote holds a grave debate with Sancho, whether he shall turn saint
or archbishop.

So reciprocal, or rather so convertible, was the pious and the military
character, that even some of the apostles had their romance. In the ninth
century, the chivalrous and fabling spirit of the Spaniards transformed saint
James into a knight. They pretended that he appeared and fought with
irresistible fury, completely armed, and mounted on a stately white horse, in
most of their engagements with the Moors; and ^^cause, by his superior prowess
in these bloody conflicts, he was supposed to have freed the Spaniards from
paying the annual tribute of a hundred christian virgins to their infidel
enemies, they represented him as a professed and powerful champion of
distressed damsels. This apotheosis of chivalry in the person of their own
apostle, must have ever afterward contributed to exaggerate the
characteristical romantic heroism of the Spaniards, by which it was occasioned;
and to propagate through succeeding ages, a stronger veneration for that
species of military enthusiasm, to which they were naturally devoted. It is
certain, that in consequence of these illustrious achievements in the Moorish
wars, saint James was constituted patron of Spain; and became the founder of
one of the most magnificent shrines, and of the most opulent order of
knighthood, now existing in christendom. The Legend of this invincible apostle
is inserted in the Mosarabic liturgy.

CHAP. clxxiii. A king goes to a fair, carrying in his train, a master with one
of his scholars, who expose six bundles, containing a system of ethics, to sale
Compare Matthew. Paris. edit. Watts. p. 927. 40. -- And p. 751. 10.
.

Among the revenues accruing to the crown of England from the Fair of saint
Botolph at Boston in Lincolnshire, within the HONOR of RICHMOND, mention is
made of the royal pavilion, or booth, which stood in the fair, about the year
1280. This fair was regularly frequented by merchants from the most capital
trading towns of Normandy, Germany, Flanders, and other countries. "Ibidem [in
feria] sunt quaedam domus quae dicuntur BOTHAE REGIAE, quae valent per annum
xxviii, l. xiii, s. iiii, d. Ibidem sunt quaedam domus quas MERCATORES DE YPRE
tenent, quae valent per annum, xx, l. Et quaedam domus quas MERCATORES DE
CADOMO Caen in Normandy.
ET OSTOGANIO Perhaps, Ostend.
tenent, xi, l. Et quaedam domus quas MERCATORES DE ANACO Perhaps Le Pais
d'Aunis, between the Provinces of Poictou and Santone, where is Rochelle, a
famous port and mart.
tenent, xiii, l. vi, s. viii, d. Et quaedam domus quas MERCATORES DE COLONIA
tenent, xxv, l. x, s Registr. HONORIS DE RICHMOND. Land. 1722. fol. Number, viii.
APPEND. p. 39.
." The high rent of these lodges, is a proof that they were considerable
edifices in point of size and accommodation.

CHAP. clxxiv. The fable of a serpent cherished in a man's bosom This fable is
in Alphonsus's CLERICALIS DISCIPLINA.
.

About the year 1470, a collection of Latin fables, in six books, distinguished
by the name of Esop, was published in Germany. The three first books consist of
the sixty anonymous elegiac fables, printed in Nevelet's collection, under the
title of Anonymi Fabulae Aesopicae, and translated in 1503, by Wynkyn de Word,
with a few variations: under each is a fable in prose on the same subject from
ROMULUS, or the old prose LATIN ESOP, which was probably fabricated in the
twelfth century. The fourth book has the remaining fables of Romulus in prose
only. The fifth, containing one or two fables only which were never called
Esop's, is taken from Alphonsus, the GESTA ROMANORUM, the CALILA U DAMNAH, and
other obscure sources. The sixth and last book has seventeen fables ex
translatione Rinucii, that is Rinucius, who translated Planudes's life of Esop,
and sixty-nine of his fables, from Greek into Latin, in the fifteenth century.
This collection soon afterward was circulated in a French version, which
Caxton translated into English.

In an ancient general Chronicle, printed at Lubec in 1475, and entitled
RUDIMENTUM NOVITIORUM In this work the following question is discussed,
originally, I believe, started by saint Austin, and perhaps determined by
Thomas Aquinas, An Angeli possi^t coir^ cum Muli^rib^^, ^t generar^ Gigantes?
, a short life of Esop is introduced, together with twenty-nine of his fables.
The writer says, "Esopus adelphus claruit tempore Cyri regis Persarum. -- Vir
ingeniosus et prudens, qui confinxit fabulas el^gantes. Quas Romulus postmodum
de greco transtulit in latinum, et filio suo Tibertino direxit, etc Fol. 237. a.
." The whole of this passage about Esop is transcribed from Vincent of Beauvais
SP^CUL. HIST. L. iii. c. ii.
.

CHAP. clxxvii. The feast of king Ahasuerus and Esther.

I have mentioned a metrical romance on this subject Vol. ii. p. 178.
. And I have before observed, that Thomas of Elmham, a chronicler, calls the
coronation-feast of king Henry the sixth, a second feast of Ahasuerus Vol. ii.
p. 35.
. Hence also Chaucer's allusion at the marriage of January and May, while they
are at the solemnity of the wedding-dinner, which is very splendid. Queen
Esther looked ner with soch an eye
On Assuere, so meke a look has she MARCH TALE, v. 1260. Urr.
.


Froissart, an historian, who shares the merit with Philip de Comines of
describing every thing, gives this idea of the solemnity of a dinner of
Christmas Day, at which he was present, in the hall of the castle of Gaston
earl of Foiz at Ortez in Bevern, under the year 1388. At the upper or first
table, he says, ^ate four bishops, then the earl, three viscounts, and an
English knight belonging to the duke of Lancaster. At another table, five
abbots, and two knights of Arragon. At another, many barons and knights of
Gascony and Bigorre. At another, a great number of knights of Bevern. Four
knights were the chief stewards of the hall, and the two bastard brothers of
the earl served at the high table. "The earls two sons, sir Yvan of Leschell
was sewer, and sir Gracyen bare his cup In the old romance, or LAY, of EMARE,
a beautiful use is made of the Lady Emare's son serving as cup bearer to the
king of Galicia: by which means, the king discovers the boy to be his son, and
in consequence finds out his queen Emare, whom he had long lost. The passage
also points out the duties of this office. MSS. Cott. CALIG. A. ^. f. 69. Emare
says to the young prince, her son. To morrow thou shall serve in halle
In a kurtyll of rich palle A tunic of rich cl^th.
,
Before this nobull king;
Look, sone Son.
, so curtois thou be,
That no man find chalange to the
In no manner thing May accus^ thee of want of court^sy.
.
When the king is served of spycerye,
Knele thou down hastylye,
And take his hond in thine;
And when thou have so done,
Take the kuppe of gold, sone,
And serve him of the wine.
And what that he speaks to the
Cum anon and tell me,
On goddys blessyng and mine.
The child The ^oy.
went ynto the hall
Among the lords great and small
That lufsume were unther line ^^chly ^pparelled.
^
Then the lords, that were great,
Wysh W^shed.
, and went to her mete;
Menstrelles browt in the kours Cours^.
,
The child hem served so curteysly,
All him loved that him sy Saw.
,
And spoke him great honowres.
Then said all that looked him upon,
So curt^ys a child saw they never non,
In halle, ne in bowres:
The king said to him in game,
Sweet sone, what is thy name?
Lord, he said, y hyth I am c^ll^d.
Segramowres.
Then that nobull king
Took up a great sykynge Sighing.
,
For his sone Hi^ son.
hight so:
Certys, without lesynge,
The teres out of his yen Eyes. Eye^.
began wring.
In hert^ he was full woo:
Neverthelese, he let be^
And looked on the child so fre The boy so beautiful.
,
And mykell Greatly.
he loved hem thoo Then.
. --
Then the lords that were great
Whesshen aeyn Washed again.
, aftyr mete,
And then com spycerye Spic^ry. Spi^^d Wine.
.
The child, that was of chere sweet,
On his kne down he s^te Bow^d his knee.
,
And served hem curteyslye.
The king called the burgeys him till,
And said, Sir, if hit be thy will,
if me this little body Give me this boy.
;
I shall him make lord of town and tower,
Of hye halles, and of bower,
I love him specially, etc.

. And there were many mynstrelles, as well of his own as of strangers, and
each of them did their devoyre in their faculties. The same day the earl of
Foiz gave to harauldes and mynstrelles, the sum of fyve hundred frankes: and
gave to the duke of Touraynes mynstrelles, gowns of clothe of gold furred
with ermyns, valued at two hundred frankes. This dinner endured four hours
CRON. vol. ii. fol. xxxvi. a. Transl. Bern. 1523.
." Froissart, who was entertained in this castle for twelve weeks, thus
describes the earl's ordinary mode of supping. "In this estate the earl of Foiz
lyved. And at mydnyght when he came out of his chamber into the halle to
supper, he had ever before him twelve torches brennyng, borne by twelve
varlettes [valets] standing before his table all supper It appears that candles
were borne by domestics, and not placed on the table, at a very early period in
France. Gregory of Tours mentions a piece of savage merriment practiced by a
feudal lord at supper, on one of his valets de chandelle, in consequence of
this custom. Greg. Turon. HIST. Lib. v. c. iii. fol. 34. b. edit. 1522. It is
probable that our proverbial scoff, You are not ^it to hold a candl^ to him,
took its rise from this fashion. See Ray's PROVE. C. p. 4. edit. 1670. And
Shakesp. ROMEO AND JULIET, i. 4. I Will be a Candle-holder, and look on.

: they gave a great light, and the hall ever full of knights and squyers; and
many other tables dressed to suppe who would. There was none should speak to him
at his table, but if he were called. His meat was lightlye wild foul. -- He
had great pleasure in armony of instruments, he could do it right well
himself: he would have songs song before him. He would gladlye se conseytes
[conceits] and fantasies at his table. And when he had seen it, then he would
send it to the other tables. -- There was seen in his hall, chamber, and court,
knights and squyers of honor going up and down, and talkyng of arms and of
amors, etc Ibid. ^ol. xxx. a. col. 2.
." After supper, Froissart was admitted to an audience with this magnificent
earl; and used to read to him a book of sonnets, rondeaus, and virelays,
written by a gentle duke of Luxemburgh Ibid. col. ^.
.

In this age of curiosity, distinguished for its love of historical anecdotes
and the investigation of ancient manners, it is extraordinary that a new
translation should not be made of Froissart from a collated and corrected
original of the French. Froissart is commonly ranked with romances: but it
ought to be remembered, that he is the historian of a romantic age, when those
manners which form the fantastic books of chivalry were actually practiced. As
he received his multifarious intelligence from such a variety of vouchers, and
of different nations, and almost always collected his knowledge of events from
report, rather than from written or recorded evidence, his notices of persons
and places are frequently confused and unexact. Many of these petty
incorrectnesses are not, however, to be imputed to Froissart: and it may seem
surprising, that there are not more inaccuracies of this kind in a voluminous
chronicle, treating of the affairs of England, and abounding in English
appellations, composed by a Frenchman, and printed in France. Whoever will take
the pains to compare this author with the coeval records in Rymer, will find
numerous instances of his truth and integrity, in relating the more public and
important transactions of his own times. Why he should not have been honored
with a modern edition at the Louvre, it is easy to conceive: the French have a
national prejudice against a writer, who has been so much more complaisant to
England, than to their own country. Upon the whole, if Froissart should be
neglected by the historical reader for his want of precision and authenticity,
he will at least be valued by the philosopher for his striking pictures of
life, drawn without reserve or affectation from real nature with a faithful and
free pencil, and by one who had the best opportunities of observation, who was
welcome alike to the feudal castle or the royal palace, and who mingled in the
bustle and business of the world, at that very curious period of society, when
manners are very far refined, and yet retain a considerable tincture of
barbarism. But I cannot better express my sentiments on this subject, than in
the words of Montaigne. "J'ayme les Historien^ ou fort simples ou excellens.
Les simples qui n'ont point de quoy y mesler quelque chose du leur, et qui n'y
apportent que le soin et la diligence de ramasser tout ce qui vient a leur
notice, et d'enregistrer a la bonne foy toutes chooses sans chois et sans
triage, nous laissent le jugement entier pour la conoissance de la verite. Tell
est enter autres pour example le bon Froissard, qui a march en son enterprise
d'une si franche naifuete, qu'ayant fait une fault il ne craint aucunement de
la reconnoistre et corriger en l'endroit, ou il en a este adverty: et qui nous
represente la diversite mesme des bruits qui couroient, et les differens
rapports qu'on luy faisot. C'est la matiere de l'Histoire nui et inform;
chacun en peut fair son proffit autant qu'il a d'entendement ESSAIS. Libr. i^.
chapter x. p. 409. edit. 1598. 8vo.
."

CHAP. clxxviii. A king is desirous to know how to rule himself and his
kingdom. One of his wise men presents an allegorical picture on the wall; from
which, after much study, he acquires the desired instruction.

In the original eastern apologue, perhaps this was a piece of tapestry. From
the cultivation of the textorial arts among the orientals, came Darius's
wonderful cloth abovementioned CHA^. xx.
; and the idea of the robe richly embroidered and embossed with stories of
romance and other imageries, in the unprinted romance of EMARE, which forms of
one the finest descriptions of the kind that I have seen in Gothic poetry, and
which I shall therefore not scruple to give at large.

Soon after, in a while,
The rich king of Cesyle Sicily.

To the Emperor began wend Went to.
;
A rich present with him he browght,
A clothe that was wordylye Worthily.
wroght,
He welcomed him as the hende Courteously. But, I beli^ve there i^ a slight
corruption.
.
Sir Tergaunte, that nobyll knyt,
He presented the emperor ryt,
And set him on his kne He presented it kneeling.
,
With that cloth rychyly dyght;
Full of stones thar hit was pyght,
As thykke as hit might be:
Off topaze and of rubyes,
And other stones of myche prys,
That semely were to se;
Of crapoutes and nakette,
As thykhe as they set,
For sothe as y say the I tell thee.
.
The cloth was dysplayed sone:
The emperor looked thar upone
And might hit Could not it.
not se;
For glysterynge of the rich stone,
Ready sight had he non,
And said, how may this be?
The emperor said on high,
Sertes Certainly.
, this is a fayry An illusion, a piece of enchantment.
,
Or else a vanyte.
The king of Cysyle answered than,
So rich a jewel JEWEL was anciently any precious thing.
is there non
In all crystyante.
The amerayles dowter of hethenes The daughter of the Amerayle of the Saracens.
AMI^AL in the eastern languages was the governor, or prince, of a province,
from the Arabic EMIR, Lord. In this sense, AMRAYL is used by Robert of
Gloucester. Hence, by corruption the word ADMIRAL, and in a restricted sense,
for the commander of a fleet: which Milton, who knew the original, in that
sense written AMMIRAL. PARAD. L. i. 294. Dufresne thinks, that our naval Amiral,
i. e. Admiral^ came from the crusades, where the Christians heard it used by
the Saracens (in consequence of its general signification) for the title of the
leader of their fleets: and that from the Mediterran^an states it was
propagated over Europe.

Made this cloth, withouten lees Lying.
,
And wrote hit all with pride;
And portreyed hit with great honor,
With rich gold and asour Azure.
,
And stones on ylka Every.
side.
And as the story tells in hand,
The stones that on this cloth stand
Sowt Sought.
they were full wide:
Seven winter hit was in making,
Or hit was browght to ending,
In heart is not to hyde.
In that on korner made was
YDOYNE and AMADAS On one corner, or side, was embroidered the history of
Idonia and Amadas. For their Romance, see supr. vol. ii. p. 24.
.
With love that was so true;
For they loveden hem Loved each other.
with honor,
Portreyed they were with true love flour
Of stones bright of hew.
With carbunkull, and safere Sapphire.
,
Kalsydonys, and onyx so clear,
Set in gold new;
Deamondes and rubyes,
And othyr stones of mychyll pryse,
And menstrellys with her gle Figures of minstrels, with their music, or
musical instruments.
.
In that othyr korner was dyght
TRYSTRAM and ISOWDE so bryt Sir Tristram and Bell I^olde, famous in king
ARTHUR'S Romance.
,
That semely were to se;
And for they loved hem right,
As full of stones ar they dyght,
As thykke as they may be. --
In the thrydde Third.
korner with great honor
Was FLORYS and BLAUNCHEFLOUR See what I have said of their romance above, vol.
i. p. 351. A manuscript copy of it in French meter was destroyed in the fire
which happened in the Cotton Library. Boccace has the adventures of FLORIO and
BIANCOFLORE, in his PHILOCOPO. FLORIS and BLANCAFLOR are mentioned as
illustrious lovers by Matfres Eymegau de B^zers, a bard of Languedoc, in his
BREVIARI D'AMOR, dated in the year 1288. MSS. Re^. 19 C. i. fol. 199. See
Tyrwhitt's CHAUCER, vol. iv. p. 169.
^
As love was hem between,
For they loved with honor,
Portrayed they were with true loveflour,
With stones bryht and shene. --
In the fourth korner was oon
Of Babylone the sowdans son,
The amerayles dowter him by:
For his sake the cloth was wrowght,
She loved him in heart and thowght,
As testymoyneth this storye.
The fair maiden her byforn,
Was portrayed an unikorn,
With his horn so hye;
Flowers and bryddes on ylka side,
With stones that were sowght wide,
Stuffed with ymagerye.
When the cloth to end was wrowght,
To the Sowdan sone Soldan's son.
hit was browt,
That semely was of syte;
My fadyr was a nobyll man,
Of the Sowdan he hit wan
With maystrye and with myte MSS. Cott. (ut supr.) CALI^. A. 2. fol. 69. ver.
80. seq.
.
Chaucer says in the ROMAUNT OF THE ROSE, that RICHESSE wore a robe of purple,
which,

-- Full well
With orfraies laid was every dele,
And purtraied in the ribaninges
Of DUKIS STORIES and of KINGS Ver. 1076.
.
And, in the original, Portraictes y furent d'orfroys
Hystoryes d'empereurs et roys Ver. 1068.
.


CHAP. clxxix. Cesarius, saint Basil, the Gospel, Boethius, and Ovid, are
quoted to show the detestable guilt of gluttony and ebriety.

Cesarius, I suppose, is a Cistercian monk of the thirteenth century; who,
beside voluminous Lives, Chronicles, and Homilies, wrote twelve Books on the
Miracles, Visions, and Examples, of his own age. But there is another and an
older monkish writer of the same name. In the British Museum, there is a
narrative taken from Cesarius, in old northern English, of a lady deceived by
the fiends, or the devil, through the pride of rich clothing MSS. HARL. 1022. 4.
.

CHAP. clxxx. Paul, the historian of the Longobards, is cited, for the fidelity
of the knight Onulphus.

CHAP. clxxxi. The sagacity of a lion.

This is the last chapter in the edition of 1488.

Manuscript copies of the GESTA ROMANORUM are very numerous See supr. vol. ii.
p. 19.
. A proof of the popularity of the work. There are two in the British Museum;
which, I think, contain, each one hundred and two chapters MSS. HARL. 2270. And
5259.
. But although the printed copies have one hundred and eighty-one stories or
chapters, there are many in the manuscripts which do not appear in the
editions. The story of the CASKETTS, one of the principal incidents in
Shakespeare's MERCHANT OF VENICE, is in one of the manuscripts of the Museum
Viz. CHAP. x^ix. ^ol. 78. b^ MSS. HARL. 2270. In the CLERI^ALIS DISCIPLINA of
Alphonsus, there is a narrative of a king who kept a ^A^ULATOR, or
story-teller, to lull him to sleep every night. The king on some occasion being
seized with an unusual disquietude of mind, ordered his FABULATOR to tell him
longer stories, for that otherwise he could not fall asleep. The FABULATOR
begins a longer story, but in the midst falls asleep himself, etc. I think I
have seen this tale in some manuscript of the GESTA ROMANORUM.
. This story, however, is in an old English translation printed by Wynkyn de
Word, without date; from which, or more probably from another edition printed
in 1577, and entitled A RECORD OF ANCIENT HYSTORYES in Latin GESTA ROMANORUM,
corrected and bettered, Shakespeare borrowed it. The story of the BOND in the
same play, which Shakespeare perhaps took from a translation of the PECORONE of
Ser Florentino Giovanni GIORN. iv. Nov. 5. In Vincent of Beauvais, there is a
story of a bond between a Christian and a Jew; in which the former uses a
deception which occasions the conversion of the latter. HIST. SPECUL. fol. 181.
a. edit. ut supr. Jews, yet under heavy restrictions, were originally tol^rated
in the Christian kingdoms of the dark ages, for the purpose of borrowing money,
with which they supplied the exigencies of the state, and of merchants, or
others, on the most lucrative us^riou^ contracts.
, makes the fortyeighth chapter of the last-mentioned manuscript Fol. 43. a. In
this story MAGISTER VIRG^LIUS, or Virgil the cunning man, is consulted.
. Giovanni flourished about the year 1378 See Johnson's and Steevens's
SHAK^SPEARE, iii. p. 247. edit. ult. And Tyrwhitt's CHAUCER, iv. p. 332. 334.
. The tale of Gower's FLORENT CON^ESS. AMANT. Lib. i. f. xv. b. See supr. vol.
ii. p. 31.
, which resembles Chaucer's WIFE OF BATH, occurs in some of the manuscripts of
this work. The same may be said of a tale by Occleve, never printed; concerning
the chaste consort of the emperor Gerelaus, who is abused by his steward, in
his absence. This is the first stanza. A larger specimen shall appear in its
place.

In Roman Actis written is thus,
Sometime an emperor in the city
Of Rome reigned, clept Gerelaus,
Which his noble astate and his dignite
Governed wisely, and weddid had he
The doutir of the king of Vngrye,
A fair lady to every man's ye.
At the end is the MORALISATION in prose MSS. SELD. Sup. 53. Bibl. Bodl. De
quadam bona et n^bili Imperatrice. It is introduced with "A Tale the which I in
the Roman dedis, etc." Viz. MSS. L^U^. ibid. K. 78. See also MSS. DIGB. 185.
Where, in the first line of the poem, we have, "In the Roman je^^ys written is
this." It is in other manuscripts of Occleve. This story is in the GESTA
ROMANORUM, MSS. HARL. 2270. chap. 101. fol. 80. a. Where Ger^laus is Menelaus.
.

I could point out other stories, beside those I have mentioned, for which
Gower, Lydgate, Occleve, and the author of the DECAMERON, and of the CENTO
NOVELLE ANTICHE, have been indebted to this admired repository Bonifacio
Vannozzi, in D^lle LETTERE MISCELLAN^E all Academia V^neta^ says, that Boccace
borrowed [Nov. i. D. iii.] the Novel of Maseto da Lamporecchio, with many other
parts of the DECAMERON, from an older Collection of Novels. "In uno libro de
Novelle, et di Parlare Gentile, ANTERIORE al Boccacio, etc." In Venetia, 1606.
4to. page 580. seq. I believe, however, that many of the tales are of Boccace's
own invention. He tells us himself, in the GENEALOGIA DEORUM, that when he was
a little boy, he was fond of making FICTIUNCULAE. Lib. xv. cap. x. p. 579.
edit. Basil. 1532. fol.
. Chaucer, as I have before remarked, has taken one of his Canterbury tales
from his collection; and it has been supposed that he alludes to it in the
following couplet, And ROMAIN GESTIS makin remembrance
Of many a very true wife also MARCHANT'S TALE, ver. 10158. edit. Tyrw. This
may still be doubted, as from what has been said above, the ROMAN GESTS were
the Roman history in general.
.


The plot also of the knight against Constance, who having killed Hermegild,
puts the bloody knife into the hand of Constance while asleep, and her
adventure with the steward, in the MAN OF LAWS TALE, are also taken from that
manuscript chapter of this work, which I have just mentioned to have been
versified by Occleve. The former of these incidents is thus treated by Occleve.

She with this onge child in the chamber lay
Every nit where lay the earl and the countess Here we see the ancient
practice, even in great families, of one and the same bedchamber serving for
many persons. Much of the humor in Chaucer's TROMPINGTON MILLER arises from
this circumstance. See the Romance of SIR TRYAMORE. And Gower, CONF. AM. ii. f.
39. a.
,
Bitween whose beddis burnt a lamp always.
And he espied, by the lamps lit,
The bed where that lay this empress
With erlis doutur Earl's daughter.
, and as blyve rit,
This feendly man his purpose and malice
Thoute Thought.
for to fulfille and accomplice;
And so he did, a long knife out he drove Drew.
,
And there with all the maiden child he sloue Sl^w.
.
Her throat with the knyfe on two he kutte
And as this empress lay sleeping;
Into her hand this bloody knyfe he put,
Ffor men should have noon other deemyng Opinion.

But she had gilty ben of this murdring:
And when that he had wroute this cursidnesse,
Anoone out of the chamber he began hem dress He hastened, etc.
.
The countess after her sleep awakid
And to the emperesse bed began cast her look
And sy Saw.
the bloody knyfe in her hand nakid,
And, for the fear she tremblid and quook. --
She awakens the earl, who awakens the empress.

And her awook, and thus to her he cried,
"Woman, what is that, that in thin hand I see?
"What have thou done, woman, for him that diede^
"What wickid spirit has travaylid the?"
And as soon as that adawed was she,
The knyfe fell out of her hand in the bed,
And she bihilde the cloothis al forbledde,
And the child dead, "Allas, she cried, allas,
"How may this be, god woot all I note how,
"I am not privy to her hevy caas,
"The gilte is not mine, I the child not slow Slew.
."
To which spoke the countess, "What say thou?
"Excuse the not, thou may not say nay,
"The knyfe all bloody in thin hand I say Saw.
." Ut supr. viz. MS. SELD. SUP. 45. Qu. iiii.

This story, but with some variation of circumstances, is told in the
HISTORICAL MIRROR of Vincent of Beauvais SPECUL. HISTOR. Lib. vii. c. 90. fol.
86. a.
.

But I hasten to point out the writer of the GESTA ROMANORUM, who has hitherto
remained unknown to the most diligent enquirers in Gothic literature. He is
Petrus Berchorius, or Pierre Bercheur, a native of Poitou, and who died Prior
of the Benedictine convent of saint Eloi at Paris, in the year 1362.

For the knowledge of this very curious circumstance, I am obliged to Solomon
Glassius, a celebrated theologist of SaxeGotha, in his PHILOLOGIA SACRA
PHILOLO^IAE SACRAE, qua totius sacrosanctae veteris et novi testamenti
scripturae tum stylus et literatura, tum sensus et genuinae interpretationis
ratio expenditur, Libri quinque, etc. edit. tert. Francof. et Hamb. 1653.
, written about the year 1623 From the date of the Dedication. For his other
works, which are very numerous, see the DIARIUM BIOGRAPHICUM of H. Wit, sub
Ann. 1665. Gedani, 1688. 4to.
. In his chapter DE ALLEGORIIS FABULARUM, he censures those writers who affect
to interpret allegorically, not only texts of scripture, but also poetical
fables and profane histories, which they arbitrarily apply to the explication
or confirmation of the mysteries of christianity. He adds, "Hoc in studio
excelluit quidam Petrus Berchorius, Pictaviensis, ordinis divi Benedicti: qui,
peculiari libro, GESTA ROMANORUM, necnon Legendas Patrum, aliasque aniles
fabulas, allegorice ac mystice exposuit LIB. ii. Part. i. TRACTAT. ii. Sect.
iii. Artic. viii. page 312.
." That is, "In this art excelled one Peter Berchorius, a Benedictine; who, in
a certain peculiar book, has expounded, mystically and allegorically, the Roman
GESTS, legends of saints, and other idle tales Salmeron, a profound
school-divine, who flourished about 1560, censures the unwarrantable liberty of
the GESTA ROMANORUM, in accommodating histories and fables to Christ and the
church. COMM. in EVANGEL. HIST. i. page 356. PROL. xix. CAN. xxi. -- Colon.
Agrippin. 1602. fol.
." He then quotes for an example, the whole one hundred and seventieth chapter
of the GESTA ROMANORUM, containing the story of saint Bernard and the
Dice-player, together with its moralisation.

Berchorius was one of the most learned divines of his country, and a
voluminous writer. His three grand printed works are, I. REDUCTORIUM MORALE
super totam Bibliam, in twentyfour books. II. REPERTORIUM [or Reductorium]
MORALE, in fourteen books I use a folio edition of all these three works, in
three volumes, printed at Venice in 1583. These pieces were all printed very
early.
. III. DICTIONARIUM MORALE. Whoever shall have the patience or the curiosity to
turn over a few pages of this immense treasure of multifarious erudition, will
soon see this assertion of Glassius abundantly verified; and will be convinced
beyond a doubt, from a general coincidence of plan, manner, method, and
execution, that the author of these volumes, and of the GESTA ROMANORUM, must
be one and the same. The REDUCTORIUM SUPER BIBLIAM This was first printed,
Argentorat. 1473. fol. There was a very curious book in lord Oxford's library,
I am not sure whether the same, entitled MORALIZATIONES BIBLIAE, Ulmae 1474.
fol. With this colophon in the last page. Infinita dei clementia. Finitus est
liber Moralizationum Bibliarum in ejusdem laudem et gloriam compilatus. Ac per
indu^^rium Joannem Zeiner de Reutlingen Artis impressoriae magistrum non penna
sed scagneis characteribus in oppido Ulmensi arti^icialiter ^ffigiatus. Anno
Incarnationis Domini millesimo quadriugentessimo septuag^ssimo quarto Aprilis
nono. This book is not mentioned by Maittaire.
contains all the stories and incidents in the Bible, reduced into allegories
To this work Alanus de Lynne, a Carmelite of Lynne in Norfolk, wrote an Index
or Tabula, about the year 1240. It is in MSS. RE^. 3 D. 3. 1.
. The REPERTORIUM MORALE is a dictionary of things, persons, and places; all
which are supposed to be mystical, and which are therefore explained in their
moral or practical sense. The DICTIONARIUM MORALE is in two parts, and seems
principally designed to be a moral repertory for students in theology.

The moralisation, or moral explanation, which is added to every ar^^cle, is
commonly prefaced, as in the GESTA, with the introductory address of CARISSIMI.
In the colophon, the GESTA is called Ex gestis Romanorum RECOLLECTORIUM: a word
much of a piece with his other titles of REPERTORIUM and REDUCTORIUM. Four of
the stories occurring in the GESTA, The Discovery of the gigantic body of
Pallas CAP. xlix. f. 643. He quotes CHRONICA, and says, that this happened in
the reign of the emperor Henry the second. [See GEST. ROMANS c. clviii.]
, The subterraneous golden palace CAP. lxxii. f. 689. col. 1. 2. He quotes for
this story [GEST. ROMANS c. cvii.] William of Malmesbury, but tells it in the
words of Beauvais, ut supr.
, The adventures of the English knight in the bishopric of Ely Fol. 610. col.
2. [GEST. ROMANS c. clv.] Here also his author is Gervase of Tilbury: from whom,
I think in the same chapter, he quotes part of king Arthur's Romance. See OTIA
IMPERIAL. Dec. ii. c. 12.
, and The miraculous horn Fol. 610. ut supr. [GEST. ROMANS c. lxi.]
, are related in the fourteenth book of the REPERTORIUM MORALE. For the two
last of these he quotes Gervase of Tilbury, as in his GESTA A MORALISATION is
joined to these stories, with the introduction of CARISSIMI.
. As a further proof of his allegorising genius I must add, that he moralized
all the stories in Ovid's Metamorphosis, in a work entitled, Commentarius
MORALIS, five ALLEGORIAE in Libros quindecim Ovidii Metamorphoseon See what he
says of the Fabulae Poetarum, REPERTOR. MORAL. lib. xiv. cap. i. f. 601. col.
2. ad calc.
, and now remaining in manuscript in the library of the monastery of saint
Germains Oudin. COMMENT. SCRIPTOR. ECCLES. iii. p. 1064. Lips. 1723. fol. I
doubt whether this work was not translated into French by Guillaume Nangis, at
the beginning of the fourteenth century. See MEM. LIT. xx. 751. 4to.
. He seems to have been strongly impressed with whatever related to the Roman
affairs, and to have thought their history more interesting than that of any
other people. This appears from the following passage, which I translate from
the article ROMA, in his DICTIONARIUM MORALE, and which will also contribute to
throw some other lights on this subject. "How many remarkable facts might be
here collected concerning the virtues and vices of the Romans, did my design
permit me to drop Moralities, and to enter upon an historical detail! For that
most excellent historian Livy, unequalled for the dignity, brevity, and
difficulty of his style, (whose eloquence is so highly extolled by saint
Jerome, and whom I, however unworthy, have translated from Latin into French
with great labor I have mentioned this work before, vol. ii. p. 114. It is
remarkable, that a copy of this manuscript in the British Museum is entitled,
"TITUS LIVIUS Des FAIS DES ROMANS translate par Pierre Bertheure." MSS. REG.
15 D. vi.
, at the request of John the most famous king of France,) records so many
wonderful things of the prudence, fortitude, fidelity, and friendship, of the
Roman people; as also of their quarrels, envy, pride, avarice, and other vices,
which are indeed allied to virtues, and are such, to say the truth, as I never
remember to have heard of in any nation besides. But because I do not mean to
treat of historical affairs in the present work, the matter of which is
entirely moral, I refer the historical reader to Livy himself, to Trogus
Pompeius, Justin, Florus, and Orosius, who have all written histories of Rome;
as also to Innocent, who in his book on the Miseries of human nature Pope
Innocent the third, about the year 1200, wrote three Books De Contemptu Mundi,
^ive De Miseria humanae Conditionis, printed, Colon. 1496.
, speaks largely of the vices of the Romans DICTION. MORAL. P. iii. vol. ii. f.
274. col. 2. edit. 1583. -- S^e supr. vol. ii. p. 114.
." In the mean time we must remember, that at this particular period, the Roman
history had become the grand object of the public taste in France. The king
himself, as we have just seen, recommended a translation of Livy. French
translations also of Sallust, Caesar, and Lucan, were now circulated. A Latin
historical compilation called ROMULEON was now just published by a gentleman of
France, which was soon afterward translated into French. A collection of the
GESTA ROMANORUM was therefore a popular subject, at least it produced a popular
title, and was dictated by the fashion of the times.

I have here mentioned all Berchorius's works, except his Comment on a Prosody
called Doctrinale metricum, which was used as a school-book in France, till
Despauterius's manual on that subject appeared Oudin, ubi supr.
. Some biographers mention his TROPOLOGIA, his COSMOGRAPHIA, and his
BREVIARIUM. But the TROPOLOGIA I have seen a very old black-letter edition with
the title, "Tropologiarum mysticarumque enarrationum, etc." Without date.
is nothing more than his REDUCTORIUM on the Bible; and probably the BREVLARIUM
is the same But see Bibl. Sangerm. Cod. MS. 687. And G. Serpilii VIT. SCRIPTOR.
BIBLIC. tom. vii. part. 2. page 44. Also Possevin. APPARAT. SACR. ii. p. 241.
Colon. 1608.
. The COSMOGRAPHIA seems to be the fourteenth book of his REPERTORIUM MORALE;
which treats of the wonders of various countries, and is chiefly taken from
Solinus and Gervase of Tilbury This is in some measure hinted by Oudin, ubi
supr. "Egressus autem a PROFANIS et grammaticis Berchorius, animum SOLIDIORIBUS
applicuit, etc."
. He is said by the biographers to have written other smaller pieces, which
they have not named or described. Among these perhaps is comprehended the
GESTA: which we may conceive to have been thus undistinguished, either as
having been neglected or proscribed by graver writers, or rather as having been
probably disclaimed by its author, who saw it at length in the light of a
juvenile performance, abounding in fantastic and unedifying narrations, which
he judged unsuitable to his character, studies, and station Gesner adds,
reciting his works, that he wrote "alia multa." EPITOM. BIBL. f. 147. b. Tig.
1555. fol. And Trith^mius, "parvos sed multos tractatus." De ILLUSTR. BENED.
Lib. ii. c. 131.
. Basilius Johannes Heroldus, however, mentions Berchorius as the author of a
CHRONICON, a word which may imply, though not with exact propriety, his GESTA
ROMANORUM. It is in the Epistle dedicatory of his edition of the Chronicles of
Marianus Scotus, and Martinus Polonus, addressed to our queen Elisabeth; in
which he promises to publish many Latin CHRONICA, that is, those of Godfrey of
Viterbo, Hugo Floriacensis, Conrade Engelhus, Hermannus Edituus, Lanfranc, Ivo,
Robert of Saint Victor, PETER BERCHORIUS, and of many others, qui de TEMPORIBUS
scripserunt, who have written of times Dat. 1559. Edit. Basil. Oporin. No Date.
fol.
. Paulus Langius, who wrote about the year 1400, in his enumeration of
Berchorius's writings, says nothing of this compilation CHRON. CITIZ. f. 841.
Apud Pistorii ILLUSTR. VIT. SCRI^TOR. etc. Francof. 1583. fol. Compare the
CHRON. of Philippus Bergom. ad ann. 1355.
.

Had other authentic evidences been wanting, we are sure of the age in which
Berchorius flourished, from the circumstance of his being employed to translate
Livy by John king of France, who acceded to the throne in the year 1350, and
died in the year 1364. That Berchorius died, and probably an old man, in the
year 1362, we learn from his epitaph in the monastery of saint Eloy at Paris,
which is recited by Sweertius, and on other accounts deserves a place here.

HIC JACET VENERABILIS MAGNAE PROFUNDAEQUE SCIENTIAE, ADMIRABILIS ET SUBTILIS
ELOQUENTIAE, F. PETRUS BERCOTH Read BERCHEUR.
, PRIOR HUJUS PRIORATUS. QUI FUIT ORIUNDUS DE VILLA S. PETRI DE ITINERE That
is, of the village of saint Pierre du C^^min. Three leagues from Poictiers.
IN EPISCOPATU MAILLIZANCENSI Of Maille^ais.
IN PICTAVIA. QUI TEMPORE SUO FECIT OPERA SUA SOLEMNIA, SCILICET DICTIONARIUM,
REDUCTORIUM, BREVIATORIUM, DESCRIPTIONEM MUNDI The COSMOGRAPHIA abovementioned.
, TRANSLATIONEM CUJUSDAM LIBRI VETUTISSIMI Of Livy.
DE LATINO IN GALLICUM, AD PRAECEPTUM EXCELLENTISS. JOANNIS REGIS FRANCORUM.
QUI OBIIT ANNO M. CCC. LXII Sweertii EPITAPHIA Joco-seri^. edit. Colon. 1645.
p. 158. It must not be dissembled, that in the MORALISATION of the hundred and
forty-fifth chapter, a proverb is explained, vulgariter, in the German
language. Fol. 69. a. col. 2. And in the hundred and forty-third chapter, a
hunter has eight dogs who have German names. Fol. 67. a. col. 1. seq. I
suspect, nor is it improbable, that those German words were introduced by a
German editor or printer. Mr. Tyrwhitt supposes, that we may reasonably
conjecture one of our countrymen to have been the compiler, because three
couplets of English verses and some English n^mes, appear in many of the
manuscripts. But these are not to be found in any of the Editions; and there is
no answering for the licentious innovations of transcribers. CANT. T. vol. iv.
331.
.

Berchorius was constituted grammatical preceptor to the novices of the
Benedictine Congregation, or monastery, at Clugni, in the year 1340 Oudin. ubi
supr. p. 1063.
. At which time he drew up his Notes on the Prosody, and his Commentary on
Ovid, for the use of his scholars. About the same time, and with a view of
rendering their exercises in Latinity more agreeable and easy by an
entertaining Latin story-book, yet resoluble into lessons of religion, he
probably compiled the GESTA: perpetually addressing the application of every
tale to his young audience, by the paternal and affectionate appellation of
CARISSIMI This, by habit, and otherwise with no impropriety, he seems to have
retained in his later and larger works.
. There was therefore time enough for the GESTA to become a fashionable book of
tales, before Boccace published his DECAMERON. The action of the DECAMERON
being supposed in 1348, the year of the great pestilence, we may safely
conjecture, that Boccace did not begin his work till after that period. An
exact and ingenious critic has proved, that it was not finished till the year
1358 See Tyrwhitt's CHAUCER, iv. 115. seq.
.

I have just observed, that Berchorius probably compiled this work for the use
of his grammatical pupils. Were there not many good reasons for that
supposition, I should be induced to think, that it might have been intended as
a book of stories for the purpose of preachers. I have already given instances,
that it was anciently fashionable for preachers to enforce the several moral
duties by applying fables, or exemplary narratives: and, in the present case,
the perpetual recurrence of the address of CARISSIMI might be brought in favor
of this hypothesis. But I will here suggest an additional reason. Soon after
the age of Berchorius, a similar collection of stories, of the same cast, was
compiled, though not exactly in the same form, professedly designed for sermon
writers, and by one who was himself an eminent preacher: for, rather before the
year 1480, a Latin volume was printed in Germany, written by John Herolt a
Dominican friar of Basil, better known by the adopted and humble appellation of
DISCIPULUS, and who flourished about the year 1418. It consists of three parts.
The first is entitled "Incipiunt Sermones pernotabiles DISCIPULI de Sanctis per
anni circulum." That is, a set of Sermons on the Saints of the whole year. The
second part, and with which I am now chiefly concerned, is a PROMPTUARY, or
ample repository, of examples for composing sermons: and in the Prologue to
this part the author says, that saint Dominic always abundabat exemplis in his
discourses, and that he constantly practiced this popular mode of edification.
This part contains a variety of little histories. Among others, are the
following. Chaucer's Friar's tale. Aristotle falling in love with a queen, who
compels him to permit her to ride upon his back EXEMPL. lxvii. Sub litera, M.
"De regina quae equitavit Aristotelem." He cites Jacobus de Vitriaco. [See
supr. p. xix.]
. The boy who was kept in a dark cave till he was twelve years of age; and who
being carried abroad, and presented with many striking objects, preferred a
woman to all he had seen EXEMPL. xxiv. Sub Litera, L.
. A boy educated in a desert is brought into a city, where he sees a woman whom
he is taught to call a fine bird, under the name of a goose: and on his return
into the desert, desires his spiritual father to kill him a goose for his
dinner Ibid. EXEMPL. xxiii. [See supr. p. l.]
. These two last stories Boccace has worked into one. The old woman and her
little dog EXEMPL. xii. Sub. lit. V.
. This, as we have seen, is in the GESTA ROMANORUM CHAPTER xxviii.
. The son who will not shoot at his father's dead body This is also in the
GESTA, CHAPTER xlv. -- EXEMPL. viii. Lit. B.
. I give these as specimens of the collection. The third part contains stories
for sermon writers, consisting only of select miracles of the Virgin Mary. The
first of these is the tale of the chast^ Roman empress, occurring in the
Harleian manuscripts of the GESTA, and versified by Occleve; yet with some
variation See supr. p. lxxxiii.
. This third part is closed with these words, which also end the volume.
"Explicit tabula Exemplorum in tractatulo de Exemplis gloriose Virginis Marie
contentorum." I quote from the first edition, which is a clumsy folio in a rude
Gothic letter, in two volumes; and without pagings, signatures, or initials.
The place and year are also wanting; but it was certainly printed before 1480
For the second edition is at Nuremburgh, 1482. fol. Others followed, before
1500.
, and probably at Nuremburgh. The same author also wrote a set of sermons
called Sermones de tempore The only edition I have seen, with the addition of
the S^^MONES DE SANCTIS, and the PROMPTUARIUM EXEMPLORUM abovementioned, was
printed by M. Fl^^cius, Argentin. 1499. fol. But there is an earlier edition.
At the close of the last Sermon, he tells us why he chose to be styled
DISCI^ULUS. Because, "non subtilia per modum MAGI^TRI, sed simplicia per modum
DISCIPULI, conscripsi et collegi." I have seen also early impressions of his
SERMONES QUADRAGESIMALES, and of other pieces of the same sort. All his works
were published together in three volumes, Mogunt. 1612. 4to. The EXAMPLES
appeared separately, Daventr. 1481. Colon. 1485. Argentorat. 1489. 1490. Hagen.
1512. 1519. fol.
. In these I find SERMON. cxxi. col. ii. Signat. C 5.
Alphonsus's story, which in the GESTA ROMANORUM is the tale of the two knights
of Egypt and Baldach CHAPTER clxxi.
; and, in Boccace's DECAMERON, the history of TITO and GESIPPO: Parnell's
HERMIT SERMON. liii.
: and the apologue of the king's brother who had heard the trumpet of Death
SERMON. cix.
: both which last are also in the GESTA CHAPTER lxxx. cxliii.
. Such are the revolutions of taste, and so capricious the modes of
composition, that a Latin homily-book of a German monk in the fifteenth
century, should exhibit outlines of the tales of Boccace, Chaucer, and Parnell^

It may not be thought impertinent to close this discourse with a remark on the
MORALISATIONS, subjoined to the stories of the GESTA ROMANORUM. This was an age
of vision and mystery: and every work was believed to contain a double, or
secondary, meaning. Nothing escaped this eccentric spirit of refinement and
abstraction: and, together with the bible, as we have seen, not only the
general history of ancient times was explained allegorically, but even the
poetical fictions of the classics were made to signify the great truths of
religion, with a degree of boldness, and a want of a discrimination, which in
another age would have acquired the character of the most profane levity, if
not of absolute impiety, and can only be defended from the simplicity of the
state of knowledge which then prevailed.

Thus, God creating man of clay, animated with the vital principle of
respiration, was the story of Prometheus, wh^ formed a man of similar
materials, to which he communicated life by fire stolen from heaven. Christ
twice born, of his father God and of his mother Mary, was prefigured by
Bacchus, who was first born of Semele, and afterward of Jupiter. And as
Minerva sprung from the brain of Jupiter, so Christ proceeded from God without
a mother. Christ born of the Virgin Mary was expressed in the fable of Danae
shut within a tower, through the covering of which Jupiter descended in a
shower of gold, and begot Perseus. Acteon, killed by his own hounds, was a type
of the persecution and death of our Savior. The poet Lycophron relates, that
Hercules in returning from the adventure of the Golden Fleece was shipwrecked;
and that being devoured by a monstrous fish, he was disgorged alive on the
shore after three days. Here was an obvious symbol of Christ's resurrection.
John Waleys, an English Fr^nciscan of the thirteenth century, in his moral
exposition of Ovid's Metamorphoses I have before mentioned Berchorius's OVID
MORALIZED.
, affords many other instances equally ridiculous; and who forgot that he was
describing a more heterrogeneous chaos, than that which makes so conspicuous a
figure in his author's exordium, and which combines, amid the monstrous and
indigested aggregate of its unnatural associations, -- Sine pondere habentia
pondus M^TAM. L. i. 20.
.


At length, compositions professedly allegorical, with which that age abounded,
were resolved into allegories for which they were never intended. In the famous
ROMAUNT OF THE ROSE, written about the year 1310, the poet couches the
difficulties of an ardent lover in attaining the object of his passion, under
the allegory of a Rose, which is gathered in a delicious but almost
inaccessible garden. The theologists proved this rose to be the white rose of
Jericho, the new Jerusalem, a state of grace, divine wisdom, the holy Virgin,
or eternal beatitude, at none of which obstinate heretics can ever arrive. The
chemists pretended, that it was the philosopher's stone; the civilians, that it
was the most consummate point of equitable decision; and the physicians, that
it was an infallible panacea. In a word, other professions, in the most
elaborate commentaries, explained away the lover's rose into the mysteries of
their own respective science. In conformity to this practice, Tasso allegorised
his own poem: and a flimsy structure of morality was raised on the chimerical
conceptions of Ariosto's ORLANDO. In the year 1577, a translation of a part of
Amadis de Gaul appeared in France; with a learned preface, developing the
valuable stores of profound instruction, concealed under the naked letter of
the old romances, which were discernible only to the intelligent, and totally
unperceived by common readers; who, instead of plucking the fruit, were obliged
to rest contented with le simple FLEUR de la Lecture litterale. Even Spenser,
at a later period, could not indulge his native impulse to descriptions of
chivalry, without framing such a story, as conveyed, under the dark conceit of
ideal champions, a set of historic transactions, and an exemplification of the
nature of the twelve moral virtues. He presents his fantastic queen with a rich
romantic mirror, which showed the wondrous achievements of her magnificent
ancestry.

And thou, O fairest princess under sky,
In this fair mirror may behold thy face,
And thine own realms in Land of Faery,
And in this antique image thy great ancestry B. ii. INTROD. St. vi.
.
It was not, however, solely from an unmeaning and a wanton spirit of
refinement, that the fashion of resolving every thing into allegory so
universally prevailed. The same apology may be offered for the cabalistical
interpreters, both of the classics and of the old romances. The former not
willing that those books should be quite exploded which contained the ancient
mythology, labored to reconcile the apparent absurdities of the pagan system
to the christian mysteries, by demonstrating a figurative resemblance. The
latter, as true learning began to dawn, with a view of supporting for a while
the expiring credit of giants and magicians, were compelled to palliate those
monstrous incredibilities, by a bold attempt to unravel the mystic web which
had been wove by fairy hands, and by showing that truth was hid under the
gorgeous veil of Gothic invention.

THE HISTORY OF ENGLISH POETRY.
SECT. XIX.
OUR communications and intercourse with Italy, which began to prevail about
the beginning of the sixteenth century, not only introduced the studies of
classical literature into England, but gave a new turn to our vernacular
poetry. At this period, Petrarch still continued the most favorite poet of the
Italians; and had established a manner, which was universally adopted and
imitated by his ingenious countrymen. In the mean time, the courts both of
France and England were distinguished for their elegance. Francis the first had
changed the state of letters in France, by mixing gallantry with learning, and
by admitting the ladies to his court in company with the ecclesiastics See
supr. vol. ii. p. 414.
. His carousals were celebrated with a brilliancy and a festivity unknown to
the ceremonious shows of former princes. Henry the eighth vied with Francis in
these gaieties. His ambition, which could not bear a rival even in diversions,
was seconded by liberality of disposition and a love of ostentation. For Henry,
with many boisterous qualities was magnificent and affable. Had he never
murdered his wives, his politeness to the fair sex would remain unimpeached.
His martial sports were unincumbered by the barbaric pomp of the ancient
chivalry, and softened by the growing habits of more rational manners. He was
attached to those spectacles and public amusements, in which beauty assumed a
principal share; and his frequent masks and tournaments encouraged a high
spirit of romantic courtesy. Poetry was the natural accompaniment of these
refinements. Henry himself was a leader and a chief character in these
pageantries, and at the same time a reader and a writer of verses. The language
and the manners of Italy were esteemed and studied. The sonnets of Petrarch
were the great models of composition. They entered into the genius of the
fashionable manners: and in a court of such a complexion, Petrach of course
became the popular poet. Henry Howard earl Surrey, with a mistress perhaps as
beautiful as Laura, and at least with Petrarch's passion if not his taste, led
the way to great improvements in English poetry, by a happy imitation of
Petrarch, and other Italian poets, who had been most successful in painting the
anxieties of love with pathos and propriety.

Lord Surrey's life throws so much light on the character and subjects of his
poetry, that it is almost impossible to consider the one, without exhibiting a
few anecdotes of the other. He was the son and grandson of two lords treasurers
dukes of Norfolk; and in his early childhood discovered the most promising
marks of lively parts and an active mind.

While a boy, he was habituated to the modes of a court at Windsor-castle;
where he resided, yet under the care of proper instructors, in the quality of a
companion to Henry Fitzroy, duke of Richmond, a natural son of king Henry the
eighth, and of the highest expectations.

This young nobleman, who also bore other titles and honors, was the child of
Henry's affection: not so much on account of hi^ hopeful abilities, as for a
reason insinuated by lord Herbert, and at which those who know Henry's history
and character will not be surprised, because he equally and strongly resembled
both his father and mother.

A friendship of the closest kind commencing between these two illustrious
youths, about the year 1530, they were both removed to cardinal Wolsey's
college at Oxford, then universally frequented, as well for the excellence as
the novelty of its institution; for it was one of the first seminaries of an
English university, that professed to explode the pedantries of the old
barbarous philosophy, and to cultivate the graces of polite literature. Two
years afterward, for the purpose of acquiring every accomplishment of an
elegant education, the earl accompanied his noble friend and fellow-pupil into
France, where they received king Henry, on his arrival at Calais to visit
Francis the first, with a most magnificent retinue. The frienship of these two
young noblemen was soon strengthened by a new tie; for Richmond married the
lady Mary Howard, Surrey's sister. Richmond, however, appears to have died in
the year 1536, about the age of seventeen, having never cohabited with his wife
Wood, ATH. OXON. i. 68.
. It was long, before Surrey forgot the untimely loss of this amiable youth,
the friend and associate of his childhood, and who nearly resembled himself in
genius, refinement of manners, and liberal acquisitions.

The FAIR GERALDINE, the general object of lord Surrey's passionate sonnets, is
commonly said to have lived at Florence, and to have been of the family of the
Gera^^i of that city. This is a mistake, yet not entirely without grounds,
propagated by an easy misapprehension of an expression in one of our poet's
odes, and a passage in Drayton's heroic epistles. She was undoubtedly one of
the daughters of Gerald Fitzgerald, earl of Kildare. But it will be necessary
to transcribe what our author himself has said of this celebrated lady. The
history of one who caused so memorable and so poetical a passion naturally
excites curiosity, and will justify an investigation, which, on many a similar
occasion, would properly be censured as frivolous and impertinent.

From Tuskane came my ladies worthy race;
Fair Florence was sumtyme her i. e. their.
ancient seat:
The western isle, whose pleasant shore does face
Wild Camber's cliffs, did gyve her lively heat:
Fostred she was with milk of Irishe breast;
Her sire an earl: her dame of princes blood:
From tender years in Britain she does rest
With kings child, where she tastes costly food.
Hunsdon did first present her to mine yien:
Bright is her hew, and Geraldine she hight.
Hampton me taught to wish her first mine,
And Windsor alas! does chase me from her sight Fol. 5. edit. 1557.
.
These notices, it must be confessed, are obscure and indirect. But a late
elegant biographer has, with the most happy sagacity, solved the difficulties
of this little enigmatical ode, which had been before either neglected and
unattempted as inexplicable, or rendered^ more unintelligible by false
conjectures. I readily adopt Mr. Walpole's key to the genealogy of the
matchless Geraldine CATAL. Roy. and Noble Authors, vol. i. p. 105. edit. 1759.
.

Her poetical appellation is almost her real name. Gerald Fitzgerald,
abovementioned, earl of Kildare in the reign of Henry the eighth, married a
second wife, Margaret daughter of Thomas Gray, marquis of Dorset: by whom he
had three daughters, Margaret, Elisabeth, and Cicely. Margaret was born deaf
and dumb; and a lady who could neither hear nor answer her lover, and who
wanted the means of contributing to the most endearing reciprocations, can
hardly be supposed to have been the cause of any vehement effusions of amorous
panegyric. We may therefore safely pronounce Elisabeth or Cicely to have been
Surrey's favorite. It was probably Elisabeth, as she seems always to have lived
in England.

Every circumstance of the sonnet evidently coincides with this state of the
case. But, to begin with the first line, it will naturally be asked, what was
lady Elisabeth Gerald's connection with Tuscany? The beginnings of noble
families, like those of nations, often owe somewhat to fictitious
embellishment: and our genealogists uniformly assert, that the family of
Fitzgerald derives its origin from Otho, a descendant of the dukes of Tuscany:
that they migrated into England under the reign of king Alfred, whose annals
are luckily too scanty to contradict such an account, and were from England
speedily transplanted into Ireland. Her father was an Irish earl, resident at
his earldom of Kildare; and she was consequently born and nursed in Ireland.
Her mother, adds the sonnet, was of princely parentage. Here is a no less exact
correspondence with the line of the lady's pedigree: for Thomas, marquis of
Dorset, was son of queen Elisabeth Gray, daughter of the duchess of Bedford,
descended from the royal house of Luxemburgh. The poet acquaints us, that he
first saw her at Hunsdon. This notice, which seems of an indifferent nature and
quite extraneous to the question, abundantly corroborates our conjecture.
Hundsdon-house in Hertfordshire was a new palace built by Henry the eighth, and
chiefly for the purpose of educating his children. The lady Elisabeth
Fitzgerald was second cousin to Henry's daughters the princesses Mary and
Elisabeth, who were both educated at Hunsdon Strype, ECCL. MEM. vol. i. APPEND.
Numb. 71.
. At this royal nursery she therefore tasted of costly food with kings
child, that is, lived while a girl with the young princesses her relations, as
a companion in their education. At the same time, and on the same plan, our
earl of Surrey resided at Windsor-castle, as I have already remarked, with the
young duke of Richmond. It is natural to suppose, that he sometimes visited the
princesses at Hunsdon, in company with the young duke their brother, where he
must have also seen the fair Geraldine: yet by the nature of his situation at
Windsor, which implied a degree of confinement, he was hindered from visiting
her at Hunsdon so often as he wished. He therefore pathetically laments,
Windsor, alas, does chase me from her sight!
But although the earl first beheld this lady at the palace of Hunsdon, yet, as
we further learn from the sonnet, he was first struck with her incomparable
beauty, and his passion commenced, at Hampton Court. Hampton me taught to wish
her first for mine!
That is, and perhaps on occasion of some splendid masque or carousal, when the
lady Elisabeth Fitzgerald, with the princesses Mary and Elisabeth, and their
brother Richmond, with the young lord Surrey, were invited by the king to
Hampton Court.

In the mean time we must remember, that the lord Leonard Gray, uncle to lord
Gerald Fitzgerald, was deputy of Ireland for the young duke of Richmond: a
connection, exclusive of all that has been said, which would alone account for
Surrey's acquaintance at least with this lady. It is also a reason, to say no
more, why the earl should have regarded her from the first with a particular
attention, which afterward grew into the most passionate attachment. She is
supposed to have been Maid of honor to queen Catharine. But there are three of
Henry's queens of that name. For obvious reasons, however, we may venture to
say, that queen Catharine Howard was Geraldine's queen.

It is not precisely known at what period the earl of Surrey began his travels.
They have the air of a romance. He made the tour of Europe in the true spirit
of chivalry, and with the ideas of an Amadis; proclaiming the unparalleled
charms of his mistress, and prepared to defend the cause of her beauty with the
weapons of knight-errantry. Nor was this adventurous journey performed without
the intervention of an enchanter. The first city in Italy which he proposed to
visit was Florence, the capital of Tuscany, and the original seat of the
ancestors of his Geraldine. In his way thither, he passed a few days at the
emperor's court; where he became acquainted with Cornelius Agrippa, a
celebrated adept in natural magic. This visionary philosopher showed our hero,
in a mirror of glass, a living image of Geraldine, reclining on a couch, sick,
and reading one of his most tender sonnets by a waxen taper Drayton, HER.
EPIST. -- HOWARD to GERALDINE, v. 57.
. His imagination, which wanted not the flattering representations and
artificial incentives of illusion, was heated anew by this interesting and
affecting spectacle. Inflamed with every enthusiasm of the most romantic
passion, he hastened to Florence: and, on his arrival, immediately published a
defiance against any person who could handle a lance and was in love, whether
Christian, Jew, Turk, Saracen, or Canibal, who should presume to dispute the
superiority of Geraldine's beauty. As the lady was pretended to be of Tuscan
extraction, the pride of the Florentines was flattered on this occasion: and
the grand duke of Tuscany permitted a general and unmolested ingress into his
dominions of the combatants of all countries, till this important trial should
be decided. The challenge was accepted, and the earl victorious Wood, ubi supr.
. The shield which he presented to the duke before the tournament began, is
exhibited in Virtue's valuable plate of the Arundel family, and was actually in
the possession of the late duke of Norfolk Walpole, AN^CD. PAINT. i. 76.
.

These heroic vanities did not, however, so totally engross the time which
Surrey spent in Italy, as to alienate his mind from letters: he studied with
the greatest success a critical knowledge of the Italian tongue, and, that he
might give new luster to the name of Geraldine, attained a just taste for the
peculiar graces of the Italian poetry.

He was recalled to England for some idle reason by the king, much sooner than
he expected: and he returned home, the most elegant traveller, the most polite
lover, the most learned nobleman, and the most accomplished gentleman, of his
age. Dexterity in tilting, and gracefulness in managing a horse under arms,
were excellencies now viewed with a critical eye, and practiced with a high
degree of emulation. In 1540, at a tournament held in the presence of the court
at Westminster, and in which the principal of the nobility were engaged, Surrey
was distinguished above the rest for his address in the use and exercise of
arms. But his martial skill was not solely displayed in the parade and
ostentation of these domestic combats. In 1542, he marched into Scotland, as a
chief commander in his father's army; and was conspicuous for his conduct and
bravery at the memorable battle of Flodden-field, where James the fourth of
Scotland was killed. The next year, we find the career of his victories impeded
by an obstacle which no valor could resist. The censures of the church have
humiliated the greatest heroes: and he was imprisoned in Windsor-castle for
eating flesh in Lent. The prohibition had been renewed or strengthened by a
recent proclamation of the king. I mention this circumstance^ not only as it
marks his character, impatient of any control, and careless of very serious
consequences which often arise from a contempt of petty formalities, but as it
gave occasion to one of his most sentimental and pathetic sonnets Fol. 6. 7.
. In 1544, he was field-marshal of the English army in the expedition to
Bologne, which he took. In that age, love and arms constantly went together:
and it was amid the fatigues of this protracted campaign, that he composed his
last sonnet called the FANCY of a wearied Lover Fol. 18. See Dudg^ BARONAG^
ii. p. 275.
.

But as Surrey's popularity increased, his interest declined with the king;
whose caprices and jealousies grew more violent with his years and infirmities.
The brilliancy of Surrey's character, his celebrity in the military science,
his general abilities, his wit, learning, and affability, were viewed by Henry
with disgust and suspicion. It was in vain that he possessed every advantageous
qualification, which could adorn the scholar, the courtier, and the soldier. In
proportion as he was amiable in the eyes of the people, he became formidable to
the king. His rising reputation was misconstrued into a dangerous ambition, and
gave birth to accusations equally groundless and frivolous^ He was suspected of
a design to marry the princess Mary; and, by that alliance, of approaching to a
possibility of wearing the crown. It was insinuated, that he conversed with
foreigners, and held a correspondence with cardinal Pole.

The addition of the escocheon of Edward the Confessor to his own, although
used by the family of Norfolk for many years, and justified by the authority of
the heralds, was a sufficient foundation for an impeachment of high treason.
These motives were privately aggravated by those prejudices, with which Henry
remembered the misbehaviour of Catharine Howard, and which were extended to all
that lady's relations. At length, the earl of Surrey fell a sacrifice to the
peevish injustice of a merciless and ungrateful master. Notwithstanding his
eloquent and masculine defense, which even in the cause of guilt itself would
have proved a powerful persuasive, he was condemned by the prepared suffrage of
a servile and obsequious jury, and beheaded on Tower Hill in the year 1547 See
Stowe, CHRON^ p. 592. Challoner, de REPUBL. ANGL. INSTAURAND^ lib. ii^ p. 45.
. In the mean time we should remember, that Surrey's public conduct was not on
all occasions quite unexceptionable. In the affair of Bologne he had made a
false step. This had offended the king. But Henry, when once offended, could
never forgive. And when Hertford was sent into France to take the command, he
could not refrain from dropping some reproachful expressions against a measure
which seemed to impeach his personal courage. Conscious of his high birth and
capacity, he was above the little attentions of caution and reserve; and he too
frequently neglected to consult his own situation, and the king's temper. It
was his misfortune to serve a monarch, whose resentments, which were easily
provoked, could only be satisfied by the most severe revenge. Henry brought
those men to the block, which other monarchs would have only disgraced.

Among these anecdotes of Surrey's life, I had almost forgot to mention what
became of his amor with the fair Geraldine. We lament to find, that Surrey's
devotion to this lady did not end in a wedding, and that all his gallantries
and verses availed so little! No memoirs of that incurious age have informed
us, whether her beauty was equalled by her cruelty; or whether her ambition
prevailed so far over her gratitude, as to tempt her to prefer the solid
glories of a more splendid title and ample fortune, to the challenges and the
compliments, of so magnanimous, so faithful, and so eloquent a lover. She
appears, however, to have been afterward the third wife of Edward Clinton,
earl of Lincoln. Such also is the power of time and accident over amorous vows,
that even Surrey himself outlived the violence of his passion. He married
Frances, daughter of John earl of Oxford, by whom he left several children. One
of his daughters, Jane countess of Westmoreland, was among the learned ladies
of that age, and became famous for her knowledge of the Greek and Latin
languages Dugd. BARON. i. 533. ii. 275.
.

Surrey's poems were in high reputation with his cotemporaries, and for many
years afterward. He is thus characterised by the author of the old ART OF
ENGLISH POESY, whose opinion remained long as a rule of criticism. "In the
latter end of the same kings [Henry] reign, spronge up a new company of
courtly makers, of whom sir Thomas Wyat the elder and Henry earl of Surrey
were the two CHIEFTAINES, who having travailed into Italy, and there tasted
the sweet and stately measured and style of the Italian poesy, as novices
newly crept out of the schools of Dante, Ariosto, and Petrarch, they greatly
polished our rude and homely manner of vulgar poesy from that it had been
before, and for that cause may justly be said the first reformers of our
English meeter and style Lib. i. chapter xxxi. p. 48. edit. 1589.
." And again, toward the close of the same chapter. "Henry earl of Surrey,
and sir Thomas Wyat, between whom I find very little difference, I repute them
(as before) for the two chief lanternes of light to all others that have since
employed their pens upon English poesy: their conceits were lofty, their
styles stately, their conveyance cleanly, their terms proper, their meetre
sweet and well-proportioned, in all imitating very naturally and studiously
their master Francis Petrarcha Ibid. p. 50.
." I forbear to recite the testimonies of Leland, Sydney, Tuberville,
Churchyard, and Drayton. Nor have these pieces, although scarcely known at
present, been without the panegyric of more recent times. Surrey is praised by
Waller, and Fenton; and he seems to have been a favorite with Pope. Pope, in
WINDSOR-FOREST, having compared his patron lord Granville with Surrey, he was
immediately reprinted, but without attracting many readers By Sewell 1717.
Reprinted by Curl, ib.
. It was vainly imagined, that all the world would eagerly wish to purchase the
works of a neglected ancient English poet, whom Pope had called the GRANVILLE
of a former age. So rapid are the revolutions of our language, and such the
uncer^ainty of literary fame, that Philips, Milton's nephew, who wrote about
the year 1674, has remarked, that in his time Surrey's poetry was antiquated
and totally forgotten TH^ATR. PO^TAR. p. 67. edit. 1674. 12mo.
.

Our authors SONGS AND SONNETTES, as they have been styled, were first
collected and printed at London by Tottell, in 1557 In quarto. It is
extraordinary, that A. Wood should not have known this edition. Another edition
appeared in 1565. Others, in 1574. -- 1585. -- 1587. -- Others appeared
afterward.
. As it happens in collections of this kind, they are of various merit. Surrey
is said, by the ingenious author of the MUSES LIBRARY, to have been the first
who broke through the fashion of stanzas, and wrote in the heroic couplet. But
all Surrey's poems are in the alternate rhyme; nor, had this been true, is the
other position to be granted. Chaucer's Prologues and most of the Canterbury
Tales are written in long verse: nor was the use of the couplet resumed, till
late in the reign of Elisabeth.

In the sonnets of Surrey, we are surprised to find nothing of that
metaphysical cast which marks the Italian poets, his supposed masters,
especially Petrarch. Surrey's sentiments are for the most part natural and
unaffected; arising from his own feelings, and dictated by the present
circumstances. His poetry is alike unembarrassed by learned allusions, or
elaborate conceits. If our author copies Petrarch, it is Petrarch's better
manner: when he descends from his Platonic abstractions, his refinements of
passion, his exaggerated compliments, and his play upon opposite sentiments,
into a track of tenderness, simplicity, and nature. Petrarch would have been a
better poet had he been a worse scholar. Our author's mind was not too much
overlaid by learning.

The following is the poem abovementioned, in which he laments his imprisonment
in Windsor-castle. But it is rather an elegy than a sonnet.

So cruel prison, how could betyde, alas,
As proud Windsor How could the stately cas^le of Windsor become so miserable
a prison.
! where I, in lust and joye In unrestrained gaiety and pleasure.
,
With a kings son With the young duke of Richmond.
my childishe years did pass,
In greater feast than Priam's sons of Troy.
Where each sweet place returns a taste full sower:
The large grene courts where we were wont to hove To hover, to loiter in
expectation. So Chaucer, TROIL. CRESS. B. 5. ver. 33. But at the yate there she
should outride
With certain folk he lovid her to abide.

,
With eyes cast up into the mayden's tower Swift's joke about the Maids of
honor being lodged at Windsor in the round tower, in queen Anne's time, is too
well known and too indelicate to be repeated here. But in the present instance,
Surrey speaks loosely and poetically in making the MAIDEN-TOWER, the true
reading, the residence of the women. The maidentower was common in other
castles, and means the principal tower, of the greatest strength and defense.
MAIDEN is a corruption of the old French Mag^e, or Main, great. Thus
Maidenhead (properly Maydenhithe) in Berkshire, signifies the great port or
wharf on the river Thames. So also, Mayden-Bradley in Wiltshire is the great
Bradley. The old Roman camp near Dorchester in Dorsetshire, a noble work, is
called Maiden castle, the capital fortress in those parts. We have Maiden-down
in Somertsetshire with the same signification. A thousand other instances might
be given. Hearne, not attending to this etymology, absurdly supposes, in one of
his Prefaces, that a strong bastion in the old walls of the city of Oxford,
called the MAIDENTOWER, was a prison for con^ining the prostitu^es of the town.
,
And easy sighs, such as men draw in love:
The stately seats, the ladies bright of hew,
The daunces short, long tales of great delight,
With words and looks that tigers could but rewe Pity.
;
Where each of us did plead the others right.
The palme-play At ball.
, where, dispoyled for the game Rendered unfit, or unable, to play.
,
With dazed yies Dazzled eyes.
, often we by gleames of love,
Have mist the ball, and got sight of our dame,
To bayte To tempt, to catch.
her eyes which kept the leads above The ladies were ranged on the lead^, or
battlements, of the castle to see the play.
,
The gravel ground The ground, or are^, was strown with gravel^ where they
were trained in chivalry.
, with sleves tied on the helm At tournaments they ^ixed the ^leeves of their
mistresses on some part of their armor.
,
On fomyng horse, with swords and friendly hearts;
With cheer Looks.
as though one should another whelme Destroy.
,
Where we have fought and chased often with darts. --
The secret groves, which often we made resounde
Of pleasant playnt, and of our ladies praise,
Recording often what grace Favor with his mistress.
each one had found,
What hope of speed Or, Success.
, what dread of long delays.
The wild forest, the clothed holtes with grene,
With raynes avayled The holtes, or thick woods, clothed in green. So in
another place he says, fol. 3. My specled cheeks with Cupid's hue.
That is, "Cheeks speckled with, etc."
, and swift ybreathed horse,
With cry of hounds, and merry blastes between
Where we did chase the fearful heart of force.
The wide vales With loosened reins. So, in his fourth Aeneid, the fleet is
"ready to avale." That is, to loosen from shore. So again, in Spenser's
FEBRUARY. They wont in the wind wagge their wriggle tails
Pearke as a peacocke, but now it AVAYLES.
" Avayle their tails," to drop or lower. So also in his DECEMBER. By that the
welked Phoebus began AVAYLE
His weary waine. --
And in the Faerie Queen, with the true spelling, i. 1. 21. Of Nilus. But when
his latter ebb gins to AVALE.
TO VALE, or avale, the bonnet, was a phrase for lowering the bonnet, or
pulling off the hat. The word occurs in Chaucer, TR. CRESS. iii. 627. That such
a ^aine from heaven began AVAIL.
And in the fourth book of his BOETHIUS, "The light fire arises into height,
and the hevie yerthes AVAILEN by their weightes." page 394. col. 2. edit. Urr.
From the French verb AVALER, which is from their adverb AVAL, downward. See
also Hearne's GLOSS. ROB. BR. p. 524. Drayton uses this word, where perhaps it
is not properly understood. ECL. iv. p. 1404. edit. 1753. With that, she began to
VALE her head,
Her cheeks were like the roses red,
But not a word she said, etc.
That is, she did not veil, or cover, but valed, held down her head for shame.
Probably the true reading is wales or walls. That is, lodgings, apartments,
etc. These poems were very corruptly printed by Tottel.
eke, that harbourd us each night,
Wherewith, alas, reviveth in my breast
The sweet accord! Such slepes as yet delight:
The pleasant dreams, the quiet bed of rest.
The secret thoughts imparted with such trust;
The wanton talk, the diverse chan^e of play;
The friendship sworn, each promise kept so just,
Wherewith we past the winter night away.
And with this thought the blood forsakes the face;
The tears berayne my chekes of deadly hew,
The which as soon as sobbing sighs, alas,
Upsupped have, thus I my plaint renew!
"O place of bliss, renewer of my woes!
"Give me account, where is my noble fere Companion.
,
"Whom in thy walls thou do We should read, did.
each night enclose,
"To other leefe Dear to others, to all.
, but unto me most dear!"
Echo, alas, that does my sorrow rue Pity.
,
Returns thereto a hollow sound of playnte.
Thus I alone, where all my fredom grew,
In prison pine, with bondage and restrainte.
And with remembrance of the greater grief
To banish the less, I find my chief relief Fol. 6. 7.
.
In the poet's situation, nothing can be more natural and striking than the
reflection with which he opens his complaint. There is also much beauty in the
abruptness of his exordial exclamation. The superb palace, where he had passed
the most pleasing days of his youth with the son of a king, was now converted
into a tedious and solitary prison! This unexpected vicissitude of fortune
awakens a new and interesting train of thought. The comparison of his past and
present circumstances recals their juvenile sports and amusements; which were
more to be regretted, as young Richmond was now dead. Having described some of
these with great elegance, he recurs to his first idea by a beautiful
apostrophe. He appeals to the place of his confinement, once the source of his
highest pleasures: "O place of bliss, renewer of my woe^! And where is now my
noble friend, my companion is these delights, who was once your inhabitant!
Echo alone either pities or answers my question, and returns a plaintive hollow
sound!" He closes his complaint with an affecting and pathetic sentiment, much
in the style of Petrarch. "To banish the miseries of my present distress, I am
forced on the wretched expedient of remembering a greater!" This is the
consolation of a warm fancy. It is the philosophy of poetry.

Some of the following stanzas, on a lover who presumed to compare his lady
with the divine Geraldine, have almost the ease and gallantry of Waller. The
leading compliment, which has been used by later writers, is in the spirit of
an Italian fiction. It is very ingenious, and handled with a high degree of
elegance.

Give place, ye Lovers, here before
That spent your bostes and bragges in vain:
My Lady's bewty passes more
The best of yours, I dare well saine,
Than does the sun the candle light,
Or brightest day the darkest night.
And thereto has a troth as just
As had Penelope the fair;
For what she says, ye may it trust,
As it by writing sealed were:
And virtues has she many more
Than I with pen have skill to show.
I could rehearse, if that I would,
The whole effect of NATURE'S plaint,
When she had lost the perfect mould,
The like to whom she could not paint.
With wringyng hands how she did cry!
And what she said, I know it, I.
I know, she swore with ragyng mind,
Her kingdom only set apart,
There was no loss, by law of kind,
That could have gone so near her heart:
And this was chefely all her pain
She could not make the like again Fol. 10.
. --
The versification of these stanzas is correct, the language polished, and the
modulation musical. The following stanza, of another ode, will hardly be
believed to have been produced in the reign of Henry the eighth.

Spite drove me into Boreas' reign Her anger drove me into a colder climate.
,
Where hory frostes the fruits do bite;
When hills were spread and every plain
With stormy winter's mantle white Fol. 13.
.
In an Elegy on the elder sir Thomas Wyat's death, his character is delineated
in the following nervous and manly quatraines.

A visage, stern and mylde; where both did growe^
Vice to contemn, in virtue to rejoice;
Amid great storms, whom grace assured so,
To live upright, and smile at fortune's choice. --
A tongue that served in foreign realms his king,
Whose courteous talk to virtue did inflame
Each noble heart; a worthy guide to bring
Our English youth by travail unto fame.
An eye, whose judgment none affect Passion.
could blind^
Friends to allure, and foes to reconcile:
Whose persing Piercing.
look did represent a mind
With virtue fraught, reposed, void of gile.
A heart, where dread was never so impressed
To hide the thought that might the truth advance;
In neither fortune lost, nor yet represt,
To swell in wealth, or yield unto mischance Fol. 17.
. --
The following lines on the same subject are remarkable.

Diverse thy death do diversely bemone:
Some that in presence of thy livelyhede
Lurked, whose breasts envy with hate had swollen,
Yield Cesar's tears upon Pompeius' head Fol. 16.
.
There is great dignity and propriety in the following Sonnet on Wyat's PSALMS.

The Macedon, that out of Persia chased
Darius, of whose power all Asia rong,
In the rich arc Chest.
Dan Homer's rimes he placed,
Who fained gestes of heathen princes song.
What holy grave, what worthy sepulture Repository.
,
To Wyat's Psalms should Christians then purchase?
Where he does paint the lively faith and pure;
The steadfast hope, the sweet return to grace
Of just David by perfect penitence.
Where rulers may see in a mirror clear
The bitter fruit of false concupiscence:
How Jewry bought Uria's death full dear.
In princes hearts God's scourge imprinted deep
Ought them awake out of their sinful sleep Fol. 16.
.
Probably the last lines may contain an oblique allusion to some of the king's
amors.

Some passages in his Description of the restless state of a Lover, are
pictures of the heart, and touched with delicacy.

I wish for night, more covertly to plain,
And me withdraw from every haunted place;
Lest by my chere Behavior. Looks.
my chance appear too plain.
And in my mind I mesure, pace by pace,
To seek the place where I myself had lost,
That day, when I was tangled in the lace,
In seming slack that knitteth ever most. --
Lo, if I seek, how I do find my sore!
And if I flee, I carry with me still
The venomed shaft, which does its force restore
By haste of flight. And I may plain my fill
Unto myself, unless this careful song
Print in your heart some parcel of my tene Sorrow.
.
For I, alas, in sil^nce all too long,
Of mine old hurt yet feel the wound but grene Fol. 2.
.
Surrey's talents, which are commonly supposed to have been confined to
sentiment and amorous lamentation, were adapted to descriptive poetry and the
representations of rural imagery. A writer only that viewed the beauties of
nature with poetic eyes, could have selected the vernal objects which compose
the following exquisite ode Fol. 2.
.

The soote season, that bud and blome forth brings,
With grene has clad the hill, and eke the val^;
The nightingale with feathers new she sings;
The turtle to her mate has told her tale:
Somer is come, for every spray now springs.
The heart has hong his old head on the pale:
The buck in brake his winter coat he flings:
The fishes flete with new repaired scale;
The adder all her slough away she flings:
The swift swalow pursues the flies small:
The busy be her honey now she mings.
Winter is worn that was the flowers bale Destruction.
.
I do not recollect a more faithful and finished version of Martial's HAPPY
LIFE than the following.

MARTIAL, the things that do attain
The happy life, be these I find.
The richesse left, not got with pain,
The fruitful ground, the quiet mind.
The equal friend, no grudge, no strife,
No charge of rule, nor governaunce;
Without disease, the healthful life:
The household of continuance.
The diet mean Moder^te.
, no delicate fare,
True wisdom joynde with simpleness:
The night discharged of all care,
Where wine the wit may not oppress.
The faithful wife without debate,
Such slepes as may begile the night:
Contented with thine own estate,
Ne wish for death, ne fear his might Fol. 16.
.
But Surrey was not merely the poet of idleness and gallantry. He was fitted
both from nature and study, for the more solid and laborious parts of
literature. He translated the second and fourth books of Virgil into blank
verse They were first printed in 1557. 12mo.
: and it seems probable, that his active situations of life prevented him from
completing a design of translating the whole Eneid.

This is the first composition in blank verse, extant in the English language.
Nor has it merely the relative and accidental merit of being a curiosity. It is
executed with great fidelity, yet not with a prosaic servility. The diction is
often poetical, and the versification varied with proper pauses. This is the
description of Dido and Eneas going to the field, in the fourth book.

-- At the threshold of her chaumber-dore,
The Carthage lords did on the Queen attend:
The trampling steed, with gold and purple trapt,
Chawing the foming bit there fercely stood.
Then issued she, awayted with great train,
Clad in a cloak of Tire embrawderd rich.
Her quyver hung behind her back, her tresse
Knotted in gold, her purple vesture eke
Buttned with gold. The Trojans of her train
Before her go, with gladsom Iulus.
Aeneas eke, the goodliest of the route,
Makes one of them, and joyneth close the throng.
Like when Apollo leaves Lycia,
His wintring place, and Xanthus' flood likewise,
To visit Delos, his mother's mansion,
Repairing eft and furnishing her quire:
The Candians, and the folk of Driopes,
With painted Agathyrsies, shoute and cry,
Environing the altars round about;
When that he walks upon mount Cynthus' top,
His sparkled tresse represt with garlandes soft
Of tender leaves, and trussed up in gold:
His quivering Perhaps the true reading is, instead of quivering, "quiver and
darts."
darts clattering behind his back.
So fresh and lusty did Aeneas seem. --
But to the hills and wild holtes when they came,
From the rocks top the driven savage rose.
Lo from the hills above, on the other side,
Through the wide lawns they began to take their course.
The hearts likewise, in troops taking their flight,
Raising the dust, the mountain-fast forsake.
The child Iu^us, blithe of his swift steed So Milton in COMUS, v. 59. --
Frolic of his ^ull-grown age.


Amids the plain, now pricks by them, now these;
And to encounter, wishes often in mind,
The foming bore, in steed of fearful beasts,
Or lion brown, might from the hill descend.
The first stages of Dido's passion, with its effects on the rising city, are
thus rendered.

-- And when they al were gone,
And the dim moon does eft withold her light;
And sliding Falling.
stars provoked unto sleep:
Alone she mournes within her palace void,
And sits her down on her forsaken bed:
And absent him she hears, when he is gone,
And sees eke. Often in her lap she holds
Ascanius, trapped by his father's form.
So to begile the love cannot be told Which cannot, etc.
!
The turrettes now arise not, erst begone:
Neither the youth welde arms, nor they avance
The ports, nor other mete defense for war.
Broken there hang the works, and mighty frames
Of walls high raised, thretening the sky.
The introduction of the wooden horse into Troy, in the same book, is thus
described.

We cleft the walls, and closures of the town,
Whereto all help: and underset the feet
With sliding rolls, and bound his neck with ropes.
The fatal gin thus overclambe our walls,
Stuffed with armd men: about the which there ran
Children and maids That is, Boys and girls, pueri innupta^que puellae.
Anciently Child (or Children) was restrained to the young of the male sex.
Thus, above, we have, "the Child Iulus," in the original Puer Ascanius. So the
Children of the chapel, signifies the Boys of the king's chapel. And in the
royal kitchen, the Children, i. e. the Boys of the Scullery. In the western
counties, to this day, Maid simply and distinctly means Girl: as, "I have got a
Boy and a Maid." -- "My wife is brought to bed of a Maid, etc. etc."
, that holy carolles sang.
And well were they whoes hands might touch the cords!
With thretning chere, thus slided through our town
The subtle tree, to Pallas temple-ward.
O native la^d, Ilion, and of the gods
The mansion placce! O warlik walls of Troy!
Four times it stopped in thentrie of our gate,
Four times the harness Arms. Armor.
clatterd in the womb.
The shade of Hector, in the same book, thus appears.

Ah me! What one? That Hector how unlike,
Which erst, returned clad with Achilles spoils!
Or when he threw into the Grekish ships
The Trojan flame! So was his beard defiled,
His crisped locks al clustred with his blood:
With all such wounds as many he received,
About the walls of that his native town!
Whom franckly thus, methought, I spoke unto,
With bitter teres, and doleful deadly voice.
"O Trojan light! O only hope of thine!
"What lettes so long thee staid? Or from what costs,
"Our most desired Hector, do thou come?
"Whom, after slaughter of our many friends,
"And travail of thy people, and thy town,
"Alweried, (lord!) how gladly we behold!
"What sorry chance has stained thy lively face?
"Or why see I these wounds, alas so wide!"
He answeard naught, nor in my vain demaundes
Abode: but from the bottom of his breast
Sighing he said: "Flee, flee, O goddess son!
"And save thee from the fury of this flame!"
This was a noble attempt to break the bondage of rhyme. But blank verse was
now growing fashionable in the Italian poetry, the school of Surrey. Felice
Figlinei, a Sanese, and Surrey's cotemporary, in his admirable Italian
commentary on the ETHICS of Aristotle, entitled FILOSOSIA MORALE SOPRA IL LIBRI
D' ETHICA D'ARISTOTILE, declaims against the barbarity of rhyme, and strongly
recommends a total rejection of this Gothic ornament to his countrymen. He
enforces his precept by his own example; and translates all Aristotle's
quotations from Homer and Euripides into verse without rhyme. Gonsalvo Perez,
the learned secretary to Philip of Spain, had also recently translated Homer's
Odyssey into Spanish blank-verse. How much the excellent Roger Ascham approved
of Surrey's disuse of rhyme in this translation from Virgil, appears from the
following passage in his SCHOLEMASTER, written about the year 1566 I know of no
English critic besides, who has mentioned Surrey's Virgil, except Bolton, a
great reader of old English books. HYPERCRIT. p. 237. Oxon. 1772.
. "The noble lord Thomas earl of Surrey, FIRST OF ALL ENGLISHMEN, in
translating the fourth [and second] book of Virgill: and Gonsalvo Perez, that
excellent learned man, and secretary to king Philip of Spain Among Ascham's
Epistles, there is one to Perez, inscribed Clarissimo viro D. Gonsalvo Perisio
Regis Catbolici Secretario primario et Consiliario intimo, Amico m^o carissimo.
In which Ascham recommends the ambassador sir William Cecil to his acquaintance
and friendship. EPISTOL. LIB. UN. p. 228. b. edit. Land. 1581.
, in translating the ULYSSES of Homer out of the Greek into Spanish, have both
by good judgment avoided the FAULT OF RYMING. -- The spying of this fault now
is not the curiosity of English eyes, but even the good judgment also of the
best that write in these days in Italy. -- And you, that be able to
understand no more than ye find in the Italian tongue: and never went further
than the school of PETRARCH and ARIOSTO abroad, or else of CHAUCER at home,
though you have pleasure to wander blindlie still in your foul wrong way,
envy not others, that seek, as wise men have done before them, the FAIREST
and RYGHTEST way. -- And therefore, even as Virgill and Horace deserve most
worthy praise, that they, spying the unperfitness in Ennius and Plautus, by
true imitation of Homer and Euripides, brought poetry to the same perfectnes
in Latin as it was in Greek, even so those, that by the same way would BENEFIT
THEIR TONGUE and country, deserve rather thanks than disprayse B. ii. p. 54. b.
55. a. edit. 1589. 4to.
."

The revival of the Greek and Roman poets in Italy, excited all the learned men
of that country to copy the Roman versification, and consequently banished the
old Leonine Latin verse. The same classical idea operated in some degree on the
vernacular poetry of Italy. In the year 1528, Trissino published his ITALIA
LIBERATA DI GOTI, or, ITALY DELIVERED FROM THE GOTHS, an heroic poem,
professedly written in imitation of the Iliad, without either rhyme, or the
usual machineries of the Gothic romance. Trissino's design was to destroy the
TERZA RIMA of Dante. We do not, however, find, whether it be from the facility
with which the Italian tongue falls into rhyme, or that the best and
established Italian poets wrote in the stanza, that these efforts to restore
blank-verse, produced any lasting effects in the progress of the Italian
poetry. It is very probable, that this specimen of the Eneid in blank-verse by
Surrey, led the way to Abraham Fleming's blank-verse translation of Virgil's
Bucolics and Georgics, although done in Alexandrines, published in the year
1589 London, 4to.
.

Lord Surrey wrote many other English poems which were never published, and are
now perhaps entirely lost. He translated the ECCLESIASTES of Solomon into
English verse. This piece is cited in the Preface to the Translation of the
Psalms, printed at London in 1567. He also translated a few of the Psalms into
meter. These versions of Scripture show that he was a friend to the
reformation. Among his works are also recited, a Poem on his friend the young
duke of Richmond, an Exhortation to the citizens of London, a Translation of
Boccace's Epistle to Pinus, and a set of Latin epistles. Aubrey has preserved
a poetical Epitaph, written by Surrey on sir Thomas Clear, his faithful
retainer and constant attendant, which was once in Lambeth-church See Aubrey's
SURREY, V. 247.
; and which, for its affection and elegance, deserves to be printed among the
earl's poems. I will quote a few lines.

Shelton for love, Surrey for lord thee chase Chose.
:
(Aye me, while life did last that league was tender!)
Tracing whose steps, thou saw Kelsall blase,
Laundersey burnt, and batterd Bulleyn's render Surrender.
:
At Mortrell gates Towns taken by lord Surrey in the Bologne expedition.
, hopeless of all recure,
Thine earl half dead gave in thy hand his Will;
Which cause did thee this pining death procure,
Ere summers four times seven thou could fulfill.
Ah, Clear! if love had booted care or cost,
Heaven had not won, nor earth so timely lost He died in 1545. See Stowe's
CHRON. p. 586. 588. edit. 1615.
!
John Clerc, who traveled into Italy with Pace, an eminent linguist of those
times, and secretary to Thomas duke of Norfolk father of lord Surrey, in a
dedication to the latter, prefixed to his TRETISE OF NOBILITY printed at
London in 1543 Land. 12mo. A translation from the French.
, has mentioned, with the highest commendations, many translations done by
Surrey, from the Latin, Italian, French, and Spanish languages. But these it is
probable were nothing more than juvenile exercises.

Surrey, for his justness of thought, correctness of style, and purity of
expression, may justly be pronounced the first English classical poet. He
unquestionably is the first polite writer of loveverses in our language. It
must, however, be allowed, that there is a striking native beauty in some of
our love-verses written much earlier than Surrey's. But in the most savage ages
and countries, rude nature has taught elegance to the lover.

SECT. XX.
WITH Surrey's Poems, Tottel has joined, in his editions of 1557 and 1565, the
SONGS and SONNETTES of sir Thomas Wyat the elder Wyat's begin at fol. 19.
, and of Uncertain Auctours.

Wyat was of Allington-castle in Kent, which he magnificently repaired, and
educated in both our universities. But his chief and most splendid
accomplishments were derived from his travels into various parts of Europe,
which he frequently visited in the quality of an envoy. He was endeared to king
Henry the eighth, who did not always act from caprice, for his fidelity and
success in the execution of public business, his skill in arms, literature,
familiarity with languages, and lively conversation. Wood, who degrades every
thing by poverty of style and improper representations, says, that "the king
was in a high manner delighted with his witty jests ATH. OXON. i. 51.
." It is not perhaps improbable, that Henry was as much pleased with his
repartees as his politics. He is reported to have occasioned the reformation by
a joke, and to have planned the fall of cardinal Wolsey by a seasonable story
S^e MISCELLANEOUS ANTIQUITIES. Numb. ii. page 16. Printed at Strawberryhill,
1772. 4to.
. But he had almost lost his popularity, either from an intimacy with queen
Anne Boleyn, which was called a connection, or the gloomy cabals of bishop
Bonner, who could not bear his political superiority. Yet his prudence and
integrity, no less than the powers of his oratory, justified his innocence. He
laments his severe and unjust imprisonment on that trying occasion, in a sonnet
addressed to sir Francis Bryan: insinuating his solicitude, that although the
wound would be healed, the scar would remain, and that to be acquitted of the
accusation would avail but little, while the thoughts of having been accused
were still fresh in remembrance Fol. 44.
. It is a common mistake, that he died abroad of the plague in an embassy to
Charles the fifth. Being sent to conduct that emperor's ambassador from
Falmouth to London, from too eager and a needless desire of executing his
commission with dispatch and punctuality, he caught a fever by riding in a hot
day, and in his return died on the road at Shirburn, where he was buried in the
great conventual church, in the year 1541. The next year, Leland published a
book of Latin verses on his death, with a wooden print of his head prefixed,
probably done by Holbein NAEN^AE in mortem T. Viati, Land. 1542. 4to. See also
Leland's ENCOM^ p. 358.
. It will be superfluous to transcribe the panegyrics of his cotemporaries,
after the encomium of lord Surrey, in which his amiable character owes more to
truth, than to the graces of poetry, or to the flattery of friendship.

We must agree with a critic above quoted, that Wyat cooperated with Surry, in
having corrected the roughness of our poetic style. But Wyat, although
sufficiently distinguished from the common versifiers of his age, is
confessedly inferior to Surrey in harmony of numbers, perspicuity of
expression, and facility of phraseology. Nor is he equal to Surrey in elegance
of sentitiment, in nature and sensibility. His feelings are disguised by
affectation, and obscured by conceit. His declarations of passion are
embarrassed by wit and fancy; and his style is not intelligible, in proportion
as it is careless and unadorned. His compliments, like the modes of behavior
in that age, are ceremonious and strained. He has too much art as a lover, and
too little as a poet. His gallantries are labored, and his versification
negligent. The truth is, his genius was of the moral and didactic species: and
his poems abound more in good sense, satire, and observations on life, than in
pathos or imagination. Yet there is a degree of lyric sweetness in the
following lines to his lute, in which, The lover complains of the unkindness
of his love.

My Lute awake, perform the last
Labor, that thou and I shall wast;
And end that I have now begone:
And when this song is sung and past,
My lute be still, for I have done.
As to be heard where care is none,
As lead to grave in marble stone;
My song, now pearse her heart as sone.
Should we then sigh, or sing, or moan?
No, no, my lute, for I have done.
The rocks do not so cruelly
Repulse the waves continually,
As she my suit and affection:
So that I am past remedy.
Whereby Wherefore.
my lute and I have done.
Proud of the spoil which thou has got
Of simple hearts, through Loves shot,
By whom unkind thou have them won;
Think not he has his bow forgotte,
Although my lute and I have done.
Vengeance shall fall on thy disdain,
That make but game on earnest pain:
Think not alone under the sun
Unquit Unacquitted. Free.
to cause thy lovers plain:
Although my lute and I have done.
May chance thee It may chance you may, etc.
lie withered and old
In winter nights that are so cold,
Plaining in vain unto the moon Moon.
:
Thy wishes then dare not be told:
Care then who list, for I have done.
And then may chance thee to repent
The time that thou have lost and spent,
To cause thy lovers sighe and swowne;
Then shall thou know beauty but lent,
And wish and want as I have done.
Now cease my lute, this is the last
Labor, that thou and I shall wast;
And ended is that that we begone.
Now is this song both song and past,
My lute be still, for I have done Fol. 33.
.
Our author has more imitations, and even translations, from the Italian poets
than Surrey: and he seems to have been more fond of their conceits. Petrarch
has described the perplexities of a lover's mind, and his struggles betwixt
hope and despair, a subject most fertile of sentimental complaint, by a
combination of contrarieties, a species of wit highly relished by the Italians.
I am, says he, neither at peace nor war. I burn, and I freeze. I soar to
heaven, and yet grovel on the earth. I can hold nothing, and yet grasp every
thing. My prison is neither shut, nor is it opened. I see without eyes, and I
complain without a voice. I laugh, and I weep. I live, and am dead. Laura^ to
what a condition am I reduced, by your cruelty!

Pace non trovo, e non ho da far guerra;
E temo, e spero, ed ardo, e son en un ghiaccio:
E volo sopra'l cielo, e giaccio in terra:
E nulla stringo, e tutto l'mondo abraiccio.
Tal m'ha in prigion, che non m'apre ne serra Thi^ passage is taken from Messen
Jordi, a Provencial poet of Valen^i^.
;
Ne per suo mi rittien, ne scioglie il laccio;
E non m'uccide Amor, e non mi sferra;
Ni mi vuol vivo, ni mi trae d'impaccio.
Veggio senz' occhi, e non ho lingua, e grido;
E bramo di perir, e cheggio aita;
Ed ho in odio me stesso, ed amo altrui:
Pascomi di dolor, piangendo rido.
Egualmente mi spiace morte, e vita:
In questo stato son, Donna, per vui Son. ciii. There is a Sonnet in imitation
of this, among those of the UNCERTAIN AUCTOURS at the end of Surrey'^ Poems^
fol. 107. And in Davison's POEMS, B. ii. CANZON. viii. p. 108. 4th edit. Land.
1621. 12mo.
.
Wyat has thus copied this sonnet of epigrams.

I find no peace, and all my war is done:
I fear and hope, I burn and frese likewise:
I fly aloft, and yet cannot arise;
And naught I have, and at the world I season;
That locks That which locks, i. e. a key.
nor loses, [nor] holds me in prison.
And holds me not, yet can I escape no wise;
Nor lettes me live, nor dye, at my devi^e,
And yet of death it gives me occasion.
Without eye I se, without tongue I plain:
I wish to perish, yet I ask for health;
I love another, and I hate myself;
I feed me in sorrow, and laugh in all my pain.
Lo thus displeases me both death and life
And my delight is causer of this strife Fol. 21, 22.
.
It was from the capricious and over-strained invention of the Italian poets,
that Wyat was taught to ^orture the passion of love by prolix and intricate
comparisons, and unnatural allusions. At one time his love is a galley steered
by cruelty through stormy seas and dangerous rocks; the sails torn by the blast
of tempestuous sighs, and the cordage consumed by incessant showers of tears: a
cloud of grief envelopes the stars^ reason is drowned, and the haven is at a
distance Fol. 22.
. At another Fol. 25.
, it is a spring trickling from the summit of the Alps, which gathering force
in its fall, at length overflows all the plain beneath Fol. 25.
. Sometimes, it is a gun, which being overcharged, expands the flame within
itself, and bursts in pieces Fol. 29.
. Sometimes it is like a prodigious mountain, which is perpetually weeping in
copious fountains, and sending forth sighs from its forests: which bears more
leaves than fruits: which breeds wild-beasts, the proper emblems of rage, and
harbors birds that are always singing Fol. 36.
. In another of his sonnets, he says, that all nature sympathises with his
passion. The woods resound his elegies, the rivers stop their course to hear
him complain, and the grass weeps in dew. These thoughts are common and
fantastic. But he adds an image which is new, and has much nature and
sentiment, although not well expressed. The hugy oaks have rored in the wind,
Each thing, methought, complaining in their kind.
This is a touch of the pensive. And the apostrophe which follows is natural
and simple. Ah stony heart, who has thus framed thee
So cruel, that art clothed with beauty Fol. 24.
!
And there is much strength in these lines of the lover to his bed. The place
of sleep, wherein I do but wake,
Besprent with tears, my bed, I thee forsake Fol. 25.
!
But such passages as these are not the general characteristics of Wyat's
poetry. They strike us but seldom, amidst an impracticable mass of forced
reflections, hyperbolical metaphors, and complaints that move no compassion.

But Wyat appears a much more pleasing writer, when he moralizes on the
felicities of retirement, and attacks the vanities and vices of a court, with
the honest indignation of an independent philosopher, and the freedom and
pleasantry of Horace. Three of his poetical epistles are professedly written in
this strain, two to John Poines He seems to have been a person about the court.
See LIFE of Sir Thomas Pope, p. 46.
, and the other to sir Francis Bryan: and we must regret, that he has not left
more pieces in a style of composition for which he seems to have been eminently
qualified. In one of the epistles to Poines on the life of a courtier, are
these spirited and manly reflections.

Mine own John Poines, since ye delight to know
The causes why that homewarde I me draw,
And flee the prease Press. Crowd.
of courts, where so they go The court was perpetually moving from one palace
to another.
;
Rather than to live thrall under the awe
Of lordly looks, wrapped within my cloak;
To will and lust learning to set a law:
It is not that, because I scorn or mock
The power of them, whom Fortune here has lent
Charge over us, of Right Justice.
to strike the stroke:
But true it is, that I have always meant
Less to esteem them, (than the common sort)
Of outward things that judge, in their intent,
Without regard what inward does resort.
I grant sometime of glory that the fire
Does touch my heart. Me list not to report To speak favorably of what is bad.

Blame by honor, nor honor to desire.
But how can I this honor now attain,
That cannot die the color black a liar?
My Poines, I cannot frame my tune Perhaps the re^ding is tongue.
to feign,
To cloak the truth, etc.
In pursuit of this argument, he declares his indisposition and inability to
disguise the truth, and to flatter, by a variety of instances. Among others, he
protests he cannot prefer Chaucer's TALE of SIR THOPAS to his PALAMON AND
AR^ITE.

Praise SIR THOPAS for a noble tale,
And scorn the STORY that the KNIGHT told;
Praise him for counsel that is drunk of ale:
Grinne when he laughes, that bears all the sway;
Frown when he frowns, and groan when he is pale:
On others lust to hang both night and day, etc.
I mention this circumstance about Chaucer, to show the esteem in which the
KNIGHT'S TALE, that noble epic poem of the dark ages, was held in the reign of
Henry eighth, by men of taste.

The poet's execration of flatterers and courtiers is contrasted with the
following entertaining picture of his own private life and rural enjoyments at
Allingham-castle in Kent.

This is the cause that I could never yet
Hang on their sleeve^, that weigh, as thou may se,
A chippe of chance more than a pound of wit:
This makes me at home to hunt and hawke,
And in foul wether at my book to sit;
In frost and snow then with my bow to stalk;
No man does mark whereso I ride or go:
In lusty leas In large fields. Over fruitful grounds.
at liberty I walk:
And of these news I feel no weal nor woe:
Save that a clogge does hang yet at my hele Probably he alludes to some
office which he still held at court; and which sometimes recalled him, but not
too frequently, from the country.
;
No force for that, for it is ordered so,
That I may leap both hedge and dike full well.
I am not now in France, to judge the wine, etc.
But I am here in Kent and Christendom,
Among the Muses, where I read and rhyme;
Where if thou list, mine own John Poines to come,
Thou shall be judge how do I spend my time Fol. 47.
.
In another epistle to John Poines, on the security and happiness of a moderate
fortune, he versifies the fable of the City and Country Mouse with much humor.
My mother's maids, when they do sow and spinne,
They sing a song made of the feldishe mouse, etc.
This fable appositely suggests a train of sensible and pointed observations on
the weakness of human conduct, and the delusive plans of life.

Alas, my Poines, how men do seek the best,
And find the worse by error as they stray:
And no marvel, when sight is so oppressed,
And blindes the guide: anon out of the way
Goes guide and all, in seking quiet life.
O wretched minds! There is no gold that may
Grant that you seek: no war, no peace, no strife:
No, no, although thy head were hoopt with gold:
Serjaunt at mace, with hawbert Halbert. A parade of guards, etc. The classical
allusion is obvious.
, sword, nor knife,
Cannot repulse the care that follow should.
Each kind of life has with him his disease:
Live in delites, even as thy lust would,
And thou shall find, when lust does most thee please,
It irketh strait, and by itself does fade.
A small thing is it, that may thy mind appease?
None of you al there is that is so mad,
To seek for grapes on brambles or on breeres So read, instead of bry^rs,
;
Nor nonne, I trow, that has a wit so badde,
To set his hay for conneyes oer riveres.
Nor yet set not a drag net for a hare:
And yet the thing that most is your desire
You do misseke, with more travel and care.
Make plain thine heart, that it be not knotted
With hope or dread: and se thy will be bare Free.

From all affects Passions.
, whom vice has never spotted.
Thyself content with that is thee assinde Assigned.
;
And use it well that is to the allotted.
Then seek no more out of thyself to find,
The thing that thou have sought so long before,
For thou shall feel it sticking in thy mind. --
These Platonic doctrines are closed with a beautiful application of virtue
personified, and introduced in her irresistible charms of visible beauty. For
those who deviate into vain and vicious pursuits,

None other pain pray I for them to be,
But when the rage does lead them from the right,
That, loking backwarde, VIRTUE they may se
Even as she is, so goodly fair and bright Fol. 45, 46.
!
With these disinterested strains we may join the following single stanza,
called THE COURTIERS LIFE.

In court to serve, decked with fresh array,
Of sugared Delicious.
meats feeling the sweet repaste;
The life in bankets, and sundry kinds of play,
Amid the prease of worldly looks to waste:
Has with it joinde often times such bitter taste,
That whosoever joys such kind of life to hold,
In prison joys, fettred with chains of gold Fol. 44.
.
Wyat may justly be deemed the first polished English satirist. I am of
opinion, that he mistook his talents when, in compliance with the mode, he
became a sonnetteer; and, if we may judge from a few instances, that he was
likely to have treated any other subject with more success than that of love.
His abilities were seduced and misapplied in fabricating fine speeches to an
obdurate mistress. In the following little ode, or rather epigram, on a very
different occasion, there is great simplicity and propriety, together with a
strain of poetic allusion. It is on his return from Spain into England.

Tagus farewell, that westward with thy stremes
Turns up the grains of gold al ready tried Pure gold.
!
For I with spur and ^ayle go seek the Temes The Thames.
,
Gainward the sun that shows her welthy pride:
And to the town that Brutus sought by dremes A tradition in Geoffrey of
Monmouth.
,
Like bended moon The old city from the river appeared in the shape of a
crescent.
that leanes her lusty Strong, flourishing, populous, etc.
side;
My king, my country I seek, for whom I live:
O mighty Jove, the winds for this me give Fol. 44.
!
Among Wyat's poems is an unfinished translation, in Alexandrine verse, of the
Song of Iopas in the first book of Virgil's Eneid Fol. 49.
. Wyat's and Surrey's versions from Virgil are the first regular translations
in English of an ancient classic poet: and they are symptoms of the restoration
of the study of the Roman writers, and of the revival of elegant literature. A
version of David's Psalms by Wyat is highly extolled by lord Surrey and Leland.
But Wyat's version of the PENITENTIAL PSALMS seems to be a separate work from
his translation of the whole Psaltery, and probably that which is praised by
Surrey, in an ode above quoted, and entitled, Praise of certain Psalms of
David, translated by Sir T. Wyat the elder Fol. 16. [See supr. p. 18.]
. They were printed with this title, in 1549. "Certain Psalms chosen out of
the Psalms of David commonly called vij penytentiall Psalms, drawn into
English meter by sir Thomas Wyat knight, whereunto is added a prolog of the
aucthore before every Psalm very pleasant and profettable to the godly reader.
Imprinted at London in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the star by Thomas
Raynald and John Harryngton, cum previlegio ad imprimendum solum, MDXLIX."
Leland seems to speak of the larger version.

Transtulit in nostram Davidis carmina linguam,
Et numeros magna reddidit art pares.
Non morietur OPUS tersum, SPECTABILE, sacrum N^^N. ut supr.
.
But this version, with that of Surrey mentioned above, is now lost See
Hollinsh. CHR^N. iii. p. 978. col. 2.
: and the pious Thomas Sternhold and John Hopkins are the only immortal
translators of David's Psalms.

A similarity, or rather sameness of studies, as it is a proof, so perhaps it
was the chief cement, of that inviolable friendship which is said to have
subsisted between Wyat and Surrey. The principal subject of their poetry was
the same: and they both treated the passion of love in the spirit of the
Italian poets, and as professed disciples of Petrarch. They were alike devoted
to the melioration of their native tongue, and an attainment of the elegancies
of composition. They were both engaged in translating Virgil, and in rendering
select portions of Scripture into English meter.

SECT. XXI.
TO the poems of Surrey and Wyat are annexed, as I have before hinted, in
Tottell's editions, those of uncertain authors They begin at fol. 50.
. This latter collection forms the first printed poetical miscellany in the
English language: although very early manuscript miscellanies of that kind are
not uncommon. Many of these pieces are much in the manner of Surrey and Wyat,
which was the fashion of the times. They are all anonymous; but probably, sir
Francis Bryan, George Boleyn earl of Rochford, and lord Vaulx, all professed
rhymers and sonnet-writers, were large contributors.

Drayton, in his elegy To his dearly loved friend HENRY REYNOLDS OF POETS AND
POESY, seems to have blended all the several collections of which Tottell's
volume consists. After Chaucer he says,

They with the Muses who conversed, were
That princely Surrey, early in the time
Of the eighth Henry, who was then the prime
Of England's noble youth. With him there came
Wyat, with reverence whom we still do name
Amongst our poets: Bryan had a share
With the two former, which accounted are
That time's best Makers, and the authors were
Of those small poems which the title bear
Of Songs and Sonnetts, wherein often they hit
On many dainty passages of wit WORKS, vol. iv^ p. 1255. edit. Land. 1759. 8vo.
.
Sir Francis Bryan was the friend of Wyat, as we have seen; and served as a
commander under Thomas earl of Surrey in an expedition into Brittany, by whom
he was knighted for his bravery Dugd. BAR. ii. 273. a.
. Hence he probably became connected with lord Surrey the poet. But Bryan was
one of the brilliant ornaments of the court of king Henry the eighth, which at
least affected to be polite: and from his popular accomplishments as a wit and
a poet, he was made a gentleman of the privy-chamber to that monarch, who loved
to be entertained by his domestics Rymer, FO^D. xiv. 380.
. Yet he enjoyed much more important appointments in that reign, and in the
first year of Edward the sixth; and died chief justiciary of Ireland, at
Waterford, in the year 1548 Hollinsh. CHRON. i. 61. And Ibid. Hooker's CONTIN.
tom. ii. P. ii. page 110. See also FOX, MARTYR. p. 991.
. On the principle of an unbiassed attachment to the king, he wrote epistles on
Henry's divorce, never published; and translated into English from the French,
Antonio de Guevara's Spanish Dissertation on the life of a courtier, printed at
London in the year last mentioned Cod. Impress. A. Wood, Mus. Ashmol. Oxon.
. He was nephew to John Bourchier, lord Berners, the translator of Froissart;
who, at his desire, translated at Calais from French into English, the GOLDEN
BOOK, or Life of Marcus Aurelius, about 1533 See the COLOPHON. It was printed
by Thomas Berthelett, in 1536, quarto. Often afterward. Lord Berners was,
deputy-general of Calais, and its Marches.
. Which are Bryan's pieces I cannot ascertain.

George Boleyn, viscount Rochford, was son of sir Thomas Boleyn, afterward
earl of Wiltshire and Ormond; and at Oxford discovered an early propensity to
polite letters and poetry. He was appointed to several dignities and offices by
king Henry the eighth, and subscribed the famous declaration sent to Pope
Clement the seventh. He was brother to queen Anne Boleyn, with whom he was
suspected of a criminal familiarity. The chief accusation against him seems to
have been, that he was seen to whisper with the queen one morning while she was
in bed. As he had been raised by the exaltation, he was involved in the
misfortunes of that injured princess, who had no other fault but an un^uarded
and indiscrete frankness of nature; and whose character has been blackened by
the bigoted historians of the catholic cause, merely because she was the
mother of queen Elisabeth. To gratify the ostensible jealousy of the king, who
had conceived a violent passion for a new object, this amiable nobleman was
beheaded on the first of May, in 1536 See Dugd. BARON. iii. p. 306. a.
. His elegance of person, and spritely conversation, captivated all the ladies
of Henry's court. Wood says, that at the "royal court he was much adored,
especially by the female sex, for his admirable discourse, and symmetry of body
Ath. Oxon. i. 44.
." From these irresistible allurements his enemies endeavored to give a
plausibility to their infamous charge of an incestuous connection. After his
commitment to the Tower, his sister the queen, on being sent to the same place,
asked the lieutenant, with a degree of eagerness, "Oh! where is my sweet
brother Strype, MEM. i. p. 280.
?" Here was a specious confirmation of his imagined guilt: this stroke of
natural tenderness was too readily interpreted into a licentious attachment.
Bale mentions his RHYTHMI ELEGANTISSIMI ii. 103.
, which Wood calls, "Songs and Sonnets, with other things of the like nature
Ubi supr.
." These are now lost, unless some, as I have insinuated, are contained in the
present collection; a garland, in which it appears to have been the fashion for
every FLOWERY COURTIER to leave some of his blossoms. But Boleyn's poems cannot
now be distinguished.

The lord Vaulx, whom I have supposed, and on surer proof, to be another
contributor to this miscellany, could not be the Nicholas lord Vaux, whose gown
of purple velvet, plated with gold, eclipsed all the company present at the
marriage of prince Arthur; who shines as a statesman and a soldier with
uncommon luster in the history of Henry the seventh, and continued to adorn the
earlier annals of his successor, and who died in the year 1523. Lord Vaux the
poet, was probably Thomas lord Vaux, the son of Nicholas, and who was summoned
to parliament in 1531, and seems to have lived till the latter end of the reign
of queen Mary See what I have said of his son lord William, in the LIFE OF SIR
THOMAS POPE, p. 221. In 1558, sir Tho. Pope leaves him a legacy of one hundred
pounds, by the name of lord Vaulx.
. All our old writers mention the poetical lord Vaux, as rather posterior to
Wyat and Surrey; neither of whom was known as a writer till many years after
the death of lord Nicholas. George Gascoyne, who wrote in 1575, in his
panegyric on the ENGLISH POETS, places Vaux after Surrey.

Piers Plowman was full plain,
And Chaucer's spreet was great;
Earl Surrey had a goodly vain,
LORD VAUX the mark did beat.
Puttenham, author of the ART OF ENGLISH POESY, having spoken of Surrey and
Wyat, immediately adds, "In the SAME TIME, or NOT LONG AFTER, was the lord
Nicholas The christian name is a mistake, into which it was ^asy to fall.
Vaux, a man of much facility in vulgar making Fol. 48.
." Web, in his DISCOURSE OF ENGLISH POETRY, published in 1586, has a similar
arrangement. Great numbers of Vaux's poems are extant in the PARADISE OF DAINTY
DEVISES; and, instead of the rudeness of Skeleton, they have a smoothness and
facility of manner, which does not belong to poetry written before the year
1523, in which lord Nicholas Vaux died an old man See Percy's BALL. ii. 49.
edit. 1775.
. The PARADISE OF DAINTY DEVISES was published in 1578, and he is there simply
styled Lord Vaulx the elder: this was to distinguish him from his son lord
William, then living. If lord Nicholas was a writer of poetry, I will venture
to assert, that none of his performances now remain; notwithstanding the
testimony of Wood, who says, that Nicholas, "in his juvenile years was sent to
Oxon, where by reading humane and romantic, rather than philosophical authors,
he advanced his genius very much in poetry and history ATH. OXON. i. 19.
." This may be true of his son Thomas, whom I suppose to be the poet. But such
was the celebrity of lord Nicholas's public and political character, that he
has been made to monopolise every merit which was the property of his
successors. All these difficulties, however, are at once adjusted by a
manuscript in the British Museum: in which we have a copy of Vaux's poem,
beginning I loathe that I did love, with this title: "A dyttye or sonet made by
the lord Vaus, in the time of the noble queen Marye, representing the image of
Death MSS. HARL. 1703. 25.
." This sonnet, or rather ode, entitled, The aged lover renounceth love, which
was more remembered for its morality than its poetry, and which is idly
conjectured to have been written on his deathbed G. Gascoyne says, "The L.
Vaux his dittie, beginning thus I loath, was thought by some to be made upon
his d^ath-bed, etc." EPISTL^ TO THE YOUNG GENTLEMEN, prefixed to his Poems.
, makes a part of the collection which I am now examining Fol. 72.
. From this ditty are taken three of the stanzas, yet greatly disguised and
corrupted, of the Grave-digger's Song in Shakespeare's HAMLET Act V.
. Another of lord Vaux's poems in the volume before us, is the ASSAULT OF
CUPIDE UPON THE FORT IN WHICH THE LOVER'S HEART LAY WOUNDED Fol. 71.
. These two are the only pieces in our collection, of which there is undoubted
evidence, although no name is prefixed to either, that they were written by
lord Vaux. From palpable coincidencies of style, subject, and other
circumstances, a slender share of critical sagacity is sufficient to point out
many others.

These three writers were cotemporaries with Surrey and Wyat: but the subjects
of some of the pieces will go far in ascertaining the date of the collection in
general. There is one on the death of sir Thomas Wyat the elder, who died, as I
have remarked, in 1541 Fol. 89.
. Another on the death of lord chancellor Audley, who died in 1544 Fol. 69.
. Another on the death of master Devereux, a son of lord Ferrers, who is said
to have been a Cato for his counsel Fol. 51.
; and who is probably Richard Devereux, buried in Berkyng church Stowe, SURV.
LAND. p. 131. fol. ed.
, the son of Walter lord Ferrers, a distinguished statesman and general under
Henry the eighth Who died in 1558. See Dugd. BAR. ii. 177.
. Another on the death of a lady Wentworth Fol. 73. Margaret. See Dugd. BAR.
ii. 310.
. Another on the death of ^^r Antony Denny, the only person of the court who
dared to inform king Henry the eighth of his approaching dissolution, and who
died in 1551 Fol. 78. There is sir John Cheek's EPITAPHIUM in Anton. Denneium.
Land. 1551. 4to.
. Another on the death of Phillips, an eminent musician, and without his rival
on the lute Fol. 71. One Philips is mentioned among the famous English
musicians, in Meres's Wits Tresurie, 1598. fol. 288. I cannot ascertain who
this Phillips, a musician, was. But one Robert Phillips, or Phelipp, occurs
among the gentlemen of the royal chapel under Edward the sixth and queen Mary.
He was also one of the singingmen of saint George's chapel at Windsor: and Fox
says, "he was so notable a singing-man, wherein he gloried, that wheresoever he
came, the longest song with most counterverses in it should be set up against
him." Fox adds, that while he was singing on one side of the choir of Windsor
chapel, O Redemptrix et Salvatrix, he was answered by one Testwood a singer on
the other side, Non Redemptrix nec Salvatrix. For this irreverence, and a few
other slight heresies, Testwood was burnt at Windsor. ACTS and MONUM. vol. ii.
p. 543, 544. I must add, that sir Thomas Phelyppis, or Philips, is mentioned as
a musician before the reformation. Hawki^s, HIST. MUS. ii. 533.
. Another on the death of a countess of Pembroke, who is celebrated for her
learning, and her perfect virtues linked in a chain Fol. 85.
: probably Anne, who was buried magnificently at saint Paul's, in 1551, the
first lady of sir William Herbert the first earl of Pembroke, and sister to
Catharine Parr, the sixth queen of Henry the eighth Strype, MEM. ii. p. 317.
. Another on master Henry Williams, son of sir John Williams, afterward lord
Them, and a great favorite of Henry the eighth Fol. 99. See LIFE OF SIR THOMAS
POPE, p. 232.
. On the death of sir James Wilford, an officer in Henry's wars, we have here
an elegy Fol. 36.
, with some verses on his picture Fol. 62.
. Here is also a poem on a treasonable conspiracy, which is compared to the
stratagem of Sinon, and which threatened immediate extermination to the British
constitution, but was speedily discovered Fol. 94. 95.
. I have not the courage to explore the formidable columns of the
circumstantial Hollingshed for this occult piece of history, which I leave to
the curiosity and conjectures of some more laborious investigator. It is
certain that none of these pieces are later than the year 1557, as they were
published in that year by Richard Tottell the printer. We may venture to say,
that almost all of them were written between the years 1530 and 1550 There is
an epitaph by W. G. made on himself, with an answer, ^ol. 98, 99. I cannot
explain those initials. At fol. 111. a lady, called Arundel, is highly
celebrated for her incomparable beauty and accomplishments: perhaps of lord
Arundel's family.

Thus A^UND^L sits throned still with Fam^, etc.


. Most of them perhaps within the first part of that period.

The following nameless stanzas have that elegance which results from
simplicity. The compliments are such as would not disgrace the gallantry or the
poetry of a polished age. The thoughts support themselves, without the aid of
expression, and the affectations of language. This is a negligence, but it is a
negligence produced by art. Here is an effect obtained, which it would be vain
to seek from the studied ornaments of style.

Give place, ye ladies, and be gone,
Boast not yourselves at all:
For here at hand approaches one
Whose face will stain you all.
The virtue of her lively lokes
Excels the precious stone:
I wish to have none other books
To read or look upon.
In each of her two cris^all eyes
Smileth a naked boy:
It would you all in heart suffice
To se that lamp of joye.
I think Nature has lost the moulde See this thought in Surrey, supr. ^itat.
p. 16.

Where she her shape did take;
Or else I doubt if Nature could
So fair a creature make. --
In life she is Diana chaste,
In truth Penelopey;
In word and eke in deed steadfast.
What would you more we sey?
If all the world were sought so far,
Who could find such a wight?
Her beuty twinkleth like a star
Within the frosty night.
Her rosial color comes and goes
With such a comely grace,
(More ruddy too than is the rose)
Within her lively face.
At Bacchus feast none shall her mete,
Ne at no wanton play,
Nor gasing in an open street,
Nor gadding as astray.
The modest mirth that she does use
Is mixed with shamefa^tnesse;
Al vice she does wholly refuse,
And hates idleness.
O lord, it is a world to see
How virtue can repair
And deck in her such honesty,
Whom nature made so fair! --
How might I do to get a graffe
Of this unspotted tree?
For all the rest are plain but chaffe^
Which seem good corn to be Fol. 67.
. --
Of the same sort is the following stanza on Beauty.

Then BEAUTY stepped before the bar,
Whose breast and neck was bare;
With hair trust up, and on her head
A caul of gold she ware Fol. 84.
.
We are to recollect, that these compliments were penned at a time, when the
graces of conversation between the sexes were unknown, and the dialogue of
courtship was indelicate; when the monarch of England, in a style, which the
meanest gentleman would now be ashamed to use, pleaded the warmth of his
affection, by drawing a coarse allusion from a present of venison, which he
calls flesh, in a love-letter to his future queen, Anne Boleyn, a lady of
distinguished breeding, beauty, and modesty See Hearne's AVESBURY, APPEND. p.
354.
.

In lord Vaux's ASSAULT OF CUPIDE, abovementioned, these are the most
remarkable stanzas.

When Cupide scaled first the fort,
Wherein my heart lay wounded sore;
The batry was of such a sort,
That I must yield, or die therefore.
There saw I Love upon the wall
How he his baner did display;
Alarm, Alarm, he began to call,
And bade his soldiers keep away.
The arms the which that Cupid bare,
Were pierced hearts, with tears besprent. --
And even with the trumpettes sown
The scaling ladders were up set;
And BEAUTY walked up and down,
With bow in hand, and arrows whet.
Then first DESIRE began to scale,
And shrouded him under his targe, etc Fol. 71, 72.
.
Puttenham speaks more highly of the contrivance of the allegory of this piece,
than I can allow. "In this figure [counterfait action] the lord Nicholas For
Thomas.
Vaux, a noble gentleman, and much delighted in vulgar making English poetry.
, and a man otherwi^e of no great learning, but having herein a marvelous
facility, made a dittie representing the Battle and Assault of Cupid so
excellently well, as for the gallant and propre aplication of his fiction in
every part, I cannot choose but set down the greatest part of his ditty, for
in truth it cannot be amended: When Cupid scaled, etc Page 200.
." And in another part of the ^ame book. "The lord Vaux his commendation lies
chiefly in the facility of his meetre, and the aptness of his descriptions,
such as he takes upon him to make, namely in sundry of his songs, wherein he
shows the COUNTERFEIT ACTION very lively and pleasantly Page 51.
." By counterfeit action the critic means fictitious action, the action of
imaginary beings expressive of fact and reality. There is more poetry in some
of the old pageants described by Hollingshed, than in this allegory of Cupid.
Vaux seems to have had his eye on Sir David Lyndsey's GOLDEN TERGE See supr.
Vol. ii. p. 270.
.

In the following little ode, much pretty description and imagination is built
on the circumstance of a lady being named Bays. So much good poetry could
hardly be expected from a pun.

In Bays I boast, whose branch I bear:
Such joye therein I find,
That to the death I shall it wear,
To ease my careful mind.
In heat, in cold, both night and day,
Her virtue may be seen;
When other fruits and flowers decay,
The Bay yet grows full green.
Her berries feed the birds full often,
Her leaves sweet water make;
Her bows be set in every loft,
For their sweet savour's sake.
The birds do shroud them from the cold
In her we daily see:
And men make arbers as they would,
Under the pleasant tree Fol. 109.
. --
From the same collection, the following is perhaps the first example in our
language now remaining, of the pure and unmixed pastoral: and in the erotic
species, for ease of numbers, elegance of rural allusion, and simplicity of
imagery, excels every thing of the kind in Spenser, who is erroneously ranked
as our earliest English bucolic. I therefore hope to be pardoned for the length
of the quotation.

Phyllida was a fair maid,
As fresh as any flour;
Whom Harpalus the herdman prayde
To be her paramour.
Harpalus and eke Corin
Were herdmen both yfere Together.
:
And Phyllida could twist and spin,
And thereto sing full clear.
But Phyllida was all to coy
For Harpalus to win;
For Corin was her only joy
Who forced her not a pin Loved her not in the least.
.
How often would she flowers twine?
How often garlandes make
Of couslips and of columbine?
And al for Corin's sake.
But Corin he had hawks to lure,
And forced more the field More engaged in field-sports.
;
Of lovers law he took no cure,
For once he was begilde Deceived. Had once been in love.
.
Harpalus prevailed naught,
His labor all was lost;
For he was fardest from her thought,
And yet he loved her most.
Therefore waxt he both pale and lean,
And dry as clot Clod.
of clay;
His flesh it was consumed clean,
His color gone away.
His beard it had not long be shave,
His hear hong all unkempt Uncombed.
;
A man fit even for the grave,
Whom spiteful love had spent.
His eyes were red, and all forewatched Over-watched. That is, her eyes w^r^
always awake, never closed by sleep.
,
His face besprent with tears;
It semde Unhap had him long hatched
In mids of his dispaires.
His clothes were black and also bare,
As one forlorn was he:
Upon his head always he ware
A wreath of wyllow tree.
His beasts he kept upon the hill
And he sat in the dale;
And thus with sighs and sorrows shryll
He began to tell his tale.
"O Harpalus, thus would he say,
"Unhappiest under sun!
"The cause of thine unhappy day
"By love was first begun!
"For thou wentst first by suit to seek
"A tigre to make tame,
"That settes not by thy love a leeke,
"But makes thy grief her game.
"As easy it were to convert
"The frost into the flame,
"As for to turn a froward heart
"Whom thou so feign would frame.
"Corin he lives careless,
"He leapes among the leaves;
"He eats the fruits of thy redress Labor. Pains.
,
"Thou reapes, he takes the sheaves.
"My beasts, awhile your food refrain,
"And hark your herdsmans sound;
"Whom spiteful love, alas, has slain
"Through-girt Pierce through. So fol. 113. infr.
His entrails with a lance through-gird^d quite.

with many a wound!
"O happy be ye, beasts wild,
"That here your pasture takes!
"I se that ye be not begilde
"Of these your faithful makes Mates.
.
"The heart he fedeth by the hind,
"The buck hard by the do:
"The turtle dove is not unkind
"To him that loves her so. --
"But, welaway, that nature wrought,
"Thee, Phyllida, so fair;
"For I may say, that I have bought
"Thy beauty all too dear! etc ^ol. 55.
."
The illustrations in the two following stanzas, of the restlessness of a
lover's mind, deserve to be cited for their simple beauty, and native force of
expression.

The owl with feeble sight
Lies lurking in the leaves;
The sparrow in the frosty night,
May shroud her in the eaves.
But woe to me, alace!
In sun, nor yet in shade,
I cannot find a resting place
My burden to unlade Fol. 71.
.
Nor can I omit to notice the sentimental and expressive metaphor contained in
a single line.

Walking the path of pensive thought Fol. 87.
.
Perhaps there is more pathos and feeling in the Ode, in which The Lover in
despair lamenteth his Case, than in any other piece of the whole collection.

Adieu desert, how art thou spent!
Ah dropping tears, how do ye waste!
Ah scalding sighs, how ye be spent,
To prick Them forth that will not haste!
Ah! pained heart, thou gapst for grace Favor.
,
Even there, where pity has no place.
As easy it is the stony rock
From place to place for to remove,
As by thy plaint for to provoke
A frosen heart from hate to love.
What should I say? Such is thy lot
To fawn on them that force Love.
thee not!
Thus may thou safely say and swear,
That rigor reigns where ruth Pity.
does fail,
In thanklesse thoughts thy thoughts do wear:
Thy truth, thy faith, may naught avail
For thy good will: why should thou so
Still graft, where grace it will not grow?
Alas! poor heart, thus have thou spent
Thy flowring time, thy pleasant years?
With sighing voice weep and lament,
For of thy hope no fruit apperes!
Thy true meaning is paid with scorn,
That ever sows and repeth no corn.
And where thou sekes a quiet port,
Thou do but weigh against the wind:
For where thou gladdest woldst resort,
There is no place for thee assinde Assigned.
.
Thy destiny has set it so,
That thy true heart should cause thy woe Fol. 109.
.
These reflections, resulting from a retrospect of the vigorous and active part
of life, destined for nobler pursuits, and unworthily wasted in the tedious and
fruitless anxieties of unsuccessful love, are highly natural, and are painted
from the heart: but their force is weakened by the poet's allusions.

T^is miscellany affords the first pointed English epigram that I remember; and
which deserves to be admitted into the modern collections of that popular
species of poetry. Sir Thomas More was one of the best jokers of that age: and
there is some probability, that this might have fallen from his pen. It is on a
scholar, who was pursuing his studies successfully, but in the midst of his
literary career, married unfortunately.

A student, at his book so plast So pursuing his studies. Plast, so spelled for
the rhyme, is placed.
,
That wealth he might have won,
From book to wife did flete in have,
From wealth to woe to run.
Now, who has played a feater cast,
Since juggling first begone?
In knitting of himself so fast,
Himself he has undonne Fol. 64.
.
But the humor does not arise from the circumstances of the character. It is a
general joke on an unhappy match.

These two lines are said to have been written by Mary queen of Scots with a
diamond on a window in Fotheringay castle, during her imprisonment there, and
to have been of her composition. From the top of all my trust
Mishap has thrown me in the dust See Ballard's LEARN. LAD. p. 161.
.
But they belong to an elegant little ode of ten stanzas in the collection
before us, in which a lover complains that he is caught by the snare which he
once defied Fol. 53.
. The unfortunate queen only quoted a distich applicable to her situation,
which she remembered in a fashionable set of poems, perhaps the amusement of
her youth.

The ode, which is the comparison of the author's faithful and painful passion
with that of Troilus Fol. 81.
, is founded on Chaucer's poem, or Boccace's, on the same subject. This was the
most favorite love-story of our old poetry, and from its popularity was wrought
into a drama by Shakespeare. Troilus's sufferings for Cressida were a common
topic for a lover's fidelity and assiduity. Shakespeare, in his MERCHANT OF
VENICE, compares a night favorable to the stratagems or the meditation of a
lover, to such a night as Troilus might have chosen, for stealing a view of the
Grecian camp from the ramparts of Troy.

And sighed his soul toward the Grecian tents
Where Cressid lay that night Act V. Sc. i.
. --
Among these poems is a short fragment of a translation into Alexandrines of
Ovid's epistle from Penelope to Ulysses Fol. 89.
. This is the first attempt at a metrical translation of any part of Ovid into
English, for Caxton's Ovid is a loose paraphrase in prose. Nor were the heroic
epistles of Ovid translated into verse till the year 1582, by George
Tuberville. It is a proof that the classics were studied, when they began to be
translated.

It would be tedious and intricate to trace the particular imitations of the
Italian poets, with which these anonymous poems abound. Two of the sonnets Fol.
74.
are panegyrics on Petrarch and Laura, names at that time familiar to every
polite reader, and the patterns of poetry and beauty. The sonnet on The diverse
and contrary passions of the lover Fol. 107.
, is formed on one of Petrarch's sonnets, and which, as I have remarked before,
was translated by sir Thomas Wyat Supr. p. 31.
. So many of the nobility, and principal persons about the court, writing
sonnets in the Italian style, is a circumstance which must have greatly
contributed to circulate this mode of composition, and to encourage the study
of the Italian poets. Beside lord Surrey, sir Thomas Wyat, lord Boleyn, lord
Vaux, and sir Francis Bryan, already mentioned, Ed^und lord Sheffield, created
a baron by king Edward the sixth, and killed by a butcher in the Norfolk
insurrection, is said by Bale to have written sonnets in the Italian manner See
Tanner BIBL. p. 668. Dugd. BAR. iii. 386.
.

I have been informed, that Henry lord Berners translated some of Petrarch's
sonnets MSS. Oldys.
. But this nobleman otherwise deserved notice here, for his prose works, which
co-operated with the romantic genius and the gallantry of the age. He
translated, and by the king's command, Froissart's chronicle, which was printed
by Pinson in 1523. Some of his other translations are professed romances. He
translated from the Spanish, by desire of the lady of sir Nicholas Carew, THE
CASTLE OF LOVE. From the French he translated, at the request of the earl of
Huntingdon, SIR HUGH OF BOURDEAUX, which became exceedingly popular. And from
the same language, THE HISTORY OF ARTHUR an Armorican knight. Bale says Cent.
ix. p. 706.
, that he wrote a comedy called Ite in vineam, or the PARABLE OF THE VINEYARD,
which was frequently acted at Calais, where lord Berners resided, after vespers
ATH. OXON. i. 33. It is not known, whether it was in Latin or English. Stowe
says, that in 1528, at Greenwich, after a grand tournament and banquet, there
was the "most goodliest Disguising or Interlude in Latin, etc." CHRON. p. 539.
edit. fol. 1615. But possibly this may be Stowe's way of naming and describing
a comedy of Plautus. See supr. vol. ii. 363.
. He died in 1532.

I have also been told, that the late lord Eglintoun had a genuine book of
manuscript sonnets, written by king Henry the eighth. There is an old madrigal,
set to music by William Bird, supposed to be written by Henry, when he first
fell in love with Anne Boleyn I must not forget, that a song is ascribed to
Anne Boleyn, but with little probability, called her COMPLAINT. See Hawkins,
HIST. MUS. iii. 32. v. 480.
. It begins,

The eagles force subdues each bird that flies,
What metal can resyste the flaming fire?
Does not the sun dazzle the cleareste eyes,
And melt the ice, and makethe froste retire?
It appears in Bird's PSALMS, SONGS, AND SONNETS, printed with musical notes,
in 1611 See also NUGAE ANTIQUAE, ii. 248.
. Poetry and music are congenial; and it is certain, that Henry was skilled in
musical composition. Erasmus attests, that he composed some church services See
Hawkins, HIST. MUS. ii. 533.
: and one of his anthems still continues to be performed in the choir of
Christ-church at Oxford, of his foundation. It is in an admirable style, and is
for four voices. Henry, although a scholar, had little taste for the classical
elegancies which now began to be known in England. His education seems to have
been altogether theological: and, whether it best suited his taste or his
interest, polemical divinity seems to have been his favorite science. He was a
patron of learned men, when they humoured his vanities; and were wise enough,
not to interrupt his pleasures, his convenience, or his ambition.

SECT. XXII.
TO these SONGS and SONNETTES of UNCERTAIN AUCTOURS, in Tottell's edition are
annexed SONGS WRITTEN BY N. G. They begin with fol. 113.
By the initials N. G. we are to understand Nicholas Grimoald, a name which
never appeared yet in the poetical biography of England. But I have before
mentioned him incidentally See vol. ii. 342.
. He was a native of Huntingdonshire, and received the first part of his
academical institution at Christ's college in Cambridge. Removing to Oxford in
the year 1542, he was elected fellow of Merton College: but, about 1547, having
opened a rhetorical lecture in the refectory of Christ-church, then newly
founded, he was transplanted to that society, which gave the greatest
encouragement to such students as were distinguished for their proficiency in
criticism and philology. The same year, he wrote a Latin tragedy, which
probably was acted in the college, entitled, ARCHIPROPHETA, ^ive JOHANNES
BAPTISTA, TRAGAEDIA, That is, The Arch-prophet, or Saint John Baptist, a
tragedy, and dedicated to the dean Richard Cox Printed, Colon. 1548. 8vo. [See
supr. vol. ii. 379.]
. In the year 1548 ii Edw. vi.
, he explained all the four books of Virgil's Georgics in a regular prose Latin
paraphrase, in the public hall of his college Printed at London in 1591. 8vo.
. He wrote also explanatory commentaries or lectures on the Andria of Terence,
the Epistles of Horace, and many pieces of Cicero, perhaps for the same
auditory. He translated Tully's Offices into English. This translation, which
is dedicated to the learned Thirlby bishop of Ely, was printed at London, 1553
In octavo. Again, 1574. -- 1596.
. He also familiarised some of the purest Greek classics by English versions,
which I believe were never printed. Among others was the CYROPAEDIA. Bale the
biographer and bishop of Ossory, says, that he turned Chaucer's TROILUS into a
play: but whether this piece was in Latin or English, we are still to seek: and
the word Comedia, which Bale uses on this occasion, is without precision or
distinction. The same may be said of what Bale calls his FAME, a comedy. Bale
also recites his System of Rhetoric for the use of Englishmen Rhetorica in usum
Britannorum.
, which seems to be the course of the rhetorical lectures I have mentioned. It
is to be wished, that Bale, who appears to have been his friend Bale cites his
comment, or paraphrase on the first Eclogue of Virgil, addressed ad Amicum
Joannem Bal^um, viii. 99.
, and therefore possessed the opportunities of information, had given us a more
exact and full detail, at least of such of Grimoald's works as are now lost,
or, if remaining, are unprinted Titles of many others of his pieces may be seen
in Bale, ubi supr.
. Undoubtedly this is the same person, called by Strype one Grimbold, who was
chaplain to bishop Ridley, and who was employed by that prelate, while in
prison, to translate into English, Laurentio Valla's book against the fiction
of Constantine's DONATION, with some other popular Latin pieces against the
papists See Strype's CRANMER, B. iii. c. 11. p. 343. And GRINDAL, 8. Fox, edit.
i. 1047. And Wood, ATH. OXON. i. 178.
. In the ecclesiastical history of Mary's reign, he appears to have been
imprisoned for heresy, and to have saved his life, if not his credit, by a
recantation. But theology does not seem to have been his talent, nor the
glories of martyrdom to have made any part of his ambition. One of his plans,
but which never took effect, was to print a new edition of Josephus Iscanus's
poem on the TROJAN WAR, with emendations from the most correct manuscripts
Bale, ubi supr.
.

I have taken more pains to introduce this Nicholas Grimoald to the reader's
acquaintance, because he is the second English poet after lord Surrey, who
wrote in blank-verse. Nor is it his only praise, that he was the first who
followed in this new path of versification. To the style of blank-verse
exhibited by Surrey, he added new strength, elegance, and modulation. In the
disposition and conduct of his cadencies, he often approaches to the legitimate
structure of the improved blank-verse: but we cannot suppose, that he is
entirely free from those dissonancies and asp^rities, which still adhered to
the general character and state of our diction.

In his poem on the DEATH OF MARCUS TULLIUS CICERO are these lines. The
assassins of Cicero are said to relent,

-- When
They his bare neck beheld, and his hoar hears,
Scant could they hold the tears that forth began burst,
And almost fell from bloody hands the swoordes.
Only the stern Herennius, with grym look,
Dastardes, why stand ye still? he says: and straight
Swapt off the head with his presumptuous yrone.
Ne with the slaughter yet is he not filled:
Foul shame on shame to hepe, is his delight.
Wherefore the hands also he does off-smyte,
Which durst Antonius' life so lively paint.
Him, yelding strained ghost His constrained spirit.
, from welkin hie
With lothly chere lord Phoebus began behold;
And in black cloud, they say, long hid his head.
The Latin Muses, and the Grayes Grai^^. Greek.
, they wept,
And for his fall eternally shall weep.
And lo! hart-persing PITHO P^itho, the goddess of persuasion.
, strange to tell,
Who had suffisde to him both sense and words,
When so he spoke, and dressed with nectar soote
That flowyng tongue, when his windpipe disclosde,
Fled with her fleeing friend Fol. 117.
; and, out, alas!
Has left the earth, ne will no more return.
Nor is this passage unsupported by a warmth of imagination, and the spirit of
pathetic poetry. The general cast of the whole poem shows, that our author was
not ill qualified for dramatic composition.

Another of Grimoald's blank-verse poems, is on the death of Zoroas an Egyptian
astronomer, who was killed in Alexander's first battle with the Persians. It is
opened with this nervous and animated exordium.

Now clattering arms, now ragyng broyls of war,
Began pass the noyes of dreadful trompets clang The reader must recollect
Shakespeare'^,
Loud larums, neighing steeds, and TRUMPETS CLANG.

;
Shrouded with shafts the heaven, with clowd of darts
Covered the air. Against full-fatted bulls
As forces kindled ire the lions keen,
Whose greedy gutts the gnawing honger pricks,
So Macedonians against the Persians fare Fol. 115.
.
In the midst of the tumult and hurry of the battle, appears the sage
philosopher Zoroas: a classical and elegant description of whose skill in
natural science, forms a pleasing contrast amidst images of death and
destruction; and is inserted with great propriety, as it is necessary to
introduce the history of his catastrophe.

Shaking her bloody hands Bellone, among
The Perses, sowth all kind of cruel death. --
Him smites the club; him wounds far-strikyng bow;
And him the slyng, and him the shining sword. --
Right over stood, in snow-white armor brave Brav^, is richly decked.
,
The Memphite Zoroas, a cunning clarke,
To whom the heaven lay open as his book:
And in celestial bodies he could tell
The moving, meting, light, aspect, eclips,
And influence, and constellacions all.
What earthly chances would betide: what year
Of plenty With plenty.
stord: what sign forwarned derth:
How winter gendreth snow: what temperature
In the prime tide Spring. Printemps.
does season well the soil.
Why summer burns: why autumn has ripe grapes:
Whether the circle quadrate may become:
Whether our tunes heavens harmony can yield Whether any music made by man ^^n
resemble that of the Spheres.
: --
What star does let Hinder.
the hurtful sire Saturn.
to rage,
Or him more mild what opposition makes:
What fire does qualify Mavorses Of Mavors, or the planet M^rs.
fire, etc Fol. 115.
.
Our astronomer, finding by the stars that he is destined to die speedily,
chooses to be killed by the hand of Alexander, whom he endeavors to irritate to
an attack, first by throwing darts, and then by reproachful speeches.

-- Shameful stain
Of mothers bed! Why lo^est thou thy strokes
Cowards among? Turn thee to me, in case
Manhood there be so much left in thy heart:
Come, fight with me, that on my helmet wear
Apolloes laurel, both for learnings laud,
And eke for martial praise: that in my shield
The sevenfold sophie of Minerve contain.
A match more mete, sir king, than any here.
Alexander is for a while unwilling to revenge this insult on a man eminent for
wisdom.

The noble prince amoved takes ruthe upon
The wilful wight; and with soft words, again:
O monstrous man, quoth he, What so thou art!
I pray thee live, ne do not with thy death
This lodge of lore His head.
, the Muses mansion mar,
That treasure-house this hand shall never spoil.
My sword shall never bruise that skillful brain,
Long-gathered heaps of Science sone to spill.
O how fair fruits may you to mortal man
From WISDOM'S garden give! How many may,
By you, the wiser and the better prove!
What error, what mad mood, what frensy, thee
Persuades, to be down sent to deep Averne,
Where no arts flourish, nor no knowledge 'vails
For all these sawes Lessons of wisdom.
? When thus the sovereign said,
Alighted Zoroas, etc Fol. 115. 116.
. --
I have a suspicion, that these two pieces in blank-verse, if not fragments of
larger works, were finished in their present state, as prolusions, or
illustrative practical specimens, for our author's course of lectures in
rhetoric. In that case, they were written so early as the year 1547. There is
positive proof, that they appeared not later than 1557, when they were first
printed by Tottell.

I have already mentioned lord Surrey's Virgil: and for the sake of
juxtaposition, will here produce a third specimen of early blank-verse, little
known. In the year 1590, William Vallans published a blank-verse poem,
entitled, A TALE OF TWO SWANNES, which, under a poetic fiction, describes the
situation and antiquities of several towns in Hertfordshire. The author, a
native or inhabitant of Hertfordshire, seems to have been connected with Camden
and other ingenious antiquaries of his age. I cite the exordium.

When Nature, nurse of every living thing,
Had clad her charge in brave and new array;
The hills rejoist to see themselves so fine:
The fields and woods grew proud thereof also:
The meadows with their partie-colour'd coats,
Like to the rainebow in the azurd sky,
Gave just occasion to the cheerful birds
With sweetest note to singe their nurse's praise.
Among the which, the merry nightingale
With sweet and sweet, her breast against a thorn,
Ringes out all night, etc London, Printed by Roger Ward for Robert Sheldrake,
MDXC. 4to. 3. Sheets. He mentions most of the Seats in Hertfordshire then
existing, belonging to the queen and the nobility. See Hearne's LEL. ITIN. V.
Pr. p iv. seq. ed. 2.
.
Vallans is probably the author of a piece much better known, a history, by
many held to be a romance, but which proves the writer a diligent searcher into
ancient records, entitled, "The HONORABLE PRENTICE, Showed in the Life and
Death of Sir JOHN HAWKEWOOD sometime Prentice of London, interlaced with the
famous History of the noble FITZWALTER Lord of Woodham in Essex The founder of
Dunmowe Priory, afterward mentioned, in the reign of Henry the third.
, and ofthe poisoning of his fair daughter. Also of the merry Customs of
DUNMOWE, etc. Whereunto is annexed the most lamentable murder of Robert Hall
at the High Altar in Westminster Abbey There are two old ^ditions, at London,
in 1615, and 1616, both for Henry Gosson, in 5 sh. 4to. They have only the
author's initials W. V. See Hearne, ut modo supr. iii. p. v. ii. p. xvi.
."

The reader will observe, that what has been here said about early specimens of
blank-verse, is to be restrained to poems not written for the stage. Long
before Vallans's TWO SWANNES, many theatrical pieces in blank-verse had
appeared; the first of which is, The TRAGEDY OF GORDOBUCKE, written in 1561.
The second is George Gascoigne's JOCASTA, a tragedy, acted at Gray's Inn, in
1566. George Peele had also published his tragedy in blank-verse of DAVID and
BETHSABE, about the year 1579 Shakespeare did not begin writing for the stage
till 1591. Jonson, about 1598.
. HIERONYMO, a tragedy also without rhyme, was acted before 1590. But this
point, which is here only transiently mentioned, will be more fully considered
hereafter, in its proper place. We will now return to our author Grimoald.

Grimoald, as a writer of verses in rhyme, yields to none of his cotemporaries,
for a masterly choice of chaste expression, and the concise elegancies of
didactic versification. Some of the couplets, in his poem IN PRAISE OF
MODERATION, have all the smartness which marks the modern style of sententious
poetry, and would have done honor to Pope's ethic epistles.

The ancient Time commended not for naught
The Mean. What better thing can there be sought?
In mean is virtue placed: on either side,
Both right and left, amiss a man may slide.
Icar, with sire Icarus, with thy father.
had thou the midway flown,
Icarian beak Strait. Sea.
by name no man known.
If middle path kept had proud Phaeton,
No burning brande this earth had fallen upon.
Ne cruel power, ne none too soft can reign:
That kepes That which.
a mean, the same shall still remain.
Thee, Julie Julius Caesar.
, once did too much mercy spill:
Thee, Nero stern, rigor extreme did kill.
How could August Augustus Caesar.
so many years well pass?
Nor overmeke, nor overfierce, he was.
Worship not Jove with curious fancies vain,
Nor him despise: hold right atween these twain.
No wastefull wight, no greedy groom is praizd:
Stands Largess just in equal balance paizd Poised.
.
So Catoes meat surmountes Antonius chere,
And better fame his sober fare has here.
Too slender building bad, as bad too gross Thick. Massy.
;
One an eye sore, the other falls to loss.
As medcines help in measure, so, god wot,
By overmuch the sick their bane have got.
Unmete, mesemes, to utter this mo ways;
Measure forbids unmeasurable praise Fol. 113.
.
The maxim is enforced with great quickness and variety of illustration: nor is
the collision of opposite thoughts, which the subject so naturally affords,
extravagantly pursued, or indulged beyond the bounds of good sense and
propriety. The following stanzas on the NINE MUSES are more poetical, and not
less correct Fol. 113.
.

Imps Daughters.
of king JOVE and queen REMEMBRANCE, lo,
The sisters nine, the poets pleasant feres Companions.
,
Calliope does stately style below,
And worthy praises paintes of princely peers.
Clion in solemn songs renews all day,
With present years conjoining age bypast.
Delighteful talk loves comicall Thaley;
In fresh grene youth who does like laurel last.
With voices tragical soundes Melpomen,
And, as with cheins, thallured ear she binds.
Her stringes when Terpsechor does touch, even then
She touches hearts, and reigns in men's minds.
Fine Erato, whose look a lively chere
Presents, in dancing keeps a comely grace.
With semely gesture does Polymnie stere,
Whose words whole routes of ranks do rule in place.
Uranie, her globes to view all bent,
The ninefold heaven observes with fixed face.
The blastes Euterpe tunes of instrument,
With solace sweet, hence heavy dumps to chase.
Lord Phoebus in the mids, (whose heavenly sprite
These ladies does inspire) embraces all.
The Graces in the Muses weed, delight
To lead them forth, that men in maze they fall.
It would be unpardonable to dismiss this valuable miscellany, without
acknowledging our obligations to its original editor Richard Tottell: who
deserves highly of English literature, for having collected at a critical
period, and preserved in a printed volume, so many admirable specimens of
ancient genius, which would have mouldered in manuscript, or perhaps from their
detached and fugitive state of existence, their want of length, the
capriciousness of taste, the general depredations of time, inattention, and
other accidents, would never have reached the present age. It seems to have
given birth to two favorite and celebrated collections of the same kind, THE
PARADISE OF DAINTY DEVISES, and ENGLAND'S HELICON, which appeared in the reign
of queen Elisabeth ^. u The reader will observe, that I have followed the
paging and arrangement of Tottell's second edition in 1565. 12mo. In his
edition of 1557, there is much confusion. A poem is there given to Grimoald, on
the death of lady Margaret Lee, in 1555. Also among Grimoald's is a poem on Sir
James Wilford, mentioned above, who appears to have ^ought under Henry the
eighth in the the wars of France and Scotland. This edition, of 1557, is not in
quarto, as I have called it by an oversight, but in small duodecimo, and only
with signatures. It is not mentioned by Ames, and I have seen it only among
Tanner's printed books at Oxford. It has this colophon. "Imprinted at London in
Fleet street within Temple bar, at the sign of the hand and star by
Richard Tottel, the sifte day of June. An. 1557. Cum privilegio ad imprimendum
solum."
.

SECT. XXIII.
IT will not be supposed, that all the poets of the reign of Henry the eighth
were educated in the school of Petrarch. The graces of the Italian muse, which
had been taught by Surrey and Wyat, were confined to a few. Nor were the
beauties of the classics yet become general objects of imitation. There are
many writers of this period who still rhymed on, in the old prosaic track of
their immediate predecessors, and never ventured to deviate into the modern
improvements. The strain of romantic fiction was lost; in the place of which,
they did not substitute the elegancies newly introduced.

I shall consider together, yet without an exact observation of chronological
order, the poets of the reign of Henry the eighth who form this subordinate
class, and who do not bear any mark of the character of the poetry which
distinguishes this period. Yet some of these have their degree of merit; and,
if they had not necessarily claimed a place in our series, deserve examination.

Andrew Board, who writes himself ANDREAS PERFORATUS, with about as much
propriety and as little pedantry as Buchanan calls one Wisehart SOPHOCARDIUS,
was educated at Winchester and Oxford See his INTRODUCTION TO KNOWLEDGE, ut
infr. cap. xxxv.
; and is said, I believe on very slender proof, to have been physician to king
Henry the eighth. His BREVIARY OF HEALTH, first printed in 1547 "Compyled by
Andrewe Boorde of Physic Doctoure an English man." It was reprinted by
William Powell in 1552, and again in 1557. There was an impression by T. East,
1587,^4to. Others also in 1548, and 1575, which I have never seen. The latest
is by East in 1598, 4to.
, is dedicated to the college of physicians, into which he had been
incorporated. The first book of this treatise is said to have been examined and
approved by the University of Oxford in 1546 At the end of which is this Note.
"Here ^ndeth the first bok^ Examined in Oxforde in the year of our Lord
MCCCCCXLVI, etc."
. He chiefly practiced in Hampshire; and being popishly affected, was censured
by Poynet, a Calvinistic bishop of Winchester, for keeping three prostitutes in
his house, which he proved to be his patients See Against Mart^n, etc. p. 48.
. He appears to have been a man of great superstition, and of a weak and
whimsical head: and having been once a Carthusian, continued ever afterward to
profess celibacy, to drink water, and to wear a shirt of hair. His thirst of
knowledge, dislike of the reformation, or rather his unsettled disposition, led
him abroad into various parts of Europe, which he visited in the medical
character. Wood says, that he was "esteemed a noted poet, a witty and ingenious
person, and an excellent physician." Hearne, who has plainly discovered the
origin of Tom Thumb, is of opinion, that this facetious practitioner in physic
gave rise to the name of MERRY ANDREW, the Fool on the mountebank's stage. The
reader will not perhaps be displeased to see that antiquary's reasons for this
conjecture: which are at the same time a vindication of Borde's character,
afford some new anecdotes of his life, and show that a Merry Andrew may be a
scholar and an ingenious man. "It is observable, that the author [Borde] was as
fond of the word DOLENTYD, as of many other hard and uncooth words, as any
Quack can be. He begins his BREVIARY OF HEALTH, Egregious doctors and Masters
of the eximious and archane science of Physic, of your urbanite exasperate
not your selve, etc. But notwithstanding this, will any one from hence infer or
assert, that the author was either a pedant or a superficial scholar? I think,
upon due consideration, he will judge the contrary. Dr. Board was an ingenious
man, and knew how to humor and please his patients, readers, and auditors. In
his travells and visits, he often appeared and spoke in public: and would often
frequent markets and fairs where a conflux of people used to get together, to
whom he prescribed; and to induce them to flock thither the more readily, he
would make humorous speeches, couched in such language as caused mirth, and
wonderfully propagated his fame: and 'twas for the same end that he made use of
such expressions in his Books, as would otherwise (the circumstances not
considered) be very justly pronounced bombast. As he was versed in antiquity,
he had words at command from old writers with which to amuse his hearers, which
could not fail of pleasing, provided he added at the same time some remarkable
explication. For instance, if he told them that (...) was an old brass medal
among the Greeks, the oddness of the word, would, without doubt, gain
attention; tho nothing near so much, as if withal he signified, that 'twas a
brass medal a little bigger than an Obolus, that used to be put in the mouths
of persons that were dead. -- And withal, 'twould affect them the more, if
when he spoke of such a brass medal, he signified to them, that brass was in
old time looked upon as more honorable than other metals, which he might
safely enough do, from Homer and his scholiast. Homer's words are etc. A
passage, which without doubt HIERONYMUS MAGIUS would have taken notice of in
the fourteenth chapter of his Book DE TINTINNABULIS, had it occurred to his
memory when in prison he was writing, without the help of books before him,
that curious Discourse. 'Twas from the Doctor's method of using such speeches
at markets and fairs, that in aftertimes, those that imitated the like
humorous, jocose language, were styled MERRY ANDREWS, a term much in vogue on
our stages Hearne's BENEDICT. ABB. Tom. i. P^AE^AT. p. 50. edit. Oxon. 1735.
."

He is supposed to have compiled or composed the MERRY TALES of the mad men of
Gotham, which, as were told by Wood, "in the reign of Henry the eighth, and
after, was accounted a book full of wit and mirth by scholars and gentlemen
ATH. OXON. i. 74. There is an edition in duodecimo by Henry Wikes, without
date, but about 1568, entitled, MERRY TALES of the madmen of Gotam, gathered
together by A. B. of physic doctor. The oldest I have seen, is London, 1630,
12mo.
." This piece, which probably was not without its temporary ridicule, and which
yet mantains a popularity in the nursery, was, I think, first printed by Wynkyn
de Word. Hearne was of opinion, that these idle pranks of the men of Gotham, a
town in Lincolnshire, bore a reference to some customary law-tenures belonging
to that place or its neighborhood, now grown obsolete; and that Blount might
have enriched his book on ANCIENT TENURES with these ludicrous stories. He is
speaking of the political design of REYNARD THE FOX, printed by Caxto^. "It was
an admirable Thing. And the design, being political, and to represent a wise
government, was equally good. So little reason is there to look upon this as a
poor despicable book. Nor is there more reason to esteem THE MERRY TALES OF THE
MAD MEN OF GOTHAM (which was much valued and cried up in Henry the eighth's
time tho now sold at ballad-singers stalls) as altogether a romance: a certain
skillfull person having told me more than once, that he was assured by one of
Gotham, that they formerly held lands there, by such Sports and Customs as are
touched upon in this book. For which reason, I think particular notice should
have been taken of it in Blount's TENURES, as I do not doubt but there would,
had that otherwise curious author been apprised of the matter. But it is strange
to see the changes that have been made in the book of REYNARD THE FOX, from the
original editions Hearne's NOT. ET SPICILEG. ad Gul. Neubrig. vol. iii. p. 744.
See also BENEDICT. ABB. ut supr. p. 54.
!"

Borde's chief poetical work is entitled, "The first Book of the INTRODUCTION
OF KNOWLEDGE, the which does teach a man to speak part of al manner of
languages, and to know the usage and fashion of al manner of countries: and for
to know the most part of al manner of coins of money, the which is current in
every region. Made by Andrew Board of phisyk doctor." It was printed by the
Coplands, and is dedicated to the king's daughter the princess Mary. The
dedication is dated from Montpelier, in the year 1542. The book, containing
thirty-nine chapters, is partly in verse and partly in prose; with wooden cuts
prefixed to each chapter. The first is a satire, as it appears, on the fickle
nature of an Englishman: the symbolical print prefixed to this chapter,
exhibiting a naked man, with a pair of sheers in one hand and a roll of cloth
in the other, not determined what sort of a coat he shall order to be made, has
more humor, than any of the verses which follow Harrison, in his DESCRIPTION
OF ENGLAND, having mentioned this work by Board, add^, "Such is our
mutabili^ie, that to day there is none [equal] to the Spanish guise, to morrow
the Fr^nch toies are most fine and d^lectable, yer [ere] long no such apparel
as that which is after the Almaine fashion: by and ^y the Turkish manner
otherwise the Morisc^ gowns, the Barbarian sleves, the mandilion worn to
Collie Weston ward, and the short French breeches, etc." B. ii. chapter 9. p. 172.
. Nor is the poetry destitute of humor only; but of every embellishment, both
of metrical arrangement and of expression. Board has all the baldness of
allusion, and barbarity of versification, belonging to Skeleton, without his
strokes of satire and severity. The following lines, part of the Englishman's
speech, will not prejudice the reader in his favor.

What do I care, if all the world me fail?
I will have a garment reach to my tail.
Then am I a minion, for I wear the new guise,
The next year after I hope to be wise,
Not only in wearing my gorgeous array,
For I will go to learning a whole summers day.
In the seventh chapter, be gives a fantastic account of his travels Prefixed
to which, is a wooden cut of the author Board, standing in a sort of pew or
stall, under a canopy, habited in an academical gown, a laurel-crown on his
head, with a book before him on a desk.
, and owns, that his meter deserves no higher appellation than ryme d^grell.
But this delineation of the fickle Englishman is perhaps to be restricted to
the circumstances of the author's age, without a respect to the national
character: and, as Board was a rigid catholic, there is a probability,
notwithstanding in other places he treats o^ natural dispositions, that a
satire is designed on the laxity of principle, and revolutions of opinion,
which prevailed at the reformation, and the easy compliance of many of his
changeable countrymen with a new religion for lucrative purposes.

I transcribe the character of the Welshman, chiefly because he speaks of his
harp.

I am a Welshman, and do dwell in Wales,
I have loved to search budgets, and look in males:
I love not to labor, to delve, nor to dyg,
My fyngers be lymed like a lyme-twyg.
And whereby riches I do not greatly set,
Sith all his [is] fysshe that comes ^o the net.
I am a gentylman, and come of Brutes blood,
My name is ap Ryce, ap Davy, ap Flood:
I love our Lady, for I am of her kynne,
He that does not love her, I beshrewe his chynne.
My kyndred is ap Hoby, ap Jenkin, ap Goffe.
Because I go barelegged, I do catch the coffe.
Because I do go barelegged it is not for pride.
I have a gray cote, my body for to hyde.
I do love cawse boby That is, toas^^d ch^^s^, next mentioned.
, good roasted cheese,
And swysshe metheglyn I look for my fees.
And if I have my HARP, I care for no more,
It is my treasure, I keep it in store.
For my harp is made of a good mare's skyn,
The strings be of horse hear, it makes a good din.
My song, and my voice, and my harp does agree,
Much like the bussing of an homble be:
Yet in my country I do make pastyme
In tellyng of prophyces which be not in ryme Chapter ii. In the prose description
of Wales he says, there are many beautiful and strong castles standing yet.
"The ^astels and the country of Wales, and the people of Wales, be much like to
the castles and the country of the people of Castyle and Biscayn." In
describing Gascony, he says, that at Bordeaux, "in the cathedral church of
Saint Andrews, is the fairest and the greatest pair of orgyns [organs] in all
Chrystendome, in the which orgins be many instruments and vy^es [devices] as
gians [giants] heads and stars, the which does move and wagge with their
jaws and ^is [eyes] as fast as the player plays." chapter xxiii.
.
I have before mentioned "A right pleasant and merry History of the MYLNER OF
ABINGTON A village near Cambridge.
, with his wife and his fair, daughter and of two poor scholars of Cambridge,"
a meagre epitome of Chaucer's MILLER'S TALE. In a blank leaf of the Bodleian
copy, this tale is said by Thomas Newton of Cheshire, an elegant Latin
epigrammatist of the reign of queen Elisabeth, to have been written by Board
See supr. vol. i. p. 432.
. He is also supposed to have published a collection of silly stories called
SCOGIN'S JESTS, sixty in number. Perhaps Shakespeare took his idea from this
jest-book, that Scogan was a mere buffoon, where he says that Falstaff, as a
juvenile exploit, "broke Scogan's head at the court-gate See. P. Hen. iv. Act.
iii. Sc. ii.
." Nor have we any better authority, than this publication by Board, that
Scogan was a graduate in the university, and a jester to a king It is hard to
say whence Jonson got his account of Scogan, MASQUE OF THE FORTUNATE ISLES,
vol. iv. p. 192. Merefool. Skogan? What was he?


Johphiel. O, a fine gentleman, and a Master of Arts

Of Henry the Fourth's time, that made disguises
For the king's sons, and writ in balad. royal
Daintily well.

Merefool. But wrote he like a gentleman?


Johphiel. In rhyme, fine tinkling rhyme, and flowand verse.

With now and then some sense; and he was paid for it,
Regarded and rewarded, which few poets
Are now adays. --

See Tyrwhitt's CHAUCER, vol. v. AN ACCOUNT, etc. p. xx. And compare what I
have said of Scogan, supr. vol. ii. p. 135. Drayton, in the Preface to his
ECLOGUES, says, "the COLIN CLOUT OF SKOGGAN under Henry the seventh is pretty."
He must mean Skeleton.
. Hearne, at the end of Benedictus Abbas, has printed Borde's ITINERARY, as it
may be called; which is little more than a string of names, but is quoted by
Norden in his SPECULUM BRITANNIAE Page 13. MIDDLESEX. i. P.
. Borde's circulatory peregrinations, in the quality of a quack-doctor, might
have furnished more ample materials for an English topography. Beside the
BREVIARY OF HEALTH, mentioned above, and which was approved by the university
of Oxford, Board has left the DIETARIE OF HEALTH, reprinted in 1576, the
PROMPTUARIE OF MEDICINE, the DOCTRINE OF URINES, and the PRINCIPLES OF
ASTRONOMICAL PROGNOSTICATIONS The Princyples of Astronamye the which
diligently perscrutyd is in a manner a prognosticacyon to the worlds end. In
thirteen chapters. For R. Copland, without date, 12mo. It is among bishop
More's collection at Cambridge, with some other of Borde's books.
: which are proofs of attention to his profession, and show that he could
sometimes be serious See Ames, HIST. PRINT. p. 152. Pits. p. 735.
. But Borde's name would not have been now remembered, had he wrote only
profound systems in medicine and astronomy. He is known to posterity as a
buffoon, not as a philosopher. Yet, I think, some of his astronomical tracts
have been epitomized and bound up with Erra Pater's Almanacs.

Of Borde's numerous books, the only one that can afford any degree of
entertainment to the modern reader, is the DIETARIE OF HEALTH: where, giving
directions as a physician, concerning the choice of houses, diet, and apparel,
and not suspecting how little he should instruct, and how much he might amuse,
a curious posterity, he has preserved many anecdotes of the private life,
customs, and arts, of our ancestors In his rules for building or planning a
House, he supposes a quadrangle. The Gate House, or Tower, to be exactly
opposite to the Portico of the Hall. The Privy Chamber to be annexed to the
Chamber of State. A Parlour joining to the Buttery and Pantry at the lower end
of the Hall. The Pastry-house and Larder annexed to the Kitchen. Many of the
chambers to have a view into the Chapel. In the outer quadrangle to be a
stable, but only for horses of pleasure. The stables, dairy, and
slaughterhouse, to be a quarter of a mile from the house. The Moat to have a
spring falling into it, and to be often scowered. An Orchard of sundry fruits
is convenient: but he rather recommends a Garden filled with aromatic herbs. In
the Garden a Pool or two, for fish. A Park filled with deer and conies. "A
Dove-house also is a necessary thing about a mansyon-place. And, among other
things, a Pair of Buttes is a decent thing about a mansyon. And otherwise,
for a great man necessary it is for to pass his time with bowls in an aly,
when all this is finished, and the mansyon replenished with implements." Chapter iv.
Sign. C. ii. Dedication dated 1542.
. This work is dedicated to Thomas duke of Norfolk, lord treasurer under Henry
the eighth. In the dedication, he speaks of his being called in as a physician
to sir John Drury, the year when cardinal Wolsey was promoted to York; but that
he did not choose to prescribe without consulting doctor Buttes, the king's
physician. He apologizes to the duke, for not writing in the ornate phraseology
now generally affected. He also hopes to be excused, for using in his writings
so many words of mirth: but this, he says, was only to make your grace merry,
and because mirth has ever been esteemed the best medicine. Board must have had
no small share of vanity, who could think thus highly of his own pleasantry.
And to what a degree of taste and refinement must our ancient dukes and lords
treasurers have arrived, who could be exhilarated by the witticisms and the
lively language of this facetious philosopher?

John Bale, a tolerable Latin classic, and an eminent biographer, before his
conversion from popery, and his advancement to the bishopric of Ossory by king
Edward the sixth, composed many scriptural interludes, chiefly from incidents
of the New Testament. They are, the Life of Saint John the Bap^ist, written in
1538. Christ in his twelfth year. Baptism and Temptation. The Resurrection of
Lazarus. The Council of the Highpriests. Simon the Leper. Our Lord's Supper,
and the Washing of the feet of his Disciples. Christ's Burial and Resurrection.
The Passion of Christ. The Comedy of the three Laws of Nature, Moses, and
Christ, corrupted by the Sodomites, Pharisees, and Papists, printed by Nicholas
Bamburgh in 1538: and so popular, that it was reprinted by Colwell in 1562 Both
in quarto. At the end is A Song of Benedictus, compiled by Johan Bale.
. God's Promises to Man This was written in 1538. And first printed under the
name of a TRAGEDY or ENTE^LUDE, by Ch^^lewood. 1577. 4to.
. Our author, in his Vocacyon to the Bishopric of Ossory, informs us, that his
COMEDY of John the Baptist, and his TRAGEDY of God's Promises, were acted by
the youths upon a Sunday, at the market cross of Kilkenny Fol. 24.
. What shall we think of the state, I will not say of the stage, but of common
sense, when these deplorable dramas could be endured? Of an age, when the Bible
was profaned and ridiculed from a principle of piety? But the fashion of acting
mysteries appears to have expired with this writer. He is said, by himself, to
have written a book of Hymns, and another of jests and tales: and to have
translated the tragedy of PAMMACHIUS CENT. viii. 100. p. 702. And Verheiden, p.
149.
; the same perhaps which was acted at Christ's college in Cambridge in 1544,
and afterward laid before the privy council as a libel on the reformation See
vol. ii. p. 377. Bale says, "Pammachii tragoedias transtuli."
. A low vein of abusive burlesque, which had more virulence than humor, seems
to have been one of Bale's talents: two of his pamphlets against the papists,
all whom he considered as monks, are entitled the MASS OF THE GLUTTONS, and the
ALCORAN OF THE PRELATES Ibid.
. Next to exposing the impostures of popery, literary history was his favorite
pursuit: and his most celebrated performance is his account of the British
writers. But this work, perhaps originally undertaken by Bale as a vehicle of
his sentiments in religion, is not only full of misrepresentations and
partialities, arising from his religious prejudices, but of general
inaccuracies, proceeding from negligence or misinformation. Even those more
ancient Lives which he transcribes from Leland's commentary on the same
subject, are often interpolated with false facts, and impertinently marked with
a misapplied zeal for reformation. He is angry with many authors, who
flourished before the thirteenth century, for being catholics. He tells us,
that lord Cromwell frequently screened him from the fury of the more bigoted
bishops, on account of the comedies he had published "Ob editas COMAEDIAS." Ubi
supr.
. But whether plays in particular, or other compositions, are here to be
understood by comedies, is uncertain.

Brian Anslay, or Annesley, yeoman of the wine cellar to Henry the eighth about
the year 1520, translated a popular French poem into English rhymes, at the
exhortation of the gentle earl of Kent, called the CITY OF DAMES, in three
books. It was printed in 1521, by Henry Pepwell, whose prologue prefixed begins
with these unpromising lines,

So now of late came into my custode
This forseyde book, by Brian Anslay,
Yeoman of the seller with the eight king Henry.
Another translator of French into English, much about the same time, is Andrew
Chertsey. In the year 1520, Wynkyn de Word printed a book with this title,
partly in prose and partly in verse, Here follows the passion of our lord Jesu
Crist translated out of French into Englysch by Andrew Chertsey gentleman the
year of our lord MDXX In quarto.
. I will give two stanzas of Robert Copland's prologue, as it records the
diligence, and some other performances, of this very obscure writer.

The godly use of prudent-wytted men
Cannot absteyn their ancient exercise.
Record of late how besiley with his pen
The translator of the said treatise
Has him indevered, in most godly wise,
Books to translate, in volumes large and fair,
From French in prose, of goostly exemplaire.
As is, the flower of Gods commandments,
A treatise also called Lucydarye,
With two other of the sevyn sacraments,
One of christian men the ordinary,
The second the craft to lyve well and to dye.
With dyvers other to man's life profitable,
A vertuose use and right commendable.
The Flower of God's Commandments was printed by Wynkyn de Word, in folio,
in 1521. A print of the author's arms, with the name CHERTSEY, is added. The
Lucydayre is translated from a favorite old French poem called Li Lusidaire.
This is a translation of the ELUCIDARIUM, a large work in dialogue, containing
the sum of christian theology, by some attributed to Anselm archbishop of
Canterbury in the twelfth century Wynkyn de Word printed, Here begins a
little treatise called the Lycydarye. With wooden cuts. No date. In quarto.
. Chertsey's other versions, mentioned in Copland's prologue, are from old
French manuals of devotion, now equally forgotten, Such has been the fate of
volumes fair and large! Some of these versions have been given to George
Ashby, clerk of the signet to Margaret queen of Henry the sixth, who wrote a
moral poem for the use of their son prince Edward, on the Active policy of a
prince, finished in the author's eightieth year. The prologue begins with a
compliment to "Masters Gower, Chaucer, and Lydgate," a proof of the estimation
which that celebrated triumvirate still continued to maintain. I believe it was
never printed. But a copy, with a small mutilation at the end, remains among
bishop More's manuscripts at Cambridge MSS. MORE, 492. It begins, "Right and
mighty prince and my right good lord.".
.

In the dispersed library of the late Mr. William Collins, I saw a thin folio
of two sheets in black letter, containing a poem in the octave stanza,
entitled, FABYL'S GHOST, printed by John Rastell in the year 1533. The piece
is of no merit; and I should not perhaps have mentioned it, but as the subject
serves to throw light on our early drama. Peter Fabell, whose apparition speaks
in this poem, was called The Merry Devil of Edmonton, near London. He lived in
the reign of Henry the seventh, and was buried in the church of Edmonton.
Weever, in his ANCIENT FUNERAL MONUMENTS, published in 1631, says under
Edmonton, that in the church "lies interred under a seemlie tomb without
inscription, the body of Peter Fabell, as the report goes, upon whom this fable
was fathered, that he by his witty devises beguiled the devil. Belike he was
some ingenious-conceited gentleman, who did use some sleighte tricks for his
own disportes. He lived and died in the reign of Henry the seventh, says the
book of his merry Pranks Page 534.
." The book of Fabell's Merry Pranks I have never seen. But there is an old
anonymous comedy, written in the reign of James the first, which took its rise
from this merry magician. It was printed in 1617, and is called the MERRY DEVIL
OF EDMONTON, as it has been sundry times acted by his majesty's servants at
the Globe on the Banke-side In quarto, Land.
. In the Prologue, Fabell is introduced, reciting his own history.

It Is Peter Fabell a renowned scholar,
Whose fame has still been hitherto forgot
By all the writers of this latter age.
In Middle-sex his birth, and his aboade,
Not full seven mile from this great famous city:
That, for his fame in slights and magic won,
Was called the Merry Fiend of Edmonton.
If any here make doubt of such a name,
In Edmonton yet fresh unto this day,
Fixed in the wall of that old ancient church
His monument remains to be seen:
His memory yet in the mouths of men,
That whilst he lived he could deceive the devil.
Imagine now, that whilst he is retirde,
From Cambridge back unto his native home,
Suppose the silent sable visage night,
Casts her black curtain over all the world,
And whilst he sleeps within his silent bed,
Toiled with the studies of the passed day:
The very time and hour wherein that spirit
That many years attended his command;
And oftentimes 'twixt Cambridge and that town,
Had in a minute borne him through the air,
By composition 'twixt the fiend and him,
Comes now to claim the scholar for his due.
Behold him here laid on his restless couch,
His fatal chime prepared at his head,
His chamber guarded with these sable slights,
And by him stands that necromanticke chair,
In which he makes his direful inuocations,
And binds the fiends that shall obey his will.
Sit with a pleased eye until you know
The commicke end of our sad tragique show.
The play is without absurdities, and the author was evidently an attentive
reader of Shakespeare. It has nothing, except the machine of the chime, in
common with FABYLL'S GHOST. Fabell is mentioned in our chronicle-histories,
and from his dealings with the devil, was commonly supposed to be a friar See
also Norden's SPECULUM BRITANNIAE, written in 1596. MIDDLESEX, p. 18. And
Fuller'^ WORTHI^S, MIDDLESEX, p. 186. edit. fol. 1662.
.

In the year 1537, Wilfrid Holme, a gentleman of Huntington in Yorkshire, wrote
a poem called The Fall and evil Success of Rebellion. It is a dialogue between
England and the author, on the commotions raised in the northern counties on
account of the reformation in 1537, under Cromwell's administration. It was
printed at London in 1573. Alliteration is here carried to the most ridiculous
excess: and from the constraint of adhering inviolably to an identity of
initials, from an affectation of coining prolix words from the Latin, and from
a total ignoranc^ of prosodical harmony, the author has produced one of the
most obscure, rough, and unpleasing pieces of versification in our language. He
seems to have been a disciple of Skeleton. The poem, probably from its political
reference, is mentioned by Hollinshed Chron. iii. p. 978.
. Bale, who overlooks the author's poetry in his piety, thinks that he has
learnedly and perspicuously discussed the absurdities of popery ix. 22.
.

One Charles Bansley, about the year 1540, wrote a rhyming satire on the pride
and vices of women now a days. I know not if the first line will tempt the
reader to see more. "Bo peep, what have we spied!"
It was printed in quarto by Thomas Rainolde; but I do not find it among Ames's
books of that printer, whose last piece is dated 1555. Of equal reputation is
Christopher Goodwin, who wrote the MAYDEN'S DREME, a vision without
imagination, printed in 1542 In 4to. Pr. "Behold you young ladies of high
parentage."
, and THE CHANCE OF THE DOLORUS LOVER, a lamentable story without pathos,
printed in 1520 In 4to. Pr. "Upon a certain time as i^ befell."
. With these two may be ranked, Richard Feylde, or Field, author of a poem
printed in quarto by Wynkyn de Word, called THE TREATISE OF THE LOVER AND
JAYE. The prologue begins.

Though laureate poets in old antiquite.
I must not forget to observe here, that Edward Haliwell, admitted a fellow of
King's college Cambridge in 1532, wrote the Tragedy of Dido, which was acted at
saint Paul's school in London, under the conduct of the very learned master
John Rightwise, before cardinal Wolsey See supr. Vol. ii. 434.
. But it may be doubted, whether this drama was in English. Wood says, that it
was written by Rightwise Compare Tanner, BIBL. page 632. 372. ATH. OXON. i. 17.
. One John Hooker, fellow of Magdalene college Oxford in 1535, wrote a comedy
called by Wood PISCATOR, or The Fisher caught ATH. OXON. i. 60. [See supr. Vol.
ii. p. 387.]
. But as latinity seems to have been his object, I suspect this comedy to have
been in Latin, and to have been acted by the youth of his college.

The fanaticisms of chemistry seem to have remained at least till the
dissolution of the monasteries. William Blomefield, otherwise Rattelsden, born
at Bury in Suffolk, bachelor in physic, and a monk of Bury-abbey, was an
adventurer in quest of the philosopher's stone. While a monk of Bury, as I
presume, he wrote a metrical chemical tract, entitled, BLOMEFIELD'S BLOSSOMS,
or the CAMP OF PHILOSOPHY. It is a vision, and in the octava stanza. It was
originally written in the year 1530, according to a manuscript that I have
seen: but in the copy printed by Ashmole See Stanz. 5.
, which has some few improvements and additional stanzas, our author says he
began to dream in 1557 See Ashmole's THEATRUM CH^MICUM, p. 305. 478.
. He is admitted into the camp of philosophy by TIME, through a superb gate
which has twelve locks. Just within the entrance were assembled all the true
philosophers from Hermes and Aristotle, down to Roger Bacon, and the canon of
Bridlington. Detached at some distance, appear those unskilful but specious
pretenders to the transmutation of metals, lame, blind, and emaciated, by their
own pernicious drugs and injudicious experiments, who defrauded king Henry the
fourth of immense tr^asures by a counterfeit elixir. Among other wonders of
this mysterious region, he sees the tree of philosophy, which has fifteen
different buds, bearing fifteen different fruits. Afterward Blomfield turning
protestant, did not renounce his chemistry with his religion, for he appears to
have dedicated to queen Elisabeth another system of occult science, entitled,
THE RULE OF LIFE, OR THE FIFTH ESSENCE, with which her majesty must have been
highly edified MSS. MORE, autograph. 430. Pr. "Although, most redoubted,
suffran lady." See FOX, MARTYR. edit. i. p. 479.
.

Although lord Surrey and some others so far deviated from the dullness of the
times, as to copy the Italian poets, the same taste does not seem to have
uniformly influenced all the nobility of the court of king Henry the eighth who
were fond of writing verses. Henry Parker, lord Morley, who died an old man in
the latter end of that reign, was educated in the best literature which our
universities afforded. Bale mentions his TRAGEDIES and COMEDIES, which I
suspect to be nothing more than grave mysteries and moralities, and which
probably would not now have been lost, had they deserved to live. He mentions
also his RHYMES, which I will not suppose to have been imitations of Petrarch
SCRIPT. BRIT. par. p. st. 103.
. Wood says, that "his younger years were adorned with all kinds of superficial
learning, especially with dramatic poetry, and his elder with that which was
divine ATH. OXON. i. 52.
." It is a stronger proof of his piety than his taste, that he sent, as a new
year's gift to the princess Mary, HAMPOLE'S COMMENTARY UPON SEVEN OF THE FIRST
PENITENTIAL PSALMS. The manuscript, with his epistle prefixed, is in the royal
manuscripts of the British Museum MSS. 18 B. xxi.
. Many of Morley's translations, being dedicated either to king Henry the
eighth, or to the princess M^ry, are preserved in manuscript in the same royal
repository But see MSS. GR^SHAM. 8.
. They are chiefly from Solomon, Seneca, Erasmus, Athanasius, Anselm, Thomas
Aquinas, and Paulus Jovius. The authors he translated show his track of
reading. But we should not forget his attention to the classics, and that he
translated also Tully's DREAM OF SCIPIO, and three or four lives of Plutarch,
although not immediately from the Greek See MSS. (Bibl. Bodl.) LAUD. H. 17.
MSS. Bibl. RE^. 17 D. 2. -- 17 D. xi. -- 18 A. lx. And Walpole, ROY. and NO^,
AUTH. i. p. 92. seq.
. He seems to have been a rigid catholic, retired and studious. His
declaration, or paraphrase, on the ninety-fourth Psalm, was printed by
Berthelette in 1539. A theological commentary by a lord, was too curious and
important a production to be neglected by our first printers.

SECT. XXIV.
JOHN HEYWOOD, commonly called the epigrammatist, was beloved and rewarded by
Henry the eighth for his buffooneries. At leaving the university, he commenced
author, and was countenanced by sir Thomas More for his facetious disposition.
To his talents of jocularity in conversation, he joined a skill in music, both
vocal and instrumental. His merriments were so irresistible, that they moved
even the rigid muscles of queen Mary; and her sullen solemnity was not proof
against his songs, his rhymes, and his jests. He is said to have been often
invited to exercise his arts of entertainment and pleasantry in her presence,
and to have had the honor to be constantly admitted into her privy-chamber for
this purpose Wood, ATH. OXON. i. 150.
.

Notwithstanding his professional dissipation, Heywood appears to have lived
comfortably under the smiles of royal patronage. What the FAIRY QUEEN could not
procure for Spenser from the penurious Elisabeth and her precise ministers,
Heywood gained by puns and conceits.

His comedies, most of which appeared before the year 1534, are destitute of
plot, humor, or character, and give us no very high opinion of the festivity
of this agreeable companion. They consist of low incident, and the language of
ribaldry. But perfection must not be expected before its time. He is called our
first writer of comedies. But those who say this, speak without determinate
ideas, and confound comedies with moralities and interludes. We will allow,
that he is among the first of our dramatists who drove the Bible from the
stage, and introduced representations of familiar life and popular manners.
These are the titles of his plays. The PLAY called the four P. s, being a new
and merry INTERLUDE OF A PALMER, PARDONER, POTICARY, AND PEDLAR, printed at
London in quarto, without date or name of the printer, but prob^bl^ from the
press of Berthelette or Rastell. The PLAY of LOVE, or a new and very merry
INTERLUDE of all manner of WEATHERS, printed in quarto by William Rastell, 1533,
and again by Robert Wyer In duodecimo. No date. Pr. "Jupiter right far so far
long as now were to recyte."
. A merry PLAY between the PARDONER and the FRIAR, the CURATE, and neybour
PRATTE, in quarto, by William Rastell, dated the fifth day of April, 1533. The
PLAY of Gentleness and Nobility, i^ two parts, at London, without date. The
PINNER of Wakefield, a COMEDY. Philotas Scotch, a COMEDY. A merry PLAY
between JOHAN JOHAN the husband, TYB the wife, and sir JOHAN the preeste, by
William Rastell, in quarto, 1533.

His EPIGRAMS, six hundred in number See three hundred Epigrammes on three
hundred Proverbes. Pr. "If every man mend one." London, without date, but
certainly before 1553. Again, 1577. -- 1587. -- 1598. The first hundred
Epigrammes. Pr. "Ryme without reason." Land. 1566. -- 1577. -- 1587. 4to. The
fourth hundred of Epigrammes, Land. without date. Again, 1577. -- 1587. --
1597. 4to. Pr. PROL. "Ryme without reason, and reason." The fifth and sixth
hundredth of Epigramme^. Pr. "Were it as perilous to deal cards as play."
Land. 1566. -- 1577. -- 1587. -- 1597. 4to. See JOHN HEYWOODES WORKS, Anno
domini 1576. Imprinted at London in Fleetestreate, etc. by Thomas Marshe. In
qua^to. The colophon has 1577. This edi^ion is not mentioned by Ame^.
, are probably some of his jokes versified; and perhaps were often
extemporaneou^ sallies, made and repeated in company. Wit and humor are ever
found in proportion to the progress of politeness. The miserable drolleries and
the contemptible quibbles, with which these little pieces are pointed, indicate
the great want of refinement, not only in the composition but in the
conversation of our ancestors. This is a specimen, on a piece of humor of
Wolsey's Fool, A saying of PATCHE my lord Cardinale's FOOL.

Master Sexton The real name of PATCH, Wolsey's Fool.
, a person of known wit,
As he at my lord Cardinale's board did sit,
Gredily raught Reached.
at a goblet of wine:
Drink none, said my lord, for that fore leg of thy^^:
I warrant your Grace, says Sexton, I provide
For my leg: I drink on the the other side FIRST HUNDRED. Epigr. 44.
.
The following is rather a humorous tale than an epigram, yet with an
epigrammatic turn.

Although that a Fox have been seen there seelde Seldom.
,
Yet there was lately in Finsbery Feelde Finsbury field.

A Fox sat in sight of certain people,
Noddinge, and blissinge Bowing and Blessing.
, staring on Paul's steeple.
A Maid toward market with hens in a band
Came by, and with the Fox she fell in hand Joined company.
.
"What thing is it, Rainard, in your brain ploddinge^
"What brings this busy blissinge, and noddinge?
"I another Neither.
nod for sleep sweet heart, the Fox said,
"Nor bliss for spirytes To drive away evil spirits.
, except the devil be a maid:
"My noddinge and blissinge breedth of wonder Proceeds from wonder.

"Of the wit Wisdom.
of Poules Weathercocke yonder.
"There is more wit in that cocks only head
"Than has been in all men's heds that be dead.
"And thus -- by all common report we find,
"All that be dead, died for lack of wind:
"But the Weathercockes wit is not so weak
"To lack wind -- the wind is ever in his beak.
"So that, while any wind blowth in the sky,
"For lack of wind that Weathercocke will not die."
She cast down her hens, and now did she blis Cross herself.
,
"Jesu, quod she, in nomine patris!
"Who has ever heard, at any season,
"Of a Fox forging so feat a reason?"
And while she praised the Foxes wit so,
He gat her hens on his neck, and to go Began to steal off.
.
"Whither away with my hens, Fox, quoth she?
"To Poules pig Pike, i. e. spire, or steeple.
as fast as I can, quoth he.
"Betwixt these Hens and yond Weathercocke,
"I will assay to have chickens a flock;
"Which if I may get, this tale is made good,
"In all christendom not so Wise a brood The FIRST HUNDRED. Epigr. 10. There
are six more lines, which are super-^HOUS.
!" --
The other is on the phrase, wagging beards.

It is merry in hall, when beardes wagge all.
Husband, for this these words to mind I call;
This is meant by men in their merry eatinge,
Not to wag their beardes in brawling or threatinge:
Wife, the meaning hereof differs not two pinnes,
Between wagginge of men's beardes and women's chinnes EPIGRAMMES on PROVERBES.
Epigram 2.
.
On the fashion of wearing Verdingales, or farthingales.

Alas! poor verdingales must lie in the street,
To house them no door in the city made meet.
Syns at our narrow doors they in cannot win Enter in. WIN is probably a
contraction for go in. But see Tyrwhitt's GLOSS. Chapter
,
Send them to Oxforde, at brodegate to get in FI^T^ HUNDRED. Epigr. 55.
.
Our author was educated at Broadgate-hall in Oxford, so called from an
uncommonly wide gate or entrance, and since converted into Pembroke college.
These EPIGRAMS are mentioned in Wilson's RHETORIKE, published in 1553.

Another of Heywood's works, is a poem in long verse, entitled, A DIALOGUE
containing in effect the number of all the PROVERBES in the English tongue
compact in a matter concerning two marriages. The first edition I have seen, is
dated 1547 In quarto. Others followed, 1566. -- 1576. -- 1587. -- 1598. 4to.
. All the proverbs of the English language are here interwoven into a very
silly comic tale.

The lady of the story, an old widow now going to be married again, is thus
described, with some degree of drollery, on the bridal day.

In this late old widow, and than old new wife,
Age and Appetite fell at a strong strife.
Her lust was as young, as her lims were old.
The day of her wedding, like one to be sold,
She set out herself in fine apparel:
She was made like a beere-pott, or a barell.
A crooked hooked nose, beetle browde, blere eyde,
Many men wished for beautifying that bryde.
Her wast to be gyrde in, and for a boon grace,
Some well favored visor on her ill favored face;
But with visorlike visage, such as it was,
She smirkt and she smyld, but so lisped this las,
That folk might have thought it done only alone
Of wantonness, had not her teeth been gone.
Upright as a candle stands in a socket,
Stood she that day, so simpre de cocket I do not understand this, which is
marked for a proverb.
.
Of ancient fathers she took no cure ne care,
She was to them as koy as Crokers mare.
She took the entertainment of young men,
All in daliaunce, as nice as a nuns hen An admirable proverbial simile. It
is used in Wilson's ART^ OF R^ETORIK^, "I knew a priest that was as nice as a
Nuns Hen, when he would say mass he would never say DOMINU^ VOBISCUM, but
Dominus Vobic^m^" fol. 112. a. edit. 1567. 4to.
.
I suppose, That day her ears might well glow,
For all the town talked of her high and low^
One said a well favored old woman she is:
The divill she is, said another: and to this
In came the third with his five eggs, and said,
Fifty year ago I knew her a trim maid.
Whatever she were then, said one, she is now,
To become a bryde, as meet as a sow,
To bear a saddle. She is in this marriage,
As comely as a cow in a cage.
Gup with a gald back, Gill, come up to supper,
What my old mare would have a new crupper,
And now mine old hat must have a new band, etc SECOND PART. chapter i.
.
The work has its value and curiosity as a repertory of proverbs made at so
early a period. Nor was the plan totally void of ingenuity, to exhibit these
maxims in the course of a narrative, enlivened by facts and circumstances. It
certainly was susceptible of humor and invention.

Heywood's largest and most labored performance is the SPIDER AND THE FLY,
with wooden cuts, printed at London by Thomas Powell, in 1556 In quarto.
. It is a very long poem in the octave stanza, containing ninety-eight
chapters. Perhaps there never was so dull, so tedious, and trifling an
apologue: without fancy, meaning, or moral. A long tale of fictitious manners
will always be tiresome, unless the design be burlesque: and then the
ridiculous, arising from the contrast between the solemn and the light, must be
ingeniously supported. Our author seems to have intended a fable on the
burlesque construction: but we know not when he would be serious and when
witty, whether he means to make the reader laugh, or to give him advice. We
must indeed acknowledge, that the age was not yet sufficiently refined, either
to relish or to produ^e, burlesque poetry But I must not forget Chaucer's SIR
THOPAS: and that among the Cotton manuscripts, there is a^ anonymous poem,
perhaps coeval with Chaucer, in the style of allegorical burlesque, which
describes the power of money, with great humor, and in no common vein of
satire. The hero of the piece is SIR PENNY. MSS. Cott. CALL. 7. A. 2. IN^IPIT
NARRACIO DE DNO DENARIO.
In earth it es a littill thing,
And regnes ^ls A^.
a rich king,
Whare he es lent in land;
SIR PENI es his name calde,
He makes both young and alde Old.

Bow until Unto.
his hand:
Papes, kings, and empoures,
Bisschoppes, abbottes, and priowres,
Person, pressed, and knight,
Dukes, earls, and ilk barowne,
To serve him er Are.
thai full boune Ready.
,
Both biday and night.
SIR PENI chaunges man's mode,
And gers them off do down thaire hode Make^. Cause^. Compel^.

And to rise him agayn^ Against. Before.
.
Men honors him with great reverence,
Makes full mekell obedience
Unto that litill swain.
In kings court es it no bote Use.
,
Ogaines SIR PENI for to mote Dispute.
,
So mekill es he of might,
He es so witty and so strange,
That be it never so mekill wrang,
He will make it right.
With PENNY may men women till Approach. Gain.

Be thai never so strange of will,
So often may it be seen,
Lang with him will thai noght chide,
For he may ger tham trayl side Make them walk.

In good skarlet and grene.
He may by Buy.
both heuyn and hell,
And ilka thing that es to sell.
In earth has he swilk grace,
He may lose Loose.
and he may bind.
The pouer er ay put bihind,
Whare he cumes in place.
When he bigines him to mell Meddle.
,
He makes meke that are was fell.
And waik Weak.
that bald has been.
All ye needs full sone er sped All you want i^ soon done.
,
Bath withowten borgh and wed Borrowing or pledging.
,
Whare PENI gase bitwene Goes between.
.
The domes men Jud^e^.
he mase Monks.
so blind
That he may noght the right find
Ne the suth Truth.
to se.
For to gif dome Judgment.
tham e^ full lath Loath.
,
Tharwith to make SIR PENI wrath.
Full dear with tham es he,
Their Where.
strif was PENI makes pese Peace.
,
Of all angers he may relese,
In land whare he will lend,
Of fase Fo^^.
may he make friends sad,
Of counsel thar tham never be rad Vold.
^
That may have him to friend.
That SIRE es set on high dese Sect.
,
And served with mani rich mese Mes^.

At the high burde High-table^
.
The more he es to men plente,
The more ernid Coveted.
always es he:
And halden dear in horde.
He makes mani be forsworn,
And sum life and saul forlorn Despise. Quit.
,
Him to get and wyn.
Other god will thai none have,
Bot that litil round knave,
Thaire bales Eyes.
for to blin Blind.
.
On him halely Wholly.
thaire hertes set,
Him for to luf Love.
will thai noght let Never cease.
,
Nowther for good ne ill.
All that he will in earth have done,
Ilka man grantes it full sone,
Right at his awin will.
He may both lene Lend.
and gyf;
He may ger both sla and lif Kill and save.
,
Both by frith and fell Se^ and land.
.
PENI es a good felaw,
Men welcums him in deed and saw Do^ng and speaking.
.
Cum he never so often,
He es noght welkumd als a gest,
Bot evermore served with the best,
And made at To sit.
sit full soft.
Who so es sted in any need Under any difficulty.
,
With SIR PENI may thai speed.
How so ever they betyde Whatever happens.
.
He that SIR PENI es with all,
Sal have his will instead and stall.
When other er set byside Despised.
,
SIR PENNY gers, in rich wede,
Full mani go and ride on stead Causes many to ride, etc.
,
In this werldes wide.
In ilka Every.
gamin and ilka play,
The maystri es gifen ay
To PENNY, for his pride.
SIR PENNY over all gettes the gre Degree. Pre-eminence.
,
Both in burgh and in cete Town and city.
,
In castle and in tower.
Withowten owther spear or schelde Either.
,
Es he the best in frith or field,
And stalworthest in stowre Stoutest in battle.
.
In ilka place, the suth es seen Truth i^ seen.
,
SIR PENI es over albidene,
Master most in mode.
And all es als he will cumand:
Ogains his stevyn Voice. Sound.
dar no man stand,
Nowther by land ne flode.
SIR PENNY may full mekill avail Be of much power.

To tham that has need of cownsail,
Als seen es in assize As appears in the place of judicature, Or, in passing
sentence.
:
He lenkethes Lengthens.
life and saues fro ded Death.
.
Bot luf it noght over well I read Love money not too much, I advise.
,
For sin of couaityse Covetousness.
.
If thou have happ tresore to win,
Delight the noght to mekill tharin Too much therein.
.
Ne nything Nyding. Be not too careless of it.
thareof be,
But spend it als well als thou can,
So that thou luf both god and man
In per^ite charity.
God grante us grace with heart and will,
The gudes that he has gifen us till To ^s.
,
Well and wisely to spend.
And so our lives here for to lead,
That we may have his blis to mede Our reward.
,
Ever withowten end. Amen.
An old Scotch poem called SIR PENNY has been formed from this, printed in
ANCIENT SCOTTISH POEMS, p. 153. Edinb. 1770. [See supr. vol. i. 9.]
. Harrison, the author of the DESCRIPTION OF BRITAIN, prefixed to Hollinshed's
Chronicle, has left a sensible criticism on this poem. "One has made a book of
the SPIDER AND FLY, wherein he deals so profoundly, and beyond all measure of
skill, that neither he himself that made it, neither any one that reads it,
can reach unto the meaning thereof DESCRIPT. BRIT. p. 226. Hollinsh. CHRON.
tom. i.
." It is a proof of the unpopularity of this poem, that it never was reprinted.
Our author's EPIGRAMS, and the poem of PROVERBS, were in high vogue, and had
numerous editions within the year 1598. The most lively part of the SPIDER and
FLY is perhaps the mock-fight between the spiders and flies, an awkward
imitation of Homer's BATRACHOMUOMACHY. The preparations for this bloody and
eventful engagement, on the part of the spiders, in their cobweb-castle, are
thus described.

Behold! the battilments in every loope:
How the ordinance lies, flies far and nere to fac^:
Behold how every peace, that lies there in groope In rows.
,
Has a spider gonner, with redy-f^red match.
Behold on the walls, spiders making ware wach:
The wach-spider in the tower a larum to strike,
At aproch of any number showing warlike.
Se the enprenabill Impregnable.
fort, in every border,
How every spider with his wepon does stand,
So thorowlie harnest Clad in armor.
, in so good order:
The capital Perhaps, Captain.
spider, with wepon in hand,
For that sort of sowdiers so manfully mand,
With copwebs like casting nets all flies to quell:
My heart shakes at the sight: behold it is hell Cap. 57. Signat. B b.
!
The beginning of all this confusion is owing to a fly entering the poet's
window, not through a broken pane, as might be presumed, but through the
lattice, where it is suddenly entangled in a cobweb Cap. i.
. The cobweb, however, will be allowed to be sufficiently descriptive of the
poet's apartment. But I mention this circumstance as a probable proof, that
windows of lattice, and not of glass, were now the common fashion See his
EPIGRAMMES. Epig. 82. FIRST HUNDRED. And Puttenham's ART OF ENGLISH POESY,
Lib. i. c. 31. p. 49. One of Heywood's Epigrams is descriptive of his life and
character. FIFTE HUNDRED. Epigr. 100.

OF HEYWOOD.
Art thou Heywood with the mad merry wit?
Yea forsooth, master, that same is even hit.
Art thou Heywood that applies mirth more than thrift?
Ye sir, I take merry mirth a golden gift.
Art thou Heywood that has made many mad Plays?
Yea many plays, few good works in all my days.
Art thou Heywood that has made men merry long?
Yea and will, if I be made merry long.
Art thou Heywood that would be made merry now?
Yea, sir, help me to it now I beseech you.
In the CONCLUSION to the SPIDER and FLY, Heywood mentions queen Mary and king
Philip. But as most of his pieces seem to have been written some time before, I
have placed him under Henry the eighth.


.

John Heywood died at Mechlin in Brabant about the year 1565. He was inflexibly
attached to the catholic cause, and on the death of queen Mary quitted the
kingdom. Antony Wood remarks ATH. OXON. i. 150.
, with his usual acrimony, that it was a matter of wonder with many, that,
considering the great and usual want of principle in the profession, a poet
should become a voluntary exile for the sake of religion.

SECT. XXV.
I KNOW not if sir Thomas More may properly be considered as an English poet.
He has, however, left a few obsolete poems, which although without any striking
merit, yet, as productions of the restorer of literature in England, seem to
claim some notice here. One of these is, A MERRY JEST how a SERGEANT would
learn to play the FREERE. Written by Master Thomas More in his youth WORKERS,
Land. 1557. in folio. Sign. C. i.
. The story is too dull and too long to be told here. But I will cite two or
three of the prefatory stanzas.

He that has lafte Left.
the Hosier's craft,
And fallth to making shone Shoes.
;
The smyth that shall to paynting fall,
His thrift is well nigh done.
A black draper with white paper,
To go to writing scole,
An old butler becum a cutler,
I wene shall prove a fool.
And an old trot, that can, god wot,
Nothing but kiss the cup,
With her physic will keep one sick,
Till she has soused him up.
A man of law that never saw
The ways to bye and sell,
Wenyng to rise by marchandyse,
I pray god speed him well!
A merchant eke, that will goo seek
By all the means he may,
To fall in s^te till he dispute
His money clean away;
Pletyng the law for every straw,
Shall prove a thrifty man,
With bate Debate.
and strife, but by my life,
I cannot tell you when.
When an h^tter will smatter
In philosophy;
Or a pedlar wax a medlar
In theology.
In these lines, which are intended to illustrate by familiar examples, the
absurdity of a sergeant at law assuming the business of a friar, perhaps the
reader perceives but little of that festivity, which is supposed to have marked
the character and the conversation of sir Thomas More. The last two stanzas
deserve to be transcribed, as they prove, that this tale was designed to be
sung to music by a minstrel, for the entertainment of company.

Now Masters all, here now I shall
End then as I began;
In any wise, I would avyse,
And counsel every man,
His own cra^te use, all new refuse,
And lightly let them gone:
Play not the FREERE, Now make good cheer.
This piece is mentioned, among other popular story-books in 1575, by Laneham,
in his ENTERTAINMENT AT KILLINGWORTH CASTLE in the reign of queen Elisabeth
Fol. 44. seq.
.

In CERTAIN METERS, written also in his youth, as a prologue for his BOOK OF
FORTUNE, and forming a poem of considerable length, are these stanzas, which
are an attempt at personification and imagery. FORTUNE is represented sitting
on a lofty throne, smiling on all mankind who are gathered around her, eagerly
expecting a distribution of her favors.

Then, as a bayte, she brings forth her ware,
Silver and gold, rich perle and precious stone;
On which the mased people gase and stare,
And gape therefore, as dogs do for the bone.
FORTUNE at them laugheth: and in her trone
Amyd her treasure and waveryng richesse
Prowdly she hoveth as lady and empress.
Fast by her side does weary Labor stand,
Pale Fere also, and Sorrow all bewept;
Disdayn, and Hatred, on that other hand,
Eke restles Watch from sleep with travayles kept:
Before her stands Danger and Envy,
Flattery, Dysceyt, Mischief, and Tyranny Ibid. Sign. C. iiii.
.
Another of sir Thomas More's juvenile poems is, A RUFULL LAMENTATION on the
death of queen Elisabeth, wife of Henry the seventh, and mother of Henry the
eighth, who died in childbed, in 1503. It is evidently formed on the tragical
soliloquies, which compose Lydgate's paraphrase of Boccace's book DE CASIBUS
VIRORUM ILLUSTRIUM, and which gave birth to the MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES, the
origin of our historic dramas. These stanzas are part of the queen's complaint
at the approach of death.

Where are our castles now, where are our towers?
Goodly Rychemonde The palace of Richmond.
, sone art thou gone from me!
At Westmynster that costly work of yours
Mine own dear lord, now shall I never se King Henry the seventh's chapel,
begun in the year 1502. The year before the queen died.
!
Almighty God vouchsafe to grant that ye
For you and your children well may edify,
My palace byldyd is, and lo now here I ly. --
Farewell my daughter, lady Margaret Married in 1503, to James the fourth, king
of Scotland.
!
God wotte, full often it greved has my mind
That ye should go where we should seldom mete,
Now I am gone and have left you behind.
O mortal folk, that we be very blind!
That we lest feere, full often it is most nigh:
From you depart I must, and lo now here I lie.
Farewell, madame, my lords worthy mother Margaret countess of Richmond.
!
Comfort your son, and be ye of good chere.
Take all a worth, for it will be no another,
Farewell my daughter Katharine, late the fere
To prince Arthur mine own child so dear Catharine of Spain, wi^e of her son
^rince Arthur, now dead.
.
It boteth not for me to weep and cry,
Pray for my soul, for lo now here I lie.
Adieu lord Henry, my loving son adieu Afterward king Henry the eighth.
,
Our lord increase your honor and estate,
Adieu my daughter Mary, bright of hew Afterward queen of France. Remarried to
Charles Brandon, duke of Suffolk.
,
God make you virtuous, wise, and fortunate.
Adieu sweet heart, my little daughter Kate The queen died within a few days
after she was delivered of this in^ant, ^he princess Catharine, who ^id not
long survive her mother's death.
,
Thou shall, sweet babe, such is thy destiny,
Thy mother never know, for lo now here I ly WORKS, ut supr.
.
In the fourth stanza, she reproaches the astrologers for their falsity in
having predicted, that this should be the happiest and most fortunate year of
her whole life. This, while it is a natural reflection in the speaker, is a
proof of More's contempt of a futile and frivolous science, then so much in
esteem. I have been prolix in my citation from this forgotten poem: but I am of
opinion, that some of the stanzas have strokes of nature and pathos, and
deserved to be rescued from total oblivion.

More, when a young man, contrived in an apartment of his father's house a
goodly hangyng of fine painted clothe, exhibiting nine pageants, or allegoric
representations, of the stages of man's life, together with the figures of
Death, Fame, Time, and Eternity. Under each picture he wrote a stanza. The
first is under CHILDHOODE, expressed by a boy whipping a top.

I am called CHILDHOD, in play is all my mind,
To cast a coyte A quoit.
, a cokstele A stick for throwing at a cock. STELE is handl^, Sax.
, or a ball;
A top can I set, and dryve in its kind:
But would to God, these hateful books all
Were in a fire ybrent to powder small!
Then might I led my life always in play,
Which life God send me to mine endyng day.
Next was pictured MANHOD, a comely young man mounted on a fleet horse, with a
hawk on his fist, and followed by two greyhounds, with this stanza affixed.

MANHOD I am, therefore I me delyght
To hunt and hawke, to nourishe up and feed
The grayhounde to the course, the hawke to the flight,
And to bestryde a good and lusty stead:
These things become a very man in deed.
Yet thinks this boy his pevishe game sweter,
But what, no force, his reason is no better.
The personification of FAME, like RUMOR in the Chorus to Shakespeare's HENRY
THE FIFTH, is surrounded with tongues Ibid. Sign. C. iii.
.

Tapestry, with metrical legends illustrating the subject, was common in this
age: and the public pageants in the streets were often exhibited with
explanatory verses. I am of opinion, that the COMOEDIOLAE, or little
interludes, which More is said to have written and acted in his father's house,
were only these nine pageants See supr. Vol. ii. p. 387.
.

Another juvenile exercise of More in the English stanza, is annexed to his
prose translation of the LIFE of John Picus Mirandula, and entitled, TWELVE
RULES OF JOHN PICUS MIRANDULA, partly exciting partly directing a man in
SPIRITUAL BATAILE These pieces were written in the reign of Henry the seventh.
But as More flourished in the succeeding reign, I have placed them accordingly.
. The old collector of his ENGLISH WORKS has also preserved two short
ballettes Ibid. b. iii.
, or stanzas, which he wrote for his pastyme, while a prisoner in the tower Ut
supr. fol. 1432.
.

It is not my design, by these specimens, to add to the ^ame of sir Thomas
More; who is reverenced by posterity, as the scholar who taught that erudition
which civilized his country, and as the philosopher who met the horrors of the
block with that fortitude which was equally free from ostentation and
enthusiasm: as the man, whose genius overthrew the fabric of false learning,
and whose amiable tranquillity of temper triumphed over the malice and
injustice of tyranny.

To some part of the reign of Henry the eighth I assign the TOURNAMENT OF
TOTTENHAM, or The wooeing, winning, and wedding of TIBBE the Reeves Daug^ter
there. I presume it will not be supposed to be later than that reign: and the
substance of its phraseology, which I divest of its obvious innovations, is not
altogether obsolete enough for a highe^ period. I am aware, that in a
manuscript of the British Museum it is referred to the time of Henry the sixth.
But that manuscript affords no positive indication of that date MSS. HARL. 5396.
. It was published from an ancient manuscript in the year 1631, and reduced to
a more modern style, by William Bedwell, rector of Tottenham, and one of the
translators of the Bible. He says it was written by Gilbert Pilkington,
supposed to have been rector of the same parish, and author of an unknown
tract, called PASSIO DOMINI JESU. But Bedwell, without the least comprehension
of the scope and spirit of the piece, imagines it to be a serious narrative of
a real event; and, with as little sagacity, believes it to have been written
before the year 1330. Allowing that it might originate from a real event, and
that there might be some private and local abuse at the bottom, it is
impossible that the poet could be serious. Undoubtedly the chief merit of this
poem, although not destitute of humor, consists in the design rather than the
execution. As Chaucer, in the RHYME OF SIR THOPAS I take this opportunity of
observing, that the stanza of one of Laurence Minot's poems on the wars of
Edward the third, is the same as Chaucer's SIR TOPAS. Minot was Chaucer's
cotempary. MSS. Cott. GAL^. E. ix. Edward our cumly king
In Braband has his woning,
With mani a cumly knight,
And in that land, trewly to tell,
Ordains he still for to dwell,
To time he think to ^ight.
Now God that es of mightes maste^
Grant him grace of the Haly Gas^e,
His heritage to win;
And Mari mother of mercy fre,
Save our king, and his mean,
Fro sorrow, and schame, and syn.
Thus in Braband has he been,
Whare he before was seldom seen,
For to prove thaire japes;
Now no langer will he spare,
Bot unto France fast will he fare,
To con^ort him with grapes.
Forth he fe^d into France,
God save him fro mischance,
And all his cumpany;
The nobill duc of Braband
With him went into that land,
Ready to lif or die.
Than the rich flower de lice
Wan their full litill prise,
Fast he fled for ferde;
The right air H^ir.
of that ^untree
Es cumen with all his knights fre
To schac Shake.
him by the berd.
Sir Philip the Valayse,
Wit his men in tho days,
To batale had he thought;
He bad his men tham purvay
Withowten longer delay^
Bot he ne held it noght.
He brought folk full great wone,
Ay sevyn ^gains one,
That full well wapind were Weaponed. Armed.
;
Bot sone when he herd ascry,
That king Edward was nere thereby,
Tha^ durst he noght cum nere.
In that morning fell a mist;
And when our Ingliss men it wist,
It changed all thair^ chere:
Our king unto God made his bone,
And God sent him good confort sone,
The weder wex full clear.
Our king and his men held the field,
Stalworthy with spear and schelde,
And thought to win his right;
With lords and with knights kene,
And other doghty men bydene,
That war full frek to fight.
When sir Phili^ of France herd tell,
That king Edward in feld walld dwell,
Than gained him no gle;
He traisted of no better bote,
Bot both on horse and on foot,
He hasted him to fle.
It semid he was ferd for str^kes,
When he did fell his great oaks
Obout his pavilyoune.
Abated was than all his pride,
For langer their durst he noght bide,
His bost was brought all down.
The king of Beme had cares cold,
That was fur, hardy, and bold,
A stead to amstride:
The king als of Naverne
War fair feld in the ferene,
Thaire heviddes for to hide.
And leves well, it is no lie,
And field hat Flemangrye
That king Edward was in;
With princes that war stif and bold,
And dukes that war doghty told,
In battle to begin.
The princes that war rich on raw,
Gert nakers strikes and ^^^mpes blaw In glitt^r^ng r^nks, made the drums, etc.
,
And made mirth at thaire might;
Both arlblast and many a bow
War ready railed upon a row,
And full frek for to fight.
Gladly thai gaf mete and drink,
So that thai should the better swink,
The wight men that thar ware:
Sir Philip of France fled for dout,
And hied him hame with all his rout,
Coward God gi^f him care.
For their than had the lely flower
Lorn all halely his honowre,
That so gat ^led for ferd;
Bot our king Edwa^d com^ full still,
When that he ^rowed ^o harm till^
And keped him in the b^rde.

, travestied the romances of chivalry, the TOURNAMENT OF TOTTENHAM is a
burlesque on the parade and ^opperies of chivalry itself. In this light, it may
be considered as a curiosity; and does honor to the good sense and discernment
of the writer, who seeing through the ^olly of these fashionable exercises, was
sensible at the same time, that they were too popular to be attacked by the
more solid weapons of reason and argument. Even on a supposition that here is
an allusion to real facts and characters, and that it was intended to expose
some popular story of the amors of the daughter of the Reve of Tottenham, we
must acknowledge that the satire is conveyed in an ingenious mode. He has
introduced a parcel of clowns and rustics, the inhabitants of Tottenham,
Islington, Highgate, and Hackney, places then not quite so polished as at
present, who imitate all the solemnities of the barriers. The whole is a
mock-parody on the challenge, the various events of the encounter, the
exhibition of the prize, the devices and escocheons, the display of arms, the
triumphant procession of the conqueror, the oath before the combat, and the
splendid feast which followed, with every other ceremony and circumstance which
constituted the regular tournament. The reader will form an idea of the work
from a short extract V. 42.
.

He that bear'th him best in the tournament,
Shall be granted the gree Prize.
by the common assent,
For to win my daughter with doughtinesse of dent Strength of blows.
,
And Copple my brood hen that was brought out of Kent,
And my dunned cow:
For no spence Expense.
will I spare,
For no cattle will I care.
He shall have my gray mare, and my spotted sow.
There was many a bold lad their bodies to bid Bid. Offer.
;
Then they took their leave, and hamward they head Hied.
;
And all the weke after they gayed her wede Made their clothes gay.
,
Till it come to the day that they should do their deed Fight for the lady.
:
They armed them in mattes;
They set on their nowls Heads.

Good black bowls Instead of helmets.
,
To keep their powls Poles.
from battering of battes Cudgels.
.
They sewed hem in sheepskinnes for they should not breast They sewed themselves
up in ^heep skins, by way of armor, to avoid being hurt.
,
And every ilk Each.
of them had a black hatte instead of a crest;
A baskett or panyer before on their breast,
And a flayle in her hand, for to fight pressed Ready.
,
Forth con they fare On they went.
.
There was kid Kithed, i. e. shown.
mickle force.
Who should best fend Desend.
his corse,
He that had no good horse, borrowed him a mare, etc I have before observed,
that it was a disgrace to chivalry to ride a mare.

The poems of this manus^ript do not seem to be all precisely of the same hand,
and might probably once have been separate papers, here stitched together. At
the end of one of them, viz. fol. 46. The lysom ledys the Blind, mention is
inserted of an account settled ann. 34. H^n. vi. And this is in the hand and
ink of that poem, and of some others. The TOURNAMENT OF TOTT^N^AM, which might
once have been detached from the present collection, comes at some distance
afterward, and cannot perhaps for a certainty be pronounced to be of the same
writing. I take this opportunity of correcting a wrong reference to SIR P^NI
just cited, at p. 93. It belongs to GAL^. E. 9^ MSS. Cott.


.
It appears to me, that the author, to give dignity to his narrative, and to
heighten the ridicule by stiffening the familiarity of his incidents and
characters, has affected an antiquity of style. This I could prove from the
cast of its fundamental diction and idiom, with which many of the old words do
not agree. Perhaps another of the author's affectations is the alliterative
manner. For although other specimens of alliteration, in smaller pieces, are
now to be found, yet it was a singularity. To those which I have mentioned, of
this reign, I take this opportunity of adding an alliterative poem, which may
be called the FALCON AND THE PIE, who support a DYALOGUE DESENSYVE FOR WOMEN
AGAINST MALICYOUS DETRACTOURS, printed in 1542 Coloph. "Thus ends the faucon
and pie anno dni 1542. Imprynted by me Rob. Wire for Richard Banks."

I have an ancient manuscript alliterative poem, in which a despairing lover
bids farewell to his mistress. At the end is written, "Explicit Amo^r p. Ducem
Ebo^rr nuper fact." I will here cite a few of the stanzas of this unknown
prince.

Farewell Lade of great pris,
Farewell wise, both fair and free,
Farewell freefull ^lourdelys,
Farewell beril, bright of ble! --
Farewell mirthe that I do miss^,
Farewell Prowess in purpell pall!
Fa^ewell creature comely to kiss,
Farewell Faucon, fare you be^all!
Farewell amorouse and amyable,
Farewell worthy, witty, and wy^,
Farewell pris prisable,
Farewell ryal rose in the rys. --
Farewell dereworth of dignite,
Farewell grace of governaunce,
However y fare, farewell ye,
Farewell primerose my plesaunce!
For the use of those who collect specimens of alliteration, I will add an
instance in the reign of Edward the third from the BANOCBURN of Laurence Minot,
all whose pieces, in some degree, are tinctured with it. MSS. Cott. GALB. E.
ix. ut supr.

Skottes out of Berwick and of Abirdene,
At the Bannockburn war e to kene;
Their slogh e many sackles Naked.
, als it was seen.
And now has king Edward wroken it I wene;
It es wroken I wene well wurth the while,
War it with the Skottes for thai er full of gile.
Whare er e Skottes of saint Johnes town?
The boste of owre baner es betin all down;
When e b^sting will Allow it.
bid, sir Edward es boune,
For to kindel ow care and crak owre crown:
He has crakked owre croune well worth the while,
Schame bityde the Skottes for thai er full of gile.
Skottes of Striflin war steren Stern.
and stout,
Of God ne of good men had thai no dout;
Now have thai the pelers priked obout,
Bot at the last sir Edward ri^ild thaire rout;
He has ri^ild thaire rout well wurth the while,
Bot ever er thai under bot gaudes and gile.
Rughfute riueling now kindels thy care,
Bear bag with thy boste thy biging Clothing.
is bare;
Falls wretch and forsworn, whider wiltou fare?
Busk the unto Brig and abide their.
Their wretch saltou won and weary the while,
Thy dwelling in Donde es done for thy gile.
The Skottes gase Go.
in burghes and betes the streets,
All thise Inglis men harms he hetes;
Fast makes he his moan to men that he metes,
Bot sone friends he finds that his bale betes;
Sune betes his bale well wurth the while,
He uses all threting with gaudes and gile.
Bot many man thretes and spekes full ill,
That sumtyme war better to be stane still;
The Skot in his words has wind for to spill,
For at the last Edward sall have al his will:
He had his will at Berwick well wurth the while,
Skottes brought him the kayes, bot get for thaire gile.
A VISION on vellum, perhaps of the same age, is alliterative. MSS. Cott. NERO,
A. x. These are specimens.

Ryt as the maynful moan con rys As the moon began to rise.
,
Er theven the day glem dryve aldon The even drove down the daylight.
,
So suddenly, on a wonder wise,
I was war of a prosessyoun Procession.
:
This noble cite of rich enpresse
Was sodanly full, withouten somoun Summons. Notice.
,
Of such vergynes in the same gyse
That was my blisful an under croun,
A corone wernalle All wore ^ crown.
of the same fasoun,
Depaynt in perles and wedes qwhyt^ White robes.
.
Again, On golden gates that glent Glanced. Shone.
as glass.
Again, But mylde as maiden sen^ at mas.
The poem begins, Perle pleasant to princes raye,
So clanly clos in gold so cler Cleanly. A pearl beautifully enclosed or ^^tt
in gold.
.
In the same manuscript is an alliterative poem without rhyme, exactly in the
versification of PIERCE PLOWMAN, of equal or higher antiquity, viz.

Old Abraham in erde Earth.
over he syttes,
Even byfor his house door under an oak grene,
Bryt blikk^d the bem Bright shone the beam.
of the brod heven
In the hye hete High heat.
thereof Abraham bides.
The handwriting of these two last^mentioned pieces cannot be later than
Edward the third. [See supr. Vol. i. p. 312.]
. The author's name Robert Vaghane, or Vaughan, is prefixed to some sonnets
which form a sort of epilogue to the performance.

For the purpose of ascertaining or illustrating the age of pieces which have
been lately or will be soon produced, I here stop to recall the reader's
attention to the poetry and language of the last century, by exhibiting some
extracts from the manuscript romance of YWAIN and GAWAIN, which has some great
outlines of Gothic painting, and appears to have been written in the reign of
king Henry the sixth MSS. Cotton. GALB. E. ix.
. I premise, that but few circumstances happened, which contributed to the
improvement of our language, within that and the present period.

The following is the adventure of the enchanted forest attempted by sir
Colgrevance, which he relates to the knights of the round table at Cardiff in
Wales -- King Arthur,
He made a fes^e, the ^othe to say,
Opon the Witsonenday,
At Kerdyf, that es in Wales,
And after mete thar in the hales H^ll^.
,
Full great and gay was the assemble
Of lords and ladies of that cuntre.
And als of knights, war and wise,
And dameseles of mykel pryse,
Ilkan with other made great gamen,
And great solas, als thai war samen,
Fast thai carped, and curtaysli,
Of deeds of arms and of veneri,
And of good knights, etc.
It is a piece of considerable length, and contains a variety of GESTS. Sir
YWAIN is sir EWAINE, or OW^N, in MORTE ARTHUR. None of these advent^res belong
to that romance. But see B. iv. c. 17. 27. etc. The story of the lion and the
dragon in this romance, is told of a Christian champion in the Holy War, by
Berchorius, RE^UCTOR. p. 661. See supr. DISS. p. lxxxvii. And GEST. ROMANOR.
chapter civ. The lion being delivered from the dragon by sir YWAIN, ever afterward
accompanies and defends him in the greatest dangers. Hence Spenser's Una
attended by a lion. F. QU. i. iii. 7. See sir Percival's lion in MORTE ARTHUR,
B. xiv. c. 6. The dark ages had many stories and traditions of the lion's
gratitude and generosity to man. Hence in Shakespeare, Troilus says, TR. CR^S^.
Act V. Sc. iii. Brother you have a vice of mercy in you
Which better fits a lion than a man.



.

A fair forest sone I fand Found.
,
Me thought mi hap Chance. Fortune.
their ^el full hard
For thar was mani a wide bayard Will bayard, i. e. horse.
,
Lions, beres, both bull and bare,
That rewfully began rope R^mp.
and rare Roar.
.
Away I drogh Drew.
me, and with that,
I saw sone whar a man sat
On a lawnd, the ^owlest wight,
That ever it Yet.
man saw in sight:
He was a lathly Loathly.
creatur,
For fowl he was out of mesur;
A wonder mace ^lub.
in hand he hade,
And sone mi way to him I made;
His hevyd Head.
, me thought, was als great
Als of a rowncy or a nete Horse, or ox.
.
Unto his belt hang Hung.
his hare Hair.
;
And eft that byheld I mare More.
,
To his forhede byheld I than
Was bradder Broader.
than two large span;
He had eres Ears.
als As.
an olyfant,
And was well more Bigger.
than a geant,
His face was full brade and flat,
His nase Nose.
was cutted as a cat,
His brows war like litel buskes Bushes.
,
And his ^ethe like bare tuskes;
A full great bulge Bunch.
open his bak,
Thar was noght made with outen lac Lack.
;
His chin was fast until To.
his breast,
On his mace he began him rest.
Also it was a wonder wede Wondrous dress.

That the cherle Churl.
in ede Went in.
,
Nowther Neither.
of wol Wool.
ne of line Linen.
,
Was the wede that he went in.
When he me sagh, he stood up right,
I frayned A^ked.
him if he would fight,
For tharto was I in good will,
Bot als As.
a best than stood he still:
I hopid Supposed. Apprehended.
that he no wits kowth Had no understanding.
,
Ne reason for to speak with mowth.
To him I spak full hardily,
And said, What ertow Art thou.
, belamy My Friend.
?
He said ogain, I am a man.
I said, Swilk Such.
saw I never nane None.
.
What ertow Art thou.
alsone Also.
, said he?
I said, Swilk als As.
you her may se.
I said, What dose Do.
you here allane Alone.
?
He said, I keep this These.
bestes ilkane Every one.
.
I said, That es mervaile, think me,
For I herd never of man bot the,
In wilderness, ne in forestes,
That kepeing had of wild bestes,
Bot Except.
thai war bunden fast in halde Hold.
.
He said, Of thirses These.
none so balde,
Nowther by day ne by night,
Anes Once.
to pas out of mi sight.
I said, How so, tell me thy still.
Per fay, he said, gladly I will.
He said, In all this fair forest
Es thar non so wild best,
That run Runs.
dar There.
, bot still stand Stands still.

When I am to him cumand Coming.
;
And ay when that I will him fang Take.

With my fingers that er Are strong.
strange,
I ger Cause.
him cri on swilk manner,
That all the bestes when thai him here,
Obout me than cum thai all,
And to mi fete fast thai fall
On their manner, merci to cry.
Bot onderstond now redyli^
Olyve Alive.
es Is.
thar lifand Living.
no ma Man.
,
Bot I, that durst amang them ga Go.
,
That he ne sold sone be altorent All rent to pieces.
;
Bot thai ar at my comandment,
To me thai cum when I tham call,
And I am master of tham all.
Than he asked onone right,
What man I was? I said, a knight,
That soght avents in that land,
My body to asai Exercise.
and fand Fend, defend.
;
And I the pray of thy kounsayle
You teache me to sum mervayle Tell me of some wonder. So Alexander, in the
deserts of India, meets two old cheorlis, or churls, from whom he defires to
learn, Any merveilles by this ways,
That y my^tc do in story,
That men han in memory.
They tell him, that a little farther he will see the Trees of the Sun and
Moon, etc. GEST^ O^ ALEXANDER, MS. p. 231.
.
He said, I can no wonders tell,
Bot her beside es a Well;
Wend yeder Go thither.
, and do als I say,
You passes noght al quite oway,
Follow forth this ilk street Way. Road.
,
And sone sum mervayles sal you mete:
The well es under the fairest Tree
That ever was in this cuntre;
By that Well hinges Hangs.
a Bacyne A helmet, or basin.

That es of gold good and fine,
With a cheyne, trewly to tell,
That will reche in to the Well.
Their as a Chapel nere thar by,
That nobil es and full lufely Lovely.
:
By the well stands a Stane Stone.
,
Take the bacyn sone onane Perhaps, In hand.
,
And cast on water with thy hand,
And sone you sal se new tithand Tidings. Wonders.
:
A storm sal rise and a tempest,
Al obout, by est and west,
You sal here Hear.
mani thonor Thunder.
blast
Al obout the Thee.
the blawand Blowing.
fast,
And thar sal cum sike Such.
slete and rain
That unnese Scarcely.
sal you stand ogayne:
Of lightness Lightening.
sal you se a low,
Unnethes you sal thy selvan Self.
know;
And if you pas with owten grevance,
Than has thou the fairest chance
That ever it had any knight,
That theder come to kyth Know. Prove.
his might.
Than took I leve, and went my way,
And rade unto the midday;
By than I com whare I sold be,
I saw the Chapel and the Tree:
Their I fand the fairest thorn
That ever groued sen God Christ.
was born:
So thik it was with leves grene
Might no rayn cum tharby twene There between.
;
And that grenes Verdure.
lastes ay,
For no winter dear Hurt.
yt may.
I fand the Bacyn, als he talde,
And the Well with water kalde Cold.
.
An emerawd Emerald.
was the Stane Stone.
,
Richer saw I never nane,
On fowr rubyes on heght standand Standing high.
,
Their light lasted over all the land.
And when I saw that semely sight,
It made me bath joyful and light.
I took the Bacyn sone onane
And helt water opon the Stane:
The weder Weather.
wex than wonder blak,
And the thoner Thunder.
fast began crak;
Thar cum slike Such.
storms of hayl and rayn,
Unnethes Hardly.
I might stand their ogayn:
The store Strong.
winds blew full loud,
So kene came never are Air.
of clowd.
I was drevyn with snawe and slete,
Unnethes I might stand on my fete.
In my face the levening Lightening.
smate Smote.
,
I wend have brent I thought I should be burnt.
, so was it hate It was so hot.
:
That weder made me so will of read,
I hopid Feared. See John's. Steev. SHAKE^PEARE, Vol. v. p. 273. edit. 1779.
sone to have my deed Death.
;
And sertes Surely.
, if it lang had last,
I hope I had never thethin Thence.
past.
Bot thorgh his might that tholed Suffered.
wownd
The storm sesed within a stownde Ceased on a sudden.
:
Then wex the weder fair ogayne,
And tharof was I wonder feign;
For best comforth of al thing
Es solace after mislykeing.
Then saw I sone a merry sight,
Of all the fowls that er in flight,
Lighted so thik opon that tree,
That bogh ne lefe none might I se;
So merrily than gone thai sing,
That all the wode bigan to ring;
Full merry was the melody
Of thaire sang and of thaire cry;
Thar herd never man none swilk,
Bot Unless.
if any had herd that ilk.
And when that merry din was done,
Another^ din than herd I sone,
Als it war of horse men,
Mo than owther Either.
nyen Nine.
or ten.
Sone than saw I cum a knight,
In rich armure was he dight;
And sone when I began on him look,
Mi shield and sper to me I took.
That knight to me hied full fast,
And kene words out began he cast:
He bad that I sold tell him lite Soon.

Why I did him swilk despite,
With weders The storm.
wakend him of rest,
And done him wrang in his Forest;
Thar fore, he said, You sal aby Abide. Stay.
:
And with that come he egerly,
And said, I had ogayn resowne Against reason or law.

Done him great destrucciowne,
And might it nevermore amend;
Tharfor he bad, I sold me fend:
And sone I smate him on the shield,
Mi schaft brac out in the field;
And then he bar me son by strenkith
Out of my sadel my speres lenkith:
I wat that he was largely
By the shuldres mare Greater.
than I;
And by the ded Death.
that I sal thole Suffer.
,
Mi stead by his was bot a fool.
For mate Sleep.
I lay down on the grownde,
So was I stonayd Astonished. Stunned.
in that stownde:
A word to me wald he noght say,
Bot took my stead, and went his way.
Ffull sarily Sorrily.
than their I sat,
For wa Wo^.
I wist noght what was what:
With mi stead he went in hy,
The same way that he come by;
And I durst follow him no ferr
For dout me sold bite werr,
And also it by Gods dome God's sentence, the crucifixion.
,
I ne wist whar he bycome.
Than I thought how I had hight Hette. Promised.
,
Unto mine ost the hende knight,
And also till his lady bright,
To come ogayn if that I might.
Mine armurs left I their ylkane,
For else might I noght have gane Gone.
;
Unto mine in Lodging.
I come by day:
The hende knight and the fair may,
Of mi come war thai full glade,
And nobil semblant thai me made;
In all things thai have tham born
Als thai did the night biforn.
Sone thai wist whar I had been,
And said, that thai had never seen
Knight that ever theder come
Take the way ogayn home. --
I add Sir Ywain's achievement of the same Adventure, with its consequences.

When Ywayn was withowten town,
Of his palfray lighted he down,
And dight him right well in his wede,
And lepe up on his good stead.
Forth he rade on right,
Until it neghed nere Drew near.
the night:
He passed many a high mountain
In wilderness, and many a plain,
Til he come to that leyir Wicked, bad.
sty That is, the forest. But I do not precisely know the meaning of fty. It is
thus used in the LAY OF EMARE. MSS. Cott. CALIG. A. 2. fol. 59. Messengeres
forth he sent
Aftyr the maid fair and gent
That was bryt as someres day:
Messengeres dyte hem in hye,
With myche myrthe and melodye
Forth gone they fare
Both by streets and by STYE
Aftyr that fair lady.
And again in the same romance.

That him byhoved pass by:
Than was he seker for to se
The Well, and the fair Tree;
The Chapel saw he at the last,
And theder That way.
hyed he full fast.
More curtaysli and more honowr
Fand Found.
he with tham in that towr i. e. The castle.
,
And mare comforth by money falde Manifold.
,
Than Colgrevance had him of talde.
That night was he herbered Lodged.
thar,
So well was he never are Ever.
.
At morn he went forth by the street,
And with the cherel Churl, i. e. the Wild-man.
sone began he mete
That sold tell to him the way;
He sayned Viewed.
him, the sothe to say,
Twenty since Times.
, or ever he blan Ceased.
,
Swilke mervayle had he of that man,
For had wonder He wondered.
, that nature
Might make so foul a creature.
Than to the Well he rade good pase,
And down he lighted in that plase;
And sone the bacyn has he taken,
And kest Cast.
water opon the Stane;
And sone thar wax, withowten fail,
Wind and thonor, rayn and hayle:
When it was sesed, than saw he
The fowls light opon the tree,
Thai sang full fair opon that thorn
Right als thai had done byforn.
And sone he saw cumand Coming.
a knight,
As fast so the fowl in flight,
With rude sembland Countenance.
, and stern chere,
And hastily he neghed nere;
To speak of luf Friendly.
na time was their,
For aither hated uther full sare Sore.
.
Togeder smertly began thai drive,
Their sheldes son bigan to ryve,
Their shaftes cheverd Shivered.
to their hand
Bot thai war buth full well syttand Seated.
.
Out thai drogh Drew.
their swerdes kene,
And dealt strakes tham between;
Al to pieces thai hewed their sheldes,
The culpons Pieces.
flegh Flew.
out in the feldes.
On helmes struck they so with ire,
At ilka struck out brast the fyr;
Ayther of tham good buffettes bid Abided.
,
And nowther wald styr of the stead.
Full kenely thai kyd Showed.
their might,
And feyned tham noght for to fight:
Their hauberkes that men might ken
The blood out of their bodies ren.
Ayther on other laid so fast,
The batayl might noght lang last:
Hauberks er Are.
broken, and helmes reven,
Styf strakes war thar gyfen;
Thai foght on horse stiffly always,
The batel was well more to prays;
Bot at the last sir Ywayne
On his fellow kyd his main,
So egerly he smate him than,
He clefe the helm and the herne pan So in Minot's Poems. MSS. Cott. GALB. E.
ix. ut supr. And sum lay knoked out their hernes.

:
The knight wist he was nere ded,
To fly than was his best read Counsel.
;
And fast he fled with all his main,
And fast follow sir Ywayne,
Bot he ne might him overtake,
Tharfore great murning began he make:
He folowd him full stowtlyk Stoutly.
,
And would have taken him ded or quik;
He followed him to the cete City.
,
Naman lyfand No man living.
met he.
When thai come to the kastel ate,
In he followed fast tharate:
At aither enter was, I wys,
Straytly wroght a port culis,
Shod well with yren and stele,
And also grunden Ground. Sharpened.
wonder well:
Under that then was a swyke Switch. Twig.

That made sir Y wayn to myslike,
His horse foot toched their on;
Than fell the port culis onone Traps of this kind are not uncommon in romance.
Thus sir Lancelot, walking round the chambers of a strange castle, treads on a
board which throws him into a cave twelve fathoms deep. MORT. ARTH. B. xix. chapter
vii.
,
Bytwyx him and his arsown,
Thorgh sadel and stead it smate al down,
His spores Spurs.
of his heles it schare Cut.
:
Than had Ywayne murnyng Mourning.
mare More.
,
Bot so he wend have passed quite But even so he thought to have passed
forward, through.
,
That fell the the other The other portcullis^
biforn alstyte.
A fair grace that fell him swa So.
,
Al if it did his horse in two Twain.
,
And his spors of aither hele,
That himself passed so well.
While sir Ywaine remains in this perilous confinement, a lady looks out of a
wicket which opened in the wall of the gateway, and releases him. She gives him
her ring,

I sal leve the har mi Ring This ring is used in another adventure.
,
Bot elde it me at mine askyng:
When thou ert brought of al thy pain
elde Yield.
it than to me ogayne:
Als the bark hills Covers.
the tree,
Right so sal my Ring do the;
When you in hand has the stane Stone.
,
Der Harm.
sal thai do the nane,
For the stane es of swilk might,
Of the sal men have na sight No man will see you.
.
Wit e Know ye.
well that sir Ywayne
Of their words was full feign Glad.
;
In at the door sho hem led,
And did him sit opon her bed,
A quylte full nobil lay tharon,
Richer saw he never none, etc.
Here he is secreted. In the mean time, the Lord of the castle dies of his
wounds, and is magnificently buried. But before the interment, the people of
the castle search for sir Ywayne.

Half his stead thar fand thai They found.

That within the ates Gates.
lay;
Bot the knight thar fand thai noght:
Than was thar mekil sorrow unsoght,
Door ne window was thar nane,
Whar he might oway gane.
Thai said he sold their be laft He still was there.
,
Or else he cowth of weche craft Understood witchcraft.
,
Or he cowth of nygromancy,
Or he had wenges to fly.
Hastily than went thai all
And soght him in the maidens hall,
In chambers high es noght at hide,
And in solers High chambers.
on ilka side.
Sir Ywayne saw full well all that,
And still opon the bed he sat:
Thar was nane that anes mynt
Unto the bed at smite i. e. On account of the ring.
a dynt Never once minded, or thought, t^ strike at the bed, not seeing him
there.
:
Al about thai smate so fast,
That mani of their wapins brast;
Mekyl sorrow thai made ilkane,
For thai ne might wreke their lord bane.
Thai went oway with dreri chere,
And sone thar after come the Bear Bier.
;
A lady folowd white so mylk,
In all that land was none swilk:
Sho wrang her fingers, outbraste the blood,
For mekyl wa Great grief.
sho was nere wode Mad.
;
Her fair har scho alto drogh Drew. So in the LAY OF THE EARL OF TOULOUSE, MSS.
Mus. Ashmol. 45. The earl himself an ax^ DROGH,
A hundred men that day he slough.

,
And full often fell sho down in swogh Swoon.
;
Sho weep with a full dreri voice.
The hali water, and the croyce,
Was born before the procession;
Thar folowd mani a mother son.
Bifor the cors rade a knight
On his stead that was full wight Swi^t.
;
In his armurs well arayd,
With spear and target gudely grayd.
Than sir Ywayne herd the cry
Of the dole of tha^ fair lady, etc.
Sir Ywayne desires the damsel's permission to look at the lady of the deceased
knight through a window. He falls in love with her. She passes her time in
praying for his soul.

Unto his saul was sho full hulde Bound. Obligated.
:
Opon a sawter al of gulde Psaltery, a harp, of gold.
,
To say the sal-mas Soul mass. The mass of requi^m.
fast sho bigan.
The damsel There is a damsel of this name in MORTE ARTHUR, B. vii. chapter xvi.
, whose name is Lunet, promises sir Ywaine an interview with the Lady. She uses
many arguments to the Lady, and with much art, to show the necessity of her
marrying again, for the defense of her castle.

The maiden redies her full rath Early. Soon.
,
Bilive she gert sir Ywayne bath Made him bathe immediately.
,
And clad him seym in good scarlet,
Fororde Furrured^ Furred.
well, and with gold fret In another part of this romance, a knight is dressed
by a lady.

A damisel come unto me,
Lufsumer lifed Lovelier lived.
never in land;
Hendly scho Courteously she^
took me by the hand,
And sone that gentyl c^eature
Al unlaced mine armure;
Into a chamber scho me led,
And with a mantel scho me cled,
It was of purpur fair and fine,
And the pane Border.
of rich ermine:
All the folk war went us fra From.
,
And their was none than bot we two Two.
;
Scho served me hendely to hend,
Her manners might no man amend,
Of tongue scho was true and renable Reasonable.
,
And of her semblant Look.
soft and stabile;
Full fain I wald Would.
, if that I might,
Have woned Lodged.
with that sweet wight.
In MORTE ARTHUR, sir Lancelot going into a nunnery is unarmed in the abbess's
chamber. B. xiii. chapter i. In MORTE ARTHUR, si^ Galahad is dis^rmed, and clothed
"in a cote of red sendall and a mantell furred with fine ERMYNES, etc." B.
xiii. chapter i. In the British LAY or romance, of LAUNVAL (MSS. Cott^ VESPAS. B.
14. 1.) we have, Un cher mantel de BLANCH ERMINE,
Couvert de purpre Alexandrine.
There is a statute, made in 1337, prohibiting any under 100l. per annum, to
wear fur. I suppose the richest fur was Ermine; which, before the manufactures
of gold and silver, was the greatest article of finery in dress. But it
continued in use long afterward, as appears by ancient portraits. In the
Statutes of Cardinal Wolsey's College at Oxford, given in the year 1525, the
students are enjoned, "Ne magis pretiosis aut sumptuosis utantur PELLIBUS." De
VESTITU, etc. fol. 49. MSS. Cott. TIT. F. iii. This injunction is a proof that
rich furs were at that time a luxury of the secular life. In an old poem
written in the reign of Henry the sixth, about 1436, entitled the ENGLISH
POLICY, exhorting all England to keep the sea, a curious and valuable record
of the state of our traffic and mercantile navigation at that period, it
appears that our trade with Ireland, for furs only, was then very considerable.
Speaking of Ireland, the writer says,

-- Martens good been her marchandie,
Hertes hides, and other of venerie,
Skins of otter^ squirrell, and Irish hare;
Of sheep, lamb, and fox, is her chaffare.
See Hacklvyt's VOIAGES, Vol. i. p. 199. edit. 1598.

At the sacking of a town in Normandy, Froissart says, "There was found so
much richesse, that the boys and vyllaynes of the hooste set nothing by
good FURRED gowns." Berners's Transl. tom. i. fol. lx. a.


;
A girdel full rich for the nones,
Of perry and of precious stones.
Sho talde him al how he sold do
When that he come the lady to.
He is conducted to her chamber.

Bot it sir Ywayne had great dread,
When he unto chamber ede;
The chamber, flore, and als the bed,
With klothes of gold was al over spread In the manners of romance, it was not
any indelicacy for a lady to pay amorous courtship to a knight. Thus in Davie's
GESTE OF ALEXANDER, written in 1312, queen Candace openly endeavors to win
Alexander to her love. MS. penes me, p. 271. [Cod. Hospit. Linc. 150.] She
shows Alexander, not only her palace, but her bedchamber. -- Quoth the queen,
Go we now mine esteris to seone To see my apartmen^s.
:
Our mete schol, thar bytweone Our dinner shall, meanwhile^
,
Ygraithed Prepared.
and ready beone Be.
.
Scheo She.
ladde him to an halle of nobleys,
Then he dude of his harneys Put off his armor.
:
Of Troy was there men For there m^n, read therein, (...) MS. LAUD. 1. 74. Bibl.
Bodl.
the storye The story of Tro^ was in the tapestry, or painted on the walls of
the hall.

How Gregoys Creek^.
had the victory:
Theo bemes there weore The rafters were.
of bras.
Theo wyndowes weoren of rich glass Painted glas^.
:
Theo pinnes Of the window^.
weore of ivorye.
The king went with the lady,
Himself alone, from bour to bour,
And sye Saw.
much rich tresour,
Gold and seolver, and preciouse stones,
Baudekyns Rich clothe^.
made for the nones That i^ for the occasion. So the paint^ng or tapestry,
before mentioned, representing the Greek^ v^c^or^^u^, was in complime^t to
Alexander.
,
Mantellis, robes, and pavelounes Pavilions.
,
Of gold and seolver rich foysounes Stores.
;
And heo She.
him asked, par amor,
of he sye ever such a tresour.
And he said, in his contray
Tresour he wiste Knew.
of great noblay.
Heo She.
thote more that heo said.
To anothir stude sheo he began him led ^ted^. Lodging^
,
That her own chamber was,
In all this world richer none nas.
Theo atyr The furniture.
was therein so rich
In all this world nys him non lyche None like it.
.
Heo ladde him to a stage,
And him schewed one image,
And said, Alexander leif thou me Believe.
,
This image is made after the Them.
;
Y dude hit in ymagoure Imagery.
,
And cast hit after thy vigoure Figure.
;
This other eir, tho thou nolde Would^st not.

To me come for love ne for gold,
Het is the ylyche Lik^.
, leove brother Dear Brother, or Friend.
,
So any faucon A^ one f^ulcon. In MSS. LAUD. I. 174. ut supr. it is p^ny, for
faulcon.
is anothir.
O Alisaunder, of great renoun,
Thou taken art in my prisoun!
Al thy streynthe helpethe the nowt,
For womman the haveth bycowt Catched.
,
For womman the heveth in hire las Her lace.
.
O, quoth Alisaunder, alas,
That I were yarmed Here^ y i^ the Saxon i. See Hearne'^ GL^ RO^. GLOUC. p. 738.
well,
And head my sweord of brown stel,
Many an heid would y cleove,
Ar y would in prison bileve Be le^t. Stay. Even.
.
Alysaunder, heo said, thou ^aist soth,
Beo noither adrad no wroth Neither a^^righted nor angry.
;
For here, undir thi^ covertour,
Y will have the to mine amor, etc.

.
After this interview, she is reconciled to him, as he only in self-defence has
slain her husband, and she promises him marriage.

Than hastily sho went to Hall,
Thar abode her barons all,
For to hald their parliament Assembly. Consultation.
,
And mari Marry.
her by their asent.
They agree to the marriage.

Than the lady went ogayne
Unto chamber to Ywayne;
Sir, sho said, so God me save,
Other lord will I nane have:
If I the left Was I not to marry you.
I did noght right,
A king son, and a noble knight.
Now has the maiden done her thought Intention.
,
Sir Ywayne out of anger brought.
The Lady led him unto Hall,
Ogains Against. Before.
him rose the barons all,
And at thai said full sekerly,
This Knight sal wed the Lady:
And ilkane said thamself Among themselves.
bitwene,
So fair a man had thai noght seen,
For his bewte in hal and bowr:
Him semes to be an emperowr.
We walde that thai war trowth plight,
And weded sone this ilk night.
The lady set her on the dese Deis. The high-table. In the GESTE OF ALEXANDER
we have the phrase of ^^lding the deis, MS. ut supr. p. 45.

There was gynnyng a new feste,
And of gleomen many a geste,
King Philip was in mal ese,
Alisaundre HELD THE DES^.

,
And cumand al to hald their pese Peace.
;
And bad her steward sumwhat say,
Or Ere.
men went fra cowrt away.
The steward said, Sirs, understandes,
Worcester War.
is waxen Growing.
in this lands;
The king Arthur is ready dight
To be here by this four tenyght:
He and his mean Knights.
ha thought
To win this land if thai moght:
Thai wate Know.
full well, that he is ded
That was lord here in this stead Mansion. Castle.
:
None es so wight wapins Active to wield weapons.
to welde,
Ne that so boldly may us belde,
And women may maintene no stowr Fight.
,
Thai most needs have a governowr:
Tharfor mi lady most need
Be weded hastily for dread Fear.
,
And to na lord will sho take tent Attention.
,
Bot if it be by owr assent.
Than the lords al on raw On a row.

Held them well paid of this saw Opinion. Word. It is of extensive
signification, EMARE, MS. ut supr. I have herd minstrelles sing in SAW.

.
Al assented her until Unto. So Rob. Brunne, of Stonehenge, edit. Hearne, p.
cxci. In Afrik were thai compast and wrought,
Geantz TILLE Ireland from thithen tham brought.
That is, "Giants brought them from Africa into Ireland."

To tak a lord at her own will.
Than said the lady onone right,
How hald e ow paid of this knight?
He profers him on al wise
To mine honor and my servyse,
And sertes, sirs, the soth to say,
I saw him never, er this day;
Bot talde unto me has it been
He es the king son Uriene:
He es cumen of high parage Kindred. So in the GESTE OF ALEXAND^R, MS. p. 258.
They were men of great parage,
And haden fowrty winter in age.

,
And wonder doghty of vassalage Courage.
,
War and wise, and full curtayse,
He ernes Eagerly wishes.
me to wife alwayse;
And nere the lose, I wate, he might
Have well better, and so war right.
With a voice halely Wholly.
thai said,
Madame, full well we hald us paid:
Bot hastes fast all that e may,
That e war wedded this ilk day:
And great prayer began thai make
On alwise, that sho should him take.
Sone unto the kirk thai went,
And war wedded in their present;
Thar wedded Ywain in plevyne Fr. Plevine. See Du Fresne. PLEVINA.

The rich lady ALUNDYNE,
The dukes doghter of Landuit,
Else had her land been destruyt.
Thus thai made the marriage
Amang all the rich barnage Baronage.
:
Thai made full mekyl mirth that day,
Full great festes on good array;
Great mirthes made thai in that stead,
And al forgetyn es now the deed Death.

Of him that was their lord fre;
Thai say that this es worth swilk three.
And that thai lufed him mekil more
Than him that lord was their before.
The bridal Bridal is Saxon for the nuptial feast. So in Davie's GESTE OF
ALEXANDER. MS. fol. 41. penes me. He wist nout of this BRIDALE,
Ne no man told him the tale.
In GAMELYN, or the COKE'S. Tale, v. 1267. At every BRIDALE he would sing and
hop.
Spenser, FAERIE QU. B. v. C. ii. st. 3. -- Where and when the BRIDALE cheer
Should be solemnised. --
And, vi. x. 13. -- Theseus her unto his BRIDALE bore.
See also Spenser's PROTHALAMION. The word has been applied adjectively, for
CONNUBIAL. Perhaps Milton remembered or retained its original use in the
following passage of SAMSON AGONISTES, ver. 1196.

And in your ci^y held my nuptial feast:
But your ill-meaning politician lords,
Under pretense of BRIDAL friends and guests,
Appointed to await me thirty spies.
"Under pretense of friends and guests invited to the BRIDAL." But in PARA^I^E
LOST, he speaks of the evening star hastening to light the BRIDAL LAMP, which
in another part of the same poem he calls the NUPTIAL TORCH. viii. 520. xi.
590. I presume this Saxon BRIDALE is Bride-Ale, the FEAST in honor of the
bride or marriage. ALE, simply put, is the feast or the merry-making, as in
PIERCE PLOWMAN, fol. xxxii. b. edit. 1550. 4to. And then satin some and song
at the ALE [nale.]
Again, fol. xxvi. b. I am occupied every day, holy day and other,
With idle tales at the ALE, and otherwhile in churches.
So Chaucer of his FREERE, Urr. p. 87. v. 85. And they were only glad to fill
his purse,
And maden him great festis at the NALE.
Nale is ALE. "They feasted him, or entertained him, with particular respect,
at the parish^feast, etc." Again, PLOWMAN'S TALE, p. 125. v. 2110. At the
Wrestling, and at the Wake,
And the chief chaunters at the NALE.
See more instances supr. vol. i. 60. That ALE is festival, appears from its
sense in composition; as, among others, in the word^ Leet-ale, Lamb-ale,
Whitson-ale, Clerkale, and Church-ale. LEET-ALE, in some parts of England,
signifies the Dinner at a court leet of a manor for the jury and customary
tenants. LAMB-ALE is still used at the village of Kirtlington in Oxfordshire,
for an annual feast or celebrity at lambshearing. WHITSON-ALE, is the common
name in the midland counties, for the rural sports and feasting at Whit^ontide.
CLERK-ALE occurs in Aubrey's manuscript History of WILTSHIRE. "In the Easter
holidays was the CLARKES-ALE, for his private benefit and the solace of the
neighborhood." MSS. Mus. ASHM. Oxon. CHURCH-ALE, was a feast established for
the repair of the church, or in honor of the church-saint, etc. In Dodsworth's
Manuscripts, there is an old indenture, made before the Reformation, which not
only shows the design of the Church-ale, but explains this particular use and
application of the word Ale. The parishioners of Elveston and Okebrook, in
Derbyshire, agree jointly, "to brew four ALES, and every ALE of one quarter of
malt, betwixt this and the feast of saint John Baptist next coming. And that
every inhabitant of the said town of Okebrook shall be at the several ALES. And
every husband and hi^ wife shall pay two pence, every cottager one penny, and
all the inhabitants of Elveston shall have and receive all the profits and
advantages coming of the said ALES, to the use and behoof of the said church of
Elveston. And the inhabitants of Elveston shall brew eight ALES betwixt this
and the feast of saint John Baptist, at the which ALES the inhabitants of
Okebrook shall come and pay as before rehearsed. And if he be away at one ALE,
to pay at the toder ALE for both, etc." MSS. Bibl. Bodl. vol. 148. f. 97. See
also our CHURCH-CANONS, given in 1603. CAN. 88. The application of what is here
collected to the word BRIDALE, is obvious. But Mr. Astle has a curious record,
about 1575, which proves the BRIDE-ALE synonimous with the WEDDYN-ALE. During
the course of queen Elisabeth's entertainments at Kenilworthcastle, in 1575, a
BRYDE-ALE was celebrated with a great variety of shows and sports. Laneham's
LETTER, dated the same year. fol. xxvi. seq. What was the nature of the
merriment of the CHURCHALE, we learn from the WITCHES-SONG in Jonson's MASQUE
OF QUEENS at Whitehall in 1609, where one of the Witches boa^ts to have killed
and stole the fat of an infant, begotten by a piper at a CHURCH-ALE. S. 6.

Among bishop Tanner's manuscript additions to Cowell's Law-Glossary in the
Bodleian library, is the following Note, from his own Collections. [Lit. V.]
"A. D. 1468. Prior Cant. et Commissarii visitationem fecerunt (diocesi Cant.
vacant per mortem archiepiscopi) et ibi publicatum erat, quod Potationes
factae in ecclesiis, vulgariter dictae YEVEALYS Give-ales, or gift-ales.
, vel BREDEALYS Bride-ales.
, non essent ulterius in usu sub paena excommunicationis majoris."

Had the learned author of the Dissertation on BARLEY WINE been as well
acquainted with the British as the Grecian literature, this long note would
perhaps have been unnecessary.


sat, for soth to tell,
Till king Arthur come to the well
With all his knights ever ilkane,
Byhind leved thar noght ane One.
. --
The king kest water on the stane,
The storm raze full sone onane
With wikked Wicked is here, accursed. In which seuse it is used by
Shakespeare's Caliban, TEMP. Act i. Sc. ii. As WICKED dew as ever my mother
brushed
With raven's feather, etc.

weders, kene and calde,
Als it was before hand talde.
The king and his men ilkane
Wend tharwith to have been slane,
So blew it store Strong.
with slete and rain:
And hastily began sir Ywayne To defend the fountain, the office of the lord of
this castle.
,
Dight him graythly Readily.
in his gere,
With nobil shield, and strong spear:
When he was dight in seker wede,
Than he umstrade Bestrode.
a nobil stead:
Him thought that he was als light
Als a fowl es to the flight.
Unto the Well fast wendes he,
And sone when thai might him se,
Sir Kay, for he wald noght fail,
Smertly asks the battle.
And alsone than said the king,
Sir Kay, I grante thine askyng.
Sir Ywaine is victorious, who discovers himself to king Arthur after the
battle.

And sone sir Ywayne began him tell
Of al his fare how it byfell,
With the knight how that he sped,
And how he had the Lady wed;
And how the Maiden him helped well:
Thus talde he to him ilka dele.
Sir king, he said, I ow byseke,
And al owr mean mild and meke,
That e wald grante to me that grace,
At To.
wend with me to my purchase,
And se my Kastle and my Tower,
Than might e do me great honowre.
The king granted him full right
To dwell with him a fouretenyght.
Sir Ywayne thanked him often since Oft-times.
,
The knights war al glad and blyth,
With sir Ywayne for to wend:
And sone a squier has he send
Unto the kastel, the way he nome,
And warned the Lady of their come,
And that his Lord come with the king.
And when the Lady herd this thing,
It es no lifand man with mowth
That half her cumforth tell kowth.
Hastily that Lady hende
Cumand al her men to wend,
And dight tham in their best array,
To keep the king that ilk day:
Thai keped Waited on. See Tyrwh. GL. Chapter
him in rich wede
Rydeand on many a nobil stead;
Thai hailsed Saluted.
him full curtaysly,
And also al his cumpany:
Thai said he was worthy to dowt To ^ear.
,
That so feel folk led obowt So large a train of knights.
:
Thar was great joy, I ow bihete Promise you.
,
With clothes spered Tapestry spread on the walls.
in ilka street,
And damysels danceand full well,
With trumpes, pipes, and with fristele:
The Castle and the Cetee rang
With mynstralsi and nobil sang.
Thai ordand tham ilkane in fere
To keep the king on fair manner.
The Lady went withowten town,
And with her many balde barowne,
Cled in purpure and ermyne,
With girdels al of gold full fine.
The Lady made full m^ri chere,
Sho was al dight with drewries Gallantries. Jewels. Davie says, that in one of
Alexander'^ battles, many a lady lost her drewery. GESTE AL^XANDER, MS. p. 86.
Athens is called the Drywery of the world. ibid.
dear;
About her was full mekyl thrang,
The puple cried and said omang,
Welcum ertou, king Arthoure,
Of all this werld thou beres the flower!
Lord king of all kings,
And blissed be he that the brynges!
When the Lady the King saw,
Unto him fast began sho draw,
To hald his sterap whils he light;
Bot sone when he of her had sight,
With mekyl mirth thai samen Together.
met,
With hende words sho him great;
A thousand sithes welkum sho says,
And so es sir Gawayne the curtayse.
The king said, Lady white so flowr,
God gif ye joy and mekyl honowr,
For thou ert fair with body gent:
With that he her in arms hent,
And full fair he began her falde Fold.
,
Thar was many to bihalde:
Et es no man with tongue may tell
The mirth that was tham omell;
Of maidens was thar so good wane Assembly.
,
That ilka knight might take ane.
The king stays here eight days, entertained with various sports.

And ilk day thai had solace sere
Of huntyng, and als of revere Hawking. River.
:
For thar was a full fair cuntre,
With wodes and parkes great plente;
And castles wroght with lyme and stane,
That Ywayne with his wife had taken There are three old poems on the exploits
of Gawain, one of the heroes of this romance. There is a fourth in the Scotch
dialect, by Clerk of Tranent, an old Scotch poet. See LAMENT FOR THE DEATH OF
THE MAKKARIS, st. xvii. Clerk of Tranent eke has [death] taken
That made the Aventers of GAWANE.
ANC. SCOTT. P. 1576.

The two heroes of this romance, YWAIN and GAWAIN, are mentioned jointly in a
very old French version of the British or Armorican LAY OF LAUNVAL, of which
there is a beautiful vellum manuscript. MSS. Cott. VESPAS. B. xiv. 1. [supr.
modo citat.] Ensemble od eus GAWAYNS,
E sis cosins li beus YWAYNS.
This LAY, or SONG, like the romance in the text, is opened with a feast
celebrated at Whitsontide by king Arthur at Kardoyl, a French corruption from
Carliol, by which is meant Cairleon in Wales, sometimes in romances confounded
with Cardiff. [See Geoffr. Monm. ix 12.]

"Jci commence le Lay de LAUNVAL."
Laventure de un Lay,
Cum de avint uns cunteray,
Fait fu dun gentil vassal,
En Bretaigne lapelent LAUNVAL:
A Kardoyl suiornoit li reys
Arthur, li prouz, e li curteys,
Pur les Escot, e pur les Pis,
Ki destrueient le^ pays;
En la terre de Logres Logres, or Loegria, from Locrine, was the middle part of
Britain.
le trououent,
Mult souent le damagouent:
A la Pentecuste en este,
I aveit li reys sojourne,
A les i dona riches du^s,
E al cuntes Counts. So in ROBERT OF GLOUCESTER, we have CONTAS^ for coun^ess,
On which word his editor Hearne observes, that king James the first used to
call a Countess a cuntys. And he quotes one of James'^ letters, "Come and b^ing
the three Cuntys [for co^ntesses] with you." GLOS^, p. 635.
, e al baruns,
A uns de la Table R^nde, etc.
That is, "HERE BEGINS THE LAY OF LAUNVAL. -- The Adventure of a certain LAY,
which has been related of old, made of a gentle vassal, whom in Bretaigne they
called LAUNVAL. The brave and courteous king Arthur sojourned at Kardoyl, for
making war against the Scots and Picts, who destroyed the country. He found
them in the land of Logres, where they committed frequent outrages. The king
was there at the feast of Pentecost, where he gave rich gifts to the counts and
barons, and the knights of the round table, etc."

The writing of this manuscript of LAUNVAL seems about 1300. The composition is
undoubtedly much earlier. There is another, MSS. HARL. 978.. 112. This I have
cited in the FIRST DISSERTATION. From this French LAUNVAL is translated, but
with great additions, the English LAUNFALL, of which I have given several
extracts in the DISSERTATION prefixed to this Volume, p. lxxv. etc. [See also
supr. Vol. ii. EMEND. ADD. ad Page 103.]

I presume this romance of YWAYN and GAWAYNE is translated from a French one of
the same title, and in the reign of Henry the sixth; but not by Thomas Chestre,
who translated, or rather paraphrased, LAUNVAL, or Sir LAUNFALL, and who seems
to have been master of a more copious and poetic style. It is not however
unlikely, that Chestre translated from a more modern French copy of LAUNVAL,
heightened and improved from the old simple Armorican tale, of which I have
here produced a short extract. [See supr. Vol. ii. p. 102.] The same perhaps
may be said of the English metrical romance EMARE, who marries the king of
Galys, or Wales, originally an Armorican tale, before quoted. MSS. Cott. CALIG.
A. 2. fol. 69. [See supr. DISS. p. lxxviii.] The last stanza confirms what has
been advanced in the FIRST DISSERTATION, concerning the connection between
Cornwall and Bretagne, or Armorica. fol. ult.

A grette feste thar was hold
Of earls and barons bolde^
As testymonieth this story:
This is on of BRYTAYNE LAYS,
That was used in old days,
Men callys plain the GARYE.
I believe the last line means, "Made for an entertainment," -- "Which men call
playing the GARYE." The reader may perhaps recollect, that the old Cornish
Miracle interlude was called the Guary Mirakil, that is, the Miracle Play. [See
supr. Vol. i. p. 237.] In Cornish, Plan an guare is the level place, the plain
of sport and pastime, the theater of games, etc. Guare is a Cornish verb, to
sport, to play. In affinity with which, is probably Garish, gay, splendid.
Milton, IL PENS. v. 141. Day's garish eye. Shakespeare, ROMANS JUL. iii. 4. The
garish sun. KING RICHARD THE THIRD. A garish flag. Compare Lie, Sax. Dict. V.
Zeapp^an. To dress fine.

Who was the translator of EMARE, it is not known. I presume it was translated
in the reign of Henry the sixth, and very probably by Thomas Chestre, the
translator of LAUNVAL.


.
SECT. XXVI.
I FEAR I shall be pronounced a heretic to modern criticism, in retracting what
I have said in a preceding page, and in placing the NOTBROWNE MAID under some
part of this reign. Prior, who, about the year 1718, paraphrased this poem,
without improving its native beauties, supposes it to have been three hundred
years old. It appears from two letters preserved in the British Museum, written
by Prior to Wanley, lord Oxford's librarian, that Prior consulted Wanley about
this ancient ballad MSS. HARL. 3777.
. It is, however, certain, that Wanley, an antiquarian of unquestionable skill
and judgment in these niceties, whatever directions and information he might
have imparted to Prior on this subject, could never have communicated such a
decision. He certainly in these letters gives no such opinion These letters are
printed in the ADDITIONS TO POPE'S WORKS, in two volumes, published about two
years ago.
. This is therefore the hasty conjecture of Prior; who thought that the
curiosity which he was presenting to the world, would derive proportionable
value from its antiquity, who was better employed than in the petty labor of
ascertaining dates, and who knew much more of modern than ancient poetry.

The NOT-BROWNE MAID first appeared in Arnolde's CHRONICLE, or CUSTOMS OF
LONDON, which was first printed about the year 1521. This is perhaps the most
heterogeneous and multifarious miscellany that ever existed. The collector sets
out with a catalogue of the mayors and sheriffs, the customs and charters, of
the city of London. Soon afterward we have receipts to pickle sturgeon, to
make vinegar, ink, and gunpowder; how to raise parsley in an hour; the arts of
brewery and soap-making; an estimate of the livings in London; an account of
the last visitation of saint Magnus's church; the weight of Essex cheese, and a
letter to cardinal Wolsey. The NOT-BROWNE MAID is introduced, between an
estimate of some subsidies paid into the exchequer, and directions for buying
goods in Flanders. In a word, it seems to have been this compiler's plan, by
way of making up a volume, to print together all the notices and papers,
whether ancient or modern, which he could amass, of every sort and subject. It
is supposed, that he intended an antiquarian repertory: but as many recent
materials were admitted, that idea was not at least uniformly observed; nor can
any argument be drawn from that supposition, that this poem existed long
before, and was inserted as a piece of antiquity.

The editor of the PROLUSIONS infers PROLUSIONS, or select pieces of ancient
Poetry, Land. 1760. 4to. Pref. p. vii.
, from an identity of rhythmus and orthography, and an affinity of words and
phrases, that this poem appeared after sir Thomas More's JEST OF THE SERGEANT
AND FREER, which, as I have observed, was written about the year 1500. This
reasoning, were not other arguments obvious, would be inconclusive, and might
be turned to the opposite side of the question. But it is evident from the
language of the NOTBROWNE MAID, that it was not written earlier than the
beginning, at least, of the sixteenth century. There is hardly an obsolete
word, or that requires a glossary, in the whole piece: and many parts of Surry
and Wyat are much more difficult to be understood. Reduce any two stanzas to
modern orthography, and they shall hardly wear the appearance of ancient
poetry. The reader shall try the experiment on the two following, which occur
accidentally V. 168.
.

HE. Yet take good head, for ever I dread
That ye could not sustain,
The thornie ways, the deep valeis,
The snow, the frost, the rain,
The cold, the hete: for, dry or wete,
We must lodge on the plain;
And us abofe i. e. Above.
none other rofe
But a brake bush, or twain.
Which sone should greve you, I believe;
And ye would gladly than,
That I had to the grene wode go
Alone a banyshed man. --

SHE. Among the wild dear, such an archere,
As men say that ye be,
May ye not fail of good vitayle
Where is so great plente:
And water clear of the ryvere
Shall be full sweet to me;
With which in hele, I shall right well
Endure, as ye shall see:
And, or we go, a bed or two
I can provyde anon.
For, in my mind, of all mankind
I love but you alone.

The simplicity of which passage Prior has thus decorated and dilated.

HENRY. Those limbs, in lawn and softest silk arrayed,
From sunbeams guarded, and of winds afraid;
Can they bear angry Jove? can they resist
The parching dog star, and the bleak north-east?
When, chilled by adverse snows and beating rain,
We tread with weary steps the longsome plain;
When with hard toil we seek our evening food,
Berries and acorns from the neighboring wood;
And find among the cliffs no other house,
But the thin covert of some gathered boughs;
Will thou not then reluctant send thine eye
Around the dreary waste; and weeping try
(Though then, alas! that trial be too late)
To find thy father's hospitable gate,
And seats, where ease and plenty brooding sat?
Those seats, whence long excluded thou must mourn;
That gate, for ever barred to thy return:
Will thou not then bewail ill-fated love,
And hate a banished man, condemned in woods to rove?

EMMA. Thy rise of fortune did I only wed,
From it is decline determined to recede;
Did I but purpose to embark with thee
On the smooth surface of a summer's sea:
While gentle Zephyrs play in prosperous gales,
And Fortune's favor fills the swelling sails;
But would forsake the ship, and make the shore,
When the winds whistle, and the tempests roar?
No, Henry, no: one sacred oath has tied
Our loves; one destiny our life shall guide;
Nor wild nor deep our common way divide.
When from the cave thou risest with the day,
To beat the woods, and rouse the bounding prey,
The cave with moss and branches I Will adorn,
And cheerful sit, to wait my lord's return:
And, when thou frequent bring'st the smitten deer
(For seldom, archers say, thy arrows err,)
I Will fetch quick fuel from the neighbouriug wood,
And strike the sparklng flint, and dress the food;
With humble duty and officious haste,
I Will cull the farthest mead for thy repast;
The choicest herbs I to thy board will bring,
And draw thy water from the freshest spring:
And, when at night with weary toil oppressed,
Soft slumbers thou enjoy'st, and wholesome rest;
Watchful I Will guard thee, and with midnight prayer
Weary the Gods to keep thee in their care;
And joyous ask, at morn's returning ray,
If thou have health, and I may bless the day.
My thoughts shall fix, my latest wish depend,
On thee, guide, guardian, kinsman, father, friend:
By all these sacred names be Henry known
To Emma's heart; and grateful let him own,
That she, of all mankind, could love but him alone!

What degree of credit this poem maintained among our earlier ancestors, I
cannot determine. I suspect the sentiment was too refined for the general
taste. Yet it is enumerated among the popular tales and ballads by Laneham, in
his narrative of queen Elisabeth's entertainment at Kenilworth-castle in 1575
^ol. 34^
. I have never seen it in manuscript. I believe it was never reprinted from
Arnolde's Chronicle, where it first appeared in 1521, till so late as the year
1707. It was that year revived in a collection called the MONTHLY MISCELLANY,
or MEMO^RS FOR THE CURIOUS, and prefaced with a little essay on our ancient
poets and poetry, in which it is said to have been three hundred old.
Fortunately for modern poetry, this republication suggested it to the notice of
Prior, who perhaps from the same source might have adopted or confirmed his
hypothesis, that it was coeval with the commencement of the fifteenth century.

Whoever was the original inventor of this little dramatic dialogue, he has
shown no common skill in contriving a plan, which powerfully detains our
attention, and interests the passions, by a constant succession of suspense and
pleasure, of anxiety and satisfaction. Betwixt hopes perpetually disappointed,
and solicitude perpetually relieved, we know not how to determine the event of
a debate, in which new difficulties still continue to be raised, and are almost
as soon removed. In the midst of this vicissitude of feelings, a striking
contrast of character is artfully formed, and uniformly supported, between the
seeming unkindness and ingratitude of the man, and the unconquerable attachment
and fidelity of the woman, whose amiable compliance unexpectedly defeats every
objection, and continually furnishes new matter for our love and compassion. At
length, our fears subside in the triumph of suffering innocence and patient
sincerity. The Man, whose hard speeches had given us so much pain, suddenly
surprises us with a change of sentiment, and becomes equally an object of our
admiration and esteem. In the disentanglement of this distressful tale, we are
happy to find, that all his cruelty was tenderness, and his inconstancy the
most invariable truth; his levity an ingenious artifice, and his perversity the
friendly disguise of the firmest affection. He is no longer an unfortunate
exile, the profligate companion of the thieves and ruffians of the forest, but
an opulent earl of Westmoreland; and promises, that the lady, who is a baron's
daughter, and whose constancy he had proved by such a series of embarrassing
proposals, shall instantly be made the partner of his riches and honors. Nor
should we forget to commend the invention of the poet, in imagining the modes
of trying the lady's patience, and in feigning so many new situations: which,
at the same time, open a way to description, and to a variety of new scenes and
images.

I cannot help observing here, by the way, that Prior has misconceived and
essentially marred his poet's design, by softening the sternness of the Man,
which could not be intended to admit of any degree of relaxation. Henry's
hypocrisy is not characteristically nor consistently sustained. He frequently
talks in too respectful and complaisant a style. Sometimes he calls Emma my
tender maid, and my beauteous Emma; he fondly dwells on the ambrosial plenty of
her flowing ringlets gracefully wreathed with variegated ribbands, and
expatiates with rapture on the charms of her snowy bosom, her slender waist,
and harmony of shape. In the ancient poem, the concealed lover never abates his
affectation of rigor and reserve, nor ever drops an expression which may tend
to betray any traces of tenderness. He retains his severity to the last, in
order to give force to the conclusion of the piece, and to heighten the effect
of the final declaration of his love. Thus, by diminishing the opposition of
interests, and by giving too great a degree of uniformity to both characters,
the distress is in some measure destroyed by Prior. For this reason, Henry,
during the course of the dialogue, is less an object of our aversion, and Emma
of our pity. But these are the unavoidable consequences of Prior's plan, who
presupposes a long connection between the lovers, which is attended with the
warmest professions of a reciprocal passion. Yet this very plan suggested
another reason, why Prior should have more closely copied the cast of his
original. After so many mutual promises and protestations, to have made Henry
more obdurate, would have enhanced the sufferings and the sincerity of the
amiable Emma.

It is highly probable, that the metrical romances of RICHARD CUER DE LION, GUY
EARL OF WARWICK, and SIR BEVYS OF SOUTHAMPTON, were modernised in this reign
from more ancient and simple narrations. The first was printed by Wynkyn de
Word, in 1528 In quarto. See supr. Vol. i^ p, 150. seq.
. The second without date, but about the same time, by William Copland. I mean
that which begins thus, Ithen the time that God was borne,
And cryst^ndome was set and sworn.
With this colophon. "Here ends the book of the most victoryous prince Guy
earl of Warwyk. Imprinted at London in Lothbury, over against saint Margaret's
church by Wyllyam Copland In octavo.
." Richard Pinson prin^ed SIR BEVYS without date. Many quarto prose romances
were printed between the years 1510 and 1540 See supr. p. 58.
. Of these, KING APPOLYN OF THYRE is not one of the worst.

In the year 1542, as it seems, Robert Wyer printed, "Here begins a little
book named the SCOLE HOUSE. wherein every man may read a goodly Prayer of the
condycyons of women." Within the leaf is a border of naked women. This is a
satire against the female sex. The writer was wise enough to suppress his name,
as we may judge from the following passage.

Trewly some men there be,
That lyve always in great horroure;
And say, it goth by destenye
To hang or wed, both has one hour:
And whether it be, I am well sure,
Hanging is better of the twain,
Sooner done, and shorter pain.
In the year 1521, Wynkyn de Word printed a set of Christmas Carols For many
small miscellaneous pieces under the reign of Henry viii, the more inquisitive
reader is referred to MSS. Cott. VESP. A. 25.
. I have seen a fragment of this scarce book, and it preserves this colophon.
"Thus ends the Christmasse carolles newly imprinted at London in the
Flete-strete at the sign of the son by Wynkyn de Word. The year of our
Lord, M. D. XXI In quarto.
." These were festal chansons for enlivening the merriments of the Christmas
celebrity: and not such religious songs as are current at this day with the
common people under the same title, and which were substituted by those enemies
of innocent and useful mirth the puritans. The boar's head soused, was
anciently the first dish on Christmas day, and was carried up to the principal
table in the Hall with great state and solemnity. Hollinshead says, that in the
year 1170, upon the day of the young prince's coronation, king Henry the first
"served his son at the table as sewer, bringing up the BORES HEAD with
trumpets before it according to the manner CHRON. iii. 76. See also Polyd.
Virg. HIST. p^ 212. 10. ed. 1534.
." For this indispensable ceremony, as also for others of that season, there
was a Carol, which Wynkyn de Word has given us in the miscellany just
mentioned, as it was sung in his time, with the title, "A CAROL bryngyng in the
bores head."

Caput Apri defero,
Reddens lauds Domino.
The bores head in hand bring I,
With garlandes gay and rosemary.
I pray you all sing merely,
Qui estis in convivio.
The bores head, I understande,
Is the chief servyce That is, the chief dish served at a feast.
in this land:
Look wherever it be fande Found.

Servite cum cantico.
Be glad lords, both more and less Great and small.
,
For this has ordained our steward
To chere you all this christmasse,
The bores head with mustarde.
This carol, yet with many innovations, is retained at Queen's college in
Oxford. Other ancient Christmas carols occur with Latin Burdens or Latin
intermixtures. As thus,

Puer nobis natus est de Virgin Maria.
Be glad lordynges, be the more or less,
I bring you tidings of gladness MSS. HARL. 5396. fol. 4. fol. 18.
.
The Latin scraps were banished from these jocund hymns, when the Reformation
had established an English liturgy. At length appeared, "Certain of David's
Psalms intended for Christmas Carolls fitted to the most sollempne tunes every
where familiarlie used, by William Slatyer, printed by Robert Young 1630 In
octavo.
."

It was impossible that the Reformation of religion could escape without its
rhyming libels. Accordingly, among others, we have, "An Answer to a papystical
exhortation, pretending to avoid false doctrine, under that color to maintain
the same," printed in 1548, and beginning, Every pilde P^lled, i. e. bald.
pedlar
Will be a medlar.


In the year 1533, a proclamation was promulged, prohibiting evil-disposed
persons to preach, either in public or private, "After their own brain, and by
playing of enterludes, and printing of false fond books, ballades, rhymes, and
other lewd treatyses in the English tongue, concerning doctrines in matters now
in question and controversy, etc FOX, MARTYROLOG. f. 1339. edit. 1576.
." But this popular mode of attack, which all understood, and in which the idle
and unlearned could join, appears to have been more powerful than royal
interdictions and parliamentary censures.

In the year 1540, Thomas lord Cromwell, during the short interval which
Henry's hasty passion for Catharine Howard permitted between his commitment and
execution, was insulted in a ballad written by a defender of the declining
cause of popery, who certainly showed more zeal than courage, in reproaching a
disgraced minister and a dying man. This satire, however unseemly, gave rise to
a religious controversy in verse, which is preserved in the archives of the
antiquarian society.

I find a poem of thirty octave stanzas, printed in 1546, called the DOWFAL OF
ANTICHRISTS MAS, or Mass, in which the nameless satirist is unjustly severe on
the distresses of that ingenious class of mechanics who got their living by
writing and ornamenting service-books for the old papistic worship, now growing
into decay and disuse; insinuating at the same time, in a strain of triumph,
the great blow their craft had received, by the diminution of the number of
churches in the dissolution of the monasteries In a roll of John Morys, warden
of Winchester college, an. xx Ric. ii. A. D. 1397, are large articles of
disbursement for grails, legends, and other service-books for the choir of the
chapel, then just founded. It appears that they bought the parchment; and hired
persons to do the business of writing, illuminating, noting, and binding,
within the walls of the college. As thus. " Item in xi doseyn iiij pellibus
emptis pro i legenda integra, que incipit folio secundo Quia dixerunt,
continente xxxiiij quaterniones, (pret. doseyn iiij s. vi d. pret. pellis iiij
d. ob.) li s. Item in scriptura ejusdem Legende, lxxij s. Et in illuminacione
et ligacione ejusdem, xxx ^. Item in vj doseyn de velym emptis pro factura vj
Processionalium, quorum quilibet continet xv quaterniones, (pret. doseyn iiij
^. vi d) xxvij ^. Et in scrip^ura, notacione, illuminacione, et ligacion^
corundem, xxxiij s." The highest cost of one of these books is, 7l. 13 s.
Vellum, for this purpose, made an article of staurum or store. As, " Item in vj
doseyn de velym emptis in staurum pro aliis libris inde faciendis, xxxiiij s.
xj d." The books were covered with deer-skin. As, " Item in vj p^llibus
cervinis emptis pro libris predictis cooperiendis, xiij s. iiij d." In another
roll (xix Ric. ii. A. D. 1396.) of warden John Morys abovementioned,
disbursements of diet for SCRIPTORES enter into the quarterly account of that
article. "EXPENSE extraneorum superveniencium, iij SCRIPTORUM, viij
serviencium, et x choristarum, ix l. iiij s. x d." The whole diet expenses this
year, for strangers, writers, servants, and choristers, amount to 20l. 19s.
10d. In another roll of 1399, (Rot. Co^p. B^rss. 22 Ric. ii.) writers are in
commons weekly with the regular members of the society.
. It is, however, certain, that this busy and lucrative occupation was
otherwise much injured by the invention and propagation of typography, as
several catholic rituals were printed in England: yet still they continued to
employ writers and illuminators for this purpose. The finest and the latest
specimen of this sort I have seen, is Cardinal Wolsey's LECTIONARY, now
preserved at Christ-church in Oxford, a prodigious folio on vellum, written and
embellished with great splendour and beauty by the most elegant artists, either
for the use of his own private chapel, or for the magnificent chapel which he
had projected for his college, and peculiarly characteristic of that prelate's
predominant ideas of ecclesiastic pomp.

Wynkyn de Word printed a TRETISE OF MERLYN, or his prophesies in verse, in
1529. Another appeared by John Hawkyns, in 1533. Metrical and prosaic
prophesies attributed to the magician Merlin, all originating from Geoffrey of
Monmouth's historical romance, and of oriental growth, are numerous and
various. Merlin's predictions were successively accommodated by the
minstrel-poets to the politics of their own times. There are many among the
Cotton manuscripts, both in French and English, and in other libraries See
Geoffr. Monm. vii. 3. And Rob. Glouc. p. 132. 133. seq. 254. 256. Of the
authority of Merlin's Prophesies in England in 1216, See Wykes's CHRON. sub
ann. Merlin's Prophesies were printed in French at Paris, in 1498. And MERLINI
VITAE ET PROPHETIAE, at Venice, 1554.
. Laurence Minot above cited, who wrote about 1360, and in the northern
dialect, has applied some of them to the numerous victories of Edward the third
MS. GAL^. E. ix. ut supr.
. As thus.

Men may read in Romance In another place Minot calls the book on which his
narrative is founded, the ROMANCE. How Edward, als the Rom^nce sai^s,
Held his sege before Calais.

right,
Of a great clerk that MERLIN hight:
Full many books er of him wreten,
Als their clerks well may witten As scholars well know.
;
And it And yet.
in many prive nokes Privy nooks.

May men find of Merlin books.
Merlin said thus with his his mouth,
Out of the North into the Sowth,
Should cum a Bare Should come a Boar. This Boar is king Arthur in Merlin's
Prophesies.
over the se,
That should make many men to fle;
And in the se, he said, full right,
Should he schew Should he show.
full mekill might:
And in France he should bigin Begin.

To make tham wrath that are their in:
Until the se his tail reche sale His tail shall reach to the sea.
,
All folk of France to mekill bale To the great destruction of the French.
.
Thus have I matter for to make
For a nobill Prince That is, king Edward the third.
sake.
Help me, God, my wit is thin Weak. Tenuis.
,
Now LAURENCE MINOT will bigin.
A Bore is brought on banks bare l,
With full batail bifor his breast,
For John King John.
of France will he noght spare
In Normandy to take his rest. --
At Cressy when tha^ brak the brig Bridge.
,
That saw Edward with both his ine Eyne. Eye^.
;
Than liked him no langer to lig Lie idle.
,
Ilk Inglis man on others rig The English ran over one another. Pressed forward.
;
Over that watir er thai went Fro^ssart calls this the passage or ford of
Blanch taque. B. i. chapter cxxvii. Berners's Transl. fol. lxiii. a.
,
To batail er thai baldly big,
With brade ax Broad^ax. Battle-ax.
, and with bows bent,
With bent bows thai war full bold,
For to fell of Fall upon.
the Frankish men.
Thai gert Cau^ed.
them lig with cares cold.
Full sari Sorry.
was sir Philip Philip of Valois, son of John king of France.
then:
He saw the town of Ferrum Perhaps Vernon.
bren Burn.
,
And folk for ferd war fast fleand Flying for fear.
:
The teres he let full rathly Quickly. Fast, run.
ren
Out of his eghen Eyes.
, I understand.
Than cum Philip, full ready dight,
Toward the town with all his rowt;
With him come mani a kumly knight,
And all umset Beset.
the Boar obout:
The Boar made them full law to lout,
And dealt tham knokkes to their mede Reward.
,
He gert tham stumbell that war stowt.
Thar helpid noather staf ne stead Lance^ and horses were now of no service.
.
Stedes strong bileved still Stood still. Bleve. Sax. Chauc. TR. CR. iv. 1357.

Biside Cressy opon the grene A plain. So in Minot's Siege of Tournay, MSS.
ibid. A Bore with brenis bright
Es brought opon owre grene,
That as a semely s^ht,
With schilterouns fair and sch^n^.

.
Sir Philip wanted all his will
That was well on his sembland Countenance.
seen,
With spear and schelde, and helmis schene Bright helmets.
,
Thai Bare than durst thai noght habide They could no longer withstand the Boar.
.
The king of Beme John king of Bohemia. Ey Froissart he is called inaccurately
the king of Behaigne, or Charles of Luxemburgh. See Froissart, ut supr. fol.
lxiv. b. The lord Charles of Bohemia, ^is son, was also in the battle and
killed, being lately elected emperor. Hollinsh. iii. 372.
was cant and kene Gay. Alert.
,
Bot thaire he left both play and pride.
Pride in prese ne prais I noght I cannot praise the mer^ pomp of royalty.
.
Omong their princes proud in pall,
Princes should be well bithoght Advised. Prepared.

When kings should them tell To.
Counsel call.
The same boar, that is, Edward the third, is introduced by Minot as resisting
the Scottish invasion in 1347, at Nevil's cross near Durham The reader will
recollect, that this versification is in the structure of that of the LIVES OF
THE SAINTS, where two lines are thrown into one. [See supr. Vol. ii. EM. ADD.
at p. 14.] viz. VNDECIM MILLIA VIRGINUM. MSS. Coll. Trin. Oxon. 57.

Ellevene thousand virgins, that fair company was,
Imartird were for godis sone, ich will tell that cas.
A king there was in Bretaygne, Maur was his name,
A douter he had that het Vrse, a maid of guod fame.
So fair woman me nyste non, ne so guod in none point,
Cristene was al hire ken, swithe noble and queynte:
Of hire fairhede and guodnesse me told in each sonde side,
That the word com into Engelonde, and else where wide.
A king there wa^ in Engelonde, man of great power,
Of this maid he herd tell great nobleie far and ner.
The minstrel, who used the perpetual return of a kind of plain chant, made his
pause or close at every hemistic. In the same manner, the verses of the
following poem were divided by the minstrel. MSS. Cott. JUL. V. fol. 175.
Pergamen. [The transcript is not later than the year 1300.]

Als yod on a Monday, by twene Wittingdon and Wall,
Me ane after brade way, a litel man met withalle,
The le^t man that ever sathe, to say owther in boure other in halle,
His robe was another grene ne gray, bot all yt was of rich palle.
On me he called and bade me bide, well still stood ay little space;
Fro Lanchester the Park side, then he come well fair his pace:
I biheld that litell man, by the street al^ we gone gae Went on.
,
His berde was side ay large span, and glided als the fether of pae Hi^ beard
w^^ a sp^n broad, and shone like a peacock'^ plumage.
.
His heved Head.
was white as any snawe, his higehen Eyes.
were great and grai, etc.
His robe was al gold biganne, well cristlik made i undurstande,
Botones asurd everwick ane, from his elbouthe to his hand Buttons, every one
of them azure, from hi^ ^lbow ^o his hand.
.
They enter a castle. The bankers on the binkes lay Cushions, or t^pestry, on
the benche^ laid.
, and fair lords set fond,
In ilk ay hirn herd ay lay, and levedys southe me loud song In every corner I
h^^rd ^ L^y, and l^die^, etc.
.



.

Sir David the Bruise David Bruce, king of Scotland. See P. LANGTOET, p. 116.

Was at distance,
When Edward the baliolfe Warlike.
,
Rade Rode.
with his lance:
The north end of Ingland,
Teached him to dance,
When he was met on the more,
With mekill mischance.
Sir Philip the Valayce,
May him not avance Could do him no service.
,
The flowers that fair were,
Er Are.
fallen in France!
The flowers er now fallen,
That fers Fierce.
were and fell,
A Bare Boar.
with his bataille,
Has done tham to dwell.
Sir David the Bruise,
Said he sulde fond Should attempt.

To ride through all Ingland,
Would he noght wonde Wander in going.
:
At the Westminster Hall,
Sulde his stedes stand,
Whils our king Edward
War out of the land MSS. ut supr. GALB. E. ix.
.
Also in Edward's victory over the Spaniards in a sea fight, in 1350, a part of
Minot's general subject.

I would noght spare for to speak,
Wist I to speed,
Of wight men with wapin Active with weapons.
,
And worthly in wede.
That now are driven to dale Sorrow.
,
And ded all thaire deed,
Thai sail in the sea-gronde Sea-bottom.
,
Fisches for to feed!
Feel Many.
Fisches thai feed,
For all thaire great fare Feasting.
,
It was in the waniand Q. Waning of the Moon?

That thai come their.
Thai sailed forth in the Swin
In a summers tide,
With trompes and taburnes Tambourins. Tabours or drums. In Chaucer we have
TABOURE, Fr. to drum.
,
And mikell other pride MSS. ut supr.
.
I have seen one of Merlin's PROPHESIES, probably translated from the French,
which begins thus.

Listeneth now to Merlin's saw,
And I woll tell to aw All.
,
What he wrat for men to come,
Another by greffe ne by plume I know not when this piece was written. But the
word greffe is old French for Graphium, or Stylus. It is generally supposed,
and it has been positively asserted by an able French antiquary, that the
ancient Roman practice of writing with a style on wa^en tablets, lasted not
longer than the fifth century. Hearne also supposes that the pen had succeeded
to the style long before the age of Alfred. Lel. ITIN. Vol. vii. PREF. p. xxi.
I will produce an instance of this practice in England so late as the year
1395. In an accompt-roll of Winchester college, of that year, is the following
disbursement. "Et in i tabula ceranda cum viridi c^ra pro intitulatione
capellanorum et clericorum Capelle ad missas et alia psallenda, viij d Viz.
"COMPUTUS magistri Johis Morys Custodis a die Sabbati proxime post sestum
Annunciationis beat Mari^ anno regni Regis Ricardi secundi post conquestum
xv^j^^, usque diem Veneris proxime ante ^estum sancti Micha^lls extunc proxime
sequens anno regis predicti xviijvo, vidlt per xxvj septimanas." It is
indorsed, "Computus primus post ingres^um in Colle^ium, Anno octavo post
inceptionem Operis."
." This very curious and remarkable article signifies, that a tablet covered
with green wax was kept in the chapel, for noting down with a style, the
respective courses of daily or weekly portions of duty, alternately assigned to
the officers of the choir. So far, indeed, from having ceased in the fifth
century, it appears that this mode of writing continued throughout all the dark
ages. Among many express proofs that might be produced of the centuries after
that period, Du Cange cites these verses from a French metrical romance,
written about the year 1376. Lat. GLOSS. V. GRAPHIUM See ibid. STYLI^ONU^.
.

Les uns se prennent a ecrire,
Des greffes Styl^^. Lat. Grapbium.
en tables de cire;
Les autres suivent la coustume
De fournir lettres a la plume.
Many ample and authentic records of the royal household of France, of the
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, written on waxen tablets, are still
preserved. Waxen tablets were constantly kept in the French religious houses,
for the same purpose as at Winchester college. Thus in the Ordinary of the
Priour of saint Lo at Rouen, printed at Rouen, written about the year 1250.
"Qui, ad missam, lectiones aut tractus dicturi sunt, in tabula cerea primitus
recitentur." page 261. Even to this day, several of the collegiate bodies in
France, more especially the chapter of the cathedral of Rouen, retain this
usage of marking the successive rotation of the ministers of the choir. See the
Sieur le Brun's VOYAGE LITURGIQUE, 1718. p. 275. The same mode of writing was
used for registering the capitular acts of the monasteries in France. Du Cange,
in reciting from an ancient manuscript the Signs injoined to the monks of the
order of saint Victor at Paris, where the rule of silence was rigorously
observed, gives us, among others, the tacit signals by which they called for
the style and tablet. " Pro SIGNO Grafii. -- Signo metalli praemisso, extenso
pollice cum indice simila [simula] scribentem. Pro SIGNO Tabularum. -- Manus
ambas complica, et ita disjunge quasi aperiens Tabulas." GLOSS. ut supr. V.
SIGNA. tom iii. p. 866. col. 2. edit. vet. Among the implements of writing
allowed to the Carthusians, Tabulae and Graphium are enumerated. Statut. Antiq.
CARTHUSIAN. 2 part. cap. xvi.. 8. This, however, at Winchester college, is the
only express specification which I have found of the practice, in the religious
houses of England But see Wanley's account of the text of S. Chad CATAL. Codd.
Anglo-S^x. p. 289. seq.
. Yet in many of our old col^egiate establishments it seems to be pointed out
by ^mplication: and the article here extracted from the roll at Winchester
college, explains the manner of keeping the following injunction in the
Statutes of saint Elisabeth's college at Winchester, now destroyed, which is a
direction of the same kind, and cannot be well understood without supposing a
waxen tablet. These statutes were given in 1301. "Habeat itaque idem praecentor
unam Tabulam semper in capella appensam, in qua scribat quolib^t die sabbati
post prandium, et ordinet, qualem Missam quis little capellanorum in sequenti
septimana debeat celebrare; quis qualem lectionem in crastino legere debeat; Et
sic de caeteris divinis officiis in praedicta capella faciendis. Et sic cotidie
post prandium ordinet idem praecentor de servicio diei sequentis: hoc
diligentius observando, quod capellani Missam, ad quam die sabbati, ut
praemittitur, intitulantur, per integram celebrent septimanam." Dugd. MONAST.
tom. iii. ECCLES. COLL. i. 10. Nothing could have been a more convenient method
of temporary notation, especially at a time when parchment and paper were
neither cheap nor common commodities, and of carrying on an account, which was
perpetually to be obliterated and renewed: for the written surface of the wax
being easily smoothed by the round or blunt end of the style, was soon again
prepared for the admission of new characters. And among the Romans, the chief
use of the style was for fugitive and occasional entries. In the same light, we
must view the following parallel passage of the Ordination of bishop Wykeham's
sepulchral chantry, founded in Winchester cathedral, in the year 1404. "Die
sabbati cujuslibet septimanae futurae, monachi prioratus nostri in ordine
sacerdotali constituti, valentes et dispositi ad celebrandum, ordinentur et
intitulentur in Tabula seriatim ad celebrandum Missas praedictas cotidie per
septimanam tunc sequentem, etc." B. Lowth's WYKEHAM. Append. p. xxxi. edit.
1777. Without multiplying superfluous citations See Statut. Eccles. Cath.
Lich^. Dugd. MON. iii. p. 244. col. 2. 10. p. 247. col. 2. 20. Statut. Eccle^.
Colleglat^ de Tongue, ibid. ECCLE^. COLL. p. 1^^. col. 2. 40.
, I think we may fairly conclude, that whenever a Tabula pro Clericis
intitulandis occurs in the more ancient rituals of our ecclesiastical
fraternities, a PUGILLARE or waxen tablet, and not a schedule of parchment or
paper, is intended. The inquisitive reader, who wishes to see more foreign
evidences of this mode of writing during the course of the middle ages, is
referred to a Memoir drawn up with great diligence and research by M. L'Abbe
Lebeuf. MEM. LITT. tom. xx. p. 267^ edit. 4to.

The reasonings and conjectures of Wise and others, who have treated of the
Saxon AESTEL, more particularly of those who contend that king Alfred's STYLE
is still in being at Oxford, may perhaps receive elucidation or correction from
what is here casually collected on a subject, which needs and deserves a full
investigation.

To a Note already laboring with its length I have only to add, that without
supposing an allusion to this way of writing, it will be hard to explain the
following lines in Shakespeare's TIMON OF ATHENS, Act i. Sc. i.

-- My free drift
Halts not particularly, but moves itself
"In a wide sea of wax." --
Why Shakespeare should here allude to this peculiar and obsolete fashion of
writing, to express a poet's design of describing general life, will appear, if
we consider the freedom and facility with which it is executed. It is not yet,
I think, discovered, on what original Shakespeare formed this drama.


.
The public pageantries of this reign are proofs of the growing familiarity and
national diffusion of classical learning. I will select an instance, among
others, from the shows exhibited with great magnificence at the coronation of
queen Anne Boleyn, in the year 1533. The procession to Westminster abbey, began
from the Tower; and the queen, in passing through Gracechurch street, was
entertained with a representation of mount Parnassus. The fountain of Helicon,
by a bold fiction unknown to the bards of antiquity, ran in four streams of
Rhenish wine from a basin of white marble. On the summit of the mountain sat
Apollo, and at his feet Calliope. On either side of the declivity were arranged
four of the Muses, playing on their respective musical instruments. Under them
were written epigrams and poesies in golden letters, in which every Muse
praised the queen, according to her character and office. At the Conduit in
Cornhill appeared the three Graces; before whom, with no great propriety, was
the spring of Grace perpetually running wine. But when a conduit came in the
way, a religious allusion was too tempting and obvious to be omitted. Before
the spring, however, ^ate a poet, describing in meter the properties or
functions of every Grace: and then each of these four Graces allotted in a
short speech to the queen, the virtue or accomplishment over which she
severally presided. At the Conduit in Cheapside, as my chronicler says, she was
saluted with "a rich pageaunt full of melody and song." In this pageant were
Pallas, Juno, and Venus: before them stood Mercury, who presented to her
majesty, in the name of the three goddesses, a golden ball or globe divided
into three parts, signifying wisdom, riches, and felicity. At entering saint
Paul's gate, an ancient portal leading into the churchyard on the east, and
long since destroyed, three ladies richly attired showered on her head wafers,
in which were contained Latin distichs. At the eastern side of saint Paul's
Churchyard, two hundred scholars of saint Paul's School, addressed her in
chosen and apposite passages from the Roman poets, translated into English
rhymes. On the leads of saint Martin's church stood a choir of boys and men,
who sung, not spiritual hymns, but new balads in praise of her majesty. On the
conduit without Ludgate, where the arms and angels had been refreshed, was
erected a tower with four turrets, within each of which was placed a Cardinal
Virtue, symbolically habited. Each of these personages in turn uttered an
oration, promising to protect and accompany the queen on all occasions Hall's
CHRONICLE, fol. ccxii. Among the Orations spoken to the Queen, is one too
curious to be omitted. At Leadenhall sat saint Anne with her numerous progeny,
and Mary Cleophas with her four children. One of the children made "a goodly
oration to the queen, of the fruitfulnes of saint Anne, and of her generation;
trusting the like fruit should come of her."
. Here we see the pagan history and mythology predominating in those
spectacles, which were once furnished from the Golden Legend. Instead of
saints, prophets, apostles, and confessors, we have Apollo, Mercury, and the
Muses. Instead of religious canticles, and texts of scripture, which were
usually introduced in the course of these ceremonies, we are entertained with
profane poetry, translations from the classics, and occasional verses; with
exhortations, not delivered by personified doctors of the church, but by the
heathen divinities.

It may not be foreign to our purpose, to give the reader some distinct idea of
the polite amusements of this reign, among which, the Masque, already mentioned
in general terms, seems to have held the first place. It chiefly consisted of
music, dancing, gaming, a banquet, and a display of grotesque personages and
fantastic dresses. The performers, as I have hinted, were often the king, and
the chief of the nobility of both sexes, who under proper disguises executed
some preconcerted strategem, which ended in mirth and good humor. With one of
these shows, in 1530, the king formed a scheme to surprise cardinal Wolsey,
while he was celebrating a splendid banquet at his palace of Whitehall It th^n
belonged to Wolsey.
. At night his majesty in a masque, with twelve more masquers all richly but
strangely dressed, privately landed from Westminster at Whitehall stairs. At
landing, several small pieces of canon were fired, which the king had before
ordered to be placed on the shore near the house. The cardinal, who was
separately seated at the banquet in the presence chamber under the cloth of
state, a great number of ladies and lords being seated at the side-tables, was
alarmed at this sudden and unusual noise: and immediately ordered lord Sandys,
the king's chamberlain, who was one of the guests, and in the secret, to
enquire the reason. Lord Sandys brought answer, that thirteen foreign noblemen
of distinction were just arrived, and were then waiting in the great hall
below; having been drawn thither by the report of the cardinal's magnificent
banquet, and of the beautiful ladies which were present at it. The cardinal
ordered them immediately into the banquetting-room, to which they were
conducted from the hall with twenty new torches and a concert of drums and
fifes. After a proper refreshment, they requested in the French language to
dance with the ladies, whom they kissed, and to play with them at mum-chance A
game of hazard with dic^.
; producing at the same time a great golden cup filled with many hundred
crowns. Having played for sometime with the ladies, they de^ignedly lost all
that remained in the cup to the cardinal; whose sagacity was not easily to be
deceived, and who now began, from some circumstances, to suspect one of them to
be the king. On finding their plot in danger, they answered, "If your grace can
point him out, he will readily discover himself." The cardinal pointed to a
masque with a black beard, but he was mistaken, for it was sir Edward Nevil. At
this, the king could not forbear laughing aloud: and pulling off his own and
sir Edward Nevil's masque, convinced the cardinal, with much arch complaisance,
that he had for once guessed wrong. The king and the masquers then retired into
another apartment to change their apparel: and in the meantime the banquet was
removed, and the table covered afresh with perfumed clothes. Soon afterward
the king, with his company, returned, and took his seat under the cardinal's
canopy of state. Immediately two hundred dishes of the most costly cookery and
confectionary were served up; the contrivance and success of the royal joke
afforded much pleasant conversation, and the night was spent in dancing,
dice-playing, banketting and other triumphs Hollinsh. CHRON. iii. 921. seq.
. The old chronicler Edward Hall, a cotemporary and a curious observer,
acquaints us, that at Greenwich, in 1512, "on the day of the Epiphanie at
night, the king with eleven others was disguised after the manner of Italy,
called a Mask, a thing not seen before in England: they were apparalled in
garments long and broad, wrought all with gold, with visors and caps of gold.
And after the banquet done, these maskers came in, with six gentlemen disguised
in silk, bearing staffe-torches and desired the ladies to danse; some were
content, and some refused; and after they had dansed and communed together, as
the fashion of the mask is, they took their leave and departed, and so did
the queen and all the ladies CHRON. fol. xv. [See supr. Vol. i. p. 239.]
."

I do not find that it was a part of their diversion in these entertainments to
display humor and character. Their chief aim seems to have been, to surprise,
by the ridiculous and exaggerated oddity of the visors, and by the singularity
and splendour of the dresses. Every thing was out of nature and propriety.
Frequently the Masque was attended with an exhibition of some gorgeous
machinery, resembling the wonders of a modern pantomime. For instance, in the
great hall of the palace, the usual place of performance, a vast mountain
covered with tall trees arose suddenly, from whose opening caverns issued
hermits, pilgrims, shepherds, knights, damsels, and gypsies, who being regaled
with spices and wine danced a morisco, or morris-dance. They were then again
received into the mountain, which with a symphony of rebecs and recorders
closed its caverns; and tumbling to pieces, was replaced by a ship in full
sail, or a castle besieged. To be more particular. The following device was
shown in the hall of the palace at Greenwich. A castle was reared, with
numerous towers, gates, and battlements; and furnished with every military
preparation for sustaining a long siege. On the front was inscribed Le
fortress dangereux. From the windows looked out six ladies, clothed in the
richest russet satin, "laid all over with leaves of gold, and every one knit
with laces of blew silk and gold, on their heads coi^s and caps all of gold."
This castle was moved about the hall; and when the queen had viewed it for a
time, the king entered the hall with five knights, in embroidered vestments,
spangled and plated with gold, of the most curious and costly workmanship. They
assaulted the castle; and the six ladies, finding them to be champions of
redoubted prowess, after a parley, yielded their perilous fortress, descended,
and danced with their assailants. The ladies then led the knights into the
castle, which immediately vanished, and the company retired Hollinsh. iii. 812^
. Here we see the representation of an action. But all these magnificent
mummeries, which were their evening-amusements on festivals, notwithstanding a
parley, which my historian calls a communication, is here mentioned, were yet
in dumb show But at a most sumptuous Disguising in 1519, in the hall at
Greenwich, the figure of FAME is introduced, who, "in French, declared the
meaning of the trees, the rock, and turneie." But as this show was a political
compliment, and many foreigners present, an explanation was necessary. See
Hall, CHRON. fol. lxvi. This was in 1512. But in the year 1509, a more rational
evening-amusement took place in the Hall of the old Westminster-palace, several
foreign ambassadors being present. "After supper, his grace [the king] with the
queen, lords, and ladies, came into the White Hall, which was hanged richly;
the hall was scaffolded and railed on all parts. There was an INTERLUDE of the
gentlemen of his chapel before his grace, and diverse fresh songs." Hall,
CHRON. fol. xi. xii. [See supr. ii. 204.]
, and without dialogue.

But toward the latter part of Henry's reign, much of the old cumbersome state
began to be laid aside. This I collect from a set of new regulations given to
the royal household about the year 1526, by cardinal Wolsey. In the Chapter For
keeping the Hall and ordering of the Chapel, it is recited, that by the
frequent intermission and disuse of the solemnities of dining and supping in
the great hall of the palace, the proper officers had almost forgot their duty,
and the manner of conducting that very long and intricate ceremonial. It is
therefore ordered, that when his majesty is not at Westminster, and with regard
to his palaces in the country, the formalities of the Hall, which ought not
entirely to fall into desuetude, shall be at least observed, when he is at
Windsor, Beaulieu, or Newhall A new house built by Henry the eighth. Hollinsh^
CHRON. iii. 852.
, in Essex, Richmond, Hampton Court, Greenwich, Eltham, and Woodstock. And that
at these places only, the whole choir of the chapel shall attend. This attempt
to revive that which had began to cease from the nature of things, and from the
growth of new manners, perhaps had but little or no lasting effect. And with
respect to the Chapel, my record adds, that when the king is on journies or
progresses, only six singing boys and six gentlemen of the choir shall make a
part of the royal retinue; who "daily in absence of the ^esidue of the chapel
shall have a Mass of our Lady bi^ore noon, and on Sondaies and holidaies,
mass of the day besides our Lady-masse, and an anthempne in the afternoon:
for which purpose, no great carriage of either vestiments or books shall
require "ORDENAUNCES made for the kings household and chambres." Bibl. Bodl.
MSS. LAUD. K. 48. fol. It is the original on vellum. In it, Sir Thomas More is
mentioned as Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster.
." Henry never seems to have been so truly happy, as when he was engaged in one
of these progresses: in other words, moving from one seat to another, and
enjoying his ease and amusements in a state of royal relaxation. This we may
collect from a curious passage in Hollinshead; who had pleased and perhaps
informed us less, had he never deserted the dignity of the historian. "From
thence the whole court remooved to Windsor, then beginning his progress, and
exercising himself daily in shooting, singing, dansing, wrestling, casting of
the bar, plaieing at the recorders, flute, virginals, in setting of songs,
and making of ballades. -- And when he came to Oking Woking in Surrey, near
Guildford, a royal seat.
there were kept both justes turneies Chron. iii. 806.
." I make no apology for these seeming digressions. The manners and the poetry
of a country are so nearly connected, that they mutually throw light on each
other.

The same connection subsists between the state of poetry and of the arts; to
which we may now recall the reader's attention with as little violation of our
general subject.

We are taught in the mythology of the ancients, that the three Graces were
produced at a birth. The meaning of the fable is, that the three most beautiful
imitative arts were born and grew up together. Our poetry now beginning to be
divested of its monastic barbarism, and to advance toward elegance, was
accompanied by proportionable improvements in Painting and Music. Henry
employed many capital painters, and endeavored to invite Raphael and Titian
into England. Instead of allegorical tapestry, many of the royal apartments
were adorned with historical pictures. Our familiarity with the manners of
Italy, and affectation of Italian accomplishments, influenced the tones and
enriched the modulation of our musical composition. Those who could read the
sonnets of Petrarch must have relished the airs of Palestrina. At the same
time, Architecture, like Milton's lion pawing to get free, made frequent
efforts to disentangle itself from the massy encumbrances of the Gothic manner;
and began to catch the correct graces, and to copy the true magnificence, of
the Grecian and Roman models. Henry was himself a great builder; and his
numerous edifices, although constructed altogether on the ancient system, are
sometimes interspersed with chaste ornaments and graceful mouldings, and often
marked with a legitimacy of proportion, and a purity of design, before
unattempted. It was among the literary plans of Leland, one of the most
classical scholars of this age, to write an account of Henry's palaces, in
imitation of Procopius, who is said to have described the palaces of the
emperor Justinian. Frequent symptoms appeared, that perfection in every work of
taste was at no great distance. Those clouds of ignorance which yet remained,
began now to be illuminated by the approach of the dawn of truth.

SECT. XXVII.
THE reformation of our church produced an alteration for a time in the general
system of study, and changed the character and subjects of our poetry. Every
mind, both learned and unlearned, was busied in religious speculation; and
every pen was employed in recommending, illustrating, and familiarising the
Bible, which was now laid open to the people.

The poetical annals of king Edward the sixth, who removed those chains of
bigottry which his brother Henry had only loosened, are marked with metrical
translations of various parts of the sacred scripture. Of these the chief is
the versification of the Psalter by Sternhold and Hopkins: a performance, which
has acquired an importance, and consequently claims a place in our series, not
so much from any merit of its own, as from the circumstances with which it is
connected.

It is extraordinary, that the protestant churches should be indebted to a
country in which the reformation had never begun to make any progress, and even
to the indulgence of a society which remains to this day the grand bulwark of
the catholic theology, for a very distinguishing and essential part of their
ritual.

About the year 1540, Clement Marot, a valet of the bedchamber to king Francis
the first, was the favorite poet of France. This writer, having attained an
unusual elegance and facility of style, added many new embellishments to the
rude state of the French poetry. It is not the least of his praises, that La
Fontaine used to call him his master. He was the inventor of the rondeau, and
the restorer of the madrigal: but he became chiefly eminent for his pastorals,
ballads, fables, elegies, epigrams, and translations from Ovid and Petrarch. At
length, being tired of the vanities of profane poetry, or rather privately
tinctured with the principles of Lutheranism, he attempted, with the assistance
of his friend Theodore Beza, and by the encouragement of the professor of
Hebrew in the university of Paris, a version of David's Psalms into French
rhymes. This translation, which did not aim at any innovation in the public
worship, and which received the sanction of the Sorbonne as containing nothing
contrary to sound doctrine, he dedicated to his master Francis the first, and
to the Ladies of France. In the dedication to the Ladies or les Dames de
France, whom he had often before addressed in the tenderest strains of passion
or compliment, he seems anxious to deprecate the raillery which the new tone of
his versification was likely to incur, and is embarrassed how to find an
apology for turning saint. Conscious of his apostasy from the levities of life,
in a spirit of religious gallantry, he declares that his design is to add to
the happiness of his fair readers, by substituting divine hymns in the place of
chansons d' amor, to inspire their susceptible hearts with a passion in which
there is no torment, to banish that fickle and fantastic deity CUPID from the
world, and to fill their apartments with the praises, not of the little god,
but of the true Jehovah.

E voz doigts sur les espinettes
Pour dire SAINTS CHANSONETTES.
He adds, that the golden age would now be restored, when we should see, the
peasant at his plough, the carman in the streets, and the mechanic in his shop,
solacing their toils with psalms and canticles: and the shepherd and
sheperdess, reposing in the shade, and teaching the rocks to echo the name of
the Creator.

Le Laboureur a sa charrue,
Le Charretier parmy le rue,
Et l'Artisan a en sa boutique,
Avecques un PSEAUME ou CANTIQUE,
En son labor se soulager.
Heureux qui orra le Berger
Et la Begere au bois estans,
Fair que rochers et estangs,
Apres eux chantant la hauteur
Du saint nom de createur Les OEVVRE^ de Clement Marot de Cahors, valet de
chamber du roy, etc. A Lion, 1551. 12mo. See ad calc. TRADUCTIONS, etc. p. 192.
.
Marot's Psalms soon eclipsed the brilliancy of his madrigals and sonnets. Not
suspecting how prejudicial the predominant rage of psalm-singing might prove to
the ancient religion of Europe, the catholics themselves adopted these sacred
songs as serious ballads, and as a more rational species of domestic merriment.
Thy were the common accompaniments of the fiddle. They were sold so rapidly,
that the printers could not supply the public with copies. In the festive and
splendid court of Francis the first, of a sudden nothing was heard but the
psalms of Clement Marot. By each of the royal family and the principal nobility
of the court a psalm was chosen, and fitted to the ballad-tune which each liked
best. The dauphin prince Henry, who delighted in hunting, was fond of Ainsi
qu'on oit le cerf bruire, or, Like as the Heart desires the waterbrooks, which
he constantly sung in going out to the chase. Madame de Valentinois, between
whom and the young prince there was an attachment, took Du fond de ma pensee,
or, From the depth of my heart, O Lord. The queen's favorite was, Ne uveilles
pas, O Sire, that is, O Lord, rebuke me not in thine indignation, which she
sung to a fashionable jig. Antony king of Navarre sung, Revenge moy, pren le
querelle, or, Stand up, O Lord, to revenge my quarrel, to the air of a dance of
Poitou See Bayle'^ DICT. V. MAROT.
. It was on very different principles that psalmody flourished in the gloomy
court of Cromwell. This fashion does not seem in the least to have diminished
the gaiety and good humor of the court of Francis.

At this period John Calvin, in opposition to the discipline and doctrines of
Rome, was framing his novel church at Geneva: in which the whole substance and
form of divine worship was reduced to praying, preaching, and singing. In the
last of these three, he chose to depart widely from the catholic usage: and,
either because he thought that novelty was sure to succeed, that the practice
of antiphonal chanting was superstitious, or that the people were excluded from
bearing a part in the more solemn and elaborate performance of ecclesiastical
music, or that the old papistic hymns were unedifying, or that verse was better
remembered than prose, he projected, with the advice of Luther, a species of
religious song, consisting of portions of the psalms intelligibly translated
into the vernacular language, and adapted to plain and easy melodies, which all
might learn, and in which all might join. This scheme, either by design or
accident, was luckily seconded by the publication of Marot's metrical psalms at
Paris, which Calvin immediately introduced into his congregation at Geneva.
Being set to simple and almost monotonous notes by Guillaume de Franc, they
were soon established as the principal branch in that reformer's new devotion,
and became a characteristical mark or badge of the Calvinistic worship and
profession. Nor were they sung only in his churches. They exhilarated the
convivial assemblies of the Calvinists, were commonly heard in the streets, and
accompanied the labors of the artificer. The weavers and woollen manufacturers
of Flanders, many of whom left the loom and entered into the ministry, are said
to have been the capital performers into this science. At length Marot's psalms
formed an appendix to the catechism of Geneva, and were interdicted to the
catholics under the most severe penalties. In the language of the orthodox,
psalm-singing and heresy were synonimous terms.

It was Calvin's system of reformation, not only to strip religion of its
superstitious and ostensible pageantries, of crucifixes, images, tapers, superb
vestments, and splendid processions, but of all that was estimable in the sight
of the people, and even of every simple ornament, every significant symbol, and
decent ceremony; in a word, to banish every thing from his church which
attracted or employed the senses, or which might tend to mar the purity of an
abstracted adoration, and of a mental intercourse with the deity. It is hard to
determine, how Calvin could reconcile the use of singing, even when purged from
the corruptions and abuses of popery, to so philosophical a plan of worship. On
a parallel principle, and if any artificial aids to devotion were to be
allowed, he might at least have retained the use of pictures in the church. But
a new sect always draws its converts from the multitude and the meanest of the
people, who can have no relish for the more elegant externals. Calvin well knew
that the manufacturers of Germany were no judges of pictures. At the same time
it was necessary that his congregation should be kept in good humor by some
kind of pleasurable gratification and allurement, which might qualify and
enliven the attendance on the more rigid duties of praying and preaching.
Calvin therefore, intent as he was to form a new church on a severe model, had
yet too much sagacity to exclude every auxiliary to devotion. Under this idea,
he permitted an exercise, which might engage the affections, without violating
the simplicity of his worship: and sensible that his chief resources were in
the rabble of a republic, and availing himself of that natural propensity which
prompts even vulgar minds to express their more animated feelings in rhyme and
music, he conceived a mode of universal psalmody, not too refined for common
capacities, and fitted to please the populace. The rapid propagation of
Calvin's religion, and his numerous proselytes, are a strong proof of his
address in planning such a sort of service. France and Germany were instantly
infatuated with a love of psalmsinging: which being admirably calculated to
kindle and diffuse the flame of fanaticism, was peculiarly serviceable to the
purposes of faction, and frequently served as the trumpet to rebellion. These
energetic hymns of Geneva, under the conduct of the Calvinistic preachers,
excited and supported a variety of popular insurrections; they filled the most
flourishing cities of the Low Countries with sedition and tumult, and fomented
the fury which defaced many of the most beautiful and venerable churches of
Flanders.

This infectious frenzy of sacred song soon reached England, at the very
critical point of time, when it had just embraced the reformation: and the new
psalmody was obtruded on the new English liturgy by some few officious zealots,
who favored the discipline of Geneva, and who wished to abolish, not only the
choral mode of worship in general, but more particularly to suppress the TE
DEUM, BENEDICTUS, MAGNIFICAT, JUBILATE, NUNC DIMITTIS, and the rest of the
liturgic hymns, which were supposed to be contaminated by their long and
ancient connection with the Roman missal, or at least in their prosaic form, to
be unsuitable to the new system of worship.

Although Wyat and Surrey had before made translations of the Psalms into
meter, Thomas Sternhold was the first whose metrical version of the Psalms was
used in the church of England. Sternhold was a native of Hampshire, and
probably educated at Winchester college. Having passed some time at Oxford, he
became groom of the robes to king Henry the eighth. In this department, either
his diligent services or his knack at rhyming so pleased the king, that his
majesty bequeathed him a legacy of one hundred marks. He continued in the same
office under Edward the sixth, and is said to have acquired some degree of
reputation about the court for his poetry. Being of a serious disposition, and
an enthusiast to reformation, he was much offended at the lascivious ballads
which prevailed among the courtiers: and, with a laudable design to check these
indecencies, undertook a metrical version of the Psalter, "thinking thereby,
says Antony Wood, that the courtiers would sing them instead of their sonnets,
but did not, only some few excepted ATH. Oxon. i. 76.
." Here was the zeal, if not the success, of his fellow labourer Clement Marot.
A singular coincidence of circumstances is, notwithstanding, to be remarked on
this occasion. Vernacular versions for general use of the Psalter were first
published both in France and England, by laymen, by court-poets, and by
servants of the court. Nor were the respective translations entirely completed
by themselves: and yet they translated nearly an equal number of psalms, Marot
having versified fifty, and Sternhold fifty-one. Sternhold died in the year
1549. His fifty-one psalms were printed the same year by Edward Whitchurch,
under the following title. "All such Psalms of David as Thomas Sternholde late
grome of the kings Maiestyes robes did in his ly^e time draw into English
meter." They are without the musical notes, as is the second edition in 1552.
He probably lived to prepare the first edition for the press, as it is
dedicated by himself to king Edward the sixth.

Cotemporary with Sternhold, and his coadjutor, was John Hopkins: of whose life
nothing more is known, than that he was a clergyman and a schoolmaster of
Suffolk, and perhaps a graduate at Oxford about the year 1544. Of his abilities
as a teacher of the classics, he has left a specimen in some Latin stanzas
prefixed to FOX'S MARTYROLOGY. He is rather a better English poet than
Sternhold; and translated fifty eight of the psalms, distinguished by the
initials of his name.

Of the rest of the contributors to this undertaking, the chief, at least in
point of rank and learning, was William Whyttingham, promoted by Robert earl of
Leicester to the deanery of Durham, yet not without a strong reluctance to
comply with the use of the canonical habiliments. Among our religious exiles in
the reign of Mary, he was Calvin's principal favorite, from whom he received
ordination. So pure was his faith, that he was thought worthy to succeed to the
congregation of Geneva, superintended by Knox, the Scotch reformer; who, from a
detestation of idols, proceeded to demolish the churches in which they were
contained. It was one of the natural consequences of Whyttingham's translation
from Knox's pastorship at Geneva to an English deanery, that he destroyed or
removed many beautiful and harmless monuments of ancient art in his cathedral.
To a man, who had so highly spiritualised his religious conceptions, as to be
convinced that a field, a street, or a barn, were fully sufficient for all the
operations of christian worship, the venerable structures raised by the
magnificent piety of our ancestors could convey no ideas of solemnity, and had
no other charms than their ample endowments. Beside the psalms he translated
Among them is the hundredth, and the hundred and nineteenth.
, all which bear his initials, by way of innovating still further on our
established formularly, he versified the Decalogue, the Nicene, Apostolic, and
Athanasian Creeds, the Lord's Prayer, the TE DEUM, the Song of the three
Children, with other hymns which follow the book of psalmody. How the Ten
Commandments and the Athanasian Creed, to say nothing of some of the rest,
should become more edifying and better suited to common use, or how they could
receive improvement in any respect or degree, by being reduced into rhym^, it
is not easy to perceive. But the real design was, to render that more tolerable
which could not be entirely removed, to accommodate every part of the service
to the psalmodic tone, and to clothe our whole liturgy in the garb of Geneva.
All these, for he was a lover of music, were sung in Whyttingham's church of
Durham under his own directions. Heylin says, that from vicinity of situation,
he was enabled to lend considerable assistance to his friend Knox in the
introduction of the presbyterian hierarchy into Scotland. I must indulge the
reader with a stanza or two of this dignified fanatic's divine poetry from his
Creeds and the Decalogue. From the Athanasian Creed.

The Father God is, God the Son,
God Holy Ghost also,
Yet are there not three Gods in all
But one God and no m^.
From the Apostolic Creed.

From thence shall he come for to judge,
All men both dead and quick;
I in the holy ghost believe,
And church that is catholic.
The Ten Commandments are thus closed.

Nor his manservant, nor his maid,
Nor ox, nor ass of his;
Nor any other thing that to
Thy neighbor proper is.
These were also versified by Clement Marot.

Twenty-seven of the psalms were turned into meter by Thomas Norton Marked N.
, who perhaps was better employed, at least as a poet, in writing the tragedy
of GORDOBUCKE in conjunction with lord Buckhurst. It is certain that in
Norton's psalms we see none of those sublime strokes which sir Philip Sydney
discovered in that venerable drama. He was of Sharpenhoe in Bedfordshire, a
barrister, and in the opinion and phraseology of the Oxford biographer, a bold
and busy Calvinist about the beginning of the reign of queen Elisabeth. He was
patronised by the Protector Somerset; at whose desire he translated an epistle
addressed by Peter Martyr to Somerset, into English, in 1550. Under the same
patronage he probably tran^lated also Calvin's Institutes.

Robert Wisdom, a protestant fugitive in the calamitous reign of queen Mary,
afterward archdeacon of Ely, and who had been nominated to an Irish bishopric
by king Edward the sixth, rendered the twenty-fifth psalm of this version See
Strype's CRANMER, p. 274. 276. ^77. PSALMS 70, 104, 112, 122, 125, and 134, are
marked with W. K. PSALM 136, with T. C. It is not known to whom these initials
belong.
. But he is chiefly memorable for his metrical prayer, intended to be sung in
the church, against the Pope and the Turk, of whom he seems to have conceived
the most alarming apprehensions. It is probable, that he thought popery and
mahometanism were equally dangerous to christianity, at least the most powerful
and the sole enemies of our religion. This is the first stanza.

Preserve us, Lord, by thy dear word,
From POPE and TURK defend us, Lord!
Which both would thrust out of thy throne
Our Lord Jesus Christ, thy dear son!
Happily we have hitherto survived these two formidable evils! Among other
orthodox wits, the facetious bishop Corbet has ridiculed these lines. He
supposes himself seized with a sudden impulse to hear or to pen a puritanical
hymn, and invokes the ghost of Robert Wisdom, as the most skilful poet in this
mode of composition, to come and assist. But he advises Wisdom to steal back
again to his tomb, which was in Carfax church at Oxford, silent and
unperceived, for fear of being detected and intercepted by the Pope or the
Turk. But I will produce Corbet's epigram, more especially as it contains a
criticism written in the reign of Charles the first, on the style of this sort
of poetry.

TO THE GHOST OF ROBERT WISDOM.
Thou once a body, now but air,
Arch-botcher of a psalm or prayer,
From Carfax come!
And patch us up a zealous lay,
With an old ever and for ay,
Or all and some.
Or such a spirit lend me,
As may a hymn down send me
To purge my brain:
But, Robert, look behind thee,
Lest TURK or POPE do find thee,
And go to bed again POEMS, Land. 1647. duod. p. 49.
.
The entire version of the psalter was at length published by John Day, in
1562, attached for the first time to the common prayer, and entitled, "The
whole Book of Psalms collected into English meter by T. Sternhold, J.
Hopkins, and others, conferred with the Ebrue, with apt Notes to ^ing them
withal." Calvin's music was intended to correspond with the general
parsimonious spirit of his worship: not to captivate the passions, and seduce
the mind, by a levity, a variety, or a richness of modulation, but to infuse
the more sober and unravishing ecstasies. The music he permitted, although
sometimes it had wonderful effects, was to be without grace, elegance, or
elevation. These apt notes were about forty tunes, of one part only, and in one
unisonous key; remarkable for a certain uniform strain of sombrous gravity, and
applicable to all the psalms in their turns, as the stanza and sense might
allow. They also appear in the subsequent impressions, particularly of 1564,
and 1577. They are believed to contain some of the original melodies, composed
by French and German musicians. Many of them, particularly the celebrated one
of the hundredth psalm, are the tunes of Goudimel and Le Jeune, who are among
the first composers of Marot's French psalms See this matte^ traced with great
skill and accuracy by Hawkins, HIST. MUS. iii. 518.
. Not a few were probably imported by the protestant manufacturers of cloth, of
Flanders, and the Low Countries, who fled into England from the persecution of
the Duke de Alva, and settled in those counties where their art now chiefly
flourishes. It is not however unlikely, that some of our own musicians, who
lived about the year 1562, and who could always tune their harps to the
religion of the times, such as Marbeck, Tallis, Tie, Parsons, and Monday, were
employed on this occasion; yet under the restriction of conforming to the
jejune and unadorned movements of the foreign composers. I ^resume much of the
primitive harmony of all these ancient tunes is now lost, by additions,
variations, and transpositions.

This version is said to be conferred with the Ebrue. But I am inclined to
think, that the translation was altogether made from the vulgate text, either
in Latin or English.

It is evident that the prose psalms of our liturgy were chiefly consulted and
copied, by the perpetual assumption of their words and combinations: many of
the stanza^ are literally nothing more than the prose-verses put into rhyme. As
thus,

Thus were they stained with the works
Of their own filthy way;
And with their own inve^tions did
A whoring go astray PSALM cvi. 38.
.
Whyttingham however, who had traveled to acquire the literature then taught
in the foreign universities, and who joined in the translation of Coverdale's
Bible, was undoubtedly a scholar, and an adept in the Hebrew language.

It is certain that every attempt to clothe the sacred Scripture in verse, will
have the effect of misrepresenting and debasing the dignity of the original.
But this general inconvenience, arising from the nature of things, was not the
only difficulty which our versifiers of the psalter had to encounter, in common
with all other writers employed in a similar task. Allowing for the state of
our language in the middle of the sixteenth century, they appear to have been
but little qualified either by genius or accomplishments for poetical
composition. It is for this reason that they have produced a translation
entirely destitute of elegance, spirit, and propriety. The truth is, that they
undertook this work, not so much from an ambition of literary fame, or a
consciousness of abilities, as from motives of piety, and in compliance with
the cast of the times. I presume I am communicating no very new criticism when
I observe, that in every part of this translation we are disgusted with a
languor of versification, and a want of common prosody. The most exalted
effusions of thanksgiving, and the most sublime imageries of the divine
majesty, are lowered by a coldness of conception, weakened by frigid
interpolations, and disfigured by a poverty of phraseology. Thomas Hopkins
expostulates with the deity in these ludicrous, at least trivial, expressions.

Why do withdraw thy hand aback,
And hide it in thy lap?
O pluck it out, and be not slack
To give thy foes a rappe Ps. lxxiv. 12. Perhaps this verse is not much
improved in the translation of king James the first, who seems to have rested
entirely on the image of why withdrawe^t thou not thine hand, which he has
expressed in Hopkins's manner. Why do thou thus withdraw thy hand,
Even thy right hand restrain?
Out of thy bosom, for our good,
Draw back the same again!
In another stanza he has preserved Hopkins's rhymes and expletives, and, if
possible, lowered his language and cadences. Ps. lxxiv. 1. Oh why, our God, for
ev^rmore
Have thou neglected us?
Why smoaks thy wrath against the sheep
Of thine own pasture thus?
Here he has chiefly displayed the smoking of God's wrath, which kindles in
Hopkins. The particle thus was never so distinguished and dignified. And it is
hard to say, why his majesty should choose to make the divine indignation smoke,
rather than burn, which is suggested by the original.
!
What writer who wished to diminish the might of the supreme Being, and to
expose the style and sentiments of Scripture, could have done it more
skilfully, than by making David call upon God, not to consume his enemies by an
irresistible blow, but to give them a rap? Although some shadow of an apology
may be suggested for the word rap, that it had not then acquired its present
burlesque acceptance, or the idea of a petty stroke, the vulgarity of the
following phrase, in which the practice or profession of religion, or more
particularly God's covenant with the Jews, is degraded to a trade, cannot
easily be vindicated on any consideration of the fluctuating sense of words.
For why, their hearts were nothing bent
To him, nor to his trade Ps^ lxviii. 37.
.
Nor is there greater delicacy or consistency in the following stanza.

Confound them that apply
And seek to work my shame;
And at my harm do laugh, and cry,
So, So, there goes the game Ps^ lxx. 3.
.
The psalmist says, that God has placed the sun in the heavens, "which comes
forth as a bridegroom out of his chamber." Here is a comparison of the sun
rising, to a bridegroom; who, according to the Jewish custom, was ushered from
his chamber at midnight, with great state, preceded by torches and music.
Sternhold has thus metrified the passage Ps. xix. 4.
.

In them the Lord made for the sun,
A place of great renown,
Who like a bridegroom ready trimmed
Does from his chamber come.
The translator had better have spared his epithet to the bridegroom; which,
even in the sense of ready-dressed, is derogatory to the idea of the
comparison. But ready-trimm'd, in the language of that time, was nothing more
than fresh-shaved. Sternhold as often impairs a splendid description by an
impotent redundancy, as by an omission or contraction of the most important
circumstances.

The miraculous march of Jehovah before the Israelites through the wilderness
in their departure from Egypt, with other marks of his omnipotence, is thus
imaged by the inspired psalmist. "O God, when thou wentest forth before the
people, when thou wentest through the wilderness: the earth shook, and the
heavens dropped at the presence of God; even as Sinai also was moved at the
presence of God, who is the God of Israel. Thou, O God, sentedst a gracious
rain upon thine inheritance, and refreshedst it when it was weary. -- The
chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of angels; and the Lord is
among them, as in the holy place of Sinai." Sternhold has thus represented
these great ideas.

When thou did march before thy folk
The Egyptians from among,
And brought them from the wilderness,
Which was both wide and long:
The earth did quake, the rain pourde down,
Heard were great claps of thunder;
The mount Sinai shook in such sort,
As it would cleave in sunder.
Thy heritage with drops of rain
Abundantly was washed,
And if so be it barren was,
By thee it was refresht.
God's army is two millions,
Of warriors good and strong,
The Lord also in Sinai
Is present them among Ps. lxviii. 7. seq.
.
If there be here any merit, it arises solely from preserving the expressions
of the prose version. And the translator would have done better had he
preserved more, and had given us no feeble or foreign enlargements of his own.
He has shown no independent skill or energy. When once he attempts to add or
dilate, his weakness appears. It is this circumstance alone, which supports the
two following well-known stanzas Ps. xviii. 9. 10.
.

The Lord descended from above,
And bowde the heavens high;
And underneath his feet he cast
The darkness of the sky.
On Cherubs and on Cherubims
Full royally he rode;
And on the wings of all the winds
Came flying all abroad.
Almost the entire contexture of the prose is here literally transferred,
unbroken and without transposition, allowing for the small deviations
necessarily occasioned by the meter and rhyme. It may be said, that the
translator has testified his judgment in retaining so much of the original, and
proved he was sensible the passage needed not any adventitious ornament. But
what may seem here to be judgment or even taste, I fear, was want of expression
in himself. He only adopted what was almost ready done to his hand.

To the disgrace of sacred music, sacred poetry, and our established worship,
these psalms still continue to be sung in the church of England. It is certain,
had they been more poetically translated, they would not have been acceptable
to the common people. Yet however they may be allowed to serve the purposes of
private edification, in administering spiritual consolation to the manufacturer
and mechanic, as they are extrinsic to the frame of our liturgy, and
incompatible with the genius of our service, there is perhaps no impropriety in
wishing, that they were remitted and restrained to that church in which they
sprung, and with whose character and constitution they seem so aptly to
correspond. Whatever estimation in point of composition they might have
attracted at their first appearance in a ruder age, and however instrumental
they might have been at the infancy of the reformation in weaning the minds of
men from the papistic ritual, all these considerations can now no longer
support even a specious argument for their being retained. From the
circumstances of the times, and the growing refinements of literature, of
course they become obsolete and contemptible. A work grave, serious, and even
respectable for its poetry, in the reign of Edward the sixth, at length in a
cultivated age, has contracted the air of an absolute travestie. Voltaire
observes, that in proportion as good taste improved, the psalms of Clement
Marot inspired only disgust: and that although they charmed the court of
Francis the first, they seemed only to be calculated for the populace in the
reign of Lewis the fourteenth HIST. MOD. chapter ccvii.
.

To obviate these objections, attempts have been made from time to time to
modernise this ancient metrical version, and to render it more tolerable and
intelligible by the substitution of more familiar modes of diction. But, to say
nothing of the unskilfulness with which these arbitrary corrections have been
conducted, by changing obsolete for known words, the texture and integrity of
the original style, such as it was, has been destroyed: and many stanzas,
before too naked and weak, like a plain old Gothic edifice stripped of its few
signatures of antiquity, have lost that little and almost only strength and
support which they derived from ancient phrases. Such alterations, even if
executed with prudence and judgment, only corrupt what they endeavor to
explain; and exhibit a motley performance, belonging to no character of
writing, and which contains more improprieties than those which it professes to
remove. Hearne is highly offended at these unwarrantable and incongruous
emendations, which he pronounces to be abominable in any book, "much more in a
sacred work;" and is confident, that were Sternhold and Hopkins "now living,
they would be so far from owning what is ascribed to them, that they would
proceed against the innovators as CHEATS GLOSS. ROB. GL. p. 699.
." It is certain, that this translation in its genuine and unsophisticated
state, by ascertaining the signification of many radical words now perhaps
undeservedly disused, and by displaying original modes of the English language,
may justly be deemed no inconsiderable monument of our ancient literature, if
not of our ancient poetry. In condemning the practice of adulterating this
primitive version, I would not be understood to recommend another in its place,
entirely new. I reprobate any version at all, more especially if intended for
the use of the church.

In the mean time, not to insist any longer on the incompatibility of these
metrical psalms with the spirit of our liturgy, and the barbarism of their
style, it should b^ remembered, that they were never admitted into our church
by lawful authority. They were first introduced by the puritans, and afterward
continued by connivance. But they never received any royal approbation or
parlia^entary sanction, notwithstanding it is said in their title page, that
they are "set forth and ALLOWED to be sung in all churches of all the people
together before and after evening prayer, and also before and after sermons:
and moreover in private houses for their godly solace and comfort, laying apart
all ungodly songs and ballads, which tend only to the nourishing of vice and
the corrupting of youth." At the beginning of the reign of queen Elisabeth,
when our ecclesiastical reformation began to be placed on a solid and durable
establishment, those English divines who had fled from the superstitions of
queen Mary to Franckfort and Geneva, where they had learned to embrace the
opposite extreme, and where, from an abhorrence of catholic ceremonies, they
had contracted a dislike to the decent appendages of divine worship,
endeavored, in conjunction with some of the principal courtiers, to effect an
abrogation of our solemn church service, which they pronounced to be
antichristian and unevangelical. They contended that the metrical psalms of
David, set to plain and popular music, were more suitable to the simplicity of
the gospel, and abundantly adequate to all the purposes of edification: and
this proposal they rested on the authority and practice of Calvin, between whom
and the church of England the breach was not then so wide as at present. But
the queen and those bishops to whom she had delegated the business of
supervising the liturgy, among which was the learned and liberal archbishop
Parker, objected, that too much attention had already been paid to the German
theology. She declared, that the foreign reformers had before interpo^ed, on
^imilar deliberations, with unbecoming forwardness: and that the Common Prayer
of her brother Edward had been once altered, to quiet the scruples, and to
gratify the cavils, of Calvin, Bucer, and Fagius. She was therefore invariably
determined to make no more concessions to the importunate partisans of Geneva,
and peremptorily decreed that the choral formalities should still be continued
in the celebration of the sacred offices See CANONS and INJUNCTIONS, A. D.
1559. NUMBER. xlix.
.

SECT. XXVIII.
THE spirit of versifying the psalms, and other parts of the Bible, at the
beginning of the reformation, was almost as epidemic as psalm-singing. William
Hunnis, a gentleman of the chapel under Edward the sixth, and afterward
chapel-master to queen Elisabeth, rendered into rhyme many select psalms, which
had not the good fortune to be rescued from oblivion by being incorporated into
Hopkins's collection, nor to be sung in the royal chapel. They were printed in
1550, with this title, "Certain Psalms chosen out of the Psalter of David,
and drawn forth into Englysh meter by William Hunnis servant to the right
honorable sir William Harberd knight. Newly collected and imprinted I have
also seen Hunnis's "Abridgement or brief meditation on certain of the Psalms
in English meter," printed by R. Wier, 4to.
."

I know not if among these are his SEVEN SOBS of a sorrowful soul for s^^,
comprehending the SEVEN PENITENTIAL PSALMS in meter. They are dedicated to
Frances countess of Sussex, whose attachment to the gospel he much extols, and
who was afterward the foundress of Sydney college in Cambridge. Hunnis also,
under the happy title of a HANDFUL OF HONEYSUCKLES, published Blessings out of
Deuteronomie, Prayers to Christ, Athanasius's Creed, and Meditations, in meter
with musical notes. But his spiritual nosegays are numerous. To say nothing of
his RECREATIONS on Adam's banishment, Christ his Cribb, and the Lost Sheep, he
translated into English rhyme the whole book of GENESIS, which he calls a HIVE
FULL OF HONEY Printed by T. Marshe, 1578. 4to.
. But his honey-suckles and his honey are now no longer delicious. He was a
large contributor to the PARADISE OF DAINTY DEVISES, of which more will be said
in its place. In the year 1550, were also published by John Hall, or Hawle, a
surgeon or physician of Maidstone in Kent, and author of many tracts in his
profession, "Certain chapters taken out of the proverbes of Solomon, with
other chapters of the holy Scripture, and certain Psalms of David translated
into English meter by John Hall There is an edition i^ quarto dedicated to king
Edward the sixth with this title, "The Psalms of David translated into English
meter by T. Sternhold, sir T. Wyat, and William Hunnis, with certain chapters
of the Proverbes and select Psalms by John Hall." I think I have seen a book by
Hall called the COURT OF VIRTUE, containing some or all of these sacred songs,
with notes, 1565. 8vo. He has a copy of verses prefixed to Gale's ENCHI^IDION
OF SU^GERY, Land. 1563. See John Reade's Preface to his translation of F.
Arcaeus's ANATOMY.
." By the remainder of the title it appears, that the proverbs had been in a
former impression unfairly attributed to Thomas Sternhold. The other chapters
of Scripture are from Ecclesiasticus and saint Paul's Epistles. We must not
confound this John Hall with his cotemporary Eliseus Hall, who pretended to be
a missionary from heaven to the queen, prophesied in the streets, and wrote a
set of metrical visions Strype, ANN. i. p. 291. chapter xxv. ed. 1725.
. Meter was now become the vehicle of enthusiasm, and the puritans seem to have
appropriated it to themselves, in opposition to our service, which was in prose.

William Baldwyn, of whom more will be said when we come to the MIRROR OF
MAGISTRATES, published a Phraselike declaration in English meeter on the
CANTICLES or SONGS OF SOLOMON, in 1549. It is dedicated to Edward the sixth In
quarto. I have seen also "The Ballads or Canticles of Solomon in Prose and
Verse." Without date, or name of printer or author.
. Nineteen of the psalms in rhyme are extant by Francis Seagar, printed by
William Seres in 1553, with musical notes, and dedicated to lord Russel At the
end is a poem entitled, "A Description of the Life of Man, the World and
Vanities ^hereof." Princ. "Who on earth can justly rejoice."
.

Archbishop Parker also versified the psalter; not from any opposition to our
liturgy, but, either for the private amusement and exercise of his religious
exile, or that the people, whose predilection for psalmody could not be
suppressed, might at least be furnished with a rational and proper translation.
It was finished in 1557. And a few years afterward printed by Day, the
archbishop's printer, in quarto, with this title, "The whole Psalter translated
into English meter, which contains an hundredth and fifty psalms. The first
Quinquagene The second quinquagene follows, fol. 146. The third and last, fol.
280.
. Quoniam omnis terrae deus, psallite sapienter. Ps. 14. 47. Imprinted at
London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate beneath Saint Martyn's. Cum
privilegio per decennium In black letter. Among the prefaces are four lines
from lord Surrey's ECCLESIASTES. Attached to every psalm is a prose collect. At
the end of the psalms are versions o^ Te Deum, Benedictus, Quicunqu^ vult, etc.
etc.
." Without date of the printer Day had a license, Jun. 3, 1561, to print the
psalms in meter. Ames, p. 238.
, or name of the translator. In the metrical preface prefixed, he tries to
remove the objections of those who censured versifications of Scripture, he
pleads the comforts of such an employment to the persecuted theologist who
suffers voluntary banishment, and thus displays the power of sacred music.

The psalmist stayde with tuned song
The rage of minds aghast,
As David did with harp among
To Saul in fury cast.
With golden stringes such harmony
His harp so sweet did wrest,
That he relieved his phrenesie
Whom wicked sprites possessed He thus remonstrates against the secular ballads,
Ye songs so nice, ye sonnets all,
Of lothly lovers lays,
Ye work men's minds but bitter gall
By phansies peevish plays.

.
Whatever might at first have been his design, it is certain that his version,
although printed, was never published: and notwithstanding the formality of his
metrical preface abovementioned, which was professedly written to show the
spiritual efficacy or virtue of the psalms in meter, and in which he directs a
distinct and audible mode of congregational singing, he probably suppressed it,
because he saw that the practice had been abused to the purposes of fanaticism,
and ^dopted by the puritans in contradiction to the national worship; or at
least that such a publication, whatever his private sentiments might have been,
would not have suited the nature and dignity of his high office in the church.
Some of our musical antiquaries, however, have justly conjectured, that the
archbishop, who was skilled in music, and had formerly founded a music-school
in his college of Stoke Clare, intended these psalms, which are adapted to
complicated tunes of four parts probably constructed by himself and here given
in score, for the use of cathedrals; at a time, when compositions in
counterpoint were uncommon in the church, and when that part of our
choir-service called the motet or anthem, which admits a more artificial
display of harmony, and which is recommended and allowed in queen Elisabeth's
earliest ecclesiastical injunctions, was yet almost unknown, or but in a very
imperfect state. Accordingly, although the direction is not quite
comprehensible, he orders many of them to be sung by the rector chori, or
chantor, and the quier, or choir, alternately. That at least he had a taste for
music, we may conclude from the following not inelegant scale of modulation,
prefixed to his eight tunes abovementioned.

"THE NATURE OF THE EIGHT TUNES.
The first is meke, devout to see,
The second sad, in majesty:
The third does rage, and roughly brayth,
The fourth does fawn, and flattry playth:
The fifth deligth, and laugheth the more,
The sixth bewayleth, it wepeth full sore.
The seventh tredeth stout in froward race,
The eyghte goes mild in modest pace."
What follows is another proof, that he had proposed to introduce these psalms
into the choir-service. "The tenor of these parts be for the people when they
will sing alone, the other parts put for the greater quiers, or to such as
will sing or play them privately As the singing-psalms were never a part of our
liturgy, no rubrical direction^ are any where given for the manner of
performing them. In one of the PREFACES, written about 1550, it is ordered,
"Whereas heretofore there has been great diversity of saying and singing in
churches within this realm, some following Salisbury use, some Hereford use,
some the use of Bangor, some of York, some of Lincoln; now from henceforth all
the whole realm shall have but one use." But this is said in reference to the
chants, responds, suffrages, versicles, introites, kyrie-eleeyso^s, doxologies,
and other melodies of the Book of Common Prayer, then newly published under
lawful authority, with musical notes by Marbeck, and which are still used; that
no arbitrary variations should be made in the manner of singing these melodies,
as had been lately the case with the Roman missal, in performing which some
cathedrals affected a manner of their own. The Salisbury mi^^al was most famous
and chie^ly followed.
."

How far this memorable prelate, perhaps the most accomplished scholar that had
yet filled the archbishopric of Canterbury, has succeeded in producing a
translation of the psalter preferable to the common one, the reader may judge
from these stanzas of a psalm highly poetical, in which I have exactly
preserved the translator's peculiar use of the hemistic punctuation.

To feed my need: he will me lead
To pastures green and fat:
He forth brought me: in liberty,
To waters delicate.
My soul and heart: he did convart,
To me he shewth the path:
Of right wisness: in holiness,
His name such virtue has.
Yea though I go: through Death his woe
His vale and shadow wide:
I fear no dart: with me thou art
With rod and staff to guide.
Thou shall provyde: a table wide,
For me against their spite:
With oil my head: thou have bespred,
My cup is fully dight Fol. 13.
.
I add, in the more sublime character, a part of the eighteenth psalm, in which
Sternhold is supposed to have exerted his powers most successfully, and without
the interruptions of the pointing which perhaps was designed for some
regulations of the music, now unknown.

The earth did shake, for fear did quake,
The hills their bases shook;
Removed they were, in place most fair,
At God's right fearful look.
Dark smoke rose to his face therefro,
His mouth as fire consumde,
That coals at it were kyndled bright
When he in anger fumde.
The heavens full low he made to bow,
And down did he ensue Follow.
;
And darkness great was undersete
His feet in clowdy hue.
He rode on hye, and did so fly,
Upon the Cherubins;
He came in sight, and made his flight
Upon the wyng of wyndes.
The Lord from heaven sent down his leaven
And thundered thence in ire;
He thunder cast in wondrous blast
With hayle and coals of fire Fol. 35.
.
Here is some degree of spirit, and a choice of phraseology. But on the whole,
and especially for this species of stanza^ Parker will be found to want
facility, and in general to have been unpractised in writing English verses.
His abilities were destined to other studies, and adapted to employments of a
more ar^hiepiscopal nature.

The industrious Strype, Parker's biographer, after a diligent search never
could gain a sight o^ this translation: nor is it even mentioned by Ames, the
inquisitive collector of our typographical antiquities. In the late Mr. West's
library there was a superb copy, once belonging to bishop Kennet, who has
remarked in a blank page, that the archbishop permitted his wife dame Margaret
to present the book to some of the nobility. It is certainly at this time
extremely scarce, and would be deservedly deemed a fortunate acquisition to
those capricious students who labor only to collect a library of rarities. Yet
it is not generally known, that there are two copies in the Bodleian library of
this anonymous version, which have hitherto been given to an obscure po^t by
the name of John Keeper. One of them, in 1643, appears to have been the
property of bishop Barlow: and on the opposite side of the title, in somewhat
of an ancient hand, is this manuscript insertion. "The auctor of this book is
one John Keeper, who was brought upp in the close of Wells." Perhaps Antony
Wood had no better authority than this slender unauthenticated note, for
saying, that John Keeper, a native of Somersetshire, and a graduate at Oxford
in the year 1564, and who afterward studied music and poetry at Wells,
"translated The whole Psalter into English meter which contains 150 psalms,
etc. printed at London by John Day living over Aldersgate, about 1570, in
quarto: and added thereunto The Gloria Patri, Te Deum, The Song of the three
Children, Quicunque vult, Benedictus, etc. all in m^tre. At the end of which,
are musical notes set in four parts to several psalms. What other things, he
adds, of poetry, music, or other faculties, he has published, I know not, nor
any thing more; yet I suppose he had some dignity in the church of Wells ATH.
OXON. i. 181.
." If this version should really be the work of Keeper, I fear we are still to
seek for archbishop Parker's psalms, with Strype and Ames There is a metrical
English version of the Ps^lm^ among the Cotton manuscripts about the year 1320,
which has merit. S^^ also supr. Vol. i. 23.
.

A considerable contributor to the metrical theology was Robert Crowley,
educated in Magdalene college at Oxford, where he obtained a fellowship in
1542. In the reign of Edward the sixth, he commenced printer and preacher in
London. He lived in Ely-rents in Holborn: "where, says Wood, he sold books, and
at leisure times exercised the gift of preaching in the great city and
elsewhere ATH. OXON. i. 235.
." In 1550 he printed the first edition of PIERCE PLOWMAN'S VISION, but with
the ideas of a controversialist, and with the view of helping forward the
reformation by the revival of a book which exposed the absurdities of popery in
strong satire, and which at present is only valuable or useful, as it serves to
gratify the harmless researches of those peaceable philosophers who study the
progression of ancient literature. His pulpit and his press, those two prolific
sources of faction, happily cooperated in propagating his principles of
predestination: and his shop and his sermons were alike frequented. Possessed
of those talents which qualified him for captivating the attention and moving
the passions of the multitude, under queen Elisabeth he held many dignities in
a church, whose doctrines and polity his undiscerning zeal had a tendency to
destroy. He translated into popular rhyme, not only the psalter, but the
litany, with hymns, all which he printed together in 1549. In the same year,
and in the same measure, he published The Voice of the last Trumpet blown by
the seventh angel. This piece contains twelve several lessons, for the
instruction or amendment of those who seemed at that time chiefly to need
advice; and among whom he enumerates lewd priests, scholars, physicians,
beggars, yeomen, gentlemen, magistrates, and women. He also attacked the abuses
of his age in thirty-one EPIGRAMS, first printed in 1551. The subjects are
placed alphabetically. In his first alphabet are Abbayes, Alehouses, Alleys,
and Almeshouses. The second, Bailiffs, Bawds, Beggars, Bear-bayting, and
Brawlers. They display, but without spirit or humor, the reprehensible
practices and licentious manners which then prevailed. He published in 1551, a
kind of metrical sermon on Pleasure and Pain, Heaven and Hell. Many of these,
to say nothing of his almost innumerable controversial tracts in prose, had
repeated editions, and from his own press. But one of his treatises, to prove
that Lent is a human invention and a superstitious institution, deserves notice
for its plan: it is a Dialogue between Lent and Liberty. The personification of
Lent is a bold and a perfectly new prosopopeia. In an old poem of this age
against the papists, written by one doctor William Turner a physician, but
afterward dean of Wells, the Mass, or mistress MISSA, is personified, who,
arrayed in all her meretricious trappings, must at least have been a more
theatrical figure See Strype, ECC^. MEM. ii. p. 138. S^^ the speakers in
Ochin'^ Di^logu^ against the Pope, englished by Poyne^, printed in 1549.
Strype, ibid. 198.
. Crowley likewise wrote, and printed in 1588, a rhyming manual, The School of
Virtue and Book of good Nurture. This is a translation into meter, of many of
the less exceptionable Latin hymns anciently used by the catholics, and still
continuing to retain among the protestants a degree of popularity. One of these
begins, Jam Lucis orto sydere. At the end are prayers and graces in rhyme. This
book, which in Wood's time had been degraded to the stall of the ballad-singer,
and is now only to be found on the shelf of the antiquary, was intended to
supersede or abolish the original Latin hymns, which were only offensive
because they were in Latin, and which were the recreation of scholars in our
universities after dinner on festival days. At an archiepiscopal visitation of
Merton college in Oxford, in the year 1562, it was a matter of enquiry, whether
the superstitious hymns appointed to be sung in the Hall on holidays, were
changed for the psalms in meter: and one of the fellows is accused of having
attempted to prevent the singing of the metrical Te Deum in the refectory on
All Saints day Strype's Parker, B. 11. Chapter ii. page 116, 117. Compare LIFE OF
SIR THOMAS POPE, 2d edit. p. 354.
.

It will not be foreign to our purpose to remark here, that when doctor Cosins,
prebendary of Durham, afterward bishop, was cited before the parliament in
1640, for reviving or supporting papistic usages in his cathedral, it was
alleged against him, that he had worn an ^mbroidered cope, had repaired some
ruinous cherubims, had used a consecrated knife for dividing the sacramental
bread, had renovated the blue cap and golden beard of a little image of Christ
on bishop Hatfield's tomb, had placed two lighted tapers on the altar which was
decorated with emblematic sculpture, and had forbidden the psalms of Sternhold
and Hopkins to be sung in the choir Neale's HIST. PURIT. vol. ii. chapter vii. page
387. edit. 1733. Nalson's COLLECTIONS, vol. i. page 789.
.

SECT. XXIX.
BUT among the theological versifiers of these times, the most notable is
Christopher Tie, a doctor of music at Cambridge in 1545, and musical preceptor
to prince Edward, and probably to his sisters the princesses Mary and
Elisabeth. In the reign of Elisabeth he was organist of the royal chapel, in
which he had been educated. To his profession of music, he joined some
knowledge of English literature: and having been taught to believe that rhyme
and edification were closely connected, and being persuaded that every part of
the Scripture would be more instructive and better received if reduced into
verse, he projected a translation of the ACTS OF THE APOSTLES into familiar
meter. It appears that the BOOK OF KINGS had before been versified, which for
many reasons was more capable of shining under the hands of a translator. But
the most splendid historical book, I mean the most susceptible of poetic
ornament, in the Old or New Testament, would have become ridiculous when
clothed in the fashionable ecclesiastical stanza. Perhaps the plan of setting a
narrative of this kind to music, was still more preposterous and exceptionable.
However, he completed only the first fourteen chapters: and they were printed
in 1553, by William Serres, with the following title, which by the reader, who
is not acquainted with the peculiar complexion of this period, will hardly be
suspected to be serious. "The ACTS OF THE APOSTLES translated into English
meter, and dedicated to the kings most excellent majesty by Cristofer Tie,
doctor in musyke, and one of the Gentylmen of his graces most honorable
Chapel, with notes to each chapter to sing and also to play upon the Lute,
very necessary for students after their study to fyle their wits, and
also for all christians that cannot sing, to read the good and godly
stories of the lives of Christ his apostles." It is dedicated in Sternhold's
stanza, "To the virtuous and godly learned prince Edward the sixth." As this
singular dedication contains, not only anecdotes of the author and his work,
but of his majesty's eminent attention to the study of the scripture, and of
his skill in playing on the lute, I need not apologize for transcribing a few
dull stanzas; especially as they will also serve as a specimen of the poet's
native style and manner, unconfined by the fetters of translation.

Your Grace may note, from time to time,
That some does undertake
Upon the Psalms to write in ryme,
The verse plesaunt to make:
And some does take in hand to write
Out of the Book of Kings;
Because they se your Grace delight
In such like godly things Strype says, that "Sternhold composed several
psalms at first for his own solace. For he set and sung them to his organ.
Which music king Edward vi. sometime hearing, for he was a Gentleman of the
privy-chamber, was much delighted with them. Which occasioned his publication
and dedication of them to the said king." ECCLES. MEMOR. B. i. chapter 2. p. 86.
.
And last of all, I your poor man,
Whose doings are full base,
Yet glad to do the best I can
To give unto your Grace,
Have thought it good now to recyte
The stories of the Acts
Even of the Twelve, as Luke does write,
Of all their worthy factes. --
Unto the text I do not ad,
Nor nothing take away;
And though my style be gros and bad,
The truth perceyve ye may. --
My calling is another way,
Your Grace shall herein find
My notes set forth to sing or play,
To recreate the mind.
And though they be not curious That is, they are plain and unisonous: the
established character of thi^ sort of music.
,
But for the letter mete;
Ye shall them find harmonious,
And eke pleasant and sweet.
A young monarch singing the ACTS OF THE APOSTLES in verse to his lute, is a
royal character of which we have seldom heard. But he proceeds,

That such good things your Grace might move
Your Lute when ye assaye,
Instead of songs of wanton love,
These stories then to play.
So shall your Grace plese God the lord
In walkyng in his way,
His laws and statutes to record
In your heart night and day.
And eke your realm shall flourish still,
No good thing shall decay,
Your subjectes shall with right good will,
These words record and say:
"Thy life, O king, to us does shine,
"As God's book does thee teach;
"Thou do us feed with such doctrine
"As God's elect did preach."
From this sample of his original vein, my reader will not perhaps hastily
predetermine, that our author has communicated any considerable decorations to
his ACTS OF THE APOSTLES in English verse. There is as much elegance and
animation in the two following initial stanzas of the fourteenth chapter, as in
any of the whole performance, which I shall therefore exhibit.

It chanced in Iconium,
As they Apostles.
often times did use,
Together they into did come
The Sinagoge of Jues.
Where they did preach and only seek
God's grace them to atcheve;
That so they speak to Jue and Greek
That many did bileve.
Doctor Tye's ACTS OF THE APOSTLES were sung for a time in the royal chapel of
Edward the sixth. But they never became popular. The impropriety of the design,
and the impotency of the execution, seem to have been perceived even by his own
prejudiced and undiscerning age. This circumstance, however, had probably the
fortunate and seasonable effect, of turning Tye's musical studies to another
and a more rational system: to the composition of words judiciously selected
from the prose psalms in four or five parts. Before the middle of the reign of
Elisabeth, at a time when the more ornamental and intricate music was wanted in
our service, he concurred with the celebrated Tallis and a few others in
setting several anthems, which are not only justly supposed to retain much of
the original strain of our ancient choral melody before the reformation, but in
respect of harmony, expression, contrivance, and general effect, are allowed to
be perfect models of the genuine ecclesiastic style. Fuller informs us, that
Tie was the chief restorer of the loss which the music of the church had
sustained by the destruction of the monasteries WORTHI^S, ii. 244. Tallis here
mentioned, at the begin^ing of the reign of Elisabeth, and by proper authority,
enriched the music of Marbeck's liturgy. He set to music the T^ DEUM,
BENEDICTUS, MAGNIFICAT, NUNC DIMITTIS, and other offices, to which Marbeck had
given only the canto fi^mo, or plain chant. He composed a new Litany still in
use; and improved the simpler modulation of Marbeck's Suffrages, Kyries after
the Commandments, and other versicle^, as they are sung at present. There are
two chants of Tallis, one to the VENITE EXULTEMUS, and another to the
Athanasian Cre^d.
. Tie also appears to have been a translator of Italian. The History of
Nastagio and Traversari translated out of Italian into English by C. T. perhaps
Christopher Tie, was printed at London in 1569 In duod^cimo. -- I had almost
forgot to observe, that John Mardiley, clerk of the king's Mint, called
Suffolk-house in Southwark, translated twenty-four of David's Psalms into
English verse, about 1550. He wrote also Religious Hymns. Bale, par. post. p.
106. There is extant his Complaint against the sti^^necked papist in verse.
Land. by T. Raynold, 1548. 8vo. And, a Short Resytal of certyu^ holy doctors,
against the real presence, collected in myter [metre] by John Mardiley. Land.
12mo. Se^ another of his pieces on the same subject, and in rhyme, presented
and dedicated to queen Elisabeth, MSS. R^^. 17 B. xxxvii. The Protector
Somerset was his patron.
.

It is not my intention to pursue any farther the mob of religious rhymers,
who, from principles of the most unfeigned piety, devoutly labored to darken
the luster, and enervate the force, of the divine pages. And perhaps I have
been already too prolix in examining a species of poetry, if it may be so
called, which even impoverishes prose; or rather, by mixing the style of prose
with verse, and of verse with prose, destroys the character and effect of both.
But in surveying the general course of a species of literature, absurdities as
well as excellencies, the weakness and the vigor of the human mind, must have
their historian. Nor is it unpleasing to trace and to contemplate those strange
incongruities, and false ideas of perfection, which at various times, either
affectation, or caprice, or fashion, or opinion, or prejudi^e, or ignorance, or
enthusiasm, present to the conceptions of men, in the shape of truth.

I must not, however, forget, that king Edward the sixth is to be ranked among
the religious poets of his own reign. Fox has published his metrical
instructions concerning the eucharist, addressed to sir Antony Saint Ledger.
Bale also mentions his comedy called the WHORE OF BABYLON, which Holland the
heroologist, who perhaps had never seen it, and knew not whether it was a play
or a ballad, in verse or prose, pronounces to be a most elegant perfo^mance
HEROOLOG. p. 27.
. Its elegance, with some, will not perhaps apologize or atone for its subject:
and it may seem strange, that controversial ribaldry should have been suffered
to enter into the education of a great monarch. But the genius, habits, and
situation; of his age should be considered. The reformation was the great
political topic of Edward's court. Intricate discussions in divinity were no
longer confined to the schools or the clergy. The new religion, from its
novelty, as well as importance, interested every mind, and was almost the sole
object of the general attention. Men emancipated from the severities of a
spiritual tyranny, reflected with horror on the slavery they had so long
suffered, and with exultation on the triumph they had obtained. These feelings
were often expressed in a strain of enthusiasm. The spirit of innovation, which
had seized the times, often transgressed the bounds of truth. Every change of
religion is attended with those ebullitions, which growing more moderate by
degrees, afterward appear eccentric and ridiculous.

We who live at a distance from this great and national struggle between popery
and protestantism, when our church has been long and peaceably established, and
in an age of good sense, of politeness and philosophy, are apt to view these
effusions of royal piety as weak and unworthy the character of a king. But an
ostentation of zeal and example in the young Edward, as it was natural so it
was necessary, while the reformation was yet immature. It was the duty of his
preceptors, to impress on his tender years, an abhorrence of the principles of
Rome, and a predilection to that happy system which now seemed likely to
prevail. His early diligence, his inclination to letters, and his seriousness
of disposition, seconded their active endeavors to cultivate and to bias his
mind in favor of the new theology, which was now become the fashionable
knowledge. These and other amiable virtues his cotemporaries have given young
Edward in an eminent degree. But it may be presumed, that the partiality which
youth always commands, the specious prospects excited by expectation, and the
flattering promises of religious liberty secured to a distant posterity, have
had some small share in dictating his panegyric.

The new settlement of religion, by counteracting inveterate prejudices of the
most interesting nature, by throwing the clergy into a state of contention, and
by disseminating theological opinions among the people, excited so general a
ferment, that even the popular ballads and the stage, were made the vehicles of
the controversy between the papal and protestant communions See instances
already given, before the Reformation had actually taken place, supr. p. 144.
.

The Ballad of LUTHER, the POPE, a CARDINAL, and a HUSBANDMAN, written in 1550,
in defense of the reformation, has some spirit, and supports a degree of
character in the speakers. There is another written about the same time, which
is a lively satire on the English Bible, the vernacular liturgy, and the book
of homilies See Percy BALL. ii. 102.
. The measure of the last is that of PIERCE PLOWMAN, with the addition of
rhyme: a sort of versification which now was not uncommon.

Strype has printed a poem called the PORE HELP, of the year 1550, which is a
lampoon against the new preachers or gospellers, not very elegant in its
allusions, and in Skelton's style. The anonymous satirist mentions with
applause Master Huggarde, or Miles Hoggard, a shoemaker of London, and who
wrote several virulent pamphlets against the reformation, which were made
important by extorting labored answers from several eminent divines One of
these pieces is, "A Confutation to the answer of a wicked ballad," printed in
1550. Crowley abovementioned wrote, "A Confutation of Miles Hoggar^'s wicked
ballad made in defense of the transubstantiation of the Sacrament." Land. 1548.
octavo.
. He also mentions a nobler clarke, whose learned Balad in defense of the holy
Kyrke had triumphed over all the raillery of its numerous opponents Strype,
ECCL. MEM. ii. APP^ND, i. p. 34.
. The same industrious annalist has also preserved A Song on bishop Latimer, in
the octave rhyme, by a poet of the same persuasion Ibid. vol. i. APPEND. xliv.
p. 121.
. And in the catalogue of modern English prohibited books delivered in 1542 to
the parish priests, to the intent that their authors might be discovered and
punished, there is the Burying of the Mass in Eaglish rithme Burnet, HIST. REF.
vol. i. R^C. Number. xxvi. p. 257.
. But it is not my intention to make a full and formal collection of these
fugitive religious pasquinades, which died with their respective controversies.

In the year 1547, a proclamation was published to prohibit preaching. This was
a t^mporary expedient to suppress the turbulent harangues of the catholic
ministers, who still composed no small part of the parochial clergy: for the
court of augmentations took care perpetually to supply the vacant benefices
with the disincorporated monks, in order to exonerate the exchequer from the
payment of their annuities. These men, both from inclination and interest, and
hoping to restore the church to its ancient orthodoxy and opulence, exerted all
their powers of declamation in combating the doctrines of protestantism and in
alienating the minds of the people from the new doctrines and reformed rites of
worship. Being silenced by authority, they had recourse to the stage: and from
the pulpit removed their polemics to the playhouse. Their farces became more
successful than their sermons. The people flocked eagerly to the playhouse,
when deprived not only of their ancient pageantries, but of their pastoral
discourses, in the church. Archbishop Cranmer and the protector Somerset were
the chief objects of these dramatic invectives Fuller, CHAPTER HIST. B. vii. Cent.
xvi. p. 390.
. At length, the same authority which had checked the preachers, found it
expedient to control the players: and a new proclamation, which I think has
not yet appeared in the history of the British drama, was promulgated in the
following terms Dat. 3. Edw. vi. Aug. 8.
. The inquisitive reader will observe, that from this instrument plays appear
to have been long before a general and familiar species of entertainment, that
they were acted not only in London but in the great towns, that the profession
of a player, even in our present sense, was common and established; and that
these satirical interludes are forbidden only in the English tongue. "Forasmuch
as a great number of those that be COMMON PLAYERS of ENTERLUDES and PLAYS, as
well within the city of London as elsewhere within the realm, do for the most
part play such ENTERLUDES, as contain matter tending to sedition, and
contemning of sundry good orders and laws; whereupon are grown and daily are
likely to grow and ensue much disquiet, division, tumults and uprores in this
realm It should, however, be remarked, that the reformers had themselves shown
the way to this sort of abuse long before. Bale's comedy OF THE THREE LAWS,
printed in 1538, is commonly supposed to be a Mys^ery, and merely doctrinal:
but it is a satirical play against ^opery, and perhaps the ^^rst of the kind in
our language. I have mentioned it in general terms before, under Bale as a
poet; but I reserved a more particular notice of it for this place. [See supr.
p. 78.] It is exceedingly scarce, and has this colophon. "Thus ends this
Comedy concerning the three laws, of Nature, Moses, and Christ, co^rupted by
the Sodomytes, Pharisees, and Papys^es, most wicked. Compyled by Johan Bal^.
Anno M. D. XXXVIII. And lately imprented per Nicolaum Bamburgensem." duod. It
has these directions about the dresses, the first I remember to have seen,
which show the scope and spirit of the piece. SIGNAT. G. "The apparellynge of
the six Vices or fruits of Infydely^e. -- Let Idolatry be decked like an old
wytche, Sodomy like a monk of all sects, Ambycyon like a bishop,
Covetousness ^yke a Pharisee or spyrituall lawer, False Doctrine like a popysh
doctor, and Hypocresy like a graye fryre. The rest of the parts are easy
enough to conjecture." A scene in the second Act is thus opened by INFIDELITAS.
-- " Post cantionem, Infidelitas alta voce dicat. OREMUS. Omnipotens sempiterne
Deus, qui ad imaginem et similitudinem nostram formasti laicos, da, quaesumus,
ut sicut eorum sudoribus vivimus, ita ^orum uxoribus, filiabus, et domicelli^
perpetuo frui mereamur, per dominum nostrum Papam." Bale, a clergyman, and at
length a bishop in Ireland, ought to have known, that this profane and impious
parody was more o^^ensive and injurious to true religion than any part of the
missal which he means to ridicule. INFIDELITY then begins in English verse a
conversation with LEX MOYSIS, containing the most low and licentious obscenity,
which I am ashamed to transcribe, concerning the words of a Latin a^teme,
between an old fryre, or friar, with spectacles on his nose, and dame Isabel an
old nun, who crows like a capon. This is the most tolerable part of
INFIDELITY'S dialogue. SIGNAT. C. iiij. It was a good world, when we had sech
wholesome stories
Preached in our church, on sondayes and other f^ryes Holidays.
.


With us was it mer^e
When we went to Berye Bury Saint Edmunds.
,
And to our Lady of Grace:
To the Blood of Hayles
Where no good chere fayles,
And other holy place.
When the prests might walk,
And with young wyves talk,
Then had we children plentye;
Then cuckoldes might leap
A score on a heap,
Now is there not one to twentye.
When the monks were fat, etc.
In another place, the old philosophy is ridiculed. SIGNAT. E. v. Where
HYPOCRISY says,

And I will rays up in the unyversitees
The seven sleepers there, to advance the pope's decrees:
As Dorbel, and Duns, Durande, and Thomas of Aquyne,
The Mastre of Sentens, with Bachon the great devyne:
Henricus de Gandavo^ and these shall read ad Clerum
Aristotle, and Albert de secretis mulier^m:
With the commentaryes of Avic^n and Averoyes, etc^

: the Kings Majesty, by the advice and consent of his dearest uncle Edward
duke of Somerset, and the rest of his highness Privy Council, straightly
charge and commands all and every his Majesty's subjects, of whatsoever
state, order, or degree they be, that from the ninth day of this present month
of August until the feast of All Saints next coming, they nor any of them,
openly or secretly PLAY IN THE ENGLISH TONGUE, any kind of INTERLUDE, PLAY,
DIALOGUE, or other matter set forth in form of PLAY, in any place public or
private within this realm, upon pain, that whosoever shall PLAY in ENGLISH any
such PLAY, INTERLUDE, DIALOGUE, or other MATTER, shall suffer imprisonment, or
other punishment at the pleasure of his Majesty Fuller, ibid. p. 391. See also
STAT. 2, 3. Edw. vi. A. D. 1^48. Gibs. COD. i. p 261. edit. 1761.
." But when the short date of this proclamation expired, the reformers,
availing themselves of the stratagems of an enemy, attacked the papists with
their own weapons. One the comedies on the side of reformation still remains
See supr. vol. i. 241. ii. 378. 397. And Gibs. COD. i. p. 191. edit. 1761.
. But the writer, while his own religion from its simple and impalpable form
was much less exposed to the ridicule of scenic exhibition, has not taken
advantage of that opportunity which the papistic ceremonies so obviously
afforded to burlesque and drollery, from their visible pomp, their number, and
their absurdities: nor did he perceive an effect which he might have turned to
his own use, suggested by the practice of his catholic antagonists in the
drama, who, by way of recommending their own superstitious solemnities, often
made them contemptible by theatrical representation.

This piece is entitled, An Interlude called LUSTY JUVENTUS: lively describing
the Frailty of youth: of Nature prone to Vice: by Grace and Good Council
traynable to virtue See Hawkins's OLD PLAY^, i. p. 135.
. The author, of whom nothing more is known, was one R. Wever, as appears from
the colophon. "Finis, quod R. Wever. Imprinted at London in Paul's church
yard by Abraham Vele at the sign of the Lamb." Hypocrisy is its best
character: who laments the loss of her superstitions to the devil, and recites
a long catalogue of the trumpery of the popish worship in the meter and manner
of Skeleton From Bale's THREE LAWS abovementioned, SIGN. B. v. Here have I
pratye gynnes,
Both brouches, beads, and pynnes,
With soch as the people wynnes
Unto idolatrye, etc.

. The chapter and verse of Scripture are often announced: and in one scene, a
personage, called GOD'S MERCIFUL PROMISES, cites Ezekiel as from the pulpit.

The Lord by his prophet Ezekiel says in this wise plainly,
As in the xxiii chapter it does appear:
Be converted, O ye children, etc Ibid. p. 159.
.
From this interlude we learn, that the young men, which was natural, were
eager to embrace the new religion, and that the old were unwilling to give up
those doctrines and modes of worship, to which they had been habitually
attached, and had paid the most implicit and reverential obedience, from their
childhood. To this circumstance the devil, who is made to represent the
Scripture as a novelty, attributes the destruction of his spiritual kingdom.

The old people would beleve still in my laws,
But the younger sort lead them a contrary way;
They will not beleve, they plainly say,
In old traditions as made by men,
But they will 'leve as the Scripture teaches them Ibid. p. 133.
.
The devil then, in order to recover his interest, applies to his son
Hypocrisy, who attempts to convert a young man to the ancient faith, and says
that the Scripture can teach no more, than that God is a good man Ibid. 141.
, a phrase which Shakespeare with great humor has put into the mouth of
Dogberry MUCH ADO. iii. 8.
. But he adds an argument in jest, which the papists sometimes seriously used
against the protestants, and which, if we consider the poet's ultimate
intention, had better been suppressed.

The world was never so merry,
Since children were so bold:
Now every boy will be a teacher,
The father a fool, the child a pr^acher Ibid. p. 143.
.
It was among the reproaches of protestantism, that the inexperienced and the
unlearned thought themselves at liberty to explain the Scriptures, and to
debate the most abstruse and metaphysical topics of theological speculation.
The two songs in the character of YOUTH, at the opening and close of this
interlude, are flowery and not inelegant Ibid. p. 121. 153.
.

The protestants continued their plays in Mary's reign: for Strype has
exhibited a remonstrance from the Privy Council to the lord President of the
North, representing, that "certain lewd [ignorant] persons, to the number of
six or seven in a company, naming themselves to be servants of sir Frauncis
Lake, and wearing his livery or badge on their sleeves, have wandered about
those north parts, and representing certain Plays and Enterludes," reflecting
on her majesty and king Philip, and the formalities of the mass ECCL. MEM. iii.
APPEND. iii. p. 185. Dat. 1556. Sir Francis Lake is ordered to correct his
servants so offending.

One Henry Nicholas a native of Amsterdam, who imported his own translations of
many enthusiastic German books into England, about the year 1550, translated
and published, "COMOEDIA, a work in rhyme, containing an interlude of Minds
witnessing man's fall from God and Christ, set forth by H. N. and by him newly
perused and amended. Translated out of base Almayne into Englysh." Without
date, in duodecimo. It seems to have been printed abroad. Our author was the
founder of one of the numerous offsets of calvinistic fanaticis^, called the
FAMILY OF LOVE.


. These were familyminstrels or players, who were constantly distinguished by
their master's livery or badge.

When the English liturgy was restored at the accession of Elisabeth, after its
suppression under Mary, the papists renewed their hostilities from the stage;
and again tried the intelligible mode of attack by ballads, farces, and
interludes. A new injunction was then necessary, and it was again enacted in
1559, that no person, but under heavy forfeitures, should abuse the Common
Prayer in "any Enterludes, Plays, songs or rimes Ann. i. Eliz.
." But under Henry the eighth, so early as the year 1542, before the
reformation was fixed or even intended on its present liberal establishment,
yet when men had begun to discern and to reprobat^ many of the impostures of
popery, it became an object of the legislature to curb the bold and seditious
spirit of popular poetry. No sooner were the Scriptures translated and
permitted in English, than they were brought upon the stage: they were not only
misinterpreted and misunderstood by the multitude, but profaned or burlesqued
in comedies and mummeries. Effectually to restrain these abuses, Henry, who
loved to create a subject for persecution, who commonly proceeded to disannul
what he had just confirmed, and who found that a freedom of enquiry tended to
shake his ecclesiastical supremacy, framed a law, that not only Tyndale's
English Bible, and all the printed English commentaries, expositions,
annotations, defenses, replies, and sermons, whether orthodox or heretical,
which it had occasioned, should be utterly abolished; but that the kingdom
should also be purged and cleansed of all religious plays, interludes, rhymes,
ballads, and songs, which are equally pestiferou^ and noisome to the peace of
the church STAT. Ann. 34, 35. Henr. viii. Cap. i. Tyndale's Bible was printed
at Paris 1536.
.

Henry appears to have been piqued as an author and a theologist in adding the
clause concerning his own INSTITUTION OF A CHRISTIAN MAN, which had been
treated with the same sort of ridicule. Yet under the general injunction of
suppressing all English books on religious subjects, he formally excepts, among
others, some not properly belonging to that class, such as the CANTERBURY
TALES, the works of Chaucer and Gower, CRONICLES, and STORIES OF MEN'S LIVES
Ibid. Artic. vii.
. There is also an exception added about plays, and those only are allowed
which were called MORALITIES, or perhaps interludes of r^al character and
action, "for the rebuking and reproaching of vices and the setting forth of
virtue." MYSTERIES are totally rejected Ibid. Artic. ix.
. The reservations which follow, concerning the use of a corrected English
Bible, which was permitted, are curious for their quaint partiality, and they
show the embarrassment of administration, in the difficult business of
confining that benefit to a few, from which all might reap advantage, but which
threatened to become a general evil, without some degrees of restriction. It is
absolutely forbidden to be read or expounded in the church. The lord
chancellor, the speaker of the house of commons, captains of the wars,
justices of the peace, and recorders of cities, may quote passages to enforce
their public harangues, as has been accustomed. A nobleman or gentleman may
read it, in his house, orchards, or garden, yet quietly, and without
disturbance "of good order." A merchant also may read it to himself privately.
But the common people, who had already abused this liberty to the purpose of
division and dissensions, and under the denomination of women, artificers,
apprentices, journeymen, and servingmen, are to be punished with one month's
imprisonment, as often as they are detected in reading the Bible either
privately or openly.

It should be observed, that few of these had now learned to read. But such was
the privilege of peerage, that ladies of quality might read "to themselves and
alone, and not to others," any chapter either in the Old or New Testament Ibid.
Artic. x. seq.
. This has the air of a sumptuary law, which indulges the nobility with many
superb articles of finery, that are interdicted to those of inferior degree And
of an old DIETARIE FOR THE CLER^Y, I think by archbishop Cranmer, in which an
archbishop is allowed to have two swans or two capons in a dish, a bishop two.
An archbishop six blackbirds at once, ^ bishop five, a dean four, an archdeacon
two. If a dean has four dishes in his first course, he is not afterward^ to
have custard^ or ^ritter^. An archbishop may have ^ix snip^^, an archdeacon
only two. Rabbit^, lark^, ph^^sant^, and partridges, are allowed in these
proportions. A canon residentiary is to have a swan only on a Sunday. A rector
of sixteen marks, only three blackbirds in a week. See a similar instrument,
Strype's PARKER, APPEND. p. 65.

In the British Museum, there is a beautiful manuscript on vellum of a French
translation of the Bible, which was found in the ^ent of king John, king of
France, after the battle of Poictiers. Perhaps hi^ majesty poss^ssed this book
on the plan of an exclusive royal right.


. Undoubtedly the duchesses and countesses of this age, if not from principles
of piety, at least from motives of curiosity, became eager to read a book which
was made inaccessible to three parts of the nation. But the partial
distribution of a treasure to which all had a right could not long remain. This
was a MANNA to be gathered by every man. The claim of the people was too
powerful to be overruled by the bigottry, the prejudice, or the caprice of
Henry.

I must add here, in reference to my general subject, that the translation of
the Bible, which in the reign of Edward the sixth was admitted into the
churches, is supposed to have fixed our language. It certainly has transmitted
and perpetuated many ancient words which would otherwise have been obsolete or
unintelligible. I have never seen it remarked, that at the same time this
translation contributed to enrich our native English at an early period, by
importing and familiarising many Latin words More particularly in the Latin
derivative substantives, such as, divination, perdition, adoption,
manifestatio^, consolation, contribution, administration, consummation,
reconciliation, operation, communication, retribution, preparation,
immortality, principality, etc. etc. And in other words, frustrate,
inexcusable, tran^figure, concupiscence, etc. etc.
.

These were suggested by the Latin vulgate, which was used as a medium by the
translators. Some of these, however, now interwoven into our common speech,
could not have been understood by many readers even above the rank of the
vulgar, when the Bible first appeared in English. Bishop Gardener had therefore
much less reason than we now imagine, for complaining of the too great
clearness of the translation, when with an insidious view of keeping the people
in their ancient ignorance, he proposed, that instead of always using English
phrases, many Latin words should still be preserved, because they contained an
inherent significance and a genuine dignity, to which the common tongue
afforded no correspondent expressions of sufficient energy Such as,
Idololatria, contritus, holocausta, sacramentum, elementa, humilitas,
satisfactio, ceremonia, absolutio, mysterium, penitentia, etc. See Gardiner's
proposals in Burnet, HIST. REF. vol. i. B. iii. p. 315. And Fuller, CHAPTER HI^T.
B. v. Cent. xvi. p. 238.
.

To the reign of Edward the sixth belongs Arthur Kelton, a native of Shropshire
or Wales. He wrote the CRONICLE OF THE BRUTES in English verse. It is dedicated
to the young king, who seems to have been the general patron; and was printed
in 1547 Land. Octavo. Pr. "In the golden time when all things."
. Wood allows that he was an able antiquary; but laments, that he "being
withal poetically given, must forsooth write and publish his lucubrations in
verse; whereby, for rhime's sake, many material matters, and the due timing of
them, are omitted, and so consequently rejected by historians and antiquarians
ATH. OXON. i. 73.
." Yet he has not supplied his want of genealogical and historical precision
with those strokes of poetry which his subject suggested; nor has his
imagination been any impediment to his accuracy. At the end of his CRONICLE is
the GENEALOGY OF THE BRUTES, in which the pedigree of king Edward the sixth is
lineally drawn through thirty-two generations, from Osiris the first king of
Egypt. Here too Wood reproaches our author for his ignorance in genealogy. But
in an heraldic enquiry, so difficult and so new, many mistakes are pardonable.
It is extraordinary that a Welshman should have carried his genealogical
researches into Egypt, or rather should have wished to prove that Edward was
descended from Osiris: but this was with a design to show, that the Egyptian
monarch was the original progen^tor of Brutus, the undoubted founder of
Edward's family. Bale says that he wrote, and dedicated to sir William Herbert,
afterward earl of Pembroke, a most elegant poetical panegyric on the
Cambro-Britons Bale, xi. 97.
. But Bale's praises and censures are always regulated according to the
religion of his authors.

The first CHANSON a BOIRE, or DRINKING-BALLAD, of any merit, in our language,
appeared in the year 1551. It has a vein of ease and humor, which we should
not expect to have been inspired by the simple beverage of those times. I
believe I shall not tire my reader by giving it at length; and am only afraid
that in this specimen the transition will be thought too violent, from the
poetry of the puritans to a convivial and ungodlie ballad.

I cannot eat, but little meat,
My stomach is not good;
But sure I think, that I can drink
With him that wears a hood A monk.
.
Though I go bare, take ye no care,
I nothing am a cold;
I stuff my skin so full within,
Of joly good ale and old.
Back and side go bare, go bare,
Booth foot and hand go cold;
But, belly, God send thee good ale inoughe,
Whether it be new or old!
I love no roast, but a nut-browne toste,
And a crab laid in the fire;
A little bread shall do me stead,
Much bread I noght desire.
No frost no snow, no wind, I trow,
Can hurt me if I would,
I am so wrapped, and throwly lapt
Of joly good ale and old.
Back and side, etc.
And TIB my wife, that as her life
Loves well good ale to seek,
Full often drinks she, till ye may see
The tears run down her cheek.
Then does she trowle to me the bowl
Even as a mault-worm should;
And Having drank she says.
, "says, sweet heart, I took my part
"Of this joly good ale and old."
Back and side, etc.
Now let them drink, till they nod and winke^
Even as good fellows should do:
They shall not miss to have the bliss
Good ale does bring men to.
And al good sowles that have scoured bowls,
Or have them lustely trolde,
God save the lives^ of them and their wives,
Whether they be young or old!
Back and side, etc.
This song opens the second act of GAMMER GURTON'S NEEDLE, a comedy, written
and printed in 1551 On the authority of MSS. Oldys. A valuable black-letter
copy, in the possession of Mr. Steevens, i^ the oldest I have seen.
, and soon afterward acted at Christ's College in Cambridge. In the title of
the old edition it is said to have been written "by Mr. S. master of arts,"
who probably was a member of that society. This is held to be the first comedy
in our language: that is, the first play which was neither Mystery nor
Morality, and which handled a comic story with some disposition of plot, and
some dis^rimination of character See supr. vol. ii. p. 378.
. The writer has a degree of jocularity which sometimes rises above buffoonery,
but is often disgraced by lowness of incident. Yet in a more polished age he
would have chosen, nor would he perhaps have disgraced, a better subject. It
has been thought surprising that a learned audience could have endured some of
these indelicate scenes. But the established festivities of scholars were gross
and agreeable to their general habits: nor was learning in that age always
accompanied by gentleness of manners. When the sermons of Hugh Latimer were in
vogue at court, the university might be justified in applauding GAMMER GURTON'S
NEEDLE.

SECT. XXX.
TRUE genius, unseduced by the cabals and unalarmed by the dangers of faction,
defies or neglects those events which destroy the peace of mankind, and often
exerts its operations amidst the most violent commotions of a state. Without
patronage and without readers, I may add without models, the earlier Italian
writers, while their country was shook by the intestine tumults of the Guelfes
and Guibelines, continued to produce original compositions both in prose and
verse, which yet stand unrivalled. The age of Pericles and of the Peloponnesian
war was the same. Careless of those who governed or disturbed the world, and
superior to the calamities of a quarrel in which two mighty leaders contended
for the prize of universal dominion, Lucretius wrote his sublime didactic poem
on the system of nature, Virgil his bucolics, and Cicero his books of
philosophy. The proscriptions of Augustus did not prevent the progress of the
Roman literature.

In the turbulent and unpropitious reign of queen Mary, when controversy was no
longer confined to speculation, and a spiritual warfare polluted every part of
England with murders more atrocious than the slaughters of the most bloody
civil contest, a poem was planned, although not fully completed, which
illuminates with no common luster that interval of darkness, which occupies the
annals of English poetry from Surrey to Spenser, entitled, A MIRROR FOR
MAGISTRATES.

More writers than one were concerned in the execution of this piece: but its
primary inventor, and most distinguished contributor, was Thomas Sackville the
first lord Buckhurst, and first earl of Dorset. Much about the same period, the
same author wrote the first genuine English tragedy, which I shall consider in
its proper place.

Sackville was born at Buckhurst, a pricipal seat of his ancient and
illustrious family in the parish of Withiam in Sussex. His birth is placed, but
with evident inaccuracy, under the year 1536 Archbishop Abbot, in Sackville's
Funeral-sermon, says he was aged 72 when he died, in the year 1608. If so, he
was not twenty years of age when h^ wrote GORDOBUCK.
. At least it should be placed six years before. Discovering a vigorous
understanding in his childhood, from a domestic tuition he was removed, as it
may reasonably be conjectured, to Hart-hall, now Hertford college, in Oxford.
But he appears to have been a master of Arts at Cambridge Wood, ATH. OXON. i.
^. 767.
. At both universities he became celebrated as a Latin and English poet; and he
carried his love of poetry, which he seems to have almost solely cultivated, to
the Inner Temple. It was now fashionable for every young man of fortune, before
he began his travels, or was admitted into parliament, to be initiated in the
study of the law. But instead of pursuing a science, which could not be his
profession, and which was unaccommodated to the bias of his genius, he betrayed
his predilection to a more pleasing species of literature, by composing the
tragedy just mentioned, for the entertainment and honor of his
fellow-students. His high birth, however, and ample patrimony, soon advanced
him to more important situations and employments. His eminent accomplishments
and abilities having acquired the confidence and esteem of queen Elisabeth, the
poet was soon lost in the statesman, and negotiations and embassies
extinguished the milder ambitions of the ingenuous Muse. Yet it should be
remembered, that he was uncorrupted amidst the intrigues of an artful court,
that in the character of a first minister he preserved the integrity of a
private man, and that his family refused the offer of an apology to his memory,
when it was insulted by the malicious insinuations of a rival party. Nor is it
foreign to our purpose to remark, that his original elegance and brilliancy of
mind sometimes broke forth, in the exercise of his more formal political
functions. He was frequently disgusted at the pedantry and official barbarity
of style, with which the public letters and instruments were usually framed:
and Naunton relates, that his "secretaries had difficulty to please him, he was
so facete and choice in his style FRAGM. REGAL. p. 70.
." Even in the decisions and pleadings of that rigid tribunal the star chamber,
which was never esteemed the school of rhetoric, he practiced and encouraged an
unaccustomed strain of eloquent and graceful oratory: on which account, says
Lloyd, "so flowing was his invention, that he was called the star chamber bell
Lloyd'^ WO^THI^S, p. 678.
." After he was made a peer by the title of lord Buckhurst, and had succeeded
to a most extensive inheritance, and was now discharging the business of an
envoy to Paris, he found time to prefix a Latin epistle to Clerke's Latin
translation of Castilio's COURTIER, printed at London in 1571, which is not an
unworthy recommendation of a treatise remarkable for its polite Latinity. It
was either because his mistress Elisabeth paid a sincere compliment to his
singular learning and fidelity, or because she was willing to indulge an
affected fit of indignation against the object of her capricious passion, that
when Sackville, in 1591, was a candidate for the chancellorship of the
university of Oxford, she condescended earnestly to solicit the university in
his favor, and in opposition to his competitor the earl of Essex. At least she
appears to have approved the choice, for her majesty soon afterward visited
Oxford, where she was entertained by the new chancellor with splendid banquets
and much solid erudition. It is neither my design nor my province, to develope
the profound policy with which he conducted a peace with Spain, the address
with which he penetrated or baffled the machinations of Essex, and the
circumspection and success with which he managed the treasury of two opulent
sovereigns. I return to Sackville as a poet, and to the history of the MIRROR
OF MAGISTRATES Many of his L^tter^ are in the CA^ALA. And in the university
register at Oxford, (Mar. 21. 1591.) see his Letter about the Habits^ See also
Howard'^ COLL. p. 297.
.

About the year 1557, he formed the plan of a poem, in which all the
illustrious but unfortunate characters of the English history, from the
conquest to the end of the fourteenth century, were to pass in review before
the poet, who descends like Dante into the infernal region, and is conducted by
SORROW. Although a descent into hell had been suggested by other poets, the
application of such a fiction to the present design, is a conspicuous proof of
genius and even of invention. Every personage was to recite his own misfortunes
in a separate soliloquy. But Sackville had leisure only to finish a poetical
preface called an INDUCTION, and one legend, which is the life of Henry
Stafford duke of Buckingham. Relinquishing therefore the design abruptly, and
hastily adapting the close of his INDUCTION to the appearance of Buckingham,
the only story he had yet written, and which was to have been the last in his
series, he recommended the completion of the whole to Richard Baldwyne and
George Ferrers.

Baldwyne seems to have been graduated at Oxford about the year 1532. He was an
ecclesiastic, and engaged in the education of youth. I have already mentioned
his metrical version of SOLOMON'S SONG, dedicated to king Edward the sixth See
supr. 181.
. His patron was Henry lord Stafford Ut in^r. He wrote also Three book^s of
M^ral Philosop^y. And The Liv^^ and Sayings of Philosoph^rs, Emperors, Kings,
^tc. dedicated to lord Stafford, often printed at London in quarto. Altered by
Thomas^ Pal^r^ym^n, Land. 1608. 12mo. Also, Similies and Prover^s. And The Us^
of Adagies. Bale says, that he wrote, "Comoedias etiam aliquot." page 108.
.

George Ferrers, a man of superior rank, was born at saint Albans, educated at
Oxford, and a student of Lincoln's Inn. Leland, who has given him a place in his
ENCOMIA, informs us, that he was patronised by lord Cromwell Fol. 66.
. He was in parliament under Henry the eighth; and, in 1542, imprisoned by that
whimsical tyrant, perhaps very unjustly, and for some cabal now not exactly
known. About the same time, in his juridical capacity, he translated the MAGNA
CHARTA from French into Latin and English, with some other statutes of England
For Robert Redman. No date. After 1540. At the end he is called George Ferrerz.
In duodecimo. Redman printed MA^NA CHARTA in French, 1529. Duodecim. oblong.
. In a scarce book, William Patten's Expedition into Scotland of the most
woorthely fortunate prince Edward duke of Somerset, printed at London in 1548
Dedicated to sir William Paget. Duodecimo. Compare Leland, ut supr. fol. 66.
, and partly incorporated into Hollinshead's history, it appears from the
following passage that he was of the suite of the protector Somerset. "George
Ferrers a gentleman of my lord Protectors, and one of the commissioners of the
carriage of this army." He is said to have compiled the history of queen Mary's
reign, which makes a part of Grafton's CHRONICLE Stowe, CHRON. p. 632.
. He was a composer almost by profession of occasional interludes for the
diversion of the court: and in 1553, being then a member of Lincoln's Inn, he
bore the office of LORD OF MISRULE at the royal palace of Greenwich during the
twelve days of Christmas. Stowe says, "George Ferrers gentleman of
Lincoln's Inn, being lord of the disportes all the 12 days of Christmas anno
MDLIII Hollinshead says 1552. fol. 1067.
, at Greenwich: who so pleasantly and wisely behaved himself, that the king had
great delight in his pastymes CHRON. p. 608. [See supr. vol. ii. p. 382.]
." No common talents were required for these festivities. Bale says that he
wrote some rhymes, rhythmos aliquot p. 108. SCRIPT. NOSTR. TEMP.
. He died at Flamstead in Hertfordshire in 1579. Wood's account of George
Ferrers, our author, who misled by Puttenham the author of the ART OF ENGLISH
POESY, has confounded him with Edward Ferrers a writer of plays, is full of
mistakes and inconsistencies ATH. OXON. i. 193. The same mistake is in Mere^'s
WITS TREASURY, printed in 1598. In reciting the dramatic poets of those times
he says, "Master Edward Ferris the author of the MIRROR FOR MAGISTRATES."
fol. 282. None of his plays, which, Puttenham says, "were written with much
skill and magnificence in his meter, and wherein the king had so much good
recreation that he had thereby many good rewards," are now remaining, and as I
suppose were never printed. He died and was buried in the church of
Bade^ley-Clinton in Warwickshire 1564. He was of Warwickshire, and educated at
Oxford. See Philip^'s TH^ATR. PO^T. p. 221. SUPPL. Land. 1674. 12mo. Another
Ferris [Richard] wrote The dangerous adventure of Richard Ferris and others who
undertook to row from Tower whar^e to Bristowe i^ a small wherry-boate, Land.
1590. 4to. I believe the names of all three should be written FERRERS.
. Our author wrote the epitaph of his friend Thomas Phayer, the old translator
of the Eneid into English verse, who died in 1560, and is buried in the church
of Kilgarran in Pembrokeshire.

Baldwyne and Ferrers, perhaps deterred by the greatness of the attempt, did
not attend to the series prescribed by Sackville; but inviting some others to
their assistance, among which are Churchyard and Phayer, chose such lives from
the newly published chronicles of Fabyan and Hall, as seemed to display the
most affecting catastrophes, and which very probably were pointed out by
Sackville. The civil wars of York and Lancaster, which Hall had compiled with a
laborious investigation of the subject, appear to have been their chief
resource.

These legends with their authors, including Sackville's part, are as follows.
Robert Tresilian chief Justice of England, in 1388, by Ferrers. The two
Mortimers, surnamed Roger, in 1329, and 1387, by Baldwyne. Thomas of Woodstock
duke of Gloucester, uncle to Richard the second, murdered in 1397, by Ferrers.
Lord Mowbray, preferred and banished by the same king in 1398, by Churchyard.
King Richard the second, deposed in 1399, by Baldwyne. Owen Glendour, the
pretended prince of Wales, starved to death in 1401, by Phayer. Henry Percy
earl of Northumberland, executed at York in 1407, by Baldwyne. Richard
Plantagenet earl of Cambridge, executed at Southampton in 1415, by Baldwyne.
Thomas Montague earl of Salisbury, in 1428, by Baldwyne. James the first of
Scotland, by Baldwyne. William de la Poole duke of Suffolk, p Hall's Union of
the two noble and illustrious families of York and Lancaster was printed at
London, for Berthelette, 1542. fol. Continued by Grafton the printer, from
Hall's manuscripts, Land. 1548. fol.
banished for destroying Humphry duke of Gloucester in 1450, by Baldwyne. Jack
Cade the rebel in 1450, by Baldwyne. Richard Plantagenet duke of York, and his
son the earl of Rutland, killed in 1460, by Baldwyne. Lord Clifford, in 1461,
by Baldwyne. Tiptoft earl of Worcester, in 1470, by Baldwyne. Richard Nevil
earl of Warwick, and his brother John lord Montacute, killed in the battle of
Barnet, 1471, by Baldwyne. King Henry the sixth murdered in the Tower London,
in 1471, by Baldwyne. George Plantagenet, third son of the duke of York,
murdered by his brother Richard in 1478, by Baldwyne. Edward the fourth, who
died suddenly in 1483, by Skeleton Printed in his WORKS. But there is an old
edition of this piece alone, without date, in duodecimo.
. Sir Anthony Woodville, lord Rivers and Scales, governor of prince Edward,
murdered with his nephew lord Gray in 1483, by Baldwyne The SECOND PART
begins with this Life.
. Lord Hastings betrayed by Catesby, and murdered in the Tower by Richard duke
of Gloucester, in 1483 Subscribed in Niccols's edition, " Master D." that is,
John Dolman. It was intended to introduce here The two Princes murdered in the
tower, "by the lord Vaulx, who undertook to pen it, says Baldwyne, but what
he has done therein I am not certain." fol. cxiiii. b. Dolman abovementioned
was of the Middle Temple. He translated into English Tully's TUSCULANE
QUESTIONS, dedicated to Jewel bishop of Salisbury, and printed in 1561,
duodecimo.
. Sackville's INDUCTION. Sackville's Duke of Buckingham. Collingbourne, cruelly
executed for making a foolish rhyme, by Baldwyne. Richard duke of Gloucester,
slain in Bosworth field by Henry the seventh, in 1485, by Francis Seagers A
translator of the PSALMS, see supr. p. 181.
. Jane Shore, by Churchyard In the Prologue which follows, Baldwyne says, he
was "exhorted to procure Master Churchyard to undertake and to pen as many
more of the remaynder, as might be attained, etc." fol. clvi. a.
. Edmund duke of Somerset killed in the first battle of Saint Albans in 1454,
by Ferrers. Michael Joseph the blacksmith and lord Audely, in 1496, by Cavyl.

It was injudicious to choose so many stories which were then recent. Most of
these events were at that time too well known to become the proper subject of
poetry, and must have lost much of their solemnity by their notoriety. But
Shakespeare has been guilty of the same fault. The objection, however, is now
worn away, and age has given a dignity to familiar circumstances.

This collection, or set of poems, was printed in quarto, in 1559, with the
following title. "A MYRROVRE FOR MAGISTRATES, Wherein may be seen by example of
others, with how grievous plages vices are punished, and how frayl and
unstable worldly prosperity is found, even of those whom Fortune seems most
highly to favor. Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum. Anno 1559.
Londini, in aedibus Thomae Marshe." A Mirror was a favorite title of a book,
especially among the old French writers. Some anecdotes of the publication may
be collected from Baldwyne's DEDICATION TO THE NOBILITY, prefixed. "The wurke
was begun and part of it prynted in Queen Mary's time, but hyndred by the
Lord Chancellor that then was This chancellor must have been bishop Gardener.
: nevertheles, through the means of my lord Stafford Henry lord Stafford, son
and heir of Edward last duke of Buckingham, a scholar and a writer. See Wood,
ATH. OXON. i. 108. One of his books is dedicated to the Protector Somerset.
Aubrey gives us a rhyming epitaph in Howard's chapel in Lambeth church, written
by this nobleman to his sister the duchess of Norfolk. SURREY, vol. v. p. 236.
It is subscribed "by thy most bounden brother Henry lord Stafford." Bale says
that he was "vir multarum rerum ac disciplinarum notitia ornatus," and that he
died in 1558. par. post. 112.
, the first part was licenced, and imprynted the first year of the raygne of
this our most noble and virtuous queen Elisabeth.
, and dedicated then to your honors with this preface. Since which time,
although I have been called to another trade of life, yet my good lord Stafford
has not ceased to call upon me to publyshe so much as I had gotten at other
men's hands, so that through his lordshyppes earnest means I have now also set
forth another part, containing as little of mine own as the first part does
of other men's SIGNAT. C ii.
."

The plan was confessedly borrowed from Boccace's DE CASIBUS PRINCIPUM, a book
translated, as we have seen, by Lydgate, but which never was popular, because
it had no English examples. But Baldwyne's scope and conduct, with respect to
this and other circumstances, will best appear from his Preface, which cannot
easily be found, and which I shall therefore insert at large. "When the printer
had purposed with himself to printe Lydgate's book of the FALL OF PRINCES,
and had made pryvye thereto many both honorable and worshipful, he was
counsayled by dyvers of them, to procure to have the story contynewed from
where as Bochas left, unto this present time; chiefly of such as Fortune had
dalyed with in this ylande. -- Which advyse lyked him so well, that he required
me to take pains therein. But because it was a matter passing my wit and skyll,
and more thankles than gaineful to meddle in, I refused utterly to undertake
it, except I might have the help of such, as in wit were apt, in learning
allowed, and in judgment and estymacyon able to wield and furnysh so weighty
an enterprise, thinkyng even so to shift my hands. But he, earnest and
diligent in his affairs, procured Atlas to set under his shoulder. For shortly
after, diverse learned men, whose many gifts need few praises, consented to
take upon them part of the travayle. And when certain of them, to the number
of seven, were through a general assent at an appointed time and place gathered
together to devyse thereupon, I resorted unto them, bearing the book of Bochas
translated by Dan Lidgate, for the better observation of his order. Which
although we liked well, yet would it not cumly serve, seeing that both Bochas
and Lidgate were dead; neither were there any alive that meddled with like
argument, to whom the UNFORTUNATE might make make their moan. To make therefore
a state mete for the matter, they all agreed that I should usurp Bochas rowme,
and the WRETCHED PRINCES complain unto me: and take upon themselves every man
for his part to be sundry personages, and in their behalfes to bewail unto ME
their greevous chances, heavye destinies, and woeful misfortunes. This done, we
opened such books of Cronicles as we had there present. And master Ferrers,
after he had found where Bochas left, which was about the end of king Edward
the thirdes reign, to begin the matter said thus."

"I marvayle what Bochas means, to forget among his MISERABLE PRINCES such as
were of our nation, whose number is as great, as their adventures wunderfull.
For to let pass all, both Britons, Danes, and Saxons, and to come to the last
Conquest, what a sort are they How many they are^ ^l^ude. Crew.
, and some even in his [Boccace's] own time! As for example, king Richard the
first, slain with a quarle Q^ar^ll. The bol^ of a cros^-bow.
in his chyefe prosperity. Also king John his brother, as sum say, poisoned.
Are not their histories rufull, and of rare example? But as it should appear,
he being an Italian, minded most the Roman and Italike story, or else perhaps he
wanted our country Cronicles. It were therefore a goodly and a notable matter,
to search and discourse our whole story from the first beginning of the
inhabiting of the isle. But seeing the printer's mind is, to have us follow
where Lidgate left, we will leave that great labor to other that may intend
it, and (as blind Bayard is always boldest) I will begin at the time of Rychard
the second, a time as unfortunate as the ruler therein. And forasmuch, friend
Baldwyne, as it shall be your charge to note and pen orderlye the whole process,
I will, so far as my memory and judgment serves, sumwhat further you in the
truth of the storye. And therefore omitting the ruffle of Jacke Straw and his
meyney Mu^^
, and the murder of many notable men which thereby happened, for Jacke, as ye
know, was but a poor prince; I will begin with a notable example which within
a while after ensued. And although he be no Great Prince, yet since he had a
princely office, I will take upon me the miserable person of sir ROBERT
TRESILIAN chyefe justyce of England, and of other which suffered with him.
Thereby to warn all of his authority and profession, to take heed of wrong
judgments, misconstruynge of laws, or wresting the same to serve the princes
turns, which ryghtfully brought them to a miserable end, which they may
justly lament in manner ensuing SI^NAT. A^ ii.
." Then follows sir ROBERT TRESILIAN'S legend or history, supposed to be spoken
by himself, and addressed to Baldwyne.

Here we see that a company was feigned to be assembled, each of which, one
excepted, by turns personates a character of one of the great Unfortunate: and
that the stories were all connected, by being related to the silent person of
the assembly, who is like the chorus in the Greek tragedies, or the Host in
Chaucer's Canterbury Tales. The whole was to form a sort of dramatic interlude,
including a series of independent soliloquies. A continuity to this imagined
representation is preserved by the introduction, after every soliloquy, of a
prose epilogue, which also serves as a prologue to the succeeding piece, and
has the air of a stage-direction. Boccace had done this before. We have this
interposition, which I give as a specimen, and which explains the method of the
recital, between the tragedies of king RICHARD THE SECOND and OWEN GLENDOUR.
"When he had ended this so woeful a tragedye, and to all PRINCES a right worthy
instruction, we paused: having passed through a miserable time, full of pyteous
tragedyes. And seeing the reygne of Henry the fourth ensued, a man more ware and
prosperous in his doings, although not untroubled with wars both of
outforthe and inward enemies, we began to search what Pyers [peers] were fallen
therein, whereof the number was not small: and yet because their examples were
not much to be noted for our purpose, we passed over all the Maskers, of whom
king Rycharde's brother was chief: which were all slain and put to death for
their traiterous attempt. And finding Owen Glendoure next one of Fortune's
own whelps, and the Percyes his confederates, I thought them unmete to be
overpassed, and therefore said thus to the sylent cumpany, What, my masters,
is every one at once in a brown study, and has no man affection to any of
these stories? You mind so much some other belyke, that those do not move you.
And to say the troth, there is no special cause why they should. Howbeyt Owen
Glendoure, because he was one of Fortune's darlings, rather than he should be
forgotten, I will tell his tale for him, under the privelidge of Martine
hundred. Which OWEN, cuming out of the wild mountains like the Image of Death
in all points, (his darte only excepted,) so sore has famyne and hunger
consumed him, may lament his folly after this manner." This process was a
departure from Sackville's idea: who supposes, as I have hinted, the scene laid
in hell, and that the unfortunate princes appeared to him in succession, and
uttered their respective complaints, at the gates of Elysium, under the
guidance of SORROW.

Many stanzas in the legends written by Baldwyne That is, Baldwyne had
previously prepared and written his l^gend or monologue, and one of the company
was to act his part, and assume this appearance^ fol. xviii^ b.
and Ferrers, and their friends, have considerable merit, and often show a
command of language and versification These lines in COLLINGBOURNE'S legend are
remarkable, fol. cxliiii. a. Like Pegasus a poet must have wings,
To slye to heaven, or where him likes best;
He must have knowledge of eternal things,
Almighti^ Jove must harbor in his breast.

. But their performances have not the pathos which the subject so naturally
suggests. They give us, yet often with no common degree of elegance and
perspicuity, the chronicles of Hall and Fabyan in verse. I shall therefore, in
examining this part of the MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES, confine my criticism to
Sackville's INDUCTION and Legend of Buckingham.

SECT. XXXI.
SACKVILLE'S INDUCTION, which was to have been placed at the head of our
English tragical story, and which loses much of its dignity and propriety by
being prefixed to a single life, and that of no great historical importance, is
opened with the following poetical landscape of winter See fol. cxvi.
.

The wrathful winter, prochinge on apace,
With blustering blasts had all ybard the treene;
And old Saturnus with his frosty face
With chilling cold had pearst the tender green:
The mantels rent, wherein enwrapped been
The gladsom groves, that now lay overthrowen,
The tapets torn, and every bloom down blown.
The soil that erst so seemly was to seen,
Was all despoyled of her beauty's hew;
And soote fresh flowers, wherewith the summers queen
Had clad the earth, now Boreas blastes down blewe;
And small fowls flocking in their song did rewe
The winters wrath, wherewith each thing defaste
In woeful wise bewayld the summer paste.
Hawthorne had lost his motley lyverye,
The naked twigges were shivering all for cold;
And droppinge down the tears abundantly,
Each thing, methought, with weping ^ye me told
The cruel season, bidding me witholde
Myself within: for I was gotten out
Into the feldes where as I walked about.
When lo the night, with mistie mantels spread,
Began dark the day, and dim the azure skies, etc.
The altered scene of things, the flowers and verdure of summer deformed by the
frosts and storms of winter, and the day suddenly overspread with darkness,
remind the poet of the uncertainties of human life, the transient state of
honor, and the instability of prosperity.

And sorrowing I to see the summer flowers,
The lively green, the lusty leas forlorn,
The sturdy trees so shattred with the showers,
The fields so fade, that floorisht so beforne;
It taught we well, all earthly things be borne
To dye the death, for naught long time may last:
If sommors beauty yields to winters blast.
Then looking upwards to the heavens beams,
With nights stars thick-powdred every where,
Which erst so glistened with the golden streams
That cheerful Phoebus spread down from his sphere,
Beholding dark, oppressing day, so near;
The sudden sight reduced to my mind
The sundry chaunges that in earth we find.
Immediately the figure of SORROW suddenly appears, which shows the poet in a
new and bolder mode of composition.

And strayt forth stalking with redoubled pace,
For that I saw the night drew on so fast,
In black all clad there fell before my face
A piteous wight, whom woe had all forwast;
Forth from her iyen the crystal tears outbrast,
And syghing sore her haunds she wrong and fold,
Tare al her hair that ruth was to behold.
Her body small, forwithered and forespent,
As is the stalk that summers drought oppressed;
Her wealked face with woeful tears besprent,
Her color pale, and, as it seemed her best,
In woe and playnt reposed was her rest:
And as the stone that drops of water wears,
So dented were her cheeks with fall of tears. --
I stood aghast, beholding all her plight,
Tween dread and dolor so distreynd in heart,
That while my hears upstarted with the sight,
The tears outstreamde for sorrow of her smatt.
But when I saw no end, that could aparte
The deadly dole which she so sore did make,
With doleful voice then thus to her I spoke.
Unwrap thy woes, whatever wight thou be!
And stint betime to spill thyselfe with playnt.
Tell what thou art, and whence, for well I see
Thou can not dure with sorrow thus attaynt.
And with that word, of sorrow all forfaynt,
She looked up, and prostrate as she lay,
With piteous sound, lo! thus she began to say.
Alas, I wretch, whom thu^ thou ^eest distrayned,
With wasting woes, that never shall aslake,
SORROW I am, in endeles torments payned,
Among the Furies in the infernal lake;
Where Pluto god of hell so grisly blake
Does hold his throne, and Lethes deadly taste
Does reive remembrance of ^che thing forepast.
Whence come I am, the drery destiny,
And luckles lot, for to bemone of those,
Whom Fortune in this maze of misery,
Of wretched chance, most woeful myrrours chose:
That when thou ^ee^t how lightly they did lose
Their pomp, their power, and that they thought most sure,
Thou may soon deem no earthlye joye may dure.
SORROW then conducts the poet to the classical hell, to the place of torments
and the place of happiness.

I shall thee guide first to the griesly lake,
And thence unto the blissfull place of rest:
Where thou shall see and hear the playnt they make,
That whilom here bare swinge Sway.
among the best.
This shall thou see. But great is the unrest
That thou must bide, before thou can attain
Unto the dreadful place where those remain.
And with these words as I upraysed stood
And began to follow her that straight forth paste,
Ere I was ware, into a desert wood
We now were come: where hand in hand embraced,
She led the way, and through the thick so traced
As, but I had been guyded by her might,
It was no way for any mortal wight.
But lo! while thus amid the desert dark
We passed on, with steps and pace unmeete,
A rumbling roar confusde, with howl and bark
Of dogs, shook all the ground under our feet,
And struck the din within our ears so deep,
As half distraught unto the ground I fell,
Besought return, and not to visit hell. --
An hydeous hole al vast, withouten shape,
Of endless depth, orewhelmde with ragged stone,
With oughly mouth and griesly jaws does gape,
And to our sight confounds itself in one.
Here entered we, and yeding Going.
forth, anon
An horrible lothly lake we might discern,
As black as pitche, that cleped Called.
is Averne.
A deadly gulf where naught but rubbish grows,
With foul blake swelth in thickened lumpes that lies,
Which upp in the air such stinking vapor throws,
That over there may fly no foul, but dies
Choakt with the noysom vapors that arise.
Hither we come, whence forth we still did pace,
In dreadful fear amid the dreadful place.
Our author appears to have felt and to have conceived with true taste, that
very romantic part of Virgil's Eneid which he has here happily copied and
heightened. The imaginary beings which sat within the porch of hell, are all
his own. I must not omit a single figure of this dreadful groupe, nor one
compartment of the portraitures which are feigned to be sculptured or painted
on the SHIELD of WAR, indented with gashes deep and wide.

And, first, within the porch and jaws of hell
Sat deep REMORSE OF CONSCIENCE, all besprent
With tears; and to herself often would she tell
Her wretchedness, and, cursing, never stent
To sob and sigh, but ever thus lament
With thoughtful care; as she that, all in vain,
Would wear and waste continually in pain:
Her eyes unstedfast, rolling here and there,
Whirled on each place, as place that vengeance brought,
So was her mind continually in fear,
Tossed and tormented with the tedious thought
Of those detested crimes which she had wrought;
With dreadful cheer, and looks thrown to the sky,
Wishing for death, and yet she could not die.
Next, saw we DREAD, all trembling how he shook,
With foot uncertain, profer'd here and there,;
Benumbed with speech; and, with a ghastly look,
Searched every place, all pale and dead for fear,
His cap born up with with staring of his hair;
'Stoin'd and amazed at his own shade for dread,
And fearing greater dangers than was need.
And, next, within the entry of this lake,
Sat fell REVENGE, gnashing her teeth for ire;
Devising means how she may vengeance take;
Never in rest, 'till she have her desire;
But frets within so far forth with the fire
Of wreaking flames, that now determines she
To die by death, or 'veng'd by death to be.
When fell REVENGE, with bloody foul pretense,
Had showed herself, as next in order set,
With trembling limbs we softly parted thence,
'Till in our eyes another sight we met;
When fro my heart a sigh forthwith I fet,
Ruing, alas, upon the woeful plight
Of MISERY, that next appeared in sight:
His face was lean, and some-deal pined away^
And eke his hands consumed to the bone;
But, what his body was, I cannot say,
For on his carcass raiment had he none,
Save clouts and patches pieced one by one;
With staff in hand, and scrip on shoulders cast,
His chief defense against the winter's blast:
His food, for most, was wild fruits of the tree,
Unless sometime some crumbs fell to his share,
Which in his wallet long, God wot, kept he,
As on the which full daint'ly would he fare;
His drink, the running stream, his cup, the bare
Of his palm closed; his bed, the hard cold ground:
To this poor life was MISERY ybound.
Whose wretched state when we had well beheld,
With tender ruth on him, and on his feers,
In thoughtful cares forth then our pace we held;
And, by and by, another shape appears
Of greedy CARE, still brushing up the breers;
His knuckles knob'd, his flesh deep dinted in,
With tawed hands, and hard ytanned skin:
The morrow gray no sooner has begun
To spread his light, even peeping in our eyes,
But he is up, and to his work yrun;
But let the night's black misty mantles rise,
And with foul dark never so much disguise
The fair bright day, yet cease he no while,
But has his candles to prolong his toil.
By him lay heavy SLEEP, the cousin of Death,
Flat on the ground, and still as any stone,
A very corpse, save yielding forth a breath;
Small keep took he, whom fortune frowned on,
Or whom she lifted up into the throne
Of high renown, but, as a living death,
So, dead alive, of life he drew the breath:
The body's rest, the quiet of the heart,
The travel's ease, the still night's feer was he,
And of our life in earth the better part;
Rever of sight, and yet in whom we see
Things often that chance and often that never be;
Without respect, esteemed equally
King CROESUS' pomp and IRUS' poverty.
And next, in order sad, OLD AGE we found:
His beard all hoar, his eyes hollow and blind;
With drooping cheer still poring on the ground,
As on the place where nature him assigned
To rest, when that the sisters had untwin'd
His vital th^^ad, and ended with their knife
The fleeting course of fast-declining life:
There heard we him with broken and hollow plaint
Rue with himself his end approaching fast,
And all for naught his wretched mind torment
With sweet remembrance of his pleasures past,
And fresh delights of lusty youth forewaste;
Recounting which, how would he sob and shriek,
And to be young again of JOVE beseek!
But, an' the cruel fates so fixed be
That time forepast cannot return again,
This one request of JOVE yet prayed he, --
That, in such withered plight, and wretched pain,
As eld, accompanied with her loathsome train,
Had brought on him, all were it woe and grief,
He might a while yet linger forth his lief,
And not so soon descend into the pit;
Where Death, when he the mortal corpse has slain,
With rechless hand in grave does cover it;
Thereafter never to enjoy again
The gladsome light, but, in the ground ylain,
In depth of darkness waste and wear to naught,
As he had never into the world been brought:
But who had seen him sobbing how he stood
Unto himself, and how he would bemoan
His youth forepast, -- as though it wrought him good
To talk of youth, all were his youth foregone, --
He would have mused, and marvel'd much, whereon
This wretched Age should life desire so fain,
And knows full well life does but length his pain:
Crook-back'd he was, tooth-shaken, and blear-eyed;
Went on three feet, and, sometimes, crept on four;
With old lame bones, that rattled by his side;
His scalp all pil'd, and he with eld forelore,
His withered fist still knocking at death's door;
Fumbling, and driveling, as he draws his bread;
For brief, the shape and messenger of Death.
And fast by him pale MALADY was placed:
Sore sick in bed, her color all foregone;
Bereft of stomach, savor, and of taste,
Ne could she brook no meat but broths alone;
Her breath corrupt; her keepers every one
Abhorring her; her sickness past recure,
Detesting physic, and all physick's cure.
But, O, the doleful sight that then we see!
We turned our look, and on the other side
A grisly shape of FAMINE might we see:
With greedy looks, and gaping mouth, that cried
And roared for meat, as she should there have died;
Her body thin and bare as any bone,
Whereto was left naught but the case alone,
And that, alas, was gnaw'n on every where,
All full of holes; that I ne might refrain
From tears, to see how she her arms could tear,
And with her teeth gnash on the bones in vain,
When, all for naught, she fain would so sustain
Her starven corpse, that rather seemed a shade
Than any substance of a creature made:
Great was her force, whom stone-wall could not stay:
Her tearing nails snatching at all she saw;
With gaping jaws, that by no means ymay
Be satisfied from hunger of her maw,
But eats herself as she that has no law;
Gnawing, alas, her carcass all in vain,
Where you may count each sinew, bone, and vein.
On her while we thus firmly fixed our eyes,
That bled for ruth of such a dreary sight,
Lo, suddenly she shright in so huge wise
As made hell gates to shiver with the might;
Wherewith, a dart we saw, how it did light
Right on her breast, and, therewithal, pale DEATH
Enthrilling it, to reve her of her b^eath:
And, by and by, a dumb dead corpse we saw,
Heavy, and cold, the shape of Death aright,
That daunts all earthly creatures to his law,
Against whose force in vain it is to fight;
Ne peers, ne princes, nor no mortal wight,
No towns, ne realms, cities, ne strongest tower,
But all, per^orce, must yield unto his power:
His dart, anon, out of the corpse he took,
And in his hand (a dreadful sight to see)
With great triumph ^^tsoons the same he shook,
That most of all my fears affrayed me;
His body dight with naught but bones, pardy;
The naked shape of man there saw I plain,
All save the flesh, the sinew, and the vein.
Lastly, stood WAR, in glittering arms yclad,
With visage grim, stern looked, and blackly hued:
In his right hand a naked sword he had,
That to the hilts was all with blood imbrued;
And in his left (that kings and kingdoms rued)
Famine and fire he held, and therewithal
He razed towns, and threw down towers and all:
Cities he sacked, and realms (that whilom flowered
In honor, glory', and rule, above the rest)
He overwhelmed, and all their fame devoured,
Consumed, destroyed, wasted, and never c^as'd
'Till he their wealth, their name, and all oppressed:
His face forehew'd with wounds; and by his side
There hung his TARGE, with gashes deep and wide:
In mids of which depainted there we found
Deadly DEBATE, all full of snaky hair
That with a bloody fillet was ybound,
Outbreathing naught but discord every where:
And round about were portrayed, here and there,
The hugy hosts; DARIUS and his power,
His kings, his princes, peers, and all his flower. --
XERXES, the Persian king, yet saw I there,
With his huge host, that drank the rivers dry,
Dismounted hills, and made the vales uprear;
His host and all yet saw I slain, pardy:
Thebes too I saw, all razed how it did lie
In heaps of stones; and Tyrus put to spoil,
With walls and towers flat-^ven'd with the soil.
But Troy, (alas!) methought, above them all,
It made mine eyes in very tears consume;
When I beheld the woeful word befall,
That by the wrathful will of gods was come,
And JOVE'S unmoved sentence and foredoom
On PRIAM king and on his town so bent,
I could not lin but I must there lament;
And that the more, since destiny was so stern
As, force perforce, there might no force avail
But she must fall: and, by her fall, we learn
That cities, towers, wealth, world, and all shall quail;
No manhood, might, nor nothing might prevail;
All were there pressed, full many a prince and peer,
And many a knight that sold his death full dear:
Not worthy HECTOR, worthiest of them all,
Her hope, her joy, his force is now for naught:
O Troy, Troy, Troy, there is no boot but bale!
The hugy horse within thy walls is brought;
Thy turrets fall; thy knights, that whilom fought
In arms amid the field, are slain in bed;
Thy gods defiled, and all thy honor dead:
The flames upspring, and cruelly they creep
From wall to roof, 'till all to cinders waste:
Some fire the houses where the wretches sleep;
Some rush in here, some run in there as fast;
In every where or sword, or fire, they taste:
The walls are torn, the towers whirled to the ground;
There is no mischief but may there be found.
CASSANDRA yet there saw I how they haled
From PALLAS' house, with spercled tress undone,
Her wrists fast bound, and with Greek rout impaled;
And PRIAM eke, in vain how he did run
To arms, whom PYRRHUS with despite has done
To cruel death, and bathed him in the baign
Of his son's blood before the altar slain.
But how can I descrive the doleful sight
That in the shield so lively fair did shine?
Since in this world, I think, was never wight
Could have set forth the half not half so fine:
I can no more, but tell how there is seen
Fair ILIUM fall in burning red gledes down,
And, from the soil, great Troy, NEPTUNUS' town.
These shadowy inhabitants of hell-gate are conceived with the vigor of a
creative imagination, and described with great force of expression. They are
delineated with that fullness of proportion, that invention of picturesqu^
^^tributes, distinctness, animation, and amplit^de, of which Spenser is
commonly supposed to have given the first specimens in our language, and which
are characteristical of his poetry. We may venture to pronounce that Spenser,
at least, caught his manner of designing allegorical personages from this
model, which so greatly enlarged the former narrow bounds of our ideal imagery,
as that it may justly be deemed an original in that style of painting. For we
must not forget, that it is to this INDUCTION that Spenser alludes, in a sonnet
prefixed to his Pastorals, in 1579, addressed To the right honorable THE LORD
OF BUCKHURST, one of her majesty's privy council.

In vain I think, right honorable lord,
By this rude rhyme to memorize thy name,
Whose learned Muse has writ her own record
In golden verse, worthy immortal fame.
Thou much more fit, were leisure for the same,
Thy gracious sovereigns praises to compile,
And her imperial m^jestie to frame
In lofty numbers and heroic style.
The readers of the FAERIE QUEEN will easily point out many particular
passages which Sackville's INDUCTION suggested to Spenser.

From this scene SORROW, who is well known to Charon, and to Cerberus the
hideous hound of hell, leads the poet over the loathsome lake of rude Acheron,
to the dominions of Pluto, which are described in numbers too beautiful to have
been relished by his cotemporaries, or equalled by his successors.

Thence come we to the horror and the hell,
The large great kingdoms, and the dreadful raygne
Of Pluto in his trone where he did dwell,
The wide waste places, and the hugie plain;
The waylinges, shrykes, and sundry sorts of pain,
The syghes, the sobbes, the deep and deadly groan,
Earth, air, and all resounding playnt and moan The two next stanzas ar^ not
in the first edition, of 1559. But instead of the^, the following stanza. Here
pulled the babes, and here the maids unwed
With folded hands their sorry chance bewayl'd;
Here wept the guiltles^ Slain, and lovers dead
That slew themselves when nothing else avayl'd.
A thousand sorts of sorrows here that wayl'd
With sighs, and tears, sobs, shricks, and all yfere,
That, O alas! it was a hell to here, etc.

.
Thence did we pass the threefold emperie
To the utmost bounds where Rhadamanthus reigns,
Where proud folk wail their woeful misery;
Where dreadful din of thousand dragging chains,
And baleful shri^kes of ghosts in deadly pains
Torturd eternally are heard most brim Breme, i. ^. curel.

Through silent shades of night so dark and dim.
From hence upon our way we forward pass,
And through the groves and uncoth paths we go,
Which lead unto the Cyclops walls of brass:
And where that main broad flood for aye does floe,
Which parts the gladsome fields from place of woe:
Whence none shall ever pass to Elysium plain,
Or from Elysium ever turn again.
Here they are surrounded by a troop of men, the most in arms bedight, who met
an untimely death, and of whose destiny, whether they were sentenced to eternal
night or to blissfull peace, it was uncertain.

Lo here, quoth SORROW, Princes of renown
That whilom sat on top of Fortune's wheel,
Now laid full low, like wretches whurled down
Even with one frown, that staid but with a smile, etc.
They pass in order before SORROW and the poet. The first is Henry duke of
Buckingham, a principal instrument of king Richard the third.

Then first came Henry duke of Buckingham,
His cloak of black, all pild, and quite forlorn,
Wringing his hands, and Fortune often does blame,
Which of a duke has made him now her skorne;
With ghastly lokes, as one in manner lorne,
Often spread his arms, str^tcht hands he joins as fast,
With rufull cheer and vapored eyes up^ast.
His cloak he rent, his manly breast he beat;
His hair al torn, about the place it layne:
My heart so molt Melted:
to see his grief so great,
As feelingly, methought, it dropped away:
His eyes they whurled about withouten stay:
With stormy syghes the place did so complain,
As if his heart at each had burst in twain.
Thryse he began to tell his doleful tale,
And thryse the syghes did swalowe up his voyse;
At each of which he shryked so withale,
As though the heavens ryved with the noise:
Til at the last recovering his voyse;
Supping the tears that all his breast beraynde
On cruel Fortune weping thus he playnde.
Nothing more fully illustrates and ascertains the respective merits and genius
of different poets, than a juxtaposition of their performances on similar
subjects. Having examined at large Sackville's Descent into Hell, for the sake
of throwing a still stronger light on his manner of treating a fiction which
gives so large a scope to fancy, I shall employ the remainder of this Section
in setting before my reader a general view of Dante's Italian poem, entitled
COMMEDIA, containing a description of Hell, Paradise, and Purgatory, and
written about the year 1310. In the mean time, I presume that most of my
readers will recollect and apply the sixth Book of Virgil: to which, however,
it may be necessary to refer occasionally.

Although I have before insinuated that Dante has in this poem used the ghost
of Virgil for a mystagogue, in imitation of Tully, who in the SOMNIUM Scipionis
supposes Scipio to have shown the other world to his ancestor Africanus, yet at
the same time in the invention of his introduction, he seems to have had an eye
on the exordium of an old forgotten Florentine poem called TESORETTO, written
in Frottola, or a short irregular measure, exhibiting a cyclopede of theoretic
and practic philosophy, and composed by his preceptor Brunetto Latini about the
year 1270 See supr. vol. ii. 219.
. Brunetto supposes himself lost in a wood, at the foot of a mountain covered
with animals, flowers, plants, and fruits of every species, and subject to the
supreme command of a wonderful Lady, whom he thus describes. "Her head touched
the heavens, which served at once for a veil and an ornament. The sky grew dark
or serene at her voice, and her arms extended to the extremities of the earth
See supr. vol. ii. 263.
." This bold personification, one of the earliest of the rude ages of poetry,
is NATURE. She converses with the poet, and describes the creation of the
world. She enters upon a most unphilosophical and indeed unpoetical detail of
the physical system: developes the head of man, and points out the seat of
intelligence and of memory. From physics she proceeds to morals: but her
principles are here confined to theology and the laws of the church, which she
couches in technical rhymes Brunetto's TESORETTO was abstracted by himself from
his larger prose work on the same subject, written in old French and never
printed, entitled TESORO. See supr. vol. ii. 116. 222. And HIST. ACAD.
INSCRIPT. tom. vii. 296. seq. The TESORO was afterward translated into Italian
by one Bono Giamboni, and printed at Trevisa, viz. "IL T^SORO di Messer
Brunetto Latino, Fiorentino, Precettore del divino poeta Dante: nel qual si
tratta di tutte le cose che a mortali se appartengeno. In Trivisa, 1474. fol.
After a table of chapters is another title, "Qui inchomincia el Tesoro di S.
Brunetto Latino di firenze: e parla del nascimento e della natura di tutte le
cose." It was printed again at Venice, by Marchio Sessa, 1533. octavo. Mabillon
seems to have confounded this Italian translation with the French original. IT.
ITALIC. p. 169. See also Salviat^, AVERTIS. DECAM. ii. xii. Dante int^oduces
Brunetto in the fifteenth Can^o of the INFERNO: and after the colophon of the
first edition of the Italian TESORO abovementioned, is this insertion.
"Risposta di Dante a Brunetto Latino ritrovado da lui nel quintodecimo canto
nel suo inferno." The TESORETTO or Little Treasure, mentioned above in the
text, has been printed, but is exceedingly scarce.
.

Dante, like his master Brunetto, is bewildered in an unfrequented forest. He
attempts to climb a mountain, whose summit is illuminated by the rising sun. A
furious leopard, pressed by hunger, and a lion, at whose aspect the air is
affrighted, accompanied by a she-wolf, oppose his progress; and force him to
fly precipitately into the profundities of a pathless valley, where, says the
poet, the sun was silent.

Mi ripingeva dove'l sol tace INF. CANT. i. The same bold metaphor occurs
below, CANT. v. Evenni in luogo d'ogni LUCE MUTO.

.
In the middle of a vast solitude he perceives a spectre, of whom he implores
pity and help. The spectre hastens to his cries: it was the shade of Virgil,
whom Beatrix, Dante's mistress, had sent, to give him courage, and to guide him
into the regions of hell See supr. vol. ii. p. 219.
. Virgil begins a long discourse with Dante; and expostulates with him for
choosing to wander through the rough obscurities of a barren and dreary vale,
when the top of the neighboring mountain afforded every delight. The
conversation of Virgil, and the name of Beatrix, by degrees dissipate the fears
of the poet, who explains his situation. He returns to himself, and compares
this revival of his strength and spirits to a flower smitten by the frost of a
night, which again lifts its shrinking head, and expands its vivid colors, at
the first gleamings of the morning-sun.

Qual' il fioretti dal notturno gelo
Chinati et chiusi, etc CANT. ii. In another part of the INFERNO, Virgil is
angry with Dante, but is soon reconciled. H^re the poet compares himself to a
cottager in the early part of a promising spring, who looks out in the morning
from his humble shed, and see^ the fields covered with a severe and unexpected
frost. But the sun soon melts the ground, and he drives his goats a^ield. CANT.
xxiv. This poem abound^ in comparisons, Not one of the worst is a comic one, in
which a person looking sharply and eagerly, is compared to an old tailor
threading a needle. INP. CANT. xv.
. --
Dante, under the conduct of Virgil, penetrates hell. But he does not on this
occasion always avail himself of Virgil's descriptions and mythologies. At
least the formation of Dante's imageries are of another school. He feigns his
hell to be a prodigious and almost bottomless abyss, which from its aperture to
its lowest depth preserves a rotund shape: or rather, an immense perpendicular
cavern, which opening as it descends into different circles, forms so many
distinct subterraneous regions. We are struck with horror at the commencement
of this dreadful adventure.

The first object which the poet perceives is a gate of brass, over which were
inscribed in characters of a dark hue, di color oscuro, these verses.

Per me si va nella citta dolente:
Per me si va nel eterno dolor:
Per me si va tra la perduta gente.
Giustizia mosse'l mio alto fattore:
Fece me li divina potestate,
La somma Sapienzia, e l'primo Amore He means the Platonic (...). The Italian
expositors will have it to be the Holy Ghost.
.
Dinanzi a me non fur cose create:
Se non eterne, el io duro eterno.
Lassate ogni speranza voi ch'entraste CANT. iii.
.
That is, "By me is the way to the woeful city. By me is the way to the eternal
pains. By me is the way to the damned race. My mighty maker was divine Justice
and Power, the Supreme Wisdom, and the First Love. Before me nothing was
created. If not eternal, I shall eternally remain. Put away all hope, ye that
enter."

There is a severe solemnity in these abrupt and comprehensive sentences, and
they are a striking preparation to the scenes that ensue. But the idea of such
an inscription on the brazen portal of hell, was suggested to Dante by books of
chivalry; in which the gate of an impregnable enchanted castle, is often
inscribed with words importing the dangers or wonders to be found within. Over
the door of every chamber in Spenser's necromantic palace of Busyrane, was
written a threat to the champions who presumed to attempt to enter FAIR. QU.
iii. xi. 54.
. This total exclusion of hope from hell, here so finely introduced and so
forcibly expressed, was probably remembered by Milton, a disciple of Dante,
where he describes,

Regions of sorrow, doleful shades, where peace
And rest can never dwell, HOPE NEVER COMES
THAT COMES TO ALL PAR. L. i. 65.
. --
I have not time to follow Dante regularly through his dialogues and adventures
with the crowds of ghosts, ancient and modern, which he meets in the course of
this infernal journey. In these interviews, there is often much of the party
and politics of his own times, and of allusion to recent facts. Nor have I
leisure particularly to display our author's punishments and phantoms. I
observe in general, that the groundwork of his hell is classical, yet with
many Gothic and extravagant innovations. The burning lakes, the fosses, and
fiery towers which surround the city of DIS, and the three Furies which wait at
its entrance, are touched with new strokes See CANT. ix. vii.
. The Gorgons, the Hydra, the Chimera, Cerberus, the serpent of Lerna, and the
rest of Virgil's, or rather Homer's, infernal apparitions, are dilated with new
touches of the terrible, and sometimes made ridiculous by the addition of comic
or incongruous circumstances, yet without any intention of burlesque. Because
Virgil had mentioned the Harpies in a single word only Gorgones, HARPYIAEQUE.
vi. 289.
, in one of the loathsome groves which Dante passes, consisting of trees whose
leaves are black, and whose knotted boughs are hard as iron, the Harpies build
their nests CANT. xiii.
.

Non frondi verdi, ma di color fosco,
Non rami schietti, ma nodosi e'nvolti,
Non pomi v'eran, ma stecchi con tosco.
Cacus, whom Virgil had called Semifer in his seventh book, appears in the
shape of a Centaur covered with curling snakes, and on whose neck is perched a
dragon hovering with expanded wings CANT. xxv.
. It is supposed that Dante took the idea of his INFERNO from a magnificent
nightly representation of hell, exhibited by the pope in honor of the bishop
of Ostia on the river Arno at Florence, in the year 1304. This is mentioned by
the Italian critics in extenuation of Dante's choice of so strange a subject.
But why should we attempt to excuse any absurdity in the writings or manners of
the middle ages? Dante chose this subject as a reader of Virgil and Homer. The
religious MYSTERY represented on the river Arno, however magnificent, was
perhaps a spectacle purely orthodox, and perfectly conformable to the ideas of
the church. And if we allow that it might hint the subject, with all its
inconsistencies, it never could have furnished any considerable part of this
wonderful compound of classical and romantic fancy, of pagan and christian
theology, of real and fictitious history, of tragical and comic incidents, of
familiar and heroic manners, and of satirical and sublime poetry. But the
grossest improprieties of this poem discover an originality of invention, and
its absurdities often border on sublimity. We are surprised that a poet should
write one hundred cantos on hell, paradise, and purgatory. But this prolixity
is partly owing to the want of art and method: and is common to all early
compositions, in which every thing is related circumstantially and without
rejection, and not in those general terms which are used by modern writers.

Dante has beautifully enlarged Virgil's short comparison of the souls
lingering on the banks of Lethe, to the numerous leaves falling from the trees
in Autumn.

Come d'Autumno si levan le foglie
L'un appresso del'altra, infin che'l ramo
Vede a la terre tutte le sue spoglie;
Similmente, il mal seem d'Adamo
Getta si di quel lito ad una ad una
Per cenni, com'augel per suo richiamo CANT. iii.
.
In the Fields inhabited by unhappy lovers he sees Semiramis, Achilles, Paris,
and Tristan, or sir Tristram. One of the old Italian commentators on this poem
says, that the last was an English knight born in Cornovaglio, or Cornwall, a
city of England In the sixteenth Canto of the PARADISO, king Arthur's queen
GENEURA, who belongs to ^ir Tristram's romance, is mentioned.
.

Among many others of his friends, he sees Francisca the daughter of Guido di
Polenta, in whose palace Dante died at Ravenna, and Paulo one of the sons of
Malatesta lord of Rimini. This lady fell in love with Paulo; the passion was
mutual, and she was betrothed to him in marriage: but her family chose rather
that she should be married to Lanciotto, Paulo's eldest brother. This match had
the most fatal consequences. The injured lovers could not dissemble or stifle
their affection: they were surprised, and both assassinated by Lanciotto. Dante
finds the shades of these distinguished victims of an unfortunate attachment at
a distance from the rest, in a region of his INFERNO desolated by the most
violent tempests. He accosts them both, and Francisca relates their history:
yet the conversation is carried on with some difficulty, on account of the
impetuosity of the storm which was perpetually raging. Dante, who from many
circumstances of his own amors, appears to have possessed the most refined
sensibilities about the delicacies of love, enquires in what manner, when in
the other world, they first communicated their passion to each other. Francisca
answers, that they were one day sitting together, and reading the romance of
LANCELOT; where two lovers were represented in the same critical situation with
themselves. Their changes of color and countenance, while they were reading,
often tacitly betrayed their yet undiscovered feelings. When they came to that
passage in the romance, where the lovers, after many tender approaches, are
gradually drawn by one uniform reciprocation of involuntary attraction to kiss
each other, the book dropped from their hands. By a sudden impulse and an
irresistible sympathy, they are tempted to do the same. Here was the
commencement of their tragical history.

Noi leggiavam' un giorno per diletto
Di LANCILOTTO, comme amor le strinse;
Soli eravamo, et senza alcun sospetto.
Per piu fia^e gli occhi ci sospinse
Quella lettura et scolorocc' il viso:
Ma sol un punto fu qual che ci vinse.
Quando legemmo il disiato riso
Esser baciato da cotanto amante
Questi che may da me no fia diviso
La bocca mi bascio tutto tremante:
GALEOTTO He is one of the knights of the Round Table, and is commonly called
Sir GALHAAD, in ARTHUR'S romance.
fu il libro, et chi lo scrisse
Quel giorno piu non vi legemmo avante CANT. v.
.
But this picture, in which nature, sentiment, and the graces are concerned, I
have to contrast with scenes of a very different nature. Salvator Rosa has here
borrowed the pencil Correggio. Dante's beauties are not of the soft and gentle
kind.

-- Through many a dark and dreary vale
They passed, and many a region dolorous,
Over many a frozen many a fiery Alp Milton, PAR. L. ii. 618.
.
A hurricane suddenly rising on the banks of the river Styx is thus described.

Et gia venia su per le torbid onde
Un fracasso d'un suon pien di spavento,
Per cui tremavan amendue le sponde;
Non altrimenti fatto che d'un vento
Impetuoso per gli avversi ardori
Che fire la salva senz' alcun rattento
Gli rami schianta i abatte, et porta i fiori,
Dinanzi polveroso va superbo,
Et fa fuggir le fiere et glipastori CANT. ix.
.
Dante and his mystagogue meet the monster Geryon. He has the face of a man
with a mild and benign aspect, but his human form ends in a serpent with a
voluminous tail of immense length, terminated by a sting, which he brandishes
like a scorpion. His hands are rough with bristles and scales. His breast,
back, and sides have all the rich colors displayed in the textures of Tartary
and Turkey, or in the labors of Arachne. To speak in Spenser's language, he
is, -- A dragon, horrible and bright FAIR. QU. i. ix. 52.
.
No monster of romance is more savage or superb.

Lo dosso, e'l petto, ad amenduo le cost,
Dipinte avea di nodi, e di rotelle,
Con piu color sommesse e soppraposte
Non fur man in drappo Tartari ne Turchi,
Ne fur tar tale per Aragne imposte CANT. xvii. Dante says, that he ^ay on the
banks of a river like a Beaver, the CASTOR. But this foolish comparison is
affectedly introduced by our author for a display of his natural knowledge from
Pliny, or rather from the TESORO of his m^ster Brunetto.
.
The conformation of this heterogeneous beast, as a fabulous hell is the
subject, perhaps immediately gave rise to one of the formidable shapes which
sat on either side of the gates of hell in Milton. Although the fiction is
founded in the cla^^ics.

The one seemed woman to the waste and fair,
But ended foul in many a scaly fold
Voluminous and vast, a serpent armed
With mortal sting PAR. L. ii. 649.
. --
Virgil, seeming to acknowledge him as an old acquaintance, mounts the back of
Geryon. At the same time Dante mounts, whom Virgil places before, "that you may
not, says he, be exposed to the monster's venomous sting." Virgil then commands
Geryon not to move too rapidly, "for, consider, what a new burden you carry!"

-- "Gerion muoviti omai,
"Le ruote large, e lo scender sia poco:
"Pensa la nuova soma che tu hai CANT. xvii.
."
In this manner they travel in the air through Tartarus: and from the back of
the monster Geryon, Dante looks down on the burning lake of Phlegethon. This
imagery is at once great and ridiculous. But much later Italian poets have
fallen into the same strange mixture. In this horrid situation says Dante,

I sentia gia dalla man destra il gorgo
Far sotto noi un orribile stroscio:
Perch con gli occhi in giu la testa sporsi
Allor fu io piu timido allo scoscio
Perioch i vidi fuochi, e sent pianti,
Oud' io tremando tutto mi rancosco Ibid.
.
This airy journey is copied from the flight of Icarus and Phaeton, and at
length produced the Ippogrifo of Ariosto. Nor is it quite improbable, that
Milton, although he has greatly improved and dignified the idea, might have
caught from hence his fiction of Satan soaring over the infernal abyss. At
length Geryon, having circuited the air like a faulcon towering without prey,
deposits his burden and vanishes In the thirty-fourth CANTO, Dante and Virgil
return to light on the back of Lucifer, who (like Milton's Satan, ii. 927.) is
described as having wings like sails, Vele di mar non vid' io may est celi.
And again, -- Quando l'ale ^uro aperte assai.
This Canto begins with a Latin line, Vexilla regis prodeunt inferni.

.

While they are wandering along the banks of Phlegethon, as the twilight of
evening approaches, Dante suddenly hears the sound of a horn more loud than
thunder, or the horn of Orlando Or Roland, the subject of archbishop Turpin's
romance. See supr. vol. i. 132.
.

Ma io senti sonare alto corno: --
Non sono si terribilimente Orlando CANT. xxxi.
.
Dante descries through the gloom, what he thinks to be many high and vast
towers, molte alti torri. These are the giants who warred against heaven,
standing in a row, half concealed within and half extant without an immense
abyss or pit.

Gli orribili giganti, cui minaccia
Giove del cielo ancora quando tuona Ibid.
.
But Virgil informs Dante that he is deceived by appearances, and that these
are not towers but the giants.

Sappi, che non son torri ma giganti
E son nel pezzo intorno della ripa
D'all umbilico in guiso, tutti quanti Ibid.
.
One of them cries out to Dante with horrible voice. Another, Ephialtes, is
clothed in iron and bound with huge chains. Dante wishes to see Briareus: he
is answered, that he lies in an interior cavern biting his chain. Immediately
Ephialtes arose from another cavern, and shook himself like an earthquake.

Non fu tremuoto gia tanto rubesto,
Che schotesse una torri cosi forte,
Come Fialte a scuotersi fu presto Ibid.
.
Dante views the horn which had sounded so vehemently hanging by a leathern
thong from the neck of one of the giants. Antaeus, whose body stands ten else
high from the pit, is commanded by Virgil to advance. They both mount on his
shoulders, and are thus carried about Cocytus. The giant, says the poet, moved
off with us like the mast of a ship Dante says, if I understand the passage
right, that the face of one of the giants resembled the Cupola, shaped like a
pineapple, of saint Peter's church at Rome, ibid. CANT. xxxi. Come la pina di
san Pietro a Roma.

. One cannot help observing, what has been indeed already hinted, how
judiciously Milton, in a similar argument, has retained the just beauties, and
avoided the childish or l^dicrous excesses of these bold inventions. At the
same time we may remark, how Dante has sometimes heightened, and sometimes
diminished by improper additions or misrepresentations, the legitimate
descriptions of Virgil.

One of the torments of the Damned in Dante's INFERNO, is the punishment of
being eternally confined in lakes of ice.

Eran l'ombre dolenti nell ghiaccia
Mettendo i denti in nota di cicogna CANT. xxxii.
.
The ice is described to be like that of the Danube or Tanais. This species of
infernal torment, which is neither directly warranted by scripture, nor
suggested in the systems of the Platonic fabulists, and which has been adopted
both by Shakespeare and Milton, has its origin in the legendary hell of the
monks. The hint seems to have been taken from an obscure text in the Book of
JOB, dilated by saint Jerome and the early commentators JOB, xxiv. 19.
. The torments of hell, in which the punishment by cold is painted at large,
had formed a visionary romance, under the name of saint Patrick's Purgatory or
Cave, long before Dante wrote See supr. vol. ii. 199. And ADD. EMEND. ibid.
. The venerable Bede, who lived in the seventh century, has framed a future
mansion of existence for departed souls with this mode of torture. In the hands
of Dante it has assumed many fantastic and grotesque circumstances, which make
us laugh and shudder at the same time.

In another department, Dante represents some of his criminals rolling
themselves in human ordure. If his subject led him to such a description, he
might at least have used decent expressions. But his diction is not here less
sordid than his imagery. I am almost afraid to transcribe this gross passage,
even in the disguise of the old Tuscan phraseology.

-- Quindi giu nel fos^o
Vidi gente attuffata in uno sterco,
Che dagli uman privati para mosso;
Et mentre che laggiu con l'occhio cerco:
Vidi un, co'l capo si da merda lordo,
Che non parea s'era laico, o cherco CANT. xviii.
.
The humor of the last line does not make amends for the nastiness of the
image.

It is not to be supposed, that a man of strong sense and genius, whose
understanding had been cultivated by a most exact education, and who had passed
his life in the courts of sovereign princes, would have indulged himself in
these disgusting fooleries, had he been at all apprehensive that his readers
would have been disgusted. But rude and early poets desc^ib^ every thing. They
follow the public manners: and if they are either obscene or indelicate, it
should be remembered that they wrote before obscenity or indelicacy became
offensive.

Some of the Guilty are made objects of contempt by a transformation into
beastly or ridiculous shapes. This was from the fable of Circe. In others, the
human figure is rendered ridiculous by distortion. There is one set of
criminals whose faces are turned round toward their backs.

-- E'l piante de gli occhi
Le natiche bagnava per lo fesso CANT. xx.
.
But Dante has displayed more true poetry in describing a real event than in
the best of his fictions. This is in the story of Ugolino count of Pisa, the
subject of a very capital picture by Reynolds. The poet, wandering through the
depths of hell, sees two of the Damned gnawing the sculls of each other, which
was their daily food. He enquires the meaning of this dreadful repast.

La bocca sollevo dal fiero pasto
Quel peccator, forbendola a capelli
Del capo ch'egli havea di retro guasto CANT. xxxiii. They are both in the lake
of ice.
.
Ugolino quitting his companion's half-devoured scull, begins his tale to this
effect. "We are Ugolin count of Pisa, and archbishop Ruggieri. Trusting in the
perfidious counsels of Ruggieri, I was brought to a miserable death. I was
committed with four of my children to the dungeon of hunger. The time came when
we expected food to be brought. Instead of which, I heard the gates of the
horrible tower more closely barred. I looked at my children, and could not
speak.

-- "L'hora s'appressava
"Che'l cibo ne soleva essere adotto;
"E per suo sogno ciascun dubitava:
"Ed io senti chiavar l'uscio di sotto
"A l'ORRIBILE TORRE, ond'io guardai
"Nel viso a miei figliuoli, senza far metta.
"I could not complain. I was petrified. My children cried: and my little
Anselm, Anselmuccio mio, said, Father, you look on us, what is the matter? --
"Tu guardi si, padre, che hai?"
I could neither weep, nor answer, all that day and the following night. When
the scanty rays of the sun began to glimmer through the dolorous prison,
"Com'un poco di raggio si fu messo
"Nel doloroso carcere, --
and I could again see those four countenances on which my own image was
stamped, I gnawed both my hands for grief. My children supposing I did this
through a desire to eat, lifting themselves suddenly up, exclaimed, O father,
our grief would be less, if you would eat us! "Ambo le mani per dolor mi morsi:
"E quei pensando ch'io'l fessi per voglia
"Di manicar, di subito levorsi
"Et disser, Padre, assai ci fia men doglia
"Se tu mangi di noi! --
"I restrained myself that I might not make them more miserable. We were all
silent, that day and the following. Ah cruel earth, why did thou not swallow
us up at once! "Quel di, et l'altro, stemmo tutta muti.
"Ahi! dura terra, perch non l'apristi?
The fourth day being come, Gaddo falling all along at my feet, cried out, My
father, why do not you help me, and died. The other three expired, one after
the other, between the fifth and sixth days, famished as you see me now. And I
being seized with blindness began to crawl over them, sovra ciascuno, on hands
and feet; and for three days after they were dead, continued calling them by
their names. At length, famine finished my torments." Having said this, the
poet adds, with distorted eyes he again fixed his teeth on the mangled scull
Ibid. See supr. vol. i. 390. And ESSAY ON POPE, p. 254.
. It is not improbable, that the shades of unfortunate men, who described under
peculiar situations and with their proper attributes, are introduced relating
at large their histories in hell to Dante, might have given the hint to
Boccace's book DE CASIBUS VIRORUM ILLUSTRIUM, On the Misfortunes of Illustrious
Personages, the original model of the MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES.

Dante's PURGATORY is not on the whole less fantastic than his HELL. As his
hell was a vast perpendicular cavity in the earth, he supposes Purgatory to be
a cylindric mass elevated to a prodigious height. At intervals are recesses
projecting from the outside of the cylinder. In these recesses, some higher and
some lower, the wicked expiate their crimes, according to the proportion of
their guilt. From one department they pass to another by steps of stone
exceedingly steep. On the top of the whole, or the summit of Purgatory, is a
platform adorned with trees and vegetables of every kind. This is the
Terrestrial Paradise, which has been transported hither we know not how, and
which forms an avenue to the Paradise Celestial. It is extraordinary that some
of the Gothic painters should not have given us this subject.

Dante describes not disagreeably the first region which he traverses on
leaving Hell. The heavens are tinged with sapphire, and the star of love, or
the sun, makes all the orient laugh. He sees a venerable sage approach. This is
Cato of Utica, who, astonished to see a living man in the mansion of ghosts,
questions Dante and Virgil about the business which brought them hither. y
PURGAT. CANT. i.
Virgil answers: and Cato advises Virgil to wash Dante's face, which was soiled
with the smoke of hell, and to cover his head with one of the reeds which grew
on the borders of the neighboring river. Virgil takes his advice; and having
gathered one reed, sees another spring up in its place. This is the golden
bough of the Eneid, uno avulso non deficit alter. The shades also, as in
Virgil, crowd to be ferried over Styx: but an angel performs the office of
Charon, admitting some into the boat, and rejecting others. This confusion of
fable and religion destroys the graces of the one and the majesty of the other.

Through adventures and scenes more strange and wild than any in the Pilgrim's
Progress, we at length arrive at the twentyfirst Canto. A concussion of the
earth announces the deliverance of a soul from Purgatory. This is the soul of
Statius, the favorite poet of the dark ages. Although a very improper companion
for Virgil, he immediately joins our adventurers, and accompanies them in their
progress. It is difficult to discover what pagan or christian idea regulates
Dante's dispensation of rewards and punishments. Statius passes from Purgatory
to Paradise, Cato remains in the place of expiation, and Virgil is condemned to
eternal torments.

Dante meets his old acquaintance Forese, a debauchee of Florence. On finishing
the conversation, Forese asks Dante when he shall have the pleasure of seeing
him again. This question in Purgatory is diverting enough. Dante answers with
much serious gravity, "I know not the time of death: but it cannot be too near.
Look back on the troubles in which my country is involved CANT. xxiv.
!" The dispute between the pontificate and the empire, appears to have been the
predominant topic of Dante's mind. This circumstance has filled Dante's poem
with strokes of satire. Every reader of Voltaire must remember that lively
writer's paraphrase from the INFERNO, of the story of count Guido, in which are
these inimitable lines. A Franciscan friar abandoned to Beelzebub thus exclaims.

-- "Monsieur de Lucifer!
"Je suis un Saint; voyes ma robe grise:
"Je fus absous par le Chef de l'Eglise.
"J'aurai, toujours, repondit le Demon,
"Un grand respect pour l'Absolution;
"On est lave de ses vielles sotises,
"Pourvu qu'apres autres ne soient commises.
"J'ai fait souvent cette distinction
"A tes pareils: et, grace a l'Italie,
"Le Diable sait la Theology.
"Il dit et rit. Je ne repliquai rien
"A Belzebut, il raisonnoit trop bien.
"Lors il m'empoigne, et d'un bras roide et ferme
"Il appliqua sur ma triste epiderme
"Vingt coups de fouet, don't bien fort il me cuit:
"Que Dieu le rend a Boniface huit."
Dante thus translated would have had many more readers than at present. I take
this opportunity of remarking, that our author's perpetual reference to recent
facts and characters is in imitation of Virgil, yet with this very material
difference. The persons recognized in Virgil's sixth book, for instance the
chiefs of the Trojan war, are the cotemporaries of the hero not of the poet.
The truth is, Dante's poem is a satirical history of his own times.

Dante sees some of the ghosts of Purgatory advancing forward, more meagre and
emaciated than the rest. He asks how this could happen in a place where all
live alike without nourishment. Virgil quotes the example of Meleager, who
wasted with a firebrand, on the gradual extinction of which his life depended.
He also produces the comparison of a mirror reflecting a figure. These obscure
explications do not satisfy the doubts of Dante. Statius, for his better
instruction, explains how a child grows in the womb of the mother, how it is
enlarged, and by degrees receives life and intellect. The drift of our author
is apparent in these profound illustrations. He means to show his skill in a
sort of metaphysical anatomy. We see something of this in the TESORETTO of
Brunetto. Unintelligible solutions of a similar sort, drawn from a frivolous
and mysterious philosophy, mark the writers of Dante's age.

The PARADISE of Dante, the third part of this poem, resembles his PURGATORY.
Its fictions, and its allegories which suffer by being explained, are all
conceived in the same chimerical spirit. The poet successively views the glory
of the saints, of angels, of the holy Virgin, and at last of God himself.

Heaven as well as hell, among the monks, had its legendary description; which
it was heresy to disbelieve, and which was formed on perversions or
misinterpretations of scripture. Our author's vision ends with the deity, and
we know not by what miraculous assistance he returns to earth.

It must be allowed, that the scenes of Virgil's sixth book have many fine
strokes of the terrible. But Dante's coloring is of a more gloomy temperature.
There is a sombrous cast in his imagination: and he has given new shades of
horror to the classical hell. We may say of Dante, that -- Hell
Grows DARKER at his FROWN PAR. L. ii. 720.
. --
The sensations of fear impressed by the Roman poet are less harrassing to the
repose of the mind: they have a more equable and placid effect. The terror of
Virgil's tremendous objects is diminished by correctness of composition and
elegance of style. We are reconciled to his Gorgons and Hydras, by the grace of
expression, and the charms of versification.

In the mean time, it may seem a matter of surprise, that the Italian poets of
the thirteenth century who restored, admired, and studied the classics, did not
imitate their beauties. But while they possessed the genuine models of
antiquity, their unnatural and eccentric habits of mind and manners, their
attachments to system, their scholastic theology, superstition, ideal love, and
above all their chivalry, had corrupted every true principle of life and
literature, and consequently prevented the progress of taste and propriety.
They could not conform to the practices and notions of their own age, and to
the ideas of the ancients, at the same time. They were dazzled with the
imageries of Virgil and Homer, which they could not always understand or apply:
or which they saw through the mist of prejudice and misconception. Their genius
having once taken a false direction, when recalled to copy a just pattern,
produced only constraint and affectation, a distorted and unpleasing
resemblance. The early Italian poets disfigured, instead of adorning their
works, by attempting to imitate the classics. The charms which we so much
admire in Dante, do not belong to the Greeks and Romans. They are derived from
another origin, and must be traced back to a different stock. Nor is it at the
same time less surprising, that the later Italian poets, in more enlightened
times, should have paid so respectful a compliment to Dante as to acknowledge
no other model, and with his excellencies, to transcribe and perpetuate all his
extravagancies.

SECT. XXXII.
I NOW return to the MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES, and to Sackville's Legend of
Buckingham, which follows his INDUCTION.

The Complaynt of HENRYE DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM, is written with a force and even
elegance of expression, a copiousness of phraseology, and an exactness of
versification, not to be found in any other parts of the collection. On the
whole, it may be thought tedious and languid. But that objection unavoidably
results from the general plan of these pieces. It is impossible that
soliloquies of such prolixity, and designed to include much historical and even
biographical matter, should every where sustain a proper degree of spirit,
pathos, and interest. In the exordium are these nervous and correct couplets.
Whom flattering Fortune falsely so beguilde,
That lo, she slew, where erst full smooth she smilde.
Again, And paynt it forth, that all estates may know:
Have they the warning, and be mine the woe.


Buckingham is made to enter thus rapidly, yet with much address, into his
fatal share of the civil broils between York and Lancaster.

But what may boot to stay the sisters three,
When Atropos perforce will cut the thread?
The doleful day was come, when you might see
Northampton field with armed men orespred.
In these lines there is great energy.

O would to God the cruel dismal day
That gave me light first to behold thy face,
With foul eclipse had reft my sight away,
The unhappie hour, the time, and eke the day, etc.
And the following are an example of the simple and sublime united.

And thou, Alecto, feed me with thy food!
Let fall thy serpents from thy snaky hear!
For such relief well fits me in my mood,
To feed my plaint with horroure and with fear!
With rage afresh thy renomd worm areare.
Many comparisons are introduced by the distressed speaker. But it is common
for the best poets to forget that they are describing what is only related or
spoken. The captive Proteus has his simile of the nightingale; and Eneas
decorates his narrative of the disastrous conflagration of Troy with a variety
of the most labored comparisons.

Buckingham in his reproaches against the traitorous behavior of his ancient
friend Banastre, utters this forcible exclamation, which breathes the genuine
spirit of revenge, and is unloaded with poetical superfluities.

Hat^d be thou, disdainde of every wight,
And pointed at wherever thou shall go:
A traitorous wr^tch, unworthy of the light
Be thou esteemde: and, to increase thy woe,
The sound be hateful of thy name also.
And in this sort, with shame and sharp reproach,
Lead thou thy life, till greater grief approach.
The ingenious writers of these times are perpetually deserting propriety for
the sake of learned allusions. Buckingham exhorts the peers and princes to
remember the fate of some of the most renowned heroes of antiquity, whose lives
and misfortunes he relates at large, and often in the most glowing colors of
poetry. Alexander's murder of Clitus is thus described in stanzas, pronounced
by the poet and not by Buckingham.

And deeply grave within your stony hart^
The dreerie dole, that mighty Macedo
With tears unfolded, wrapped in deadly smarts,
When he the death of Clitus sorrowed so,
Whom erst he murdered with the deadly blow;
Raught in his rage upon his friend so dear,
For which, behold lo how his panges appear!
The launced spear he writhes out of the wound,
From which the purple blood spins in his face:
His heinous guilt when he returned found,
He throws himself upon the corpse, alas!
And in his arms how often does he embrace
His murdered friend! And kissing him in vain,
Forth flow the floudes of salt repentant rain.
His friends amazde at such a murder done,
In fearful flocks begin to shrink away;
And he thereat, with heaps of grief fordone,
Hates ^imselfe, wishing his latter day. --
He calls for death, and loathing longer life,
Bent to his bane ref^seth kindly food,
And plungde in depth of death and dolours strife
Had queld Killed. Manqueller is murderer.
himself, had not his friends withstoode.
Lo he that thus has shed the guiltless blood,
Though he were king and keeper over all,
Yet chose he death, to guerdon death withal.
This prince, whos^ peer ^as never under sun,
Whose glistening ^ame the earth did overglide,
Which with his power the world welnigh had won,
His bloody hands himsel^e could no^ abide,
But folly bent with famine to have did;
The worthy prince deemed in his regard
That death for death could be but just reward.
Our MIRROR, having had three new editions in 1563 This edition, printed by
Thomas Marshe, has clx leaves, with a table of contents at the end.
, 1571^ and 1574 This edition, printed also for T. Marshe, is improperly enough
entitled "The Last Part of the MIRROR FOR MAGISTRATES, etc." But it contains
all that is in the foregoing editions, and ends with JANE SHORE, or SHORE'S
WIFE. It has 163 leaves. In the title page the work is said to be "Newly
corrected and amended." They are all in quarto, and in black letter.
, was reprinted in quarto in the year 1587 But in the Preface Higgins says h^
began to prepare it twelve years before. In imitation of the title, a
story-book was published called the MIRR^UR OF MIRTH, by R. D. 1583. bl. let.
4to. Also The MIRROR OF THE MATHEMATIKES, A MIRROR OF MONST^RS, etc.
, with the addition of many new lives, under the conduct of John Higgins.

Higgins lived at Winsham in Somersetshire DEDICATION, ut in^r.
. He was educated at Oxford, was a clergyman, and engaged in the instruction of
youth. As a preceptor of boys, on the plan of a former collection by Nicholas
Udal, a celebrated master of Eton school, he compiled the FLOSCULI OF TERENCE,
a manual famous in its time, and applauded in a Latin epigram by the elegant
Latin encomiast Thomas Newton of Cheshire In TERENT^^ FLOSCULOS N. Udalli et J.
Higgini opera decerptos. ENCOM. fol. 128. It also pre^ixed to the book, with
others.
. In the pedagogic character he also published "HOLCOT'S DICTIONARIE, newly
corrected, amended, set in order, and enlarged, with many names of men, towns,
beasts, fowls, etc. By which you may find the Latin or French of any
English word you will. By John Higgins, late student in Oxeforde Perhaps at
Trinity college, where one of both his names occurs in 1566.
." In an engraved title page are a few English verses. It is in folio, and
printed for Thomas Marshe at London, 1572. The dedication to sir George Peckham
knight, is written by Higgins, and is a good specimen of his classical
accomplishments. He calls Peckham his^principal friend, and the most eminent
patron of letters. A recommendatory copy of verses by Churchyard the poet is
prefixed, with four Latin epigrams by others. Another of his works in the same
profession is the NOMENCLATOR of Adrian Junius, translated into English, in
conjunction with Abraham Flemming, and printed at London, for Newberie and
Durham, in 1585 Octavo.
. It is dedicated in Latin to his most bountiful patron Doctor Valentine,
master of Requests, and dean of Wells, from Winsham The D^dication of his
MIRROR TO MAGISTRATES is from the same place.
, 1584. From this dedication, Higgins seems to have been connected with the
school of Ilminster, a neighboring town in Somersetshire He says, that he
translated it in London. "Quo facto, novus interpres Waldenus, Ilm^st^iae
gymnasiarcha, moriens, priusquam manum ^peri summam admovisset, me ami^um
veter^m suum omnib^s libri^ suis et hoc imprimis Nom^nclatore [his translation]
donavit." But Higgins ^ound his own v^rsion better, which he therefore
published, yet with a part of his friend's.
. He appears to have been living so late as the year 1602. For in that year he
published an Answer to William Perkins, a forgotten controversialist,
concerning Christ's descent into hell, dedicated from Winsham.

To the MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES Higgins wrote a new INDUCTION in the octave
stanza; and without assistance of friends, began a new series from Albanact the
youngest son of Brutus, and the first king of Albanie or Scotland, continued to
the emperor Caracalla At ^ol. 108. ^. The two l^st lives in the latt^r^ or what
may be called B^ldwin's part of this edition, are JANE SHORE and CARDINAL
WOLSEY by Churchyard. Colophon, "Imprinted at London by Henry Marshe, being the
assign of Thomas Marshe near^ to saint Dunstanes church in Fleetestreete,
1587." It has 272 leaves. The last signature is M m 4.
. In this edition by Higgins, among the pieces after the conquest, first
appeared the Life of CARDINAL WOLSEY, by Churchyard Fol. 265. b.
; of SIR NICHOLAS BURDET, by Baldwine Fol. 244. a.
; and of ELEANOR COBHAM Fol. 140. b.
, and of HUMFREY DUKE OF GLOUCESTER Fol. 146. a.
, by Ferrers. Also the Legend of KING JAMES THE FOURTH OF SCOTLAND Fol. 253. b.
, said to have been penned fifty years ago Fol. 255. b.
, and of FLODDEN FIELD, said to be of equal antiquity, and subscribed FRANCIS
DINGLEY Fol. 258. b.
, the name of a poet who has not otherwise occurred. Prefixed is a
recommendatory poem in stanzas by the abovementioned Thomas Newton of Cheshire
Subscribed THOMAS NEWTONUS C^ystr^shyrius, 1587.
, who understood much more of Latin than of English poetry.

The most poetical passage of Higgins's performance in this collection is in
his Legend of QUEEN CORDILA, or Cordelia, king Lear's youngest daughter Fol.
36. ^.
. Being imprisoned in a dungeon, and coucht on straw, she sees amid the
darkness of the night a griesly ghost approach, Eke nearer still with stealing
steps she drew:
She was of color pale and deadly hew.
Her garment was figured with various sorts of imprisonment, and pictures of
violent and premature death. Her clothes resembled thousand kinds of thrall,
And pictures plain of hastened deaths withal.
Cordelia, in extreme terror, asks,

-- What wight art thou, a foe or fawning ^rend?
If Death thou art, I pray thee ^ake an end --
But the art not Death! -- Art thou some Fury sent
My woeful corpse with pains more to torment?
With that she spoke, "I am thy friend DESPAIR. --
* * * * * * * * * *
"Now if thou art to dye no whit afraid
"Here shall thou choose of Instruments, behold,
"Shall rid thy restless life." --
DESPAIR then, throwing her robe aside, shows Cordelia a thousand instruments
of death, knives, sharp swords, and ponyards, all bedyde with blood and
poisons. She presents the sword wit^ which queen Dido slew herself.

"Lo! here the blade that D^do' of Carthage hight, etc.
Cordelia takes this sword, but doubtful yet to dye. DESPAIR then represents
to her the state and power which she enjoyed in France, her troops of
attendants, and the pleasures of the court she had left. She then points out
her present melancholy condition and dreary situation.

She shewde me all the dongeon where I sat,
The dankish walls, the darkes, and bade me smell
And bide the ^avour if I like it well.
Cordelia gropes f^r the sword, or fatal knife, in the dark, which DESPAIR
places in her hand. DESPAIR to aid my senceless limbs was glad,
And gave the blade: to end my woes she bad.
At length Cordelia's s^ght fails her so that she can see only DESPAIR who
exhorts her to strike. And by her elbowe DEATH for me did watch.
DESPAIR at last gives the blow. The temptation of the R^dcrosse knight by
DESPAIR in Spenser'^ FAERIE QUEEN, seems to have been copied, yet with high
improvements, from this scene. These stanzas of Spenser bear a strong
res^mblance to what I have cited from CORDELIA'S Legend.

Then began the villain That i^, D^SPAIR.
him to oueraw,
And brought unto him swords, rope^, poisons, fire,
And all that might him to perdition draw;
And bade him choose what death he would desire:
For death was due ^o him that had prouokt God's ire.
But when as none of them he saw him take,
He to him raught a dagger sharp and keen,
And gave it him in hand: his hand did quake
And tremble like a lease of aspin green,
And troubled blood through his pale face was seen
To come and go, with tydinges from the heart,
As it a running messenger had been.
At last, resolved to work his final smart
He lifted up his hand that back again did start FAER. QU^ i. x. 50.
.
The three first books of the FAERIE QUEEN were published in 1590. Higgins's
Legend of Cordelia in 1587.

At length the whole was digested anew with additions, in 1610, by Richard
Niccols, an ingenious poet, of whom more will be said hereafter, under the
following title. " A MIRROR FOR MAGISTRATES Of the early use in the middle
ages of the word SP^CULUM as the title of a book, see Joh. Finnaeus's
DISS^RTATIOHISTORICA-LITT^RARIA, prefixed to the KONGS-SKUGG-SIO, or ROYAL
MIRROR, an ancient prose work in Norvegian, written about 1170, printed in
1768, 4to. fol. xviii.
, being a true Chronicle-h^story of the untimely falls of such unfortunate
princes and men of note as have happened since the first entrance of Brute into
this Island until this our age. NEWLY ENLARGED with a last part called a WINTER
NIGHT'S VISION being an addition of such Tragedies especially famous as are
exempted in the former History, with a poem annexed called ENGLANDS ELIZA. At
London, imprinted by Felix Kyngston, 1610 A thick quarto.
." Niccols arranged his edition thus. Higgins's INDUCTION is at the head of the
Lives from Brutus to the Conquest. Those from the conquest to LORD CROMWELL'S
lege^d written by Drayton and now first added Drayton wrote three other legends
on this plan, Robert duke of Normandy, Matilda, and Pierce Gaveston, of which I
shall ^pe^^ more particularly under that writer.
, are introduced by Sackville's INDUCTION, After this are placed such lives as
had been before omitted, ten in number, written by Niccols himself, with an
INDUCTION Fol. 555.
. As it illustrates the history of this work, especially of Sackville's share
in it, I will here insert a part of Niccols's preface prefixed to those
TRAGEDIES which happened after the conquest, beginning with that of Robert
Tresili^n. "Having hitherto continued the story from the first entrance of
BRVTE into this island, with the FALLS of svch PRINCES as were never before
this time in one volume comprised, I now proceed with the rest, which take
their beginning from the Conquest: whose penmen being many and diverse, all
diversely affected in the method of this their MIRROR, I purpose only to
follow the intended scope of that most honorable personage, who by how mvch he
did surpass the rest in the eminence of ^^s noble condition, by so mvch he
has exceeded them all in the excellency of his heroical style, which with
golden pen he has limmed out to posterity in that worthy object of his mind
the TRAGEDY OF THE DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM, and in his Preface then intit^led
MASTER SACK^ILS INDUCTION. This worthy president of learning intended to
perfect all this story of himself from the Conquest. Being called to a more
serious expense of his time in the great state affairs of his most royal
lady and sovereign, he left the dispose thereof to M. Baldwine, M. Ferrers,
and others, the compose^s of these Tragedies: who continving their method,
which was by way of dialogue or interlocvtion betwixt every Tragedy, gave it
only place before the dvke of Bvckingham's COMPLAINT. Which order I since
having altered, have placed the INDUCTION in the beginning, with every
Tragedy following according to svccession and just compvtation of time, which
before was not observed Fol. 253. Compare Baldwyne's Prologue at fol. cxiv. b.
^dit. 1559. ut supr.
."

In the Legend of king Richard the Thir^, Niccols appears to have copied some
passages from Shakespeare's Tragedy on that history. In the opening of the play
Richard says,

Now are our brows bound with victorious w^eaths,
Our bruised arms hung up for monuments:
Our stern alarums changed to merry meetings;
Our dreadful marches to delightful measures.
Grim-visag'd War has smoothed his wrinkled front;
And now, instead of mounting barbed steeds,
To fright the souls of fearful adversaries,
He capers nimbly in a lady's chamber
To the lascivious pleasing of a lute Act i. Sc. i.
.
These lines evidently gave rise to part of Richard's soliloquy in Niccols's
Legend.

-- The battles fought in field before
Were turned to meetings of sweet amity:
The war-god's thundering cannons dreadful rore,
And rattling drum-sounds warlike harmony,
To sweet-tun'd noise of pleasing min^trals^e. --
God Mars laid by his Lance and took his Lute,
And turned his rugged frowns to smiling looks;
In stead of crimson fields, wars fatal fruit,
He bathed his limbs in Cypre's warbling brooks,
And set his thoughts upon her wanton looks Page 753.
.
Part of the tent-scene in Shakespeare is also imitated by Niccols. Richard,
starting from his horrid dream, says,

Methought the souls of all that I had murdered
Came to my tent, and every one did threat
To morrow's vengeance on the head of Richard Act v. Sc. ult. Drayton has also
described these visionary terrors of Richard. POLYOL^. S. xxii. When to the
guilty king, the black ^orerunning night,
Appear the dreadful ghosts of Henry and his Son,
Of his own brother George and his two nephews, done
Most cruelly to death, and of his Wife, and friend
Lord Hastinges, with pale hands prepared as they would rend
Him peacemeal: at which o^t he roar^t^ in his sleep.
The POLYOL^ION was published in 1612. fol.

.
So Niccols,

I thought that all those murdered ghosts, whom I
By death had sent to their untimely grave,
With balefull noise about my tent did cry,
And of the heavens with sad complaint did crave,
That they on guilty wretch might vengeance have:
To whom I thought the i^dge of heaven gave ear,
And against me gave a judgment full of fear Page 764.
.
But some of the stanzas immediately following, which are formed on
Shakespeare's ideas, yet with some original imagination, will give the reader
the most favorable idea of Niccols as a contributor to this work.

For lo, eftsoons, a thousand hellish hags,
Leaving the abode of their infernal cell,
Seasing on me, my hateful body drags
From forth my bed into a place like hell,
Where fiends did naught but bellow, howl and yell,
Who in stern strife stood against each other bent,
Who should my hateful body most torment.
Tormented in such trance long did I lie,
Till extreme fear did rouse me where I lay,
And caused me from my naked bed to fly:
Alone within my tente I durst not stay,
This dreadful dream my soul did so affray:
When wakt I was from sleep, I for a space
Thought I had been in some infernal place.
About mine ears a buzzing fear still flew,
My fainting knees languish for want of might;
Upon my body stands an icie dew;
My heart is dead within, and with affright
The hair upon my head does stand upright:
Each limb about me quaking, does resemble
A rivers rush, that with the wind does tremble.
Thus with my guilty souls sad torture torn
The dark nights dismal hours I past away:
But at cocks crow, the message of the morn,
My fear I did conceal, etc Page 764.
.
If internal evidence was not a proof, we are sure from other evidences that
Shakespeare's tragedy preceded Niccols's legend. The tragedy was written about
1597. Niccols, at eighteen years of age, was admitted into Magdalene college in
Oxford, in the year 1602 Registr. Univ. Oxon. He retired to Magdalene Hall,
where he was graduated in Arts, 1606. Ibid.
. It is easy to point out other marks of imitation. Shakespeare has taken
nothing from Seagars's Richard the third, printed in Baldwine's collection, or
first edition, in the year 1559. Shakespeare, however, probably catched the
idea of the royal shades, in the same scene of the tragedy before us, appearing
in succession and speaking to Richard and Richmond, from the general plan of
the MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES: more especially, as many of Shakespeare's ghosts
there introduced, for instance, King Henry the sixth, Clarence, Rivers,
Hastings, and Buckingham, are the personages of five of the legends belonging
to this poem.

SECT. XXXIII.
BY way of recapitulating what has been said, and in order to give a connected
and uniform view of the MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES in its most complete and
extended state, its original contents and additions, I will here detail the
subjects of this poem as they stand in this last or Niccols's edition of 1610,
with reference to two preceding editions, and some other incidental
particularities.

Niccols's edition, after the Epistle Dedicatorie prefixed to Higgins's edition
of 1587, an Advertisement To the Reader by Niccols, a Table of Contents, and
Thomas Newton's recommendatory verses abovementioned, begins with an Induction
called the AUTHOR'S INDUCTION, written by Higgins, and properly belonging to
his edition. Then follow these Lives.

Albanact youngest son of Brutus Page 1.
. Humber king of the Huns. King Locrine eldest son of Brutus. Queen Elstride
concubine of Locrine. Sabrina daughter of Locrine. King Madan. King Malin. King
Mempric. King Bladud. Queen Cordelia. Morgan king of Albany. King Jago. Ferrex.
Porrex. King Pinnar slain by Molucius Donwallo. King Stater. King Rudacke of
Wales. King Kimarus. King Morindus. King Emerianus. King Cherinnus. King
Varianus. Irelanglas cousin to Ca^^ibelane. Julius Caesar. Claudius Tiberius
Nero. Caligula. King Guiderius. Lelius Hamo. Tiberius Drusus. Domitius Nero.
Galba. Vitellius. Londric the Pict. Severus. Fulgentius a Pict. Geta. Caracalla
Ending with page 185.
. All these from Albanact, and in the same order, form the first part of
Higgins's edition of the year 1587 Where they end at fol. 108. a.
. But none of them are in Baldwyne's, or the first, collection, of the year
1559. And, as I presume, these lives are all written by Higgins. Then follow in
Niccols's edition, Carausius, Queen Helena, Vortigern, Uther Pendragon,
Cadwallader, Sigebert, Ebba, Egelred, Edric, and Harold, all written by Thomas
Blener Hasset, and never before printed. We have next a new title After p. 250.
, "The variable Fortune and unhappy Falls of svch princes as has happened
since the Conquest. Wherein may be seen, etc. At London, by Felix Kyngston.
1609." Then, after an Epistle to the Reader, subscribed R. N. that is Richard
Niccols, follow, Sackville's INDUCTION. Cavyll's Roger Mortimer. Ferrers's
Tresilian. Ferrers's Thomas of Woodstock. Churchyard's Mowbray. Ferrers's King
Richard the second. Phaer's Owen Glendour. Henry Percy. Baldwyne's Richard earl
of Cambridge. Baldwyne's Montague earl of Salisbury. Ferrers's Eleanor Cobham.
Ferrers's Humfrey duke of Gloucester. Baldwyne's William De La Poole earl of
Suffolk. Baldwyne's Jack Cade. Ferrers's Edmund duke of Somerset. Richard
Plantagenet duke of York. Lord Clifford. Tiptoft earl of Worcester. Richard
lord Warwick. King Henry the sixth. George Plantagenet duke of Clarence.
Skelton's King Edward the fourth. Woodvile lord Rivers. Dolman's Lord Hastings.
Sackville's Duke of Buckingham. Collingburne. Cavyll's Blacksmith. Higgins's
Sir Nicholas Burdet. Churchyard's Jane Shore. Churchyard's Wolsey. Drayton's
Lord Cromwell. All these That is, from p. 250.
, Humfrey, Cobham, Burdet, Cromwell, and Wolsey, excepted, form the whole, but
in a less chronological disposition, of Baldwyne's collection, or edition, of
the year 1559, as we have seen above: from whence they were reprinted, with the
addition of Humfrey, Cobham, Burdet, and Wolsey, by Higgins, in his edition
aforesaid of 1587, and where Wolsey closes the work. Another title then appears
in Niccols's edition After p. 547.
, "A WINTER NIGHTS VISION. Being an Addition of svch Princes especially famovs,
who were exempted in the former HISTORY. By Richard Niccols, Oxon. Magd. Hall.
At London, by Felix Kyngston, 1610." An Epistle to the Reader, and an elegant
Sonnet to Lord Charles Howard lord High Admiral, both by Niccols, are prefixed
From the Sonnet it appears, that our author Niccols was on board Howard's ^hip
the ARC, when Cadiz was taken. This was in 1596. See also page 861. stanz. iv.
. Then follows Niccols's INDUCTION to these new lives From page 555.
. They are, King Arthur. Edmund Ironside. Prince Alfred. Godwin earl of Kent.
Robert Curthose. King Richard the first. King John. King Edward the second. The
two Young Princes murdered in the Tower, and King Richard the third Ending
with page 769.
. Our author, but with little propriety, has annexed "ENGLAND'S ELIZA, or the
victoriovs and trivmphant reign of that virgin empress of sacred memory
Elizabeth Queen of England, etc. At London, by Felix Kyngston, 1610." This is
a title page. Then follows a Sonnet to the virtuous Lady the Lady Elisabeth
Clear, wife to sir Francis Clear, and an Epistle to the Reader. A very poetical
INDUCTION is prefixed to the ELIZA, which contains the history of queen
Elisabeth, then just dead, in the octave stanza. Niccols, however, has not
entirely preserved the whole of the old collection, although he made large
additions. He has omitted King James the first of Scotland, which appears in
Baldwyne's edition of 1559 At fol. xlii. b.
, and in Higgins's of 1587 Fol. 137. b.
. He has also omitted, and probably for the same obvious reason, king James the
fourth of Scotland, which we find in Higgins Fol. 253. a. In Ulpian Fullwell's
FLOWER OF FAME, an old quarto book both in prose and verse, in praise of the
reign of Henry the eighth, and printed by W. ^oskyns in 1575, is a tragic
monologue, in the octave stanza, of James the fourth of Scotland, and of his
son. fol. 22. b. The whole title is, "THE FLOWER OF FAME, containing the bright
renown and mos^ fortunate reign of Henry viii. Wherein is mention of matters
by the rest of our chronographers overpassed. Compyled by Vlpian Fullwell."
Annexed is a panegyric of three of the same Henry's noble and virtuous queens.
And "The service done at Haddington in Scotland the second year of the reign
of king Edward the sixth." Bl. let. F^llwell will occur hereafter in his proper
place.
. Nor has Niccols retained the Battle of Flodden-field, which is in Higgins's
edition Fol. 256. a.
. Nicc^ls has also omitted Seagars's King Richard the Third, which first occurs
in Baldwyne's edition of 1559 Fol. cxlvii. b.
, and afterward in Higgins's of 1587 Fol. 230. b.
. But Niccols has written a new Legend on this subject, cited above, and one of
the best of his additional lives Page 750.
. This edition by Niccols, printed by Felix Kyngston in 1610, I believe was
never reprinted. It contains eight hundred and seventy-five pages.

The MIRROR of MAGISTRATES is obliquely ridiculed in bishop Hall's SATIRES,
published in 1597.

Another, whose more heavie-hearted saint
Delights in naught but notes of ruefull plaint,
Urges his melting muse with solemn tears,
Rhyme of some drearie fates of LUCKLESS PEERS.
Then brings he up some BRANDED WHINING GHOST
To tell how old Misfortunes have him tossed B. i. Sat. v. duodecim. But in
CER^AINE SATYRS by John Marston, subjoined to his PY^MALIONS IMAGE, an
academical critic is abused for affecting to censure this poem. Land. 1598.
SAT. iv. This is undoubtedly our author Hall just quoted. [See Marston's
SCOVRGE OF VILLAINY, printed 1599. Lib. iii. SAT. x.] Fond censurer! why should
those Mirrors seem
So vile to thee? which better ^udgements deem
Exquisite then, and in our polished tim^s
May run for sencefull tolerable lines.
What not ^^ediocra firma from thy spite?
But must thy envious hungry fangs needs light
On MAGISTRATES MIRROR? Must thou needs detract
And str^ue to work his ancient honors wrack?
What shall not Rosamond, or Gaueston,
Open their sweet lips without detraction?
But must our modern Critticks envious eye, etc.
The two last pieces indeed do not properly belong to this collection, and are
only on the same plan. Rosamond is Daniel's COMPLAINT OF ROSAMOND, and Gaueston
is Drayton's monologue on that subject.
.
That it should have been the object even of an ingenious satirist, is so far
from proving that it wanted either merit or popularity, that the contrary
conclusion may be justly inferred. It was, however, at length superseded by the
growing reputation of a new poetical chronicle, entitled ALBION'S ENGLAND,
published before the beginning of the reign of James the first. That it was in
high esteem throughout the reign of queen Elisabeth, appears, not only from its
numerous editions, but from the testimony of sir Philip Sidney, and other
cotemporary writers Sydney says, "I esteem the MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES to be
furnished of beautiful parts." He then mentions Surrey's Lyric pieces.
DEFENSE OF POESY, fol. 561. ad calc. ARCAD. Land. 1629. fol. Sidney died in
1586. So that this wa^ written before Higgins's, and consequently Niccols's,
additions.
. It is ranked among the most fashionable pieces of the times, in the metrical
preface prefixed to Jasper Heywood's THYESTES of Seneca, translated into
English verse, and published in 1560 Coloph. "Imprinted at London in
Fletestrete in the house late Thomas Berthelettes. Cum priv. etc. Anno M. D^
LX." duodecim. bl. let. It is dedicated in verse to sir John Mason.
. It must be remembered that only Baldwyne's part had yet appeared, and that
the translator is supposed to be speaking to Seneca.

In Lyncolnes Inn, and Temples twain,
Grayes Inn, and many mo,
Thou shall them find whose paynefull pen
Thy verse shall florishe so;
That Melpomen, thou would well ween,
Had taught them for to wright,
And all their woorks with stately style
And goodly grace to endight.
There shall thou se the self same North,
Whose woork his wit displayes;
And DYALL does of PRINCES paynte,
And preach abroad his praise Sir Thomas North, second son of Edward lord
North of Kirtling, translated from French into English Antonio Guevara's
HOROLOGIUM PRINCIPUM. This translation was printed in 1557, and dedicated to
Queen Mary, fol. Again, 1548, 1582, 4to. This is the book mentioned in the
text. North studied in Lincoln's Inn in the reign of queen Mary. I am not sure
that the translator of Plutarch's LIVES in 1579 is the same. There is Doni's
MORAL PHILOSOPHI^ from the Italian by sir Thomas North, in 1601.
.
There Sackvyldes SONNETS Sackville lord Buckhurst, the contributor to the
MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES. I have never seen his SONNETS, which would be a
valuable accession to our old poetry. But probably the term sonnets here means
only verses in general, and may signify nothing more than his part in the
MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES, and his GORDOBUCKE.
sweetly sauste,
And featlye syned be:
There Norton's Norton is Sackville's coadjutor in GORDOBUCKE.
Ditties do delight,
There Yelverton's The Epilogue to Gascoigne's JOCASTA, acted at Gray's Inn in
1566, was written by Christopher Yelverton, a student of that inn, afterward a
knight and a Judge. I have never seen his DITTIES here mentioned.
do flee
Well pewrde with pen: such young men three
As ween thou might again,
To be begotte as Pallas was
Of myghtie Jove his brain.
There hear thou shall a great report
Of BALDWYNE'S worthy name,
Whose MIRROR does of MAGISTRATES
Proclayme eternal fame.
And there the gentle Blunduille Thomas Blundeville of Newton-Flotman in
Norsolk, from whence his dedication to lord Leicester of an English version of
Furio's Spanish tract on COUNSELS AND COUNSELORS is dated, Apr. 1. 1570. He
printed many other prose pieces, chiefly translations. His P^UTARCH mentioned
in the text, is perhaps a manuscript in the British Museum, PLUTARC^S
COMMENTARY that learning is requisite to a prince, translated into English
meeter by Thomas Blundevile, MSS. RE^. 18. A. 43.
is
By name and eke by kind,
Of whom we learn by Plutarches lore
What fruit by foes to find.
There Bauande bydes William Bavande, a student in the Middle Temple,
translated into English Ferrarius Montanus DE RECTA REIPUBLICAE
ADMINISTRATIONE. Dated from the Middle Temple, in a Dedication to queen
Elisabeth, December. 20. 1559^ 4to. Bl. L^tt. Printed by John Kingston. "A work
of Joannes Ferrarius Montanus touching the good orderinge of a common weal,
etc. Englished by William Bauande." He was of Oxford.
, that turnde his toil
A common wealth to frame,
And greater grace in English gyves
To worthy authors name.
There Googe a grateful name has got,
Report that runs ryfe;
Who crooked compass does describe
And Zodiake of life Barnaby Googe's Palingenius will be spoken of herea^ter.
. --
A pryncely place in Parnasse hill
For these there is preparde,
Whence crown of glitteryng glory hangs
For them a right reward.
Whereas the lappes of Ladies nine,
Shall dewly them defend,
That have preparde the laurel leaf
About their heddes to bend.
And where their pens shall hang full high, etc.
These, he adds, are alone qualified to translate Seneca's tragedies.

In a small black-lettered tract entitled the TOUCHSTONE OF WITS, chiefly
compiled, with some slender additions, from William Webbe's DISCOURSE OF
ENGLISH POETRY, written by Edward Hake, and printed at London by Edmund
Botifaunt in 1588, this poem is mentioned with applause. "Then have we the
MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES lately augmented by my friend master John Higgins, and
penned by the choysest learned wits, which for the stately-proportioned uaine
of the heroic style, and good meetly proportion of uerse, may challenge the
best of Lydgate, and all our late rhymers Fol. vii. a. duodecim. I know but
little more of this forgotten writer, than that he wrote also, "A TOUCHESTONE
for this time present, expressly declaring such ruins, enormities, and abuses,
as trouble the church of God and our christian commonwealth at this day, etc.
Newly set forth by E. H. Imprinted at London by Thomas Hacket, and are to be
sold at his shop at the Green Dragon in the Royal Exchange^ 1574." duodec.
At the end of the "Epistle dedicatorie to his known friend Master Edward
Godfrey, merchant," his name EDWARD HAKE is subscribed at length. Annexed is,
"A Compendious sourme of education, to be diligently observed of all parents
and scholemasters in the trayning up of their children and scholars in
learning. Gathered into English meeter by Edward Hake." It is an epitome of a
Latin tract D^ pueris statim ac liberaliter instituendis. In the dedication, to
master John Harlowe his approved friend, he calls himself an attorney in
the Common Pleas, observing at the same time, that the "name of an Attorney in
the common place [pleas] is now a days grown into contempt." He adds another
circumstance of his life, that he was educated under John Hopkins, whom I
suppose to be the translator of the psalms. [See supr. p. 167.] "You being
trained up together with me your poor school^ellow, with the instructions of
that learned and exquisite teacher, Master JOHN HOPKINS, that worthy
schoolemaister, nay rather that most worthy parent unto all children committed
to his charge of education. Of whose memory, if I should in such an opportunity
as this is, be ^orgetful, etc." I will give a specimen of this little piece,
which shows at least that he learned versification under his master Hopkins. He
is speaking of the Latin tongue. (Signat. G. 4.) Wheret^, as has been said
before,
The Fables do inuit,
With moral sawes in covert tales:
Whereto agrees rite
Fine Comedies with pleasure sawst,
Which, as it were by play,
Do teach unto philosophy
A perfect ready way. --
So as nathles we careful be
To avoid all bawdi^ rimes,
And wanton iestes of poets vain,
That teach them filthy crimes.
Good stories from the Bible chargde,
And from some civil style
As Quintus Curtius and such like,
To read them other while, etc.
Compare Ames, p. 322. 389.
." That sensible old English critic Edmund Bolton, in a general criticism on
the style of our most noted poets before the year 1600, places the MIRROR OF
MAGISTRATES in a high rank. It is under that head of his HYPERCRITICA, entitled
"Prime Gardens for gathering English according to the true gage or standard of
the tongue about fifteen or sixteen years ago." The extract is a curious piece
of criticism, as written by a judicious cotemporary. Having mentioned our prose
writers, the chief of which are More, Sidney, queen Elisabeth, Hooker, Saville,
cardinal Alan, Bacon, and Raleigh, he proceeds thus. "In verse there are Edmund
Spenser's HYMNS The pieces mentioned in this extract will be considered in
their proper places.
. I cannot advise the allowance of other his poems as for practick English, no
more than I can Jeffrey Chaucer, Lydgate, Pierce Plowman, or LAUREATE Skeleton.
It was laid as a fault to the charge of Salust, that he used some old outworn
words stolen out of Cato in his books de Originibus. And for an historian in our
tongue to affect the like out of those our poets, would be accounted a foul
oversight. -- My judgment is nothing at all in poems or poesy, and therefore
I dare not go far; but will simply deliver my mind concerning those authors
among us, whose English has in my conceit most propriety, and is nearest to
the phrase of court, and to the speech used among the noble, and among the
better sort in London: the two sovereign seats, and as it were parliament
tribunals, to try the question in. Brave language are Chapman's Iliads. -- The
works of Samuel Daniel contain somewhat aflat, but yet withal a very pure and
copious English^ and words as warrantable as any man's, and fitter perhaps for
prose than measure. Michael Drayton's Heroical Epistles are well worth the
reading also for the purpose of our subject, which is to furnish an English
historian with choice and copy of tongue. Queen Elizabeth's verses, those which
I have seen and read, some exstant in the elegant, witty, and artificial book
of the ART OF ENGLISH POETRY, the work, as the fame is, of one of her
gentlemen-pensioners, Puttenham, are princely as her prose. Never must be
forgotten St. PETER'S COMPLAINT, and those other serious poems said to be
father Southwell's: the English whereof, as it is most proper, so the sharpness
and light of wit is very rare in them. Noble Henry Constable was a great master
in English tongue, nor had any gentleman of our nation a more pure, quick, or
higher delivery of conceit, witness among all other that Sonnet of his before
his Majesty's LEPANTO. I have not seen much of sir Edward Dyer's poetry. Among
the lesser late poets, George Gascoigne's Works may be endured. But the best of
these times, if Albion's England be not preferred, for our business, is the
MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES, and in that MIRROUR^ Sackvil's INDUCTION, the work of
Thomas afterward earl of Dorset and lord treasurer of England: whose also the
famous Tragedy of GORDOBUC, was the best of that time, even in sir Philip
Sidney's judgment; and all skillful Englishmen cannot but ascribe as much
thereto, for his phrase and eloquence therein. But before in age, if not also
in noble, courtly, and lustrous English, is that of the Songs and Sonnettes of
Henry Howard earl of Surrey, (son of that victorious prince, the duke of
Norfolk, and father of that learned Howard his most lively image Henry earl of
Northampton,) written chiefly by him, and by sir Thomas Wiat, not the dangerous
commotioner, but his worthy father. Nevertheless, they who commend those poems
and exercises of honorable wit, if they have seen that incomparable earl of
Surrey his English translation of Virgil's Eneids, which, for a book or two, he
admirably renders, almost line for line, will bear me witness that those other
were foils and sportives. The English poems of sir Walter Raleigh, of John
Done, of Hugh Holland, but especially of sir Foulk Grevile in his matchless
MUSTAPHA, are not easily to be mended. I dare not presume to speak of his
Majesty's exercises in this heroic kind. Because I see them all left out in
that which Montague lord bishop of Winchester has given us of his royal
writings. But if I should declare mine own rudeness rudely, I should then
confess, that I never tasted English more to my liking, nor more smart, and put
to the height of use in poetry, than in that vital, judicious, and most
practicable language of Benjamin Jonson's poems Bolton's HYPERCRITICA, "Or a
Rule of Judgment for writing or reading our Historys." ADDRESS, iv. SECT.
iii. page 235. seq. First printed by Anthony Hall, (at the end of Trivet.
Annal. Cont. And Ad. Murimuth. Chron.) Oxford, 1722. octavo. The manuscript is
among Cod. MSS. A. WOOD, Mus. ASHMOL. 8471. 9. quarto^ with a few notes by
Wood. This judicious little tract was occasioned by a passage in sir Henry
Saville's Epistle prefixed to his edition of our old Latin historians, 1596.
HYPERCRIT. p. 217. Hearne has printed that part of it which contains a
Vindication of Jeffrey of Monmouth, without know^^g the author's name. Gul.
Neubrig. PRAEFAT. APPEND. Number. iii. p. lxxvii. vol. i. See HYPERCRIT. p. 204.
Bolton's principal work now extant is "NERO CAESAR, or Monarchy depraved, an
Historical Work." Land. 1624. fol. This scarce book, which is the life of that
emperor, and is adorned with plates of many curious and valuable medals, is
dedicated to George duke of Buckingham, to whom Bolton seems to have been a
retainer. (See Hearne'^ Lel. COLLECTAN. vol. vi. p. 60. edit. 1770.) In it he
supports a specious theory, that Stonehenge was a monument erected by the
Britons to Boadicea. chapter xxv. At the end is his HISTORICAL PARALLEL, showing
the difference between epitomes and just histories, "heretofore privately
written to my good and noble friend Endymion Porter, one of the gentlemen of
the Prince's chamber." He instances in the accounts given by Florus and
Polybius of the battle between Hannibal and Scipio: observing, that
generalities are not so interesting as facts and circumstances, and that Florus
gives us "in proper words the ^lowers and tops of noble matter, but Polybius
sets the things themselves, in all their necessary parts, before our eyes." He
therefore concludes, "that all spacious minds, attended with the felicities of
means and leisure, will fly abridgements as bane." He published, however, an
English version of Florus. He wrote the Life of the Emperor Tiberius, never
printed. NER. CAES. ut supr. p. 82. He designed a General History of England.
HYPERCRIT. p. 240. In the British Museum, there is the manuscript draught of a
book entitled "AGON HEROICUS, or concerning arms and armories, by Edmund
Boulton." MSS. COTT. Faus^in. E. 1. 7. fol. 63. And in the same library, his
PROSOPOPEIA BASILICA, a Latin Poem upon the translation of the body of Mary
queen of Scots in 1612, from Peterborough to Westminster^abbey. MSS. COTT. Tit.
A. 13. 23. He compiled the Life of king Henry the second for Speed's Chronicle:
but Bolton being a catholic, an^ speaking too favorably of Be^ket, another
Life was written by Doctor John Barcham, dean of Bocking. See THE SURFEIT TO A.
B. C. Land. 12mo. 1656. p. 22. Written by Dr. Ph. King, author of poems in
16^7, son of King bishop of London. Compare HYPERCRIT. p. 220. Another work in
the walk of philological antiquity, was his "VINDICIAE BRITANNICAE, or London
righted, etc." Never printed, but prepared for the press by the author. Among
other ingenious paradoxes, the principal aim of this treatise is to prove, that
London was a great and ^lourishing city in the time of Nero; and that
consequent^^ Julius Cesar's general description of a^^ the British towns, in
his COMMENTARIES, is false and unjust. Hugh Howard, esquire, (see GENESIS DICT.
iii. 446.) had a fair manuscript of this book, very accurately written in a
thin ^olio of forty ^ive pages. It is not known when or where he died. One
Edmund Bolton, most probably the same, occurs as a CONVICTOR, that is, an
independent member, of Trinity college Ox^ord, under the year 1586. In Archiv.
ibid. Wood (MS. Notes, ut supr.) supposed the HYP^RCRITICA to have been written
about 1610. But our author himself, (HYPERCRIT. p. 237.) mentions king James's
Works published by bishop Montague. That edition is dated 1616.

A few particularities relating to this writer's NERO CAESAR, and some other of
his pieces, may be seen in Hearne's MSS. COLL. Vol 50. p. 125. Vol. 132. p. 94.
Vol. 52. pp. 171. 192. 186. See also Original Letters from Anstis t^ Hearne.
MSS. Bibl. Bodl. RAWLINS. I add, that Edmund Bolton has a Latin copy of
recommendatory verses, in company with George Chapman, Hugh Holland, Done,
Selden^ Beaumont, Fletcher, and others, prefixed to the old folio edition of
Benjamin Jonson'^ Works in 1616.


."

Among several proofs of the popularity of this poem afforded by our old
comedies, I will mention one in George Chapman's MAY DAY printed in 1611. A
ge^tleman of the most elegant taste for reading, and highly accomplished in the
current books of the times, is called "One that has read Marcus Aurelius "Lord
Berners's Golden book of MARCUS AURELIUS emperor and eloquent orator." See
supr. p. 42. The first edition I have seen was by Berthelette, 1536. quarto. It
was often repri^ted. But see Mr. Steevens's ^^AK^SPEARE, vol. i. p. 91. edit.
1778. MAR^US AURELIUS is among the COPPIE^ of James Roberts, a considerable
printer from 1573, down to below 1600. MSS. Coxeter. S^e Ames, HIST. PRINT. p.
341.
, Gesta Romanorum, and the MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES ACT iii. ^ol. 39. 4to. S^e
DISS^RTAT. supr. p. iv. I take this opportunity of remarking, that Ames
recites^ printed for Richard ^ones, "The MIROUR OF MAJESTRATES by G. Whe^stone,
1584," quarto. HIST. PRINT. p. 347. I have never seen it, but believe it has
nothing t^ do with this work.
."

The books of poetry which abounded in the reign of queen Elisabeth, and were
more numerous than any other kinds of writing in our language, gave birth to
two collections of FLOWERS selected from the works of the most fashionable
poets. The first of these is, "ENGLAND'S PARNASSUS. Or, the choysest Flowers of
our modern Poets, with their poetical Comparisons, Descriptions of Bewties,
Personages, Castles, Palaces, Mountains, Groves, Seas, Springs, Rivers, etc.
Whereunto are annexed other various Discourses Poetical extracts.
both pleasant and profitable. Imprinted at London for N. L. C. B. and Th.
Hayes^ 1600 In duodecimo. cont. 510 pages.
." The collector is probably Robert Allot A copy which I have seen has R.
Allot, instead of R. A. There is a cotemporary bookseller of that name. But in
a little book of EPIGRAMS by John Weever, printed in 1599, (12mo.) I fi^d the
following compliment. "Ad Robertum Allot et Christopherum Middleton.
Quick are your wits, sharp your con^eit^,
Short, and more sweet, your lays:
Quick but no wit, sharp no conceit,
Short and l^sse sweet my Praise."

, whose initials R. A. appear subscribed to two Sonnets prefixed, one to sir
Thomas Mounson, and the other to the Reader. The other compilation of this sort
is entitled, "BELVIDERE, or the Garden of the Muses. London, imprinted for Hugh
Astly, 1600 "Or sentences gathered out of all kinds of poets, referred to
certain methodical heads, profitable for the use of these times to rhyme upon
any occasion at a little warning." Octavo. But the compiler does not cite the
names of the poets with the extracts. This work is ridiculed in an anonymous
old play, "The RETURN FROM PA^NASSUS, Or the Scourge of Simony, publicly acted
by the students in Saint John's College Cambridge, 1606." quarto. JUDICIO says,
"Considering the furies of the times, I could better see these young
can-qua^^ing hucksters shoot o^f their pelletts, so they could keep them from
these EN^LISH FLOR^S POETARUM; but now the world is come to that pass, that
there starts up every day an old goose that sits hatching up these eggs which
have been filched from the nest of crows and kestrells, etc." ACT i. Sc. ii.
Then follows a criticism on Spenser, Constable^ Lodge, Daniel, Watson, Drayton,
Davis, Marston, Marlowe, Churchyard, Nashe, Lock, and Hudson. Churchyard is
commended for his Legend of SHORE'S WIF^ in the MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES. Has
not Shores Wife, although a lightskirts she,
Given him a long and lasting memory?
By the way, in the Register of the Stationers, jun. 19. 1594, The lamentable
end of SHORE'S WIFE is mentioned as a part of Shakespeare's Richard the third.
And in a pamphlet called PYMLICO OR RUN AWAY REDCAP, printed in 1596, the
well-frequented play of SHORE is mentioned with PERICLES PRINCE of TIRE. From
Beaumont and Fletcher's KKIGHT OF THE BURNING PESTLE, written 1613, JANE SHORE
appears to have been a celebrated tragedy. And in the Stationer's Register
(Oxenbridge and Busby, Aug. 28. 1599.) occurs "The History of the Life and
Death of Master Shore and JANE SHORE his wife, as it was lately acted by the
earl Derbie his servants."
." The compiler is one John Bodenham. In both of these, especially the former,
the MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES is cited at large, and has a conspicuous share
Allot'^ i^ much the most complete perf^rmance of the two. The method is by f^r
more judicious, the extracts more copious, and made with a degree of taste.
With the extracts he respectively cite^ the names of the poets, which are as
follows. Thomas ACHELLY. Thomas BASTARD. George CHAPMAN. Thomas CHURCHYARD.
Henry CONSTABLE. Samuel DANIEL. John DAVIES. Michael DRAYTON. Thomas DEKKAR.
Edmund FAIRFAX. Charles FITZ^JEFFREY. Abraham FRANCE. George GASCOIGNE. Edward
GILPIN. Sir ^ohn HARRINGTON. John HIGGINS. Thomas HUDSON. JAME^ King of Scots.
[i. e. James the First.] Benjamin JONSON. Thomas KYD. Thomas LODGE. [M. M. i.
e. MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES.] Christopher MARLOWE. Jarvis MARKHAM. John MARSTON.
Christopher MIDDLETON. Thomas NASHE. [Vaulx] Earl of Oxford. George PEELE.
Matthew RAYDON. Master SACKVILE. William SHAKESPEARE. Sir Philip SI^NEY. Edmund
SPENSER. Thomas STORER. [H. Howard] Earl of SURR^Y. John SYLVESTER. George
TURBERVILLE. William WARNER. Thomas WATSON. John, and William, WEEVER. Sir
Thomas WYAT. I suspect that Wood, by mistake, has attributed this collection by
Allot, to Charles Fitz-jeffr^y abovementioned, a poet before and after 1600,
and author of the AFFANIAE. But I will quote Wood's words. "Fitz-jeffrey has
also made, as ti^ said, A Collection of choice Flowers and D^s^riptions, a^
well out of his, as the works of several others the most renowned poets of our
nation, collected about the beginning of the reign of King James I. But this
tho I have been years seeking after, yet I cannot get a sight of it." ATH.
OXON. p. 606. But the most comprehensive and exact COMMONPLACE of the works of
our most eminent poets thr^ughout the reign of queen Elisabeth, and afterward,
was published about forty years ago, by Mr. Thomas Hayward of Hungerford in
Berkshire, viz. "The BRITISH MUSE, A Collection of THOUGHTS, MORAL, NATURAL,
and SUBLIME, of our ENGLISH POETS, who flourished in the sixteenth and
seventeenth Centuries. With several curious Topics, and beautiful Passages,
never before extracted, from Shakespeare, Jonson, Beaumont, Fletcher, and above
a Hundred more. The whole digested alphabetically, etc. In three volume^.
London, Printed for F. Cogan, etc. 1738." 12mo. The PREFACE, of twenty pages,
was written by Mr. William Oldys, with the supervisal and corrections of his
friend doctor Cam^bell. This aneodote I learn from a manuscript i^sertion by
Oldy^ in my copy of Allot'^ ENGLANDS PARNASSUS, abovementioned, which once
belonged to Oldys.
. At the latter end of the reign of queen Elisabeth, as I am informed from some
curious manuscript authorities, a thin quarto in the black letter was
published, with this title, "The MIRROR OF MIRROVRS, or all the tragedys of
the Mirrovr for Magistrates abbreuiated in brief histories in prose. Very
necessary for those that have not the Cronicle. London, imprinted for James
Roberts in Barbican, 1598 From manuscripts of Mr. Co^eter, of Trinity college
Oxford, lately in the hands of Mr. Wise Radclivian Librarian at Oxford,
containing extracts from the copyrights of our old printers, and registers of
the Stationers, with several other curious notices of that kind. Ames had many
of Coxeter's papers. He died in Lon^on about 1745.
." This was an attempt to familiarise and illustrate this favorite series of
historic soliloquies: or a plan to present its subjects, which were now become
universally popular in rhyme, in the dress of prose.

It is reasonable to suppose, that the publication of the MIRROR OF
MAGISTRATES enriched the stores, and extended the limits, of our drama. These
lives are so many tragical speeches in character. We have seen, that they
suggested scenes to Shakespeare. Some critics imagine, that HISTORICAL Plays
owed their origin to this collection. At least it is certain, that the writers
of this MIRROR were the first who made a poetical use of the English
chronicles recently compiled by Fabyan, Hall, and Hollinshed, which opened a
new field of subjects and events; and, I may add, produced a great revolution
in the state of popular knowledge. For before those elaborate and voluminous
compilations appeared, the History of England, which had been shut up in the
Latin narratives of the monkish annalists, was unfamiliar and almost unknown to
the general reader.

SECT. XXXIV.
IN tracing the gradual accessions of the MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES, an incidental
departure from the general line of our chronologic series has been incurred.
But such an anticipation was unavoidable, in order to exhibit a full and
uninter^upted view of that poem, which originated in the reign of Mary, and was
not finally completed till the beginning of the seventeenth century. I now
therefore return to the reign of queen Mary.

To this reign I assign Richard Edwards, a native of Somersetshire about the
year 1523. He is said by Wood to have been a scholar of Corpus Christi college
in Oxford: but in his early years, he was employed in some department about the
court. This circumstance appears from one of his poems in the PARADISE OF
DAINTY DEVISES, a miscellany which contains many of his pieces.

In youthful years when first my young desires began
To prick me forth to serve in court, a slender tall young man,
My fathers b^essing then, I asked upon my knee,
Who blessing me with trembling hand, these words began say to me,
My son, God guide thy way, and shield thee from mischaunce,
And make thy just desartes in court, thy poor estate to advance, etc Edit.
1585. 4to. CARM. 7.
.
In the year 1547, he was appointed a senior student of Christchurch in Oxford,
then newly founded. In the British Museum there is a small set of manuscript
sonnets signed with his initials, addressed to some of the beauties of the
courts of queen Mary, and of queen Elisabeth MSS. COTTON. Tit. A. xxiv. "To
some court Ladies." -- Pr. "Howarde is not hawghte, etc."
. Hence we may conjecture, that he did not long remain at the university. About
this time he was probably a member of Lincoln's End. In the year 1561, he was
constituted a gentleman of the royal chapel by queen Elisabeth, and master of
the singing boys there. He had received his musical education, while at Oxford,
under George Etheridge George Etheridge, born at Them in Oxfordshire, was
admitted Scholar of Corpus Christi college Oxford, under the tuition of the
learned John Shepreve, in 1534. Fellow; in 1539. In 1553, he was made royal
professor of Greek at Oxford. In 1556, he was recommended by lord Williams of
Them, to Sir Thomas Pope founder of Trinity college in Oxford, to be admitted
a fellow of his college at its first foundation. But Etheridge choosing to
pursue the medical line, that scheme did not take effect. He was persecuted for
popery by queen Elisabeth at her accession: but afterward practiced physic at
Oxford with much reputation, and established a private seminary there for the
instruction of catholic youths in the classi^s, music, and logic.
Notwithstanding his active perseverance in the papistic persuasion, he
presented to the queen when she visited Oxford in 1566^ an E^comium in Gre^k
verse on her father Henry, now in the British Museum, MSS. B^^L. REG. 16^ C. x.
He prefixed a not inelegant pre^ace in Latin verse to his tutor Sheprev^'^
HY^POLYTUS, an Answer to Ovid's PHAEDRA, which he published in 1584. Pits his
cotemporary says, "He was an able mathematician, and one of the most excellent
vocal and instrumental musicians in England, but he chiefly delighted in the
lute and lyre. A most elegant poet, and a most exact composer of English,
Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, verses, which he used to set to his harp with the
greatest skill." ANGL. SCRIPT. p. 784. Paris. 1619. Pits add^, that he
translated several of David's Psalms into a short Hebrew meter for music. Wood
mentions his musical compositions in manuscript. His familiar friend Leland
addresses him in an encomiastic epigram, and asserts that his many excellent
writings were highly pleasing to king Henry the eighth. ENCOM. Land. 1589. p.
111. His chief patrons seem to have been Lord Williams, Sir Thomas Pope, Sir
Walter Mildmay, and Robertson dean of Durham. He died in 1588, at Oxford. I
have given ^theridge so long a note, because he appears from Pits to have been
an English poet. Compare Fox, MARTY^OLOG. iii. 500.
.

When queen Elisabeth visited Oxford in 1566, she was attended by Edwards, who
was on this occasion employed to compose a play called PALAMON AND ARCITE,
which was acted before her majesty in Christ-church hall See supr. vol. ii. 382.
. I believe it was never printed. Another of his plays is DAMON AND PYTHIAS,
which was acted at court. It is a mistake, that the first edition of this play
is the same that is among Mr. Garrick's collection, printed by Richard Johnes,
and dated 1571 Quarto. Bl. let.
. The first edition was printed by William How in Fleet Street, in 1570, with
this title, "The tragical comedy of DAMON AND PITHIAS, newly imprinted as the
same was playde before the queens majesty by the children of her graces
chapple. Made by Master Edward then being master of the children Quarto. Bl.
let. The third edition is among Mr. Garrick's Plays. 4to. Bl. L. dated 1582.
." There is some degree of low humor in the dialogues between Grimme the
collier and the two lacquies, which I presume was highly pleasing to the queen.
He probably wrote many other dramatic pieces now lost. Puttenham having
mentioned lord Buckhurst and Master Edward Ferrys, or Ferrers, as most eminent
in tragedy, gives the prize to Edwards for Comedy and Interlude ART OF ENGLISH
POETRY. fol. 51.
. The word Interlude is here of wide extent. For Edwards, besides that he was a
writer of regular dramas, appears to have been a contriver of masks, and a
composer of poetry for pageants. In a word, he united all those arts and
accomplishments which minister to popular pleasantry: he was the first fiddle,
the most fashionable sonnetteer, the readiest rhymer, and the most facetious
mimic, of the court. In consequence of his love and his knowledge of the
histrionic art, he taught the choristers over which he presided to act plays;
and they were formed into a company of players, like those of saint Paul's
cathedral, by the queen's license, under the superintendency of Edwards See
supr. vol. ii. 393.
.

The most poetical of Edward's ditties in the PARADISE OF DAINTY DEVISES is a
des^ription of May CARM. 6. edit. 1585. It seems to have been a favorite, and
is complimented in another piece, A reply to M. Edwardes May, subscribed M. S.
ibid. CARM. 29. This miscellany, of which more will be said hereafter, is said
in the title to "be devised and written for the most part by M. Edwardes
sometime of her maiesti^s Chapel." Edwards however had been dead twelve years
when the first edition appeared, viz. in 1578.
. The rest are moral sentences in stanzas. His SOUL-KNELL, supposed to have
been written on his deathbed, was once celebrated It is mentioned by G.
Gascoigne in his Epistl^ to the young Gentlemen, before his works, 1587. qu.
. His popularity seems to have altogether arisen from those pleasing talents of
which no specimens could be transmitted to posterity, and which prejudiced his
partial cotemporaries in favor of his poetry. He died in the year 1566 Wood,
ATH. OXON. i. 151. See also, ibid. FA^T. 71.
.

In the Epitaphs, Songs, and Sonets of George Turbervile, printed in 1570,
there are two elegies on his death; which record the places of his education,
ascertain his poetical and musical character, and bear ample testimony to the
high distinction in which his performances, more particularly of the dramatic
kind, were held. The fist is by Turbervile himself, entitled, "An Epitaph on
Master Edwards, sometime Master of the Children of the Chapel and gentleman
of Lyncolnes inn of court."

Ye learned Muses nine
And sacred sisters all;
Now lay your cheerful cithrons down,
And to lamenting fall. --
For he that led the dance,
The chiefest of your train,
I mean the man that Edwards height,
By cruel death is slain.
Ye courtiers change your cheer,
Lament in wastefull wise;
For now your Orpheus has resignde,
In clay his carcas lies.
O ruth! he is bereft,
That, whilst he lived here,
For poets pen and passinge wit
Could have no English peer.
His vain in verse was such,
So stately eke his style,
His feate in forging sugared songs
With clean and curious file Shakespeare has inserted a part of Edwards's song
In Commendation of Musick^, extant at length in the PARADISE OF DAINTY
DEVISES, (fol. 34. b.) in ROMEO AND JULIET. "When griping grief, etc." ACT iv.
SC. 5. In some Miscellany of the reign of Elisabeth, I have seen a song called
The WILLOW-GARLAND, attributed to Edwards: and the same, I think, that is
licenced to T. Colwell in 1564, beginning, "I am not the first that has taken
in hand, The wearynge of the willow^ garlande." This song, often reprinted^
seems to have been written in consequence of that sung by Desdemona in OTHELLO,
with the burden, Sing, O the green willowe shall be my garland. OTHELL. ACT
iv. SC. 3. See REGISTER OF THE STATIONERS, A. fol. 119. b. Hence the antiquity
of Desdemona's song may in some degree be asc^rtained. I take this opportunity
of observing, that the ballad of SUSANNAH, part of which is sung by sir Toby in
TWELFTH NIGHT, was licenced to T. Colwell, in 1562, with the title, "The godly
and constante wife Susanna." Ibid. fol. 89. b. There is a play on this subject,
ibid. fol. 176. a. See TW. N. ACT ii. SC. 3. And COLLECT. PEPYSIAN. tom. i. p.
33. 496.
^
As all the learned Greeks,
And Romans would repine,
If they did live again, to vewe
His verse with scornful eine Eyes.
.
From Plautus he the palm
And learned Terence wan, etc Fol. 142. b.
.
The other is written by Thomas Twyne, an assistant in Phaer's Translation of
Virgil's Eneid into English verse, educated a few years after Edwards at Corpus
Christi college, and an actor in Edwards's play of PALAMON AND ARCITE before
queen Elisabeth at Oxford in 1566 Miles Winsore of the same college was another
actor in that play, and I suppose his performance was much liked by the queen.
For when her majesty left Oxford, after this visit, he was appointed by the
university to speak an or^tion before her at lord Windsor's at Bradenham in
Bucks: and when he had done speaking, the queen turning to Gama de Sylva, the
Spanish ambassador, and looking wistly on Winsore, said to the ambassador, I^
not this a pretty young man? Wood, A^^. OXON. i. 151. 489. Winsore proved
afterward a diligent ^ntiquary.
. It is entitled, "An Epitaph upon the death of the worshipful Master
Richard Edwardes late Master of the Children in the queene^ majesty's
chapel."

O happy house, O place
Of Corpus Christi Corpus Christi college at Oxford.
, thou
That plantedst first, and gaust the root
To that so brave a bow Bough. Branch.
:
And Christ-church At Oxford.
, which enioydste
The fruit more ripe at fill,
Plunge up a thousand sighs, for grief
Your trickling tears distill.
Whilst Child and Chapel dure While the royal chapel and its singing-boys
remain.

In a puritanical pamphlet without name, printed in 1569, and entitled, "The
Children of the Chapel stripped and whipped," among bishop Tanner's books at
Oxford, it is said, "Plays will never be suppressed, while her majesty's
unfledged minions flaunt it in silks and sattens. They had as well be at their
popish service, in the devils garments, etc." fol. xii. a. 12mo. This is
perhaps the earliest notice now to be found in print, of this young company of
comedians, at least the earliest proof of their celebrity, From the same
pamphlet we learn, that it gave still greater offense to the puritans, that
they were suffered to act plays on profane subjects in the royal chapel its^lf.
"Even in her majesty's chapel do these pretty vpstart youths profane the
Lords Day by the lascivious writhing of their tender limbs, and gorgeous
decking of their apparel, in feigning bawdie fables gathered from the
idolatrous heathen poe^s, etc." ibid. fol. xiii. b. But this practice soon
ceased in the royal chapels. Yet in one of Stephen Gos^on's books against the
stage, written in 1579, i^ this passage. "In plays, either those things are
fained that never were, as CUPID AND PSYCHE played at PAUL'S, and a great many
comedies more at the Black-friars, and in every playhouse in London, etc."
SIGNAT. D 4^ Undoubtedly the actors of this play of CUPID AND PSYCHE were the
choristers of saint Paul's cathedral: but it may be doubted, whether by Paule^
we are here to understand the Cathedral or its Singing school, the last of
which was the usual theater of those choristers. See Gosson's " PLAYS CONFUTED
IN FIVE ACTIONS, etc. Proving that they are not to be suffered in a christian
common weal, by the way both the cauils of Thomas Lodge, and the Play of
Plays, written in their defense, and other obj^ctions of Players friends, are
truly set down and directly aunsweard." Land. Impr. for T. Gosson, no date.
Bl. Let. 12mo. We are sure that RELIGIOU^ plays were presented in our churches
long after the re^ormation^ Not to repeat or multiply instances, see SECOND AND
THIRD BLAST OF RETRAIT FROM PLAYS, printed 1580, page 77. 12mo. And Gosson's
SCHOOL OF A^USE, p. 24. b. edit. 1579. As to the exhibition of plays on
SUNDAYS after the reformation, we are told by John Field, in his DECLARATION OF
GOD'S JUDGMENT at Paris Garden, that in the year 1580, "The Magistrates of the
city of London obtained from queen Elizabeth, that all heathenish plays and
enterludes should be banished upon sabbath days." fol. ix. Land. 1583. 8vo. It
appears from this pamphlet, that a prodigious concourse of people were
assembled at Paris Garden, to see plays and a bear-baiting, on Sunday Jan. 13,
1583, when the whole theater fell to the ground, by which accident many of the
spectators were killed. [See also Henry Cave's Narration of the Fall of Paris
Garden, Land. 1588. And D. Beard's Theater of Gods Judgments, edit. 3. Land.
1631. lib. i. c. 35. page 212. Also Refutation of Heywood's Apologi^ for
Actors, p. 43. by J. G. Land. 1615. 4to. And Stubbs's Anatomy of Abuses, p.
134, 135. edit. Land. 1595.] And we learn from Richard Reulidges's Monster
lately found out and discovered, or the Scourging of Tiplers, a circumstance
not generally known in our dramatic history, and perhaps occasioned by these
profanations of the sabbath, that "Many godly citizens and wel-disposed
gentlemen of London, considering that play houses and dicing-house^ were traps
for young gentlemen and others, -- made humble suite to queen Elizabeth and her
Privy^councell, and obtained leave from her Majesty, to thrust the Players out
of the city; and to pull down all Play Houses and Dicing-houses within their
Liberties^ which accordingly was effected, and the Play Houses, in GRACIOUS
[Grace-church] STREET, BISHOPS GATE STREET, that nigh PAUL^S, that on
LUDGATE HILL, and the WHITE-FRIERS, were quite put down and suppressed, by the
care of these religious senators." Land. 1628. pp. 2, 3^ 4. Compare G.
Whetstone's MIRROR FOR MAGISTRATES OF CITIES. Land. 1586. fol. 24. But
notwithstanding these precise measures of the city magistrates and the
privy council, the queen appears to have been a constant attendant at plays,
especially those presented by the children of her chapel.


,
Whilst court a court shall be;
Good Edwards, each astat Estate. Rank of life.
shall much
Both want and wish for thee!
Thy tender tunes and rhymes
Wherein thou wontst to play,
Each princely dame of court and town
Shall bear in mind away.
Thy DAMON Hamlet calls Horatio, O Damon dear, in allusion to the friendship of
Damon and Pythias, celebrated in Edwards's play. HAML. ACT iii. Sc. 2.
and his Friend Pythias. I have said above, that the first edition of Edwards's
DAMON AND PYTHIAS was printed by William How in Fleet Street, in the year
1570, "The tragical comedy, etc." See supr. p. 285. But perhaps it may be
necessary to retract this assertion. For in the Register of the Stationers,
under the year 156^, a receipt is entered for the license of Alexander Lacy to
print, "A ballat entitled tow [two] lamentable Songs PITHIAS and DAMON."
REGISTR. A. fol. 136. b. And again^ there is the receipt for license of Richard
James in 1566, to print "A book entitled the tragical ^omedye of Damonde and
Pithyas." Ibid. fol. 161. b. In the same Register I find, under the year
1569-70, "An INTERLUDE, a lamentable Tragedy full of pleasant mirth," licenced
to John Alde. Ibid. fol. 184. b. This I take to be the first edition of
Preston's CAMBYSES, so frequently ridiculed by his cotemporaries.
,
ARCITE and PALAMON,
With mo^ More.
full fit for princes ears, etc Ibid. fol. 78. b. And not to multiply in the
text citations in proof of Edwards's popularity from forgotten or obs^ure
poet^, I observe at the bottom of the page, that T. B in a recommendatory poem
prefixed to John Studley's English version of Seneca's AGAMEMNON, printed in
1566, ranks our author Edwards with Phaer the translator of Virgil, Jasper
Haywood the translator of Seneca's TROAS and HERCULES FURENS, Nevile the
translator of Seneca's OEDIPUS, Googe, and Golding the translator of Ovid, more
particularly with the latter. With him also, as seems me,
Our EDWARDS may compare;
Who nothing gyuing place to him
Does he sit in agall chair.

.
Francis Meres, in his "PALLADIS TAMIA, Wits Treasury, being the second part
of WITS COMMONWEALTH," published in 1598, recites Master EDWARDES of her
majesty's chapel as one of the best for comedy, together with "Edward earl of
Oxforde, doctor Gager of Oxford A famous writer of Latin plays at Oxford. See
supr. vol. ii. 384.
, master Rowly once a rare scholar of Pembrooke Hall in Cambridge, eloquent
and witty John Lilly, Lodge, Gascoygne, Green, Shakespeare, Thomas Nash,
Thomas Heywood, Anthony Mundye I have never seen any of Antony Munday's plays.
It appears from Kemp's NINE DAYS WONDER, printed in 1600, that he was famous
for writing ballads. In The Request to the impudent generation of
Ballad-makers, Kemp calls Monday "one whose employment of the pageant was
utterly spent, he being known to be Elderton's immediate heire^ etc." SIGNAT.
D 2. See the next note. He seems to have been much employed by the booksellers
a^ a publisher and compiler both in verse and prose. He was bred at Rome in the
English college, and was thence usually called the Pope's scholar. See his
pamphlet The Englishman's Roman Life, or how Englishmen live at Rome. Land.
1582. 4to. But he afterward tu ned protestant. He published "The Discovery of
Edmund Campion the Jesuit," in 1582. 12mo. Land. for E. White. He published
also, and dedicated to the earl of Leicester, Two godly and learned Sermons
made by that famous and worthy^instrument in God's church M. Jo^n Calvin,
translated into English by Horn bishop of Winchester, during his exile.
"Published by A. M." For Henry Ca^, Land. 1584. 12mo. Monday frequently used
his initials only. Also, a Brief CHRONICLE from the Creation to this time,
Land. 1611. 8vo. This seems to be cited by Hutten, ANTIQUIT. OX^. p. 281. edit.
Hearne. See REGISTR. STATION. B. fol. 143. b.

He was a city-poet, and a composer and contriver of the city^pageants. These
are, CHRYSO-TRIUMPHOS, etc. devised and written by A. Monday, 1611. -- TRIUMPHS
OF OLD DRAPERY, etc. by A. M. 1616. -- METROPOLIS CORONATA, etc. by A. M. 1615.
with the Story of ROBIN-HOOD. Printed by G. Purstowe. -- CHRYSANAL^IA, [The
golden-fishery] or the honor of fishmongers, concerning Mr. John Lemans being
twice Lord^mayor, by A. M. 1616. 4to. -- THE TRIUMPHS OF REUNITED BRITANNIA,
etc. by A. Monday, citizen and draper of London, 4to. ^robably Meres, as in the
text, calls him the best plotter, from his invention in these or the like
shows. William Web in the Discourse of ENGLISH POETRY, printed in 1586,
says, that he has seen by Anthony Monday, " an earnest traveller in this art,
very excellent works, especially upon nymphs and shepherds, well worthy to be
viewed, and to be esteemed as rare poetry." In an old play attributed to
Jonson, called The Case is altered, he is ridiculed under the name of ANTONIO
BALLADINO, and as a pageant-poet. In the same scene, there is an oblique stroke
on Meres, for calling him the BEST PLOTTER. "You are in pri^t already for the
BEST PLOTTER." With his city-pageants, I suppose he was DUMB-SHOW maker to the
stage.

Munday's DISCOVERY OF CAMPION gave great offense to the catholics, and
produced an anonymous reply called "A True Report of ^he death and martyrdom of
M. Campion, etc. Whereunto is annexed certain verses made by ^undrie persons."
Without date of year or place. Bl. Let. Never seen by Wood, [ATH. OXON. col.
166.] Pub^ished, I suppose, in 1583, 8vo. At the end is a CAVEAT, containing
some curious anecdotes of Monday. "Monday was first a stage player; after an
aprentise, which time he well served by with deceeuing of his master. Then
wandering toward Italy, by his own report, became a cosener in his journey.
Coming to Rome, in his short abode there, was charitably relieved, but never
admitted in the ^eminary, as he pleseth to lie in the ti^le of his book; and
being weary of well doing, returned home to his first vomit, and was hist from
his stage for folly. Being thereby disc^uraged, he set forth a balet against
plays, -- tho he afterward began again to ruffle upon the stage. I omit among
other places h^^ behavior in Barbican with his good mistres, and mother. Two
things however must not be passed over of this boys infelicitie two several
way^s of late notorious. First, he writing upon the death of Everaud Haunse was
immediately controled and disproued by one of his owe hatche. And shortly after
setting forth the Aprehension of Mr. Campion, etc." The last piece is, "a breef
Discourse of the Taking of Edmund Campion, and diverse other papists in
Barkshire, etc. Gathered by A. M." For W. Wrighte, 1581.

He published in 1618, a new edition of Stowe's SURVEY OF LONDON, with the
addition of materials which he pretends to have received from the author's own
hands. See DEDICATION. He was a citizen of London, and is buried in
Coleman-street church; where his epitaph gives him the character of a learned
antiquary. SEYMOUR'S SURV. LAND. i. 322. He collected the Arms of the county of
Middlesex, lately transferred from sir Simeon Stuart's library to the British
Museum.


, our best plotter, Chapman, Porter, Wilson, Hathway, and Henry Chettle Fol.
282. I do not recollect to have seen any of Chettle's comedies. He wrote a
little romance, with some verses intermixed, entitled, "PIERS PLAINNES seven
years Prentiship, by H. C. Nuda Veritas. Printed at London by J. Danter for
Thomas Gosson, and are to be sold at his shop by London-bride gate, 1595." 4to.
Bl. Let. He wrote another pamphlet, containing anecdotes of the petty literary
squabbles, in which he was concerned with Green, Nashe, Tarleton, and the
players, called "KINDE-HARTS DREAM. Containing five Apparitions with their
Inuectiues against abuses reigning. Delivered by several Ghosts unto him to be
published after Piers Penilesse Post had refused the carriage. Inuita Inuidia.
By H. C. Imprinted at London for William Wright." 4to. without date. Bl. Let.
In the Epistle prefixed, To the Gentlemen Readers, and signed Henry Chettle,
he says, "About three months since died M. Robert Gre^ne, [in 1592] leaving
many papers in sundry Book sellers hands, among others his GROATS WORTH OF
WIT, in which a letter written to diverse PLAY-MAKERS is offensibly by one or
two of them taken, etc." In the same, he mentions an Epistle prefixed to the
second part of GERILEON, falsely attributed to Nashe. The work consists of four
or five Addresses. The first is an ironical Admonition to the Ballad-singers of
London, from Antonie Now Now, or Antony Monday, just mentioned in the text, a
great Ballad-writer. From this piece it appears, that the ancient and
respectable profession of ballad-making, as well as of balladsinging, was in
high repute about the metropolis and in the country fairs. SIGNAT. C. "When I
was liked, says Anthony, there was no thought of that idle vpstart generation
of ballad-singers, neither was there a printer so lewd that would set his
finger to a lascivious line." But now, he adds, "ballads are abusively chanted
in every street; and from London this evil has overspread Essex and the
adjoining counties. There is many a tradesman, of a worship^ull trade, yet no
stationer, who after a little bringing up apprentices to singing brokerie,
takes into his shop some fresh men, and trustes his old servauntes of a two
months standing with a dossen groates worth of ballads. In which if they prove
thriftie, he makes them pretty chapmen, able to spread more pamphlets by the
state forbidden, than all the booksellers in London, etc." The names of many
ballads are here also recorded, WATKINS ALE, The CARMANS WHISTL^,
CHOPPING-KNIVES, and FRIAR FOX-TAILE. Out-roaringe Dick, and Wat Wimbars, two
celebrated trebles, are said to have got twenty shillings a day by singing at
Braintree fair in Essex. Another of these Addresses is from Robert Green to
Pierce Pennilesse. SIGNAT. E. Another from Tarleton the Player to all ^aligners
of honest mirth. E 2. "Is it not lamentable, says he, that a man should spend
his two pence on plays in an afternoon! -- If players were suppressed, it
would be to the no small profit of the Bowlinge Alleys in Bedlam and other
places, that were [are] wont in the afternoones to be left empty by the
recourse of good fellows into that unprofitable recreation of stageplaying.
And it were not much amiss would they join with the Dicinghouses to make
suit again for their longer restrainte, though the Sickness cease. -- While
Plays are usde, half the day is by most youths that have liberty spent
upon them, or at least the greatest company drawn to the places where they
frequent, etc." This is all in pure irony. The last address is from William
Cuckowe, a famous master of legerdemain, on the tricks of juglers. I could not
suffer this opportunity, accidentally offered, to pass, of giving a note to a
forgotten old writer of comedy, whose name may not perhaps occur again. But I
must add, that the initials H. C. to pieces of this period do not always mean
Henry Chettle. In ENGLAND'S HELICON are many pieces signed H. C. Probably for
Henry Constable, a noted sonnet-writer of these times. I have "DIANA, or the
excellent conceitfull Sonnets of H. C. Augmented with diverse quatorzains of
honorable and learned pe^sonages, Divided into vii^ Decads. Vincitur a facibus
qui jacit ipse faces." At Land. 1596. 16mo. These are perhaps by Henry
Constable. The last Sonnet is on a Lady born 1588. In my copy, those by H. C.
are marked H. C. with a pen. Henry Constable will be examined in his proper
place. Chettle is mentioned, as a player I think, in the last page of Dekker's
KNIGHTS CONJURING, printed in 1607.
." Puttenham, the author of the Art of English Poe^ie, mentions the "earl of
Oxford, and master Edwardes of her majesty's chapel, for comedy and interlude
Lib. i. chapter xxxi. fol. 51. a.
."

Among the books of my friend the late Mr. William Collins of Chichester, now
dispersed, was a Collection of short comic stories in prose, printed in the
black letter under the year 1570, "set forth by master Richard Edwardes
master of her majesty's revels." Undoubtedly this is the same Edwards: who
from this title expressly appears to have been the general conductor of the
court festivities: and who most probably succeeded in this office George
Ferrers, one of the original authors of the MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES Who had
certainly q^itted that office before the year 1575. For in George Gascoigne's
Narrative of queen Elisabeth's splendid visit at Kenilworth-castle in
Warwickshire, entitled the PRINCELY PLEASURES OF KENILWORTH-CASTLE, the octav^
stanzas spoken by the Lady of the Lake, are said to have been "devised and
penned by M. [Master] Ferrers, sometime Lord of Misrule in the Court." Signat.
A. iij. See also Signat. B. ij. This was GEORGE FERRERS mentioned in the text,
a contributor to the MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES. I take this opportunity of
insinuating my suspicions, that I have too closely followed the testimony of
Philips, Wood, and Tanner, in supposing that this GEORGE Ferrers, and EDWARD
Ferrer^ a writer of plays, were two distinct persons. See supr. p. 213. I am
now convinced that they have been confounded, and that they are one and the
same man. We have already seen, and from good authority, that GEORGE Ferrers
was Lord of Misrule to the count, that is, among other things of a like kind, a
writer of court interludes or plays; and that king Edward the sixth had great
delight in his pastimes. See supr. vol. ii. 381. The confusion appears to have
originated from Puttenham, the author of the ART OF ENGLISH PO^SIE, who has
inadvertently given to GEORGE the christian name of EDWARD. But his account, or
character, of this EDWARD Ferrers has served ^o lead us to the truth. "But the
principal man in this profession [poetry] at the same time [of Edward the
six^h] was master EDWARD Ferrys, a man of no less mirth and felici^ie that
way, but of much more skill and magnificence in his meeter, and therefore wrate
for the most part to the stage in Tragedy and sometimes in Comedy, or
Interlude, wherein he gave the king so much good recreation, as he had thereby
many good rewards." Lib. i. chapter xxxi. page 49. edit. 1589. And again, "For
Tragedy the Lord Buckhurst, and master Edward Ferrys, for such doings as I
have seen of theirs, deserve the highest price." Ibid. p. 51. His Tragedies,
with the magnificent meeter, are perhaps nothing more than the stately
monologues in the MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES; and he might have written others
either for the stage in general, or the more private entertaiment of the court,
now lost, and probably never printed. His Comedy and Interlude are perhaps to
be understood, to have ^een, not so much regular and professed dramas for a
theater, as little dramatic mumm^ries for the courtholidays, or other
occasional festivities. The court-shows, like this at Kenilworth, were
accompanied with personated dialogues in verse, and the whole pageantry was
often styled an interlude. This reasoning also accounts for Puttenham's s^eming
omission, in not having enumerated the MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES, by name, among
the shining poems of his age. I have before observed, what is much to our
purpose, that no plays of an EDWARD Ferrers, (or Ferrys, which i^ the same,) in
print or manuscript, are now known to exist, nor are mentioned by any writer of
the times with which we are now concerned. GEORGE Ferrers at least, from what
actually remains of him, has some title to the dramatic character. Our GEORGE
Ferrers, from the part he bore in the exhibitions at Kenilworth, appears to
have been employed as a writer of metrical speeches or dialogues to b^ spoken
in character, long after he had left the office of lord of misrule. A proof of
hi^ reputed ^xcellence in composition^ of this nature, and of the celebrity
with which he filled that department.

I also take this opportunity, the earliest which has occurred, of retracting
another slight mistake. See supr. p. 272. There was a second edition of
Niccols's MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES, printed for W. Aspley, Land. 1621. 4to.


. Among these tales was that of the INDUCTION OF THE TINKER in Shakespeare's
TAMING OF THE SHREW: and perhaps Edwards's story-book was the immediate source
from which Shakespeare, or rather the author of the old TAMING OF A SHREW, drew
that diverting apologue See SIX OLD PLAYS, Land. 1779. 12mo.
. If I recollect right, the circumstances almost exactly tallied with an
incident which Heuterus relates, from an Epistle of Ludovicus Vives, to have
actually happened at the marriage of Duke Philip the Good of Burgundy, about
the year 1440. I will give it in the words, either of Vives, or of that
perspicuous annalist, who flourished about the year 1580. "Nocte quadam a caena
cum aliquot praecipuis amicorum per urbem deambulans, jacentem conspicatus est
medio foro hominem de plebe ebrium, altum stertentem. In eo visum est experiri
quale esset vitae nostrae ludicrum, de quo illi interdum essent collocuti.
Jussit hominem deferri ad Palatium, et lecto Ducali collocari, nocturnum Ducis
pileum capiti ejus imponi, exutaque sordida vest linea, aliam e tenuissimo ei
lino indui. De mane ubi evigilavit, praesto fuere pueri nobiles et cubicularii
Ducis, qui non aliter quam ex Duce ipso quaererent an luberet surgere, et
quemadmodum vellet eo die vestiri. Prolata sunt Ducis vestimenta. Mirari homo
ubi se eo lo^i vidit. Indutus est, prodiit e cubiculo, adfuere proceres qui
illum ad sacellum deducerent. Interfuit sacro, datus est illi osculandus liber,
et reliqua penitus ut Duci. A sacro ad prandium instructissimum. A prandio
cubicularius attulit chartas lusorias, pecuniae acervum. Lusit cum magnatibus,
sub serum deambulavit in hortulis, venatus est in leporario, et cepit aves
aliquot aucupio. Caena peracta est pari celebritate qua prandium. Accensis
luminibus inducta sunt musica instrumenta, puellae atque nobiles adolescentes
saltarunt, exhibitae sunt fabulae, dehinc comessatio quae hilaritate atque
invitationibus ad potandum producta est in multam noctem. Ille vero largiter se
vino obruit praestantissimo; et postquam collapsus in somnum altissimum, jussit
eum Dux vestimentis prioribus indui, atque in eum locum reportari, quo prius
fuerat repertus: ibi transegit noctem totam dormiens. Postridie experrectus
caepit secum de vita illa Ducali cogitare, incertum habens fuissetne res vera,
an visum quod animo esset per quietem observatum. Tandem collatis conjectu^is
omnibus atque argumentis, statuit somnium fuisse, et ut tale uxori liberis ac
viris narravit. Quid interest inter diem illius et nostros aliquot annos? Nihil
penitus, nisi quod hoc est paulo diuturnius somnium, ac si quis unam duntaxat
horam, alter vero december somniasset Heuterus, RER. BURGUND. Lib. iv. p. 150.
edit. Plantin. 1584. fol. Heuterus says, this story was told to Vives by an old
officer of the duke's court.
."

To an irresistible digression, into which the magic of Shakespeare's name has
insensibly seduced us, I hope to be pardo^^d for adding another narrative of
this frolic, from the ANATOMY OF MELANCHOLY by Democritus junior, or (...)
Burton, a very learned and ingenious writer of the reign of king James the
first. "When as by reason of unseasonable weather, he could neither hawke nor
hunt, and was now tired with ca^ds and dice, and such other domestical sports,
or to see ladies dance with some of his courtiers, he would in the evening
walk disguised all about the town. It so fortuned, as he was walking late one
night, he found a country fellow dead drunk, snorting on a bulk: he caused
his followers to bring him to his palace, and then stripping him of his old
clothes, and attyring him in the court-fashion, when he wakened, he and they
were all ready to attend upon his Excellency and persuaded him he was some
great Duke. The poor fellow admiring how he came there, was served in state
all day long: after supper he saw them dance, heard music, and all the rest
of those court-like pleasures. But late at night, when he was well tipled, and
again fast asleep, they put on his old robes, and so conveyed him to the
place where they first found him. Now the fellow had not made there so good
sport the day before, as he did now when he returned to himself; all the jest
was, to see how he looked upon it. In conclusion, after some little admiration,
the poor man told his friends he had seen a vision, constantly believed it,
would not otherwise be persuaded, and so the joke ended Burton's ANATOMY OF
MELANCHOLY. Part ii.. 2. page 232. fol. Oxon. 1624. There is an older edition
in quarto.
." If this is a true story, it is a curious specimen of the winter-diversions
of a very polite court of France in the middle of the fifteenth century. The
merit of the contrivance, however, and comic effect of this practical joke,
will atone in some measure for many indelicate circumstances with which it must
have necessarily been attended. I presume it first appeared in Vives's Epistle.
I have seen the story of a tinker disguised like a lord in recent collections
of humorous tales, probably transmitted from Edwards's story-book, which I wish
I had examined more carefully.

I have assigned Edwards to queen Mary's reign, as his reputation in the
character of general poetry seems to have been then at its height. I have
mentioned his sonnets addressed to the court-beauties of that reign, and of the
beginning of the reign of queen Elisabeth Viz. Tit. A. xxiv. MSS. COTT. (See
supr. p. 284.) I will here cite a few lines. HAWARDE is not haugte, but of such
smiling cheer,
That would alure each gentill heart, her love to hold fulle dear:
DACARS is not dangerus, her talk is nothing coye,
Her noble stature may compare with Hector's wife of Troy, etc.
At the end, "Finis R. E." I have a faint recollection, that some of Edwards's
songs are in a poetical miscellany, printed by T. Colwell in 1567, or 1568.
"New Sonettes and pretty pamphlettes, etc." Entered to Colwell in 1567-8.
REGISTR. STATION. A. fol. 163. b. I cannot quit Edwards's songs, without citing
the first stanza of his beautiful one in the Paradise of Dainty Devises, on
Terence's apothegm of Amantium irae amoris integratio est. NUMBER. 50. SIGNAT. G.
ii. edit. 1585. In going to my naked bed, as one that would have slept,
I heard a wife sing to her child, that long before had wept:
She sighed sore, and sang full sweet, to bring the babe to rest,
That would not cease, but cried still, in sucking at her breast.
She was full weary of her watch, and greeved with her child;
She rocked it, and rated it, till that on her it smilde.
Then did she say, now have I found this Proverb true to prove,
The falling out of faithful friends renuyng is of love.
The close of the second stanza is prettily conducted. Then kissed she her
little babe, and swear by God above,
The falling out of faithful friends, renuyng is of love.

.

If I should be thought to have been disproportionately prolix in speaking of
Edwards, I would be understood to have partly intended a tribute of respect to
the memory of a poet, who is one of the earliest of our dramatic writers after
the reformation of the British stage.

SECT. XXXV.
ABOUT the same time flourished Thomas Tusser, one of our earliest didactic
poets, in a science of the highest utility, and which produced one of the most
beautiful poems of antiquity. The vicissitudes of this man's life have uncommon
variety and novelty for the life of an author, and his history conveys some
curious traces of the times as well as of himself. He seems to have been alike
the sport of fortune, and a dupe to his own discontented disposition and his
perpetual propensity to change of situation.

He was born of an ancient family, about the year 1523, at Rivenhall in Essex;
and was placed as a chorister, or singingboy, in the collegiate chapel of the
castle of Wallingford in Berkshire This chapel had a dean, six prebendaries,
six clerks, and four choris^ers. It was dissolved in 1549.
. Having a fine voice, he was impressed from Wallingford college into the
king's chapel. Soon afterward he was admitted into the choir of saint Paul's
cathedral in London; where he made great improvements under the instruction of
John Redford the organist, a famous musician. He was next sent to Eton-school,
where, at one chastisement, he received fifty-three stripes of the rod, from
the severe but celebrated master Nicholas Udall Udall's English interludes,
mentioned above, were perhaps written for his scholars. Thirty-five lines of
one of them are quoted in Wilson's ART OF LOGIKE, edit. 1567. fol. 67. a.
"Suete maistresse whereas, etc."
. His academical education was at Trinity-hall in Cambridge: but Hatcher
affirms, that he was from Eton admitted a scholar of King's college in that
university, under the year 1543 MSS. Catal. Praepos. Soc. Schol. Coll. Regal.
Cant.
. From the university he was called up to court by his singular and generous
patron William lord Paget, in whose family he appears to have been a retainer
Our author's HUSBANDRY is dedicated to his son Lord Thomas Paget of
Beaudesert, fol. 7. chapter ii. edit. ut in^r.
. In this department he lived ten years: but being disgusted with the vices,
and wearied with the quarrels of the courtiers, he retired into the country,
and embraced the profession of a farmer, which he successively practiced at
Ratwood in Sussex, Ipswich in Suffolk, Fairstead in Essex, Norwich, and other
places In Peacham's MINERVA, a book of emblems printed in 1612, there is the
device of a whetstone and a scythe with these lines, fol. 61. edit. 4to. They
tell me, TUSSER, when thou were alive,
And had for pro^it turned every stone,
Where ere thou ca^est thou could never thrive,
Though heereto best could counsel every one,
As it may in thy HUSBANDRY appear
Wherein afresh thou liust among us here.
So like thy self a number more are wont,
To sharpen others with advice of wit,
When thy themselves are like the whetstone blunt, etc.

. Here his patrons were sir Richard Southwell See LIFE OF SIR THOMAS POPE, 2d
edit. p. 218.
, and Salisbury dean of Norwich. Under the latter he procured the place of a
singing-man in Norwich cathedral. At length, having perhaps too much philosophy
and too little experience to succeed in the business of agriculture, he
returned to London: but the plague drove him away from town, and he took
shelter at Trinity college in Cambridge. Without a tincture of careless
imprudence, or vicious extragance, this desultory character seems to have
thrived in no vocation. Fuller says, that his stone, which gathered no moss,
was the stone of Sisyphus. His plough and his poetry were alike unprofitable.
He was by turns a fiddler and a farmer, a grasier and a poet with equal
success. He died very aged at London in 1580, and was buried in saint Mildred's
church in the Poultry See his Epitaph in Stowe's SURV. LAND. p. 474. edit.
1618. 4to. And F^ller's WORTHIES, p. 334.
.

Some of these circumstances, with many others of less consequence, are related
by himself in one of his pieces, entitled the AUTHOR'S LIFE, as follows.

What robes The livery, or vestis liberata, often called robe, allowed annually
by the col^ege.
how bare, what college fare!
What bread how stale, what penny ale!
Then WALLINGFORD, how were thou abhord
Of silly boys!
Thence for my voice, I must, no choice,
Away of forse, like posting horse;
For sundry men had placardes then
Such child to take.
The better breast To the passages lately collected by the commentators on
Shakespeare, to prove that Breast signifies voice, the following may be added
from Ascham's TOXOPHILUS. He is speaking of the expediency of educating youth
in singing. "Truly two degrees of men, which have the highest offices under
the king in all this realm, shall greatly lack the use of singinge, preachers
and lawyers, because they shall not, without this, be able to rule their
BREASTS for every purpose, etc." fol. 8. b. Land. 1571. 4to. Bl. Let.
, the lesser rest,
To serve the queer, now there now here:
For time so spent, I may repent,
And sorrow make.
But mark the chance, myself to vance,
By friendships lot, to PAUL'S I got;
So found I grace a certain space,
Still to remain.
With REDFORD there, the like no where,
For cunning such, and virtue much,
By whom some part of music art,
So did I gain.
From PAUL'S I went, to EATON sent,
To learn straighte ways the Latin phraies,
Where fifty three stripes given to me
At once I had:
The fault but small, or none at all,
It came to pas, thus beat I was:
See, Udall, see, the mercy of thee
To me, poor lad!
To LONDON hence, to CAMBRIDGE thence,
With thanks to thee, O TRINITE,
That to thy HALL, so passinge all,
I got at last.
There joy I felt, there trim I dwelt, etc.
At length he married a wife by the name of Moon, from whom, for an obvious
reason, he expected great inconstancy, but was happily disappointed.

Through Uenus' toies, in hope of ioies,
I chanced soon to find a Moon,
Of cheerful hew:
Which well and fine, methought, did shine,
And never change, a thing most strange,
Yet kept in sight, her course aright,
And compass true, etc Fol. 155. edit. 1586. See also THE AUTHORS EPISTL^ to the
lat^ lord William Paget, wher^in h^ does discourse of his own bringing up^
etc. fol. 5. And the EPISTL^ to Lady Paget, fol. 7. And his rules for training
a boy in music, fol. 141.
.
Before I proceed, I must say a few words concerning the very remarkable
practice implied in these stanzas, of seizing boys by a warrant for the service
of the king's chapel. Strype has printed an abstract of an instrument, by which
it appears, that emissaries were dispatched into various parts of England with
full powers to take boys from any choir for the use of the chapel of king
Edward the sixth. Under the year 1550, says Strype, there was a grant of a
commission "to Philip Van Wilder gentleman of the Privy Chamber, in any
churches or chappells within England to take to the king's use, such and as
many singing children and choristers, as he or his deputy shall think good Dat.
April. Strype's MEM. ECCL. ii. p. 538.
." And again, in the following year, the master of the king's chapel, that is,
the master of the king's singing-boys, has license "to take up from time to
time as many children [boys] to serve in the king's chapel as he shall think
fit Ibi^. p. 539. Under the same year, a yearly allow^nce of 80l, i^ speci^^ed,
"to find six singing children for the king's privy chamber." Ibid. I presume
this appointment was transmitted from preceding reigns.
." Under the year 1454, there is a commission of the same sort from king Henry
the sixth, De ministrallis propter solatium regis providendis, for procuring
minstrels, even by force, for the solace or entertainment of the king: and it
is required, that the minstrels so procured, should be not only skilled in art
minstrallatus, in the art of minstrelsy, but membris naturalibus elegantes,
handsome and elegantly shaped Rym^ FOED. xi. 375.
. As the word Minstrel is of an extensive signification, and is applied as a
general term to every character of that species of men whose business it was to
entertain, either with oral recitation, music, gesticulation, and singing, or
with a mixture of all these arts united, it is certainly difficult to
determine, whether singers only, more particularly singers for the royal
chapel, were here intended. The last clause may perhaps more immediately seem
to point out tumblers or posture-masters Even so late as the present reign of
qu^^n Mary, we find tumblers introduced for the diversion of the court. In
1556, at a grand military review of the queen's pensioners in Greenwich park,
"came a Tumbler and played many pretty seats, the queen and cardinal [Pole]
looking on; whereat she was observed to laugh heartily, etc." Strype's ECCL.
MEM. iii. p. 312. chapter xxxix. Mr. Astle has a roll of some private expenses of
king Edward the second: among which it appears, that fifty shillings were paid
to a person who danced before the king on a ^able, "et lui ^^^t ^re^-grandement
ri^e." And that twenty shillings were allowed to another, who rode before his
majesty, and often fell from his horse, at which his majesty laughed heartily,
de queux roi rya grantement. The laughter of kings was thought worthy to be
recorded.
. But in the register of the capitulary acts of York cathedral, it is ordered
as an indispensable qualification, that the chorister who is annually to be
elected the boy-bishop, should be competenter corpore formosus. I will
transcribe an article of the register, relating to that ridiculous ceremony.
"Dec. 2. 1367. Joannes de Quixly confirmatur Episcopus Puerorum, et Capitulum
ordinavit, quod electio episcopi Puerorum in ecclesia Eboracensi de cetero
fieret de Eo, qui diutius et magis in dicta ecclesia laboraverit, et magis
idoneus repertus fuerit, dum tamen competenter sit corpore formosus, et quod
aliter facta electio non valebit Registr. Archiv. Eccles. Ebor. MSS. In the
Salisbury-missal, in the office of EPISCOPUS PUERORUM, among the suffrages we
read, "Corpore enim formosus es O ^ili, et diffusa est gratia in labiis tuis,
etc." In further proof of the solemnity with which this farce was conducted, I
will cite another extract from the chapter-registers at York. "xj febr. 1370.
In Scriptoria capituli Ebor. dominus Johannes Gisson, magister choristarum
ecclesiae Eboracensis, liberavit Roberto de Holme choristae, qui tunc ultimo
fuerat episcopus puerorum, iij libras, xvs. id. ob. de perquisitis ipsius
episcopi per ipsum Johannem receptis, et dictus Robertus ad sancta dei
evangelia per ipsum corporaliter tacta juravit, quod nunquam molestaret dictum
dominum Johannem de summa pecuniae praedicta." REGISTR. E^OR.
." It is certainly a matter of no consequence, whether we understand these
Minstrels of Henry the sixth to have been singers, pipers, players, or
posture-masters. From the known character of that king, I should rather suppose
them performers for his chapel. In any sense, this is an instance of the same
oppressive and arbitrary privilege that was practiced on our poet.

Our author Tusser wrote, during his residence at Ratwood in Sussex, a work in
rhym^ entitled FIVE HUNDRED POINTS OF GOOD HU^BANDRIE, which was printed at
London in 1557 Quarto. Bl. Let. In 1557, John Day has license to print "the
hundredth points of good Husserie." REGISTR. STATION. A. fol. 23. a. In
1559-60^ ju^. 20, T. Marshe has license to print "the book of Husbandry." Ibid.
fol. 48. b. This last title occurs in these registers much lower.
. But it was soon afterward reprinted, with additions and improvements, under
the following title, "Five hundredth points of good Husbandry as well for the
Champion or open country, as also for the Woodland or Several, mixed in
every month with Huswiferie, over and besides the book of HUSWIF^RIE.
Corrected, better ordered, and newly augmented a fourth part more, with diverse
other lessons, as a diet for the farmer, of the properties of winds, planets,
hops, herbs, bees, and approved remedies for the sheep and cattle, with many
other matters both profitabell and not unpleasant for the Reader. Also a table
of HUSBANDRY at the beginning of this book, and another of HUSWIFERIE at the
end, etc. Newly set foor^h by THOMAS TUSSER gentleman The oldest edition with
this title which I have seen is in quarto, dated 1586, and printed at London,
"in the now dwelling house of Henry Denham in Aldersgate street at the sign
of the star." In black letter, containing 164 pages. The next edition is for
H. Yardley, London 1593. Bl. Let. 4to. Again at London, p^inted by Peter
Short, 1597. Bl. Let. 4to. The last I have seen is dated 1610. 4to.

In the Register of the Stationers, a receipt of T. Hackett is entered for
license for printing "A dialoge of wyvynge and thryvynge of Tusshers with ij
lessons for old and young," in 1562 or 1563. REGISTR. STAT. COMP. LAND. notat.
A. fol. 74. b. I find licenced to Alde in 1565, "An hundredth points of evell
huswyfraye," I suppose a satire on Tusser. Ibid. fol. 131. b. In 1561, Richard
Tottell was to print "A book inti^uled one hundredth good points of husboundry
lately married unto a hundredth good points of Huswiffry newly corrected and
amplyfyed." Ibid. fol. 74. a.


."

It must be acknowledged, that this old English georgic has much more of the
simplicity of Hesiod, than of the elegance of Virgil: and a modern reader would
suspect, that many of its salutary maxims originally decorated the margins, and
illustrated the calendars, of an ancient almanac. It is without invocations,
digressions, and descriptions: no pleasing pictures of rural imagery are drawn
from meadows covered with flocks and fields waving with corn, nor are Pan and
Ceres once named. Yet it is valuable, as a genuine picture of the agriculture,
the rural arts, and the domestic economy and customs, of our industrious
ancestors.

I must begin my examination of this work with the apology of Virgil on a
similar subject, Possum multa tibi veterum praecepta refer,
Ni refugis, tenuesque piget cognoscere curas GEOK^IC. i. 176.
.


I first produce a specimen of his directions for cultivating a hop-garden,
which may, perhaps not unprofitably, be compared with the modern practice.

Whom fancy persuades, among other crops,
To have for his spending, sufficient of hops,
Must willingly follow, of choises to choose,
Such lessons approved, as skilful do use.
Ground grauellie, sandy, and mixed with claie,
Is naughty for hops, any manner of way;
Or if it be mingled with rubbish and stone,
For dryness and barrenness let it alone.
Choose soil for the hop of the rottenest mould,
Well doonged and wrought, as a garden-plot should;
Not far from the water, but not overflowed,
This lesson well noted is meet to be known.
The sun in the southe, or else southlie and west,
Is joy to the hop, as a welcomed guest;
But wind in the north, or else northerlie east,
To the hop, is as ill as a fraie in a feast.
Meet plot for a hop-yard, once found as is told,
Make thereof account, as of jewel of gold:
Now dig it and leave it, the sun for to burn,
And afterward fence it, to serve for that turn.
The hop for his profit I thus do exalt:
It strengthens drink, and it favors malt;
And being well brewed, long kept it will last,
And drawing abide -- if ye draw not too fast CHAP. 42. fol. 93. In this
stanza, is a copy of verses by one William Kethe, a divine of Geneva, pre^ixed
to Dr. Christopher's Goodman's absurd and factious pamphlet against queen Mary,
How superior Powers, etc. Printed at Geneva by John Crispin, 1558. 16mo. Whom
f^ry long fosterd by sufferance and awe,
Have right rule subverted, and made will their law,
Whose pride how to temper, this truth will thee t^ll,
So as thou resist may, and yet not rebel, etc.

.
To this work belongs the well known old song, which begins, The Ape, the Lion,
the Fox, and the Ass,
Thus sett^ forth man in a glass, etc Chap. 50. fol. 107.
.


For the farmer's general diet he assigns, in Lent, red herrings, and salt
fish, which may remain in store when Lent is past: at Easter, veal and bacon:
at Martinmas, salted beef, when dainties are not to be had in the country: at
Midsummer, when mackrel are no longer in season, grass, or sallads^ fresh
beef, and pease: at Michaelmas, fresh herrings, with fatted crones, or sheep:
at All Saints, pork and pease, sprats and spurlings: at Christmas, good cheer
and play. The farmer's weekly fish-days, are Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday;
and he is charged to be careful in keeping embrings and fast-days Chap. 12.
fol. 25, 26.
.

Among the Husbandlie Furniture are recited most of the instruments now in use,
yet with several obsolete and unintelligible names of farming utensils Chap.
15. fol. 31, 32, 33.
. Horses, I know not from what superstition, are to be annually blooded on
saint Stephen's day Fol. 52.
. Among the Christmas husbandlie fare, our author recommends good drink, a
good fire in the Hall, brawne, pudding and souse, and mustard withal, beef,
mutton, and pork, shred, or minced, pies of the best, pig, veal, goose, capon,
and turkey, cheese, apples, and nuts, with jolie carols. A Christmas carol is
then introduced to the tune of King Solomon Chap. 30. fol. 37. These are four
of the line^. Even Christ, I mean, that virgins child, In Bethlem born:
That lamb of God, that prophet mild, Crowned with thorn!
Mar. 4. 1559, there is a receipt from Ralph Newbery for his license for
printing a balled called "King Saloman." REGISTR. STATION. COMP. LAND. notat.
A. fol. 48. a. Again, in 1561, a license to print "iij balletts, the one
entitled News out^ of Kent; the other, a new^ ballat after the tune of king
SOLOMON; and the other, News out of Heaven and Hell." Ibid. fol. 75. a. See
License of John Tysdale for printing "Certain goodly Carowles to be song to
the glory of God," in 1562. Ibid. fol. 86. a. Again, ibid. "Crestenmas Carowles
auctori^shed by my lord of London." A ballad of Solomon and the queen of Sheba
is entered in 1567. Ibid. fol. 166. a. In 1569, is entered an "Interlude for
bo^es to handle and to pass time at Christimas." Ibid. fol. 183. b. Again, in
the same year, fol. 185. b. More instances follow.
.

In a comparison between Champion and Several, that is, open and enclosed
land, the disputes about enclosures appear to have been as violent as at
present Chap. 52. fol. 111.
. Among his Huswifelie Admonitions, which are not particularly addressed to the
farmer, he advises three dishes at dinner, which being well dressed, will be
sufficient to please your friend, and will become your Hall Fol. 133.
. The prudent houfewife is directed to make her own tallowcandles Fol. 135.
. Servants of both sexes are ordered to go to bed at ten in the summer, and
nine in the winter: to rise at five in the winter, and four in the summer Fol.
137.
. The ploughman's feasting days, or holidays, are PLOUGH-MONDAY, or the first
Monday after Twelfth-day, when ploughing begins, in Leicestershire. SHROF-TIDE,
or SHROVE-TUESDAY, in Essex and Suffolk, when after shroving, or confession, he
is permitted to go thresh the fat hen, and "if blindfold [you] can kill her
then give it thy men," and to dine on fritters and pancakes I have before
mentioned Shrove^Tuesday as a day dedicated to festivities. See supr. vol. ii.
p. 387. In some parts of G^rmany it was usual to celebrate Shrovetide with
bon^ires. Lavaterus o^ GHOSTES, etc. trans^ated into English by R. H. Land.
1572 4to. fol. 51. Bl. Le^t. Polydore Virgil says, that so early as the year
1170, it was the custom of the English nation to celebrate their Christmas with
plays, masque^, and the mos^ magnificent spectacles; together with games at
dice, and dancing^ This practice he adds, was not conformable to the usage of
most other nations, who permitted these diversions, not at Christmas, but a few
days before Lent, about the time of Shrovetide. HIST. A^GL. Lib. xiii. f. 211.
Basil. 1534. By the way, Polydore Virgil observes, that the Christma^prince or
Lo^d of Mis^ule, is almost peculiar to the English. De RER. INVENTOR. lib. v.
cap. ii. Shrove-Tuesday ^eems to have been sometimes considered as the last day
of Christmas, and on that account might be celebrated as a festival. In the
year 1440, on Shrove-Tuesday, which that year was in March, at Norwich there
was a "Disport in the ^streets, when one rode through the streets havyng his
horse trappyd with tyn-soyle, and other nyse disgysyngs, coronned as King of
CRESTEMASSE, in tokyn that seson should end with the twelve months of the
year: aforn him went yche [each] Month dysgusysyd after the seson requiryd,
etc." Blomf. NORF. ii. p. 111. This very poetical pagea^try reminds me of a
similar and a beautiful procession at Rome, described by Lucretius, where the
SEASONS, with their accompaniments, walk personi^ied. Lib. v. 736. It VER ^t
VENUS, et Veneris praenuntius ante
Pinnatus ZEPHYRUS graditur vestigia propter^
FLORA quibus matter praespergens ante viai
Cuncta coloribus egregii^ et odoribus opplet. --
Inde AUTUMNUS adit, etc.

. SHEEP-SHEARING, which is celebrated in Northamptonshire with wafers and
cakes. The WAKE-DAY, or the vigil of the church saint, when every wanton may
danse at her will, as in Leicestershire, and the oven is to be filled with
flawnes. HARVEST-HOME, when the harvest-home goose is to be killed. SEED-CAKE,
a festival so called at the end of wheat-sowing in Essex and Suffolk, when the
village is to be treated with seedcakes, pasties, and the frumentie-pot. But
twice a week, according to ancient right and custom, the farmer is to give
roastmeat, that is, on Sundays and on Thursday-nights Fol. 138.
. We have then a set of posies or proverbial rhymes, to be written in various
rooms of the house, such as "Husbandlie posies for the Hall, Posies for the
Parlour, Posies for the Ghests chamber, and Posies for thine own bedchamber
Fol. 144, 145. See Inscriptions of this sort in "The Welspring of witty
Conceights," translated from the Italian by W. Phist. Land. for R. Jones, 1584.
Bl. Let. 4to. SIGNAT. N 2.
." Botany appears to have been eminently cultivated, and illustrated with
numerous treatises in English^ throughout the latter part of the sixteenth
century See the Preface to Johnson's edition of Gerharde's HERBAL, printed in
1633. ^ol.
. In this work are large enumerations of plants, as well for the medical as the
culinary garden.

Our author's general precepts have often an expressive brevity, and are
sometimes pointed with an epigrammatic turn and a smartness of allusion. As
thus,

Save wing for a thresher, when gander does die;
Save feathers of all things, the softer to lie:
Much spice is a thief, so is candle and fire;
Sweet sause is as crafty as ever was friar Fol. 134.
.
Again, under the lessons of the housewife.

Though cat, a good mouser, does dwell in a house,
Yet ever in dairie have trap for a mouse:
Take heed how thou laiest the bane Poison.
for the rats,
For poisoning thy servant, thyself, and thy brats Fol. 131.
.
And in the following rule of the smaller economics.

Save droppings and skimmings, however ye do,
For medcine, for cattle, for cart, and for shoo Fol. 134.
.
In these stanzas on haymaking, he rises above his common manner.

Go muster thy servants, be captain thyselfe,
Providing them weapons, and other like pelf:
Get bottells and wallets, keep field in the heat,
The fear is as much, as the danger is great.
With tossing, and raking, and setting on cox,
Grass lately in swathes, is haie for an ox.
That done, go to cart it, and have it away:
The battle is fought, ye have gotten the day Fol. 95. CHAPTER 44.
.
A great variety of verse is used in this poem, which is thrown into numerous
detached chapters In this book I first find the meter of Prior's s^ng,
"Despairing beside a clear stream."
For instance. What look ye, I pray you show what?
Terms painted with rhetorike ^ine?
Good husbandry seeks not that,
Nor is it any meaning of mine.
What look thou, speak at the last,
Good lessons for thee and thy wife?
Then keep them in memory fast
To help as a comfort to life.
See PREFACE TO THE BUIER OF THIS ^OOKE, chapter 5. fol. 14. In the same measure is
the COMPARISON B^TWEEN^ CHAMPION COUNTRY AND SEVERAL, chapter 52. fol. 108.
. The HUSBANDRY is divided into the several months. Tusser, in respect of his
antiquated diction, and his argument, may not improperly be styled the English
Varro.

Such were the rude beginnings in the English language of didactic poetry,
which, on a kindred subject, the present age has seen brought to perfection, by
the happy combination of judicious precepts with the most elegant ornaments of
language and imagery, in Mr. Mason's ENGLISH GARDEN.

SECT. XXXVI.
AMONG Antony Wood's manuscripts in the Bodleian library at Oxford, I find a
poem of considerable length written by William Forest, chaplain to queen Mary
In folio. MSS. Cod. A. Wood. Number. 2. They were purchased by the university
after Wood's death.
. It is entitled, "A true and most notable History of a right noble and famous
Lady produced in Spain entitled the second GRESIELD, practiced not long out of
this time in much part tragedous as delectable both to hearers and readers."
This is a panegyrical history in octave rhyme, of the life of queen Catharine,
the first queen of king Henry the eighth. The poet compares Catharine to
patient Grisild, celebrated by Petrarch and Chaucer, and Henry to earl Walter
her husband The affecting story of PATIENT GRISILD seems to have long kept up
its celebrity. In the books of the Stationers, in 1565, Owen Rogers has a
license to print "a ballat entitled the song of pacyent Gressell unto her
make." REGISTR. A. fol. 132. b. Two ballads are entered in 1565, "to the tune
of pacyente Gressell." Ibid. fol. 135. a. In the same year, T. Colwell has
license to print," "The history of meke and pacyent Gresell." Ibid. fol. 139.
a. Colwell ha^ a second edition of this history in 1568. Ibid. fol. 177. a.
Instances occur much lower.
. Catharine had certainly the patience and conjugal compliance of Grisild: but
Henry's cruelty was not, like Walter's, only artificial and assumed. It is
dedicated to queen Mary: and Wood's manuscript, which was once very superbly
bound and embossed, and is elegantly written on vellum, evidently appears to
have been the book presented by the author to her majesty. Much of its ancient
finery is tarnished: but on the brass bosses at each corner is still
discernible AVE, MARIA GRATIA PLENA. At the end is this colophon. "Here ends
the Historye of Grysilde the second, duly meaning Queen Catharine mother to
our most dread sovereign Lady queen Mary, fynysched the xxv day of June, the
year of owre Lord 1558. By the simple and unlearned Sir Wylliam Forest
preeiste, propria manu." The poem, which consists of twenty chapters, contains
a zealous condemnation of Henry's divorce: and, I believe, preserves some
anecdotes, yet apparently misrepresented by the writer's religious and
political bigotry, not extant in any of our printed histories. Forest was a
student at Oxford, at the time when this notable and knotty point of casuistry
prostituted the learning of all the universities of Europe, to the
gratification of the capricious amors of a libidinous and implacable tyrant.
He has recorded many particulars and local incidents of what passed in Oxford
during that transaction In the first chapter, he thus speaks of the
towardliness of the princess Catharine's younger years. With stool and needyl
she was not to seek,
And other practiseingis for ladies meet;
To pastyme at tables, ticktacke, or gleeke,
Cardys, dyce, etc.
He adds, that she was a pure virgin when married to the king: and that her
first husband prince Hen^y, on account of his tender years, never slept with
her.
. At the end of the poem is a metrical ORATION CONSOLATORY, in six leaves, to
queen Mary.

In the British Museum is another of Forrest's poems, written in two splendid
folio volumes on vellum, called "The tragedious troubles of the most chaste and
innocent Joseph, son to the holy patriarch Jacob," and dedicated to Thomas
Howard duke of Norfolk MSS. REG. 18 C. xiii. It appears to have once belonged
to the library of John Theyer of Coopershill near Gloucester. There is another
copy in University-college Library, MSS. G. 7. with gilded leaves. This, I
believe, once belonged to Robert earl of Aylesbury. Pr. "In Canaan that country
opulent."
. In the same repository is another of his pieces, never printed, dedicated to
king Edward the sixth, "A notable warke called The PLEASANT POESY OF PRINCELY
PRACTICE, composed of late by the simple and unlearned sir William Forest
priest, much part collected out of a book entitled the GOVERNANCE OF NOBLEMEN,
which book the wise philosopher Aristotle wrote to his disciple Alexander the
Great MSS. REG. 17 D. iii. In the Preface twenty-seven chapters are enumerated^
but the book contains only twenty-four.
." The book here mentioned is Aegidius Romanus de REGIMINE PRINCIPIUM, which
yet retained its reputation and popularity from the middle age See supr. vol.
ii. p. 39. Not long before, Robert Copland, the printer, author of the
TESTAMENT OF JULIAN OF BRENTFORD, translated from the French and printed, "The
SECRET of SECRETS of Aristotle, with the governayle of princes and ^u^ri^
manner of estate, with rules of health for body and soul." Land. 1528. 4to.
To what I have before said of Robert Copland as a poet (supr. vol. ii. p. 300.)
may be added, that he prefixed an English copy of verses to the Mirror of the
Church of saint Austin^ of Abyngdon, etc. Printed by himself, 1521. 4to.
Another to Andrew Chertsey's PASSIO DOMINI, ibid. 1521. 4to. (See supr. p. 80.)
He and his brother William printed s^veral romances before 1530.
. I ought to have observed before, that Forest translated into English meter
fifty of David's Psalms, in 1551, which are dedicated to the duke of Somerset,
the Protector MSS. REG. 17 A. xxi.
. Hence we are led to suspect, that our author could accommodate his faith to
the reigning powers. Many more of his manuscript pieces both in prose and
verse, all professional and of the religious kind, were in the hands of Robert
earl of Ailesbury Wood, ATH. OXON. i. 124. Fox says, that he paraphrased the
PATER NOSTER in English verse, Pr. "Our Father which in heaven does sit." Also
the TE DEUM, as ^ thanksgiving hymn for queen Mary, Pr. "O God thy name we
magnify." Fox, MART. p. 1139. edit. vet.
. Forest, who must have been living at Oxford, as appears from his poem on
queen Catharine, so early as the year 1530, was in reception of an annual
pension of six pounds from Christ-church in that university, in the year 1555
MSS. Le Neve. From a long chapter in his KATHARINE, about the building of
Christ-church and the regimen of it, he appears to have been of that college.
. He was eminently skilled in music: and with much diligence and expense, he
collected the works of the most excellent English composers, that were his
cotemporaries. These, being the choicest compositions, of John Taverner of
Boston, organist of Cardinal-college now Christ-church at Oxford, John Merbeck
who first digested our present church service from the notes of the Roman
missal, Fairfax, Tie, Sheppard, Norman, and others, falling after Forrest's
death into the possession of doctor William Hither, founder of the musical
praxis and professorship at at Oxford in 1623, are now fortunately preserved at
Oxford, in the archives of the music-school assigned to that institution.

In the year 1554, a poem of two sheets, in the spirit and stanza of Sternhold,
was printed under the title, "The UNGODLINESS OF THE HETHNICKE GODS, or The
Downfall of Diana of the Ephe^ians, by J. D. an exile for the word, late a
minister in London, MDLIV Bl. Let. 12mo.
." I presume it was printed at Geneva, and imported into England with other
books of the same tendency, and which were afterward suppressed by a
proclamation. The writer, whose arguments are as weak as his poetry, attempts
to prove, that the customary mode of training youths in the Roman poets
encouraged idolatry and pagan superstition. This was a topic much labored by
the puritans. Prynne, in that chapter of his HISTRIOMASTIX, where he exposes
"the obscenity, ribaldry, amorousnesse, HEATHENISHNESSE, and profaneness, of
most play-bookes, Arcadias, and fained histories that are now so much in
admiration," acquaints us, that the infallible leaders of the puritan
persuasion in the reign of queen Elisabeth, among which are two bishops, h^ve
solemnly prohibited all christians, "to pen, to print, to sell, to read, or
schoolmasters and others to teach, any amorous wanton Play-bookes, Histories,
or Heathen authors, especially Ovid's wanton Epistles and Books of love,
Catullus, Tibullus, Propertius, Martial, the Comedies of Plautus, Terence, and
other such amorous books, savoring either of Pagan Gods, of Ethnicke rites and
ceremonies, of scurrility, amorousnesse, and profaneness Page 913. 916.
." But the classics were at length condemned by a much higher authority. In the
year 1582, one Christopher Ocland, a schoolmaster of Cheltenham, published two
poems in Latin hexameters, one entitled ANGLORUM PRAELIA, the other ELIZABETHA
Londini. Apud Rad. Neubery ex assignatione Henrici Bynneman typographi. Anno
1582^ Cum priv. 12mo. The whole title is this, "ANGLORUM PRAELIA ab A. D. 1327,
anno nimirum primo inclytissimi principis Edwardi eius nominis tertii, usque ad
A. D. 1558, carmine summatim perstricta. ITEM De pacatissimo Angliae statu,
imperante Elizabetha, compendiosa Narratio. Author^ CHRISTOPHORO OCLANDO, primo
Scholae Southwa^kiensis prope Londinum, dein Cheltennamensis, quae sunt a
serenissima sua majestate fundatae, moderatore. Haec duo poemata, tam ob
argumenti grauitatem, quam carminis facilitatem, nobilissimi regiae majestatis
consiliarii in omnibus regni scholis praelegenda pueris prae scrip s^runt. Hijs
Alexandri Neuilli KETTUM, tum propter argumenti similitudinem, tum prop^er
orationis elegantiam, adiunximus. Londini, etc." Prefixed to the ANGLORUM
PRAELIA is a Latin elegiac copy by Thomas Newton of Cheshire: to the
ELIZABETHA, which is dedicated by the author to the learned lady Mildred
Burleigh, two more; one by Richard Mulcaster the celebrated master of
Merchanttaylor's school, the other by Thomas Watson an elegant writer of
sonnets. Our author was a very old man, as appears by the last of these copies.
Whence, say^ bishop Hall, SAT. iii. B. iv. Or cite old Ocland's verse, how
they did wi^ld
The wars, in Turwin or in Turney field.

. To these poems, which are written in a low style of Latin versification, is
prefixed an edict from the lords of privy council, signed, among others, by
Cowper bishop of Lincoln, Lord Warwick, Lord Leicester, sir Francis Knollys,
sir Christopher Hatton, and sir Francis Walsingham, and directed to the queen's
ecclesiastical commissioners, containing the following passage. "Forasmuch as
the subject or matter of this book is such, as is worthy to be read of all
men, and especially in common schools, where diverse HEATHEN POETS are
ordinarily read and taught, from which the youth of the realm does rather
receive infection in manners, than advancement in virtue: in place of some of
which poets, we think this Book fit to read and taught in the grammar
schools: we have therefore thought, as well for the encouraging the said
Ocklande and others that are learned, to bestow their travel and studies to
so good purposes, as also for the benefit of the youth and the removing of such
lascivious poets as are commonly read and taught in the said grammar-schooles
(the matter of this book being heroical and of good instruction) to pray and
require you upon the sight hereof, as by our special order, to write your
letters unto all the Bishops throughout this realm, requiring them to give
commandment, that in all the gramer and free schools within their several
diocesses, the said Book de ANGLORUM PRAELIIS, and peaceable Government of her
majesty, [the ELIZABETHA,] may be in place of some of the heathen poets
received, and publicly read and taught by the scholemasters Signat. A. ij.
Then follows an order from the ecclesiastical commissioners to all the bishops
for this purpose.
." With such abundant circumspection and solemnity, did these profound and
pious politicians, not suspecting that they were acting in opposition to their
own principles and intentions, exert their endeavors to bring back barbarism,
and to obstruct the progress of truth and good sense See supr. vol. ii. 461.
.

Hollingshead mentions Lucas Shepherd of Colchester, as an eminent poet of
queen Mary's reign CHRON. vol. iii. p. 1168.
. I do not pretend to any great talents for decyphering; but I presume, that
this is the same person who is called by Bale, from a most injudicious
affectation of Latinity, Lucas OPILIO. Bale affirms, that his cotemporary,
Opilio, was a very facetious poet: and means to pay him a still higher
compliment in pronouncing him not inferior even to Skeleton for his rhimes Par.
post. p. 109.
. It is unlucky, that Bale, by disguising his name, should have contributed to
conceal this writer so long from the notice of posterity, and even to
counteract his own partiality. Lucas Shepherd, however, appears to have been
nothing more than a petty pamphleteer in the cause of Calvinism, and to have
acquired the character of a poet from a metrical translation of some of David's
Psalms about the year 1554. Bale's narrow prejudices are well known. The
puritans never suspected that they were greater bigots than the papists. I
believe one or two of Shepherd's pieces in prose are among bishop Tanner's
books at Oxford.

Bale also mentions metrical English versions of ECCLESIASTES, of the histories
of ESTHER, SUSANNAH, JUDITH, and of the TESTAMENT OF THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS,
printed and written about this period, by John Pullaine, one of the original
students of Christ-church at Oxford, and at length archdeacon of Colchester. He
was chaplain to the duchess of Suffolk; and, either by choice or compulsion,
imbibed ideas of reformation at Geneva Bale ix. 83. Wood, ATH. OXON. i. 148.
. I have seen the name of John Pullayne, affixed in manuscript to a copy of an
anonymous version of Solomon's Song, or "Salomon's balads in meter,"
abovementioned "Imprinted at London by William Baldwine servaunt with Edward
Whitchurch." Nor date, nor place. Cum privileg. 4to. This WILLIAM BALDWINE is
perhaps Baldwin the poet, the contributor to the MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES. At
least that the poet Baldwin was connected with Whitchurch the printer, appears
from a book printed by Whitchurch, quoted above, "A treatise of moral
philosophy contaygning the Sayings of the Wise, gathered and Englyshed by
Wylliam Baldwyn, 20 of January, MDXLVII." Compositors at this time often were
learned men: and Baldwin was perhaps occasionally employed by Whitchurch, both
as a compositor and an author."
, in which is this stanza.

She is so young in Christ's truth,
That yet she has no teates;
She wants breasts, to feed her youth
With sound and perfect meats SIGNAT. m. iij.
.
There were numerous versions of Solomon's SONG before the year 1600: and
perhaps no portion of scripture was selected with more propriety to be clothed
in verse. Beside those I have mentioned, there is, "The SONG OF SONGS, that is
the most excellent Song which was Solomon's, translated out of the Hebrew into
English meater with as little liberty in departing from the words as any
plain translation in prose can use, and interpreted by a short commentary."
For Richard Schilders, printer to the states of Zealand, I suppose at
Middleburgh, 1587, in duodecimo. Nor have I yet mentioned Solomon's Song,
translated from English prose into English verse by Robert Fletcher, a native
of Warwickshire, and a member of Merton college, printed at London, with notes,
in 1586 In duodecimo.
. The CANTICLES in English verse are among the lost poems of Spenser A metrical
commentary was written on the CANTICLES by one Dudley Fenner, a puritan, who
retired to Middleburgh to enjoy the privilege and felicity of preaching endless
sermons without molestation. Middleb. 15^7. 8vo.
. Bishop Hall, in his nervous and elegant satires printed in 1597, meaning to
ridicule and expose the spiritual poetry with which his age was overwhelmed,
has an allusion to a metrical English version of Solomon's Song B. i. SAT.
viii. But for this abuse of the divine sonnetters, Marston not inelegantly
retorts against Hall. CERTAIN SATYRS, Land. for E. Matts, 1598. 12mo. SAT.
iv. Come dance, ye stumbling Satyrs, by his side,
If he list once the SYON MUSE deride.
Ye Granta's white Nymphs come, and with you bring
Some sillabub, whilst he does sweetly sing
Against Peter's Tears, and Mary's moving Moan;
And like a sierce-enraged boar^ does ^oame
At Sacred Sonnets, O daring hardiment!
At Bartas sweet Semaines Du Bartas's Divine Weeks.
rail impudent.
At Hopkins, Sternhold, and the Scottish king,
At all Translators that do strive to bring
That stranger language ^o our vulgar tongue, etc.

. Having mentioned SAINT PETER'S COMPLAINT, written by Robert Southwell, and
printed in 1595, with some other religious effusions of that author, he adds,

Yea, and the prophet of the heavenly lyre,
Great Solomon, singes in the English quire;
And is become a newfound Sonnetist,
Singing his love, the holy spouse of Christ,
Like as she were some light-skirts of the rest Origin and Jerome say, that the
youth of the Jews were not permitted to read SOLOMON'S SONG till they were
thirty years of age, for fear they should in^lame their passions by drawing the
spiritual allegory into a carnal sense. Orig. Homil. in CANTIC. CANT. apud
Hieronymi Opp. Tom. viii. p. 122. And Opp. Origin. ii. fol. 68. Hieron. Proem.
in Ezech. iv. p. 330. D.
,
In mightiest inkhornismes he can thither wrest.
Ye Sion Muses shall by my dear will,
For this your zeal and far-admired skill,
Be straight transported from Jerusalem,
Unto the holy house of Bethlehem.
It is not to any of the versions of the CANTICLES which I have hitherto
mentioned, that Hall here alludes. His censure is levelled at "The Poem of
Poems, or SION'S MUSE. Contaynyng the divine Song of King Solomon divided into
eight Eclogues. Bramo assai, poco spero, nulla chieggio. At London, printed by
James Roberts for Matthew Lownes, and are to be sold at his shop in saint
Dunstones church-yarde, 1596 16mo.
." The author signs his dedication, which is addressed to the sacred virgin,
divine mistress Elizabeth Sydney, sole daughter of the ever admired sir Philip
Sydney, with the initials J. M. These initials, which are subscribed to many
pieces in ENGLAND'S HELICON, signify Jarvis, or Iarvis, Markham Some of the
prefatory Sonnet^ to Ja^vi^ Markham's poem, entitled, "The most honorable
Tragedy of sir Richard Grinuile knight," (At London, printed by J. Roberts for
Richard Smith, 1595. 16mo.) are ^^gned J. M. But the dedication, to Charles
lord Montioy, has his name at length.
.

Although the translation of the scriptures into English rhyme was for the most
part an exercise of the enlightened puritans, the recent publication of
Sternhold's psalms taught that mode of writing to many of the papists, after
the sudden revival of the mass under queen Mary. One Richard Beearde, parson of
saint Mary-hill in London, celebrated the accession of that queen in a godly
psalm printed in 1553 In duodecimo, viz. A godly psalm of Mary queen, which
brought us comfort all,
Through God whom we of deuty praise that give her foes a fall.
With psalm^tune^ in four parts. Se^ Strype's ELIZ. p. 20^. New^. REP. i. 451.
See what is said above of Miles Hoggard.
. Much about the same time, George Marshall wrote A compendious treatise in
meter, declaring the first original of sacrifice and of building churches and
aultars, and of the first receiving the christian faith here in England,
dedicated to George Wharton esquire, and printed at London in 1554 In quarto.
Bl. Let.
.

In 1556, Miles Hoggard, a famous butt of the protestants, published "a short
treatise in meter upon the CXXIX psalm of David called De profundis. Compiled
and set forth by Miles Huggard^ servante to the queen's majesty In quarto. Bl.
Let. for R. Caley. Jan. 4. with Grafton's copartment.
." Of the opposite or heretical persuasion was Peter Moon, who wrote a
metrical tract on the abuses of the mass, printed by John Oswen at Ipswich,
about the first year of queen Mary A short treatise of certain things abused,
In the popish church long used;
But now abolyshed to our consolation,
And God's word advanced, the light of our salvation.
In eight leaves, quarto, Bl. L^tt. Fox mentions one William Punt, author of a
ballade made against the Pope and Popery under Edward the sixth, and of other
tracts of the same tendency under queen Mary. MARTYR. p. 1605. edit. vet.
Punt's printer was William Hill at the sign of the hill near the west door of
saint Paul's. See in Strype, an account of Underhill's Sufferings in 1553, for
writing a ballad against the Queen, he "being a witty and facetious gentleman."
ECCL. MEM. iii. 60, 61. chapter vi. Many rhimes and Ballads were written against
the Spanish match, in 1554. Strype, ibid. p. 127. chapter xiv. Fox has preserved
some hymns in Sternhold's meter sung by the protestant martyrs in Newgate, in
1555. MAR^. fol. 1539. edit. 1597. vol. ii.
. Nearly the same period, a translation of ECCLESIATES into rhyme by Oliver
Starkey occurs in bishop Tanner's library, if I recollect right, together with
his Translation of Sallust's two histories. By the way, there was another
vernacular versification of ECCLESIASTES by Henry Lok, or Lock, of whom more
will be said hereafter, printed in 1597. This book was also translated into
Latin hexameters by Drant, who will occur again in 1572. The ECCLESIASTES was
versified in English by Spenser.

I have before mentioned the SCHOOL-HOUSE OF WOMEN, a satire against the fair
sex Supr. p. 142^
. This was answered by Edward More of Hambledon in Buckinghamshire, about the
year 1557, before he was twenty years of age. It required no very powerful
abilities either of genius or judgment to confute such a groundless and
malignant invective. More's book is entitled, The DEFENSE OF WOMEN, especially
English women, against a book entitled the SCHOOL-HOUSE OF WOMEN. It it
dedicated to Master William Page, secretary to his neighbor and patron sir
Edward Hoby of Bisham-abbey, and was printed at London in 1560 In quarto.
PRINCIP. "Venus unto thee for help, good Lady do I call."
Our author, if I remember right, has furnished some arguments to one William
Heal of Exeter college; who wrote, in 1609, AN APOLOGY FOR WOMAN, in
opposition to Dr. Gager abovementioned, who had maintained at the Public Act,
that it was lawful for husbands to beat their wives. Wood says, that Heal "was
always esteemed an ingenious man, but weak, as being too much devoted to the
female sex." ATH. OXON. i. 314.
.

With the catholic liturgy, all the pageantries of popery were restored to
their ancient splendor by queen Mary. Among others, the procession of the
boy-bishop was too popular a mummery to b^ forgotten. In the preceding reign of
king Edward the sixth, Hugh Rhodes, a gentleman or musician of the royal
chapel, published an English poem with the title, THE BOOK OF NURTUR for men
servants and children, or of the gouernaunc^ of youth, with STANS PUER AD
MENSAM In quarto. Bl. Let. P^. Prol. "There is few things to be understood."
The poem begins, "All ye that would learn and would be called wise."
. In the following reign of Mary, the same poet printed a poem consisting of
thirty-six octave stanzas, entitled, "The SONG of the CHYLDBYSSHOP, as it was
song In the church of York, no chorister was to be elected boy-bishop, "nisi
habu^rit claram vocem pu^ril^m." Registr. Capitul. Eccles. Ebor. sub ann. 1390.
MS. ut supr.
before the queens majesty in her privy chamber at her manor of saint James
in the ffeeldes on saint Nicholas day and Innocents day this year now
present, by the child bysshope of Poules church In the old statut^^ of saint
Paul's, are many orders about this mock-solemnity. One is, that the canon,
called STAGIARIUS, shall find the boy-bishop his robe^, and "equitatum
honestum." MS. fol. 86. Dic^to dean. In the statutes of Salisbury cathedral, it
is orderd, that the boy-bishop shall not make a feast, "sed in domo communi cum
socii^ conv^rs^tur, nisi eum ut Choristam, ad domum Canoni^i, causa solatii, ad
mensam contigerit evocari." Sub anno 1319. Tit. xlv. De STATU CHORISTARUM. MS.
with his company. LONDINI, in aedibus Johannis Cawood typographi reginae,
1555. Cum privilegio, etc In quarto. Bl. Let. Strype says, that in 1556, "On
S. Nicolas even, Saint Nicolas, that is a boy habited like a bishop in
pontificalibus went abroad in most parts of London, singing after the old
fashion, and was received with many ignorant but well-disposed people into
their houses; and had as much good che^r as ever was wont to be had before."
ECCL. MEM. iii. 310. chapter xxxix. See also p. 387. chapter ^. In 1554, Nov. 13. an
edict was issued by the bishop of London, to all the cl^rgy of his diocese, t^
have a boy-bishop in procession, etc. Strype, ibid. p. 202. ch^ xxv. S^^ also
p. 205, 206. chapter xxvi.
." By admitting this spectacle into her presence, it appears that her majesty's
bigotry condescended to give countenance to the most ridiculous and unmeaning
ceremony of the Roman ritual. As to the song itself, it is a fulsome panegyric
on the queen's devotion: in which she is compared to Judith, Esther, the queen
of Sheba, and the virgin Mary In a poem by Llodowyke Lloyd, in the Paradise of
dainty De^ises, (edit, 1585.) on the death of sir Edward Saunders, queen
Elisabeth is complimented much in the same manner. NUMBER. 32. SIGNAT. E. 2. -- O
sacred seat, where Saba sage does sit^
Like Susan sound, like Sara sad, with Hester's mace in hand,
With Iudithes sword, Bellona-like, to rule this noble land.

. This show of the boy-bishop, not so much for its superstition as its levity
and absurdity, had been formally abrogated by king Henry the eighth, fourteen
years before, in the year 1542, as appears by a "Proclamation devised by the
Kings Majesty by the advys of his Highness Counsel the xxii day of Julie, 33
Hen. viij, commanding the ffeasts of saint Luke, saint Mark, saint Marie
Magdalene, Invention of the Cross, and saint Laurence, which had been
abrogated, should be now again celebrated and kept holy days," of which the
following is the concluding clause. "And where as heretofore diverse and many
superstitious and chyldysh obseruances have be used, and yet to this day are
observed and kept, in many and sundry parts of this realm, as upon saint
Nicholas In Barnabie Googe's POPISH KINGDOM, a translation from Naogeorgius's
REGNUM ANTICHRISTI, fol. 55. Land. 1570. 4to.

Saint Nicholas money used to give to maidens secretly,
Who that be still may use his wonted liberality:
The mother all their children on the Eeve do cause to fast,
And when they ^uerie on^ at night in senseless sleep are cast,
Both apples, nuts and payres they bring, and other things beside,
As cappes, and shoes, and petticoates, with kertles they hide,
And in the morning ^ound, they say, "Saint Nicholas this brought, etc."
S^^ a curious passage in bishop Fisher's Sermon of the MONTHS MIND of
Margaret countess of Richmond. Where it is said, that she prayed to S. Nicholas
the patron and helper of all true maidens, when nine years old, about the
choice of a husband: and that the saint appeared in a vision, and announced the
^arl of Richmond. Edit^ Baker, page 8. There is a pre^^pt issued to the sheriff
of Oxford from Edward the first, in 1305, to prohibit tournaments being
intermixed with the sports of the schola^s on saint Nicholas's day. Rot. Claus.
33 Edw. i. memb. 2.

I have already given ^races of this practice in the colleges of Winchester and
Eton. [see supr. vol. ii. p. 389.] To which I here add another. Registr. Coll.
Wint. sub ann. 1427. "Crux deaurata de cupro [copper] cum Baculo, pro EPI^COPO
PUERORUM." But it appears that the practice subsisted in common g^ammarschools.
"Hoc anno, 1464, in festo sancti Nicolai non erat EPI^COPUS PU^^ORUM in schola
grammaticali in civitat^ Cantuariae ex defectu Magistrorum, viz. J. Sidney et
T. Hikson, etc." Lib. Johannis Stone, Monachi Eccles. Cant. sc. D^ Obitibus et
ali^s Memorabilibus sui ca^^obii ab anno 1415 ad annum 1467. MS. C. C. C. C. Q.
8. The abuses of this custom in Wells cathedral are mentioned so early as
December. 1. 1298. Registr. Eccl. Wellens. [See supr. vol. i. 248. ii. 375. 389.]


, saint Catharine The reader will recollect the old play of Saint Catharine,
LUDUS CATHARINAE, exhibited at saint Albans abbey in 1160. Strype says, in
1556, "On Saint Katharines day, at six of the clock at night, S. Katharine went
about the battlements of S. Paul's church accompanied with fine singing and
great lights. This was saint Katharine's Procession." ECCL. MEM. iii. 309. chapter
xxxix. Again, her procession, in 1553, is celebrated with five hundred great
lights, round saint Paul's steeple, etc. Ibid. p. 51. chapter v. And p. 57. chapter v.
, saint Clement Among the church-processions revived by Queen Mary, that of S.
Clement's church, in honor of this saint, was by far the most splendid of any
in London. Their procession to S. Paul's in 1557, "was made very pompous with
fourscore ba^ners and streamers, and the waits of the city playing, and
threescore priests and clerks in copes. And diverse of the Inns of Court were
there, who went next the priests, etc." Strype, ubi supr. iii. 377. chapter xlix.
, the holy Innocents, and and such like In the SYNODUS CARNOTENSIS, under the
year 1526, It is ordered, "In festo sancti Nicholai, Catharinae, Innocentium,
aut alio quovis die, praetextu recreationis, ne Scholastici, Clerici,
Sacerdotesve, stultum aliquod aut ridiculum faciant in ecclesia. Denique ab
ecclesia ejiciantur VESTES fatuorum personas SCENICAS agentium." See Bochellus,
Decret. ECCLES. GALL. lib. iv. TIT. vii. C. 43. 44. 46. p. 586. Yet these
sports seem to nave remained in France so late as 1585. For in the Synod of
Aix, 1585, it is enjoined, "Cessent in die Sanctorum Innocentium ludibria omnia
^t pueriles ac theatrales lusus." Bochell. ibid. C. 45. p. 586. A Synod of
Toulouse, an. 1590, removes plays, spectacles, and histrionum circulationes,
from churches and their cemeteries. Bochell. ibid. lib. iv. TIT. 1. C. 98. p.
560.
, Children [boys] be strangely decked and apparayled, to counterfeit Priests,
Bisshopes, and Women, and so be led with Songs and Dances from house to
house, blessing the people, and gathering of money; and Boys do singe mass,
and preach in the pulpitt, with such other vnfittinge and inconvenient vsages,
rather to the derysyon than any true glory of God, or honor of his saints:
The Kings majesty therefore, myndinge nothing so much as to advance the
true glory of God without vain superstition, wylleth and commands, that from
henceforth all svch svperstitious observations be left and clearly extinguished
throwout all this his realm and dominions, for-as much as the same does
resemble rather the unlawful superstition of gentilitie, than the pvre and
sincere religion of Christ." With respect to the disguisings of these young
fraternities, and their processions from house to house with singing and
dancing, specified in this edict, in a very mutilated fragment of a COMPUTUS,
or annual Accompt-roll, of saint Swithin's cathedral Priory at Winchester,
under the year 1441, a disbursement is made to the singing-boys of the
monastery, who, together with the choristers of saint Elisabeth's collegiate
chapel near that city, were dressed up like girls, and exhibited their sports
before the abbess and nuns of saint Mary's abbey at Winchester, in the public
refectory of that convent, on Innocent's day In the Register of Wodeloke bishop
of Winchester, the following is an article among the INJUNCTIONS given to the
nuns of the convent of Rumsey in Hampshire, in consequence of an episcopal
visitation, under the year 1310. "Item prohibemus, ne cubent in dormitorio
pueri masculi cum monialibus, vel foemellae, nec per moniales ducantur in
Chorum, dum ibidem divinum officium celebratur." fol. 134. In the same Register
these Injunctions follow in a literal French translation, made for the
convenience of the nun^.
. "Pro Pueris Eleemosynariae una cum Pueris Capellae sanctae Elizabethae,
ornatis more puellarum, et saltantibus, cantantibus, et ludentibus, coram
domina Abbatissa et monialibus Abbathiae beatae Mariae virginis, in aula ibidem
in die sanctorum Innocentium MS. in Archiv. Wulves. apud Winton. It appears to
have been a practice for itinerant players to gain admittance i^to the
nunneries, and to play Latin MYSTERIES before the nuns. There is a curious
Canon of the COUNCIL of COLOGNE, in 1549, which is to this effect. "We have
been informed, that certain Actors of Comedies, ^ot contented with the stage
and theaters, have even entered the nunneries, in order to recreate the nuns,
ubi virginibus commoveant voluptatem, with their profane, amorous, and secular
gesticulations. Which spectacles, or plays, although they consisted of sacr^d
and pious subjects, can yet notwithstanding leave little good, but on the
contrary much harm, in the minds of the nuns, who behold and admire the outward
gestures of the performers, and understand not the word^. Therefore we decree,
that henceforward no Plays, Comedias, shall be admitted into the convents of
nuns, etc." Sur. COUNCIL. tom. iv. p. 852. Binius, tom. iv. p. 765.
." And again, in a fragment of an Account of the Celerar of Hyde Abbey at
Winchester, under the year 1490. "In larvis et aliis indumentis Puerorum
visentium Dominum apud Wulsey, et Constabularium Castri Winton, in apparatu
suo, necnon subintrantium omnia monasteria civitatis Winton, in ffesto sancti
Nicholai MS. Ibid. See supr. p. 303.
." That is, "In furnishing masks and dresses for the boys of the convent, when
they visited the bishop at Wulvesey-palace, the constable of Winchester-castle,
and all the monasteries of the city of Winchester, on the festival of saint
Nicholas." As to the divine service being performed by children on these
feasts, it was not only celebrated by boys, but there is an injunction given to
the Benedictine nunnery of Godstowe in Oxfordshire, by archbishop Peckham, in
the year 1278, that on Innocent's day, the public prayers should not any more
be said in the church of that monastery PER PARVULAS, that is, by little girls
Harpsfield, HIST. ECCL. ANGL. p. 441. edit. 1622. [See supr. vol. ii. p. 362.]
.

The groundwork of this religious mockery of the boy-bishop, which is
evidently founded on modes of barbarous life, man perhaps be traced backward at
least as far as the year 867 Or, 870.
. At the Constantinopolitan synod under that year, at which were present three
hundred and seventy-three bishops, it was found to be a solemn custom in the
courts of princes, on certain stated days, to dress some layman in the
episcopal apparel, who should exactly personate a bishop both in his tonsure
and ornaments: as also to create a burlesque patriarch, who might make sport
for the company Sur^us, COUNCIL. iii. 529. 539. Baron. ANNAL. Ann^ 869.. 11. See
COUNCIL. Basil. number. xxxii. The French have a miracle^play^ BEAU MIRACLE DE S.
NICOLAS, to be acted by twenty four personage^, printed at Paris, for Pierre
Sergeant, in quarto, without date, Bl. Let.
. This scandal to the clergy was anathematised. But ecclesiastical synods and
censures have often proved too weak to suppress popular spectacles, which take
deep root in the public manners, and are only concealed for a while, to spring
up afresh with new vigor.

After the form of a legitimate stage had appeared in England, MYSTERIES and
MIRACLES were also revived by queen Mary, as an appendage of the papistic
worship.

-- En, iterum crudelia retro
Fata vocant Virgil, Georg. iv. 495.
! --
In the year 1556, a goodly stage play of the PASSION OF CHRIST was presented
at the Gray friars in London, on CorpusChri^ti day, before the lord mayor, the
privy council, and many great estates of the realm MSS. Cott. VITELL. E. 5.
STRYPE. See LIFE OF SIR THOMAS POPE, PREF. p. xii.
. Strype also mentions, under the year 1557, a stage play at the Grey-friers,
of the Passion of Christ, on the day that war was proclaimed in London against
France, and in honor of that occasion ECCL. MEM. vol. iii. chapter xlix.
. On saint Olave's day in the same year, the holiday of the church in
Silver-street which is dedicated to that saint, was kept with much solemnity.
At eight of the clock at night, began a stage play of goodly matter, being the
miraculous history of the life of that saint Strype^ ibid. p. 379. With the
religious pageantries, other ancient sports and spectacles also, which had
fallen into disuse in the reign of Edward the sixth, beg^n to be now revived.
As thus, "On the 30th of May was a goodly Maygame in Fenchurch-street, with
drums, and gun^, and pikes, with the NIN^ WORTHIES who rid. And each made his
speech. There was also the Moricedance, and an elephant and castle, and the
Lord and Lady of the May appeared to make up thi^ show." Strype, ibid. 376. chapter
xl^x.
, which continued four hours, and was concluded with many re^^gious songs
Ludovicus Vives relates, that it was customary in Brabant to present annual
plays in honor of the respective saints to which the churches were dedicated:
and he betrays his great credulity in adding a wonderful story in consequence
of this custom. NOT. in Augustine. De CIVIT. DEI. lib. xii. cap. 25. C.
.

Many curious circumstances of the nature of these miracleplays, appear in a
roll of the churchwardens of Bassingborne in Cambridgeshire, which is an
account of the expenses and receptions for acting the play of SAINT GEORGE at
Bassingborne, on the feast of saint Margaret in the year 1511. They collected
upwards of four pounds in twenty-seven neighboring parishes for furnishing the
play. They disbursed about two pounds in the representation. These
disbursements are to four minstrels, or waits, of Cambridge for three days, v,
s. vj, d. To the players, in bread and ale, iij, s. ij, d. To the garnementman
for garnements, and propyrts The property-room is yet known at our theaters.
, that is, for dresses, decorations, and implements, and for play-books, xx, s.
To John Hobard brotherhoode preeste, that is, a priest of the guild in the
church, for the play-book, ij, s. viij d. For the crofte, or field in which the
play was exhibited, j, s. For propyrte-making, or furniture, j, s. iv, d. "For
fish and bread, and to setting up the stages, iv, d." For painting three
fanchoms and four tormentors, words which I do not understand, but perhaps
phantoms and devils... The rest was expended for a feast on the occasion, in
which are recited, "Four chicken for the gentilmen, iv, d." It appears from the
manuscript of the Coventry plays, that a temporary scaffold only, was erected
for these performances. And Chaucer says, of Absolon a parish-clerk, and an
actor of king Herod's character in these dramas, in the MILLER'S TALE, And for
to show his lightness and maistry
He playith Herawdes on a SCAFFALD HIE Mill. T. v. 275. Urr. Mr. Steevens and
Mr. Malone have shown, that the accommodations in our early regular theatre^
were but little better. That the old scenery was very simple, may partly be
collected from an entry in a Computus of Winchester-college, under the year
1579. viz. COMP. BURS. Coll. Winton. A. D. 1573. Eliz. xvo. -- "CUSTUS AULAE.
Item, pro diversis expensis circa Scaffoldam erigendam et deponendam, et pro
Domunculis de novo compositis cum carriagio et ^ecarriagio ly joystes, et
aliorum mut^atorum ad eandem Scaffoldam, cum vj lin^kes et jo [uno] duodeno
candelarum, pro lumine expensis, tribus noctibus in Ludis comediarum et
^ragediarum, xxv, s. viij, d." Again in the next quarter, "Pro vij ly linckes
deli^er^ti^ pueris per M. Informatorem [the school-master] pro Ludis, iij, s."
Again, in the last quarter, "Pro ^emovendis Organis e t^mplo in Aulam et
praeparandis eisdem erga Ludos, v, s." By DOMUNCULIS I understand little c^lls
of board, raised on each side of the stage, for dressing-rooms, or retiring
plac^s. Strype, under the yea^ 1559, says, that after a grand feast at
Guildhall, "the same day was a Scaffold set up in the hall for ^ play." ANN^
REF. i. 197. edit. 1725.
.


Scenical decorations and machinery which employed the genius and invention of
Inigo Jones, in the reigns of the first James and Charles, seem to have
migrated from the ma^ques at court to the public theater. In the instrument
here cited, the priest who wrote the play, and received only two shillings and
eight pence for his labor, seems to have been worse paid in proportion than
any of the other persons concerned. The learned Oporinus^ in 1547, published in
two volumes a collection of religious interludes, which abounded in Germany.
They are in Latin, and not taken from legends but the Bible.

The puritans were highly offended at these religious plays now revived A very
late scripture-play is, "A new merry and wit ^omedie or interlude, newly
imprinted treating the history of JACOB AND ESAU, etc." for H. Bynneman, 1568.
4to. Bl. Let. But this play had appeared in queen Mary's reign, "An interlude
upon the history of Jacobe and Esawe, etc." Licenced to Henry Sutton, in 1557.
REGISTR. STATION. A. fol. 23. a. It is certain, however, that the fashion of
religious interludes was not entirely discontinued in the reign of queen
Elisabeth. For, I find licenced to T. Hackett in 1561, "A new interlude of the
ij sins of king Da^yde." Ibid. fol. 75. a. And to Pickeringe in 1560-1, the
play of queen Esther. Ibid. fol. 62. b. Again, there is licenced to T. Colwell,
in 1565, "A play of the story of king Darius from Esdras." Ibid. fol. 133. b.
Also "A pleasant recytall worthy of the readinge contaynynge the effect of
iij worthy squyres of Daryus the king of Persia," licenced to Griffiths in
1565. Ibid. fol. 132^ b. Often reprinted. And in 1566^ John Charlewood is
licenced to print "An interlude of the repentance of Mary Magdalen." Ibid. fol.
152. a. Of this piece I have cited an ancient manuscript. Also, not to m^ltiply
instances, Colwell in 1568, is licenced to print "The play of Susanna." Ibid.
fol. 176. a. Ballads on scripture subjects are now innumerable. Peele's DAVID
AND BATHSHEBA is a remain of the fashion of scriptureplays. I have mentioned
the play of HOLOFERNES acted at Hatfield in 1556. LIFE OF SIR THOMAS POPE, p.
87. In 1556, was printed "A ballet entitled the historye of Judith and
Holyfernes." REGISTR. ut supr. fol. 154. b. And Registr. B. fol. 227. In
Hearne's ^anuscript COLL^CTANEA there is a license dated 1571, from the queen,
directed to the officers of Middlesex, permitting one John Swinton Powlter, "to
have and use some plays and games at or upon nine several sondaies," within
the said county. And because great resort of people is like to come
thereunto, he is required, for the preservation of the peace, and for the sake
of good order, to take with him four or five discreet and sub^tantial men of
those places where the games shall be put in practice, to superintend duringe
the contynuance of the games or plays. Some of the exhibitions are then
specified, such as, Shotinge with the brod^ arrow^, The lepping for men, The
pytchynge of the barr^, and the like. But then follows this very general
clause, "With all such other games, as have at any time heretofore or ^ow be
lycensed, used, or played." COLL. MSS. Hearne, tom. lxi. p. 78. One wishes to
know, whether any interludes, and whether religious or profane, were included
in this instrument.
. But they were hardly less averse to the theatrical representation of the
christian than of the gentile story. Yet for different reasons. To hate a
theater was a part of their creed, and therefore plays were an improper vehicle
of religion. The heathen fables they judged to be dangerous, as too nearly
resembling the superstitions of popery.

SECT. XXXVII.
IT appears, however, that the cultivation of an English style began to be now
regarded. At the general restoration of knowledge and taste, it was a great
impediment to the progress of our language, that all the learned and ingenious,
aiming at the character of erudition, wrote in Latin. English books were
written only by the superficial and illiterate, at a time when judgment and
genius should have been exerted in the nice and critical task of polishing a
rude speech. Long after the invention of typography, our vernacular style,
instead of being strengthened and refined by numerous compositions, was only
corrupted with new barbarisms and affectations, for want of able and judicious
writers in English. Unless we except sir Thomas More, whose DIALOGUE ON
TRIBULATION, and HISTORY OF RICHARD THE THIRD, were esteemed standards of style
so low as the reign of James the first, Roger Ascham was perhaps the first of
our scholars who ventured to break the shackles of Latinity, by publishing his
TOXOPHILUS in English; chiefly with a view of giving a pure and correct model
of English composition, or rather of showing how a subject might be treated
with grace and propriety in En^lish as well as in Latin. His own vindication of
his conduct in attempting this great innovation is too sensible to be omitted,
and reflects light on the revolutions of our poetry. "As for the Lattine or
Greek tongue, every thing is so excellentlye done in Them, that none can do
better. In the English tongue contrary, every thing in a manner so meanlye,
both for the matter and handelinge, tha^ no man can do worse. For therein the
learned for the most part have been always most redye to write. And they which
had least hope in Lattine have been most bold in English: when surely every
man that is most ready to talk, is not most able to write. He that will write
well in any tongue, must follow this counsel of Aristotle; to speak as the
common people do, to think as wise men do. And so should every man
understand him, and the judgment of wise men allow him. Many English writers
have not done so; but vsinge strange words, as Lattine, French, and Italian,
do make all things dark and hard. Ones I communed with a man, which reasoned
the English tongue to be enriched and increased thereby, saying, Who will no^
praise that feast where a man shall drink at a dinner both wine, ale, and
beer? Truly, quoth I, they be al good, every one taken by himself alone; but
if you put Malmesye and sack, red wine and white, ale and beer, and al in
one pot, you shall make a drink neither easy to be known, nor yet wholesome
for the body. Cicero in following Isocrates, Plato, and Demosthenes, increased
the Lattine tongue after another sort. This way, because diverse men that write
do not know, they can neither follow it because of their ignorance, nor yet
will praise it for uery arrogance: two faults seldom the one out of the
others company. English writers by diversity of time have taken diverse
matters in hand. In our fathers tim^ nothing was red, but books of feigned
cheualrie, wherein a man by readinge should be led to none other end but only
to manslaughter and baudrye. If any man suppose they were good enough to pass
the time withal, he is deceived. For surely vain words do work no small
thing in vain, ignorant, and young minds, specially if they be given any
thing thereunto of their own nature. These books, as I have heard say, were
made the most part in abbayes and monasteries, a very likely and fit fruit of
such an idle and blind kind of living He says in his SCHOOLMASTER, written
soon after the year 1563^ "There be more of these ungracious books set out in
print within these few mone^hes, than have been seen in England many score
years before." B^ i. fol. 26. a. edit. 1589. 4to.
. In our time now, when every man is given to know much rather than live well,
very many do write, but after such a fashion as very many do shoot. Some
shooters take in hand stronger bows than they be able to maintain. This
thing makes them sometime to ouershoote the mark, sometime to shoot far
wide and perchance hurt some that look on. Other, that never learned to shoot,
nor yet knows good shaft nor bow, will be as busy as the best To all the
Gentlemen and Yomen of ENGLAND. Prefixed to TOXOPHILUS, The Schole or partition
of shooting, Land. 1545. 4to.
.

Ascham's example was followed by other learned men. But the chief was Thomas
Wilson, who published a system of LOGIC and RHETORIC both in English. Of his
LOGIC I have already spoken. I have at present only to speak of the latter,
which is not only written in English, but with a view of giving rules for
composing in the English language. It appeared in 1553, the first year of queen
Mary, and is entitled, THE ART OF RHETORIKE for the use of all such as are
studious of Eloquence, set forth in English by THOMAS WILSON Land. 1553.
4to. Dedicated to John Dudley, earl of Warwick. In the Dedication he says, that
he wrote great part of this treatise during the last summer vacation in the
country, at the house of sir Edward Dimmoke. And that it originated from a late
conversation with his lordship, "emonge other talk of learning." It was
reprinted by Jhon Kynston in 1570. Land. 4to. With "A Prologue to the Reader,"
dated Dec. 7. 1560. Again, 1567. 4to. And 1585. 4to. In the PROLOGU^, he
mentions his escape at Rome, which I have above related: and adds, "If others
never get more by books than I have done, it were better be a carter than a
scholar, for worldly pro^ite."
. Leonarde Cox, a schoolmaster, patronised by Farringdon the last abbot of
Reading, had published in 1530, as I have observed, an English tract on
rhetoric, which is nothing more than a technical and elementary man^al.
Wilson's treatise is more liberal, and discursive; illustrating the arts of
eloquence by example, and examining and ascertaining the beauties of
composition with the speculative skill and sagacity of a critic. It may
therefore be justly considered as the first book or system of criticism in our
language. A few extracts from so curious a performance need no apology; which
will also serve to throw light on the present period, and indeed on our general
subject, by displaying the state of critical knowledge, and the ideas of
writing, which now prevailed.

I must premise, that Wilson, one of the most accomplished scholars of his
times, was originally a fellow of King's College Admitted scholar in 1541. A
native of Lincolnshire. MS. Hatcher.
, where he was tutor to the two celebrated youths Henry and Charles Brandon
dukes of Suffolk. Being a doctor of laws, he was afterward one of the ordinary
masters of requests, master of saint Katharine's hospital near the Tower, a
frequent ambassador from queen Elisabeth to Mary queen of Scots, and into the
Low countries, a secretary of state and a privy counselor, and at length, in
1579, dean of Durham. He died in 1581. His remarkable diligence and dispatch in
negotiation is said to have resulted from an uncommon strength of memory. It is
another proof of his attention to the advancement of our English style, that he
translated seven orations of Demosthenes, which, in 1570, he dedicated to sir
William Cecill Which had been also translated into Latin by Nicholas Carr. To
whose version Hatcher prefixed this distich. [MSS. More. 102. Carr'^ Autograph.
MS.] Haec ^adem patrio Thomas sermon polivit
Wilsonus, patrii gloria prima soli.
Wilson published many other things. In Gabriel Harvey's SMITHUS, dedicated to
sir Walter Mildmay, and printed by Binneman in 1578, he is ranked with his
learned cotemporaries. See SIGNAT. D iij. -- E ij. -- I j.
.

Under that chapter of his third book of RHETORIC which treats of the four
parts belonging to elocution, Plainness, Aptness, Composicio^, Exornacion,
Wilson has these observations on simplicity of style, which are immediately
directed to those who write in the English tongue. "Among other lessons this
should first be learned, that we never affect any strange ynkehorne terms,
but to speak as is commonly received: neither seking to be over fine, nor yet
living over careless, using our speech as most men do, and ordering our
wits as the fewest have done. Some seek so far for outlandishe English,
that they forget altogether their mothers language. And I dare swear this, if
some of their mothers were alive, they were not able to tell what they say: and
yet these fine English clerks will say they speak in their mother tongue, if
a man should charge them for counterfeityng the kings English. Some far
iournied gentlemen at their return home, like as they love to go in foreign
apparel, so they will powder their talk with ouersea language. He that comes
lately out of France will talk French English, and never blushe at the
matter. Another choppes in with English Italianated, and applies the Italian
phraise to our English speaking: the which is, as if an Oration that
professes to utter his mind in plain Latin, would needs speak Poetry,
and far fetched colors of strange antiquity. The lawier will store his
stomach with the prating of pedlers. The auditour, in making his account and
reckenyng, comes in with sise sold, and cater denere, for vj. s. and iiij. d.
The fine courtier will talk nothing but CHAUCER. The mystical wisemen, and
poetical clerks, will speak nothing but quainte proverbs, and blind
allegories; delightyng much in their own darkness, especially when none can
tell what they do say. The unlearned or folishe fantastical, that smelles but
of learning (svche fellows as have seen learned men in their days) will so
Latin their tongues, that the simple cannot but wonder at their talk, and
think surely they speak by some reuelacion. I know Them, that think
RHETORIKE to stand wholly upon dark words; and he that can catch an
ynkehorne term by the tail, him they count to be a fine Englishman and a good
rhetorician Puttenham, in THE ART OF ENGLISH POESY, where he treats of style
and language, brings some illustrations from the practice of oratory in the
reign of queen Mary, in whose court he lived: and although his book is dated
1589, it was manisestly written much earlier. He refers to sir Nicholas Bacon,
who began to be high in the departments of the law in queen Mary's time, and
died in 1579. Having told a story from his own knowledge in the year 1553, of a
ridiculous oration made in parliament by a new speaker of the house, who came
from Yorkshire, and had more knowledge in the affairs of his county, and of the
law, than gracefulness or delicacy of language, he proceeds, "And though grave
and wise counselors in their consultations do not use much superstitious
^loquence, and also in their judicial hearings do much mislike all
scholasticall rhetoricks: yet in such a case as it may be (and as this
parliament was) if the lord chancelour of England or archbishop of Canterbury
himself were to speak, he ought to do it cunningly and eloquently, which
cannot be without the use of figures: and nevertheless, none impeachment or
blemish to the gravity of their persons or of the cause: wherein I report me
to them that knew sir Nicholas Bacon lord Keeper of the great seal, or the now
lord treasurer of England, and have been conversant in their speeches made in
the parliament house and star chamber. From whose lips I have seen to
proceed more grave and natural eloquence, than from all the orators of
Oxford and Cambridge. -- I have come to the lord Keeper sir Nicholas Bacon, and
found him sitting in his gallery alone, with the works of Quintilian before
him. In deed he was a most eloquent man and of rare learning and wisdom as
ever I knew England to breed, and one that ioyed as much in learned men and men
of good wits." Lib. iii. chapter ii. page 126. seq. What follows soon afterward
is equally apposite. "This part in our maker or poet must be heedyly looked
unto, that it [his^language] be natural, pure, and the most usual of all his
countray: and for the same purpose, rather that which is spoken in the kings
court, or in the good towns and cities within the land, than in the marches or
frontiers, or in port towns where strangers haunt for traffike sake, or yet
in universities where scholars use much peevish affectation of words out of
the primitive languages; or finally, in any vplandish village or corner of the
realm, etc. But he shall follow generally the better brovght up sort, such as
the Greeks call chari^ntes, men civil and graciously behauored and bred. Our
maker thereso^e at these days shall not follow P^ERS PLOWMAN, nor Gower, nor
Lydgate, nor yet Chaucer, for their language is now out of use with us: neither
shall he take the terms of northern men, such as they use in daily talk,
whether they be noblemen or gentlemen, or of their best clerks, all is a
matter, etc. Ye shall therefore take the usual speech of the court, and that
of London, and the shires lying about London within lx miles, and not mvch
above. I say not this, but that in every shyre of England there be gentlemen
and others that speak, but specially write, as good Sovtherne as we of
Middlesex and Surrey do, but not the common people of every shire, to whom the
gentlemen, and also their learned clerks, do for the most part condescend: but
herein we are ruled by the English Dictionaries, and other books written by
learned men. Albeit peradventure some small admonition be not impertinent; for
we find in our English writers many words and speeches amendable, and ye
shall see in some many inkhorne terms so ill affected brought in by men of
learning, as preachers and schoolemasters, and many strange terms of other
languages by secretaries and marchaunts and traueillours, and many dark words
and not usual nor well sounding, though they be daily spoken at court." Ibid.
Chapter iii. fol. 120, 121.
. And the rather to set out this folly, I will add here svche a letter as
William Summer King Henry's Jester. In another place he gives us one of
Somner's jests. "William Summer seying much ado for accomptes making, and
that Henry the eight wanted money, such as was due to him, And please your
grace, q^oth he, you have so many Frauditours, so many Conueighers, and so many
Deceivers, to get up your money, that they get all to themselves." That is,
Auditors, Surveyors, and Receivers. fol. 102. b. I have seen an old narrative
of a progress of king Henry the eighth and queen Katharine, to Newbery in
Berkshire, where Somner, who had accompanied their majesty's as court-buffoon,
sell into disgrace with the people for his impertinence, was detained, and
obliged to submit to many ridiculous indignities: but extricated himself from
all his dissiculties by comic expedients and the readiness of his wit. On
returning to court, he gave their majesty's, who were inconsolable for his long
absence, a minute account of these low adventures, with which they were
infinitely entertained. What shall we think of the manners of such a court?
himself, could not make a better for that purpose, -- devised by a
Lincolne^hire man for a void benefice Viz. "Ponderyng, expendyng, and
reuolutyng with myself, your ingent affability, and ingenious capacity, for
mundane affairs, I cannot but celebrate and extol your magnificall dexterity
above all other. For how could you have adapted such illustrate prerogative,
and dominiall superiority, if the ^ecunditie of your ingenie had not been so
fertile and wonderful pregnaunt, etc.'. It is to the lord Chancellor. See what
is said of A. Bordes's style, supr. p. 71.
." This point he illustrates with other familiar and pleasant instances B. iii.
fol. 82. b. edit. 1567.
.

In enforcing the application and explaining the nature of fables, for the
purpose of amplification, he gives a general idea of the Iliad and Odyssey.
"The saying of poets, and al their fables, are not to be forgotten. For by
them we may talk at large, and win men by persuasion, if we declare before
hand, that these tales were not fained of such wisemen without cause, neither
yet continued until this time, and kept in memory without good consideracion,
and thereupon declare the true meaning of all svche writynge. For undoubtedly,
there is no one Tale among all the poets, but under the same is comprehended
somethyng that perteyneth either to the amendment of manners, to the knowledge
of truth, to the setting forth natures work, or else to the understanding of
some notable thing done. For what other is the painful travail of Ulysses,
described so largely by Homere, but a lively picture of man's misery in this
life? And as Plutarche says, and likewise Basilius Magnus, in the ILIADES are
described strength and valiantness of body: in ODISSEA, is set forth a
lively pattern of the mind. The Poets are Wisemen, and wisshed in heart the
redress of things, the which when for fear they durst not openly rebuke,
they did in colors paint them out, and told men by shadows what they should
do in good sothe: or else, because the wicked were unworthy to hear the truth,
they spoke so that none might understand but those unto whom they please to
utter their meaning, and knew them to be men of honest conversation Lib. iii.
fol. 99. b.
."

Wilson thus recommends the force of circumstantial description, or, what he
calls, An evident or plain setting forth of a thing as though it were
presently done. "An example. If our enemies shall invade and by treason win the
victory, we shall all die every mothers son of us, and our city shall be
destroyed, stick and stone: I se our children made slaves, our daughters
ravished, our wives carried away, the father forced to kill his own son, the
mother her daughter, the son his father, the sucking child slain in his
mothers bosom, one standing to the knees in another blood, churches spoiled,
houses plucte down, and al set on fire round about us, every one cvrsing the
day of their birth, children criyng, women wailing, etc. Thus, where I might
have said, We shall al be destroyed, and say [no] more, I have by description
set the evil forth at large Fol. 91. a.
." It must be owned that this picture of a sacked city is literally translated
from Quintilian. But it is a proof, that we were now beginning to make the
beauties of the ancients our own.

On the necessity of a due preservation of character he has the following
precepts, which seem to be directed to the writers of Historical Plays. "In
describyng of persons, there ought always a comeliness to be used, so that
nothing be spoken which may be thought is not in them. As if one should describe
Henry the sixth, He might call him jentle, mild of nature, led by perswacion,
and ready to forgive, careless for wealth, suspecting none, merciful to al,
fearful in adversity, and without forecast to epsy his misfortvne. Again,
for Richard the third, I might bring him in cruel of heart, ambicious by
nature, envious of mind, a deep dissembler, a close man for weighty matters,
hardy to revenge and fearful to lose his high estate, trusty to none,
liberal for a purpose, castyng still the worste, and hoping ever for the best
Richard the third seems to have been an UNIVERSAL character for exemplifying a
cruel disposition. Our author, meaning to furnish a chamber with persons famous
for the greatest crimes, says in another place. "In the bedstede I will set
Richard the third king of England, or somelike notable murderer." fol. 109.
b. Shakespeare was not the first that exhibited this tyrant upon the stage. In
1586, a ballad was printed called a "tragic report of king Richard the iii."
REGISTR. STATION. B. fol. 210. b.
. By this figure Lively Description.
also, we imagine a talk for some one to speak, and according to his person
we frame the oration. As if one should bring in noble Henry the eight of
famous memory, to enuegh against rebels, thus he might order his oration.
What if Henry the eight were alive, and saw such rebellion in the realm,
would he not say thus and thus? Yea methinkes I hear him speak even now.
And so set forth such words as we would have him to s^y Fol. 91. b.
." Shakespeare himself has not delineated the characters of these English
monarchs with more truth. And the first writers of the MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES,
who imagine a talk for some one to speak, and according to his person frame
the oration, appear to have availed themselves of these directions, if not to
have catched the notion of their whole plan from this remarkable passage.

He next shows the advantages of personification in enlivening a composition.
"Some times it is good to make God, the Countray, or some one Town, to speak;
and look what we would say in our own person, to frame the whole tale to
them. Such variety does much good to avoid tediousness. For he that
speaks all in one sort, though he speak things never so wittily, shall
sone weary his hearers. Figures therefore were invented, to avoid satietie,
and cause delight: to refresh with pleasure and quicken with grace the dullness
of man's brain. Who will look on a white wall an hour together where no
workemanshippe is at all? Or who will eat still one kind of meat and never
desire change Fol. 91. b. 92. a.
?"

Prolix Narratives, whether jocose or serious, had not yet ceased to be the
entertainment of polite companies: and rules for telling a tale with grace, now
found a place in a book of general rhetoric Yet he has here also a reference to
the utility of tales both at the Bar and in the Pulpit. For in another place,
professedly both speaking of Pleadings and Sermons, he says, "If time may so
serve, it were good when men be wearied, to make them somewhat merry, and to
begin with some pleasant tale, or take occasion to ieste wittelie, etc." fol.
55. b. Again, "Men commonly tarry the end of a merry Play, and cannot abide
the half hearing of a sower checkyng Sermon. Therefore even these aunciente
preachers must now and then play the fools in the pulpite to serve the
tickle ears of their fletyng audience, etc." fol. 2. a. I know not if he means
Latimer here, whom he commends, "There is no better preacher among them al
except Hugh Latimer the father of al preachers." fol. 63. a. And again, "I
would think it not amiss to speak much according to the nature and fancy
of the ignorant, that the rather they might be won through fables to learn
more weighty and grave matters. For all men cannot brook sage causes and
ancient collations, but will like earnest matters the rather, if some be
spoken there among agreeing to their natures. The multitude, as Horace does
say, is a beast or rather a monster that has many hedde^, and therefore, like
unto the diversity of natvres, variety of invention must always be used.
Talk altogether of most grave matters, or deppely searc^e out the ground of
things, or use the quiddities of Duns [Scotus] to set forth Gods mysteries,
you shall se the ignorant, I warrant you, either fall aslepe, or else bid you
farewell. The multitude must needs be made merry; and the more foolish your
talk is, the more wise will they count it to be. And yet it is no foolishnes
but rather wisdom to win men, by telling of fables to hear Gods goodness."
fol. 101. a. See also fol. 52. a. 69. a. Much to the same purpose he says,
"Even in this our time, some offend much in tediousness, whose part it were
to comfort all men with cherefulnesse. Yea, the preachers of God mind so much
edi^iyng of souls, that they often forgette we have any bodies. And therefore,
some do not so much good with tellyng the truth, as they do harm with
dullyng the hearers; being so far gone in their matters, that oftentimes they
cannot tell when to make an end." fol. 70. a. Yet still he allows much praise
to the preachers in general of his age. "Yea, what tell I now of such
lessons, seeing God has raised such worthy preachers in this our time, that
their godly and learned doings may be a most just example for all other to
follow." fol. 55. b. By the way, although a zealous gospeller, in another
place he obliquely censures the rapacity with which the reformation was
conducted under Edward the sixth. [See supr. vol. ii. p. 452.] "I had rather,
said one, make my child a cobbler than a preacher, a tankard-bearer than a
scholar. For what shall my son seek for learning, when he shall never get
thereby any livyng? Set my son to that whereby he mai^ get somewhat. Do you
not see, how every one catches and pulls from the church what they can? I
fear me, one day they will plu^ke down church and all. Call you this the
GOSPEL, when men seek only for to provide for their bellies, and care not a
groate though their souls go to hell? A patron of a benefice will have a
poor yngrame soul, to bear the name of a parsone for twenty mark, or ten
pound: and the patron himself will take up, for his snapshare, as good as an
hundred mark: Thus, God is robbed, learning decayed, England dishonored, and
honesty not regarded." fol. 9. a.
. In treating of pleasant sport made rehearsyng of a whole matter, he says,
"They that can lively tell pleasant tales and merry deeds done, and set them
out as well with gesture as with voice, leaving nothing behind that may serve
for beautifying of their matter, are most mete for this purpose, whereof
assuredly there are but few. And whatsoever he is, that can aptly tell his
tale, and with countenance, voice, and gesture, so temper his report, that
the hearers may still take delight, him coompte I a man worthy to be highly
esteemed. For undoubtedly no man can do any such thing except that they have a
great mother wit, and by experience confirmed such their comeliness,
whereunto by nature they were most apt. Many a man reads histories, hears
fables, sees worthy acts done, even in this our age; but few can set them
out accordingly, and tell them lively, as the matter self requires to be
told. The kinds of delityng in this sort are diverse: whereof I will set forth
many. -- Sport moved by tellyng of old tales. -- If there be any old tale or
strange history, well and wittelie applied to some man living, all men love
to hear it of life. As if one were called Arthure, some good fellow that were
well acquainted with KING ARTHURES BOOK and the Knights of his Round Table,
would want no matter to make good sport, and for a need would dubbe him knight
of the Round Table, or else prove him to be one of his kynne, or else (which
were much) prove him to be Arthur himself. And so likewise of other names,
merry panions Companions. A cant word.
would make mad pastyme. Oftentimes the deformity of a man's body gives
matter enough to be right merry, or else a picture in shape like another manne
will make some to laugh right hartelye Fol. 74. a.
, etc." This is no unpleasing image of the arts and accomplishments, which
seasoned the mirth, and enlivened the conversations of our forefathers. Their
wit seems to have chiefly consisted in mimicry See ^ol. 70. a.
.

He thus describes the literary and ornamental qualifications of a young
nobleman which were then in fashion, and which he exemplifies in the characters
of his lamented pupils, Henry duke of Suffolk and lord Charles Brandon his
brother He gives a curious reason why a young nobleman had better be born in
London than any other place. "The shire or town helps somewhat toward the
increase of honor. As, it is much better to be borne in Paris than in
Picardie, in London than in Lincoln. For that both the air is better, the
people more civil, and the wealth much greater, and the men for the most
part more wise." fol. 7. a.
. "I may commend him for his learning, for his skill in the French or in the
Italian, for his knowledge in cosmographie, for his skill in the laws, in the
histories of al countrees, and for his gift of enditing. Again, I may
commend him for playing at weapons, for running upon a great horse, for
chargyng his staff at the tilt, for vauting, for plaiyng upon instruments,
yea and for painting, or drawing of a plat, as in old time noble princes much
delited therein Fol. 7. a.
." And again, "Such a man is an excellent fellow, says one, he can speak
the tongues well, he plays of instruments, few men better, he feigneth to
the lvte marveilous sweetly He mentions the Lute again, "The tongue gives a
certain grace to every matter, and beauti^ieth the cause, in like manner a^ a
sweet soundyng lute much sets forth a mean devised ballade." fol. 111. a.
, he ^ndites excellently: but for all this, the more is the pitee, he has his
faults, he will be drunk once a day, he loves women well, etc Fol. 67. a.
."

The following passage acquaints us, among other things, that many now studied,
and with the highest applause, to write elegantly in English as well as in
Latin. "When we have learned usual and accvstomable words to set forth our
meaning, we ought to join them together in apt order, that the ear may
delight in hearing the harmony. I know some Englishemen, that in this poinct
have such a gift in the English as few in Latin have the like; and therefore
delight the Wise and Learned so much with their pleasant composition, that
many rejoice when they may hear such, and think much learning is got
when they may talk with them This work is enlivened with a variety of little
illustrative stories, not ill told, of which the following is a specimen. "An
Italian havyng a suit here in England to the archbusshoppe of York that then
was, and coming to York when one of the Prebendaries there brake his bread,
as they term it, and thereupon made a solemn long diner, the which perhaps
began at eleven and continued well nigh till four in the afternoon, at the
which dinner this bisshoppe was: It fortvned that as they were set, the
Italian knocked at the gate, unto whom the porter, perceiving his errand,
answered, that my lord bisshoppe was at diner. The Italian departed, and
returned betwixt twelve and one; the porter answered they were yet at
dinner. He came again at two of the clock; the porter told him they had not
half dined. He came at three a clock, unto whom the porter in a heat a^swered
never a word, but churlishlie did shut the gates upon him. Whereupon, others
told the Italian, that there was no speaking with my Lord, almost all that
day, for the solemn diner sake. The gentilman Italian, wonderyng much at
such a long sitting, and greatly grieved because he could not then speak with
the archbysshoppes grace, departed straight toward London; and leauyng the
dispatche of his matters with a der^ friend of his, took his journey toward
Italy. Three years after, it hapened that an Englishman came to Rome, with
whom this Italian by chance falling acquainted, asked him if he knew the
archbisshoppe of York? The Englishman said, he knew him right well. I pray
you tell me, quoth the Italian, has that archbishop yet dined?" The Italian
explaining himself, they both laughed heartily. fol. 78. b. 79. a.

He commends Dr. Haddon's latinity, which is not always of the purest cast.
"There is no better Latin man within England, except Gualter Haddon the
lawier." fol. 63. a. Again, he commends a prosopopeia of the duchess of
Suffolk, in Haddon's Oration de vita et obitu fratrum Suffolciensium Henrici et
Caroli Brandon. [edit. Hatcher, Land. 1577. 4to. p. 89. viz. LUCU^RATIONES G.
Haddon.] fol. 94. a.

He mentions John Heiwood's PROVERBS. [See supr. p. 91.] "The English
Proverbes gathered by Jhon Heiwoode help well in this behaulfe [allegory], the
which commonly are nothing else but Allegories, and dark devised sentences."
fol. 90. a. Again, for furnishing similitudes, "The Proverbs of Heiwood help
wonderful well for this purpose." fol. 96. b.

He condemns, in an example, the growing practice of mothers who do not suckle
their own children, which he endeavors to prove to be both against the law of
nature and the will of God. fol. 56. a. Here is an early proof of a custom,
which may seem to have originated in a more luxurious and delicate age.

To these miscellaneous extracts I shall only add, that our author who was
always esteemed a sincere advocate for protestantism, and never suspected of
leaning to pop^ry, speaking of an artificial memory, ha^ this theory concerning
the use of images in churches. "When I see a lion, the image thereof abides
faster in my mind, than if I should hear some report made of a lion. Among
all the senses, the iye [eye] sight is most quick, and contains the
impression of things more assuredly than any of the other senses do. And the
rather, when a man both hears and sees a thing, (as by artificial memory
he do^th almost s^^ things lively,) he does remember it much the better. The
sight printeth things in a man's memory as a seal does printe a man's name in
wax. And therefore, heretofore Ima^^s were sett^ up for remembrance of
saints, to be LAI^ ^ENNES BOOK^S, that the rather by seying [seein^] the
pictures of such men, they might be stirred to follow their good living. --
Marry, for this purpose whereof we now write, this would have served gaily
well." fol. 111. a.


." But he adds the faults which were sometimes now to be found in English
composition, among which he censures the excess of alliteration. -- "Some will
be so short, and in such wise curtall their sentences, that they had need to
make a commentary immediately of their meaning, or else the most that hear
them shall be forced to keep counsel. Some will speak oracles, that a man can
not tell, which way to take them. Some will be so fine, and so poetical
withal, that to their seming there shall not stand one hear [hair] amiss,
and yet every body else shall think them meter [fitter] for a ladies chamber,
than for an earnest matter in any open assembly. -- Some use overmuche
repetition of one letter, as pitiful poverty prays for a penie, but pu^^ed
presumpcion passes not a poinct, pamperyng his panche with pestilent pleasure,
procuryng his passeport to post it to hell pit, there to be punished with
pains perpetual." Others, he blames for the affectation of ending a word with
a vowel and beginning the next with another. "Some, he says, end their
sentences al alike, making their talk [style] rather to appear rimed meter,
than to seem plain speech. -- I heard a preacher Preaching and controversial
tracts occasioned much writing in English after the reformation.
delityng much in this kind of composicion, who used so often to end his
sentence with words like unto that which went before, that in my judgment,
there was not a dosen sentences in his whole sermon but they ended all in rhyme
for the most part. Some, not best disposed, wished the Preacher a Lute, that
with his rimed sermon he might use some pleasant melody, and so the people
might take pleasure diverse ways, and dance if they list." Some writers, he
observes, disturbed the natural arrangement of their words: others were copious
when they should be concise. The most frequent fault seems to have been, the
rejection of common and proper phrases, for those that were more curious,
refined, and unintelligible Fol. 85. a. b. 86. a. One Thomas Wilson translated
the DIANA of Montomayer, a pas^oral Spanish romance, about the year 1595, which
has been assigned as the original of the TWO GENTLEMEN OF VERONA. He could
hardly be our author, unless that version was one of his early juvenile
exercises. This translator Wilson I presume is the person mentioned by Meres as
a poet, "Who for learning and extemporall wit in this faculty is without
compare or compeere, as to his great and eternal commendations he manifested
in his challenge at the Swanne on the Bank side." WITS TREAS. edit. 1598. 12mo.
ut supr. fol. 285. p^ 2. Again, he mentions one Wilson as an eminent dramatic
writer, perhaps the same. Ibid. fol. 282. There is, by one Thomas Wilson, an
EXPOSITION ON THE PSALMS, Land. 1591. 4to. And an EXPOSITION ON THE PROVERBS,
Land. 1589. 4to. Among the twelve players sworn the queen's servants in 1583,
were "two rare men, viz. Thomas Wilson for a quick, delicate, resined
extemporall wit, and Richard Tarleton, etc." Stowe's ANN. edit. 1615. fol.
697.
.

The English RHETORIC of Richard Sherry, schoolmaster of Magdalene college at
Oxford, published in 1555 But there seems to have been a former edition by
Richard Day, 1550, in octavo.
, is a jejune and a very different performance from Wilson's, and seems
intended only as a manual for schoolboys. It is entitled, "A treatise of the
figures of grammar and rhetorike, profitable to all that be studious of
eloquence, and in especial for such as in grammar schole^ do read most
eloquente poets and orators. Whereunto is ioygned the Oration which Cicero
made to Caesar, giving thanks unto him for pardonyng and restoring again of
that noble man Marcus Marcellus. Set fourth by Richard Sherrye Londonar,
1555 For Richard Tottell. 12mo. In 74 leaves.
." William Fullwood, in his Enemy of idleness, teaching the manner and style
how to endyte and write all sorts of epistles and letters, set forth in
English by William Fullwood merchant, published in 1571 In four books, 12mo. It
is dedicated to the master, wardens, and company of Merchant Tailors London.
"Think not Apelles painted piece." PR. "The ancient poet Lucanus." The same
person translated into English, THE CASTLE OF MEMORY, from William Gratarol,
dedicated to lord Robert Dudly, master of the horse to the queen, Land. for W.
How in Fleetstreet, 1573. 8vo. DED. begins, "Sith noble Maximilian king."
, written partly in prose and partly in verse, has left this notice. "Whosoever
will more circumspectly and narrowly entreat of such matters, let them read the
retorike of master doctor Wilson, or of master Richard Rainolde Fol. 7. a.
In 1562, "the Book of Retoryke," of which I know no more, is entered to John
Kyngeston^ REGISTR. STATION. A. fol. 87. b.
." I have never seen Richard Rainolde's RHETORIC, nor am I sure that it was
ever printed. The The author, Rainolde, was of Trinity college in Cambridge,
and created doctor of medicine in 1567 MSS. Cat. Graduat. Univ. Cant.
. He wrote also a Latin tract dedicated to the duke of Norfolk, on the
condition of princes and noblemen MSS. Stillingfl. 160. "De statu nobilium
virorum et principum."
: and there is an old CRONICLE in quarto by one Richard Reynolds Of the
Emperors, from Julius Caesar to Maximilian. Licenced to T. Marshe, in 1566.
REGISTR. STATION. A. fol. 154. b.
. I trust it will be deemed a pardonable anticipation, if I add here, for the
sake of connection, that Richard Mulcaster, who from King's college in
Cambridge was removed to a Studentship of Christ-church in Oxford about the
year 1555, and soon afterward, on account of his distinguished accomplishments
in philology, was appointed the first master of Merchant-Taylor's school in
London In 1561. It was then just founded as a proseminary for saint John's
college Oxford, in a house called the Manor of the Rose in saint Lawrence
Pounteney, by the company of Merchant-Taylors. Saint John's college had been
then established about seven years, which Mulcaster soon filled with excellent
scholars till the year 1586. In the Latin plays acted before queen Elisabeth
and James the first at Oxford, the students of this college were distinguished.
This was in consequence of their being educated under Mulcaster. He was
afterward, in 1596, master of saint Paul's school. He was a prebendary of
Salisbury, and at length was rewarded by the queen with the opulent rectory of
Standford-Rivers in Essex, where he died in 1611. He was elected scholar of
King's college Cambridge in 1548. MSS. Hatcher. And Contin. Hatch. Celebrated
in its time was his CATECHISMUS PAULINUS in usum Scholae Paulinae conscriptus,
Land. 1601. 8vo. etc. It is in long and short verse. Many of Mulcaster's
panegyrics in Latin verse may be seen prefixed to the works of his
cotemporaries. A copy of his Latin verses was spoken before queen Elisabeth at
Kenilworth^castle in 1575. See G. Gascoyne's NARRATIVE, etc. Signat. A. iij.
, published a book which contains many judicious criticisms and observations on
the English language, entitled, "The first part of the ELEMENTARIE, which
entreats chefely of the right writing of the English tung, set forth by
Richard Mulcaster, Land. 1582 Most elegantly printed, in the white letter, by
Thomas Vautrollier in quarto. It contains 272 pages. The second part never
appeared. His "POSITIONS, wherein those primitive circumstances be examined
which are necess^rie for the training up of children either for skill in their
book or health in their bodies^" [Lond. 1581. 1587. 4to.] have no connection
with this work.
." And, as many of the precepts are delivered in meter, I take this opportunity
of observing, that William Bullokar published a "Bref grammar for English,
Imprinted at London by Edmund Bollifant, 1586 Coloph. "Quoth W. Bullokar." 12mo.
It contains 68 pages.
." This little piece is also called, "W. Bullokar's abbreuiation of his Grammar
for English extracted out of his Grammar at larg for the spedi parcing of
English spech, and the eazier coming to the knowledge of grammar for other
langages Fol. 1.
." It is in the black letter, but with many novelties in the type, and
affectations of spelling. In the preface, which is in verse, and contains an
account of his life, he promises a dictionary of the English language, which,
he adds, will make his third work Here he says also, that he has another volume
lying by him of more fame, which is not to see the light till christened and
called forth by the queen.
. His first work I apprehend to be "A Treatise of Orthographie in English by
William Bullokar," licenced to Henry Denham in 1580 Jun. 10. REGISTR. STATION.
B. fol. 169. a. But I must not forget, that in 1585, he published, "Esop's
fables in true orthography, with grammar notz. Her-unto ar also coioned the
short sentencez of the wyz Cato, imprinted with like form and order: both of
which ^uthorz ar translated out of Latin intoo English by William Bullokar."
12mo.
. Among Tanner's books is a copy of his bref grammar abovementioned,
interpolated and corrected with the author's own hand, as it appears, for a new
impression. In one of these manuscript insertions, he calls this^ "the first
grammar for English that ever waz, except my grammar at large Fol. 68. In his
metrical preface he says, that he served in the army under sir Richard
Wingfield in queen Mary's time. There is "A petee schole of spellinge and
writing English," licenced to Butter, Jul. 20. 1580. REGISTR. B. fol. 171. a.
."

The French have vernacular critical and rhetorical systems at a much higher
period. I believe one of their earliest is "Le JARDIN de plaisance et FLEUR de
rhetorique, contenant plusieurs beaux livres." It is in quarto, in the gothic
type with wooden cuts, printed at Lions by Olivier Arnoullet for Martin
Boullon, and without date. But it was probably printed early in 1500 There is
another, I suppose a second, edition, without date, in black letter, with
wooden cuts, in folio, containing two hundred and forty-eight leaves, exclusive
of the tables. This has some improvements.
. In one of its poems, LA PIPEE ou chasse de dieu d'amour, is cited the year
1491 Stance, 22. fol. 134.
. Another edition, in the same letter, but in octavo, appeared at Paris in
1547, Veuve de Jehan Treperel et Jehan Jehannot. Beside the System of Rhetoric,
which is only introductory, and has the separate title of L'ART DE RHETORIQUE,
de ses couleurs, figures et especes From fol. 2. a. to fol. 14. a.
, it comprehends a miscellaneous collection of Balades, rondeaux, chansons,
dicties, comedies, and other entertaining little pieces But the compiler has
introduced "Le DONNET, traite de grammaire baille au ^eu roi ^harles viii."
fol. 20. a. One of the pieces is a MORISQU^, in which the actors are Amorevse
grace, Enuieuse jalousie, Espoir de parvenir, Tout habandonne, Sot penser. fol.
32. b.
, chiefly on the subject of the sentimental and ceremonious love which then
prevailed. The whole, I am speaking of the oldest edition, contains one hundred
and ninety leaves. The RHETORIC is written in the short French rhyme: and the
tenth chapter consists of rules for composing Moralities, Farces, Mysteries,
and other ROMANS. That chapter is thus introduced, under the Latin rubric
PROSECUTIO.

Expediez sont neuf chapitres,
Il faut un dixieme exposer:
Et comme aussi des derniers titers,
Qu'on doit a se propos poser,
Et comme l'on doit composer
Moralites, Farces, Misteres;
Et d'autres Rommans disposer
Selon les diverses matieres.
The Latin rubrics to each species are exceedingly curious. "Decimum Capitulum
pro forma compilandi MORALITATES. -- Pro COMEDIS The farce, or comedy, must
have, "Chose qui ^oit melodieuse,
"Matiere qui ^oit comedieuse, etc."

. -- Pro MISTERIIS compilandis." Receipts to make poems have generally been
thought dull. But what shall we think of dull receipts for making dull poems?
Gratian du Pont, a gentleman of Toulouse, printed in 1539 the "Art et Science
de Rhetorique metri^iee Par N. Viellard. 4to.
." It must be remembered, that there had been an early establishment of prizes
in poetry at Toulouse, and that the seven troubadours or rhetoricians at
Toulouse, were more famous in their time than the seven sages of Greece See
Verdier ii. 649. From an ingenious correspondent, who has not given me the
honor of his name, and who appears to be well acquainted with the manners and
literature of Spain, I have received the following notices relating to this
institution, of which other particulars may be seen in the old French History
of Languedoc. "At the end of the second volume of Mayan's ORIGINES DE LA LINGUA
ESPANOLA, printed in duodecimo at Madrid in 1737, is an extract from a
manuscript entitled, Libro de la Art de Trovar, o Gaya Sciencia, por Don
Enrique de Villena, said to exist in the library of the cathedral of Toledo,
and perhaps to be found in other libraries of Spain. It has these particulars.
-- The TROVADORES had their origin at Toulouse, about the middle of the twelfth
century. A CONSISTORIO de la Gaya Sciencia was there founded by Ramon Vidal de
Besalin, containing more than one hundred and twenty celebrated poets, and
among these, princes, kings, and emperors. Their art was extended throughout
Europe, and gave rise to the Italian and Spanish poetry, servio el Garona de
Hippocrene. To Ramon Vidal de Besalin succeeded Jofre de Foxa, Monge negro, who
enlarged the plan, and wrote what he called Continuacion de trovar. After him
Belenguer de Troya came from Majorca, and compiled a treatise de Figuras y
Colores Rhetoricos. And next Gul. Vedal of Majorca wrote La Suma Vitulina. To
support the GAYA SCIENCIA at the poetical college of Toulouse, the king of
France appropriated privileges and rev^nues: appointing seven Ma^tenedores, qu^
liciessen L^yes. These constituted the LAWS OF LOVE, which were afterward
abridged by Guill. Moluier under the title Tratado de las Flores. Next Fray
Ramon framed a system called Doctrinal, which was censured by Castilnon. From
thence nothing was written in Spanish on the subject, till the time of Don
Enrique de Villena. -- So great was the credit of the GAY SCIENCE, that Don
Juan the first king of Arragon, who died 1393, sent an embassy to the king of
France, requesting that some Troubadours might be transmitted to teach this art
in his kingdom. Accordingly two Mantenedores were dispatched from Toulouse, who
founded a college for poetry in Barcelona, consi^ting of four Mantenedores, a
Cavalier, a Master in Theology, a Mas^er in Laws, and an honorable Citizen.
Disputes about Don Juan's successor occasioned the removal of the college to
Tortosa. But Don Ferdinand being elected King, Don Enrique de Villena was taken
into his service: who restored the college, and was chosen principal. The
subjects he proposed, were sometimes, the Praises of the Holy Virgin, of Arms,
of Love, y de buenas Costumbres. An account of the ceremonies of their public
Acts then follows, in which every composition was recited, being written en
papeles Damasquinos de diversas colores, con letras de oro y de plata, et
illuminaduras formosas, lo major qua cada una podio. The best performance had a
crown of gold placed upon it: and the author, being presented with a joya, or
prize, received a license to cantar y decir in public^. He was afterward
conducted home in form, escorted among others by two Mantenedores, and preceded
by minstrels and trumpets, where he gave an entertainment of confects and
wine." -- [See supr. vol. i. 149. 467.]

There seems to have been a similar establishment at Amsterdam, called
R^ederiicke^ camer, or the CHAMBER OF RHETORICIANS, mentioned by Isaacus
Pontanus. Who adds, "Sunt autem hi rhetores viri amaeni et poetici spiritus,
qui lingua vernacula, aut prosa aut vorsa oratione, comoedias, trago^dias,
subindeque et mutas personas, et facta maiorum notantes, magna spectantium
voluptate exhibent." RER. ET URB. AMST. Lib. ii. c. xvi. page 118. edit. 1611.
fol. In the preceding chapter, he says, that this fraternity of rhetoricians
erected a temporary theater, at the solemn entry of prince Maurice in^o
Amsterdam in 1594, where they exhibited in DUM^ SHOW the history of David and
Golia^. Ibid. c. xv. p. 117.

Meteranus, in his Belgic history, speaks largely of the annual prizes,
assemblies, and conte^ts, of the guilds or colleges of the rhetoricians, in
Holland and the Low Countries. They answered in rhyme, questions proposed by
the dukes of Burgundy and Brabant. At Ghent in 1539, twenty of these colleges
met with great pomp, to discuss an ethical question, and each gave a solution
in a moral com^dy, magnificently presented in the public theater. In 1561, the
rhetorical guild of Antw^rp, called the VIOLET, challenged all the neighboring
cities to a decision of the same sort. On this occasion, three hundred and
forty rhetoricians of Brussels appeared on horseback, richly but fantastically
habited, accompanied with an infinite variety of pageantries, sports, and
shows. These had a garland, as a reward for the superior splendour of their
entry. Many days were spent in determining the grand questions: during which,
there were ^eastings, bonfires, farces, tumbling, and every popular diversion.
BEL^. HISTOR. UNIVERSAL. fol. 1597. Lib. i. page 31, 32.


. But the "Grand et vrai Art de plein Rhetorique" in two books, written by
Pierre Fabri, properly Le Fevre, an ecclesiastic of Rouen, for teaching
elegance in prose as well as rhyme, is dated still higher. Goujet mentions a
Gothic edition of this tract in 1521 BI^L. FR. 361. He mentions another edition
in 1539. Both at Paris, 12mo.
. It contains remarks on the versification of mysteries and farces, and throws
many lights on the old French writers.

But the French had even an ART OF POETRY so early as the year 1548. In that
year Thomas Sibilet published his Art poetique at Paris, Veuve Francois
Regnault In 16mo.
. This piece preserves many valuable anecdotes of the old French poetry: and,
among other particulars which develope the state of the old French drama, has
the following sensible strictures. "The French farce contains little or nothing
of the Latin comedy. It has neither acts nor scenes, which would only serve to
introduce a tedious prolixity: for the true subject of the French farce, or
SOTTIE, is every sort of foolery which has a tendency to provoke laughter. --
The subject of the Greek and Latin comedy was totally different from every
thing on the French stage. For it had more morality than drollery, and often as
much truth as fiction. Our MORALITIES hold a place indifferently between
tragedy and comedy: but our farces are really what the Romans called mimes, or
Priapees, the intended end and effect of which was excessive laughter, and on
that account they admitted all kinds of licentiousness, as our farces do at
present. In the mean time, their pleasantry does not derive much advantage from
rhymes, however flowing, of eight syllables Live. ii. chapter viii. At the end of
Sibilet's work is a critical piece of Quintil against Chapter Fontaine, first
printed separately at Paris, 1538. 16mo.
." Sibilet's work is chiefly founded on Horace. His definitions are clear and
just, and his precepts well explained. The most curious part of it is the
enumeration of the poets who in his time were of most repute. Jacques Pelletier
du Man's, a physician, a mathematician, a poet, and a voluminous writer on
various subjects both in prose and verse, also published an ART POETIQUE at
Lions, in 1555 By Jean de Tournes. 8vo.
. This critic had sufficient penetration to perceive the false and corrupt
taste of his cotemporaries. "Instead of the regular ode and sonnet, our
language is sophisticated by ballads, roundeaux, lays, and triolets. But with
these we must rest contented, till the farces which have so long infatuated our
nation are converted into comedy, our martyr-plays into tragedy, and our
romances into heroic poems Chapter de L'ODE.
." And again, "We have no pieces in our language written in the genuine comic
form, except some affected and unnatural MORALITIES, and other plays of the
same character, which do not deserve the name of comedy. The drama would appear
to advantage, did it but resume its proper state and ancient dignity. We have,
however, some tragedies in French learnedly translated, among which is the
HECUBA of Euripides by Lazare de Baif, etc Chapter DE LA COMEDY ET DE LA TRAGEDY.
See also, to the same purpose, Collettet Sur la poesy morale, and Guillaume
des Autels, Repos d'^n plus grand^ travail.
." Of rhyme the same writer says, "S'il n'etoit question que de parler
ornement, il ne faudroit sinon ecrire en prose, ou s'il n'etoit question que de
rimer, il ne faudroit, sinon rimer en farceur: mais en poesy, il faut fair
tous les deux, et BIEN DIRE, et BIEN RIMER Live. ii. chapter i. De la RIM^.
." His chapters on IMITATION and TRANSLATION have much more philosophy and
reflection than are to be expected for his age, and contain observations which
might edify modern critics See Live. i. chapter v. and vi.
. Nor must I forget, that Pelletier also published a French translation of
Horace's ART OF POETRY at Paris in 1545 Par Michel Vascosan. 8vo.
. I presume, that Joachim du Bellay's Deffense et Illustration de la LANGUE
FRANCOISE was published at no great distance from the year 1550. He has the
same just notion of the drama. "As to tragedies and comedies, if kings and
states would restore them in their ancient glory, which has been usurped by
farces and MORALITIES, I am of opinion that you would lend your assistance; and
if you wish to adorn our language, you know where to find models Live. ii. chapter
iv.
."

The Italian vernacular criticism began chiefly in commentaries and discourses
on the language and phraseology of Dante, Petrarch, and Boccace. I believe one
of the first of that kind is, "Le tree Fontane di Nicolo Liburnio sopra la
grammatica, e l'eloquenza di Dante, del Petrarcha, e del Boccacio. In Venezia,
per Gregorio Gregori, 1526 In quarto. Again, per Marchio Sessa, 1534. 8vo.
." Numerous expositions, lectures, annotations, and discourses of the same
sort, especially on Dante's Inferno, and the Florentine dialect, appeared soon
afterward. Immediately after the publication of their respective poems,
Ariosto, whose ORLANDO FURIOSO was styled the nuova poesia, and Tasso, were
illustrated or expounded by commentators more intricate than their text. One of
the earliest of these is, "Sposizione de Simon Fornari da Reggio sopra
l'Orlando Furioso di Lodovico Ariosto. In Firenze per Lorenzo Torrentino 1549
In 8vo. The Second Party appeared ibid. 1550. 8vo.
." Perhaps the first criticism on what the Italians call the Volgar Lingua is
by Pietro Bembo, "Prose di Pietro Bembo della volgar Lingua divise in tree
libri. In Firenze per Lorenzo Torrentino, 1549 In quarto.
." But the first edition seems to have been in 1525. This subject was discussed
in an endless succession of Regole grammaticali, Osservazioni, Avvertimenti,
and Ragionamenti. Here might also be mentioned, the annotations, although they
are altogether explanatory, which often accompanied the early translations of
the Greek and Latin classics into Italian. But I resign this labyrinth of
research to the superior opportunities and abilities of the French and Italian
antiquaries in their native literature. To have said nothing on the subject
might have been thought an omission, and to have said more, impertinent. I
therefore return to our own poetical annals.

Our three great poets, Chaucer, Gower, and Lydgate, seem to have maintained
their rank, and to have been in high reputation, during the period of which we
are now treating. Splendid impressions of large works were at this time great
undertakings. A sumptuous edition of Gower's CONFESSIO AMANTIS was published by
Berthelette in 1554. On the same ample plan, in 1555, Robert Braham printed
with great accuracy, and a diligent investigation of the ancient copies, the
first correct edition of Lydgate's TROYBOKE Nothing can be more incorrect than
the first edition in 1513.
. I have before incidentally remarked See supr. vol. ii. p. 44.
, that Nicholas Briggam, a polite scholar, a student at Oxford and at the Inns
of Court, and a writer of poetry, in the year 1555, deposited the bones of
Chaucer under a new tomb, erected at his own cost, and inscribed with a new
epitaph, in the chapel of bishop Blase in Westminster abbey, which still
remains Undoubtedly Chaucer was originally buried in this place. Leland ^ites a
Latin elegy, or NAENIA, of thirty-four lines, which he says was composed by
Stephanus Surigonius of Milan, at the request of William Caxton the printer:
and which, Leland adds, was written on a white tablet by Surigoniu^, on a
pillar near Chaucer's grave in the south i will at Westminster. SCRIPT. BRIT.
GALPRID. CHAUCERUS. See Caxton's EPILOGUE to Chaucer's BOOK OF FAME, in
Caxton's CHAUCER. Wood says, that Briggam "exerci^^d his muse much in poetry,
and took great delight in the works of Jeffrey Chaucer: for whose memory he had
so great a respect, that he removed his bones into the south cross-ile or
transept of S. Peter's church, etc." ATH. OXON. i. 130. I do not apprehend
there was any removal, in this case, from one part of the abbey to another.
Chaucer's ^omb has appropriated this aile, or transept, to the sepulture or to
the honorary monuments of our poets.
. Wilson, as we have just seen in a citation from his RHETORIC, records an
anecdote, that the more accomplished and elegant courtiers were perpetually
quoting Chaucer. Yet this must be restricted to the courtiers of Edward the
sixth. And indeed there is a peculiar reason why Chaucer, exclusive of his real
excellence, should have been the favorite of a court which laid the foundations
of the reformation of religion. It was, that his poems abounded with satirical
strokes against the corruptions of the church, and the dissolute manners of the
monks. And undoubtedly Chaucer long before, a lively and popular writer,
greatly assisted the doctrines of his cotemporary Wickliffe, in opening the
eyes of the people to the absurdities of popery, and exposing its impostures in
a vein of humor and pleasantry. Fox the martyrologist, a weak and a credulous
compiler, perhaps goes too far in affirming, that Chaucer has undeniably proved
the pope to be the antichrist of the apocalypse Tom. ii. p. 42. edit. 1684.
.

Of the reign of queen Mary, we are accustomed to conceive every thing that is
calamitous and disgusting. But when we turn our eyes from its political evils
to the objects which its literary history presents, a fair and flourishing
scene appears. In this prospect, the mind feels a repose from contemplating the
fates of those venerable prelates, who suffered the most excruciating death for
the purity and inflexibility of their faith; and whose unburied bodies,
dissipated in ashes, and undistinguished in the common mass, have acquired a
more glorious monument, than if they had been interred in magnificent shrines,
which might have been visited by pilgrims, loaded with superstitious gifts, and
venerated with the pomp of mistaken devotion.

SECT. XXXVIII.
THE first poem which presents itself at the commencement of the reign of queen
Elisabeth, is the play of GORDOBUC, written by Thomas Sackville lord Buckhurst,
the original contriver of the MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES It is scarcely worth
observing, that one Thomas Brice, at the accession of Elisabeth, printed in
English meter a Register of the Martyrs and Confessors under queen Mary, Land.
for R. Adams, 1559. 8vo. I know not how far Fox might profit by this work. I
think he has not mentioned it. In the Stationers registers, in 1567, were
entered to Henry Binneman, SON^^S and SONNETTS by Thomas Brice. REGISTR. A.
fol. 164. a. I have never seen the book. In 1570, an elegy, called "An epitaph
on Mr. Bryce preacher" occurs, licenced to John Alde. Ibid. fol. 205. b. Again,
we have the COURT OF VENUS, I suppose a ballad, MORALIZED, in 1566, by Thomas
Bryce, for Hugh Singleton. Ibid. fol. 156. a.
. Thomas Norton, already mentioned as an associate with Sternhold and Hopkins
in the metrical version of David's Psalms, is said to have been his coadjutor
See supr. p. 169. See Preface to GORDO^UC, edit. 1571. Strype says, that Thomas
Norton was a clergyman, a puritan, a man of parts and learning, well known to
secretary Cecil and archbishop Parker, and that he was suspected, but without
foundation, of writing an answer to Whitgift's book against the puritans,
publishe^ in 1572. LIFE OF PARKER, p. 364. LIFE OF WHITGIFT, p. 28. I forgot to
mention before, that Norton has a copy of recommendatory ve^ses pre^ixed to
Turner's PRESERVATIVE, a tract against the Pelagians, dedicated to Hugh
Latimer, printed Land. 1551. 12mo. In the Conferences in the Tower with Campion
the Jesuit, in 1581, one Norton, but not our author, seems to have been
employed as a notary. See "A TRUE REPORT OF THE DISPUTATION, etc." Land. 1583.
Bl. Let. 4to. SIGNAT. A a. iij.
.

It is no part of my plan, accurately to ^ark the progress of our drama, much
less to examine the merit of particular plays. But as this piece is perhaps the
first specimen in our language of an heroic tale, written in blank verse,
divided into acts and scenes, and clothed in all the formalities of a regular
tragedy, it seems justly to deserve a more minute and a distinct discussion in
this general view of our poetry.

It was first exhibited in the great Hall of the Inner Temple, by the students
of that Society, as part of the entertainment of a grand Christmas, and
afterward before queen Elisabeth at Whitehall, on the eighteenth day of
January in 1561. It was never intended for the press. But being surreptitiously
and very carelessly printed in 1565, an exact edition, with the consent and
under the inspection of the authors, appeared in 1571, in black letter, thus
entitled. "The TRAGIDIE OF FERREX AND PORREX, set forth without addition or
alteration, but altogether as the same was showed on stage before the queens
Majesty about nine year past, viz. The xviij day of Januarie, 1561. By the
gentlemen of the Inner^Temple. Seen and allowed, etc. Imprinted at London by
John Day dwelling over Aldersgate." It has no date, nor notation of pages, and
contains only thirty-one leaves in small octavo For the benefit of those who
wish to gain a full and exact information about this edition, so as to
distinguish it from all the rest, I will here exhibit the arrangement of the
lines of the title page. "The Tragidie of Ferrex and Porrex, set forth without
addition or alteration but altogether as the same was showed on stage before
the queens majesty, about nine years past, vz. the xviij day of Januarie.
1561. by the Gentlemen of the Inner Temple. Seen and allowed etc. Imprinted at
London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate." With the Bodleian copy of this
edition, are bound up four pamphlets against the papists by Thomas Norton.
. In the edition of 1565, it is called the TRAGEDY OF GORDOBUC. The whole
title of that edition runs thus. "The Tragedy of Gordobuc, whereof three acts
were written by Thomas Nortone and the two last by Thomas Sackvyle. Set
forth as the same was showed before the queens most excellent majesty in her
highness court of Whitehall, the 18 Jan. 1561. By the gentlemen of thynner
Temple in London. Sept. 22. 1565." Printed by William Griffith at the sign of
the falcon in Fleet Street, in quarto On the books of the Stationers, "The
Tragedy of GORDO^UC where iij acts were written by Thomas Norton and the
last by Thomas Sackvyle," is entered in 1565-6, with William Grif^iths.
REGIST^. A. fol. 132. b.
. I have a most incorrect black lettered copy in duodecimo, without title, but
with the printer's monogram in the last page, I suspect of 1569, which once
belonged to Pope In the year 1717, my father, then a fellow of Magdalene
college at Oxford, gave this copy to Mr. Pope, as appears by a letter of Pope
to R. Digby, dat. Jun. 2. 1717. See Pope's LETTERS^ vol. ix. p. 39. edit. 12mo.
1754. "Mr. Warton forced me to take Gordobuc, etc." Pope gave it to the late
bishop Warburton, who gave it to me about ten years ago, 1770.
, and from which the late Mr. Spence most faithfully printed a modern edition
of the tragedy, in the year 1736. I believe it was printed before that of 1571,
for it retains all the errors of Griffith's first or spurious edition of 1565.
In the Preface prefixed to the edition of 1571, is the following passage.
"Where [whereas] this tragedy was for furniture of part of the grand
Christmasse in the Inner Temple, first written about nine years ago by the
right honorable Thomas now lord Buckhurst, and by T. Norton; and afterward
showed before her majesty, and never intended by the authors thereof to be
published: Yet one W. G. getting a copy thereof at some young man's hand, that
lacked a little money and much discretion, in the last great plague anno 1565,
about five years past, while the said lord was out of England, and T. Norton
far out of London, and neither of them both made privy, put it forth
exceedingly corrupted, etc." W. G. is William Griffith, the printer in Fleet
street, abovementioned. Mr. Garrick had another old quarto edition, printed by
Alde, in 1590.

These are the circumstances of the fable of this tragedy. Gordobuc, a king of
Britain about six hundred years before Christ, made in his lifetime a division
of his kingdom to his sons Ferrex and Porrex. The two young princes within five
years quarrelled for universal sovereignty. A civil was ensued, and Porrex ^lew
his elder brother Ferrex. Their mother Viden, who loved Ferrex best, revenged
his death by entering Porrex's chamber in the night, and murdering him in his
sleep. The people, exa^perated at the cruelty and treachery of this murder,
rose in rebellion, and killed both Viden and Gordobuc. The nobility then
assembled, collected an army, and destroyed the rebels. An intestine war
commenced between the chief lords: the succession of the crown became uncertain
and arbitrary, for want of the lineal royal issue: and the country, destitute
of a king, and wasted by domestic slaughter, was reduced to a state of the most
miserable desolation.

In the dramatic conduct of this tale, the unities of time and place are
eminently and visibly violated: a defect which Shakespeare so frequently
commits, but which he covers by the magic of his poetry. The greater part of
this long and eventful history is included in the representation. But in a
story so fertile of bloodshed, no murder is committed on the stage. It is
worthy of remark, that the death of Porrex in the bedchamber is only related.
Perhaps the players had not yet learned to die, nor was the poniard so
essential an article as at present among the implements of the property-room.
Nor is it improbable, that to kill a man on the stage was not now avoided as a
spectacle shocking to humanity, but because it was difficult and inconvenient
to be represented. The writer has followed the series of facts related in the
chronicles without any material variation, or fictitious embarrassments, and
with the addition only of a few necessary and obvious characters.

There is a Chorus of Four Ancient and Sage Men of Britain, who regularly close
every Act, the last excepted, with an ode in long-lined stanzas, drawing back
the attention of the audience to the substance of what has just passed, and
illustrating it by recapitulatory moral reflections, and poetical or historical
allusions. Of these the best is that which terminates the fourth Act, in which
prince Porrex is murdered by his mother Viden. These are the two first stanzas.

When greedy lust in royal seat to reign,
Has reft all care of gods, and eke of men,
And Cruel Heart, Wrath, Treason, and Disdain,
Within the ambicious breast are lodged, then
Behold how MISCHIEF wide herself displaies,
And with the brothers hand the brother slaies!
When blood thus shed does stain the heavens face,
Crying to Joue for vengeance of the deed,
The mighty god even moves from his place,
With wrath to wreak. Then sendes he forth with speed
The dreadful Furies, daughters of the night,
With serpents girt, carrying the whip of ire,
With hair of stinging snakes, and shining bright
With flames and blood, and with a brande of fire.
These for revenge of wretched murder done
Do make the mother kill her only son!
Blood asks blood, and death must death requite:
Joue, by his just and everlasting doom,
Justly has ever so required it, etc Act iv. Sc. ult.
.
In the imagery of these verses, we discern no faint traces of the hand which
drew the terrible guardians of hell-gate, in the INDUCTION to the MIRROR of
MAGISTRATES.

The moral beauties and the spirit of the following ode, which closes the third
act, will perhaps be more pleasing to many readers.

The lust of kingdom Kingdoms, edit. 1565.
knows no sacred faith,
No rule of reason, no regard of right,
No kindly love, no fear of heavens wrath:
But with contempt of gods, and man's despite,
Through blodie slaughter does prepare the ways
To fatal scepter, and accursed reign:
The son so lothes the fathers lingerynge days,
Ne dreads his hand in brothers blood to stain!
O wretched prince! ne do thou yet record
The yet fressh murders done within the land,
Of thie forefathers, when the cruel sword
Bereft Morgain his liefe with cosyn's hand?
Thus fatal plagues pursue the guilty race,
Whose murderous hand, imbrued with giltles blood,
Asks vengeance still Still, omit. edit. 1565.
, before the heavens face,
With endless mischiefs on the cursed brood.
The wicked child thus This, edit. 1565.
bringes to woeful ^ier
The mournful plaintes, to waste his weary Very, a worse reading, in edit.
1571.
life:
Thus do the cruel flames of civyll ^ier
Destroy the parted reign with hateful strife:
And hence does spring the well, from which does flo,
The dead black streams of mourning Mournings, edit. 1565.
, plaint, and woe Act iii. Sc. ult.
.
Every Act is introduced, as was the custom in our old plays, with a piece of
machinery called the DUMB SHOW, shadowing by an allegorical exhibition the
matter that was immediately to follow. In the construction of this spectacle
and its personifications, much poetry and imagination was often displayed. It
is some apology for these prefigurations, that they were commonly too
mysterious and obscure, to forestal the future events with any degree of
clearness and precision. Not that this mute mimicry was always typical of the
ensuing incidents. It sometimes served for a compendious introduction of such
circumstances, as could not commodiously be comprehended within the bounds of
the representation. It sometimes supplied deficiencies, and covered the want of
business. Our ancestors were easily satified with this artificial supplement of
one of the most important unities, which abundantly filled up the interval that
was necessary to pass, while a hero was expected from the Holy Land, or a
princess was imported, married, and brought to bed. mean time, the greater part
of the audience were probably more pleased with the emblematical pageantry than
the poetical dialogue, although both were alike unintelligible.

I will give a specimen in the DOMME SHOW preceding the fourth act. "First,
the music of howeboies began to play. Duringe which, there came forth from
under the stage, as though out of hell, three Furies, ALECTO, MEGERA, and
CTESIPHONE Tisiphone.
, clad in black garments sprinkled with blood and flames, their bodies girt
with snakes, their heds spread with serpents instead of hear, the one bearing
in her hand ^ snake the other a whip, and the third a burning firebrande:
each driuynge before them a king and a queen, which moved by Furies
unnaturally had slain their own children. The names of the kings and queens
were these, TANTALUS, MEDEA, ATHAMAS, INO, CAMBISES, ALTHEA. After that the
Furies, and these, had passed about the stage thrice, they departed, and then
the music ceased. Hereby was signified the unnatural murders to follow,
that is to say, Porrex slain by his own mother. And of king Gordobuc and
queen Viden killed by their own subjectes." Here, by the way, the visionary
procession of kings and queens long since dead, evidently resembles our author
Sackville's original model of the MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES; and, for the same
reason, reminds us of a similar train of royal specter in the tentscene of
Shakespeare's KING RICHARD THE THIRD.

I take this opportunity of expressing my surprise, that this ostensible
comment of the Dumb Show should not regularly appear in the tragedies of
Shakespeare. There are even proofs that he treated it with contempt and
ridicule. Although some critics are of opinion, that because it is never
described in form at the close or commencement of his acts, it was therefore
never introduced. Shakespeare's aim was to collect an audience, and for this
purpose all the common expedients were necessary. No dr^matic writer of his age
has more battles or ghosts. His representations abound with the usual
appendages of mechanical terror, and he adopts all the superstitions of the
theater. This problem can only be resolved into the activity or the superiority
of a mind, which either would not be entangled by the formality, or which saw
through the futility, of this unnatural and extrinsic ornament. It was not by
declamation or by pantomime that Shakespeare was to fix his eternal dominion
over the hearts of mankind.

To return to Sackville. That this tragedy was never a favorite among our
ancestors, and had long fallen into general oblivion, is to be attributed to
the nakedness and uninteresting nature of the plot, the tedious length of the
speeches, the want of a discrimination of character, and almost a total absence
of pathetic or critical situations. It is true that a mother kills her own son.
But this act of barbarous and unnatural impiety, to say nothing of its almost
unexampled atrocity in the tender sex, proceeds only from a brutal principle of
sudden and impetuous revenge. It is not the consequence of any deep
machination, nor is it founded in a proper preparation of previous
circumstances. She is never before introduced to our notice as a wicked or
designing character. She murders her son Porrex, because in the commotions of
a civil dissension, in self-defence, after repeated provocations, and the
strongest proofs of the basest ingratitude and treachery, he had slain his
rival brother, not without the deepest compunction and remorse for what he had
done. A mother murdering a son is a fact which must be received with horror;
but it required to be complicated with other motives, and prompted by a
cooperation of other causes, to rouse our attention, and work upon our
passions. I do not mean that any other motive could have been found, to
palliate a murder of such a nature. Yet it was possible to heighten and to
divide the di^tress, by rendering this bloody mother, under the notions of
human frailty, an object of our compassion as well as of our abhorrence. But
perhaps these artifices were not yet known or wanted. The general story of the
play is great in its political consequences; and the leading incidents are
important, but not sufficiently intricate to awaken our curiosity, and hold us
in suspense. Nothing is perplexed and nothing unravelled. The opposition of
interests is such as does not affect our nicer feelings. In the plot of a play,
our pleasure arises in proportion as our expectation is excited.

Yet it must be granted, that the language of GORDOBUC has great purity and
perspicuity; and that it is entirely free from that tumid phraseology, which
does not seem to have taken place till play-writing had become a trade, and our
poets found it their int^rest to captivate the multitude by the false sublime,
and by those exaggerated imageries and pedantic metaphors, which are the chief
blemishes of the scenes of Shakespeare, and which are at this day mistaken for
his capital beauties by too many readers. Here also we perceive another and a
strong reason why this play was never popular.

Sir Philip Sydney, in his admirable DEFENSE OF POESY, remarks, that this
tragedy is full of notable morality. But tragedies are not to instruct us by
the intermixture of moral sentences, but by the force of example, and the
effect of the story. In the first act, the three counselors are introduced
debating about the division of the kingdom in long and elaborate speeches,
which are replete with political advice and maxims of civil prudence. But this
stately sort of declamation, whatever eloquence it may display, and whatever
policy it may teach, is undramatic, unanimated, and unaffecting. Sentiment and
argument will never supply the place of a^tion upon the stage. Not to mention,
that these grave harangues have some tincture of the formal modes of address,
and the ceremonious oratory, which were then in fashion. But we must allow,
that in the strain of dialogue in which they are professedly written, they have
uncommon merit, even without drawing an apology in their favor from their
antiquity: and that they contain much dignity, strength of reflection, and good
sense, couched in clear expression and polished numbers. I shall first produce
a specimen from the speech of Arostus who is styled a Coun^ellor to the King,
and who is made to defend ^ specious yet perhaps the least rational side of the
question.

And in your life, while you shall so behold
Their rule, their virtues, and their noble deede^,
Such as their kind behighteth to us all;
Great be the profits that shall grow thereof:
Your age in quiet shall the longer last,
Your lasting age shall be their longer stay:
For cares of kings, that rule, as you have ruled,
For public wealth, and not for private joy,
Do waste man's life, and hasten crooked age,
With furrowed face, and with enfeebled lymmes,
To draw on creepynge Death a swifter pace.
They two, yet young, shall bear the parted Party, edit. 1565.
regne
With greater ease, than one, now old, alone,
Can welde the whole: for whom, much harder is
With lessened strength the double weight to beare^
Your age, your counsel, and the grave regard
Of father Father^, edit. 1565.
, yea of such a fathers name,
Now at beginning of their sondred reign,
When is It is, edit. 1565.
the hazard of their whole success,
Shall bridle so the force of youthful heates,
And so restrain the rage of insolence
Which most assailes the young and noble minds,
And so shall guide and train in tempred stay
Their yet green bending wits with reverent awe,
As And, edit. 1565.
now inured with virtues at the first.
Custom, O king, shall bring delightfulnes:
By use of virtue, vice shall grow in hate.
But if you so dispose it, that the day
Which ends your life, shall first begin their reign,
Great is the peril. What will be the end,
When such beginning of such liberties
Void of such stays States, edit. 1565.
as in your life do lie,
Shall leave them free to random To free randon, edit^ 1565.
of their will,
An open prey to traitorous flattery,
The greatest pestilence of noble youth:
Which peril shall be past, if in your life,
Their tempred youth, with aged fathers awe,
Be brought in ure of skillful staiedness, etc Act i. Sc. ii.
.
From an obsequious complaisance to the king, who is present, the topic is not
agitated with that opposition of opinion and variety of arguments which it
naturally suggests, and which would have enlivened the disputation and
displayed diversity of character. But Eubulus, the king's secretary, declares
his sentiments with some freedom, and seems to be the most animated of all our
three political orators.

To part your realm unto my lords your sons,
I think not good, for you, ne yet for them,
But worst of all for this our native land:
Within For with, edit. 1565.
one land one single rule is best.
Divided reigns do make divided hearts,
But peace preserues the country and the prince.
Such is in man the gredie mind to reign,
So great is his desire to climb alo^t
In wordly stage the stateliest parts to bear,
That faith, and justice, and all kindly Natural.
love,
Do yield unto desire of sovereignty.
Where egall state does raise an egall hope,
To win the thing that either would attain.
Your grace remembers, how in passed years
The mighty Brute, first prince of all this land,
Possessed the same, and ruled it well in one:
He, thinking that the compass did suffice,
For his three sons three kingdoms eke to make,
Cut it in three, as you would now in twain:
But how much British Brutish, edit. 15^5.
blod has since Sithence, edit. 1565.
been spilt,
What princes slain before their timely hour Honor, edit. 1565.
,
To join again the sondred unity?
What wast of towns and people in the land?
What treasons heaped on murders and on spoils?
Whose just revenge even yet is scarcely ceased,
Ruthful remembrance is yet raw Had, edit. 1565.
in mind, etc Ibid.
.
The illustration from Brutus is here both apposite and poetical.

Spence, with a reference to the situation of the author lord Buckhurst in the
court of queen Elisabeth, has observed in his preface to the modern edition of
this tragedy, that "'it is no wonder, if the language of kings and statesmen
should be less happily imitated by a poet than a privy counselor." This is an
insinuation that Shakespeare, who has left many historical tragedies, was less
able to conduct some parts of a royal story than the statesman lord Buckhurst.
But I will venture to pronounce, that whatever merit there is in this play, and
particularly in the speeches we have just been examining, it is more owing to
the poet than the privy counselor. If a first minister was to write a tragedy,
I believe the piece will be the better, the less it has of the first minister.
When a statesman turns poet, I should not wish him to fetch his ideas or his
language from the canbinet. I know not why a king should be better qualified
than a private man, to make kings talk in blank verse.

The chaste elegance of the following description of a region abounding in
every convenience, will gratify the lover of classical purity.

Yea, and that half, which in Within, edit. 1565.
abounding store
Of things that serve to make a welthie realm,
In stately cities, and in fruitful soil,
In temperate breathing of the milder heaven,
In things of nedeful use, which friendly sea
Transportes by traffike from the foreign parts Ports, edit. 1565.
,
In flowing wealth, in honor and in force, etc Act ii. Sc. i.
.
The close of Marcella's narration of the murder of Porrex by the queen, which
many poets of a more enlightened age would have exhibited to the spectators, is
perhaps the most moving and pathetic speech in the play. The reader will
observe, that our author, yet to a good purpose, has transferred the ceremonies
of the tournament to the court of an old British king.

O queen of adamante! O marble breaste!
If not the favor of his comely face,
If not his princely chere and countenance,
His valiant active arms, his manly breaste,
If not his faier and semelie personage,
His noble lymmes in such proporcion In the edition of 1565, this word is
preparacion. I mention this, as a specimen of the great incorrectness of that
edition.
cast,
As would have wrapped Wrapped, rapt, i. e. ravished. I once conjectured
warped. We have "wrapped in woe." Act iv. Sc. ii.
a silly woman's thought,
If this might not have moved thy The, edit. 1565.
bloody heart,
And that most cruel hand, the wretched weapon
Even to let fall, and kiss Ki^^e, edit. 1565.
him in the face,
With tears for ruthe to reaue such one by death:
Should nature yet consent to slaye her son?
O mother thou, to murder thus thie child!
Even Joue, with Justice, must with lightening flames
From heaven send down some strange revenge on thee.
Ah! noble prince, how often have I beheld
Thee mounted on thy fierce and traumpling stead,
Shyning in armor bright before thy tylte,
And with thy mistresse^ sleaue tied on thy helm,
And charge thy staff, to please thy ladies eye,
That bowed the head piece of thy friendly foe?
How often in arms on horse to bend the mace The sha^t of the lauce.
?
How often in arms on foot to break the sword?
Which never now these eyes may see again Act iv. S^. ii.
!
Marcella, the only lady in the play except the queen, is one of the maids of
honor; and a modern writer of tragedy would have made her in love with the
young prince who is murdered.

The queen laments the loss of her eldest and favorite son, whose defeat and
death had just been announced, in the following ^oliloquy. The ideas are too
general, although happily expressed: but there is some imagination in her
wishing the old massy palace had long ago fallen, and crushed her to death.

Why should I live, and linger forth my time
In longer liefe, to double my distress?
O me most woeful wight, whom no mishap
Long ere this day could have bereued hence!
Might not these hands, by fortune or by fate,
Have perst this breast, and life with iron re^^?
Or in this pallaice here, where I so long
Have spent my days, could not that happy hour
Ones, ones, have hapt, in which these hugie frames
With death by fall might have oppressed me!
Or should not this most hard and cruel soil,
So often where I have pressed my wretched steps,
Sometime had ruthe of mine accursed liefe^
To rend in twain, and swallowe me therein!
So had my bones possessed now in peace
Their happy grave within the closed ground,
And greadie worms had gnawen this pyned heart
Without my feelynge pain! So should not now^
This lyvynge breast remain the ruthefull tomb
Wherein my heart, yelden to death, is graued, etc Act iv. Sc. i.
.
There is some animation in these imprecations of prince Ferrex upon his own
head, when he protests that he never conceived any malicious design, or
intended any injury, against his brother Porrex Act ii. Sc. i.
.

The wrekefull gods pour on my cursed head
Eternal plagues, and never dyinge woes!
The hellish prince Pluto.
adiudge my dampened ghost
To Tantales Tantalus, edit. 1565.
thirste, or proud Ixions wheel,
Or cruel gripe The vulture of Prometheus.
, to gnaw my growing heart;
To during torments and unquenched flames;
If ever I conceived so foul a thought,
To wish his end of life, or yet of reign.
It must be remembered, that the ancient Britons were supposed to be
immediately descended from the Trojan Brutus, and that consequently they were
acquainted with the pagan history and mythology. Gordobuc has a long allusion
to the miseries of the siege of Troy Act iii. Sc. i.
.

In this strain of correct versification and language, Porrex explains to his
father Gordobuc, the treachery of his brother Ferrex.

When thus I saw the knot of love unknitte;
All honest league, and faithful promise broke,
The law of kind Nature.
and trothe thus rent in twain,
His heart on mischief set, and in his breast
Black treason hid: then, then did I dispaier
That ever time could win him friend to me;
Then saw I how he smyled with slaying knife
Wrapped under cloak, then saw I deep deceit
Lurk in his face, and death prepared for me, etc Act iv. Sc. ii.
.
As the notions of subordination, of the royal authority, and the divine
institution of kings, predominated in the reign of queen Elisabeth, it is
extraordinary, that eight lines, inculcating in plain terms the doctrine of
passive and unresisting obedience to the prince, which appeared in the fifth
act of the first edition of this tragedy, should have been expunged in the
edition of 1571, published under the immediate inspection of the authors See
Signat. D. V. edit. 1571.
. It is well known, that the Calvinists carried their ideas of reformation and
refinement into government as well as religion: and it seems probable, that
these eight verses were suppressed by Thomas Norton, Sackville's supposed
assistant in the play, who was not only an active and I believe a sensible
puritan, but a licencer of the publication of books under the commission of the
bishop of London For ins^ance, " Seven steps to heaven, also The seven
p^almes reduced into meter by W. Hunnys, The honny succles, etc." by Hunnys.
Nov. 8, 1581, to Denham. REGISTR. STATION. B. fol. 185. a. Also, in the same
year, " The picture of two pernicious varlettes called Prig Pickthank and Clem
Clawbacke described by a peevishe painter." Ibid. fol. 184. a. All "under the
hands of Mr. THOMAS NORTON." Et alibi pas^im. "The STAGE OF POPISH TOYS,
written by T. N." perhaps the same, is licenced to Binneman, feb. 22. 1580.
Ibid. fol. 178. a.
.

As to Norton's assistance in this play, it is said on better authority than
that of Antony Wood, who supposes GORDOBUC to have been in old English rhyme,
that the three first acts were written by Thomas Norton, and the two last by
Sackville. But the force of internal evidence often prevails over the authority
of assertion, a testimony which is diminished by time, and may be rendered
suspicious from a variety of other circumstances. Throughout the whole piece,
there is an invariable uniformity of diction and versification. Sackville has
two poems of considerable length in the MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES, which
fortunately furnish us with the means of comparison: and every scene of
GORDOBUC is visibly marked with his characteristical manner, which consists in
a perspicuity of style, and a command of numbers, superior to the tone of his
times The same may be said of Sackville's SONNET prefixed to Thomas Hoby's
English version of Castiglio's I^ CORTEGIANO, first printed in 1556. The third
part, on the behavior of Court-ladies, appears to have been translated in
1551, at the request of the marchioness of Northampton.
. Thomas Norton's poetry is of a very different and a subordinate cast: and if
we may judge from his share in our metrical psalmody, he seems to have been
much more properly qualified to shine in the miserable mediocrity of
Sternhold's stanza, and to write spiritual rhymes for the solace of his
illuminated brethren, than to reach the bold and impassioned elevations of
tragedy.

SECT. XXXIX.
THIS appearance of a regular tragedy, with the division of acts and scenes,
and the accompaniment of the ancient chorus, represented both at the
Middle Temple and at Whitehall, and written by the most accomplished nobleman
of the court of queen Elisabeth, seems to have directed the attention of our
more learned poets to the study of the old classical drama, and in a short time
to have produced vernacular versions of the JOCASTA of Euripides, as it is
called, and of the ten Tragedies of Seneca. I do not find that it was speedily
followed by any original compositions on the same legitimate model.

The JOCASTA of Euripides was translated by George Gascoigne and Francis
Kinwelmersh, both students of Gray's Inn, and acted in the refectory of that
society, in the year 1566. Gascoigne translated the second, third, and fifth
acts, and Kinwelmersh the first, and fourth. It was printed in Gascoigne's
poems, of which more will be said hereafter, in 1577, under the following
title, "JOCASTA, a Tragedy written in Greek by Euripides. Translated and
digested into Act, by George Gascoigne and Francis Kinwelmershe of Graies inn,
and there by them presented, An. 1566." The Epilogue was written in quatraines
by Christopher Yelverton, then one of their brother students. So strongly were
our audiences still attached to spectacle, that the authors did not venture to
present their play, without introducing a DUMB SHOW at the beginning of every
act. For this, however, they had the example and authority of GORDOBUC. Some of
the earliest specimens of Inigo Jones's Grecian architecture are marred by
Gothic ornaments.

It must, however, be observed, that this is by no means a just or exact
translation of the JOCASTA, that is the PHOENISSAE, of Euripides. It is partly
a paraphrase, and partly an abridgement, of the Greek tragedy. There are many
omissions, retrenchments, and transpositions. The chorus, the characters, and
the substance of the story, are entirely retained, and the tenor of the
dialogue is often preserved through whole scenes. Some of the beautiful odes of
the Greek chorus are neglected, and others substituted in their places, newly
written by the translators. In the favorite address to Mars See PHOENISS. page
140. edit. Barnes.

(...)
(...)
(...), etc.

, Gascoigne has totally deserted the rich imagery of Euripides, yet has found
means to form an original ode, which is by no means destitute of pathos or
imagination.

O fierce and furious Mars! whose harmefull heart
Reioiceth most to shed the giltlesse blood;
Whose headie will does all the world subvart,
And does envy the pleasant merry mood
Of our estate, that erst in quiet stood:
Why do thou thus our harmless town annoy,
Which mighty Bacchus governed in joy?
Father of war and death, that do remove,
With wrathful wrecke, from woeful mothers breast
The trusty pledges of their tender love!
So grant the gods, that for our final rest
Dame Venus' pleasant looks may please thee best:
Whereby, when thou shall all amazed stand,
The sword may fall out of thy trembling hand So Tibullus, where he cautions
Mar^ not to gaze on his mistress. Lib. iv. ii. 3...... At tu, violente, caveto,
Ne tibi miranti turpiter arma cadant.

:
And thou may prove some other way full well
The bloody prowess of thy mighty spear,
Wherewith thou raisest from the depth of hell
The wrathful sprites of all the Furies there;
Who, when they wake, do wander every where,
And never rest to range about the costs,
TO enrich that pit with spoil of damned ghostes.
And when thou have our fields forsaken thus,
Let cruel DISCORD bear thee company,
Engirt with snakes and serpents venomous;
Even She, that can with red vermilion die
The gladsome green that florisht pleasantly;
And make the greedy ground a drinking cvp,
To sup the blood of murdered bodies up.
Yet thou return, O Joy, and pleasant Peace!
From whence thou did against our wills depart:
Ne let thy worthy mind from travel cease,
To chase disdain out of the poysned heart,
That raised war to all our pains and smart,
Even from the breast of Oedipus his son
Whose swelling pride has all this jar begone, etc Act ii. Sc. ult.
.
I am of opinion, that our translators thought the many mythological and
historical allusions in the Greek chorus, too remote and unintelligible,
perhaps too cumbersome, to be exhibited in English. In the ode to CONCORD,
which finishes the fourth act, translated by Kinwelmershe, there is great
elegance of expression and versification. It is not in Euripides.

O blissful CONCORD, bred in sacred breast
Of him that rules the restlesse-rolling sky,
That to the earth, for man's assured rest,
From height of heavens vouchsafest down to fly!
In thee alone the mighty power does lie,
With sweet accord to keep the frowning stars,
And every planet else, from hurtful wars.
In thee, in thee, such noble virtue bydes,
As may command the mightiest gods to bend:
From thee alone such sugared friendship slydes
As mortal wights can scarcely comprehend.
To greatest strife thou setst deliteful end.
O holy Peace, by thee are only found
The passing joys that every where abound!
Thou only, thou, through thy celestial might,
Did first of all the heavenly pole devide
From the old confused heap, that Chaos hight:
Thou madste the sun, the moon, the stars, to glyde
With ordered course, about this world so wide:
Thou have ordaynde Dan Tytans shining light
By dawne of day to change the darksome night.
When tract of time returns the lusty ver Spring.
,
By thee alone the buds and blossoms spring,
The fields with flours be garnisht every where;
The blooming trees abundant fruit do bring,
The chereful birds melodiously do sing:
Thou do appoint the crop of summers seed,
For man's relief, to serve the winters need.
Thou do inspire the hearts o^ princely peers,
By providence proceeding from above,
In flowring youth to choose their proper feeres Mates.
;
With whom they live in league of lasting love,
Till fearful death does flitting life remove:
And look how fast to death man pays his due!
So fast again do thou his stock renew.
By thee the basest thing advanced is:
Thou every where do graffe such golden peace,
As fills man with more than earthly bliss:
The earth by thee does yield her sweet increase,
At beck of thee al bloody discords cease.
And mightiest realms in quiet do remain,
Whereas thy hand does hold the royal rain.
But if thou fail, then all things gone to wrack:
The mother then does dread her natural child;
Then every town is subject to the sack,
Then spotles maids, then virgins be defilde;
Then rigor rules, then reason is exilde;
And this, thou woeful THEBES! to our great pain,
With present spoil art likely to sustain.
Methink I hear the waylful-weeping cries
Of wretched dames in every coast resound!
Methinks I see, how up to heavenly skies,
From battred walls the thundring-claps rebound:
Methink I hear, how al things go to ground:
Methink I see how soldiers wounded lie
With gasping breath, and yet they cannot die, etc Act iv. Sc. ult.
.
The constant practice of ending every act with a long ode sung by the chorus,
seems to have been adopted from GORDOBUC It may be proper to observe here, that
the tragedy of TANCRED and GISMUND, acted also before the queen at the
Innertemple, in 1568, has the chorus. The title of this play, not printed till
1592, shows the quick gradations of taste. It is said to be "Newly revived and
polished according to the decorum of these days, by R. W. Land. printed by T.
Scarlet, etc. 1592." 4to. R. W. is Robert Wilmot, mentioned with applause as a
poet in Webbe's DISCOURSE, Signat. C 4. The play was the joint-production of
five students of the society. Each seems to have taken an act. At the end of
the fourth is Composuit Chr. Hatton, or sir Christopher Hatton, undoubtedly the
same that was afterward exalted by the queen to the office of lord Keeper for
his agility in dancing.
.

But I will give a specimen of this performance as a translation, from that
affecting scene, in which Oedipus, blind and exiled from the city, is led on by
his daughter Antigone, the rival in filial fidelity of Lear's Cordelia, to
touch the dead and murdered bodies of his queen Jocasta, and his sons Eteocles
and Polynices. It appears to be the chief fault of the translators, that they
have weakened the force of the original, which consists in a pathetic brevity,
by needless dilatations, and the affectations of circumlocution. The whole
dialogue in the original is carried on in single lines. Such, however, is the
pregnant simplicity of the Greek language, that it would have been impossible
to have rendered line for line in English.

OEDIPUS. Daughter, I must commend thy noble heart.

ANTIGONE. Father, I will not live in company I will not marry.
,
And you alone wander in wilderness.

OEDIPUS. O yes, dear daughter, leave thou me alone
Amid my plagues: be merry while thou may.

ANTIGONE. And who shall guide these aged feet of yours,
That banished been, in blind necessity?

OEDIPUS. I will endure, as fatal lot me drives,
Resting these crooked sorry sides of mine
Where so the heavens shall lend me harborough.
And, in exchange of rich and stately towers,
The woods, the wilderness, the darkesome dens,
Shall be the boure of mine unhappy bones.

ANTIGONE. O father, now where is your glory gone?

OEDIPUS. One happy day did raise me to renown,
One haples day has thrown mine honor down.

ANTIGONE. Yet will I bear a part of your mishaps.

OEDIPUS. That fitteth not amyd thy pleasant years.

ANTIGONE. Dear father, yes: let youth give place to age.

OEDIPUS. Where is thy mother? Let me touch her face:
That with these hands I may yet feel the harm
That these blind eyes forbid me to behold.

ANTIGONE. Here father, here her corpse, here put your hand.

OEDIPUS. O wife, O mother! O, both woeful names!
O woeful mother, and O woeful wife!
O would to God, alas! O would to God,
Thou nere had been my mother, nor my wife!
But where now lie the paled bodies two
Of mine unlucky sons? O where be they?

ANTIGONE. Lo, here they lie, one by another dead!

OEDIPUS. Stretch out this hand, dear daughter, stretch this hand
Upon their faces.

ANTIGONE. Lo father, lo, now you do touch them both.

OEDIPUS. O bodies dear! O bodies dearly bought
Unto your father! Bought with hard mishap!

ANTIGONE. O lovely name of my dear Polynice!
Why cannot I of cruel Creon crave,
Ne with my death now purchase thee, a grave?

OEDIPUS. Now comes Apollo's oracle to pass,
That I in Athens town should end my days.
And since thou do, O daughter mine, desire
In this exile to be my woeful mate,
Lend me thy hand, and let us go together.

ANTIGONE. Lo here all pressed Ready.
, my dear beloved father^
A feeble guide, and eke a simple scoute,
To pass the perils in Road. Path.
a doubtful way Read, of.
.

OEDIPUS. Unto the wretched be a wretch guide.

ANTIGONE. In this alonly equal to my father.

OEDIPUS. And where shall I set forth my trembling feet?
O reach me yet some surer staff "She gives him a staff and stays him
herself^ also." Stage-direction.
, to stay
My staggering pace amyd these ways unknown.

ANTIGONE. Here, father, here, and here, set forth your feet.

OEDIPUS. Now can I blame none other for my harms
But secret spite of ^ore-decreed fate.
Thou art the cause, that crooked, old, and blind,
I am exilde far from my country soil, etc Act v. Sc. ult.
.

That it may be seen in some measure, how far these two poets, who deserve much
praise for even an attempt to introduce the Grecian drama to the notice of our
ancestors, have succeeded in translating this scene of the tenderest
expostulation, I will place it before the reader in a plain literal version.

"OED. My daughter, I praise your filial piety. But yet -- ANT. But if I was to
marry Creon's son, and you, my father, be left alone in banishment? OED. Stay
at home, and be happy. I will bear my own misfortunes patiently. ANT. But who
will attend you, thus blind and helpless, my father? OED. I shall fall down,
and be found lying in some field on the ground, as it may chance to happen It
is impossible to represent the Greek, v. 1681. (...)

. ANT. Where is now that Oedipus, and his famous riddle of the Sphinx? OED. He
is lost! one day made me happy, and one day destroyed me! ANT. Ought I not,
therefore, to share your miseries? OED. It will be but a base banishment of a
princess with her blind father! ANT. To one that is haughty: not to one that is
humble, and loves her father. OED. Lead me on then, and let me touch the dead
body of your mother. ANT. Lo, now your hand is upon her "The dear old woman,"
in the Greek.
. OED. O my mother! O my most wretched wife! ANT. She lies a wretched corpse,
covered with every woe. OED. But where are the dead bodies of my sons Eteocles
and Polynices? ANT. They lie just by you, stretched out close to one another.
OED. Put my blind hand upon their miserable faces! ANT. Lo now, you touch your
dead children with your hand. OED. O, dear, wretched, carcases of a wretched
father! ANT. O, to me the most dear name of my brother Polynices Creon had
refused Polynices the rites of sepulture. This was a great aggravation of the
distress.
! OED. Now, my daughter, the oracle of Apollo proves true. ANT. What? Can you
tell any more evils than those which have happened? OED. That I should die an
exile at Athens. ANT. What city of Attica will take you in? OED. The sacred
Colonus, the house of equestrian Neptune. Come, then, lend your assistance to
this blind father, since you mean to be a companion of my flight. ANT. Go then
i^to miserable banishment! O my ancient father, stretch out your dear hand! I
will accompany you, like a favorable wind to a ship. OED. Behold, I go!
Daughter, be you my unfortunate guide! ANT. Thus, am I, am I, the most unhappy
of all the Theban virgins! OED. Where shall I fix my old feeble foot? Daughter,
reach to me my staff. ANT. Here, go here, after me. Place your foot here, my
father, you that have the strength only of a dream. OED. O most unhappy
banishment! Creon drives me in my old age from my country. Alas! alas!
wretched, wretched things have I suffered, etc PHOENISS. v. 1677. seq. page
170. edit. Barnes.
." So sudden were the changes or the refinements of our language, that in the
second edition of this play, printed again with Gascoigne's poems in 1587, it
was thought necessary to affix marginal explanations of many words, not long
before in common use, but now become obsolete and unintelligible. Among others,
are behest and quell Command. Kill. By the way, this is done throughout this
edition of Gascoigne's Poems. So we have Nill, will not, etc.
. This, however, as our author says, was done at the request of a lady, who did
not understand poetical words or terms Page 128. Among others, words not of
the obsolete kind are explained, such as Monarchy, Diadem, etc. Gascoigne is
celebrated by Gabriel Harvey, as one of the English poets who have written in
praise of women. GRATULAT. VALIDENS. edit. Binneman, 1578. 4to. Lib. iv. p. 22.
CHAUCERUSQUE adsit, SURREIUS et inclytus adsit,
GASCOIGNOQUE aliquis sit, mea Corda, locus.

.

Seneca's ten Tragedies were translated at different times and by different
poets. These were all printed together in 1581, under this title, "SENECA HIS
TEN TRAGEDIES, TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH. Mercurii Nutrices horae. IMPRINTED AT
LONDON IN FLEETSTREETE near unto saint Dunstons church by Thomas Marshe,
1581 Coloph. "IMPRINTED AT LONDON IN FLEETSTREETE Near unto Saint Duns^on's
church by Thomas Marshe, 1581." Containing 217 leaves.
." The book is dedicated, from Butley in Cheshire, to sir Thomas Henneage,
treasurer of the queen's chamber. I shall speak of each man's translation
distinctly I know not the purport of a book licenced to E. Matts, "Discourses
on Seneca the tragedian," Jun. 22, 1601. REGISTR. STATION. C. fol. 71. b.
.

The HYPPOLITUS, MEDEA, HERCULES OETEUS, and AGAMEMNON, were translated by John
Studley, educated at Westminster school, and afterward a scholar of Trinity
college in Cambridge. The HYPPOLITUS, which he calls the fourth and most
ruthful tragedy, the MEDEA, in which are some alterations of the chorus See
NEWT. edit. fol. 121. a.
, and the HERCULES OETEUS, were all first printed in Thomas Newton's collection
of 1581, just mentioned But I must except the MEDEA, which is entered as
translated by John Studley of Trinity college in Cambridge, in 1565-6, with T.
Colwell. REGISTR. STATION. A. fol. 140. b. I have never seen this separate
edition. Also the HIPPOLITUS, is entered to Jones and Charlewood, in 1579.
REGISTR. B. In 1566-7, I find an entry to Henry Denham, which I do not well
understand, "for printing the fourth part of Seneca's works." REGISTR. A. fol.
152. b. HIPPOLITUS is the fourth Tragedy.
. The AGAMEMNON was first and separately published in 1566, and entitled, "The
eight Tragedy of Seneca entitled AGAMEMNON, translated out of Latin into
English by John Studley student in Trinity college in Cambridge. Imprinted at
London in Flete street beneath the Conduit at the sign of S. John. Euangelyst
by Thomas Colwell A. D. M. D. LXVI Bl^ Let. 12mo.
." This little book is exceedingly scarce, and hardly to be found in the
choicest libraries of those who collect our poetry in black letter Entered in
1565-6. REGISTR. STATION. A. fol. 136. b.
. Recommendatory verses are prefixed, in praise of our translator's performance
See supr. p. 290.
. It is dedicated to secretary Cecil. To the end of the fifth act our
translator has added a whole scene: for the purpose of relating the death of
Cassandra, the imprisonment of Electra, and the flight of Orestes. Yet these
circumstances were all known and told before. The narrator is Euribates, who in
the commencement of the third act had informed Clitemnestra of Agamemnon's
return. These efforts, however imperfect or improper, to improve the plot of a
drama by a new conduct or contrivance, deserve particular notice at this
infancy of our theatrical taste and knowledge. They show that authors now began
to think for themselves, and that they were not always implicitly enslaved to
the prescribed letter of their models. Studley, who appears to have been
qualified for better studies, misapplied his time and talents in translating
Bale's Acts of the Popes. That translation, dedicated to Thomas lord Essex, was
printed in 1574 In quarto. Bl. Let. "The pageaunt of POPES, etc. etc.
Englished with sundry additions, by J. S." For Thomas Marshe, 1574.
. He has left twenty Latin distichs on the death of the learned Nicholas Carr,
Cheke's successor in the Greek professorship at Cambridge At the end of
Bartholomew Dodington's EPISTLE of Carr's Life and Death, addressed to sir
Walter Mildmay, and subjoined to Carr's Latin Translation of seven Orations of
Demosthenes. Land. 1571. 4to. Dodington, a fellow of Trinity college, succeeded
Carr in the Greek chair, 1560. See Camden's MONUM. Eccles. Coll. Westmon. edit.
1600. 4to. Signat. K 2.
.

The OCTAVIA is translated by T. N. or Thomas Nuce, or Newce, a fellow of
Pembroke-hall in 1562, afterward rector of Oxburgh in Norfolk, Beccles,
Weston-Market, and vicar of Gaysley, in Suffolk Where he died in 1617, and is
buried with an epitaph in English rhyme. See Bentham's ELY. p. 251.
; and at length prebendary of Ely cathedral in 1586 Feb. 21.
. This version is for the most part executed in the heroic rhyming couplet. All
the rest of the translators have used, except in the chorus, the Alexandrine
measure, in which Sternhold and Hopkins rendered the psalms, perhaps the most
unsuitable species of English versification that could have been applied to
this purpose. Nuce's OCTAVIA was first printed in 1566 For in that year, there
is a receipt for license to Henry Denham to print it. REGISTR. STATION. A. fol.
148. b.
. He has two very long copies of verses, one in English and the other in Latin,
prefixed to the first edition of Studley's AGAMEMNON in 1566, just mentioned.

Alexander Nevyle, translated, or rather paraphrased, the OEDIPUS, in the
sixteenth year of his age, and in the year 1560, not printed till the year 1581
But in 1563, is a receipt for Thomas Colwell's license to print "a book
entitled the Lamentable History of the prince Oedypus." REGISTR. STATION. A.
fol. 89. a.
. It is dedicated to doctor Wootton, a privy counselor, and his godfather.
Notwithstanding the translator's youth, it is by far the most spirited and
elegant version in the whole collection, and it is to be regretted that he did
not undertake all the rest. He seems to have been persuaded by his friends, who
were of the graver sort, that poetry was only one of the lighter
accomplishments of a young man, and that it should soon give way to the more
weighty pursuits of literature. The first act of his OEDIPUS begins with these
lines, spoken by Oedipus.

The night is gone, and dreadful day begins at length to apeere,
And Phoebus, all bedimde with clouds, himself aloft does reere:
And gliding forth with deadly hue, a doleful blase in skies
Does bear: great terror and dismay to the beholders eyes!
Now shall the houses void be seen, with Plague devoured quight,
And slaughter which the night has made, shall day bring forth to light.
Does any man in princely throne rejoice? O brittle joy!
How many ills, how fair a face, and yet how much annoy,
In thee does lurk, and hidden lies? What heaps of endless strife?
They judge amiss, that deem the Prince to have the happy life Fol. 78. a.
.
Nevyl was born in Kent, in 1544 Lambarde, PERAM^. KENT. p. 72.
, and occurs taking a master's degree at Cambridge, with Robert earl of Essex,
on the sixth day of July, 1581 MS. Catal. Grad. Univ. Cant.
. He was one of the learned men whom archbishop Parker retained in his family
Strype's GRINDAL, p. 196.
: and at the time of the archbishop's death, in 1575, was his secretary Strype,
LIFE OF PARKER, p. 497. He is styled ARMIGER. See also the Dedication to his
KETTUS.
. He wrote a Latin narrative of the Norfolk insurrection under Kett, which is
dedicated to archbishop Parker, and was printed in 1575 Land. 4to. The title
is, "KETTUS, ^ive de furoribus Norfolcienfium Ketto duce." Again at London,
1582, by Henry Binneman, 8vo. And in English, 1615, and 1623. The disturbance
was occasioned by an enclosure in 1549, and began at an annual play, or
spectacle, at Wymondham, which lasted two days and two nights, according to
ancient custom, p. 6. edit. 1582. He cites part of a ^allad sung by the rebels,
which had a most powerful effect in spreading the commotion, p. 88. Prefixed is
a copy of Latin verses on the death of his patron archbishop Parker. And a
recommendatory Latin copy by Thomas Drant, the first translator of Horace. See
also Strype's PARKER, p. 499. N^vile has another Latin work, APOLOGIA AD
WALLIAE P^OCE^ES, Land. for Binneman, 1576. 4to. He is mentioned in that part
of G. Gascoi^^e's poem^ called DEVISES. His name, and the date 1565, are
inscribed on the CARTULARIUM S. GREGORII CANTUARIAE, among bishop More's books,
with two Latin lines which I hope he did not intend for hexameters.
. To thi^ he added a Latin account of Norwich, printed the same year, called
NORVICUS, the plates of which were executed by Line and Hogenberg, archbishop
Parker's domestic engravers, in 1574 It is sometimes accompanied with an
engraved map of the Saxon and British kings. See Hollinsh. CHRON. i. 139.
. He published the Cambridge verses on the death of sir Philip Sydney, which he
dedicated to lord Leicester, in 1587 Land. 4to. viz. "Academiae Cantabrigie^sis
Lacrymae tumulo D. Philippi Sidneii sacratae."
. He projected, but I suspect never completed, an English translation of Livy,
in 1577 See Note in the Register of the Stationers Company, dated May 3, 1577.
Registr. B. fol. 139. b. It was not finished in 1597.
. He died in 1614 October. 4. Batteley's CANTERB. App. 7. Where see his Epitaph.
He is buried in a chapel in Canterbury cathedral with his brother Thomas, dean
of that church. The publication of Seneca's OEDIPUS in English by Studley, or
rather Gascoigne's JOCASTA, produced a metrical tale of ETROCLES AND POLYNICES,
in "THE FOREST OF FANCY, wherein is contained very pretty APOTHEGMES, and
PLEASANT HISTORIES, both in meeter and prose, SONGS, SONETS, E^IGRAMS, and
EPISTLES, and^. Imprinted at London by Thomas Pur^oote, etc. 1579." 4to. See
SIGNAT. Bij. Perhaps Henry Chettle, or Henry Con^^able, is the writer or
compiler. [See supr. p. 292.] At least the colophon is, "Fini^, H. C." By the
way, it appears, that Chettle was the publisher of Greene's GROATSWORTH OF WIT
in 1592. It is entered to W. Wrighte, Sept. 20. REGISTR. STATION. B. fol. 292.
b.
.

The HERCULES FURENS, THYESTES, and TROAS, were translated into English by
Jasper Heywood. The HERCULES FURENS was first printed at London in 1561 In 12mo.
, and dedicated to William Herbert lord Pembroke, with the following pedantic
Latin title. "Lucii Annaei Senecae tragoedia prima, quae inscribitur HERCULES
FURENS, nuper recognita, et ab omnibus bus mendis quibus scatebat sedulo
purgata, et in studiosae juventutis utilitatem in Anglicum tanta ^ide conversa,
ut carmen pro carmine, quoad Anglica lingua patiatur, pene redditum videas, per
Jasperum Heywodum Oxoniensem." The THYESTES, said to be faithfully Englished by
Jasper Heywood fellow of Alsolne college in Oxenforde, was also first
separately printed by Berthelette at London, in 1560 In 12mo. It is dedicated
in verse to sir John Mason. Then follows in verse also, "The translatour to the
book." From the metrical Preface which next follows^ I h^v^ cited many
stanza^^ See supr. p. 273. This is a Vision of the poet Seneca, containing 27
pages. In the course of thi^ PREFACE, he laments a promising youth just dead,
whom he means to compliment by saying, that he now "lives with Jo^e, another
Ganymede." But he is happy that the father survives, who seem^ to be s^^ John
Mason. Among the old Roman poets he mentions Palingenius. After Seneca has
delivered him the THYESTES to translate, he feels an unusual agitation, and
implores Megaera to inspire him with tragic rage. "O thou Megaera, then I said,
"If might of thine it be
"(Wherewith thou Tantall drouste from hell)
"That thus dysturbeth me,
"Enspyre my pen!" --
This said, I felt the Furies force
Inflame me more and more:
And ten times more now cha^te I was
Than ever yet before.
My hair stood up, I waxed wood Mad.
,
My synewes all did shake:
And, as the ^urye had me vexed,
My teethe began to quake.
And thus en^lamede, etc.
He then enters on his translation. Nothing is here wanting but a better stanza.
. He has added a scene to the fourth act, a soliloquy by Thyestes, who bewails
his own misfortunes, and implores vengeance on Atreus. In this scene, the
speaker's application of all the torments of hell, to Atreus's unparalleled
guil^ of feasting on the bowels of his children, furnishes a sort of nauseous
bombast, which not only violates the laws of criticism, but provokes the
abhorrence of our common sensibilities. A few of the first lines are tolerable.

O king of Dytis dungeon dark, and grysly ghost of hell,
That in the deep and dreadful den of blackest Tartare dwell,
Where lean and pale Diseases lie, where Fear and Famyne are,
Where Di^cord stands with bleeding brows, where every kind of care;
Where Furies fight on beds of steel, and hears of crauling snakes,
Where Gorgon gremme, where Harpies are, and lothsom limbo lakes,
Where most prodigious So Milton, on the same subject, and in the true sense of
the word, PAR. L. ii. 625.

-- All monstrous, all PRODIGIOUS things.

ugly things the hollow hell does hyde,
If yet a monster more mishapt, etc.
In the TROAS, which was first faultily printed in or before 1560 I have never
seen this edition of 1560 or before, but he speaks of it himself in the
METRICAL PREFACE to the THYESTES just mentioned, and says it was most
carelessly printed at the sign of the hand and star. This must have been at the
shop of Richard Tottel within Temple Bar.
, afterward reprinted in 1581 by Newton, he has taken greater liberties. At
the end of the chorus after the first act, he has added about sixty verses of
his own invention. In the beginning of the second act, he has added a new
scene, in which he introduces the spectre of Achilles raised from hell, and
demanding the sacrifice of Polyxena. This scene, which is in the octave stanza,
has much of the air of one of the legends in the MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES. To the
chorus of this act, he has subjoined three stanzas. Instead of translating the
chorus of the third act, which abounds with the hard names of the ancient
geography, and which would both have puzzled the translator and tired the
English reader, he has substituted a new ode. In his preface to the reader,
from which he appears to be yet a fellow of All Souls college, he modestly
apologizes for these licentious innovations, and hopes to be pardoned for his
seeming arrogance, in attempting "to set forth in English this present piece of
the flower of all writers Seneca, among so many fine wits, and towardly
youth, with which England this day florisheth Fol. 95. a.
." Our translator Jasper Heywood has several poems extant in the Paradise of
Dainty Devises, published in 1573. He was the son of John Heywood, commonly
called the epigrammatist, and born in London. In 1547, at twelve years of age,
he was sent to Oxford, and in 1553 elected fellow of Merton college. But
inheriting too large a share of his father's facetious and free disposition, he
sometimes in the early part of life indulged his festive vein in extravagancies
and indiscretions, for which being threatened with expulsion, he resigned his
fellowship See Harrington's Epigrams, "Of old Haywood's sons." B. ii. 102.
. He exercised the office of Christmasprince, or lord of misrule, to the
college: and seems to have given offense, by suffering the levities and
jocularities of that character to mix with his life and general conversation
Among Wood's papers, there is an oration DE LIGNO ET FOEN^, spoken by Heywood's
cotemporary and fellow-collegian, David de la Hyde, in commendation of his
execution of this office.
. In the year 1558, he was recommended by cardinal Pole, as a polite scholar,
an able disputant, and a steady catholic, to sir Thomas Pope founder of Trinity
college in the same university, to be put in nomination for a fellowship of
that college, then just founded. But this scheme did not take place MS.
Collectan. Fr. Wise. See LIF^ OF SIR T. POPE.
. He was, however, appointed fellow of All Souls college the same year.
Dissatisfied with the change of the national religion, within four years he
left England, and became a catholic priest and a Jesuit at Rome, in 1562. Soon
afterward he was placed in the theological chair at Dilling in Switzerland,
which he held for seventeen years. At length returning to England, in the
capacity of a popish missionary, he was imprisoned, but released by the
interest of the earl of Warwick. For the deliverance from so perilous a
situation, he complimented the earl in a copy of English verses, two of which,
containing a most miserable paronomasy on his own name, almost bad enough to
have condemned the writer to another imprisonment, are recorded in Harrington's
Epigrams EPIGR. lib. iii. Epigr. i.
. At length he retired to Naples, where he died in 1597 ATH. OXON. i. 290.
. He is said to have been an accurate critic in the Hebrew language H. Morus,
HIST. PROVIN^. ANGL. SOC. JES. Lib. iv. number. 11. sub ann. 1585.
. His translation of the TROAS, not of Virgil as it seems, is mentioned in a
copy of verses by T. B With these initials, there is a piece pre^ixed to
Gas^oigne's poems, 1579.
. prefixed to the first edition, abovementioned, of Studley's AGAMEMNON. He was
intimately connected abroad with the biographer Pitts, who has given him rather
too partial a panegyric.

Thomas Newton, the publisher of all the ten tragedies of Seneca in English, in
one volume, as I have already remarked, in 1581 There is a receipt from Marsh
for "Seneca^s Tragedies in English." Jul. 2. 1581. REGISTR. STATION. B. fol.
181. b. The English version seems to have produced an edition of the original
for Man and Brom, Sept. 6. 1585. Ibid. fol. 205. b.
, himself added only one to these versions of Studley, Nevile, Nuce, and Jafper
Heywood. This is the THEBAIS, probably not written by Seneca, as it so
essentially differs in the ^atastrophe from his OEDIPUS. Nor is it likely the
same poet should have composed two tragedies on the same subject, even with a
variation of incidents. It is without the chorus and a fifth act. Newton
appears to have made his translation in 1581, and perhaps with a view only of
completing the collection. He is more prosaic than most of his
fellow laborers, and seems to have paid the chief attention to perspicuity and
fidelity. In the general EPISTLE DEDICATORY to sir Thomas Henneage, prefixed to
the volume, he says, "I durst not have given the adventure to approach your
presence, upon trust of any singularity, that in this Book has unskillfully
dropped out of mine own pen, but that I hoped the perfection of others
artificial workmanship that have trauayled herein, as well as myself, should
somewhat cover my nakednesse^ and purchase my pardon. -- Theirs I know to be
delivered with singular dexterity: mine, I confess to be an vnflidge
[unfledged] nestling, unable to fly; an unnatural abortion^ and an imperfect
embryon: neither throughlye labored at Aristophanes and Cleanthes candle,
neither yet exactly waighed in Critolaus his precise ballaunce. Yet this I dare
say, I have delivered mine authors meaning with as much perspicuity as so
mean a scholar, out of so mean a stoare, in so small a time, and upon so short
a warning, was well able to perform, etc Dated. "From Butley in Cheshyre the
24. of April. 1581."

I am informed by a manuscript note of Oldys, that Richard Robinson translated
the THEBAIS. Of this I know no more, but R. Robinson was a large writer both in
verse and prose. Some of his pieces I have already mentioned. He wrote also
"CHRISMAS RECREATIONS of histories and moralizations aplied for our solace and
consolations," licenced to T. East, Dec. 5. 1576. REGISTR. STATION. B. fol.
136. b. And, in 1^69, is entered to Binneman, "The ruefull tragedy of H^midos,
etc. by Richard Robinson." REGISTR. A. fol. 190. a. And, to T. Dawson in 1579,
Aug. 26, "The Vineyard of Virtue a book gathered by R. Robinson." REGISTR. B.
fol. 163. a. He was a citizen of London. The reader recollects hi^ English
GESTA ROMANORUM, in 1577. He wrote also "The ancient order, society, and
unity laudable, of PRINCE ARTHURE, and his knightly armory of the ROUND TABLE.
With a threefold assertion, etc. Translated and collected by R. R." Land. for
J. Wol^e, 1583. Bl. Let. 4to. This work is in meter, and the armorial bearings
of the knights are in verse. Prefixed is a poem by Churchyard, in praise of the
Bow. His translation of Leland's ASSERTIO ARTHURI (Bl. Let. 4to.) is entered
to J. Wolf, Jun. 6, 1582. REGISTR. STATION. B. fol. 189. b. I find, licenced
to R. James in 1565, "A book entitled of very pleasant sonnettes and stories
in myter [metre] by Clement Robynson." REGISTR. B. fol. 141. a.


."

Of Thomas Newton, a slender contributor to this volume, yet perhaps the chief
instrument of bringing about a general translation of Seneca, and otherwise
deserving well of the literature of this period, some notices seem necessary.
The first letter of his English THEBAIS is a large capital D. Within it is a
shield exhibiting a sable Lion rampant, crossed in argent on the shoulder, and
a half moon argent in the dexter corner, I suppose his armorial bearing. In a
copartment, toward the head, and under the semicircle, of the letter, are his
initials, T. N. He was descended from a respectable family in Cheshire, and was
sent while very young, about thirteen years of age, to Trinity college in
Oxford REGISTR. ibid.
. Soon afterward he went to Queen's college in Cambridge; but returned within
a very few years to Oxford, where he was readmitted into Trinity college Ibid.
. He quickly became famous for the pure elegance of his Latin poetry. Of this
he has left a specimen in his ILLUSTRIA ALIQUOT ANGLORUM ENCOMIA, published at
London in 1589 His master John Brunswerd, at Macclesfield^school, in Cheshire,
was no bad Latin poet. See his PROGYMNASMATA ALQUOT POEMATA, Land. 1590. 4to.
See Newton's ENCOM. p. 128. 131. Brunswerd died in 1589, and his ^pitaph, made
by his scholar Newton, yet remains in the chancel of the church of
Macclesfield. Alpha poetarum, coryphaeus grammaticorum,
Flos (...), hac sepelitur humo.

. He is perhaps the first Englishman that wrote Latin elegiacs with a classical
clearness and terseness after Leland, the plan of whose ENCOMIA and TROPHAEA he
seems to have followed in this little work Land. 1589. 4to. Reprinted by
Hearne, Oxon. 1715. 8vo.
. Most of the learned and ingenious men of that age, appear to have courted the
favors of this polite and popular encomiast. His chief patron was the
unfortunate Robert earl of Essex. I have often incidentally mentioned some of
Newton's recommendatory verses, both in English and Latin, prefixed to
cotemporary books, according to the mode of that age. One of his earliest
philological publications is a NOTABLE HISTORY OF THE SARACENS, digested from
Curio, in three books, printed at London in 1575 In quarto. With a SUMMARY
annexed on the same subject.
. I unavoidably anticipate in remarking here, that he wrote a poem on the death
of queen Elisabeth, called "ATROPOION DELION," or, "the Death of Delia with the
Tears of her funeral. A poetical excusive discourse of our late Eliza. By T. N.
G. Land. 1603 In quarto. For W. Johnes.
." The next year he published a flowery romance, "A pleasant new history, or a
fragrant posie made of three flowers Rosa, Rosalynd, and Rosemary, London, 1604
In quarto.
." Philips, in his THEATRUM POETARUM, attributes to Newton, a tragedy in two
parts, called TAMBURLAIN THE GREAT, OR THE SCYTHIAN SHEPHERD. But this play,
printed at London in 1593, was written by Christopher Marloe See Heywood's
Prologue to Marlow's JEW OF MALTA, 1633.
. He seems to have been a partisan of the puritans, from his pamphlet of
CHRISTIAN FRIENDSHIP, with an Invective against dice-play and other profane
games, printed at London, 1586 In octavo. From the Latin of Lamb^ Danaeus.
. For some time our author practiced physic, and, in the character of that
profession, wrote or translated many medical tracts. The first of these, on a
curious subject, A direction for the health of magistrates and students, from
Gratarolus, appeared in 1574. At length taking orders, he first taught school
at Macclesfield in Cheshire, and afterward at Little Ilford in Essex, where he
was beneficed. In this department, and in 1596, he published a correct edition
of Stanbridge's Latin Prosody "Vocabula magistri Stanbrigii ab infinitis quibus
scatebant mendis repurgata, observata interim (quoad ejus ^ieri potuit)
carminis ratione, et meliusc^le etiam correcta, studio et industria Thomae
Newtoni Cestreshyrii. Edinb. excud. R. Waldegrave." I know not if this edition,
which is in octavo, is the first. See our author's ENCOM. p. 128. Our author
published one or two translations on theological subjects.
. In the general character of an author, he was a voluminous and a laborious
writer. He died at Little Ilford, and was interred in his church, in 1607. From
a long and habitual course of studious and industrious pursuits he had acquired
a considerable fortune, a portion of which he bequeathed in charitable legacies.

It is remarkable, that Shakespeare has borrowed nothing from the English
Seneca. Perhaps a copy might not fall in his way. Shakespeare was only a reader
by accident. Hollinshed and translated Italian novels supplied most of his
plots or stories. His storehouse of learned history was North's Plutarch. The
only poetical fable of antiquity, which he has worked into a play, is TROILUS.
But this he borrowed from the romance of Troy. Modern fiction and English
history were his principal resources. These perhaps were more suitable to his
taste: at least he found that they produced the most popular subjects.
Shakespeare was above the bondage of the classics.

I must not forget to remark here, that, according to Ames, among the copies of
Henry Denham recited in the register of the Company of Stationers I find
nothing of this in REGISTER. B.
, that printer, is said, on the eighth of January, in 1583, among other books,
to have yielded into the hands and dispositions of the master, wardens, and
assistants, of that fraternity, "Two or three of Seneca his tragedies They are
mentioned by Ames, with these pieces, viz. "Pasquin in a trance. The hoppe
gardein. Ovid's metamorphosis. The courtier. Cesar's commentaries in English.
Ovid's epistles. Image of idleness. Flower of friendship. Schole of virtue.
Gardener's laborynth. Demosthene's orations." I take this opportunity of
acknowledging my great obligations to that very respectable society, who in the
most liberal manner have indulged me with a free and unreserved examination of
their original records: particularly to the kind assistance and attention of
one of its members, Mr. Lockyer Davies, Bookseller in Holbourn.
." These, if printed after 1581, cannot be new impressions of any single plays
of Seneca, of those published in Newton's edition of all the ten tragedies.

Among Hatton's manuscripts in the Bodleian library at Oxford MSS. MUS. BODL.
55. 12. [Olim HYPER. BODL.] It begins, "What harminge hurl of Fortune's arm,
etc."

, there is a long translation from the HERCULES OETAEUS of Seneca, by queen
Elisabeth. It is remarkable that it is blank verse, a measure which her majesty
perhaps adopted from GORDOBUC; and which therefore proves it to have been done
after the year 1561. It has, however, no other recommendation but its royalty.

SECT. XL.
BUT, as scholars began to direct their attention to our vernacular poetry,
many more of the ancient poets now appeared in English verse. Before the year
1600, Homer, Musaeus, Virgil, Horace, Ovid, and Martial, were translated.
Indeed most of these versions were published before the year 1580. For the sake
of presenting a connected display of these early translators, I am obliged to
trespass, in a slight degree, on that chronological order which it has been my
prescribed and constant method to observe. In the mean time we must remember,
that their versions, while they contributed to familiarise the ideas of the
ancient poets to English readers, improved our language and versification; and
that in a general view, they ought to be considered as valuable and important
accessions to the stock of our poetical literature. These were the classics of
Shakespeare.

I shall begin with those that were tran^lated first in the reign of Elisabeth.
But I must premise, that this inquiry will necessarily draw with it many other
notices much to our purpose, and which could not otherwise have been so
conveniently disposed and displayed.

Thomas Phaier, already mentioned as the writer of the story of OWEN GLENDOUR
in the MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES, a native of Pembrokeshire, educated at Oxford, a
student of Lincoln's Inn, and an advocate to the council for the Marches of
Wales, but afterward doctorated in medicine at Oxford, translated the seven
first books of the Eneid of Virgil, on his retirement to his patrimonial seat
in the forest of Kilgarran in Pembrokeshire, in the years 1555, 1556, 1557.
They were printed at London in 1558, for Ihon Kyngston, and dedicated to queen
Mary In quarto. Bl. Let. At the end of the seventh book is this colophon, "Per
Thomam Phaer in foresta Kilgerran finitum iij. Decembris. Anno 1557. Opus xij
dierum." And at the end of every book is a similar colophon, to the same
purpose. The first book was finished in eleven days, in 1555. The second in
twenty days, in the same year. The third in twenty days, in the same year. The
fourth in fifteen days, in 1556. The fifth in twenty-four days, on May the
third, in 1557, "post periculum eius Karmerdini," i. e. at Caermarthen. The
sixth in twenty days, in 1557.

Phaier has left many large works in his several professions of law and
medicine. He is pathetically lamented by sir Thomas Chaloner as a most skilful
physician, ENCOM. p. 356. Land. 1579. 4to. He has a recommendatory English poem
prefixed to Philip Betham's MILITARY PRECEPTS, translated from the Latin of
James earl of Purlilias, dedicated to lord Studley, Land. 1544. 4to. For E.
Whitchurch.

There is an entry to Pur^oot in 1566, for printing "serten verses of Cupydo by
Mr. Fair [Phaier]." REGISTR. STATION. A. fol. 154. a.


. He afterward finished the eighth book on the tenth of September, within
forty days, in 1558. The ninth, in thirty days, in 1560. Dying at Kilgarran the
same year, he lived only to begin the tenth Ex coloph. ut supr.
. All that was thus done by Phaier, one William Wightman published in 1562,
with a dedication to sir Nicholas Bacon, "The nine first books of the Eneidos
of Virgil converted into English verse by Thomas Phaer doctor of physic, etc
In quarto. Bl. Let. For Rowland Hall.
." The imperfect work was at length completed, with Maphaeus's supplemental or
thirteenth book, in 1583, by Thomas Twyne, a native of Canterbury, a physician
of Jews in Sussex, educated in both universities, an admirer of the mysterious
philosophy of John Dee, and patronised by lord Buckhurst the poet See supr. p.
287. His father was John Twyne of Bolington in Hampshire, an eminent a^tiquary,
author of the Commentary DE REBUS ALBIONICIS, etc. Land. 1590. It is addressed
to, and published by, with an epistle, his said son THOMAS. Laurence, a fellow
of All Souls and a civilian, and John Twyne, both THOMAS's brothers, have
copies of verses prefixed to several cotemporary books, about the reign of
queen Elisabeth. THOMAS wrote and translated many tracts, which it would be
superfluous and tedious to enumerate here. To his BREVIARIE OF BRITAIN, a
translation from the Latin of Humphrey Lhuyd, in 1573, are prefixed
recommendatory verses, by Brown prebendary, and Grant the learned
schoolmaster, of Westminster, Llodowyke Lloyd a poet in the PARADISE OF DAINTY
DEVISES, and his two brothers, aforesaid, Laurence and John.

Our translator, THOMAS TWYNE, died in 1613, aged 70, and was buried in the
chancel of saint Anne's church at Jews, where his epitaph of fourteen verses
still, I believe, remains on a brass plate affixed to the eastern wall.

Large antiquarian and historical manuscript collections, by the father JOHN
TWYNE, are now in Corpus Christi library at Oxford. In his COLLECTANEA VARIA,
(ibid. vol. iii. fol. 2.) he says he had written the Lives of T. Robethon, T.
Lupset, Rad. Barnes, T. Eliot, R. Sampson, T. Wriothesle, Gul Paget, G. Day,
Joh. Christopherson, N. Wooton. He is in Leland's ENCOMIA, p. 83.


. The ninth, tenth, eleventh, and twelfth books, were finished at London in
1573 Coloph. ut supr.
. The whole was printed at London in 1584, with a dedication, dated that year
from Jews, to Robert Sackville In quarto. Bl. Let. For Abraham Veale.
, the eldest son of lord Buckhurst, who lived in the dissolved monastery of the
Cluniacs at Jews Now ruined. But to this day called, Lord's Place.
. So well received was this work, that it was followed by three new editions in
1596 For Thomas Creed.
, 1607, and 1620 All in quarto. Bl. Let. In the edition of 1607, printed at
London by Thom^s Creed, it is said to " be newly set forth for the delight of
such as are studious in poetry."
. Soon after the last-mentioned period, it became obsolete and was forgotten In
1562, are entered with Nicholas England "the first and ix part of Virgill."
REGISTR. STATION. A. fol. 85. a. I suppose Phaier's first nine books of the
Eneid. And, in 1561-2, with W. Copland, the "book of Virgill in 4to." Ibid.
fol. 73. b. See REGISTR. C. fol. 8. a. sub ann. 1595.
.

Phaier undertook this translation for the defense, to use his own phrase, of
the English language, which had been by too many deemed incapable of elegance
and propriety, and for the "honest recreation of you the nobility, gentlemen,
and ladies, who study in Latin." He adds, "By me first this gate is set
open. If now the young writers will uouchsafe to enter, they may find in this
language both large and abvndant camps [fields] of uarietie, wherein they may
gather innumerable sorts of most beavtifull flowers, figures, and phrases, not
only to supply the imperfection of me, but also to garnish all kinds of their
own verses with a more clean and compendious order of meeter than heretofore
has been accustomed See "Master Phaer's Conclusion to his interpretation of
the Aeneidos of Virgil, by him converted into English ver^e."
." Phaier has omitted, misrepresented, and paraphrased many passages; but his
performance in every respect is evidently superior to Twyne's continuation. The
measure is the fourteen-footed Alexandrine of Sternhold and Hopkins. I will
give a short specimen from the siege of Troy, in the second book. Venus
addresses her son Eneas.

Thou to thy parents hest take heed, dread not, my mind obey:
In yonder place, where stones from stones, and bildings huge to sway,
Thou see, and mixed with dust and smoke thick stremes of reekings rise,
Himself the god Neptune that side does furne in wonders Wondrous.
wise;
With forke threetinde the wall vproots, foundations allto shakes^
And quite from under soil the town, with groundworks all vprakes.
On yonder side with Furies most, dame Juno fiercely stands,
The gates she keeps, and from the ships the Greeks, her friendly bands,
In armor girt she calls.
Lo! there again where Pallas sits, on fortes and castle-towres,
With Gorgons eyes, in lightning clouds enclosed grim she lowres.
The father-god himself to Greeks their mights and courage steres,
Himself against the Troyan blood both gods and armor reres.
Betake thee to thy flight, my son, thy labors end procure,
I will thee never fail, but thee to resting place assure.
She said, and through the dark nightshade herself she drew from sight:
Appear the grisly faces then, Troyes enemies ugly dight.
The popular ear, from its familiarity, was tuned to this measure. It was now
used in most works of length and gravity, but seems to have been consecrated to
translation. Whatever absolute and original dignity it may boast, at present it
is almost ridiculous, from an unavoidable association of ideas, and because it
necessarily recalls the tone of the versification of the puritans. I suspect it
might have acquired a degreee of importance and reverence, from the imaginary
merit of its being the established poetic vehicle of scripture, and its
adoption into the celebration of divine service.

I take this opportunity of observing, that I have seen an old ballad called
GADS-HILL by Fair, that is probably our translator Phaier. In the Registers of
the Stationers, among seven Ballettes licenced to William Bedell and Richard
Lante, one is entitled "The Robery at Gads hill," under the year 1558 REGISTR.
A. fol. 32. b. See Clavell's RECANTATION, a poem in quarto, Land. 1634. Clavell
was a robber, and here recites his own adventures on the highway. His first
depredations are on Gad's-hill. See fol. 1.
. I know not how far it might contribute to illustrate Shakespeare's HENRY THE
FOURTH. The title is promising.

After the associated labors of Phaier and Twyne, it is hard to say what could
induce Robert Stanyhurst, a native of Dublin, to translate the four first books
of the Eneid into English hexameters, which he printed at London, in 1583, and
dedicated to his brother Peter Plunket, the learned baron of Dusanay in Ireland
In octavo. Licenced to Binneman, Jan. 24. 1582. "By a copy printed at Leiden."
REGISTR. STATION. B. fol. 192. b. At the end of the Virgil are the four first
of David's psalms Englished in Latin measures, p. 82. Then follow "Certain
Poetical Conceits (in Latin and English) Land. 1583." Afterward are printed
Epitaphs written by our author, both in Latin and English. The first, in Latin,
is on James earl of Ormond, who died at Ely-house, October. 18. 1546. There is
anot^er on his father, James Stanyhurst, Recorder of Dublin, who died, aged 51,
Dec. 27, 1573. With translations from More's Epigrams. Stanyhurst has a copy of
recommendatory verses prefixed to Verstegan's RESTITUTION OF DECAYED
INTELLIGENCE, Antwerp, 1605. 4to.
. Stanyhurst at this time was living at Leyden, having left England for some
time on account of the change (...) religion. In the choice of his measure, he
is more unfortunate than his predecessors, and in other respects succeeded
worse. It may be remarked, that Meres, in his WITS TREASURY, printed in 1598,
among the learned translators, mentions only "Phaier, for Virgil's Aeneads Fol.
289. p. 2.
." And William Web, in his DISCOURSE OF ENGLISH POETS printed in 1586 For
John Charlewood. But there is a former edition for Walley, 1585, 4to. I know
not to which translation of Virgil, Puttenham in THE ART^ OF ENGLISH POESY
refers, where he says, "And as one who translating certain books of Virgil's
AENEIDOS into English meetre, said, that Aeneas was feign to trudge out of
Troy, which term became better to be spoken of a beggar, or of a rouge or a
lackey, etc." Lib. iii. chapter xxiii. p. 229.
, entirely omits our author, and places Phaier at the Head of all the English
translators Fol. 9.
. Thomas Nashe, in his APOLOGY OF PIERCE PENNILESSE, printed in 1593, observes,
that "Stanyhurst the otherwise learned, trod a foul, lumbring, boisterous,
wallowing measure in his translation of Virgil. -- He had never been praised by
Gabriel Harvey Gabriell Harvey, in his FOUR LETTERS AND CERTAIN SONNETS,
says, "I cordially recommend to the dear lovers of the Muses, and namely to
the professed sons of the same, Edmond Spencer, Richard Stanihurst, Abraham
France, Thomas Watson, Samuel Daniel, Thomas Nashe, and the rest, whom I
affectionately thancke for their studious endeavors commendably employed in
enriching and polishing their native tongue, etc." LET. iii. p. 29. Land.
1592. 4to.
for his labor, if therein he had not been so famously absurd Signat. B.
." Harvey, Spenser's friend, was one of the chief patrons, if not the inventor,
of the English hexameter, here used by Stanyhurst. I will give a specimen in
the first four lines of the second book.

With tentiue listening each wight was settled in harkning;
Then father Aeneas chronicled from lofty bed hautie:
You bid me, O princess, to scarifie a festered old sore,
How that the Trojans were pressed by the Grecian army Fol. 21.
.
With all this foolish pedantry, Stanyhurst was certainly a scholar. But in
this translation he calls Chorebus, one of the Trojan chiefs, a bedlamite, he
says that old Priam girded on his sword Morglay, the name of a sword in the
Gothic romances, that Dido would have been glad to have been brought to bed
even of a cockney, a Dandiprat hopthumb, and that Jupiter, in kissing his
daughter, bust his pretty prating parrot. He was admitted at University
college, in 1563, where he wrote a system of logic in his eighteenth year
"Harmonia ^ive Catena Dialectica in Porphyrianas constitutiones," a commentary
on Porphyry's ISAGOGE. Land. 1570. fol. Campion, then of S. John's college,
afterward the Jesuit, to whom it was communicated in manuscript, says of the
author, "Mirifice laetatus sum, esse adolescentem in academia nostra, tali
familia, eruditione, probitate, cujus extrema pueritia cum multis laudabili
maturita^e viris certare possit." EPISTOL. edit. Ingoldstat. 1602. fol. 50.
Four or five of Campion's EPISTLES are addressed to Stanyhurst.
. Having taken one degree, he became successively a student at Furnival's and
Lincoln's Inn. He has left many theological, philosophical, and historical
books. In one of his EPITAPHS called COMMVNE DEFUNCTORUM, he mentions Julietta,
Shakespeare's Juliet, among the celebrated heroines Meres mentions Stanyhurst
and Gabriel Harvey, as "Jambical poets." Ubi supr. fol. 282. p. 2. Stanyhurst
translated some epigrams of sir Thomas More. They are at the end of his Virgil.
. The title, and some of the lines, deserve to be cited, as they show the
poetical squabbles about the English hexameter. An Epitaph against rhyme,
entitled COMMVNE DEFUNCTORUM such as our unlearned Rithmours accustomably make
upon the death of every Tom Tyler, as if it were a last for every one his
foot, in which the quantities of syllables are not to be heeded." --

A Sara for goodness, a great Bellona for budgenesse,
For myldnesse Anna, for chastitye godly Susanna.
Hester in a good shift, a Judith stout at a dead lift:
Also IULIETTA, with Dido rich Cleopatra:
With sundry namelesse, and women many more blameless, etc At the end of his
Virgil. SIGNAT^ H iij. He mentions the friends Damon and Pythias in the same
piece.
.
His Latin DESCRIPTIO HIBERNIAE, translated into English, appears in the first
volume of Hollinshed's Chronicles, printed in 1583. He is styled by Camden,
"Eruditissimus ille nobilis Richardus Stanihurstus In HI^^RNIA. Com. WEST^MEATH.
." He is said to have been caressed for his literature and politeness by many
foreign princes In the title of his H^BDOMADA MARIANA he styles himself
"Serenissimorum principum SAC^LLANUS." That is, Albert archduke of Austria and
his princess Isabell. Antw. 1609. 8vo.
. He died at Brussels in 1618 Coxeter says a miscellany was printed in the
latter end of Elisabeth's reign "by R. S. that is, R. Stanyhurst." I presume he
may probably mean, a collection called "The PHOENIX NEST, Built up with most
rare and re^ined works of noble men, worthy knights, gallant gentlemen,
Masters of Art, and brave scholars. Full of variety, excellent invention, and
singvlar delight, etc. Set forth by R. S. of the Inner Temple gentleman.
Imprinted at London by John Jackson, 1593." 4to. But I take this R. S. to be
Richard Stapylton, who has a copy of verses prefixed to Greene's MAMILLIA,
printed in 1593. Bl. Let. By the way, in this miscellany there is a piece by
"W. S. Gent." p. 77. Perhaps by William Shakespeare. But I rather think by
William Smyth, whose "CLORIS, or the Complaynt of the Passion of the despised
Sheppard," was licenced to E. Bolifaunt, Oct. 5, 1596. REGISTR. STATION. C.
fol. 14. a. The initials W. S. are subscribed to "Corin's dream of his fair
CHLORIS," in ENGLANDS HELICON. (Signat. H. edit. 1614,) And prefixed to the
tragedy of LOCRINE, edit. 1595. Also "A book called AMORS by J. (or G.) D.
with certain other Sonnetts by W. S." is entered to Eleazar Edgar, Jan. 3, 1599.
REGISTR. C. fol. 55. a. The initials W. S. are subscribed to a copy of verses
prefixed to N. Breton's WILL OF WIT, etc. 1606. 4to.
.

Abraham Fleming, brother to Samuel They were both born in London. Thin apud
Hollinsh. vol. ii. 1590. Samuel wrote an elegant Latin Life of queen Mary,
never printed. He has a Latin recommendatory poem prefixed to Edward Grant's
SPICILEGIUM of the Greek tongue, a Dialogue, dedicated to Lord Burleigh, and
printed at London in 1575. 8vo.
, published a version of the BUCOLICS of Virgil, in 1575, with notes, and a
dedication to Peter Osborne esquire. This is the title, "The BUKOLIKES of P.
Virgilius Maro, with alphabeticall Annotations, etc. Drawn into plain and
familiar English verse by Abr. Fleming student, etc. London by John
Charlewood, etc. 1575." His plan was to give a plain and literal translation,
verse for verse. These are the five first lines of the tenth Eclogue.

O Arethusa, grant this labor be my last indeed!
A few songs unto Gallo, but let them Lycoris reed:
Needs must I singe to Gallo mine, what man would songs deny?
So when thou ronnest under Sicane seas, where froth does fry,
Let not that bitter Doris of the salt stream mingle make.
Fourteen years afterward, in 1589, the same author published a new version
both of the BUCOLICS and GEORGICS of Virgil, with notes, which he dedicated to
John Whitgift archbishop of Canterbury The Bucolics and Georgics, I think
these, are entered, 1600. REGISTR. STAT. See also under 1595, ibid.
. This is commonly said and supposed to be in blank verse, but it is in the
regular Alexandrine without rhyme. It is entitled, "The BUKOLIKES of P.
Virgilius Maro, etc. otherwise called his pastoralls or Shepherds Meetings.
Together with his GEORGICS, or Ruralls, etc. All newly translated into English
verse by A. F. At London by T. O. for T. Woodcocke, etc. 1589." I exhibit the
five first verses of the fourth Eclogue.

O Muses of Sicilia i will, let us greater matters singe!
Shrubs, groves, and bushes low, delight and please not every man:
If we do singe of woods, the woods be worthy of a consul.
Now is the last age come, whereof Sybilla's verse foretold;
And now the Virgin come again, and Saturnes kingdom come.
The fourth Georgic thus begins.

O my Mecenas, now will I dispatch forthwith to show
The heavenly gifts, or benefits, of airie honey sweet.
Look on this piece of work likewise, as thou have on the rest.
Abraham Fleming supervised, corrected, and enlarged the second edition of
Hollinshed's chronicle in 1585 His brother Samuel assisted in compiling the
INDEX^ a very laborious work, and made other improvements.
. He translated Aelian's VARIOUS HISTORY into English in 1576, which he
dedicated to Goodman dean of Westminster, "Aelian's Registre of Hystories by
Abraham Fleming In quarto.
." He published also Certain select epistles of Cicero into English, in 1576
Land. in quarto.
. And, in the same year, he imparted to our countrymen a fuller idea of the
elegance of the ancient epistle, by his "PANOPLIE OF EPISTLES from Tully,
Isocrates, Pliny, and others, printed at London 1576 Quarto. For Ralph Newbery.
." He translated Synesius's Greek PANEGYRIC on BALDNESS, which had been brought
into vogue by Erasmus's MORIAE ENCOMIUM Land. 1579. 12mo. At the end, is his
FABLE of HERMES.
. Among some other pieces, he Englished many celebrated books written in Latin
about the fifteenth century and at the restoration of learning, which was a
frequent practice, after it became fashionable to compose in English, and our
writers had begun to find the force and use of their own tongue See supr. p.
260^ Among his original pieces are, "A memorial of the charitable alms deeds
of William Lamb, gentleman of the chapel under Henry 8th, and citizen of
London, Land. 1580. 8vo. -- The Battle between the Virtues and Vices^ Land.
1582. 8vo. -- The Diamant of Devotion in six parts, Land. 1586. 12mo. -- The
Cundyt of Comfort, for Denham, 1579." He prefixed a recommendatory Latin poem
in iambics to the VO^AGE of Dennis Settle, a retainer of the earl of
Cumberland, and the companion of Martin Frobisher, Land. 1577. 12mo. Another,
in English, to Kendal's FLOWERS OF EPIGRAMMES, Land. 1577. 12mo. Another to
John Baret's ALVEARE, or quadruple Lexicon of English, Latin, Greek, and
French. Dedicated to Lord Burleigh, Land. 1580. fol. edit. 2. [See MUS. ASHMOL.
Oxon. 835.] Another to W. Whetstone's ROCK OF REGARD. I take this opportunity
of observing, that the works of one John Fleming an ancient English poet, are
in Dubliucollege library, of which I have no farther notice, than that they are
numbered, 304. See REGISTR. STATION. B. fol. 160. a. 171. a. 168. a.
. Sir William Cordall, the queen's solicitorgeneral, was his chief patron His
PANOPLIE is dedicated to Cordall. See LIFE OF SIR THOMAS POPE, p. 226. edit. 2.
.

William Web, who is styled a graduate, translated the GEORGICS into English
verse, as he himself informs us in the DISCOURSE OF ENGLISH POETRY, lately
quoted, and printed in 1586 For the sake of juxtaposition, I observe here, that
Virgil's Bucolics and fourth Georgic were translated by one Mr. Brimsly, and
licenced to Man, Sept. 3, 1619. REGISTR. STATION. C. fol. 305. a. And the
"second part of Virgill's Aeneids in English, translated by sir Thomas Wroth
knight," Apr. 4, 1620. Ibid. fol. 313. b.
. And in the same discourse, which was written in defense of the new fashion of
English hexameters, he has given us his own version of two of Virgil's
BUCOLIC^, written in that unnatural and impracticable mode of versification In
1594, Richard Jones published "PAN HIS PIPE, conteyninge Three Pastoral Eglog^
in English hexamiter with other delightful verses." Licenced Jan. 3. R^GISTR.
STATION^ B. fol. 316. b.
. I must not forget here, that the same Web ranks Abraham Fleming as a
translator, after Barnabie Googe the translator of Palingenius's ZODIAC, not
without a compliment to the poetry and the learning of his brother Samuel,
whose excellent Inventions, he adds, had not yet been made public.

Abraham France, in 1591, translated Virgil's ALEXIS into English hexameters,
verse for verse, which he calls The lamentation of Corydon for the love of
Alexis At the end of the countess of Pembroke's J^y-church, in the same
measure, Land. 8vo. He wrote also in the same verse, The lam^ntation of Amyntas
for the death of Phillis^ Land. 1587. 4to. He translated i^to English
hexameters the beginning of H^liodorus's ETHIOPICS. Land. 1591. 8vo.
. It must be owned, that the selection of this particular Eclogue from all the
ten for an English version, is somewhat extraordinary. But in the reign of
queen Elisabeth, I could point out whole sets of sonnets written with this sort
of attachment, for which perhaps it will be but an inadequate apology, that
they are free from direct impurity of expression and open immodesty of
sentiment. Such at least is our observance of external propriety, and so strong
the principles of a general decorum, that a writer of the present age who was
to print love-verses in this style, would be severely reproached, and
universally proscribed. I will instance only in the AFFECTIONATE SHEPHERD of
Richard Barnefielde, printed in 1595. Here, through the course of twenty
sonnets, not inelegant, and which were exceedingly popular, the poet bewails
his unsuccessful love for a beautiful youth, by the name of Ganimede, in a
strain of the most tender passion, yet with professions of the chastest
affection At London, for H. Lownes, 1596. 16mo. Another edition appeared the
same year, with hi^ CYNTHIA and Legend of CASSANDRA. For the same, 1596. 16mo.
In the preface of this second edition he apologizes for his Sonnets, "I will
vnshaddow my conceit: being nothing else but an imitation of Virgill in the
second Eclogue of ALEXIS." But I find, "CYNTHIA with certain SONNETTES and the
Legend of CASSANDRA," entered to H. Lownes^ Jan. 1^, 1594. REGISTR. STATION. B.
fol. 317. a.
. Many descriptions and incidents which have a like complexion, may be found in
the futile novels of Lodge and Lilly.

France is also the writer of a book, with the affected an^ unmeaning title of
the "ARCADIAN RHETORIKE, or the precepts of Rhetoric made plain by
examples, Greek, Latyne, Englisshe, Italyan, French, and Spanishe." It was
printed in 1588, and is valuable for its English examples Entered to T. Gubbyn
and T. Newman, Jun. 11, 1588. REGISTR. STATION. B. fol. 229. b.
.

In consequence of the versions of Virgil's Bucolics, a piece appeared in 1584,
called "A Comoedie of Titerus and Galathea Entered April 1, to Cawood. Ibid.
fol. 203. b. Lilly's GALATEA, however, appears to be entered as a new copy to
T. Man, Oct. 1, 1591. Ibid. fol. 280. b.
." I suppose this to be Lilly's play called GALLATHEA, played before the queen
at Greenwich on New Year's day by the choristers of saint Paul's.

It will perhaps be sufficient barely to mention Spenser's CULEX, which is a
vague and arbitrary paraphrase, of a poem not properly belonging to Virgil.
From the testimony of many early Latin writers it may be justly concluded, that
Virgil wrote an elegant poem with this title. Nor is it improbable that in the
CU^EX at present attributed to Virgil, some very few of the original phrases,
and even verses, may remain, under the accumulated incrustation of critics,
imitators, interpolators, and paraphrasts, which corrupts what it conceals. But
the texture, the character, and substance, of the genuine poem is almost
entirely lost. The CEIRIS, or the fable of Nisus and Scylla, which follows,
although never mentioned by any writer of antiquity, has much fairer
pretensions to genuineness. At least the CEIRIS, allowing for uncommon
depravations of time and transcription, appears in its present state to be a
poem of the Augustan age, and is perhaps the identical piece dedicated to the
Messala whose patronage it solicits. It has that rotundity of versification,
which seems to have been studied after the Roman poetry emerged from barbarism.
It has a general simplicity, and often a native strength, of coloring; nor is
it tinctured, except by the casual innovation of grammarians, with those
sophistications both of sentiment and expression, which afterward of course
took place among the Roman poets, and which would have betrayed a recent
forgery. It seems to be the work of a young poet: but its digressions and
descriptions which are often too prolix, are not only the marks of a young
poet, but of early poetry. It is interspersed with many lines, now in the
Eclogues, Georgics, and Eneid. Here is an argument which seems to assign it to
Virgil. A cotemporary poet would not have ventured to steal from poems so well
known. It was natural, at least allowable, for Virgil to steal from a
performance of his youth, on which he did not set any great value, and which he
did not scruple to rob of a few ornaments, deserving a better place. This
consideration excludes Cornelius Gallus, to whom Fontanini, with much acute
criticism, has ascribed the CEIRIS. Nor, for the reason given, would Virgil
have stolen from Gallus. The writer has at least the art of Virgil, in either
suppressing, or throwing into shade, the trite and uninteresting incidents of
the common fabulous history of Scylla, which were incapable of decoration, or
had been preoccupied by other poets. The dialogue between the young princess
Scylla, who is deeply in love, and her nurse, has much of the pathos of Virgil.
There are some traces which discover an imitation of Lucretius: but on the
whole, the structure of the verses, and the predominant cast and manner of the
composition, exactly resemble the ARGONAUTICA of Catullus, or the EPITHALAMIUM
of PELEUS AND THETIS. I will instance in the following passage, in which every
thing is distinctly and circumstantially touched, and in an affected pomp of
numbers. He is alluding to the stole of Minerva, interwoven with the battle of
the giants, and exhibited at Athens in the magnificent Panathenaic festival.
The classical reader will perceive one or two interpolations: and lament, that
this rich piece of embroidery has suffered a little from being unskilfully
darned by another and a more modern artificer.

Sed magno intexens, si fas est dicere, peplo,
Qualis Erectheis olim portatur Athenis,
Debita cum castae ^olvuntur vota Minervae,
Tardaque confecto redeunt quinquennia lustro,
Cum levis alterno Zephyrus concrebuit Euro,
Et prono gravidum provexit pondere cursum.
Felix ille dies, felix et dicitur annus:
Felices qui talem annum videre, diemque!
Ergo Palladiae texuntur in ordine pugnae:
Magna Gigantaeis ornantur pepla tropaeis,
Horrida sanguineo pinguntur praelia cocco.
Additur aurata dejectus cuspide Typho,
Qui prius Ossaeis consternens aethera saxis,
Emathio celsum duplicabat vertice Olympum.
Tale deae velum solemni in tempore portant Ver. 21. seq.
.
The same stately march of hexameters is observable in Tibullus's tedious
panegyric on Messala: a poem, which, if it should not be believed to be of
Tibullus's hand, may at least, from this reasoning be adjudged to his age. We
are sure that Catullus could not have been the author of the CEIRIS, as
Messala, to whom it is inscribed, was born but a very few years before the
death of Catullus. One of the chief circumstances of the story is a purple lock
of hair, which grew on the head of Nisus king of Megara, and on the
preservation of which the safety of that city, now besieged by Minos, king of
Crete, entirely depended. Scylla, Nisus's daughter, falls in love with Minos,
whom she sees from the walls of Megara: she finds means to cut off this sacred
ringlet, the city is taken, and she is married to Minos. I am of opinion that
Tibullus, in the following passage, alludes to the CEIRIS, then newly
published, and which he points out by this leading and fundamental fiction of
Nisus's purple lock.

Pieridas, pueri, doctos et amate poetas;
Aurea nec superent munera Pieridas!
CARMINE PURPUREA est Nisi coma: carmina ni sint,
Ex humero Pelopis non nituisset ebur ELEG. Lib. i. iv. 61.
.
Tibullus here, in recommending the study of the poets to the Roman youth,
illustrates the power of poetry; and, for this purpose, with much address he
selects a familiar instance from a piece recently written, perhaps by one of
his friends.

Spenser seems to have shown a particular regard to these two little poems,
supposed to be the work of Virgil's younger years. Of the CULEX he has left a
paraphrase, under the title of VIRGIL'S GNAT, dedicated to lord Leicester, who
died in 1588. It was printed without a title page at the end of the "TEARS OF
THE MUSES, by Ed. Sp. London, imprinted for William Ponsonbie dwelling in
Paul's churchyard at the sign of the bishops head, 1591 In quarto. White Let.
Containing twenty-four leaves.
." From the CEIRIS he has copied a long passage, which forms the first part of
the legend of Britomart in the third book of the FAIRY QUEEN.

Although the story of MEDEA existed in Guido de Columna, and perhaps other
modern writers in Latin, yet we seem to have had a version of Valerius Flaccus
in 1565. For in that year, I know not if in verse or prose, was entered to
Purfoote, "The story of Jason, how he got the golden flece, and how he did
begyle Media [Medea], out of Laten into Englisshe by Nycholas White REGISTR.
STATION. A. fol. 134. a.
." Of the translator White, I know nothing more.

Of Ovid's METAMORPHOSIS, the four first books were translated by Arthur
Golding in 1565 Land. Bl. Let. 4to.
. "The first four books of the Metamorphosis owte of Latin into English meter
by Arthur Golding, gentleman, etc. Imprinted at London by Willyam Seres 1565 It
is entered "A book entitled Ovidii Metamorphoses." REGISTR. STATION. A. fol.
117. b.
." But soon afterward he printed the whole, or, "The xv. Books of P. Ouidius
Naso entytuled METAMORPHOSIS, translated out of Latin into English meetre, by
Arthur Golding Gentleman. A work uery pleasant and delectable. Land. 1575."
William Seres was the printer, as before Bl. Let. 4to. It is supposed that
there were earlier editions, viz. 1567, and 1576. The last i^ mentioned in
Coxeter's papers, who saw it in Dr. Rawlinson's collection.
. This work became a favorite, and was reprinted in 1587, 1603, and 1612 All in
Bl. Let. 4to. That of 1603, by W. W. Of 1612, by Thomas Purfoot.
. The dedication, an epistle in verse, is to Robert earl of Leicester, and
dated at Berwick, April 20, 1567. In the metrical Preface to the Reader, which
immediately follows, he apologizes for having named so many fictitious and
heathen gods. This apology seems to be intended for the weaker puritans
Afterward he says, of his author, And now I have him made so well acquainted
with our tongue,
As that he may in English verse as in his own be soong,
Wherein although for pleasant style, I cannot make account, etc.

. His style is poetical and spirited, and his versification clear: his manner
ornamental and diffuse, yet with a sufficient observance of the original. On
the whole, I think him a better poet and a better translator than Phaier. This
will appear from a few of the first lines of the second book, which his readers
took for a description of an enchanted castle.

The princely palace of the Sun, stood gorgeous to behold,
On stately pillars builded high, of yellow burnisht gold;
Beset with sparkling carbuncles, that like to fire did shine,
The roof was framed curiously, of yuorie pure and fine.
The two-doore-leves of silver clear, a radiant light did cast:
But yet the cunning workmanship of things therein far past
The stuff whereof the doors were made: for there a perfect plat
Had Vulcane drawn of all the world, both of the sourges that
Embrace the earth with winding waves, and of the steadfast ground,
And of the heaven itself also, that both encloseth round.
And first and foremost of the sea, the gods thereof did stand,
Loude-sounding Tryton, with his shrill and writhen trumpe in hand,
Unstable Protew, changing aye his figure and his hue,
From shape to shape a thousand sights, as list him to renew. --
In purple robe, and royal throne of emerauds fresh and green,
Did Phoebus sit, and on each hand stood waiting well beseene,
Days, Months, Years, Ages, Seasons, Times, and eke the equal Hours;
There stood the SPRINGTIME, with a crown of fresh and fragrant flowers:
There waited SUMMER naked stark, all save a wheaten hat:
And AUTUMN smerde with treading grapes late at the pressingvat:
And lastly, quaking for the cold, stood WINTER all forlorn,
With rugged head as white as dove, and garments al to torn;
Forladen Ove^lad^n.
with the isycles, that dangled up and down,
Upon his gray and hoarie beard, and snowie frozen crown.
The Sun thus sitting in the midst, did cast his piercing eye, etc.
But I cannot resist the pleasure of transcribing a few more lines, from the
transformation of Athamas and Ino, in the fourth book. Tisiphone addresses Juno
Fol. 50. a. edit. 1603.
.

The hateful hag Tisiphone, with hoarie ruffled hear Hair.
,
Removing from her face the snakes, that loosely dangled theare,
Said thus, etc.
He proceeds,

The furious fiend Tisiphone, does cloth her out of hand,
In garment streaming gory blood, and takes in her hand
A burning cresset A torch. The word is used by Milton.
steept in blood, and girdeth her about
With wreathed snakes, and so goes forth, and at her going out,
Fear, terror, grief, and pensiveness, for company she took,
And also madness with his flaight and gastly-staring look.
Within the house of Athamas no sooner foot she set,
But that the posts began to quake, and doors look black as iet.
The sun withdrewe him: Athamas and eke his wife were cast
With ougly sightes in such a fear, that out of doors aghast
They would have fled. There stood the fiend, and stopped their passage out;
And splaying Displaying.
forth her filthy arms beknit with snakes about,
Did toss and wave her hateful head. The swarm of scaled snakes
Did make an yrksome noyce to hear, as she her tresses shakes.
About her shoulders some did craule, some trayling down her breast,
Did hiss, and spit out poison green, and spirt with tongues infest.
Then from amid her hair two snakes, with venymd hand she drew,
Of which she one at Athamas, and one at Ino threw.
The snakes did craule about their breasts, inspiring in their heart
Most grievous motions of the mind: the body had no smart
Of any wound: it was the mind that felt the cruel stinges.
A poison made in syrup-wise, she also with her brings,
The filthy ^ome of Cerberus, the casting of the snake
Echidna, bred among the fennes, about the Stygian lake.
Desire of gadding forth abroad, Forgetfullness of mind,
Delight in mischie^e, Woodnesse Madness.
, Tears, and Purpose whole inclinde
To cruel murder: all the which, she did together grind.
And mingling them with new-shed blood, she boiled them in brass,
And stird them with a hemlock stalk. Now while that Athamas
And Ino stood, and quakt for fear, this poison rank and fell
She turned into both their breasts, and made their hearts to swell.
Then whisking often round about her head, her balefull brand,
She made it soon, by gathering wind, to kindle in her hand.
Thus, as it were in tryumph-wi^e, accomplishing her hest,
To duskie Pluto's empty realm, she gets her home to rest,
And puts off the snarled snakes that girded-in her breast.
We have here almost as horrid a mixture as the ingredients in Macbeth's
cauldron. In these lines there is much enthusiasm, and the character of
original composition. The abruptnesses of the text are judiciously retained,
and perhaps improved. The translator seems to have felt Ovid's imagery, and
this perhaps is an imagery in which Ovid excells.

Golding's version of the METAMORPHOSIS kept its ground, till Sandys's English
Ovid appeared in 1632. I know not who was the author of what is called a
ballet, perhaps a translation from the Metamorphosis, licenced to John
Charlewood, in 1569, "The unfortunate end of Iphis son unto Teucer king of
Troy REGISTR. STATION. A. ^ol. 186. a. See Malone's SUPPL. SHAKESP. i. 60. seq.
."Nor must I omit The tragical and lamentable "History of two faithful mates
Ceyx king of Thrachine, and Alcione his wife, drawn into English meeter by
William Hubbard, 1569 Impr at London, by W. How for R. Johnes. Bl. Let. 12mo.
In eight leaves
." In stanzas.

Golding was of a gentleman's family, a native of London, and lived with
secretary Cecil at his house in the Strand His dedication to the four first
books of Ovid is from Cecil-house, 1564. See his Dedication to his English
version of Peter A^etine's WAR OF ITALY WITH THE GOTHS, Land. 1563. 12mo. To
this he has prefixed a long preface on the causes of the irruption of the Goths
into Italy. He appears to have also lived in the parish of All Saints ad murum,
London-wall, in 1577. EPIST. prefixed to his SENECA. His POSTILS of Chytraeus
are dedicated from Paul's Belchamp t^ sir W. Mildmay, March 10, 1570.
. Among his patrons, as we may collect from his dedications, were also sir
Walter Mildmay, William lord Cobham, Henry earl of Huntington, lord Leicester,
sir Christopher Hatton, lord Oxford, and Robert earl of Essex. He was connected
with sir Philip Sydney: for he finished an English translation of Philip
Mornay's treatise in French on the Truth of Christianity, which had been begun
by Sydney, and was published in 1587 In quarto. It was afterward corrected and
printed by Thomas Wilcox, 1604.
. He enlarged our knowledge of the treasures of antiquity by publishing English
translations, of Justin's History in 1564 Land. 4to. Again 1578. There is the
PSALTER in English, printed with Henry Middleton, by Arthur Golding. Land.
1571. 4to.
, of Cesar's Commentaries in 1565 The Dedication to Cecil is dated from Paul's
Belchamp, 12 October. Land. 12mo. Again, 1590. There was a translation by Tipto^t
earl of Worcester, printed by Ra^^all. No date. I suppose about 1530.
, of Seneca's BENEFITS in 1577 Land. 4to. To sir Christopher Hatton.
, and of the GEOGRAPHY of Pomponius Mela, and the POLYHISTORY of Solinus, in
1587, and 1590 Land. 4to.
. He has left versions of many modern Latin writers, which then had their use,
and suited the condition and opinions of the times; and which are now
forgotten, by the introduction of better books, and the general change of the
system of knowledge. I think his only original work is an account of an
Earthquake in 1580. Of his original poetry I recollect nothing more, than an
encomiastic copy of verses prefixed to Baret's ALVEARE published in 1580. It
may be regretted, that he gave so much of his time to translation. In GEORGE
GASCOIGNE'S PRINCELY PLEASURES OF KENILWORTH-CASTLE, an entertainment in the
year 1575, he seems to have been a writer of some of the verses, "The devise of
the Lady of the Lake also was master Hunnes -- The verses, as I think, were
penned, some by master Hunnes, some by master Ferrers, and some by master
Goldingham Signat. B ij.
." The want of exactness through haste or carelessness, in writing or
pronouncing names, even by cotemporaries, is a common fault, especially in our
old writers; and I suspect Golding is intended in the last name But I must
observe, that one Henry Goldingham is mentioned as a gesticulator, and one who
was to perform Arion on a dolphin's back, in some spectacle before queen
Elisabeth. M^^RY PASSAGES AND JEASTS, MSS. HARL. 6395. One B. Goldingham is an
actor and a poet, in 1579. in the pageant before queen Elisabeth at Norwich.
Hollinsh. C^RON. iii. f. 1298. col. 1.
. He is ranked among the celebrated translators by Web and Meres.

The learned Ascham wishes that some of these translators had used blank verse
instead of rhyme. But by blank verse, he seems to mean the English hexameter or
some other Latin measure. He says, "Indeed, Chauser, Thomas Norton of Bristow,
my Lord of Surry, M. Wiat, Thomas Phaier, and other gentlemen, in translating
Ouide, Palingenius, and Seneca, have gone as far to their great praise as the
copy they followed could carry them. But if such good wits, and forward
diligence, had been directed to follow the best examples, and not have been
carried by time and custom to content themselves with that barbarous and rude
Ryming, amongst their other woorthye praises which they have justly deserved,
this had not been the least, to be counted among men of learning and skill,
more like unto the Grecians than the Gothians in handling of their verse Fol.
52. a. 53. b. edit. 1589. 4to.
." The sentiments of another cotemporary critic on this subject were somewhat
different. "In queen Mary's time flourished about any other doctor Phaier, one
that was learned, and excellently well translated into English verse heroical,
certain books of Virgil's Aeneidos. Since him followed master Arthur
Golding, who with no less commendation turned into English meetre the
Metamorphosis of Ouide, and that other doctor who made the supplement to those
books of Virgil's Aeneidos, which master Phaier left undone." Again, he
commends "Phaier and Golding, for a learned and well connected verse, specially
in translation clear, and uery faithfully answering their authors intent
Puttenham's A^TE O^ ENGLISH PO^SIE, Land. 1589. 4to. Lib. i. chapter 30. fol. 49.
51.
."

I learn from Coxeter's notes, that the FASTI were translated into English
verse before the year 1570. If so, the many little pieces now current on the
subject of LUCRETIA, although her legend is in Chaucer, might immediately
originate from this source. In 1568, occurs, a Ballett called "the grevious
complaynt of Lucrece REGISTR. STATION. A. fol. 174. a. To John Alde. The story
might however have been taken from Livy: as was "The Tragedy of Appiu^ and
Virginia," inverse. This, reprinted in 1575, is entered to R. Jones, in 1567.
Ibid. fol. 163. a. And there is the Terannye of judge Apius, a ballad, in 1569.
Ibid. fol. 184. b.
." And afterward, in the year 1569, is licenced to James Robertes, "A ballet
of the death of Lucryssia REGISTR. A. fol. 192. b.
." There is also a ballad of the legend of Lucrece, printed in 1576. These
publications might give rise to Shakespeare's RAPE OF LUCRECE, which appeared
in 1594. At this period of our poetry, we find the same subject occupying the
attention of the public for many years, and successively presented in new and
various forms by different poets. Lucretia was the grand example of conjugal
fidelity throughout the Gothic ages It is remarkable, that the sign of
Berthelette the king's printer in Fleet Street, who flourished about 1540, was
the Lucretia, or as he writes it, LUCRETIA ROMANA.

There is another Lucretia belonging to our old poetic story. Laneham, in his
Narrative of the queen's visit at Kenilworth-castle in 1575, mentions among the
favorite story-books "Lucres and Eurialus." p. 34. This is, "A book of ij
lovers Euryalus and Lucressie [Lucretia] pleasant and dilectable," entered to
T. Norton, in 1569. REGISTR. STATION. A. fol. 189. a. Again, under the title of
"A book entitled the excellent historye of Euryalus and Lucretia," to T.
Creed, Oct. 19, 1596. REGISTR. C. fol. 14. b. This story was first written in
Latin prose, and partly from a real event, about the year 1440, by Aeneas
Sylvius, then imperial poet and secretary, afterward pope Pius the second. It
may be seen in EPISTOLARUM LACONICARUM ET SELECTARUM FARRAGINES DUAE, collected
by Gilbertus Cognatus, and printed at Basil, 1554. 12mo. (See FARRAG. ii. p.
386.) In the course of the narrative, Lucretia is compared by her lover to
Polyxena, Venus, and AEMILIA. The last is the Emilia of Boccace's Theseid, or
Palamon and Arcite. p. 481.


.

The fable of Salmacis and Hermaphroditus, in the fourth book of the
METAMORPHOSIS, was translated by Thomas Peend, or De la Peend, in 1565 It is
licenced to Colwell that year, with the title of the "pleasant fable of Ovide
entitled Salmacis and Hermaphroditus." REGISTR. STATION. A. fol. 135. a.
. I have seen it only among Antony Wood's books in the Ashmolean Museum. An
Epistle is prefixed, addressed to Nicolas Saint Ledger esquire, from the
writer's study in Chancery Lane opposite Serjeant's-inn. At the end of which,
is an explanation of certain poetical words occurring in the poem. In the
preface he tells us, that he had translated great part of the METAMORPHOSIS;
but that he abandoned his design, on hearing that another, undoubtedly Golding,
was engaged in the same undertaking. Peend has a recommendatory poem prefixed
to Studley's version of Seneca's AGAMEMNON, in 1566. In 1562, was licenced "the
book of Perymus and Thesbye," copied perhaps in the MIDSUMMER NIGHTS DREAM. I
suppose a translation from Ovid's fable of Pyramus and Thisbe In quarto. Land.
for T. Hackett. Bl. Let.
.

The fable of Narcissus had been translated, and printed separately in 1560, by
a nameless author, "The fable of Ovid treting of Narcissus translated out of
Latin into English mytre, with a moral thereunto, very plesante to read, Land.
1560 REGISTR. STATION. A. fol. 92. a. To William Griffiths. I know not whether
the following were regular versions of Ovid, or poems formed from his works now
circulating in English. Such as, "the Ballet of Pygmalion," to R. Jones, in
1568. Ibid. fol. 176. a. Afterward reprinted and a favorite story. There is
the "Ballet of Pygmalion," in 1568. Ibid. fol. 176. a. -- "A ballet entitled
the Golden Apple," to W. Pickering, in 1568. Ibid. fol. 175. a. -- "A ballet
entitled Hercules and his End," to W. Griffiths, in 1563. Ibid. fol. 102. b.
There is also, which yet may be referred to another source, "A ballet entitled
the History of Troilus, whose troth had well been tried," to Purfoote, in 1565.
Ibid. fol. 134. b. This occurs again in 1581, and 1608. The same may be said of
the "History of the tow [two] most noble princes of the world Astio^ax and
Polixene [Astyanax] of Troy," to T. Hackett, in 1565. Ibid. fol. 139. a. Again,
in 1567, "the ballet of Acrisious" that is, Acrisius the father of Dan^e^ Ibid.
fol. 177. b. Also, "A ballet of the mesyrable state of king Medas," or Midas,
in 1569. Ibid. fol. 185. b. These are a few and early instances out of many. Of
the METAMORPHOSIS of PIGMALIONS IMAGE, by Marston, printed 1598, and alluded to
by Shakespeare, [MEAS. MEAS. iii. 2.] more will be said hereafter.

There is likewise, which may be referred hither, a "book entitled Procris and
Cephalus divided into four parts," licenced Oct. 22, 1598, to J. Wolf, perhaps
a play, and probably ridiculed in the MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM, under the title
Shefalus and Procrus. REGISTR. STATION. B. fol. 302^ a.

There is also, at least originating from the English Ovid, a pastoral play,
presented by the queen's choir-boys, Peele's ARRAIGNEMENT OF PARIS, in 1584.
And I have seen a little novel on that subject, with the same compliment to the
queen, by Dickenson, in 1593. By the way, some passages are transferred from
that novel into another written by Dickenson^ "ARISBAS, Euphues amidst his
slumbers, or Cupid's Journey to hell, etc. By J. D. Land. For T. Creed, 1594.
4to." One of them, where Pomona falls in love with a beautiful boy named
Hyalus, is as follows. Signat. E 3. "She, desirous to win him with
ouer-cloying kindness, sed him with apples, gave him plumes, presented him
pears. Having made this entrance into her future solace, she would use often his
company, kiss him, coll him, check him, chucke him, walk with him, weep for
him, in the ^ields, near the fountains, sit with him, ^ue to him, omitting no
kinds of dalliance to to woe him, etc." I have selected this passage, because
I think it was recollected by Shakespeare in the MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM, where
he describes the caresses bestowed by the queen of the fairies on her loved
boy, ACT v. Sc. i.

Come sit thee down upon this flowery bed
While I thy amiable cheeks do coy,
And stick musk roses in thy sleek smooth head. --
I have a ventrous fairy that shall seek
The squirrel's hoard, etc.
See also, ACT ii. Sc. i. In the ARRAIGNEMENT OF PARIS just mentioned, we have
the same subject and language. Plays with Amyntas lu^ty boy, and coyes him in
the dales.
To return. There is, to omit later instances, "A proper ballet dialogue-wise
between Troylus and Cressida," Jun. 23, in 1581. REGISTR. STATION. B. fol. 180.
b. "Endimion and Phebe," a book, to John Busbye, April 12, 1595. Ibid. fol.
131^ b. A ballad, "a mirror meet for wanton and insolent dames by example of
Medusa king of Phorcius his daughter." Feb. 13, 1577. Ibid. fol. 145. b. "The
History of Glau^us and Scylla," to R. Jones, Sept. 22, 1589. Ibid fol. 248. b.
Narcissus and Phaeton were turned into plays before 1610. See Heywood's APOLOG.
ACTORS. Lilly's SAPPHO and PHAO, ENDIMION, and MIDAS, are almost too well known
to be enumerated her^. The two last, with his GALATH^A, were licenced to T.
Man, Oct. 1, 1590. [But see supr. p. 406.] Of PENELOPES WEB, unless Greene's,
I can say nothing, licenced to E. Aggas, Jun. 26, 1587. Ibid. fol. 219. b.
Among Harrington's EPIGRAMS, is one entitled, "Ouid's Confession translated
into English for General Norreyes, 1593." EPIGR. 85. lib. iii. Of this I know
no more. The subject of this note might be much further illustrated.


." The translator's name was luckily suppressed. But at the close of the work
are his initials, "Finis. T. H." Annexed to the fable is a moralisation of
twice the length in the octave stanza. Almost every narrative was anciently
supposed or made to be allegorical, and to contain a moral meaning. I have
enlarged on this subject in the DISSERTATION ON THE GESTA ROMANORUM. In the
reign of Elisabeth, a popular ballad had no sooner been circulated, than it was
converted into a practical instruction, and followed by its MORALISATION. The
old registers of the Stationers afford numerous instances of this custom, which
was encouraged by the increase of puritanism As, "Maukin was a Coventry maid,"
moralized in 1563. REGISTR. A. fol. 102. a. With a thousand others. I have seen
other moralisations of Ovid's stories by the puritans. One by W. K. or William
Kethe, a Scotch divine, no unready rhymer, mentioned above, p. 305. In our
singingpsalms, the psalms 70, 104, 122, 125, 134, are signatured with W. K. or
William Kethe. These initials have been hitherto undecyphered. At the end of
Knox's APPELLATION to the Scotch bishops, printed at Geneva in 1558, is psalm
93^ turned into meter by W. Kethe. 12mo. He wrote, about the same time, A
ball^d on the fall of the whore of Babylon, called "Tie the m^re Tom-boy." See
supr. p. 170. n. And Strype, ANN. REF. vol. ii. B. i. chapter 11. page 102. edit.
1725. Another is by J. K. or John Kepyer, mentioned above as another coadjutor
of Sternhold and Hopkins, (see supr. p. 186.) and who occurs in "The ARBOR OF
AMITY, wherein is comprised plesaunt poems and pretty poe^ies, set forth by
Thomas Howell gentleman, anno 1568." Imprinted at London, J. H. Denham, 12mo.
Bl. Let. Dedicated to lady Anne Talbot. Among the recommendatory copies is
one signed, John Keeper, student. See also "J. K. to his friend H." fol. 27. a.
And "H. to K." ibid. Again, fol. 33. b. 34. a. and 38, 39, etc.
. Hence in Randolph's MUSE'S LOOKING-GLASS, where two pu^itans are made
spectators of a play, a player, to reconcile them in some degree to a theater,
promises to moralize the plot: and one of them answers, -- That MORALIZING
I do approve: it may be for instruction ACT i. SC. ii. edit. Oxf. 1638. 4to.
Again, Mrs. Flowerdew says, "Pray, sir, continue the MORALIZING." ACT iii. SC.
^.
.


Ovid's IBIS was translated, and illustrated with annotations, by Thomas
Underdowne, born, and I suppose educated, at Oxford. It was printed at London
in 1569 See REGISTR. STATION. A. fol. 177. b.
, with a dedication to Thomas Sackville, lord Buckhurst, the author of
GORDOBUC, and entitled, "Ovid his inuective against Ibis Translated into
meeter, whereunto is added by the translator a short draught of all the stories
and tales contained therein uery pleasant to read. Imprinted at London by T.
East and H. Middleton, Anno Domini 1569." The notes are large and historical.
There was a second edition by Binneman in 1577 Both are in octavo. Salma^^s and
Hermaphroditus was translated by F. Beaumont, 1602. He also translated part of
Ovid's REMEDY OF LOVE. As did sir T. Overbury the whole soon afterward, Land.
1620. 8vo. But I believe there is a former editi^n, no date. 8vo.
. This is the first stanza.

Whole fifty years be gone and past
Since I alive have been
Yet of my Muse ere now there has
No armed verse be seen.
The same author opened a new field of romance, and which seems partly to have
suggested sir Philip Sydney's ARCADIA, in translating into English prose the
ten books of Heliodorus's Ethiopic history, in 1577 Bl Let. Lo d. 4to. A
second edition appeared in 1587. But in 1^68^9, there is an entry to Francis
Coldocke to print "a book entit^ the end of the xth book" of Heliodorus's
Ethiopics. REGISTR. STATION. A. fol. 178. b.
. This work, the beginning of which was afterward versified by Abraham France
in 1591, is dedicated to Edward earl of Oxford. The knights and dames of
chivalry, sir Tristram and Bell Isoulde, now began to give place to new lovers
and intrigues: and our author published the Excellent history of Theseus and
Ariadne, most probably suggested by Ovid, which was printed at London in 1566
In octavo. Bl. Let.
.

The ELEGIES of Ovid, which convey the obscenities of the brothel in elegant
language, but are seldom tinctured with the sentiments of a serious and
melancholy love, were translated by Christopher Marlowe belowmentioned, and
printed at Middleburgh without date. This book was ordered to be burnt at
Stationers hall, in 1599, by command of the archbishop of Canterbury and the
bishop of London REGISTR. STATION. C. fol. 316. a. b. There were two
impressions.
.

Ovid's REMEDY OF LOVE had an anonymous translator in 1599 Dec. 25. REGISTR.
STATION. C. fol. 55. a. To Brown and Jagger. Under the same year occur, Ovydes
Epistles in English, and Ovydes Metamorphoses in English. Ibid. fol. 57. a.
There seems to have been some difficulty in procuring a license for the
"Comedy of Sappho," Apr. 6, 1583. REGISTR. B. fol. 198. b.
. But this version was printed the next year under the title of "Ovidius Naso
his REMEDY OF LOVE, translated and entitled to the youth of England, by F. L.
London 1600 In quarto.
."

The HEROICAL EPISTLES of Ovid, with Sabinus's Answers, were set out and
translated by Thomas Turberville, a celebrated writer of poems in the reign of
queen Elisabeth, and of whom more will be said in his proper place "The
Heroycall Epistles of the learned poet Publius Naso in English verse, set out
and translated by George Turberville gentleman, with Aulus Sabinus answer to
certain of the same." Land. for Henry Denham, 1^67. 12mo.
. This version was printed in 1567, and followed by two editions In 1569 and
1600. All at Land. Bl. Let.
. It is dedicated to Thomas Howard viscount Byndon I find entered to Henry
Denham, in 1565-6, a book called "the first epestle of Ovide." REGISTR.
STATION. A. fol. 148. b. Again the same year, to the same, "An epestle of Ovide
being the iiijth epestle." Ibid. fol. 149. a. In the same year, to the same,
the rest of Ovid's Epist^es. Ibid. fol. 152. a. There is "A book entit. Oenone
to Paris, wherein is deciphered the extremity of Love, etc." To R. Jones, May
17, 1594. REGISTR. B. fol. 307. b.
. Six of the Epistles are rendered in blank verse. The rest in four-lined
stanzas. The printer is John Charlewood, who appears to have been printer to
the family of Howard, and probably was retained as a domestic for that liberal
purpose in Arundel-house, the seat of elegance and literature till Cromwell's
usurpation In the Defensative against the poison of supposed prophesies,
written by Henry Howard, afterward earl of Northampton and lord privy seal,
and printed (4to.) in 1583, the printer, John Charlewood, styles himself
printer to Philip earl of Arundel. And in many others of his books, he calls
himself printer to lord Arundel. Otherwise, he lived in Barbican, at the sign
of the Half eagle and Key.
. Turberville was a polite scholar, and some of the passages are not unhappily
turned. From Penelope to Ulysses.

To thee that lingrest all too long
Thy wife, Ulysses, sends:
'Gaine write not, but by quick return
For absence make amends. --
O that the surging seas had drencht
That hateful letcher though,
When he to Lacedaemon came
Inbarkt, and wrought our woe!
I add here, that Mantuan, who had acquired the rank of a classic, was also
versified by Turberville in 1594 The four first Eclogues of Mantuan, I suppose
in English, were entered to Binneman in 1566. REGISTR. STATION. A. fol. 151. b.
And "the rest of the egloggs of Mantuan," to the same, in 1566. Ibid. fol. 154.
b.
.

Coxeter says, that he had seen one of Ovid's Epistles translated by Robert
earl of Essex. This I have never seen; and, if it could be recovered, I trust
it would only be valued as a curiosity. A few of his sonnets are in the
Ashmolean Museum, which have no marks of poetic genius. He is a vigorous and
elegant writer of prose. But if Essex was no poet, few noblemen of his age were
more courted by poets. From Spenser to the lowest rhymer he was the subject of
numerous sonnets, or popular ballads. I will not except Sydney. I could produce
evidence to prove, that he scarce ever went out of England, or even left
London, on the most frivolous enterprise, without a pastoral in his praise, or
a panegyric in meter, which were sold and sung in the streets. Having
interested himself in the fashionable poetry of the times, he was placed high
in the ideal Arcadia now just established: and among other instances which
might be brought, on his return from Portugal in 1589, he was complimented with
a poem, called "An Egloge gratulatorie entitled to the right honorable and
renowned shepherd of Albions Arcadie Robert earl of Essex and for his return
lately into England Licenced to R. Jones, Aug. 1, 1589. REGISTR. STATION. B.
fol. 246. b.
." This is a light in which lord Essex is seldom viewed. I know not if the
queen's fatal partiality, or his own inherent attractions, his love of
literature, his heroism, integrity, and generosity, qualities which abundantly
overbalance his presumption, his vanity, and impetuosity, had the greater share
in dictating these praises. If adulation were any where justifiable, it must be
when paid to the man who endeavored to save Spenser from starving in the
streets of Dublin, and who buried him in Westminster-abbey with becoming
solemnity. Spenser was persecuted by Burleigh, because he was patronised by
Essex.

Thomas Churchyard, who will occur again, rendered the three first of the
TRISTIA, which he dedicated to sir Christopher Hatton, and printed at London in
1580 In quarto. An entry appears in 1577, and 1591. REGISTR. STATION.
.

Among Coxeter's papers is mentioned the ballet of Helen's epistle to Paris,
from Ovid, in 1570, by B. G. I suspect this B. G. to be the author of a poem
called "A book entitled a new tragical historye of too lovers," as it is
entered in the register of the Stationers, where it is licenced to Alexander
Lacy, under the year 1563 REGISTR. A. fol. 102. It was reprinted, in 1568, for
Griffiths, ibid. fol. 174. b. Again, the some year, for R. Jones, "The ballet
entitled the story of ij faithful lovers." Ibid. fol. 177. b. Again, for R.
Tottell, in 1564, "A tragical historye that happened between ij English
lovers." Ibid. fol. 118. a. I know not if this be "The famooste and notable
history of two faithful lover^ named Alfayns and Archelaus in myter," for
Colwell, in 1565. Ibid fol. 133. a. There is also "A proper historye of ij
Duche lovers," for Purfoote, in 1567. Ibid. fol. 163. a. Also, "The most
famous history of ij Span^she lovers," to R. Jones, in 1569. Ibid. fol. 192. b.
A poem, called The tragical history of DIDACO AND VIOLENTA, was printed in 1576.
. Ames recites this piece as written by Ber. Gar. perhaps Bernard Gardener
HIST. PRINT. 532. 551.
. Unless Gar, which I do not think, be the full name. The title of BALLET was
often applied to poems of considerable length. Thus in the register of the
Stationers, Sackville's LEGEND OF BUCKINGHAM, a part of the MIRROR OF
MAGISTRATES, is recited, under the year 1557, among a great number of ballads,
some of which seem to be properly so styled, and entitled, "The murninge of
Edward duke of Buckynham." Unless we suppose this to be a popular epitome of
Sackville's poem, then just published I will exhibit the mode of entry more at
large. "To John King THESE BOOKS FOLLOWING, Called A Nosegaye, The scole
house of women, and also a Sack full of Ne^ves" Then another paragraph begins,
"To Mr. John Wallis, and Mrs. Toye, these BALLETS FOLLOWING, that is to say,
--." Then follow about forty pieces, among which is this of the Duke of
Buckingham. REGISTR. A. fol. 22. a. But in these records, BOOK and BALLET are
often promiscuously used.
. A romance, or History, versified, so as to form a book or pamphlet, was
sometimes called a ballad. As "A ballett entitled an history of Alexander
Campaspe and Apelles, and of the faithful fryndeshippe between them, printed
for Colwell, in 1565 REGISTR. STATION. A. fol. 137. b.
. This was from the grand romance of Alexander There is, printed in 1565, "A
ballet entitled Apelles and Pygmalyne, to the tune of the first Apelles."
Ibid. fol. 140. b. And, under the year 1565, "A ballet of king Polliceute [f.
Polyeuctes] to the tune of Appelles." Ibid. fol. 133. b. Also, "The Song of
Appelles," in the same year. Ibid. fol. 138. a. By the way, Lilly's Campaspe,
first printed in 1591, might originate from these pieces.
. Sometimes a Ballad is a work in prose. I cannot say whether, "A ballet
entitled the incorraggen all kind of men to the reedyfyinge and building
Poules steeple again," printed in 1564 Ibid. fol. 116. a.
, was a pathetic ditty, or a pious homily, or both. A play or interlude was
sometimes called a ballet, as, "A Ballet entitled AN INTERLUDE, The cruel
detter by Wayer," printed for Colwell, in 1565 Ibid. fol. 138. a.
. Religious subjects were frequently called by this vague and indiscriminating
name. In 1561, was published "A new ballet of iiij commandments Ibid. fol. 75.
b.
." That is, four of the Ten Commandments in meter. Again, among many others of
the same kind, as puritanism gained ground, "A ballet entitled the xvijth
chapter of the iiijth [second] book of Kings Ibid. fol. 166. a.
." And I remember to have seen, of the same period, a Ballet of the first
chapter of Genesis. And John Hall, abovementioned, wrote or compiled in 1564,
"The COURT OF VIRTUE, contaynynge many holy or spretuall songs, sonettes,
psalms, balletts, and short sentences, as well of holy scriptures, as others
For T. Marshe. Ibid. fol. 118. b. [See supr. p. 181.]
."

It is extraordinary, that Horace's ODES should not have been translated within
the period of which we are speaking I believe they were first translated by sir
Thomas Hawkins, knight, in 1625.
. In the year 1566, Thomas Drant published, what he called, "A MEDICINABLE
MORAL, that is, the two books of Horace his satyrs Englished, according to
the prescription of saint Hierome, etc That is, Quod malum est muta, quod bonum
est prode, from his Epistle to Ru^inus.
. London, for Thomas Marshe, 1566 At the end of this translation, are, "The
waylings of the prophet Hieremiah done into English verse. Also Epigrammes. T.
Drant, A^tidoti salutaris amator. Perused and allowed according to the queens
majesty's injunctions." Of the Epigrams, four are in English, and seven in
Latin. This book is said to be authorized by the bishop of London. REGISTR.
STATION. A. fol. 140. b. I know not whether or no the EPIGRAMS were not printed
separate: for in 1567, is licenced to T. Marshe, "A book entitled Epygrams and
Sentences spiritual by Draunte." Ibid. fol. 165. a. The argument of the
JEREMIAH, which he compared with the Hebrew and the Septuagint, begins,
Jerusalem is justly plagude,
And left disconsolate,
The queen of towns the prince of realms
Deuested from her state.
In 1586, Mar. 11, are entered to J. Wolf, "LAMENTATION OF JEREMYE in prose
and meeter in English, with Tremellius's Annotations to the prose." REGISTR.
STATION. B. fol. 216. a. See Donne's POEMS, p. 306. seq. edit. 1633. 4to.
." It is dedicated to "my Lady Bacon and my Lady Cecill favorers of learning
and virtue." The following year appeared, "Horace his Art of Poetry, Pistles,
and Satyrs Englished, and to the earl of Ormounte by Thomas Drant addressed
With a Greek motto.
. Imprinted at London in Fletestrete nere to S. Dunstones church, by Thomas
Marshe, 1567 In quarto. Bl. L^tt. In the front of the Dedication he styles
himself "Master of Art, and Student in Diuinitye." There is a license in
1566-7, to Henry Week^s for "Orace epestles in Engli^she." REGISTR. STATION. A.
fol. 155. a^ And there is an entry of the EPISTLES in 1591. REGISTR. B. I find
also entered to Colwell, "The first two satars and peysels of Orace
Englesshed by Lewis Evans schoolemaister," in 1564. REGISTR. A. fol. 121. a.
This piece is not catalogued among Evans's works in Wood, ATH. OXON. i. 178.
Nor in Tanner, BIBL. p. 270.
." This version is very paraphrastic, and sometimes parodical. In the address
to the reader prefixed, our translator says of his Horace, "I have translated
him sumtymes at randun. And now at this last time welnye word for word, and
line for line. And it is marvel that I, being in all mine other speeches so
plain and perceauable, should here desyer or not shun to be hard, so far
forth as I can keep the lerninge and sayings of the author." What follows is
too curious not to be transcribed, as it is a picture of the popular learning,
and a ridicule of the idle narratives, of the reign of queen Elisabeth. "But I
fear me a number do so think of this book, as I was answered by a prynter
not long agone: Though says he, sir, your book be wise and full of learning,
yet peradventure it will not be saleable: Signifying indeed, that flim flames,
and gue gawes, be they never so slight and slender, are sooner rapte up then
are those which be lettered and clarkly makings. And no doubt the cause that
books of learning seem so hard is, because such and so great a scull of
amarouse [amorous] pamphlets have so preoccupyed the eyes and ears of men,
that a multitude believe there is none other style or phrase else worth gramercy
We have this passage in a poem called PASQUILL'S MADNESS, Land. 1600. 4to.
fol. 36. And tell prose writers, stories are so stale,
That penny ballads make a better s^le.
And in Burton's Melancholy, ^ol. 122. edit. 1624. "If they read a book at
any time '^is an English Cronicle, sir Huon of Bourdeaux, or Amadis de Gaul, a
play book, or some pamphle^t of news." Hollinshed's and Stowe's CRONICLES
became at length the only fashionable reading. In The Guls Hornbook, it is
said, "The top [the leads] of saint Paul's contains more names than Stowe's
Cronicle." Land. 1609. 4to. p. 21. Bl. Let. That the ladies now began to read
novels we find from this passage, "Let them learn plain works of all kind,
so they take heed of too open seaming. Insteade of songs and music, let them
learn cookerie and laundrie. And instead of reading sir Philip Sidney's
ARCADIA, let them read the Gr^undes of good Huswi^^ry. I like not a female
poetesse at any hand. -- Th^re is a pretty way of breeding young maids in an
Exchange-shop, or Saint Martines le Grand. But many of them get such a ^oolish
trick with carrying their band-box to gentlemen's chambers, etc." TOM OF ALL
TRADES, or the plain Path way to Preferment. etc." By Thomas Powell, Land.
1631. 4to. p. 47, 48.

Female writers of poetry seem to have now been growing common: for, in his
ART OF ENGLISH POESY, Puttenham says, "Dark word, or doubtful speech, are
not so narrowly to be looked upon in a large poem, nor specially in the pretty
poesies and devises of Ladies and Gentlewomen-makers, [poetesses,] whom we
would not have too precise poets, least with their shrewd wits, when they were
married, they might become a little too fantastical wives." Lib. iii. chapter xxi.
p. 209. Decker, in the GULS HORNBOOK, written in 1609, in the chapter How a
gallant should behave himself in a playhouse, mentions the necessity of
hoarding up a quantity of play-scraps, to be ready for the attacks of the "
Arcadian and Euphuised gentlewomen." Chapter vi. p. 27. seq. Edward Hake, in A
Touchstone for this time present, speaking of the education of young ladies,
says, that the girl is "either altogether kept from exercises of good learning,
and knowledge of good letters, or el^e she is so nouseled in AMOROU^ books,
vain STORIES, and ^onde trifeling fancies, etc." Land. by Thomas Hacket, 1574,
12mo. SIGNAT. C 4. He adds, after many severe censures on the impiety of
dancing, that "the substance which is consumed in two years space upon the
apparaill of one mean gentleman's daughter, o^ upon the daughter or wife of
one citizen, would be sufficient to find a poor student in the university
by the space of four or five years at the least." Ibid. SIGNAT. D 2. But if
girls are bred to learning, he says, "It is for no other end, but to make them
companions of carpet knights, and giglots for amorous lovers." Ibid. SIGNAT. C
4. Gabriel Harvey, in his elegy DE AULICA, or character of the Maid of Honor,
says, among many other requisite accomplishments, Saltet item, pingatque eadem,
DOCTUMQUE POEMA
Pangat, nec Musas nesciat illa meas.
See his GRATULATIONES VALDINENSES, Land. Binneman, 1578. 4to. Lib. iv. p. 21.
He adds, that she should have in her library, Chaucer, lord Surrey, and
Gascoign^, together with some medical books. Ibid. p. 22.


. No books so ryfe or so frindly red, as be these books. -- But if the setting
out of the wanton tricks of a pair of lovers, as for example let them be
cauled sir Chaunticleare and dame Partilote, to tell how their first
combination of love began, how their eyes floted, and how they anchered,
their beams mingled one with the others bewtye. Then, of their perplexed
thowghts, their throws, their fancies, their dryrie driftes, now interrupted
now vnperfyted, their love days, their sugared words, and their sugared joys.
Afterward, how enuyous fortune, through this chop or that chance, turned
their bless to bale, seuerynge two such bewtiful faces and dewtiful hearts.
Last, at partynge, to ad-to an oration or twane, interchangeably had betwixt
the two wobegone persons, the one thick powderd with manly passionat pangs,
the other watered with womanish tears. Then to shryne them up to god Cupid,
and make martirres of them both, and therwyth an end of the matter."
Afterward, reverting to the peculiar difficulty of his own attempt, he adds,
"Neither any man which can judge, can judge it one and the like labor to
translate Horace, and to make and translate a love book, a shril tragedye, or
a smoth and platleuyled poesye. This can I truly say of mine own experyence,
that I can sooner translate twelve verses out of the Greek Homer than six out
Horace." Horace's satirical writings, and even his Odes, are undoubtedly more
difficult to translate than the narrations of epic poetry, which depend more on
things than words: no^ is it to be expected, that his satires and epistles
should be happily rendered into English at this infancy of style and taste,
when his delicate turns could not be expressed, his humor and his urbanity
justly relished, and his good sense and observations on life understood. Drant
seems to have succeeded best in the exquisite Epistle to Tibullus, which I will
therefore give entire.

To Albius Tibullus, a deuisor An inventor, a poet.
.
Tybullus, friend and gentle judge
Of all that I do clatter He means to express the loose and rough ver^ification
of the SERMONES.
,
What do thou all this while abroad,
How might I learn the matter?
Do thou inuente such worthy works
As Cassius' poemes pass?
Or doste thou closely creeping lurck^
Amid the wholesome grass?
Addicted to philosop^ie,
Contemning not a whitte
That Is That which is.
seemlie for an honest man,
And for a man of wit Knowledge, wisdom. Sapient^^
.
Not thou a body without breast!
The gods made thee to excel
In shape, the gods have lent thee goods,
And art to use them well.
What better thing unto her child
Can wish the mother kind?
Than wisdom, and, in fyled frame Having a comely person. Or, to speak with
elegance.
,
To utter owte his mind:
To have fair favor, fame enoughe,
And perfect stay, and health;
Things trim at will, and not to feel
The empty ebb of wealth.
Twixt hope to have, and care to keep,
Twixt fear and wrath, away
Consumes the time: each day that cummes,
Think it the latter day.
The hour that cummes unlooked for
Shall cum more welcum aye.
Thou shall Me find fat and well fed,
As pubble I have never seen this word, which is perhaps provincial. The sense
is obvious.
as may be;
And, when thou will, a merry mate,
To laughe and chat with thee Signat. C iiij.
.
Drant undertook this version in the character of a grave divine, and as a
teacher of morality. He was educated at saint John's college in Cambridge;
where he was graduated in theology, in the year 1569 Catal. Grad. Cant. MS.
. The same year he was appointed prebendary of Chichester and of saint Paul's.
The following year he was instal^ed archdeacon of Jews in the cathedral of
Chichester. These preferments he probably procured by the interest of Grindall
archbishop of York, of whom he was a domestic chaplain MS. Tann.
. He was a tolerable Latin poet. He translated the ECCLESIASTES into Latin
hexameters, which he dedicated to sir Thomas Henneage, a common and a liberal
patron of these times, and printed at London in 1572 For Thomas Day. In
quarto. The title is, "In Solomonis regis ECCLESIASTEM, seu de Vanitate mundi
Concionem, paraphrasis poetica. Land. per Joan. Dayum 1572." There is an entry
to Richard Field of the "Ecclesiastes in English verse." Nov. 11, 1596.
REGISTR. STATION. C. fol. 15. a. And, by Thomas Granger, to W. Jones, Apr. 30,
1620. Ibid. fol. 313. b.
. At the beginning and end of this work, are six smaller pieces in Latin verse.
Among these are the first sixteen lines of a paraphrase on the book of JOB. He
has two miscellanies of Latin poetry extant, the one entitled SYLVA, dedicated
to queen Elisabeth, and the other POEMATA VARIA ET EXTERNA. The last was
printed at Paris, from which circumstance we may conclude that he traveled
Drant has two Latin poems prefixed to Nevill's KETTUS, 1575. 4to. Another, to
John Seton's LOGIC with Peter Carter's annotations, Land. 1574. 12mo. And to
the other editions. [Seton was of saint John's in Cambridge, chaplain to bishop
Gardener for seven years, and highly esteemed by him. Made D. D. in 1544.
Installed prebendary of Winchester, Mar. 19, 1553. Rector of Henton in
Hampshire, being then forty-two years old, and B. D. See A. Wood, MS. C. 287.
He is extolled by Leland for his distinguished excellence both in the classics
and philosophy. He published much Latin poetry. See Strype's ELIZ. p. 242.
Carter was also of S. John's in Cambridge.] Another, with one in English, to
John Sadler's English version of Vegetius's TACTICS, done at the request of sir
Edmund Brudenell, and addressed to the earl of Bedford, Land. 1572. 4to. He has
a Latin epitaph, or elegy, on the death of doctor Cuthbert Scot, designed
bishop of Chester, but deposed by queen Elisabeth for popery, who died a
fugitive at Louvaine, Land. 1565. He probably wrote this piece abroad. There is
licenced to T. Marsh, in 1565, "An Epigrame of the death of Cuthbert Skotte by
Roger Sherlock, and replied against by Thomas Drant." REGISTR. STATION. A.
fol. 134. b. A Latin copy of verses, DE SEIPSO, is prefixed to his HORACE.
. In the SYLVA, he mentions his new version of David's psalms, I suppose in
English verse Fol. 56.
. In the same collection, he says he had begun to translate the Iliad, but had
gone no further than the fourth book Fol. 75.
. He mentions also his version of the Greek EPIGRAMS of Gregory Nazianzen Fol.
50.
. But we are at a loss to discover, whether the latter were English or Latin
versions. The indefatigably inquisitive bishop Tanner has collect^d our
translator's Sermons, six in number, which are more to be valued for their type
than their doctrine, and at present are of little more use, than to fill the
catalogue of the typographical antiquary Codd. Tanner Oxon. Two are dedicated
to Thomas Heneage. Three to sir Francis Knollys. Date of the earliest, 1569. Of
the latest, 1572. In that preached at court 1569, he tells the ladies, he can
give them a better clothing than any to be found in the queen's wardrobe: and
mentions the speedy downfall of their "high plumy heads." Signat. K v. Land.
1570. 12mo. I find the following note by bishop Tanner. "Thomae Drantae Angli
Andvordingamii PRAESUL. Dedicat. to Archbishop Grindal. PR. DED. -- Illuxit ad
extremum dies ille." -- I presume, that under the word Andvording^amii is
concealed our author's n^tive place. His father's name was Thomas.
. Two of them were preached at saint Mary's hospital At saint Mary's Spittle.
In the statutes of many of the ancient colleges at Oxford and Cambridge, it is
ordered, that the candidates in divinity shall preach a sermon, not only at
Paul's-cross, but at saint Mary's Hospital in Bishopsgate-street, "ad Hospitale
beatae Mariae."
. Drant's latest publication is dated in 1572.

Historical ballads occur about this period with the initials T. D. These may
easily be mistaken for Thomas Drant, but they stand for Thomas Deloney, a
famous ballad writer of these times, mentioned by Kemp, one of the original
actors in Shakespeare's plays, in his NINE DAYS WONDER. Kemp's miraculous
morris-dance, performed in nine days from London to Norwich, had been
misrepresented in the popular ballads, and he thus remonstrates against some of
their authors. "I have made a privy search what private jig-monger of your
jolly number had been the author of these abominable ballets written of me. I
was told it was the great ballade maker T. D. or Thomas Deloney, chronicler of
the memorable Lives of the SIX YEOMEN OF THE WEST, JACK OF NEWBERY Entered to
T. Myllington, Mar. 7, 1596. REGISTR. STATION. C. fol. 20. b.
, THE GENTLE CRAFT I presume he means, an anonymous comedy called "THE
SHOEMAKERS HOLYDAY or the GENTLE CRAFT. With the humorous li^e of sir John Air
shoemaker, and Lord Mayor of London." Acted before the queen on New Year's Day
by Lord Nottingham's players. I have an edition, Land. for J. Wright, 1618. Bl.
Let. 4to. Prefixed are the first and second THREE MAN'S SONGS. But there is an
old prose history in quarto called the GENTLE CRAFT, which I suppose is the
subject of Harrington's Epigram, "Of a Book called the GENTLE CRAFT." B. iv.
11. "A Book called the GENTL^ CRAFT entreating of Shoemakers," is entered to
Ralph Blore, Oct. 19, 1597. REGISTR. STATION. C. fol. 25. a. See also ibid.
fol. 63. a.
, and such like honest men, omitted by Stowe, Hollinshed, Grafton, Hall,
Froysart, and the rest of those welldeseruing writers Edit. 1600. 4to. SIGNAT.
D 2.
."

I am informed from some manuscript authorities, that in the year 1571, Drant
printed an English translation from Tully, which he called, The chosen eloquent
oration of Marcus Tullius Cicero for the poet Archias, selected from his
orations, and now first published in English MSS. Coxeter.
. I have never seen this version, but I am of opinion that the translator might
have made a more happy choice. For in this favorite piece of superficial
declamation, the specious orator, when he is led to a formal defense of the
value and dignity of poetry, instead of illustrating his subject by insisting
on the higher utilities of poetry, its political nature, and its importance to
society, enlarges only on the immortality which the art confers, on the poetic
faculty being communicated by divine inspiration, on the public honors paid to
Homer and Ennius, on the esteem with which poets were regarded by Alexander and
Themistocles, on the wonderful phenomenon of an extemporaneous ^ffusion of a
great number of verses, and even recurs to the trite and obvious topics of a
schoolboy in saying, that poems are a pleasant relief after fatigue of the
mind, and that hard rocks and savage beasts have been moved by the power of
song. A modern philosopher would have considered such a subject with more
penetration, comprehension, and force of reflection. His excuse must be, that
he was uttering a popular harangue.

SECT. XLI.
THE EPIGRAMS of Martial were translated in part by Timothy Kendall, born at
North Aston in Oxfordshire, successively educated at Eton and at Oxford, and
afterward a student of the law at Staple's-inn. This performance, which cannot
properly or strictly be called a translation of Martial, has the following
title, "FLOWERS OF EPIGRAMMES out of sundry the most singular authors
selected, etc. By Timothy Kendall late of the university of Oxford, now
student of Staple Inn. London, 1577 In duodecimo. They are entered at
Stationers Hall, Feb. 25, 1576. REGISTR. B. fol. 138. a. To John Sheppard.
." It is dedicated to Robert earl of Leicester. The epigrams translated are
from Martial, Pictorius, Borbonius, Politian, Bruno, Textor, Ausonius, the
Greek anthology, Beza, sir Thomas More, Henry Stephens, Haddon Walter Haddon's
POEMATA, containing a great number of metrical Latin epitaphs, were collected,
and published with his LIFE, and verses at his death, by Giles Fletcher and
others, in 1576. See T. Baker's Letters to bishop Tanner, MS. Bibl. Bodl. And
by Hatcher, 1567. 4to.
, Parkhurst John Parkhurst, bishop of Norwich, a great re^ormer, published,
LUDICRA SEU EPIGRAMMATA JUVENILIA, Land. 1572. 4to. Also, EPIGRAMMATA SERIA,
Land. 1560. 8vo. He died in 1574. See Wilson's Collection of EPITAPHIA on
Charles and Henry Brandon, Land. 1552.
, and others. But by much the greater part is from Martial Kendal is mentioned
among the English EPIGRAMMATISTS by Meres, ubi supr. fol. 274.
. It is charitable to hope, that our translator Timothy Kendall wasted no more
of his time at Staples-inn in culling these fugitive blossoms. Yet he has
annexed to these versions his TRIFLES or juvenile epigrams, which are dated the
same year The first line is, "Borbon in France bears bell away."
That is, Nicholas Borbonius, whose NUGAE, or Latin Epigrams, then celebrated,
have great elegance. But Joachim du Bellai made this epigram on the Title.
Paul, tuum inscribis NUGARUM nomine librum,
In toto libro nil melius titulo.
Our countryman Owen, who had no notion of Borbonius's elegant simplicity, was
still more witty. Quas tu dixisti NUGAS, non esse putasti,
Non dico NUGAS esse, se^ esse puto.

.

Meres, in his WITS TREASURY, mentions doctor Johnson, as the translator of
Homer's BATRACHOMUOMACHY, and Watson of Sophocles's ANTIGONE, but with such
ambiguity, that it is difficult to determine from his words whether these
versions are in Latin or English Fol. 289. p. 2.
. That no reader may be misled, I observe here, that Christopher Johnson, a
celebrated headmaster of Winchester school, afterward a physician, translated
Homer's FROGS AND MICE into Latin hexameters, which appeared in quarto, at
London, in 1580 Entered to T. Purfoote, Jan. 4, 1579. With "certain orations of
Isocrates." REGISTR. STATION. B. fol. 165. a.
. Thomas Watson author of a HUNDRED SONNETS, or the passionate century of Love,
published a Latin ANTIGONE in 1581 In quarto. Licenced to R. Jones. Jul. 31,
1581. Ibid. fol. 182. b.
. The latter publication, however, shows at this time an attention to the Greek
tragedies.

Christopher Marlowe, or Marloe, educated in elegant letters at Cambridge,
Shakespeare's cotemporary on the stage, often applauded both by queen Elisabeth
and king James the first, as a judicious player, esteemed for his poetry by
Jonson and Drayton, and one of the most distinguished tragic poets of his age,
translated Coluthus's RAPE OF HELEN into English rhyme, in the year 1587. I
have never seen it; and I owe this information to the manuscript papers of a
diligent collector of these fugacious anecdotes MSS. Coxeter.
. But there is entered to Jones, in 1595, "A book entitled RAPTUS HELENAE,
Helens Rape, by the Athenian duke Theseus April 12. REGISTR. STATION. B. fol.
1^1^ b.
." Coluthus's poem was probably brought into vogue, and suggested to Marlowe's
notice, by being paraphrased in Latin verse the preceding year by Thomas
Watson, the writer of sonnets just mentioned Printed at Land. 1586. 4to.
. Before the year 1598, appeared Marlowe's translation of the LOVES OF HERO AND
LEANDER, the elegant prolusion of an unknown sophist of Alexandria, but
commonly ascribed to the ancient Musaeus. It was left unfinished by Marlowe's
death; but what was called a second part, which is nothing more than a
continuation from the Italian, appeared by one Henry Petowe, in 1598 For
Pur^oot, 4to. See Petowe's Preface, which has a high panegyric on Marlowe. He
says he begun where Marlowe left off. In 1593, Sept. 28, there is an entry to
John Wolf of "A book entitled Hero and Leander, being an amorous poem devised
by Christopher Marlowe." REGISTR. STATION. B. fol. 300. b. The translation, as
the entire work of Marlowe, is mentioned twice in Nashe's LENTEN STUFF, printed
in 1599. It occurs again in the registers of the Stationers, in 1597, 1598, and
1600. REGISTR. C. fol. 31. a. 34. a. I learn from Mr. Malone, that Marlowe
finished only the two first Sestiads, and about one hundred lines of the third.
Chapman did the remainder. Petowe published the Whipping of Runawaies^ for
Burbie, in 1603.

There is an old ballad on Jephtha judge of Israel, by William Petowe. In the
year 1567, there is an entry to Alexander Lacy, of "A ballett entitled the
Song of Jesphas dowghter at his death." REGISTR. STATION. A. fol. 162. a.
Perhaps this is the old song of which Hamlet in joke throws out some scraps to
Polonius, and which has been recovered by Mr. Steevens. HAMLET, ACT ii. Sc. 7.
[See also J^ffa judge o^ Israel, in REGISTR. D. fol. 93. D^c. 14, 1624.] This
is one of the pieces which Hamlet calls pious chansons, and which taking their
rise from the reformation, abounded in the reign of Elisabeth. Hence, by the
way, we see the propriety of reading pious chansons, and not po^s chansons, or
ballads sung on bridges, with Pope. Row arbitrarily substituted Rubric, not
that the titles of old ballads were ever printed in red. Rubric came at length
simply to signify title, because, in the old manuscripts, it was the custom to
write the titles or heads of chapters in red ink. In the Statutes of Winchester
and New college, every statu^e is therefore called a RUBRICA.


. Another edition was published, with the first book of Lucan, translated also
by Marlowe, and in blank verse, in 1600 But this version of Lucan is entered,
as above, Sept. 28, 1593^ to John Wolf, Ibid. fol. 300. b. Nor does it always
apappear at the end of MUSAEUS in 1600. There is an edition that year by P.
Short.
. At length George Chapman, the translator of Homer, completed, but with a
striking inequality, Marlowe's unfinished version, and printed it at London in
quarto, 1606 There is another edition in 1616, and 1629. 4to. The edition of
1616, with Chapman's name, and dedicated to Inigo Jones, not two inches long
and scarcely one broad, is the most diminutive product of English typography.
But it appears a different work from the edition of 1606. The ^Ballad of Hero
and Le^nder" is entered to J. White, Jul. 2, 1614. REGISTR. STATION. C. fol.
252. a. Burton, an excellent Grecian, having occasion to quote MUSAEUS, cites
Marlowe's version, MELANCHOLY, page ^72. ^eq. fol. edit. 1624.
. Tanner takes this piece to be one of Marlowe'^ plays. It probably suggested
to Shakespeare the allusion to Hero and Leander, in the MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S
DREAM, under the player's blunder of Limander and Helen, where the interlude of
Thisbe is presented Act v. Sc. ult.
. It has many nervous and polished verses. His tragedies manifest traces of a
just dramatic conception, but they abound with tedious and uninteresting
scenes, or with such extravagancies as proceeded from a want of judgment, and
those barbarous ideas of the times, over which it was the peculiar gift of
Shakespeare's genius alone to triumph and to predominate Nashe in his Elegy
prefixed to Marlowe's DIDO, mentions five of his plays. Mr. Malone is of
opinion, from a similarity of style, that the Tragedy of LOCRINE, published in
1595, attributed to Shakespeare, was written by Marlowe. SUPPL. SHAKESP. ii.
190. He conjectures also Marlowe to be the author of the old KING JOHN. Ibid.
i. 163. And of TITUS ANDRONICUS, and of the lines spoken by the players in the
interlude in HAMLET. Ibid. i. 371.
. His TRAGEDY OF DIDO QUEEN OF CARTHAGE was completed and published by his
friend Thomas Nashe, in 1594 In quarto. At London, by the widow Orwin, for
Thomas Woodcocke. Played by the children of the chapel. It begins, "Come gentle
Ganimed!"
It has been frequently confounded with John Rightwise's play on the same
subject performed at saint Paul's school before Cardinal Wolsey, and afterward
before queen Elisabeth at Cambridge, in 1564. I have before mentioned the Latin
tragedy of Dido and Eneas, performed at Oxford, in 1583, before the prince
Alasco. [See supr. ii. 383.] See what Hamlet says to the first Player on this
favorite story. In 1564, was entered a "ballet of a lover blaming his fortune
by Dido and Eneas for thayre untruth." REGISTR. STATION. A fol. 116. a. In the
TEMPEST, Gonzalo mentions the "widow Dido." ACT iii. SC. i. On old ballads we
read the Tune of queen Dido. Perhaps from some ballad on the subject,
Shakespeare took his idea of Dido standing with a willow in her hand on the
seashore, and beckoning Eneas back to Carthage. MERCH. VEN. ACT. v. SC. i.
Shakespeare has also strangely falsified Dido's story, in the S. P. of K. HENRY
THE SIXTH. ACT iii. SC. ii. I have before mentioned the interlude of Dido and
Eneas at Chester.
.

Although Jonson mentions Marlowe's MIGHTY MUSE, yet the highest testimony
Marlowe has received, is from his cotemporary Drayton; who from his own
feelings was well qualified to decide on the merits of a poet. It is in
Drayton's Elegy, T^ my dearly loved friend Henry Reynolds of Poets and Poesy.

Next Marlowe, bathed in the Thespian springes,
Had in him those brave translunary Langbaine, who cites these lines without
seeming to know their author, by a pleasant mistake has printed this word
sublunary. DRAM. POETS, p. 342.
things,
That the first poets had: his raptvres were
All air, and fire, which made his verses clear:
For that fine madness still he did retain
Which rightly should possess a poet's brain Land. edit. 1753. iv. p. 1256.
That Marlowe was a favorite with Jonson, appears from the Preface to one
Bosworth's poems; who says, that Jonson used to call the mighty lines of
Marlowe's MUSOEUS fitter for admiration than parallel. Thomas Heywood, who
published Marlowe's JEW OF MALTA, in 1633, wrote the Prologue, spoken at the
Cockpit, in which Marlowe is highly commended both as a player and a poet. It
was in this play that Allen, the founder of Dulwich college, acted the JEW with
so much applause.
.
In the RETURN FROM PARNASSUS, a sort of critical play, acted at Cambridge in
1606, Marlowe's buskined MUSE is celebrated Hawkins's OLD PL. iii. p. 215.
Land. 1607. 4to. But it is entered in 1605, Oct. 16, to J. Wright, where it is
said to have been acted at saint John's. REGISTR. STATION. C. fol. 130. b. See
other cotemporary testimonies of this author, in OLD PLAYS. (in 12 Vol.) Land.
1780. 12mo. Vol. ii. 308.
. His cotemporary Decker, Jonson's antagonist, having allotted to Chaucer and
grave Spenser, the highest seat in the Elisian grove of Bays, has thus
arranged Marlowe. "In another company sat learned Atchlow and, (tho he had been
a player molded out of their pens, yet because he had been their lover and
register to the Muse) inimitable Bentley: these were likewise carowsing out of
the holy well, etc. Whilst Marlowe, Green, and Peele, had got under the
shadow of a large vine, laughing to see Nashe, that was but newly come to their
college, still haunted with the same satyricall spirit that followed him here
upon earth A KNIGHT'S CONJURING, Signat. L. 1607. 4to. To this company Henry
Chettle is admitted, [see supr. p. 291.] and is saluted in bumpers of Helicon
on his arrival.
."

Marlowe's wit and spriteliness of conversation had often the unhappy effect of
tempting him to sport with sacred subjects; more perhaps from the preposterous
ambition of courting the casual applause of profligate and unprincipled
companions, than from any systematic disbelief of religion. His skepticism,
whatever it might be, was construed by the prejudiced and peevish puritans into
absolute atheism: and they took pains to represent the unfortunate catastrophe
of his untimely death, as an immediate judgment from heaven upon his execrable
impiety See Beard's THEATER OF GOD'S JUDGMENTS, lib. i. chapter xxiii. And "Account
of the blasphemous and damnable opinions of Christ. Marley and 3 others who
came to a sudden and fearful end of this life." MSS. HARL. 6853. 80. fol. 320.
. He was in love, and had for his rival, to use the significant words of Wood,
"A bawdy servingman, one rather fitter to be a pimp, than an ingenious
amoretto, as Marlowe conceived himself to be ATH. OXON. i. 338. See Meres, WITS
TR. fol. 287.
." The consequence was, that an affray ensued; in which the antagonist having
by superior agility gained an opportunity of strongly grasping Marlow's wrist,
plunged his dagger with his own hand into his own bosom. Of this wound he died
rather before the year 1593 Marston seems to allude to this catastrophe,
CERTAIN SATYRS. Land. for Edmond Matts, 1598, 12mo. SAT. ii. It Is loose-leg'd
Lais, that same common drab,
For whom good Tubro took the mortal stab.
By the way, Marlowe in his EDWARD THE SECOND, seems to have ridiculed the
puritans under the character of the scholar Spencer, who "says a long grace at
a tables end, wears a little band, buttons like pins heads, and -- "is
curate-like in his attire,
"Though inwardly licentious enough, etc."

. One of Marlowe's tragedies is, The tragical history of the life and death of
doctor John Faustus Entered, I think for the first time, to T. Bushel, Jan. 7,
1600. REGISTR. STATION. C. fol. 67. b. Or rather 1610, Sept. 13, to J. Wright.
Ibid. fol. 199. b.
. A proof of the credulous ignorance which still prevailed, and a specimen of
the subjects which then were thought not improper for tragedy. A tale which at
the close of the sixteenth century had the possession of the public theaters of
our metropolis, now only frightens children at a puppet-show in a country-town.
But that the learned John Faust continued to maintain the character of a
conjuror in the sixteenth century even by authority, appears from a "Ballad of
the life and death of doctor Faustus the great congerer," which in 1588 was
licenced to be printed by the learned Aylmer bishop of London REGISTR. STATION.
B. fol. 241. b.
.

As Marlowe, being now considered as a translator, and otherwise being
generally ranked only as a dramatic poet, will not occur again, I take this
opportunity of remarking here, that the delicate sonnet called the PASSIONATE
SHEPHERD TO HIS LOVE, falsely attributed to Shakespeare, and which occurs in
the third act of THE MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR, followed by the nymph's Reply, was
written by Marlowe See Steevens's SHAKESP. vol. i. p. 297. edit. 1778.
. Isaac Walton in his COMPLETE ANGLER, a book perhaps composed about the year
1640, although not published till 1653, has inserted this sonnet, with the
reply, under the character of "that smooth song which was made by Kit Marlowe,
now at least fifty years ago: and -- an Answer to it which was made by sir
Walter Raleigh in his younger days: old fashioned poetry, but choicely good."
In ENGLAND'S HELICON, a miscellany of the year 1600, it is printed with
Christopher Marlowe's name, and followed by the Reply, subscribed IGNOTO,
Raleigh's constant signature Signat. P. 4. edit. 1614.
. A page or two afterward, it is imitated by Raleigh. That Marlowe was
admirably qualified for what Mr. Mason, with a happy and judicious propriety,
calls PURE POETRY, will appear from the following passage of his forgotten
tragedy of EDWARD THE SECOND, written in the year 1590, and first printed in
1598. The highest entertainments, then in fashion, are contrived for the
gratification of the infatuated Edward, by his profligate minion Piers Gaveston.

I must have wanton poe^s, pleasant wits,
Musicians, that with touching of a string
May draw the plyant king which way I please.
Music and poetry are his delight;
Therefore I Will have Italian masks by night,
Sweet speeches, comedies, and pleasing shows.
And in the day, when he shall walk abroad,
Like sylvan Nymphs my pages shall be clad,
My men like Satyrs, grazing on the lawnes,
Shall with their goat-feet dance the antic hay.
Sometimes a Lovely Boy, in Dian's shape That is, acting the part of Diana.
,
With hair that gildes the water as it glides,
Crownets of pearl about his naked arms,
And in his sportfull hands an oliue-tree,
Shall bathe him in a spring: and there hard by,
One, like Acteon, peeping through the grove,
Shall by the angry goddess be transformed. --
Such things as these best please his majesty.
It must be allowed that these lines are in Marlowe's best manner. His chief
fault in description is an indulgence of the florid style, and an accumulation
of conceits, yet resulting from a warm and brilliant fancy. As in the following
description of a river.

I walked along a stream, for pureness rare,
Brighter than sunshine: for it did acqvaint
The dullest sight with all the glorious pray,
That in the pebble-paved channel lay.
No molten crystal, but a richer mine;
Even natvre's rarest alchemie ran there,
Diamonds resolved, and svbstance more divine;
Throvgh whose bright-gliding current might appear
A thousand naked Nymphs, whose yuorie shine
Enameling the banks, made them more dear Precious.
^
Than ever was that glorious pallace-gate,
Where the day-shining Sun in trivmph sat The description of the palace of
the sun wa^ a favorite passage in Golding's Ovid.
.
Upon this brim, the eglantine, and rose,
The tamariske, olive, and the almond-tree,
(As kind companions) in one union grows,
Folding their twining arms: as often we see
Turtle-taught lovers either other close,
Lending to dullness feeling sympathy:
And as a costly vallance Canopy. Shakespeare means a rich bed-canopy in SEC.
P. HENR. iv. ACT iii. SC. i. Under the canopies of costly state.

oer a bed,
So did their garland-tops the brook oerspred.
Their leaves that differed both in shape and show,
(Though all were green, yet difference such in green
Like to the checkered bend of Iris' bow)
Prided, the running maine as it had been, etc See ENGLAND'S PARNASSUS, Land.
^600. 12mo. fol. 465.
.
Philips, Milton's nephew, in a work which I think discovers many touches of
Milton's hand, calls Marlowe, "A second Shakespeare, not only because he rose
like him from an actor to be a maker of plays, though inferior both in fame
and merit, but also, because in his begun poem of Hero and Leander, he seems to
have a resemblance of that CLEAR UNSOPHISTICATED wit, which is natural to that
incomparable poet THEATR. POETAR. MOD. P. p. 24. edit. 1680.
." Criticisms of this kind were not common, after the national taste had been
just corrupted by the false and capricious refinements of the court of Charles
the second.

Ten books of Homer's ILIAD were translated from a metrical French version into
English by A. H. or Arthur Hall esquire, of Grantham, and a member of
parliament See a process against Hall, in 1580, for writing a pamphlet printed
by Binneman, related by Ames, p. 325.
, and printed at London by Ralph Newberie, in 1581 In quarto. Bl. Let. November.
25, 1580, H. Binneman is licenced to print "ten books of the Iliades of
Homer." REGISTR. STATION. B. fol. 175. a.
. This translation has no other merit than that of being the first appearance
of a part of the Iliad in an English dress. I do not find that he used any
known French version. He sometimes consulted the Latin interpretation, where
his French copy failed. It is done in the Alexandrine of Sternhold. In the
Dedication to sir Thomas Cecil, he compliments the distinguished translators of
his age, Phaier, Golding, Jasper Heywood, and Googe; together with the worthy
works of lord Buckhurst, "and the pretty pythie Conceits of M. George
Gascoygne." He adds, that he began this work about 1563, under the advice and
encouragement of, "Mr. Robert Askame He me^ns the learned Roger Ascham. It
begins, "I thee beseech, O goddess mild, the hateful hate to plain."

, a familiar acquaintance of Homer."

But a complete and regular version of Homer was reserved for George Chapman.
He began with printing the Shield of Achilles, in 1596 Land. 4to.
. This was followed by seven books of the ILIAD the same year Land. 4to.
. Fifteen books were printed in 1600 In a thin folio.
. At length appeared without date, an entire translation of the ILIAD He says
in his COMMENTARY on the first book, that he had wholly translated again his
first and second books^ but that he did not even correct the seventh, eighth,
ninth, and tenth. And that he believed his version of the twelve last to be the
best. Butter's edit. ut infr. fol. 14. Meres, who wrote in 1598, mentions
"Chapman's inchoate Homer." fol. 285. p. 2. Ubi supr.
under the following title, "The ILIADS OF HOMER Prince of Poets. Never before
in any language truly translated. With a comment upon some of his chief
places: Done according to the Greek by George Chapman. At London, printed for
Nathaniell Butter It is an engraved title page by William Hole, with figures of
Achilles and Hector, etc. In folio.
." It is dedicated in English heroics to Prince Henry. This circumstance proves
that the book was printed at least after the year 1603, in which James the
first acceded to the throne I suppose, by an entry in the register of the
Stationers, in 1611, April ^. REGISTR. C. fol. 207. ^.
. Then follows an anagram on the name of his gracious Mecenas prince Henry, and
a sonnet to the sole empress of beauty queen Anne. In a metrical address to
the reader he remarks, but with little truth, that the English language,
abounding in consonant monosyllables, is eminently adapted to rhythmical
poetry. The doctrine that an allegorical sense was hid under the narratives of
epic poetry had not yet ceased; and he here promises a poem on the mysteries he
had newly discovered in Homer. In the Preface, he declares that the last twelve
books were translated in fifteen weeks: yet with the advice of his learned and
valued friends, Master Robert Hews This Robert Hues, or Husius, was a scholar,
a good geographer and mathematician, and published ^ tr^ct in Latin on the
Globes, Land. 1593. 8vo. With other pieces in that way. There was also a Robert
Hughes who wrote a Dictionary of the English and Persic. See Wood, ATH. OXON.
i. 571. HIST. ANTIQUIT. UNIV. OXON. Lib. ii. p. 288. b.
, and Master Harriots. It is certain that the whole performance betrays the
negligence of haste. He pays his acknowledgements to his "most ancient,
learned, and right noble friend, Master Richard Stapilton Already mentioned a^
the publisher of a poetical miscellany in 1593. Supr. p. 401. "The spiritu^ll
poems or hymns of R. S." are entered to J. Busbie, Oct. 17, 1595. R^GI^TR.
STATION. C. fol. 3. b.
, the first most desertfull mouer in the frame of our Homer." He endeavors to
obviate a popular objection, perhaps not totally groundless, that he consulted
the prose Latin version more than the Greek original. He says, sensibly enough,
"it is the part of every knowing and judicious interpreter, not to follow the
number and order of words, but the material things themselves, and sentences
to weigh diligently; and to clothe and adorn them with words, and such a style
and form of oration, as are most apt for the language into which they are
converted." The danger lies, in too lavish an application of this sort of
clothing, that it may not disguise what it should only adorn. I do not say
that this is Chapman's fault: but he has by no means represented the dignity or
the simplicity Homer. He is sometimes paraphrastic and redundant, but more
frequently retrenches or impoverishes what he could not feel and express. In
the mean time, he labors with the inconvenience of an awkward, inharmonious,
and unheroic measure, imposed by custom, but disgustful to modern ears. Yet he
is not always without strength or spirit. He has enriched our language with
many compound epithets, so much in the manner of Homer, such as the
silver-footed Thetis, the silver-throned Juno, the triple-feathered helm, the
high-walled Thebes, the faire-^aired boy, the silver-flowing floods, the
hugely-peopled towns, the Grecians navy-bound, the strong-winged lance, and
many more which might be collected. Dryden reports, that Waller never could
read Chapman's Homer without a degree of transport. Pope is of opinion, that
Chapman covers his defects "by a daring fiery spirit that animates his
translation, which is something like what one might imagine Homer himself to
have writ before he arrived to years of discretion." But his fire is too
frequently darkened, by that sort of fustian which now disfigured the diction
of our tragedy.

He thus translates the comparison of Diomed to the autumnal star, at the
beginning of the fifth book. The lines are in his best manner.

From his bright helm and shield did burn, a most unwearied fire,
Like rich Autumnus' golden lamp, whose brightness men admire
Past all the other host of stars, when with his cheerful face
Fresh-washt in lofty ocean waves, he does the sky enchase Fol. 63.
.
The sublime imagery of Neptune's procession to assist the Grecians, is thus
rendered.

The woods, and all the great hills near, trembled beneath the weight
Of his immortal moving feet: three steps he only took,
Before he farr-off Aege reached: but, with the fourth, it shook
With his dread entire. In the depth of those seas, did he hold
His bright and glorious palace, built of neuer-rusting gold:
And there arrived, he put in coach his brazen-footed steeds
All golden-maned, and paced with wings Having wings on their feet.
, and all in golden weeds
Himself he clothed. The golden scourge, most elegantly done Wrought. Finished.
,
He took, and mounted to his seat, and then the god begun
To drive his chariot through the waves. From whirlpools every way
The whales exulted under him, and knew their king: the sea
For joy did open, and his horse For Horses.
so swift and lightly flew,
The under axeltree of brass no drop of water drew Fol. 169, seq.
.
My copy once belonged to Pope; in which he has noted many of Chapman's
absolute interpolations, extending sometimes to the length of a paragraph of
twelve lines. A diligent observer will easily discern, that Pope was no
careless reader of his rude predecessor. Pope complains that Chapman took
advantage of an unmeasureable length of line. But in reality Pope's lines are
longer than Chapman's. If Chapman affected the reputation of rendering line for
line, the specious expedient of choosing a protracted measure which concatenated
two lines together, undoubtedly favored his usual propensity to periphrasis.

Chapman's commentary is only incidental, contains but a small degree of
critical excursion, and is for the most part a pedantic compilation from
Spondanus. He has the boldness severely to censure Scaliger's impertinence. It
is remarkable that he has taken no illustrations from Eustathius, except
through the citations of other commentators. But of Eustathius there was no
Latin interpretation.

This volume is closed with sixteen Sonnets by the author, addressed to the
chief nobility To the Duke of Lenox, the lord Chancellor, Lord Salisbury lord
treasurer, earl of Suffolk, earl of Northampton, earl of Arundel, earl of
Pembroke, earl of Montgomery, lord Lisle, countess of Montgomery, lady Wroth,
countess of Bedford, earl of Southampton, earl of Sussex, lord Walden, and sir
Thomas Howard. Lady Mary Wroth, here mentioned, wife of sir Robert Wroth, was
much courted by the wits of this age. She wrote a romance called URANIA, in
imitation of ^ir Philip Sydney's ARCADIA. See Jonson's EPIGR. 103. 105.
. It was now a common practice, by these unpoetical and empty panegyrics, to
attempt to conciliate the attention, and secure the protection, of the great,
without which it was supposed to be impossible for any poem to struggle into
celebrity. Habits of submission, and the notions of subordination, now
prevailed in a high degree; and men looked up to peers, on whose smiles or
frowns they believed all sublunary good and evil to depend, with a reverential
awe. Henry Lock subjoined to his metrical paraphrase of Ecclesiastes, and his
Sundry Christian Passions contained in two hundred Sonnets, both printed
together for Field, in 1597, a set of secular sonnets to the nobility, among
which are lord Buckhurst and Anne the amiable countess of Warwick In quarto.
. And not to multiply more instances, Spenser in compliance with a disgraceful
custom, or rather in obedience to the established tyranny of patronage,
prefixed to the FAIRY QUEEN fifteen of these adulatory pieces, which in every
respect are to be numbered among the meanest of his compositions This practice
is touched by a satirist of those times, in PASQUILL'S MAD CAPPE, Land. Printed
by J. V. 1600. 4to. fol. 2. Speaking of every great man. He shall have ballads
written in his praise,
Books dedicate unto his patronage;
Wits working for his pleasure many ways:
Petegrues sought to mend his parentage.

.

In the year 1614, Chapman printed his version of the ODYSSEY, which he
dedicated to king James's favorite, Carr earl of Somerset. This was soon
followed by the BATRACHOMUOMACHY, and the HYMNS, and EPIGRAMS. But I find long
before Chapman's time, "A Ballett between the myce and the frogs," licenced
to Thomas East the printer, in 1568 REGISTR^ STATION^ A. fol. 177. b. Mr.
Steevens informs us, of an anonymous interlude, called THERSYTES his humors
and conceits, in 1598. See Shakesp. vol. ix. p. 166. See ibid. p. 331. And the
versions of Homer perhaps produced a ballad, in 1586, "The Lamentation of
Hecuba and the Ladies of Troy." Aug. 1, to E. White. REGISTR. STATION. B. fol.
209. a. Again to W. Matthews, Feb. 22, 1593, "The Lamentation of Troy for the
death of Hector." Ibid. fol. 305. a.
. And there is a ballad, "A most strange weddinge of the frogge and the
mouse," in 1580 Licenced to E. White, Nov. 21, 1580. REGISTR. STATION. B. fol.
174. b.
.

He is also supposed to have translated Hesiod. But this notion seems to have
arisen from these lines of Drayton, which also contain a general and a very
honorable commendation of Chapman's skil^ as a translator See also Bolton's
opinion of Chapman, supr. p. 276.
.

Others again there lived in my days,
That have of us deserved no less praise
For their TRANSLATIONS, than the daintiest wit
That on Parnassus thinks he highest does sit,
And for a chair may among the Muses call
As the most curious Maker of them all:
As reverend Chapman, who has brought to us
Musaeus, Homer, and Hesiodvs,
Out of the Greek: and by his skill has reared
Them to that height, and to our tongue endeared,
That were those poets at this day alive
To see their books thus with us to survive,
They Would think, having neglected them so long,
They had been written in the English tongue Elegy to Reynold^, ut supr.
.
I believe Chapman only translated about fourteen lines from the beginning of
the second book of Hesiod's WORKS AND DAYS, "as well as I could in haste,"
which are inserted in his commentary on the thirteenth Iliad for an occasional
illustration Fol. 185. seq.
. Here is a proof on what slight grounds assertions of this sort are often
founded, and, for want of examination, transmitted to posterity Since this was
written, I have discovered that "Hesiod's Georgic^ translated by George
Chapman," were licenced to Miles Patrich, May 14, 1618. But I doubt if the book
was printed. REGISTR. STATION. C. fol. 290. b.
.

As an original writer, Chapman belongs to the class of dramatic poets, and
will not therefore be considered again at the period in which he is placed by
the biographers But this is said not without some degree of restriction. For
Chapman wrote "OVID'S BANQUET OF SAUC^, A Coronet for his mistress Philosophy
and his amorous Zodiac. Land. 1595. 4to." To which is added, "The AMOROUS
CONTENTION of Phillis and Flora," a translation by Chapman from a Latin poem,
written, as he says, by a Friar in the year 1400. There is also his PERSEUS AND
ANDROMEDA, dedicated in a prolix metrical Epistle to Carr earl of Som^rset and
Frances his countess. Land. 1614. 4to. Chapman wrote a vindication of this
pie^e, both in prose and verse, called, A free and offenceless Justification of
a late published and misinterpreted poem entitled ANDROMEDA LIBERATA. Land.
1614. 4to.

Among Chapman's pieces recited by Wood, the following does not appear. "A
book called Petrarkes seven penitential psalms in verse, paraphrastically
translated, with other poems philosophical, and a hymn to Christ upon the
cross, written by Geo. Chapman." To Matthew Selman, Jan. 13, 1611. REGISTR.
STATION. C. fol. 215. a.


. His translations, therefore, which were begun before the year 1600, require
that we should here acquaint the reader with some particulars of his life. He
wrote eighteen plays, which although now forgotten, must have contributed in no
inconsiderable degree to enrich and advance the English stage. He was born in
1557, perhaps in Kent. He passed about two years at Trinity college in Oxford,
with a contempt of philosophy, but in a close attention to the Greek and Roman
classics From the information of Mr. Wise, late Radcliffe's librarian, and
keeper of the Archives, at Oxford.
. Leaving the university about 1576, he seems to have been led to London in the
character of a poet; where he soon commenced a friendship with Spenser,
Shakespeare, Marlowe, and Daniel, and attracted the notice of secretary
Walsingham. He probably acquired some appointment in the court of king James
the first; where untimely death, and unexpected disgrace, quickly deprived him
of his liberal patrons Prince Henry and Carr. Jonson was commonly too proud,
either to assist, or to be assisted; yet he engaged with Chapman and Marston in
writing the Comedy of EASTWARD HOE, which was performed by the children of the
revels in 1605 The first of Chapman's plays, I mean with his name, which
appears in the Stationers Registers, is the Tragedy of CHARLES DUKE OF BYRON.
Entered to T. Thorp, Jun. 5, 1608. REGISTR. C. fol. 168. b.
. But this association gave Jonson an opportunity of throwing out many
satirical parodies on Shakespeare with more security. All the three authors,
however, were in danger of being pilloried for some reflections on the Scotch
nation, which were too seriously understood by James the first. When the
societies of Lincoln's End and the Middle Temple, in 1613, had resolved to
exhibit a splendid masque at Whitehall in honor of the nuptials of the
Palsgrave and the princess Elisabeth, Chapman was employed for the poetry, and
Inigo Jones for the machinery. It is not clear, whether Dryden's resolution to
burn annually one copy of Chapman's best tragedy BUSSY D'AMBOISE, to the memory
of Jonson, was a censure or a compliment Preface to SPANISH FRIAR.
. He says, however, that this play pleased only in the representation, like a
star which glitters only while it shoots. The manes of Jonson perhaps required
some reconciliatory rites: for Jonson being delivered from Shakespeare, began
unexpectedly to be disturbed at the rising reputation of a new theatric rival.
Wood says, that Chapman was "a person of most reverend aspect, religious and
temperate, QUALITIES RARELY MEETING IN A POET ATH. OXON. i. 592.
!" The truth is, he does not seem to have mingled in the dissipations and
indiscretions, which then marked his profession. He died at the age of
seventy-seven, in 1634, and was buried on the south side of saint Giles's
church in the Fields. His friend Inigo Jones planned and erected a monument to
his memory, in the style of the new architecture, which was unluckily destroyed
with the old church Wood has preserved part of the epi^aph, "Georgius
Chapmannus, poeta Homericus, philosophus verus (etsi christianus poeta)
plusquam celebris, etc." Ubi supr.
. There was an intimate friendship between our author, and this celebrated
restorer of Grecian palaces. Chapman's MUSAEUS, not that begun by Marlowe, but
published in 1616, has a dedication to Jones: in which he is addressed as the
most skilful and ingenious architect that England had yet seen.

As a poetical novel of Greece, it will not be improper to mention here, the
CLITOPHON AND LEUCIPPE of Achilles Tatius, under the title of "The most
delectable and pleasant Historye of Clitophon and Leucippe from the Greek of
Achilles Statius, etc. by W. B. Land. 1577 In quarto. T. Creed.
." The president Montesquieu, whose refined taste was equal to his political
wisdom, is of opinion, that a certain notion of tranquillity in the fields of
Greece, gave rise to the description of soft and amorous sentiments in the
Greek romance of the middle age. But that gallantry sprung from the tales of
Gothic chivalry. "Une certain idee de tranquillite dans les campagnes de la
Greece, fit decrire les sentimens de l'amour. On peut voir les Romans de Grecs
du moyen age. L'idee des Paladins, protecteurs de la virtue et de la beauty des
femmes, conduisit a celle de la galanterie Esprit des Loix, Live. xxvii. chapter 22.
." I have mentioned a version of Heliodorus.

As Barnaby Googe's ZODIAC of Palingenius was a favorite performance, and is
constantly classed and compared with the poetical translations of this period,
by the cotemporary critics, I make no apology for giving it a place at the
close of this review I know not if translations of Plautus and Terence are to
be mentioned here with propriety. I observe however in the notes, that
Plautus's MENAECHMI, copied by Shakespeare, appeared in English by W. W. or
William Warner, author of Albion's England. Land. 1595. Tanner says that he
translated but not printed all Plautus. MSS. Tann. Oxon. Rastall printed TERENS
IN ENGLISH, that is, the ANDRIA. There is also, "ANDRIA the first Comedye of
Terence," by Maurice Ky^lin, Land. 1588. 4to. By the way, this Kyffyn, a
Welshman, published a poem called "The Blessedness of Brytaine, or a
celebration of the queens holy^ay." Land. 1588. 4to. For John Wolf. The
EUNUCHUS was entered at Stationers Hall, to W. Leche, in 1597. And the ANDRIA
and EUNUCHUS, in 1600. REGISTR. C^ fol. 20 a. Richard Bernard published Terence
in English, Cambr. 1598. 4to. A fourth edition was printed at London, "Opera ac
industria R. B. in Axholmiensi in^ula Lincolnesherii Epwortheatis." By John
Legatt, 1614. 4to.

Three or four versions of Cato, and one of Aesop's Fables, are entered in the
register of the Stationers, between 1557 and 1571. REGISTR. A.


. It was printed so early as the year 1565, with the following title A receipt
for Ralph Newbery' license is entered for printing "A book called
Pallingenius," I suppose the original, 1560. REGISTR. STATION. A. fol. 48 a.
. "The ZODIAKE OF LIFE, written by the godly and learned poet Marcellus
Pallingenius Stellatus, wherein are contained twelve books disclosing the
heinous crimes and wicked vices of our corrupt nature: And plainlye declaring
the pleasant and perfect pathway unto eternal life, besides a number of
digressions both pleasant and profitable. Newly translated into English verse
by Barnabee Googe. Probitas laudatur et alget. Imprinted at London by Henry
Denham for Rafe Newberye dwelling in Fleet-streate. Anno 1565. Aprilis 18 In
^2mo. Bl. Let. Not paged. The ^ast signature is Y y iiij. The colophon,
"Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, etc." On the second leaf after the title,
is an armorial coat with six copartments, and at the top the initials B. G.
Then follow Latin commendatory verses, by G^lbert Duke, Christopher Carli^e
doctor in divinity, James Itzwert, George Chatterton fellow of Christ college
in Cambridge, and David Bell, with some anonymous. Doctor Chri^topher Carlisle
was of Cambridge, and a learned orientalist, about 1550. He pu^lished many
tracts in divinity. He was a writer of Greek and Latin verses. He has some in
b^^^ languages on the death of Bucer in 1551^ See Bucer's ENGLISH WORKS, Bas^l.
^ol. 1577. f. 903. And in the Collection on the death of the two Brandons,
1551. 4to. ut supr. Others, before his Reply to Richard Smyth, a papistic
divine, Land. 1582. 4to. He prefixed four Latin copies to Drant's ECCLESIASTES
abovementioned, Land. 1572. 4to. Two, to one of doctor John Jones's books on
BATHS, Land. 1572. 4to. A Sapphic ode to Sadler's version of Vegetius, Land.
1572. 4to. A Latin copy to Chaloner's DE REP. ANGLORUM, Land. 1579. 4to. A
Latin hexa^tic to Batman's DOOM, Land. 1581. 4to. Two of his Latin poems IN
PAPAM, are (MS. Bale.) in MSS. Cotton. TIT. D. x. f. 77. He translated the
Psalms into English prose, with learned notes. Finished Jun. 24, 1573. Among
MSS. MORE, 206. Colomesius has published a fragment of a Latin Epistle from him
to Castalio, dat. kal. Maii, 1562. CL. VIROR. EPIST. SINGUL. Land. 1694. 12mo.
." Bishop Tanner, deceived by Wood's papers, supposes that this first edition,
which he had evidently never seen, and which is indeed uncommonly rare,
contained only the first seven books. In the epistle dedicatory to secretary
sir William Cecill, he mentions his "simple trauayles lately dedicated unto
your honor." These are his set of miscellaneous poems printed in 1563, or,
"Eglogs, Epytaphes, and Sonnetes, newly written by Barnabe Googe, 15 March,
for Rauve [Raufe] Newbury dwelling in Flete-strete a little above the Conduit
in the late shop of Thomas Berthelet In 12mo. Bl. Let. See REGISTR. STATION.
A. fol. 88. b.
." He apologizes for attempting this work, three books of which, as he had
understood too late, were "both eloquentely and excellently Englished by
Master Smith, clark unto the most honorable of the queens majesty's counsel.
Whose doings as in other matters I have with admiration beheld, etc It is
doubtful whether he means sir Thomas Smith, the secretary. Nor does it appear,
whether this translation was in verse or prose. Sir Thomas Smith, however, has
left some English poetry. While a prisoner in the Tower in 1549, he translated
eleven of David's Psalms into English meter, and composed three English
metrical prayers, with three English copies of verses besides. These are now in
the British Museum, MSS. REG. 17 A. xvii. I ought to have mentioned this before.
." Googe was first a retainer to Cecill, and afterward in 1563, a
gentlemanpensioner to the queen Strype's PARKER, p. 144.
. In his address to the virtuous and frendley reader, he thus, but with the
zeal of a puritan, defends divine poetry. "The divine and notable Prophecies of
Esaias, the Lamentation of Jeremie, the Songs and Ballades of Solomon, the
Psalter of David, and the Book of Hiob Job.
, were written by the first auctours in perfect and pleasant hexameter verses.
So that the divine and canonical volumes were garnished and set forth with
sweet according tunes and heavenly soundes of pleasant meter. Yet will not
the graceless company of our pernicious hypocrites allow, that the Psalms of
David should be translated into English meter. Marry, say they, because they
were only received to be chaunted in the church, and not to be song in every
cobblers shop. O monstrous and malicious infidels! -- do you abhor to hear
[God's] glory and praise sounding in the mouth of a poor christian artificer?
etc." He adds, that since Chaucer, "there has flourished in England so fine
and filed phrases, and so good and pleasant poets, as may counteruayle the
doings of Virgill, Ovid, Horace, Iuuenal, Martial, etc." There was a second
edition in 1588, in which the former prefatory matters of every kind are
omitted Bl. Let. 4to.
. This edition is dedicated to lord Buckhurst At the end is a short copy of
verses by Abraham Fleming. See supr. p. 404.
.

From the title of this work, ZODIACUS VITAE, written in Latin hexameters by
Marcello Palingeni, an Italian, about the year 1531, the reader at least
expects some astronomical allusions. But it has not the most distant connection
with the stars: except that the poet is once transported to the moon, not to
measure her diameter, but for a moral purpose; and that he once takes occasion,
in his general survey of the world, and in reference to his title, to introduce
a philosophic explanation of the zodiacal system B. ^i. AQUARIUS.
. The author meaning to divide his poem into twelve books, chose to distinguish
each with a name of the celestial signs: just as Herodotus, but with less
affectation and inconsistency, marked the nine books or divisions of his
history with the names of the nine Muses. Yet so strange and pedantic a title
is not totally without a conceit, as the author was born at Stellada, or
Stellata, a province of Ferrara, and from whence he calls himself Marcellus
Palingenius Stellatus It should have been STELLATENSIS.
.

This poem is a general satire on life, yet without peevishness or malevolence;
and with more of the solemnity of the censor, than the petulance of the
satirist. Much of the morality is couched under allegorical personages and
adventures. The Latinity is tolerably pure, but there is a mediocrity in the
versification. Palingenius's transitions often discover more quickness of
imagination, and fertility of reflection, than solidity of judgment. Having
started a topic, he pursues it through all its possible affinities, and
deviates into the most distant and unnecessary digressions. Yet there is a
facility in his manner, which is not always unpleasing: nor is the general
conduct of the work void of art and method. He moralizes with a boldness and a
liberality of sentiment, which were then unusual; and his maxims and strictures
are sometimes tinctured with a spirit of libertinism, which, without exposing
the opinions, must have offended the gravity, of the more orthodox
ecclesiastics. He fancies that a confident philosopher, who rashly presumes to
scrutinize the remote mysteries of nature, is shown in heaven like an ape, for
the public diversion of the gods. A thought evidently borrowed by Pope See
ESSAY ON POPE, p. 94.
. Although he submits his performance to the sentence of the church, he treats
the authority of the popes, and the voluptuous lives of the monks, with the
severest acrimony. It was the last circumstance that chiefly contributed to
give this poem almost the rank of a classic in the reformed countries, and
probably produced an early English translation. After his death, he was
pronounced an heretic; and his body was taken up, and committed to the flames.
A measure which only contributed to spread his book, and disseminate his
doctrines.

Googe seems chiefly to have excelled in rendering the descriptive and flowery
passages of this moral ZODIAC. He thus describes the Spring.

The earth again does florishe green,
The trees repair their spring;
With pleasant notes the nightingale
Begins new to sing.
With flowers fresh their heads bedeckt,
The Fairies dance in field:
And wanton songs in mossye dens
The Drids and Satirs yielde.
The wynged Cupide fast does cast
His darts of gold yframed, etc B. ii. TAURUS. Signat. B iij.
.
There is some poetic imagination in SAGITTARIUS, or the ninth book, where a
divine mystagogue opens to the poet's eyes an unknown region of infernal kings
and inhabitants. But this is an imitation of Dante. As a specimen of the
translation, and of the author's fancy, I will transcribe some of this imagery.

Now open wide your springs, and plain
Your caves abroad displaye,
You sisters of Parnassus hill
Beset about with baye!
And unto me, for need it is,
A hundred tongues in verse
Send out, that I these ayrie kings
And people may rehearse. --
Here first, whereas in chariot red
Aurora fair does rise,
And bright from out the ocean seas
Appears to mortal eyes,
And chaset^ hence the hellish night
With blushing beauty fair,
A mighty King I might discern,
Placde hi^ in lofty chair:
His hair with fyry garland decked
Puffed up in fiendish wise;
With brows full broad, and threatening look,
And fyry-flaming eyes.
Two monstrous horns and large he had,
And nostrils wide in sight;
Al black himself, (for bodies black
To every evil spright,
And ugly shape, has nature dealt,)
Yet white his teeth did show;
And white his grenning tuskes stood,
Large wings on him did grow,
Framde like the wings of flindermice;
His fete of largest sise,
In fashion as the wilde-duck bears,
Or goose that creaking cries:
His tail such one as lions have:
All naked sat he there,
But bodies covered round about
With loathsome shagged hair,
A number great about him stood, etc B. ix. Signat. H H ii^j.
.
After viewing the wonders of heaven, his guide Timalphes, the son of Jupiter
and Arete, shows him the moon, whose gates are half of gold and half of silver.
They enter a city of the moon.

The lofty walls of diamonde strong
Were raised high and fr^mde;
The bulwarks built of carbuncle
That all as fire yflamde. --
And wondered at the number great
That through the city so,
Al clad in white, by thousands thick,
Amyd the streates did go.
Their heads beset with garlands fair:
In hand the lillies white
They joyful bear Ibid. Signa^. G G iiij.
. --
Then follows a mixture of classical and christian history and mythology. This
poem has many symptoms of the wildness and wanderings of Italian fiction.

It must be confessed, that there is a perspicuity and a freedom in Googe's
versification. But this meter of Sternhold and Hopkins impoverished three parts
of the poetry of queen Elisabeth's reign. A hermit is thus described, who
afterward proves to be sir EPICURE, in a part of the poem which has been
copied by sir David Lyndesey.

His hoary beard with silver hears
His middle fully rought Reached.
;
His skin was white, and joyful face:
Of diverse colors wrought,
A flowery garland gay he ware
About his semely hear, etc Lib. iii. E j.
.
The seventh book, in which the poet looks down upon the world, with its
various occupations, follies, and vices, is opened with these nervous and
elegant stanzas.

My Muse aloft! raise up thyself,
And use a better flite:
Mount up on hie, and think it scorn^
Of base affairs to write.
More great renoune, and glory more,
In hautye matter lies:
View thou the gods, and take thy course
Above the starrye skies:
Where spring-tyme lasts for evermore,
Where peace does never quayle;
Where Sun does shine continuallye,
Where light does never fail.
Clowd-causer southwinde none there is,
No boystrous Boreas blows;
But mylder breathes the western breeze
Where sweet ambrosia grows.
Take thou this way, and yet sometimes
Down falling fast from hye,
Now up, now down, with sundry sort
Of gates Going.
aloft go fly.
And as some hawty place he seeks
That couets far to see,
So up to Joue, past Beyond.
stars to clyme,
Is needful now for thee.
There shall thou, from the towry top
Of crystall-colour'd sky,
The plot of all the world behold
With view of perfect eye Signat. N j.
.
One cannot but remark, that the conduct and machinery of the old visionary
poems is commonly the same. A rural scene, generally a wilderness, is supposed.
An imaginary being of consummate wisdom, a hermit, a goddess, or an angel,
appears; and having purged the poet's eye with a few drops of some celestial
elixir, conducts him to the top of an inaccessible mountain, which commands an
unbounded plain filled with all nations. A cavern opens, and displays the
torments of the damned: he next is introduced into heaven, by way of the moon,
the only planet which was thought big enough for a poetical visit. Although
suddenly deserted by his mystic intelligencer, he finds himself weary and
desolate, on the seashore, in an impassable forest, or a flowery meadow.

The following is the passage which Pope has copied from Palingenius: and as
Pope was a great reader of the old English poets, it is most probable that he
took it immediately from our translator, or found it by his direction Pope's
lines are almost too well-known to be transcribed. Superior beings, when of
late they saw
A mo^tal man unfold all nature's law,
Admired such wisdom in an earthy shape,
And showed a Newton as we show an Ape.

.

An Ape, quoth she, and iesting-stock
Is Man, to god in sky,
As often as he does trust his wit
Too much, presuming hie,
Dares search the things of nature hid,
Her secrets for to speak;
When as in very deed his mind
Is dull, and all to weak B. vi. Signat. Q iij.
.
These are the lines of the original.

Simia caelicolum risusque jocusque deorum est,
Tunc Homo, cum temere ingenio confidit, et audet
Abdita naturae scrutari, arcanaque rerum;
Cum revera ejus crassa imbecillaque sit men's B. vi. v. 186.
.
Googe, supposed to have been a native of Alvingham in Lincolnshire, was a
scholar, and was educated both at Christ's college in Cambridge, and
New-college in Oxford. He is complimented more than once in Turberville's
SONNETS See fol. 8. b. 11. a. 124. a. edit. 1571.
. He published other translations in English. I have already cited his version
of Naogeorgus's hexametrical poem on ANTICHRIST, or the PAPAL DOMINION, printed
at London in 1570, and dedicated to his chief patron sir William Cecill I
suspect there is a former edition for W. Pickering, Land. 1566. 4to.
. The dedication is dated from Staples-inn, where he was a student. At the end
of the book, is his version of the same author's SPIRITUAL AGRICULTURE,
dedicated to queen Elisabeth In quarto.
. Thomas Naogeorgus, a German, whose real name is Kirchmaier, was one of the
many moral or rather theological Latin poets produced by the reformation
Kirchmaier ^ignifies the same in German as his assumed Greek name NAOGEOPGOS, a
labourer in the church. He wrote besides, five books of Satires, and two
tragedies in Latin. He died in 1578. See "Thomae Naogeorgii REGNUM PAP^STICUM,
cui adjecta sunt qua^dam alia ejusdem argumenti. Basil. 1553." 8vo. Ibid. 1559.
One of his Latin tragedies called HAMAN^S, is printed among Oporin^^'s DRAMATA
SACRA, or plays from the Old Testament, in 1547, many of which are Latin
versions from the vernacular German. S^e Oporin. DRAM. S. vol. ii. p. 107.
. Googe also translated and enlarged Conrade Heresbach's treatise on
agriculture, gardening, orchards, cattle, and domestic fowls In quarto, for
Richard Watkins. In the Preface to the first edition, he says, "For my safety
in the university, I crave the aid and appeal to the defense of the famous
Christ-college in Cambridge whereof I was on^ an unprofitable member, and [of]
the ancient mother of learned men the New-college in Oxford."
. This version was printed in 1577, and dedicated from Kingston to sir William
Fiztwilliams Feb. 1, 1577. There were other editions, 1578, 1594. Land. 4to.
. Among Crynes's curious books in the Bodleian at Oxford Cod. CRYNES, 886.
, is Googe's translation from the Spanish of Lopez de Mendoza's PROVERBES,
dedicated to Cecill, which I have never seen elsewhere, printed at London by R.
Watkins in 1579 Sm. 8vo.
. In this book the old Spanish paraphrast mentions Boccace's THESEID Fol. 71. a.
.

But it was not only to these later and degenerate classics, and to modern
tracts, that Googe's industry was confined. He also translated into English
what he called Aristotle's TABLE OF THE TEN CATEGORIES MSS. Coxeter.
, that capital example of ingenious but useless subtlety, of method which
cannot be applied to practice, and of that affectation of unnecessary deduction
and frivolous investigation, which characterises the philosophy of the Greeks,
and which is conspicuous not only in the demonstrations of Euclid, but in the
Socratic disputations recorded by Xenophon. The solid simplicity of common
sense would have been much less subject to circumlocution, embarrassment, and
ambiguity. We do not want to be told by a chain of proofs, that two and two
make four. This specific character of the schools of the Greeks, is perhaps to
be traced backwards to the loquacity, the love of paradox, and the fondness for
argumentative discourse, so peculiar to their nation. Even the good sense of
Epictetus was not proof against this captious phrenzy. What patience can endure
the solemn quibbles, which mark the stoical conferences of that philosopher
perserved by Arrian? It is to this spirit, not solely from a principle of
invidious malignity, that Tully alludes, where he calls the Greeks, "Homines
contentionis quam veritatis cupidiores De ORATORE, Lib. i.. xi.
." And in another part of the same work he says, that it is a principal and
even a national fault of this people, "Quocunque in loco, quoscunque inter
homines visum est, de rebus aut DIFFICILLIMIS aut non NECESSARIIS, ARGUTISSIME
DISPUTARE Ibid. Lib. ii.. iv.
." The natural liveliness of the Athenians, heightened by the free politics of
a democracy, seems to have tinctur^d their conversation with this sort of
declamatory disputation, which they frequently practiced under an earnest
pretense of discovering the truth, but in reality to indulge their native
disposition to debate, to display their abundance of words, and their address
of argument, to amuse, surprise, and perplex. Some of Plato's dialogues,
professing a profundity of speculation, have much of this talkative humor.

Beside these versions of the Greek and Roman poets, and of the ancient writers
in prose, incidentally mentioned in this review, it will be sufficient to
observe here in general, that almost all the Greek and Roman classics appeared
in English before the year 1600. The effect and influence of these translations
on our poetry, will be considered in a future section.

SECT. XLII.
BUT the ardour of translation was not now circumscribed within the bounds of
the classics, whether poets, historians, orators, or critics, of Greece and
Rome.

I have before observed, that with our frequent tours through Italy, and our
affectation of Italian manners, about the middle of the sixteenth century, the
Italian poets became fashionable, and that this circumstance, for a time at
least, gave a new turn to our poetry. The Italian poets, however, were but in
few hands; and a practice of a more popular and general nature, yet still
resulting from our communications with Italy, now began to prevail, which
produced still greater revolutions. This was the translation of Italian books,
chiefly on fictitious and narrative subjects, into English.

The learned Ascham thought this novelty in our literature too important to be
passed over without observation, in his reflections on the course of an
ingenuous education. It will be much to our purpose to transcribe what he has
said on this subject: although I think his arguments are more like the
reasonings of a rigid puritan, than of a man of liberal views and true
penetration; and that he endeavors to account for the origin, and to state the
consequences, of these translations, more in the spirit of an early calvinistic
preacher, than as a sensible critic or a polite scholar. "These be the
inchauntments of Circe, brought out of Italy to mar men's manners in England:
much, by example of ill life, but more by precepts of fond books, of late
translated out of Italian into English, sold in every shop in London,
commended by honest titles, the sooner to corrupt honest manners, dedicated
over boldly to virtuous and honorable personages, the easelyer to beguile
simple and honest wits. It is pity, that those which have authority and
charge to allow and disallow works to be printed, be no more circumspect herein
than they are. Ten Sermons at Paul's Cross do not so much good for moving
men to true doctrine, as one of these books does harm with enticing men to
ill living. Yea I say farther, these books tend not so much to corrupt honest
living, as they do^ to subvert true religion. More papists be made by your
merry books of Italy, than by your earnest books of Louain Serious book^ in
divinity, written by the papists. The study of controversial theology
flourished at the univ^rsity of Louvain.
. -- When the busy and open papists could not, by their contentious books,
turn men in England fast enough from troth and right judgment in doctrine,
then the subtle and secret papists at home procured bawdie books to be
translated out of the Italian tongue, whereby ou^rmany young wills and wits,
allured to wantonness, do now boldly conte^ne all severe books that sound to
honesty and godliness. In our forefathers time, when papistrie, as a standing
poole, covered and ouerflowed all England, few books were red in our tongue,
saving certain Books of Chivalry, as they said for pastime and pleasure,
which, as some say, were made in monasteries by idle monks or wanton chanons:
as one for example, MORTE ARTHUR, the whole pleasure of which book stands in
two special points, in open man's slaghter and bold bawdrie: in which book
those be counted the noble^t knights that do kill most men without any
quarrel, and commit fowlest aduoulteries by sutlest shifts: as, sir Launcelote
with the wife of king Arthure his master: sir Tristram with the wife^ of king
Mark his vn^le: sir Lamerocke with the wife of king Lote that was his own
aunte. This is good stuff for wise men to laughe at, or honest men to take
pleasure at. Yet I know when God's Bible was banished the court, and MORTE
ARTHUR received into the princes chamber. What toys the daily reading of such
a book may work in the will of a young ientleman, or a young maid, that lives
welthely and idly, wife men can judge, and honest men do pity. And yet ten
MORTE ARTHURES do not the tenth part so much harm, as one of these books
made in Italy, and translated in England. They open, not fond and common ways
to vice, but such subtle, cunning, new and diverse shifts, to carry young wills
to vanity and young wits to mischief, to teach old bawdes new school
points, as the simple head of an Englishman is not hable to invent, nor never
was heard of in England before, yea when papistrie ouerflowed all. Suffer these
books to be read, and they shall soon displace all books of godly learning.
For they, carrying the will to vanity, and marring good manners, shall easily
corrupt the mind with ill opinions, and false judgment in doctrine: first to
think ill of all true religion, and at last, to think nothing of God
himself, one special point that is to be learned in Italy and Italian
books. And that which is most to be lamented, and therefore more needful to
be looked to, there be more of these ungracious books set out in print within
these few months, than have been seen in England many score years before.
And because our Englishmen made Italians cannot hurt but certain persons, and
in certain places, therefore these Italian books are made English, to bring
mischie^e enough openly and boldly to all states Conditions of life.
, great and mean, young and old, every where. -- Our English men Italianated
have more in reverence the TRIUMPHS of Petrarche In such universal vogue were
the TRIUMPHS of Petrarch, or h^^ TRIONFI D' AMOR, that they were made into a
public pageant at the entrance, I think, of Charles the fifth into Madrid.
, than the GENESIS of Moses. They make more account of Tullies Offices, than
saint Paul's Epistles: of a Tale in Boccace, than the Story of the Bible, etc
Ascham's SCHOOLMASTER, edit. 1589. fol. 25. a. seqq. This book was begun soon
after the year 1563. PREFACE, p. 1.
."

Ascham talks here exactly in the style of Prynne's HISTRIOMASTIX. It must
indeed be confessed, that by these books many pernicious obscenities were
circulated, and perhaps the doctrine of intrigue more accurately taught and
exemplified than before. But every advantage is attended with its
inconveniences and abuses. That to procure translations of Italian tales was a
plot of the papists, either for the purpose of facilitating the propagation of
their opinions, of polluting the minds of our youth, or of diffusing a spirit
of skepticism, I am by no means convinced. But I have nothing to do with the
moral effects of these versions. I mean only to show their influence on our
literature, more particularly on our poetry, although I reserve the discussion
of this point for a future section. At present, my design is to give the reader
a full and uniform view of the chief of these translations from the Italian,
which appeared in England before the year 1600.

I will begin with Boccace. The reader recollects Boccace's THESEID and
TROILUS, many of his Tales, and large passages from Petrarch and Dante,
translated by Chaucer. But the golden mine of Italian fiction opened by
Chaucer, was soon closed and forgotten. I must however premise, that the
Italian language now began to grow so fashionable, that it was explained in
lexicons and grammars, written in English, and with a view to the illustration
of the three principal Italian poets. So early as 1550, were published,
"Principal rules of the Italian grammar, with a dictionarie for the better
understanding of Boccase, Petrarche, and Dante, g^thered into this tongue by
William Thomas In quarto, for T. Berthelett. Again, 4to, 1561. For T. Powell.
Again, 4to. 1567. For H. Wykes. It was written at Padua in 1548. Thomas, a
bachelor in civil law at Oxford, and a clergyman, is said to have been rewarded
by Edward the sixth with several preferments. See Strype's GRINDAL, p. 5.
." It is dedicated to sir Thomas Chaloner, an accomplished scholar. The third
edition of this book is dated in 1567. Scipio Lentulo's Italian grammar was
translated into English in 1578, by Henry Grantham For T. Vautrollier. 8vo.
. Soon afterward appeared, in 1583, "CAMPO DI FIOR, or The Flourie Field of
four Languages of M. Claudius Desainliens, for the furtherance of the learners
of the Latin, French, and English, but chiefly of the Italian tongue For
Vautrollier. 12mo.
." In 1591, Thomas Woodcock printed, "Florio's second fruits to be gathered of
twelve trees of diverse but delightful tastes to the tongues of Italian and
Englishmen. To which is annexed a gardine of recreation yelding 6000 Italian
proverbs But his First Fruit, or, Dialogues in Italian and English, with
instruction for the Italian, appeared in 1578. His Italian dictionary, in 1595.
." Florio is Shakespeare's Holophernes in Love's Labor Lost See ACT iv. Sc. ii.
. And not to extend this catalogue, which I fear is not hitherto complete, any
further, The ITALIAN SCHOOLMASTER was published in 1591 For Thomas Purfoot.
12mo.
. But to proceed.

Before the year 1570, William Paynter, clerk of the Office of Arms within the
Tower of London, and who seems to have been master of the school of Sevenoaks
in Kent, printed a very considerable part of Boccace's novels. His first
collection is entitled, "The PALACE OF PLEASURE, the first volume, containing
sixty novels out of Boccacio, London, 1566." It is dedicated to lord Warwick A
second edition was printed for H. Binneman, Land. 1575. 4to.
. A second volume soon appeared, "The PALACE OF PLEASURE the second volume
containing thirty-four novels, London, 1567 A second edition was printed by
Thomas Marsh, in octavo. Both volumes appeared in 1575. 4to.
." This is dedicated to sir George Howard; and dated from his house near the
Tower, as is the former volume. It would be superfluous to point out here the
uses which Shakespeare made of these volumes, after the full investigation
which his ancient allusions and his plots have so lately received. One William
Painter, undoubtedly the same, translated William Fulk's ANTIPROGNOSTICON, a
treatise written to expose the astrologers of those times Land. 1570. 12mo. At
the end is an English tract against the astrologers, very probably written by
Painter. Edward Dering, a fellow of Christ's college Cambridge, in a copy of
recommendatory verses prefixed to the second edition o^ Googe's Palingenius,
attacks PAINTER, ^ucas, and others, the abettors of Fulk's ANTIPROGNOSTICON,
and the censu^^rs of astrology. In the ancient registers of the Stationers
company, an Almanac is usually joined with a PROGNOSTICATION. See REGISTR. A.
fol. 59. b. 61. a.
. He also prefixed a Latin tetrastic to Fulk's original, printed in 1570 In
1563, is a receipt for a license to William Joiner for printing "The City of
Cyvelite, translated into Englesshe by William Paynter." REGISTR^ A^ ut supr.
fol. 86. b. In 1565, there is a receipt for license to W. James to print
"Serten historyes collected out of dyvers right good and profitable authors
by William Paynter." Ibid. fol. 134. b. The second part of the "Palice of
Pleasur^," i^ entered with Nicholas England, in 1565. Ibid. fol. 156. a.
.

With Painter's PALACE OF PLEASURE, we must not confound "A petite Palace of
Petty his pleasure," although properly claiming a place here, a book of stories
from Italian and other writers, translated and collected by William Pettie^ a
student of Christ-church in Oxford about the year 1576 Entered that year, Aug.
5. to Watkins. REGISTR. STATION. B. fol. 134. a.
. It is said to contain, "many pretty histories by him set forth in comely
colors and most delightfully discoursed." The first edition I have seen was
printed in 1598, the year before our author's death, by James Roberts. The
first tale is SINORIX AND CAMMA, two lovers of Sienna in Italy, the last
ALEXIUS There is an Epistle to the Reader by R. W. In 1569, there is an entry
with Richard James for printing "A ballet int^tuled Sinorix Canna and
Sinnatus." REGISTR. STATION. A. fol. 191. b. In Pettie'^ tale, Camma is wife to
Sinnatus.
. Among Antony Wood's books in the Ashmolean Museum, is a second edition dated
1608 There was a third in 1613. By. G. Eld. Land. 4to. Bl. Let.
. But Wood, who purchased and carefully preserved this performance, solely
because it was writ^en by his great-uncle, is of opinion, that "it is now so
far from being excellent or fine, that it is more fit to be read by a
schoolboy, or rusticall amoretto, than by a gentleman of mode and language
ATH. OXON. i. 240. Pattie in conjunction with Bartholomew Young, translated the
Civil^ Conversation of Stephen^ Guazzo, 1586. 4to.
." Most of the stories are classical, perhaps supplied by the English Ovid, yet
with a variety of innovations, and a mixture of modern manners.

Painter at the end of his second volume, has left us this curious notice.
"Because suddenly, contrary to expectation, this Volume is risen to greater
heap of leaves, I do omit for this present time SUNDRY NOUELS of merry devise,
reserving the same to be joined with the rest of an other part, wherein shall
succeed the remnant of Bandello, specially such, suffrable, as the learned
French man Francois de Belleforrest has selected, and the choysest done in the
Italian. Some also out of Erizzo, Ser Giouanni Florentino, Parabosco, Cynthio,
Straparole, Sansouino, and the best liked out of the Queen of Navarre, and
other Authors. Take these in good part, with those that have and shall come
forth." But there is the greatest reason to believe, that no third volume ever
appeared. And it is probable, that Painter by the interest of his booksellers,
in compliance with the prevailing mode of publication, and for the
accommodation of universal readers, was afterward persuaded to print his
sundry novels in the perishable form of separate pamphlets, which cannot now be
recovered.

Boccace's FIAMETTA was translated by an Italian, who seems to have borne some
office about the court, in 1587, with this title, "AMOROUS FIAMETTA, wherein is
set down a catalogve of all and singvlar passions of love and jealousy
incident to an enamored young gentlewoman, with a notable caveat for all women
to eschew deceitful and wicked love, by an apparent example of a Neapolitan
lady, her approved and long miseries, and with many sound dehortations from the
same. First written in Italian by master John Boccace, the learned Florentine,
and poet lavreat. And now done into English by B. Giouanno del M. Temp In
quarto, for Thomas Gubbins.
." The same year was also printed, "Thirteen most pleasant and delectable
questions entitled A DISPORT of diverse noble personages from Boccace.
Imprinted at London by A. W. for Thomas Woodcock, 1587 In quarto. There is
entered with Richard Smyth, in 1566, "A book entitled the xiij questions
composed in the Italian by John Boccace." REGISTR. STATION. A. fol. 153. a.
."

Several tales of Boccace's DECAMERON were now translated into English rhymes.
The celebrated story of the friendship of TITUS AND GESIPPUS was rendered by
Edward Lewicke, a name not known in the catalogue of English poets, in 1562 See
supr. vol. ii. p. 342 And EM. ADD.
. The title is forgotten with the translator. "The most wonderful and
pleasant history of Titus and Gisippus, whereby is fully declared the figure
of perfect frendshyp drawn into English meter by Edward Lewicke. Anno 1562.
For Thomas Hacket In 12mo Ad calc. "FINIS quod Edward L^wick." There is
entered, in 1570, with H. Binneman, "The pet^full history of ij loving
Italians." REGISTR. STATION. A. fol. 204. b.
."

It is not suspected, that those affecting stories, the CYMON AND IPHIGENIA,
and the THEODORE AND HONORIA, of Boccace, so beautifully paraphrased by Dryden,
appeared in English verse, early in the reign of queen Elisabeth.

THEODORE AND HONORIA was translated, in 1569, by doctor Christopher Tie, the
musician, already mentioned as a voluminous versifier of scripture in the reign
of Edward the sixth. The names of the lovers are disguised, in the following
title. "A notable historye of Nastagio and Trauersari, no less pitiefull than
pleasant, translated out of Italian into English verse by C. T. Imprinted at
London in Poules churchyard, by Thomas Purefoote dwelling at the sign of the
Lucrece. Anno. 1569 In 12mo. Bl. Let. In that year Purfoot has license to
print "the History of Nostagio." The same book. REGISTR. STATION. A. fol. 183.
b. [See supr. p. 194.]
." Tie has unluckily applied to this tale, the same stanza which he used in
translating the ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. The knight of hell pursuing the lady, is
thus described.

He saw approach with swiftie foot
The place where he did stay,
A dame, with scattred hears vntrussde,
Bereft of her array. --
Besides all this, two mastiffes great
Both fierce and full he saw,
That fiercely pinchde her by the flank
With greedy ravening raw.
And eke a Knight, of color swarthe,
He saw behind her back,
Came pricking after, flinging forth
Upon a courser black:
With gastlye thretning countenance,
With armyng sword in hand;
His look would make one fear, his eyes
Were like a fiery brande, etc SIGNAT. A v.
.
About the same time appeared the tale of CYMON AND IPHIGENIA, "A pleasant and
delightful History of Galesus, Cymon, and Iphigenia, describing the
fickleness of fortune in love. Translated out of Italian into English verse
by T. C. gentleman. Printed by Nicholas Wire in saint Martin's parish besides
Charing Cross In 12mo. Bl. Let.
." It is in stanzas. I know not with what poet of that time the initials T. C.
can correspond, except with Thomas Churchyard, or Thomas Campion. The latter is
among the poets in ENGLAND'S PARNASSUS printed in 1600, is named by Camden with
Spenser, Sidney, and Drayton; and, among other pieces, published "Songs,
bewailing the untimely death of Prince Henry, set forth to be sung to the lute
or viol by John Coprario, in 1613 See also Meres, ubi supr. fol. 280. Under his
name at length are "Observations on the Art of English Poesy, Land. by R.
Field, 1602." 12mo. Dedicated to lord Buckhurst, whom he calls "the noblest
judge of poesy, etc." This piece is to prove that English is capable of all
the Roman measures. He gives a specimen of Lincenti^te Iambickes in English,
our present blank verse, p. 12. More of this hereafter. T. C. in our
singing-psalms, is affixed to psalm 136. See above, p. 170. I believe he is the
author of a Masque presented on Saint Stephen's Night, 1604.
." But he seems rather too late to have been our translator. Nicholas Wire the
printer of this piece, not mentioned by Ames, perhaps the brother of Robert,
was in vogue before or about the year 1570.

It is not at all improbable, that these old translations now entirely
forgotten and obsolete, suggested these stories to Dryden's notice. To Dryden
they were not more ancient, than pieces are to us, written soon after the
restoration of Charles the second: and they were then of sufficient antiquity
not to be too commonly known, and of such mediocrity, as not to preclude a new
translation. I think we may trace Dryden in some of the rhymes and expressions
In 1569, Thomas Colwell has license to print "A ballet of two faithful frynds
being both in love with one lady." REGISTR. STATION. A. fol. 193. a. This
seems to be PALAMON AND ARCIT^. I know not whether I should mention here,
Robert Wilmot's tragedy of TANCRED AND GISMUND, acted before queen Elisabeth at
the Inner Temple, in 1568, and printed in 1592, as the story, originally from
Boccace, is in Paynter's Collection, and in an old English poem. [See supr.
vol. ii. 238.] There is also an old French poem called GUICHARD ET SIGISMONDE,
translated from Boccace into Latin by Leo Aretine, and thence into French verse
by Jean Fleury. Paris. Bl. Let. 4to. See DECAM^RON, Giorn. iv. Nov. i.
.

It must not be forgot, that Sachetti published tales before Boccace. But the
publication of Boccace's DECAMERON gave a stability to this mode of
composition, which had existed in a rude state before the revival of letters in
Italy. Boccace collected the common tales of his country, and procured others
of Grecian origin from his friends and preceptors the Constantinopolitan
exiles, which he decorated with new circumstances, and delivered in the purest
style. Some few perhaps are of his own invention. He was soon imitated, yet
often unsuccessfully, by many of his countrymen, Poggio, Bandello, the
anonymous author of LE CIENTO NOVELLE ANTIKE, Cinthio, Firenzuola, Malespini,
and others. Even Machiavel, who united the liveliest wit with the profoundest
reflection, and who composed two comedies while he was compiling a political
history of his country, condescended to adorn this fashionable species of
writing with his NOVELLA DI BELFEGOR, or the tale of Belphegor.

In Burton's MELANCHOLY, there is a curious account of the diversions in which
our ancestors passed their winter-evenings. They were not totally inelegant or
irrational. One of them was to read Boccace's novels aloud. "The ordinary
recreations which we have in winter, are cards, tables and dice, shouelboard,
chesse-play, the philosopher's game, small trunkes, balliardes, music,
maskes, singing, dancing, vle-games (...) games. See what is said above of UL^,
vol. ii. p. 315.
, catches, purposes, questions: merry tales, of errant-knights, kings, queens,
lovers, lords, ladies, giants, dwarfes, thieves, fayries, BOCCACE'S NOUELLES,
and the rest P. ii.. 2. page 230. edit. fol. 1624.
."

The late ingenious and industrious editors of Shakespeare have revived an
ancient metrical paraphrase, by Arthur Brook, of Bandello's history of Romeo
and Juliet. "THE TRAGICAL HYSTORY OF ROMEUS AND JULIET: Containing in it a
rare example of true Constancy, with the subtle Counsels and practices of an
old ^ryer and there ill event. Imprinted at London in Fleete-streete within
Temple Bar at the sign of the hand and star by Richard Tottill the xix ^ay
of November. Ann. Dom. 1562 Under which year is entered in the register of the
Stationers, "Recevyd of Mr. Tottle for his license for pryntinge of the
Tragical history of the ROMEU^ AND JULIETT with Sonnettes." REGISTR. A. fol.
86. a. It is again entered in these Registers to be printed, viz. Feb. 18,
1582, for Tottel. And Aug. 5, 1596^ as a n^we ballet, for Edward White.
REGISTR. C. fol. 12. b.
." It is evident from a coincidence of absurdities and an identity of
phraseology, that this was Shakespeare's original, and not the meagre outline
which appears in Painter. Among the copies delivered by Tottel the printer to
the stationers of London, in 1582, is a book called ROMEO AND JULETTA REGI^TR.
B. fol. 193. a. See last Note.
. But I believe there were two different translations in verse. It must be
remembered here, that the original writer of this story was Luigi da Porto, a
gentleman of Verona, who died in 1529. His narrative appeared at Venic^ in
1535, under the title of LA GIULIETTA, and was soon afterward adopted by
Bandello. Shakespeare, misled by the English poem, missed the opportunity of
introducing a most affecting scene by the natural and obvious conclusion of the
story. In Luigi's novel, Juliet awakes from her trance in the tomb before the
death of Romeo. From Turberville's poems printed in 1567, we learn, that Arthur
Brook was drowned in his passage to New Haven, and that he was the author of
this translation, which was the distinguished proof of his excellent poetical
abilities.

Apollo lent him lute for solace sake,
To sound his verse by touch of stately string;
And of the never fading baye did make
A laurel crown, about his brows to clinge,
In proof that he for myter did excel,
As may be judge by Iulyet and her Mate;
For there he shewde his cunning passing well
When he the tale to English did translate. --
Aye me, that time, thou crooked dolphin, where
Wast thou, Aryon's help and only stay,
That safely him from sea to shore did bear,
When Brook was drowned why was thou then away? etc Fol. 143. b. 144. a.
Epitaph on the Death of Master Arthur Brook^. edit. 2. 12mo. 1570.
.
The enthusiasts to Shakespeare must wish to see more of Arthur Brooke's
poetry, and will be grati^ied with the dullest anecdotes of an author to whom
perhaps we owe the existence of a tragedy at which we have all wept. I can
discover nothing more of Arthur Brook, than that he translated from French
into English, The Agreement of sundry places of Scripture seeming to jar,
which was printed at London in 1563. At the end is a copy of verses written by
the editor Thomas Brook the younger, I suppose his brother; by which it
appears, that the author Arthur Brook was shipwrecked before the year 1563 In
octavo. PRINC. "Some men heretofore have attempted."
. Juliet soon furnished a female name to a new novel. For in 1577, Hugh Jackson
printed "The renowned History of Cleomenes and Juliet Oct. 14. REGISTR.
STATION. B. fol. 142. b.
." Unless this be Brooke's story disguised and altered.

Bishop Tanner, I think, in his correspondence with the learned and accurate
Thomas Baker of Cambridge, mentions a prose English version of the NOVELLE of
Bandello, who endeavored to avoid the obscenities of Boccace and the
improbabilities of Cinthio, in 1580, by W. W. Had I seen this performance, for
which I have searched Tanner's library in vain, I would have informed the
inquisitive reader, how far it accommodated Shakespeare in the conduct of the
Tragedy of ROMEO AND JULIET. As to the translator, I make no doubt that the
initials W. W. imply William Warner the author of ALBION'S ENGLAND But W. W.
may mean William Web, author of the DISCOURSE OF ENGLISH POETRY, 1586. I
remember an old book with these initials; and which is entered to Richard
Jones, in 1586, "A history entitled a strange and petifull novel,
dyscoursynge of a noble lord and his lady, with their tragical end of them
and thayre ij children executed by a black morryon." REGISTR. STATION. A. fol.
187. b. There is a ^ine old pathetic ballad, rather too bloody, on this story,
I think in Wood's collection of ballads in the Ashmolean Museum.
, who was esteemed by his cotemporaries as one of the refiners of our language,
and is said in Meres's WIT'S TREASURY, to be one of those by whom "the English
tongue is mightily enriched, and gorgeously invested in rare ornaments and
resplendent habiliments Fol. 280. edit. 1598.
." Warner was also a translator of Plautus; and wrote a novel, or rather a
suite of stories, much in the style of the adventures of Heliodorus's Ethiopic
romance, dedicated to lord Hunsdon, entitled, "SYRINX, or a seauenfold
History, handled with variety of pleasant and profitable, both commicall and
tragical, argument. Newly perused and amended by the first author W. WARNER.
At London, printed by Thomas Purfoote, etc. 1597 In quarto. Bl. Let. This is
the second edition. The first being full of faults. TO THE READER, he says,
"One in penning pregnanter, and a scholar better than myself, on whose grave
the grass now grows green, whom otherwise, though otherwise to me guilti^, I
name not, has borrowed out of ^uerie CALAMUS [of the Syri^x,] of the Story
herein handl^d, argument and invention to several books by him published.
Another of late, having (fayning the same a Translation) set forth an history
of a Duke of Lancaster never before authored, has vouchsafed to incerte
therein whole pages verbatim as they are herein extant, etc." The first edition
i^ entered to Pur^oot, Sept. 22, 1584. REGISTR. STATION. B. fol. 201. a.
." Warner in his ALBION'S ENGLAND, commonly supposed to be first printed in
1592 Land. by T. Orwin. 4to. Bl. Let. But it is entered to Thomas Tadman, Nov.
7, 1586. REGISTR. B. fol. 212. b. As printed.
, says, "Written have I already in Prose, allowed of some, and now offer I
Verse, attending indifferent censvres."

In 1598 was published, as it seems, "A fine Tuscane hystorye called ARNALT AND
LUCINDA." It is annexed to "The ITALIAN SCHOOLEMAISTER, conteyninge rules for
pronouncynge the Italyan tongue Entered to the two Purfootes, Aug. 19, REGISTR.
STATION. C. fol. 40. b.
."

Among George Gascoigne's WEEDS printed in 1576, is the Tale of Ferdinando
Jeronimi, or "The pleasant fable of Ferdinando Ieronimi and Leonora de Valasco,
translated out of the Italian riding tales of Bartello." Much poetry is
interwoven into the narrative. Nor, on the mention of Gascoigne, will it be
foreign to the present purpose to add here, that in the year 1566, he
translated one of Ariosto's comedies called SUPPOSITI, which was acted the same
year at Gray's-inn. The title is, "SVPPOSES. A comedy written in the Italian
tongue by Ariosto, Englished by George Gascoigne of Graies inn esquire, and
there presented, 1566 See Gascoigne's HEAR^^S, fol. 1.
." This comedy was first written in prose by Ariosto, and afterward reduced
into rhyme. Gascoigne's translation is in prose. The dialogue is supported with
much spirit and ease, and has often the air of a modern conversation. As
Gascoigne was the first who exhibited on our stage a story from Euripides, so
in this play he is the first that produced an English comedy in prose. By the
way, the quaint name of Petruchio, and the incident of the master and servant
changing habits and characters, and persuading the Scenese to personate the
father, by frightening him with the hazard of his traveling from Sienna to
Ferrara against the commands of government, was transferred into the TAMING OF
THE SHREW. I doubt not however, that there was an Italian novel on the subject.
From this play also the ridiculous name and character of Doctor Dodipoll seems
to have got into our old drama See fol. 4, etc. See also Nashe's Preface to G.
Harvey's Hunt is up: printed in 1596. "The wisdom of doctor Dodepole played by
the children of Paul's," is entered to R. Olyffe, Oct. 7, 1600. REGISTR.
STATION. C. fol. 65. b.
. But to return.

In Shakespeare's MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING, Beatric^ ^uspects she shall be told
she had "her good wit out of the HUNDRED MERRY TALES Act ii. Sc^ i.
." A translation of LES CENT NOUVELLES NOUVELLES, printed at Paris before the
year 1500, and said to have been written by some of the royal family of France,
but a compilation from the Italians, was licenced to be printed by John Waly,
in 1557, under the title of "A Hundredth merry tails," together with The freere
and the boy, stans puer ad mensam, and youth, charity, and humylite REGISTR.
STATION. A. fol. 22. a. See also B. sub ann. 1581. fol. 186. a.
. It was frequently reprinted, is mentioned as popular in Fletcher's NICE
VALOR; and in the LONDON CHAUNTICLERES, so late as 1659, is cried for sale by
a ballad-vender, with the SEVEN WISE MEN OF GOTHAM Of these, see supr. p. 72.
There is an entry to R. Jones, Jan. 5, 1595, "A COMEDY entitled A KNACK TO
KNOW A KNAVE, newlye set fourth, as it has sundry times ben played by Ned
Allen and his company, with Kemp's MERYMENTES OF THE MEN OF GOTHEHAM."
REGISTR. STATION. B. fol. 304. a.
, and Scogan's JESTS Under a license to T. Colwell, in 1565, "The geystes of
Skoggon gathered together in th^s volume." REGISTR. STATION. A. fol. 134. a.
.

In 1587, George Turberville the poet, already mentioned as the translator of
Ovid's EPISTLES, published a set of tragical tales in prose, selected from
various Italian novelists. He was a ^kilful master of the modern languages, and
went into Russia in the quality of secretary to Thomas Randolph esquire, envoy
to the emperor of Russia It may be doubted whether the trea^ise on Hunting
reprinted with his Falconrie, in 1611, and called a translation, with verses by
Gascoigne, is to be ascribed to him. One or both came out first in 1575. The
Dedication and Epilogue to the Falconrie, are signed by Turbe^vill^.
. This collection, which is dedicated to his brother Nicholas, is entitled,
"TRAGICAL TALES, translated by Turberville in time of his troubles, out of
sundry Italians, with the argument and lenvoy to each tale Land. for Abel
Jeffes, 15^7. 12mo.
."

Among Mr. Oldys's books, was the "Life of Sir Meliado a British knight
Meliadu^ del Espinoy, and M^liadus le noir Oeil, are the thirty-seventh and
thirty-eighth knights of the ROUND TA^LE, in R. Robinson's ANCIENT ORDER, etc.
Land. 1583. 4to. Bl. Let. Chiefly a French translation.
," translated from the Italian, in 1572. By the way, we are not here to suppose
that BRITISH means English. A BRITISH knight means a knight of Bretagne or
Britanny, in France. This is a common mistake, arising from an equivocation
which has converted many a French knight into an Englishman. The learned
Nicholas Antonio, in his SPANISH LIBRARY, affords a remarkable example of this
confusion, and a proof of its frequency, where he is speaking of the Spanish
translation of the romance of TIRANTE THE WHITE, in 1480. "Ad fabularum
artificem stylum convertimus, Joannem Martorell Valentiae regni civem, cujus
est liber hujus commatis, TIRANT LE BLANCH inscriptus, atque anno 1480, ut
aiunt, Valentiae in folio editus. MORE HIC ALIORUM TALIUM OTIOSORUM CONSUETO,
fingit se hunc librum ex ANGLICA in Lusitanam, deinde Lusitana in Valentinam
linguam, anno, 1460, transtulisse, etc BIBL. HISPAN. L. x. c. ix. p. 193. number.
490.
." That is, "I now turn to a writer of fabulous adventures, John Martorell of
the kingdom of Valencia, who wrote a book of this cast, entitled TIRANTE THE
WHITE, printed in folio at Valencia in 1480. This writer, according to a
practice common to such idle historians, pretends he translated this book from
English into Portugueze, and from thence into the Valencian language." The hero
is a gentleman of Bretagne, and the book was first written in the language of
that country. I take this opportunity of observing, that these mistakes of
England for Britanny, tend to confirm my hypothesis, that Bretagne, or
Armorica, was anciently a copious source of romance: an hypothesis, which I
have the happiness to find was the opinion of the most learned and ingenious M.
La Croze, as I am but just now informed from an entertaining little work,
Histoire de la vie et des ouvrages de Monsieur La Croze, printed by M. Jordan
at Amsterdam, in 1741 Chez Francois Changuion, 12mo.
. La Croze's words, which he dictated to a friend, are these. "Tous les ROMANS
DE CHEVALERIE doivent leur origin a la BRETAGNE, et au pays de Galls [Wales]
don't notre Bretagne est sortie. Le Roman D'AMADIS DE GAUL commence par un
Garinter roi de la PETITE BRETAGNE, de la Poquenna Bretonne, et ce roi fut
ayeul maternel d'Amadis. Je ne dis rien ici de LANCELOT DU LAC, et de plusieurs
autres qui sont tous BRETONS. Je n'en except point le Roman de PERCEFOREST,
don't j'ai vu un tres-beau manuscrit en velin dans la bibliotheque du roi de
France. -- Il y a un fort belle Preface sur l'origine de notre BRETAGNE
ARMORIQUE. -- Si ma sante le comportoit, je m'etendrois davantage et je
pourrois fournir un Supplement assez amusant au Traite du docte M. Huet sur
L'ORIGINE DES ROMANS Page 219. seq. See Crescimben. HIST. POES. VULGAR. L. v.
chapter 2, 3, 4. "The Historye of twoe Britain lovers," that is of Britanny, is
entered to Charlewood, Jan^ 4, 1580. REGISTR. STATION. B. fol. 176. b. Again,
"Philocasander and Elamira the fair lady of Brytayne," to Purfoot, Aug. 19,
1598. REGISTR. C. fol. 40. b. Our king Arthur wa^ sometimes called Arthur of
Little Brittayne, and there is a romance with that title, reprinted in 1609.
."

I know not from what Italian fabler the little romance called the BANISHMENT
OF CUPID, was taken. It is said to have been translated out of Italian into
English by Thomas Hedly, in 1587 Land. For Thomas Marshe, 12mo. It is among
Sampson Awdeley's copies, a^ a former grant, 1581. REGISTR. STATION. B. fol.
186. a.
. I conceive also "The fearful fantyses of the Florentyne Cowper," to be a
translation from the Italian Licenced in 1567. REGISTR. STATION. A. fol. 164.
b. There is an edition in 15^9. Bl. Let. 8vo. Purfoot.
.

Nor do I know with what propriety the romance of AURELIO AND ISABELLA, the
scene of which is laid in Scotland, may be mentioned here. But it was printed
in 1586, in one volume, in Italian, French, and English Licenced to E. White,
Aug. 8, 1586. R^GISTR. STATION. B. fol. 209. b. I have "L'HI^TOI^^ D'AU^^LIO ET
ISABELLA en Italien et Francoise," printed at Lions by G. Rouille, in 1555.
16mo^ Annexed ^s LA D^IPHIRE, by the author of the romance, as I apprehend,
LeonBaptista Alberti^ in Italian and French.
. And again, in Italian, Spanish, French, and English, in 1588 Licenced to
Aggas, Nov. 20, 1588. RE^ISTR. B. fol. 237. a.
. I was informed by the late Mr. Collins of Chichester, that Shakespeare's
TEMPEST, for which no origin is yet assigned, was formed on this favorite
romance. But although this information has not proved true on examination, an
useful conclusion may be drawn from it, that Shakespeare's story is somewhere
to be found in an Italian novel, at least that the story preceded Shakespeare.
Mr. Collins had searched this subject with no less fidelity, than judgment and
industry: but his memory failing in his last calamitous indisposition, he
probably gave me the name of one novel for another. I remember he added a
circumstance, which may lead to a discovery, that the principal character of
the romance, answering to Shakespeare's Prospero, was a chemical necromancer,
who had bound a spirit like Ariel to obey his call and perform his services. It
was a common pretense of the dealers in the occult sciences to have a demon at
command. At least Aurelio, or Orelio, was probably one of the names of this
romance, the production and multiplication of gold being the grand object of
alchemy. Taken at large, the magical part of the TEMPEST is founded in that
sort of philosophy which was practiced by John Dee and his associates, and has
been called the Rosicrusian. The name Ariel came from the Talmudistic mysteries
with which the learned Jews had infected this science.

To this head must also be referred, the Collections which appeared before
1600, of tales drawn indiscriminately from French and Spanish, as well as
Italian authors, all perhaps originally of Italian growth, and recommended by
the general love of fable and fiction which now prevailed. I will mention a few.

In point of selection and size, perhaps the most capital miscellany of this
kind is Fenton's book of tragical novels. The title is, "Certain TRAGICAL
DISCOURSES written out of French and Latin, by Geffraie Fenton, no less
pro^itable than pleasant, and of like necessitye to al degrees that take
pleasure in antiquityes or foreign reports. Mon be^r viendra. Imprinted at
London in Flete-strete nere to saint Dunstons Church by Thomas Marshe. Anno
Domini, 1567 In 4to. Bl. Let. Cont. 612 pages. See license from the archbishop
of Canterbury, 1566. REGISTR. STATION. A. fol. 156. a. See ibid. fol. 162. b.
Ames mentions another edition by Marshe, 1579. 4to.
." This edition never was seen by Ames, nor was the book known to Tanner. The
dedication is dated from his chamber at Paris, in 1567 Jun. 22.
, to the Lady Mary Sydney, and contains many sensible reflections on this of
reading. He says, "Neither do I think that our English records are hable to
yield at this day a ROMANT more delicat and chaste, treating of the veraye
th^am^ and effect^s of love, than these HYSTORIES, of no less credit than
sufficient authority, by reason the most of them were within the compass of
memory, etc He commends his illustrious patroness, for "you^ worthi^
participation with the excellent gifts of temperance and wonderful modesty in
the ii. most famous earls of Leicester and Warwike your brethren, and most^
virtuous and renowned lady the countess of Huntington your sy^ter, etc."
." Among the recommendatory poems pr^fixed Sir John Conway, M. H. who writes in
Latin, and Peter Beverley. The latter wrote in verse "The tragecall and
pleasant history of Ariodanto and Jen^ura daughter unto the king of Scots,"
licenced to H. We^kes, 1565. REGISTR. STATION. A. fol. 140. b. There is an
edition dedicated from Staples inn, for R. Wa^kins, 1600. 12mo.
, there is one by George Turberville, who lavishes much praise on Fenton's
curious fyle, which could frame this passing-pleasant book. He adds,

The learned stories erste, and sugared tales that lay
Remoude from simple common sense, this writer does displaye:
Now men of meanest skill, what BANDEL wrought may view,
And tell the tale in English well, that erst they never knew:
Discourse of sundry strange, and tragical affairs,
Of loving ladies haples haps, their deaths, and deadly cares, etc.
Most of the stories are on Italian subjects, and many from Bandello, who was
soon translated into French. The last tale, the Penance of Don Diego on the
Pyrenean mountains for the love of Genivera la blonde, containing some metrical
inscriptions, is in Don Quixote, and was versified in the octave stanza
apparently from Fenton's publication, by R. L. in 1596, at the end of a set of
sonnets called DIELLA "DIELLA, Certain Sonnets adioy^ing to the amorous poem
of Dom Diego and Gineura. By R. L. Gentleman. Ben balla a chi fortu^a suona. At
London, Printed for Henry Olney, etc. 1596." 16mo. The sonnets are twenty-eight
in number.
.

Fenton was a translator of other books from the modern languages. He
translated into English the twenty books of Guicciardin's History of Italy,
which he dedicated to queen Elisabeth from his apartment near the Tower, the
seventh day of January, 1578 I observe here, that there is a receipt from T.
Marshe for printing the "Storye of Italy," Jun. 24, 1560. REGISTR. STATION. A.
fol. 62. b.
. The predominating love of narrative, more especially when the exploits of a
favorite nation were the subject, rendered this book very popular; and it came
recommended to the public by a title page which promised almost the
entertainment of a romance, "The History of Guiccardin, containing the wars
of Italy, and other parts, continued for many years under sundry kings and
princes, together with the variations of the same, Divided into twenty books,
etc. Reduced into English by Geffrey Fenton. Mon heur viendra For Norton, with
his rebus, Land, 1579. Fol. There were other editions, in 1599. 1618. Fol.
." It is probably to this book that Gabriel Harvey, Spenser's Hobbinol,
alludes, where he says, "Even Guiccardin's silver History, and Ariosto's
golden Cantos, grow out of request, and the countess of Pembrooke's Arcadia is
not green enough for queasie stomaches but they must have Greene's Arcadia,
etc Four Letters, etc. Land. 1592. 4to. LET. 3. p. 29.
." Among his versions are also, the GOLDEN EPISTLES of Antonio de Guevara, the
secretary of Charles the fifth, and now a favorite author, addressed to Anne
countess of Oxford, from his chamber at the Dominican or black friars, the
fourth of February, 1575 Land. 1577. 4to. His FAMILIAR EPISTLES were translated
by Edward Hellowes groom of the Leashe, 1574. 4to. Fenton also translated into
English, a Latin DISPUTATION held at the Sorbonne, Land. 1571. 4to. And, an
Epistle about obedience to the pastors of the Flemish church at Antwerp, from
Antonio de Carro, Land. 1570. 8vo. His Discourses on the civil wars in France
under Charles the ninth, in 1569, are entered with Harrison and Bishop.
REGISTR. STATION. A. fol. 191. a. There was an Edward Fenton, who translated
from various authors. "Certain secrets and wonders of nature, etc." Dedicated
to lord Lumley, 1569. 4to. For H. Binneman. See Fuller, WORTH. ii. 318. MSS.
Ashmol. 816.
. I apprehend him to be the same sir Jeffrey Fenton, who is called "a privy
counselor in Ireland to the queen," in the BLAZON OF JEALOUSY written in 1615
Land. 1615. 4to. See fol. 60. 63.
, by R. T. the translator of Ariosto's Satires, in 1608 For R. Jackson.
. He died in 1608 Ware, 137. There is an old Art of English Poetry by one
Fenton.
.

With Fenton's DISCOURSES may be mentioned also, "Four strange lamentable
tragical histories translated out of French into English by Robert Smythe,"
and published, as I apprehend, in 1577 Licenced to Hugh Jackson, Jul. 30.
REGISTR. STATION. B. fol. 142. a. I have never ^een a work by Tarleton the
player, licenced to J. Charlewood, Feb. 5, 1577. "Tarketib's TRAGICAL
TREATISES conteyninge sundry discourses and pretty conceiptes both in prose
and verse." Ibid. 145. a.
.

A work of a similar nature appeared in 1571, by Thoms Fortescue. It is divided
into four books, and called "The FOREST or collection of Historyes no less
profitable, than pleasant and necessary, done out of French into English by
Thomas Fortescue Land. 4to. Bl. Let. A second edition was printed in 1576. For
John Day, 4to. It is licenced with W. Jones in 1570, and with the authority of
the bishop of London. REGISTR. STATION. A. fol. 205. b. Again with Danter, Nov.
8, 1596. REGISTR. C. fol. 15. a. Similar to this is the "PARAGON of pleasant
Historyes, or the this Nutt was new cracked, contayninge a discourse of a noble
king and his three sons," with Ponsonby, Jan. 20. 1595. Ibid. fol. 7. a.
." It is dedicated to John Fortescue esquire, keeper of the wardrobe. The
genius of these tales may be discerned from their history. The book is said to
have been written in Spanish by Petro de Messia, then translated into Italian,
thence into French by Claude Cruget a citizen of Paris, and lastly from French
into English by Fortescue. But many of the stories seem to have originally
migrated from Italy into Spain Among many others that might be mentioned I
think is the romance or novel entitled, "A MARGARITE OF AMERICA. By T. Lodge.
Printed for John Busbie, etc. 1596." 4to. Bl. Let. This piece has never yet
been recited among Lodge's works. In the Dedication to Lady Russell, and
Pre^ace to the gentlemen rea^ers, he says, that being at sea four years before
with M. Cavendish, he found this history in the Spanish tongue in the lib^ary
of the Jesuits ^f Sanctum; and that he translated it in the ship, in passing
through the Straits of Magellan. Many sonnets and metrical inscriptions are
intermixed. One of the sonnets is said to be in imitation of Dolce the Italian.
SIGNAT. C. Again, SIGNAT. K 3. About the walls of the chamber of prince
Protomachus, "in curious imagerie were the Seven Sages of Greece, set forth
with their several virtues eloquently discovered in Arabicke verses." The arch
of the bed is of ebonie set with precious stones, and depictured with the
stages of man's life from infancy to oldage. SIGNAT. B 3. The chamber of
Margarite, in the same castle, is much more sumptuous. Over the portico were
carved in the whitest marble, Diana blushing at the sudden intrusion of Acteon,
and her "naked Nymphs, who with one hand covering their own secret pleasures,
with blushes, with the other cast a beautiful veil over their mistress
dainty nakedness. The two pillars of the door were beautified with the two
Cupides of Anacreon, which well-shaped Modesty often seemed to whip, le^t they
should grow ouer-wanton." Within, "All the chaste Ladies of the world inchased
out of silver, looking through fair mirrours of chrisolites, carbuncles,
sapphires, and green emeraults, fixed their eyes on the picture of Eternity,
etc." In the tape^try, was the story of Orpheus, etc. SIGN. B 3. A sonnet of
"that excellent poet of Itali^ Lodouico Pascale," is introduced, SIGNAT. L.
Another, "in imitation of Martelli, having the right nature of an Italian
melancholy," SIGNAT. L. He mentions^ "the sweet conceits of Philip du Ports,
whose poetical writings being already for the most part Englished, and
ordinarily in every man's hands," are not here translated. SIGNAT. L 2.

I think I have also seen in Italian "The strange and wonderful adventures of
Simonides a gentilman Spaniarde. Containing uerie pleasant discourse.
Gathered as well for the recreation of our noble young gentilmen as our
honorable courtly ladies. By Barnabe Rich gentilman. London, for Robert
Walley, 1581." Bl. Let. 4to. Much poetry is intermixed. A recommendatory poem
in the octave stanza is prefixed by Lodge, who says he corrected the work, and
has now laid his muse aside. There is another in the same stanza by R. W. But
it would be endless to pursue publications of this sort. I only add, that
Barnabe Rich abovementioned wrote in prose THE HONESTY OF THIS AGE, etc.
Land. 1615. 4to, A curious picture of the times. Also "the PATHWAY TO MILITARY
PRACTICE, with a calendar for the ymbattallinge of men, newly written by
Barnabie Rich," entered to R. Walley, 22 March, 1586. REGISTR. STATION. B.
fol. 216. b. Rich in the title page to his IRISH HUBBUB (Land. 1617. 4to.)
call^ that book his twenty-sixth. I have seen most of them.


.

The learned doctor Farmer has restored to the public notice a compilation of
this class, unmentioned by any typographic annalist, and entitled, "The ORATOR,
handling a hundred several Discourses in form of Declamations: some of the
Arguments being drawn from Titus Liuius, and other ancient writers, the rest
of the author's own Invention. Part of which are of matters happened in our
age. Written in French by Alexander Silvayn, and Englished by L. P. [or
"Lazarus Pilot.] London, printed by Adam Islip, 1596 I know not exactly what
connection this piece may have with an entry, under the year 1590, to Aggas and
Wo^fe, "Certain tragical cases conteyninge Lv Hystories with their seu^rall
declamations both accusative and defensive, written in ffrenshe by Alexander
Vandenbrygt alias Silvan, translated into English by R. A." REGISTR. STATION.
B. fol. 263. b. Perhaps R. A. is Robert Allot, the publisher of ENGLAND'S
PARNASSUS in 1600. See supr. p. 280. And add, that he has some Latin hexameters
prefixed to Christopher Middleton's LEGEND OF DUKE HUMPHREY, Land. 1600. 4to.
." The subject of the ninety-fifth DECLAMATION is, Of a Jew who would for his
debt have a pound of the flesh of a Christian See fol. 401.
. We have here the incident of the BOND, in Shakespeare's MERCHANT OF VENICE,
which yet may be traced to a much higher source See supr. DISS. GEST. ROMAN.
lxxxiii.
. This Alexander Sylvain compiled in French Epitomes de cent Histoires
Tragiques party extraictes des Acts des Romans et autres, a work licenced to
Islip to be translated into English in 1596 Jul. 15. REGISTR. C. fol. 12. a.
. Perhaps the following passage in Burton's MELANCHOLY, may throw light on
these DECLAMATIONS. "In the Low Countries, before these wars, they had many
solemn feasts, plays, challenges, artillery [archery] gardens, colleges of
rimers, rhetoricians, poets, and to this day, such places are curiously
maintained in Amsterdam. In Italy, they have solemn Declamations of certain
select young gentlemen in Florence, like these reciters in old Rome, etc P.
ii.. 2. p. 229. edit. 1624.
."

In 1582, a suite of tales was published by George Whetstone, a sonnet-writer
of some rank, and one of the most passionate among us to bewail the
perplexities of love Meres, ubi supr. fol. 284. W. Web, a cotemporary, calls
him "A man singula^ly well skilled in this faculty of poetry."
, under the title of HEPTAMERON, and containing some novels from Cinthio This
title adopted from the queen of Navarre was popular. There is entered to Jones,
Jan. 11, 1581, "An HEPTAMERON of civil discourses unto the Christmas exercises
of sundry well courted gentlemen and gentlewomen." REGISTR. STATION. B. fol
185. b. I suppose a book of tales. There is also, August 8, 1586, to E. White,
"MORANDO, the TRITAMERON OF LOV^." Ibid. fol. 209. b.
. Shakespeare, in MEASURE FOR MEASURE, has fallen into great improprieties by
founding his plot on a history in the HEPTAMERON, imperfectly copied or
translated from Cinthio's original See Whetstone's RIGHT EXCELLENT AND FAMOUS
HISTORYE OF PROMOS AND CASSANDRA, Divided into Commical DISCOURSES, printed in
1578. Entered to R. Jones, 31 Jul. 1578. REGISTR. STATION. B. fol. 150. b.
. Many faults in the conduct of incidents for which Shakespeare's judgment is
arraigned, often flowed from the casual book of the day, whose mistakes he
implicitly followed without looking for a better model, and from a too hasty
acquie^cence in the present accommodation. But without a book of this sort,
Shakespeare would often have been at a loss for a subject. Yet at the same
time, we look with wonder at the structures which he forms, and even without
labor or deliberation, of the basest materials In the Prologue to a comedy
called CUPID'S WHIRLIGIG, As it has been sundry times acted by the Chil^ren
of his Majesty's Reuel^, written by E. S. and printed in quarto by T. Creed in
1616, perhaps before, an oblique stroke seems intended at some of Shakespeare's
plots. Our author'^ pen loves not to swim in blood,
He dips no ink from out black Acheron:
Nor crosses seas to get a foreign plot. --
Nor does he touch the falls of mighty kings,
No ancient history, no shepherd's love,
No statesman's life, etc.
He blames some other dramatic writers for their plots of heathen gods. So
another, but who surely had forgot Shakespeare, in PASQUI^L'S MADCAPPE'S
MESSAGE, p. 11. Land. 1600. Printed by V. S. 4to. Go, bid the poets studdie
better matter,
Than Mars and Venus in a tragedy.

.

Ames recites a large collection of novels in two volumes, dedicated to sir
George Howard master of the armory, and printed for Nicholas England in 1567
Page 328.
. I have never seen them, but presume they are translations from Boccace,
Cinthio, and Bandello Cont. 856 leaves^ 8vo.
. In 1589, was printed the CHAOS OF HISTORYES REGISTR. STATION. B. fol. 246. a.
Jul. 28, to Abell Jeffes.
. And in 1563, "A book called Certain noble stories contaynynge rare and
worthy matter To Berys. REGISTR. A. fol. 89. b. I have here thrown together
many pieces of the same sort, before 1585, from the registers of the
Stationers. Mar. 10^ 1594, to T. Creed, "MOTHER REDD-CAPPE her last will and
testament, conteynyng sundry conceipted and pleasant tales furnished with
much varyeti^ to move delighte." REGISTR. B. fol. 130. a. -- Nov. 3^ 1576, to
H. Bynneman, "MERRY TALES, wittye questions, and quick answers." Ibid fol. 135.
b. -- April 2, 1577, to R. Jones, "A FLORISHE UPON FANCY, as gallant a gloss
of such a triflinge a text as ever was written, compiled by N. B. gent. To
which are a^nexe^ many pretty pamphlets for pleasant heads to pass away
idell time withal compiled by the same author." Ibid. fol. 138. b. And by the
same author, perhaps Nicholas Breton, Jun. 1, 1577, to Watkins, afterward T.
Dawson, "The woo^kes o^ a young wit trust up, with a FARDELL of pretty
fantasies pro^itable to young poets, compiled by N. B. gent." Ibid. fol. 139. b.
-- Jun. 5, 1577, to R. Jones, "A HANDEFULL OF HIDDEN S^CRETS, conteyninge
therein certain Sonnettes and other pleasant devises, picked out of the
closet of sundry worthy writers, and collected by R. Williams." [N. B. This
is otherwise entitled, The GALLERY OF GALLANT INVENTIONS.] Ibid. fol. 140. a.
-- Jun. 23^ 1584, to T. Hacke^, two books, "A DIAL for dainty darlings," and
"the B^NQUET of dainty conceits." Ibid. fol. 200. b. -- "The parlour of
pleasant delyghtes," to Yarret James, Jan. 13, 1580. Ibid. fol. 177. b. -- "A
ballad of the traitorous and unbridled crueltye of one Lucio a knight executed
over Eriphile daughter to Hortensia Castilion of Genoway in Italy," to H.
Carre, Sept. 3, 1580. Ibid. fol. 171. b. -- "The deceipts in love discoursed in
a Comedy of ij Italyan gentlemen and translated into Engli^she," to S.
Waterson, Nov. 10, 1584. Ibid. fol. 202. a. Most of these pieces I have seen:
and although perhaps they do not all exactly coincide with the class of books
pointed out in the text, they illustrate the general subject of this ^ection.
." These pieces are perhaps to be catalogued in the same class.

In the year 1590, sir James Harrington, who will occur again in his place as
an original writer, exhibited an English version of Ariosto's ORLANDO FURIOSO
At least in that year, Feb. 26, was entered to Richard Field, under the hands
of the archbishop of Canterbury and the bishop of London, "A book enti^uled
John Harrington's Orlando Furioso, etc." REGISTR. STATION. B. fol. 271. b. But
there is entered to Cuthbert Burbye, to be printed by Danter, May 28, 1594,
"The History o^ Orlando Furioso." Ibid. fol. 306. b. See also fol. 303. a. And
Ariosto's story of Rogero and Rhodomont, translated from the French of Philip
de Ports, by G. M. [Gervis Markham] is entered to N. Linge, Sept. 15, 1598.
Ibid. C. fol. 41. b.
: which, although executed without spirit or accuracy, unanimated and
incorrect, enriched our poetry by a communication of new stores of fiction and
imagination, both of the romantic and comic species, of Gothic machinery and
familiar manners.

Fairfax is commonly supposed to be the first translator of Tasso. But in 1593,
was licenced "A book called Godfrey of Bolloign an heroycall poem of S.
Torquato Tasso, Englished by R. E. esquire To Christopher Hunt, Jan. 25.
REGISTR. STATION. B. fol. 304. b. The same version of T^sso is again entered
Nov. 22, 1599. REGISTR. C. fol. 54. a. Among Rawlinson's manuscripts are two
fair copies in large folio of a translation of Tasso in octave stanzas, by sir
G. T. An inserted note says this is George Turberville, the poet of queen
Elisabeth's reign^ and that he was knighted by the queen while ambassador.
." In consequence of this version, appeared the next year "An interlude
entitled Godfrey of Bolloigne with the Conquest of Jerusalem To John Danter,
Jun. 19. Ibid. fol. ^09. b.
." Hall in his Satires published in 1597, enumerates among the favorite stories
of his time, such as, Saint George, Brutus, king Arthur, and Charlemagne, What
were his knights did SALEM'S SIEGE maintain,
To which he immediately adds Ariosto's Orlando B. vi. Sat. i.
.

By means of the same vehicle, translation from Italian books, a precise and
systematical knowledge of the ancient heathen theology seems to have been more
effectually circulated among the people in the reign of queen Elisabeth. Among
others, in 1599 was published, "THE FOUNTAIN OF ANCIENT FICTION, wherein is
depictured the images and statues of the gods of the ancients with their proper
and particular expositions. Done into English by Richard Linche gentleman B.
vi. Sat. i.
. Tempe e figliuola di verita. London, imprinted by Valentine Sims, 1599 In
quarto. From some other book of the kind, says John Marston in his SATYRS,
Land. for E. Matts, 1593. 12mo. SAT. ii. Reach me some poets Index that will
show
IMAGINES DEORUM. Book of Epithites,
Natalis Comes, thou, I know, recites,
And make anatomy of poesy.
With this might have been bound up "A treasorie and storehouse of similis,"
for T. Creed, 1600.
." This book, or one of the same sort, is censured in a puritanical pamphlet,
written the same year, by one H. G. a painful minister of God's word in Kent,
as the Spawne of Italian Gallimawfry, as tending to corrupt the pure and
unidolatrous worship of the one God, and as one of the deadly snares of popish
deception In 1599 was published by G. Potter, "A commendacion of true poetry
and a discommendacion of all baudy, pybald, and paganizde [paganised] poets,
etc." See REGISTR. STATION. C. fol. 55. b.
. In the history of the puritans, their apprehensions that the reformed faith
was yet in danger from paganism, are not sufficiently noted. And it should be
remembered, that a PANTHEON had before appeared; rather indeed with a view of
exposing the heathen superstitions, and of showing their conformity to the
papistic, than of illustrating the religious fable of antiquity. But the scope
and design of the writer will appear from his title, which from its archness
alone deserves to be inserted. "The GOLDEN BOOK OF THE LEADEN GODS, wherein
is described the vain imaginations of the heathen pagans, and counterfeit
christians. With a description of their several tables, what each of their
pictures signified In quarto, for Thomas Marshe, 1577. It contains only 72
pages. Licenced Aug. 26, 1577. REGISTR. STATION. B. fol. 142. b.
." The writer, however, doctor Stephen Batman, had been domestic chaplain to
archbishop Parker, and is better known by his general chronicle of prodigies
called Batman's DOOM Land. 1581. 4to.
. He was also the last translator of the Gothic Pliny, BARTHOLOMEUS DE
PROPRIETATIBUS RERUM, and collected more than a thousand manuscripts for
archbishop Parker's library.

This enquiry might be much farther enlarged and extended. But let it be
sufficient to observe here in general, that the best stories of the early and
original Italian novelists, either by immediate translation, or through the
mediation of Spanish, French, or Latin versions, by paraphrase, abridgement,
imitation, and often under the disguise of licentious innovations of names,
incidents, and characters, appeared in an English dress, before the close of
the reign of Elisabeth, and for the most part, even before the publication of
the first volume of Belleforrest's grand repository of tragical narratives, a
compilation from the Italian writers, in 1583. But the CENT HISTOIRES TRAGIQUES
of Belleforrest himself, appear to have been translated soon afterward See,
under 1596, REGISTR. STATION. C.
. In the meantime, it must be remembered, that many translations of Tales from
the modern languages were licenced to be printed, but afterward suppressed by
the interest of the puritans. It appears from the register of the Stationers,
that among others, in the year 1619^ "The DECAMERON of Mr. John Boccace
Florentine," was revoked by a sudden inhibition of Abbot, archbishop of
Canterbury REGISTR. C. fol. 311. a.
. But not only the clamours of the Calvinists, but caprice and ignorance,
perhaps partiality, seem to have had some share in this business of licencing
books. The rigid arbiters of the press who condemned Boccace in the gross,
could not with propriety spare all the licentious cantos of Ariosto. That
writer's libertine friar, metamorphosis of Richardetto, Alcina and Rogero,
Anselmo, and host's tale of Astolfo, are shocking to common decency. When the
four or five first books of AMADIS DE GAUL in French were delivered to Wolf to
be translated into English and to be printed, in the year 1592, the signature
of bishop Aylmer was affixed to every book of the original RE^ISTR. STATION. B.
fol. ^86. a. Hence D^kker's familiarity of allusion, in The VNTRUSSING OF THE
HUMOROUS PO^^^ "Farewell my (...) (...) d^ Gaul!" Land. 1602. 4to. Signat. D 2.
. The romance of PALMERIN OF ENGLAND was licenced to be printed in 1580, on
condition, that if any thing reprehensible was found in the book after
publication, all the copies should be committed to the flames To John
Charlewood, Feb. 13. Ibid. fol. 177. ^.
. Notwithstanding, it is remarkable, that in 1587, a new edition of Boccace's
DECAMERON in Italian Two or three other Italian book^, ^ proof of the
popularity of the language, were allowed to b^ printed in 1588. Ibid. fol. 233.
b. fol. 234^ b.
by Wolf, should have been permitted by archbishop Whitgift Sept. 13. Together
with the Histori^ of Chi^^^ ^oth in Itali^n and English.
: and the English AMOROUS FIAMETTA of Boccace, abovementioned, in the same year
by the bishop of London Ibid. Sept. 18.
.

But in the year 1599, the Hall of the Stationers underwent as great a
purgation as was carried on in Don Quixote's library. Marston's Pygmalion,
Marlowe's Ovid, the Satires of Hall and Marston, the Epigrams of Davies and
others, and the CALTHA POETARUM, were ordered for immediate conflagration, by
the prelates Whitgift and Bancroft There are also r^cited, "The Shadow of
Truth^ in Epigram^ and S^tires. Sn^^^ing Satyrs. The book^ against women. The
xv joys of marriage."
. By the same authority, all the books of Nash and Gabriel Harvey were
anathematised; and, like thieves and outlaws, were ordered to be taken
wheresoever they may be found. It was decreed, that no S^tires of Epigrams
should be printed for the future. No plays were to be printed without the
inspection and permission of the archbishop of Canterbury and the bishop of
London, nor any English Historyes, I suppose novels and romances, without the
sanction of the Privy Council. Any pieces of this nature, unlicenced, or now at
large and wandering abroad, were to be diligently sought, recalled, and
delivered over to the ecclesiastical arm at London-house REGISTR. STATION. C.
fol. 316. a. b.
.

If any apology should be thought necessary for so prolix and intricate an
examination of these compositions, I shelter this section under the authority
of a polite and judicious Roman writer, "Sit apud te honos ANTIQUITATI, sit
ingentibus factis, sit FABULIS quoque Plin. EPIST. viii. 24.
."

SECT. XLIII.
ENOUGH has been opened of the reign of queen Elisabeth, to afford us an
opportunity of forming some general reflections, tending to establish a full
estimate of the genius of the poetry of that reign; and which, by drawing
conclusions from what has been said, and directing the reader to what he is to
expect, will at once be recapitulatory and preparatory. Such a survey perhaps
might have stood with more propriety as an introduction to this reign. But it
was first necessary to clear the way, by many circumstantial details, and the
regular narration of those particulars, which lay the foundation of principles,
and suggest matter for discursive observation. My sentiments on this subject
shall therefore compose the concluding section of the present volume.

The age of queen Elisabeth is commonly called the golden age of English
poetry. It certainly may not improperly be styled the most POETICAL age of
these annals.

Among the great features which strike us in the poetry of this period, are the
predominancy of fable, of fiction, and fancy, and a predilection for
interesting adventures and pathetic events. I will endeavor to assign and
explain the cause of this characteristic distinction, which may chiefly be
referred to the following principles, sometimes blended, and sometimes
operating singly: The revival and vernacular versions of the classics, the
importation and translation of Italian novels, the visionary reveries or
refinements of false philosophy, a degree of superstition sufficient for the
purpose^ of poetry, the adoption of the machineries of romance, and the
frequency and improvements of allegoric exhibition in the popular spectacles.

When the corruptions and impostures of popery were abolished, the fashion of
cultivating the Greek and Roman learning became universal: and the literary
character was no longer appropriated to scholars by profession, but assumed by
the nobility and gentry. The ecclesiastics had found it their interest to keep
the languages of antiquity to themselves, and men were eager to know what had
been so long injuriously concealed. Truth propagates truth, and the mantle of
mystery was removed not only from religion but from literature. The laity, who
had now been taught to assert their natural privileges, became impatient of the
old monopoly of knowledge, and demanded admittance to the usurpations of the
clergy. The general curiosity for new discoveries, heightened either by just or
imaginary ideas of the treasures contained in the Greek and Roman writers,
excited all persons of leisure and fortune to study the classics. The pedantry
of the present age was the politeness of the last. An accurate comprehension of
the phraseology and peculiarities of the ancient poets, historians, and
orators, which yet seldom went farther than a kind of technical erudition, was
an indispensable and almost the principal object in the circle of a gentleman's
education. Every young lady of fashion was carefully instituted in classical
letters: and the daughter of a duchess was taught, not only to distill strong
waters, but to construe Greek. Among the learned females of high distinction,
queen Elisabeth herself was the most conspicuous. Roger Ascham, her preceptor,
speaks with rapture of her astonishing progress in the Greek nouns; and
declares with no small degree of triumph, that during a long residence at
Windsor-castle, she was accustomed to read more Greek in a day, than "some
prebendary of that church did Latin, in one week SCHOOLMASTER. p^ 19. b. edit.
1589. 4to.
." And although perhaps a princess looking out words in a lexicon, and writing
down hard phrases from Plutarch's Lives, may be thought at present a more
incompatible and extraordinary character, than a canon of Windsor understanding
no Greek and but little Latin, yet Elisabeth's passion for these acquisitions
was then natural, and resulted from the genius and habitudes of her age.

The books of antiquity being thus familiarised to the great, every thing was
tinctured with ancient history and mythology. The heathen gods, although
discountenanced by the Calvinists on a suspicion of their tending to cherish
and revive a spirit of idolatry, came into general vogue. When the queen
paraded through a country-town, almost every pageant was a pantheon. When she
paid a visit at the house of any of her nobility, at entering the hall she was
saluted by the Penates, and conducted to her privy-chamber by Mercury. Even the
pastry-cooks were expert mythologists. At dinner, select transformations of
Ovid's metamorphoses were exhibited in confectionary: and the splendid iceing
of an immense historic plumb-cake, was embossed with a delicious basso-relievo
of the destruction of Troy. In the afternoon, when she condescended to walk in
the garden, the lake was covered with Tritons and Nereids: the pages of the
family were converted into Wood-nymphs who peeped from every bower: and the
footmen gamboled over the lawns in the figure of Satyrs. I speak it without
designing to insinuate any unfavourable suspicions, but it seems difficult to
say, why Elisabeth's virginity should have been made the theme of perpetual and
excessive panegyric: nor does it immediately appear, that there is less merit
or glory in a married than a maiden queen. Yet, the next morning, after
sleeping in a room hung with the tapestry of the voyage of Eneas, when her
majesty hunted in the Park, she was met by Diana, who pronouncing our royal
prude to be the brightest paragon of unspotted chastity, invited her to groves
free from the intrusions of Acteon. The truth is, she was so profusely
flattered for this virtue, because it was esteemed the characteristical
ornament of the heroines, as fantastic honor was the chief pride of the
champions, of the old barbarous romance. It was in conformity to the sentiments
of chivalry, which still continued in vogue, that she was celebrated for
chastity: the compliment, however, was paid in a classical allusion.

Queens must be ridiculous when they would appear as women. The softer
attractions of sex vanish on the throne. Elisabeth sought all occasions of
being extolled for her beauty, of which indeed in the prime of her youth she
possessed but a small share, whatever might have been her pretensions to
absolute virginity. Notwithstanding her exaggerated habits of dignity and
ceremony, and a certain affectation of imperial severity, she did not perceive
this ambition of being complimented for beauty, to be an idle and unpardonable
levity, totally inconsistent with her high station and character. As she
conquered all nations with her arms, it matters not what were the triumphs of
her eyes. Of what consequence was the complexion of the mistress of the world?
Not less vain of her person than her politics, this stately coquet, the
guardian of the protestant faith, the terror of the sea, the mediatrix of the
factions of France, and the scourge of Spain, was infinitely mortified, if an
ambassador, at the first audience, did not tell her she was the finest woman in
Europe. No negotiation succeeded unless she was addressed as a goddess.
Encomiastic harangues drawn from this topic, even on the supposition of youth
and beauty, were surely superfluous, unsuitable, and unworthy; and were offered
and received with an equal impropriety. Yet when she rode through the streets
of the city of Norwich, Cupid, at the command of the mayor and aldermen,
advancing from a groupe of gods who had left Olympus to grace the procession,
gave her a golden arrow, the most effective weapon of his well-furnished
quiver, which under the influence of such irresistible charms was sure to wound
the most obdurate heart. "A gift, says honest Hollinshed, which her majesty,
now verging to her fiftieth year, received very thankfully CHRON. iii. f. 1297.
." In one of the fulsome interludes at court, where she was present, the
singing-boys of her chapel presented the story of the three rival goddesses on
mount Ida, to which her majesty was ingeniously added as a fourth: and Paris
was arraigned in form for adjudging the golden apple to Venus, which was due to
the queen alone.

This inundation of classical pedantry soon infected our poetry. Our writers,
already trained in the school of fancy, were suddenly dazzled with these novel
imaginations, and the divinities and heroes of pagan antiquity decorated every
composition. The perpetual allusions to ancient fable were often introduced
without the least regard to propriety. Shakespeare's Mrs. Page, who is not
intended in any degree to be a learned or an affected lady, laughing at the
cumbersome courtship of her corpulent lover Falstaff, says, "I had rather be a
giantess and lie under mount Pelion MERRY W. Act. ii. Sc. i.
." This familiarity with the pagan story was not, however, so much owing to the
prevailing study of the original authors, as to the numerous English versions
of them, which were consequently made. The translations of the classics, which
now employed every pen, gave a currency and a celebrity to these fancies, and
had the effect of diffusing them among the people. No sooner were they
delivered from the pale of the scholastic languages, than they acquired a
general notoriety. Ovid's metamorphoses just translated by Golding, to instance
no farther, disclosed a new world of fiction, even to the illiterate. As we had
now all the ancient fables in English, learned allusions, whether in a poem or
a pageant, were no longer obscure and unintelligible to common readers and
common spectators. And here we are led to observe, that at this restoration of
the classics, we were first struck only with their fabulous inventions. We did
not attend to their regularity of design and justness of sentiment. A rude age,
beginning to read these writers, imitated their extravagancies, not their
natural beauties. And these, like other novelties, were pursued to a blameable
excess.

I have before given a sketch of the introduction of classical stories, in the
splendid show exhibited at the coronation of queen Anne Boleyn. But that is a
rare and a premature instance: and the pagan fictions are there complicated
with the barbarisms of the catholic worship, and the doctrines of scholastic
theology. Classical learning was not then so widely spread, either by study or
translation, as to bring these learned spectacles into fashion, to frame them
with sufficient skill, and to present them with propriety.

Another capital source of the poetry peculiar to this period, consisted in the
numerous translations of Italian tales into English. These narratives, not
dealing altogether in romantic inventions, but in real life and manners, and in
artful arrangements of fictitious yet probable events, afforded a new
gratification to a people which yet retained their ancient relish for
taletelling, and became the fashionable amusement of all who professed to read
for pleasure. They gave rise to innumerable plays and poems, which would not
otherwise have existed; and turned the thoughts of our writers to new
inventions of the same kind. Before these books became common, affecting
situations, the combination of incident, and the pathos of catastrophe, were
almost unknown. Distress, especially that arising from the conflicts of the
tender passion, had not yet been shown in its most interesting forms. It was
hence our poets, particularly the dramatic, borrowed ideas of a legitimate
plot, and the complication of facts necessary to constitute a story either of
the comic or tragic species. In proportion as knowledge increased, genius had
wanted subjects and materials. These pieces usurped the place of legends and
chronicles. And although the old historical songs of the minstrels contained
much bold adventure, heroic enterprise, and strong touches of rude delineation,
yet they failed in that multiplication and disposition of circumstances, and in
that description of characters and events approaching nearer to truth and
reality, which were demanded by a more discerning and curious age. Even the
rugged features of the original Gothic romance were softened by this sort of
reading: and the Italian pastoral, yet with some mixture of the kind of
incidents described in Heliodorus's Ethiopic history now newly translated, was
engrafted on the feudal manners in Sydney's ARCADIA.

But the reformation had not yet destroyed every delusion, nor disinchanted all
the strong holds of superstition. A few dim characters were yet legible in the
mouldering creed of tradition. Every goblin of ignorance did not vanish at the
first glimmerings of the morning of science. Reason suffered a few demons still
to linger, which she chose to retain in her service under the guidance of
poetry. Men believed, or were willing to believe, that spirits were yet
hovering around, who brought with them airs from heaven, or blasts from hell,
that the ghost was duly released from his prison of torment at the sound of
the curfue, and that fairies imprinted mysterious circles on the turf by
moonlight. Much of this credulity was even consecrated by the name of science
and profound speculation. Prospero had not yet broken and buried his staff, nor
drowned his book deeper than did ever plummet sound. It was now that the
alchymist, and the judicial astrologer, conducted his occult operations by the
potent intercourse of some preternatural being, who came obsequious to his
call, and was bound to accomplish his severest services, under certain
conditions, and for a limited duration of time. It was actually one of the
pretended feats of these fantastic philosophers, to evoke the queen of the
Fairies in the solitude of a gloomy grove, who, preceded by a sudden rustling
of the leaves, appeared in robes of transcendent luster Lilly's LIFE, p. 151.
. The Shakespeare of a more instructed and polished age, would not have given
us a magician darkening the sun at noon, the sabbath of the witches, and the
cauldron of incantation.

Undoubtedly most of these notions were credited and entertained in a much
higher degree, in the preceding periods. But the arts of composition had not
then made a sufficient progress, nor would the poets of those periods have
managed them with so much address and judgment. We were now arrived at that
point, when the national credulity, chastened by reason, had produced a sort of
civilized superstition, and left a set of traditions, fanciful enough for
poetic decoration, and yet not too violent and chimerical for common sense.
Hobbes, although no friend to this doctrine, observes happily, "In a good poem
both judgment and fancy are required; but the fancy must be more eminent,
because they please for the EXTRAVAGANCY, but ought not to displease by
INDISCRETION LEVIATH. Part i. chapter viii.
."

In the mean time the Gothic romance, although somewhat shook by the classical
fictions, and by the tales of Boccace and Bandello, still maintained its
ground: and the daring machineries of giants, dragons, and enchanted castles,
borrowed from the magic storehouse of Boiardo, Ariosto, and Tasso, began to be
employed by the epic muse. These ornaments have been censured by the bigotry of
precise and servile critics, as abounding in whimsical absurdities, and as
unwarrantable deviations from the practice of Homer and Virgil. The author of
AN ENQUIRY INTO THE LIFE AND WRITINGS OF HOMER is willing to allow a fertility
of genius, and a felicity of expression, to Tasso and Ariosto; but at the same
time complains, that, "quitting life, they betook themselves to aerial beings
and Utopian characters, and filled their works with Charms and Visions, the
modern Supplements of the Mavelous and Sublime. The best poets copy nature,
and give it such as they find it. When once they lose sight of this, they write
false, be their talents ever so great SECT. V. p. 69.
." But what shall we say of those Utopians, the Cyclopes and the Lestrigons in
the Odyssey? The hippogrif of Ariosto may be opposed to the harpies of Virgil.
If leaves are turned into ships in the Orlando, nymphs are transformed into
ships in the Eneid. Cacus is a more unnatural savage than Caliban. Nor am I
convinced, that the imagery of Ismeno's necromantic forest in the Gierusalemme
Liberata, guarded by walls and battlements of fire, is less mavelous and
sublime, than the leap of Juno's horses in the Iliad, celebrated by Longinus
for its singular magnificence and dignity IL^AD, V. 770. Longin.. ix.
. On the principles of this critic, Voltaire's Henriad may be placed at the
head of the modern epic. But I forbear to anticipate my opinion of a system,
which will more properly be considered, when I come to speak of Spenser. I
must, however, observe here, that the Gothic and pagan fictions were now
frequently blended and incorporated. The Lady of the Lake floated in the suite
of Neptune before queen Elisabeth at Kenilworth; Ariel assumes the semblance of
a sea-nymph, and Hecate, by an easy association, conducts the rites of the
weird sisters in Macbeth.

Allegory had been derived from the religious dramas into our civil spectacles.
The masks and pageantries of the age of Elisabeth were not only furnished by
the heathen divinities, but often by the virtues and vices impersonated,
significantly decorated, accurately distinguished by their proper types, and
represented by living actors. The ancient symbolical shows of this sort began
now to lose their old barbarism and a mixture of religion, and to assume a
degree of poetical elegance and precision. Nor was it only in the conformation
of particular figures that much fancy was shown, but in the contexture of some
of the fables or devices presented by groupes of ideal personages. These
exhibitions quickened creative invention, and reflected back on poetry what
poetry had given. From their familiarity and public nature, they formed a
national taste for allegory; and the allegorical poets were now writing to the
people. Even romance was turned into this channel. In the Fairy Queen, allegory
is wrought upon chivalry, and the feats and figments of Arthur's round table
are moralized. The virtues of magnificence and chastity are here personified:
but they are imaged with the forms, and under the agency, of romantic knights
and damsels. What was an afterthought in Tasso, appears to have been Spenser's
premeditated and primary design. In the mean time, we must not confound these
moral combatants of the Fairy Queen with some of its other embodied
abstractions, which are purely and professedly allegorical.

It may here be added, that only a few critical treatises, and but one ART OF
POETRY, were now written. Sentiments and images were not absolutely determined
by the canons of composition: nor was genius awed by the consciousness of a
future and final arraignment at the tribunal of taste. A certain dignity of
inattention to niceties is now visible in our writers. Without too closely
consulting a criterion of correctness, every man indulged his own
capriciousness of invention. The poet's appeal was chiefly to his own voluntary
feelings, his own immediate and peculiar mode of conception. And this freedom
of thought was often expressed in an undisguised frankness of diction. A
circumstance, by the way, that greatly contributed to give the flowing
modulation which now marked the measures of our poets, and which soon
degenerated into the opposite extreme of dissonance and asperity. Selection and
discrimination were often overlooked. Shakespeare wandered in pursuit of
universal nature. The glancings of his eye are from heaven to earth, from earth
to heaven. We behold him breaking the barriers of imaginary method. In the same
scene, he descends from his meridian of the noblest tragic sublimity, to puns
and quibbles, to the meanest merriments of a plebeian farce. In the midst of
his dignity, he resembles his own Richard the second, the skipping king, who
sometimes discarding the state of a monarch, Mingled his royalty with carping
fools FIRST P. HENRY iv. Act iii. Sc. ii.
.
He seems not to have seen any impropriety, in the most abrupt transitions,
from dukes to buffoons, from senators to sailors, from counselors to
constables, and from kings to clowns. Like Virgil's majestic oak, -- Quantum
vertice ad auras
Aetherias, tantum radice in Tartara tendit GEOR^. ii. 29^.
.


No Satires, properly so called, were written till toward the latter end of
the queen's reign, and then but a few. Pictures drawn at large of the vices of
the times, did not suit readers who loved to wander in the regions of
artificial manners. The Muse, like the people, was too solemn and reserved, too
ceremonious and pedantic, to stoop to common life. Satire is the poetry of a
nation highly polished.

The importance of the female character was not yet acknowledged, nor were
women admitted into the general commerce of society. The effect of that
intercourse had not imparted a comic air to poetry, nor softened the severer
tone of our versification with the levities of gallantry, and the familiarities
of compliment, sometimes perhaps operating on serious subjects, and
impe^ceptibly spreading themselves in the general habits of style and thought.
I do not mean to insinuate, that our poetry has suffered from the great change
of manners, which this assumption of the gentler ^ex, or rather the improved
state of female education, has produced, by giving elegance and variety to
life, by enlarging the sphere of conversation, and by multiplying the topics
and enriching the stores of wit and humor. But I am marking the peculiarities
of composition: and my meaning was to suggest, that the absence of so important
a circumstance from the modes and constitution of ant^ent life, must have
influenced the cotemporary poetry. Of the state of manners among our ancestors
respecting this point, many traces remain. Their style of courtship may be
collected from the love-dialogues of Hamlet, young Percy, Henry the fifth, and
Master Fenton. Their tragic heroines, their Desdemonas and Ophelias, although
of so much consequence in the piece, are degraded to the back-ground. In
comedy, their ladies are nothing more than MERRY WIVES, plain and cheerful
matrons, who stand upon the chariness of their honesty. In the smaller poems,
if a lover praises his mistress, she is complimented in strains neither polite
nor pathetic, without elegance and without affection: she is described, not in
the address of intelligible yet artful panegyric, not in the real colors, and
with the genuine accomplishments, of nature, but as an eccentric ideal being of
another system, and as inspiring sentiments equally unmeaning, hyperbolical,
and unnatural.

All or most of these circumstances, contributed to give a descriptive, a
picturesque, and a figurative cast to the poetical language. This effect
appears even in the prose compositions of the reign of Elisabeth. In the
subsequent age, prose became the language of poetry.

In the mean time, general knowledge was increasing with a wide diffusion and a
hasty rapidity. Books began to be multiplied, and a variety of the most useful
and rational topics had been discussed in our own language. But science had not
made too great advances. On the whole, we were now arrived at that period,
propitious to the operations of original and true poetry, when the coyness of
fancy was not always proof against the approaches of reason, when genius was
rather directed than governed by judgment, and when taste and learning had so
far only disciplined imagination, as to suffer its excesses to pass without
censure or control, for the sake of the beauties to which they were allied.

END OF THE THIRD VOLUME.

