THE PEERAGE OF SCOTLAND, CONTAINING An HISTORICAL and GENEALOGICAL ACCOUNT of
the NOBILITY of that Kingdom, from their ORIGIN to the present GENERATION:
COLLECTED From the PUBLIC RECORDS, and ANCIENT CHARTULARIES of this Nation, the
CHARTERS, and other WRITINGS of the NOBILITY, and the WORKS of our best
HISTORIANS.

ILLUSTRATED with COPPER PLATES.

By ROBERT DOUGLAS, Esquire;.

EDINBURGH: Printed by R. FLEMING, And sold by him, and the other Booksellers
in Edinburgh; and at London by A. MILLER, R. BALDWIN, D. WILSON, and T. DURHAM,
Booksellers. M,DCC,LXIV.

To the RIGHT HONORABLE JAMES DOUGLAS Earl of MORTON, Lord ABERDOUR, etc.
Knight of the most Noble Order of the THISTLE, Clerk Register for the Kingdom
of Scotland, etc. etc.
MY LORD,
I Know not how the PUBLIC may receive the ensuing Work; but sure I am, they
will not fail to applaud my Judgment in the Choice of a PATRON, eminent for
encouraging every Undertaking that may tend either for the Honor or Interest
of his Country: Allow me, therefore, the Honor to put the PEERAGE of SCOTLAND
under your Lordship's Protection, and to subscribe myself,

MY LORD, Your Lordship's most obliged, most devoted, and most obedient
Servant, ROBERT DOUGLAS.

PREFACE.
THE Necessity of publishing a new PEERAGE of SCOTLAND, and the Utility of it,
is acknowledged by all. The Compiler of this present Work has attempted it upon
a more regular and accurate Plan than has hitherto appeared: How far he has
succeeded the World must judge: But if the most assiduous Application for many
Years; if a painful Enquiry into the public Records, and ancient Chartularies;
if an unwearied Search after every Degree of Knowledge, necessary for carrying
on so arduous a Task; if these have any Merit, or deserve the Favor of the
Public, the Author flatters himself this Work, on Perusal, will not be found
deficient. Neither has he relied solely upon his own Skill: He acknowledges,
with the utmost Gratitude, the Obligations he lies under to Walter MacFarlane,
Esquire; of that Ilk, for the generous and benevolent Communication of that
Treasury of Scotch Antiquities of which he is possessed. Nor have the Keepers
of the public Archives been wanting in contributing all in their Power to
forward the Design.

BUT notwithstanding all that has been done, there doubtless may, and will be,
Mistakes, such are unavoidable in a Work of this Kind, though the Author hopes
they will not be found numerous, as all Manner of Pains has been taken to avoid
them, as well by the Labor bestowed upon the Compilation, as by putting it in
the Power of every Peer to correct or add to the History of his own Family, by
sending him a Manuscript Copy some Time before Publication, they producing
sufficient Documents in Support of any Alteration made: And where the History
of any particular Family in this Work varies, either from former Authors, or
from received Family Opinions, Care has been taken to justify the Difference of
Sentiment, by undoubted Authorities quoted on the Margin.

ANY Inaccuracies that may be in Point of Language, it is hoped the Reader will
overlook. It must be owned that has not been so much attended to. The chief and
principal Point the Author had in View, and the great Object of his Attention
being, in a plain and distinct Manner, to deduce the History of each Family
from its Origin to the present Generation, and to ascertain their Genealogy and
Chronology by undisputed Documents. This, it is hoped, is done, and nothing
further is pretended. Such Escapes or Omissions as have been discovered in
particular Families since they were printed off, are carefully inserted in the
Addenda at the End of the PEERAGE.

IT will probably be observed by our Readers, that certain Chartularies, and
other Vouchers, quoted on the Margin, are said to be penes MacFarlane, though
the Originals are actually in the Possession of others; but as that great and
ingenious Antiquary, in his valuable Collection, has authenticated Copies of
all these Documents, the Author was obliged to quote those Copies when he had
not Access to the Originals.

It Is thought proper here also to inform our Readers, that in engraving the
Arms of the Nobility, as prefixed to this Work, the Order is followed in which
they are ranked in the Roll made up at the Union Parliament in 1706 and 1707,
which has been looked on as an authentic Roll ever since.

IT is acknowledged, that, according to our printed Proposals, there should
have been added a short System of Heraldry, etc. but as this Volume has swelled
to a much greater Bulk than was expected, that Treatise must be reserved for
the second Part of this Work, the BARONAGE, or an Account of the GENTRY of
Scotland; and as there are few Peers but have some Descendents who will appear
in the BARONAGE, there will then be a proper Opportunity of publishing any
remarkable Event that has been omitted here.

THE Addenda, or Alterations since this Work has been put to the Press, the
Author has thrown at the End of this Volume; and, for the greater Ease to the
Reader, has reduced them to alphabetical Order, by which Means any Thing wanted
may easily be found out.

THE Reader is desired to excuse some seeming Inaccuracies that appear in
numbering the Pages of this Work. These were occasioned by the Additions made
to several Families since they were first printed off, whereby the Numbers of
many Pages are doubled.

SUBSCRIBERS.
A.
His Grace Archibald Duke of Argyle, large paper. His Grace James Duke of
Athole, two Copies, l. p. The Right Hon. James Earl of Abercorn, l. p. The
Right Hon. George Earl of Aberdeen, l. p. The Right Hon. Charles Earl of
Aboyne, l. p. The Right Hon. John Earl of Airly, l. p. The Right Hohn. John
Viscount Arbuthnot, l. p. James Abernethy of Mayn, Esquire; Dr. William
Abernethy-Drummond of Hawthornden, John Aikman of Bromeltoun, Esquire; William
Alexander of New Jersey, Esquire l. p. Sir John Anstruther of that Ilk, Bart. Dr.
Adam Austin, Physician in Edinburgh,
B.
The Right Hon. James Earl of Balcarras, l. p. The Right Hon. John Earl of
Breadalbane, l. p. The Right Hon. Henry David Earl of Buchan, l. p. The Right
Hon. Alexander Lord Banff, l. p. The Right Hon. John Lord Belhaven, two Copies,
The Right Hon. William Lord Blantyre, l. p. The Right Hon. Henry Lord
Borthwick, Robert Balfour of Balbirny, Esquire, Henry Balfour of Dunboig, Esquire;
Colonel Balfour in Zurichzee, Holland, John Balneaves of Carnbathie, Esquire;
Captain B ^neaves, John Bannantyne of Kaims, Esquire; Henry Bethune of Blebo, Esquire;
David Bethune of Kilconquhar, Esquire; Dr. George Bethune of Kingask, James Blair
of Ardblair, Esquire; Dr. John Boswall Physician in Edinburgh, Mr. Thomas Boswall
Accomptant, Alexander Bower of Methie, Esquire l. p. James Brodie of Brody, Esquire;
Miss Bruce of Kinross, Andrew Bruce of Kinloch, Esquire; Mr. David Bruce, General
Inspector of the Window Lights, Thomas Buchan of Auchmacoy, Esquire; George Buchan
of Kello, Sir Thomas Burnet of Leys, Bart. Mr. Andrew Burnet Writer to the
Signet,
C.
The Right Hon. the Countess of Caithness, large pap. The Right Hon. Robert
Earl of Carnwath, l. p. The Right Hon. John Earl of Cassilis, two Copies, l. p.
The Right Hon. Thomas Earl of Cassilis, l. p. The Right Hon. Charles Lord
Cathcart, l. p. The Hon. Francis Charteris of Amisfield, Esquire l. p. Thomas
Calderwood of Polton, Esquire l. p. Sir Alan Cameron, Bart. John Cameron of
Lochyell, Esquire; Allan Cameron of Glendesery, Esquire; The Hon. John Campbell of
Stonefield, Esquire; one of the Senators of the College of Justice, l. p. John
Campbell, Esquire; Cashier to the Royal Bank of Scotland, James Campbell of
Blythswood, Esquire; John Carmichael of Skirline, Esquire; Advocate. John Carmichael of
Castleriggs, Sir James Carnegie of Pittarrow, Bart. l. p. James Carstairs, Esquire;
Sir James Chalmers of Cults, Bart. Dr. James Chalmers, Dr. James Chisholm of
Comar, junior, Esquire; Dr. David Clerk, Physician in Edinburgh, Mr. William
Cochrane, Advocate, George Cockburn, Esquire; Advocate, Charles Congalton of that
Ilk, Esquire; Mr. Charles Congalton, Surgeon in Edinburgh, William Constable of
Burton Constable, Esquire; two Copies, l. p. Patrick Crawford of Auchinames, Esquire;
Patrick Crawford of Carsburn, Esquire; Patrick Crawford of Ardmillan, Esquire; Hugh
Crawford of Jordanhill, Esquire; Dr. William Cullen, Physician in Edinburgh,
Captain James Cunninghame, Dr. Henry Cunninghame Physician, Alexander
Cunninghame, Clerk to the Signet,
D.
His Grace Archibald Duke of Douglas, l. p. Her Grace Margaret Duchess of
Douglas, l. p. The Right Hon. Charles Earl of Dalhousie, l. p. The Right Hon.
William Earl of Dumsries, l. p. The Right Hon. Thomas Earl of Dundonald, l. p.
The Right Hon. John Earl of Dunmore, l. p. John Dalrymple younger of Cou^land,
Esquire; Mr. John Davidson, Clerk to the Signet, George Dempster of Dunnichen, Esquire;
Advocate, large paper. Mr. William Dempster, Jeweller in Edinburgh, Sir
Alexander Dick of Priestfield, Bart. l. p. Sir William Douglas of Glenbervie,
Bart. l. p. Archibald Douglas of Cavers, Esquire l. p. Dr. James Douglas of
Conzertoun, l. p. Joseph Douglas of Edrington, Esquire; Advocate, Captain William
Douglas of Kinglassie, Esquire; William Douglas of Brigton, Esquire; John Douglas of
Fechel, Esquire; John Douglas of Tilliewhillie, Esquire; Advocate, Lewis Douglas of
Garvock, Esquire; William Douglas of Garvelfoot, Esquire; Andrew Douglas, General
Inspector of the Manufactures in Scotland, George Drummond, Esquire; Lord Provost
of Edinburgh, and one of the Commissioners of his Majesty's Excise in Scotland,
George Drummond of Blair, Esquire l. p. Alexander Drummond, Esquire; Sir William Dunbar
of Durn, Bart. Sir Laurence Dundas of Carse, Bart. l. p. George Dundas of that
Ilk, Esquire; Thomas Dundas of Fingask, Esquire; Colonel Ralph Dundas,
E.
The Right Hon. Charles Earl of Elgin, l. p. The Right Hon. Mary Countess of
Errol, l. p. The Right Hon. James Earl of Errol, l. p. The Right Hon. Patrick
Lord Elibank, l. p. The Right Hon. Charles Lord Elphingston, The Right Hon.
Lady Frances Erskine, The Right Hon. Thomas Lord Erskine, l. p. James Erskine,
Esquire; Deputy Knight Marshal of Scotland, John Erskine of Dun, Esquire; John Erskine
of Carnock, Esquire; Mr. David Erskine, Writer in Edinburgh,
F.
The Right Hon. William Earl Fise, two Copies, l. p. The Right Hon. James Earl
of Finlater and Seafield, l. p. The Right Hon. James Lord Forbes, l. p. Sir
Adam Ferguson of Kilkerran, Bart, James Ferguson of Pitsour, Esquire; Francis
Farquharson, Esquire; Accomptant in Edinburgh, Sir Arthur Forbes of Craigyvar,
Bart. Colonel Arthur Forbes, Thomas Forbes of Waterston, Esquire; Captain John
Forbes of New, Esquire; Mr. William Forbes, Writer to the Signet, The Hon.
Alexander Frazer of Strichen, Esquire; one of the Senators of the College of
Justice, l. p. William Frazer of Foord, Esquire; Charles Frazer of Inneralachie,
Esquire; John Fyse of Dron, Esquire;
G.
The Right Hon. Alexander Earl of Galloway, large paper. The Right Hon. William
Earl of Glencairn, l. p. Robert Gardner, Esquire; Commissary to the Army, James
Gartshore of that Ilk, Esquire; Sir Alexander Gilmoir of Craigmillar, Bart. l. p.
Robert Glendoning of that Ilk, Esquire; John Gordon of Buthlaw, Esquire; Advocate,
William Gordon of Craig, Esquire; William Gourlay of Kincraig, Esquire; William Graham
of Gartmore, Esquire; James Graham, Esquire; Advocate, one of the Commissars of
Edinburgh, William Graham of Gartur, Esquire; Robert Graham, Esquire; Sir Ludovick
Grant of that Ilk, Bart. l. p. The Hon. Mr. Baron Grant, l. p. John Grant
Writer, James Grant in Zurichzee, Holland, Sir William Grierson of Lag, Bart.
Mr. Harry Guthrie, Writer in Edinburgh,
H.
His Grace George James Duke of Hamilton and Brandon, l. p. The Right Hon.
Thomas Earl of Hadinton, l. p. The Right Hon. Alexander Earl of Home, l. p. The
Right Hon. John Earl of Hopeton, l. p. The Right Hon. John Earl of Hyndford, l.
p. The Right Hon. Alexander Lord Halkerton, l. p. James Hague of Bomerside,
Esquire; Peter Haldane of Gleneagles, Esquire; Advocate, James Haliburton of Pitcur,
Esquire l. p. Heleneus Halkerston of Rathillet, Esquire; John Hamilton of Bargeny, Esquire
l. p. Alexander Hamilton of Innerwick, Esquire; late Postmaster-general of
Scotland, l. p. Archibald Hamilton of Rosehaugh, Esquire; Thomas Hamilton of Fala,
Esquire; Dr. Archibald Hamilton, Alexander Hay of Drumelzier, Esquire l. p. David Hay
of Leys, Esquire; Alexander Hay of Mordington, Esquire; Dr. James Hay of Hayston, Esquire;
Sir Robert Henderson of Fordel, Bart. l. p. James Hepburn of Keith, Esquire; George
Hepburn of Smeaton, Esquire; Sir John Home of Renton, Bart. l. p. David Home of
Wedderburn, Esquire; Alexander Rome of Manderstone, Esquire; Mr. George Home Writer in
Edinburgh, Archibald Hope of Rankeillor, Esquire; Mr. Alexander Hunter Merchant in
Edinburgh,
I.
Mr. William Jackson, Secretary to the Post Office in Edinburgh, John Inglis,
Esquire; William Inglis Surgeon, Mr. Charles Inglis Clerk to the Bills, Sir James
Johnston of Westerhall, Bart. large pap. William Johnston, Esquire; Advocate,
Alexander Johnston of Straiton, Esquire; Charles Irvine of Drum, Esquire; Colonel John
Irvine of Burleigh, Esquire l. p. Mr. James Justice, late one of the Clerks of
Session,
K.
The Right Hon. Thomas-Alexander Earl of Kelly, l. p. The Right Hon. Janet
Countess of Kincardine, The Right Hon. Thomas Earl of Kinnoul, l. p. The Right
Hon. John Earl of Kintore, l. p. The Right Hon. William Viscount Kenmure, l. p.
The Right Hon. Charles Lord Kinnaird, l. p. Sir Robert Keith of Ludquhairn,
Bart. l. p. Robert Keith of Craig, Esquire; Colonel Robert Keith, Alexander Keith
of Ravelston, Esquire; The Library of Kelso, l. p. Miss Christian Ker of Chatto, l.
p. James Ker of Moriston, Esquire l. p. John Kinloch of Kilrie, Esquire;
L.
The most Hon* the Marquis of Lothian, two Copies, l. p. The Right Hon. James
Earl of Lauderdale, l. p. The Right Hon. David Earl of Leven, l. p. The Right
Hon. John Earl of Loudoun, l. p. The Hon. Andrew Lessie, Esquire; George Leith of
Blackhall, Esquire; Alexander Leith of Freefield, Esquire; William Lenox of Woodhead,
Esquire; Peter Leslie-Grant of Balquhain, Esquire l. p. Mr. George Lindsay, Town Clerk
of Edinburgh, Mr. Martin Lindsay, Writer in Edinburgh, Captain William
Livingston, George Lockhart of Carnwath, Esquire l. p. James Lumisden of
Rennichill, Esquire; John Lumisden of Blenearn, Esquire;
M.
His Grace the Duke of Melfort, l. p. His Grace William Duke of Montrose, l. p.
The Right Hon. George Earl Marishall, l. p. The Right Hon. James Earl of
Murray, l. p. The Right Hon. William Lord Mansfield, l. p. The Hon. Colonel
Hugh MacKay of Bighouse, Esquire; The Hon. George MacKay of Skibo, Esquire; The Hon.
Captain Roderick MacKenzie, The Hon. Mr. Baron Maule, l. p. The Hon. Col.
Archibald Montgomery, Esquire large pap. The Hon. John Murray of Strowan, Esquire l. p.
The Hon. Admiral George Murray, l. p. Sir James MacDonald of that Ilk, Bart. l.
p. Alexander MacDonald of Glengary, Esquire; Ronald MacDonald of Clanronald, Esquire;
Alan MacDonald of Kinsburrough, Esquire; Mr. William MacDonald, Writer in
Edinburgh, John MacDonald of Largy, Esquire; Walter MacFarlane of that Ilk, Esquire;
two Copies, l. p. Arthur MacGill of Kemback, Esquire; Mr. Charles Mack, Architect,
Robert MacLauchlane of that Ilk, Esquire; Sir Alan MacLean, Bart. l. p. John
MacLean of Lochbowie, Esquire; Hector MacLean of Torloisk, Esquire; Norman MacLeod of
that Ilk, Esquire l. p. John MacLeod of Muiravenside, Esquire; John MacLeod of
Colveaks, Esquire; Hugh MacLeod of Guinies, Esquire; Sir Alexander MacKenzie of Coul,
Bart. John MacKenzie of Delvin, Esquire; Colin MacKenzie of Kilcoy, Esquire; Kenneth
MacKenzie at Kilcoy, Esquire; William MacKenzie of Suddie, Esquire; Sir Roderick
MacKenzie of Scatwell, Bart. Captain Alexander MacKenzie, Son to Sir Roderick
MacKenzie of Scatwell, Roderick MacKenzie of Redcastle, Esquire; Simon MacKenzie of
Scotsburn, Esquire; James MacKenzie, Esquire; Captain of the Swallow Man of War, John
MacKenzie of Applecross, Esquire; Captain Alexander MacKenzie of Dalmore, Dr. Peter
MacKenzie, two Copies, Colonel Archibald MacNab, three Copies, Donald MacNeal
of Colonsy, Esquire; Mr. John MacPherson, Musician, l. p. Sir William Main,
Merchant in London, l. p. Sir William Maxwell of Calderwood, Bart. l. p. Sir
William Maxwell of Springkell, Bart. John Maxwell of Broomholm, Esquire; Dougal
Maxwell of Corryhill, Esquire; Major John Melvile of Murdoy-Cairny, Esquire l. p. Sir
Robert Menzies of Weem, Bart. l. p. Robert Menzies of Culterallers, Esquire;
Archibald Menzies of Culdars, Esquire; James Menzies of Woodend, Esquire; Captain
William Mercer of Aldie, l. p. James Milligan of Milligan, Esquire l. p. Robert
Montgomery, Esquire; late one of the Commissioners of his Majesty's Customs, l. p.
Alexander Montgomery of Colesfield, Esquire; Sir James Murray, Bart. James Murray
of Abercairny, Esquire l. p. John Murray of Philiphaugh, Esquire; Colonel Robert
Murray, John Murray of Blackbarony, Esquire; Alexander Murray, Esquire; Advocate, John
Murray of Murrayquhat, Sir Robert Myrton of Gogar, Bart.
N.
The Right Hon. the Countess of Nithsdale, The Right Hon. the Earl of Northesk,
The Hon. William Master of Napier, Sir Thomas Nairn of Dunsinnan, Bart.
Alexander Nairn, Esquire; Advocate, Commissary-clerk, Lieutenant General Robert
Napier, William Nisbet of Dirleton, Esquire l. p. Samuel Nortis, Esquire; of Magdalen
College, Oxford, two Copies, l. p.
O.
Sir John Ogilvie of Innerquharity, Bart. l. p. Archibald Ogilvie of
Inchmartin, Esquire; Robert Oliphant of Rossie, Esquire; Post-master-general of
Scotland, Dr. George Oliphant of Kinloch, Esquire; Mr. Alexander Orme, Writer to
the Signet,
P.
Her Grace Anne Duchess Dowager of Perth, l. p. The Right Hon. William Earl of
Panmure, l. p. The Hon. James Drummond of Lundin, Representative of the Family
of Perth, l. p. Sir Hugh Paterson of Bannockburn, Bart. James Philp. Esquire;
Advocate, The Hon. Andrew Pringle of Alemoor, Esquire; one of the Senators of the
College of Justice, Alexander Pringle of Whitebank, Esquire; Robert Pringle of
Lochtoun, Esquire; Gilbert Pringle of Terfonce, Esquire; -- Pringle of Clifton, Esquire;
Q.
His Grace Charles Duke of Queensberry and Dover, two Copies, l. p. Baron
Qua^le in Holland, -- Quarles, one of the States General
R.
His Grace John Duke of Roxburgh, l. p. The Right Hon. John Earl of Rothes, l.
p. The Right Hon. Neil Earl of Roseberry, l. p. The Right ^on. James Lord
Ruthven. l. p. The Right Bon. Alexander Lord Rutherford, David R^e, Esquire;
Advocate, James Rae of Little Govan, Esquire; Sir James Ramsay of Banff, Bart.
Robert Ramsay of Blackeraig, Esquire; James Eamsay Lammie of Dunkenie, Esquire; Allan
Ramsay of Kinkell, Esquire; Dr. George Rai^ of Annison, Esquire; Dr. Rate, innior of
Annison, Captain Alexander Read, James Rigg of Downsield, Esquire; Thomas Rigg of
Morton, Esquire; Advocate, Roger Robertson of Ladykirk, Esquire; James Roberton of
Bedlay, Esquire; Hugh Rose of Kilravock, Esquire; Mr. William Ruthven, Dr. John
Rutherford, Physician in Edinburgh, Alexander Robertson of Straloch, Esquire alias
Baron Read, James Rattray of Craighall, Esquire; James Rattray of Rannygulzeon,
Esquire;
S.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Selkirk, two Copies, large paper. The Right Hon.
William Earl of Sutherland, l. p. The Right Hon. David Viscount Stormont, l. p.
The Right Hon. James Lord Somerville, l. p. The Right Hon. John Lord Semple, l.
p. The Hon. General James Sinclair of Sinclair, l. p. David Scot of
Scotstarvet, Esquire; Colonel John Scot, John Scot of Malenie Esquire; Charles Scot of
Bevely, Esquire; William Scot of Burnhead, Esquire; Mr. William Scot, Merchant in
Edinburgh, David Scrimzeour of Birkhill, Esquire; Sir Henry Seton, Bart. Colonel
James Seton, Sir James Sinclair of May, Mr. John Syme, Writer to the Signet,
George Skene of that Ilk, Esquire; Colonel Robert Skene of Halyards, Esquire; James
Smith of Balwhary, Esquire; David Smith of Methven, Esquire l. p. Thomas Spence of
Lathallan, Esquire; two Copies, Mr. Nathaniel Spence, Surgeon in Edinburgh, James
Smollet of Bonhill, Esquire; one of the Commissars of Edinburgh, Sir George Stewart
of Grantully, Bart. Sir John Stewart of Allanbank, Bart. Francis Stewart, Esquire
l. p. Sir John Stewart of Castlemilk, Bart. Archibald Stewart of Torrence, Esquire;
The Rev. James Stewart of Kilwhinlick, Sir William Stirling of Ardoch, Bart.
John Stirling of Keir, Esquire; John Swinton of that Ilk, junior, Advocate, Mr.
William Sutherland, Writer in Edinburgh,
T.
The most Hon. George Marquis of Tweeddale, l. p. The Right Hon. Charles Earl
of Traquair, l. p. The Right Hon. Walter Lord Torphichen, l. p. Colonel William
Tailor, -- Thomson of Banchory, Esquire; Maurice Trent of Pitcullo, Esquire; George
Turnbull of Hundwood, Esquire;
W.
The Hon. James Wemyss of Wemyss, Esquire; large paper. William Urquhart of
Meldrum, Esquire; SIr John Wedderburn, Bart. l. p. David Wedderburn of that Ilk,
Esquire; John Wedderburn of Gosford, Esquire; The. Hon James Veitch of Elliock, Esquire;
one of the Senators of the College of Justice, l. p. Sir James Wemyss of Bogie,
Bart. Walter Wemyss of Lathockar, Esquire; James Wemyss of Winthank, Esquire; John
Wemyss, Esquire; Lieutenant Governor of the Castle of Edinburgh, Mr. William
Wemyss, Writer, William Wemyss of Cuthilhill, Esquire; Mr. John Wood, Dr. Edward
Wright of Kersey, James Watson of Sauchton, Esquire; Alexander Walker of St. Fort,
Esquire; Andrew Wauchop of Niddry, Esquire large paper. Dr. James Walker of Innerdivot,
Esquire; Alan Whiteford of Ballochmyle, Esquire; Receiver-general of the Land Tax in
Scotland,
Y.
Mr. David Young, Professor of Philosophy in the College of St. Andrews, Mr.
John Young, Professor of Philosophy in the College of St. Andrews.
Nota, Such of our Subscribers as are here omitted, (and we are informed there
are several, both in Scotland and England,) shall be gratefully inserted in the
second Volume of this Work.

THE PEERAGE OF SCOTLAND.
HAMILTON Earl of ABERCORN.
THE first of the illustrious peerage of Scotland that presents to our readers,
in alphabetical order, is HAMILTON Earl of ABERCORN, the undoubted heir-male of
the great and noble family of Hamilton; a family who have equally distinguished
themselves in the field and at the council board, and have been no less
remarkable in the histories of foreign nations, than in the annals of Scotland.

But as the dignity, estate, and honors of this house, have descended in the
female as well as in the male succession, for its origin and antiquity, we
refer our readers to the Title Duke of Hamilton, and deduce the family of
Abercorn from their immediate predecessor,

X. JAMES, second earl of Arran, and duke of Chatelherault, the tenth
generation of the family of Hamilton, in a direct male line. This earl married
lady Margaret Douglas, eldest daughter of James earl of Morton, by whom he had
four sons and four daughters.

1. James, earl of Arran and duke of Chatelherault, who died without issue.

2. Lord john, who was the first marquis of Hamilton, and carried on the line
of the family.

3. Lord Claud, the first of the family of Abercorn.

For the other children, and their marriages, vide Title Duke of Hamilton.

XI. Lord CLAUD HAMILTON, third son of James earl of Arran and duke of
Chatelherault, when very young was appointed commendator of the abbacy of
Paisley, upon the resignation of John archbishop of St. Andrews, anno 1553,
Crawfurd's Peerage of Scotl. Lodge's Peerage of Ireland. Scots Compend.etc.
which was ratified and approved by pope Julius III. He was a brave and gallant
gentleman, of steady honor, and unchangeable integrity; who, by a series of
virtuous actions, reflected luster on his great ancestors, and ennobled the
illustrious blood that ran in his veins, During the melancholy discords that
prevailed in Scotland, under the unhappy reign of queen Mary, he adhered to her
interest in all her misfortunes. Prompted by his own innate bravery, and his
loyalty to his royal mistress, he appeared and distinguished himself in the
last effort that was made in her cause at the battle of Langside, anno 1568. In
vain he displayed the skill and courage of a great commander: the battle was
lost, and proved fatal to the queen's party.

Immediately after the battle, lord Claud, with many others, was summoned to
attend a parliament, called together by the earl of Murray, then regent, and,
upon his refusal, was outlawed, Ibid.
and his estate forfeited.

During the regency of the earl of Mar, his lands were given to the lord
Semple, who kept a strong garrison in his castle, and exercised all around a
severe military discipline, displaying every violence and oppression that power
can do, to maintain a precarious possession. At length this gallant lord,
supported by his faithful tenants, rose in arms, besieged the castle, Peerage
of Ireland, page 151, vol. III. M. S. Hist. of the family penes com. de
Abercorn.
and obliged lord Semple to Iurrender at discretion.

During the regency of Morton, lord Claud was a sharer of the oppressions that
bore down the Hamilton family. He was obliged to fly to England for safety, not
daring to trust the prevailing faction, though his forfeiture had been repealed
by the act of parliament confirming the pacification of Perth, anno 1573. But
when the king took the management of affairs into his own hands, and reflected
on the different parties that divided the nation, he soon perceived that the
flood of persecution, that overwhelmed the Hamiltons, was owing to no other
cause but their zealous and steady attachment to his unhappy mother; he
therefore restored them to all their estates and honors, and heaped many other
favors upon them; Ib. et Chart. in pub. archiv.
in particular, he bestowed upon lord Claud, and his heirs-male, or assigneys,
by charter, all the lordship and barony of Paisley, with the pertinents
belonging to the abbacy and monastery thereof, Ibid. ad annum 1585.
anno 1585. And, as a further testimony of his esteem and regard for him, he
was pleased, in consideration of his constant loyalty, great losses and
sufferings, to create him a peer, by the title of lord Paisley, Ibid. ad annum
1587.
anno 1587.

His majesty likewise granted, by another charter, to lord Claud Hamilton, now
lord Paisley, and his heirs-male whatever, the barony and regality of the burgh
of Paisley, Ibid. ad annum 1591.
etc. anno 1591.

And, Ibid. ad annum 1593.
by another charter, the five pound land of Sanquhar, etc. anno 1593.

This lord died advanced in age and character, anno 1621, having married
Margaret daughter of George lord Scton, by whom he had four sons and one
daughter.

1. James, afterward earl of Abercorn.

2. Sir Cland Hamilton, who married the daughter and heiress of sir Robert
Hamilton of Elieston, in the county of Tyrone in Ireland, by whom he had six
sons and two daughters; of them the Hamiltons of Elicston, Monterlony, and
several other considerable families in Ireland, are descended. He was gentleman
of the bedchamber to the King, and was made constable and commander of the
castle of Toome in the county of Antrim for life, anno 1618. Peerage of Ireland.


3. Sir George Hamilton of Greenlaw and Roserea, in the county of Tipperara in
Ireland, who behaved with great bravery in the service of his majesty king
Charles I. He married, Is It, Isabella of the family of Civicot of Bruges in
Flanders, M. S. ^^tory of the family penes com. de Aber^orn.
by whom he had a daughter, Margaret, married to sir Archibald Achinson of
Gosford: 2dly, Mary, daughter of Walter earl of Ormond and Ossory, by whom he
had a son James, who died Ibid. unmarried.

4. Sir Frederic Hamilton, a gallant officer, who acquired great reputation
under Gustavus Adolphus, and was colonel of a regiment under king Charles I. He
married Sidney, daughter of sir John Vaughan, and was ancestor of the viscount
of Boyne in Ireland. Ibid. and peerage of Ireland.


His daughter Margaret was married to William marquis of Douglas.

XII. JAMES, first son of Claud lord Paisley, commonly designed master of
Paisley, was a man of eminent parts, and much taken notice of at court. He was
highly esteemed by the King, who made him one of the lords of his
privy council, and gentleman of his bedchamber, when he was but a young man;
and gave him by a charter, anno 1600, Chart. in pub. archiv. ad ann. 1600.
the office of high sheriff of the county of Linlithgow, with all the fees,
etc. thereto belonging, to him and his heirs-male whatever.

And by another charter in 1601, Ib. ad ann. 1601.
the lands and manor of Abercorn, Braidmeadows, etc.

The king was afterward pleased, on account of his great merit, to create him
baron of Abercorn; and, by a new charter, to erect the lands of the lordship
and barony of Abercorn, the lands of Duddingston, Newton and Duntarvie, etc.
into one free barony, anno 1603; Ib. ad ann. 1063.
and in 1606, his majesty further honored him with the titles of earl of
Abercorn, baron of Paisley, Hamilton, Mountcastle and Kilpatrick, by patent to
him and his heirs-male whatever; Crawfurd's Peerage. Peerage of Ireland. Scot^
Compend.
and the same year appointed him one of the commissioners to treat of an union
with England.

He likewise granted him by charter, in 1612, the eight-merk land of
Moryhagane, Keirmouer, etc. Chart. in pub. archiv. ad ann. 1612.


He was appointed one of the lords of the privy council of the kingdom of
Ireland, and was summoned to attend the parliament there with the precedence of
an earl; and had a large grant of lands in the barony of Strabane, upon which
he built a strong and fair castle, Peerage of Ireland.
and a church.

He married Mariana, daughter of Thomas lord Boyd, Chart. in pub. archiv. ad
ann. 1589.
by whom he had five sons and three daughters.

1. James, his heir.

2. Sir Claud Hamilton, afterward baron of Strabane.

3. Sir William Hamilton knight, who was long resident at Rome from Henrietta
Maria queen-dowager of England; and married Jane, daughter of sir Alexander
Colquhoun of Luss, widow of Alan lord Cathcart, but died without issue.

4. Sir George Hamilton, ancestor of the present earl of Abercorn.

5. Sir Alexander Hamilton knight, who married Elizabeth of the family of
Bedingfield of Oxburgh, and had a son who settled in Germany, and was raised by
the emperor Leopold to the rank of a count of the empire, where his posterity
still enjoy large possessions and privileges.

1. Daughter, lady Anne, married to Hugh lord Semple.

2. Lady Margaret, married to sir William Cuninghame of Caprington.

3. Lady Lucy, died unmarried.

The earl died before his father, anno 1618, and was succeeded by his eldest
son,

XIII. JAMES, second earl of Abercorn, who succeeded also to his grandfather,
lord Paisley, in 1621.

He was in great favor with his majesty king James VI. who, on account of his
own personal merit, Peerage of Ireland.
and the great loyalty and faithful services of his noble ancestors, was
pleased to advance him to the peerage of the kingdom of Ireland, where he had a
vast estate, by the title of lord Hamilton of Strabane, 18th Oct. 1616. But the
patent being to his father's heirs-male, and the Irish estates being provided
to his younger brothers, he, on that account, resigned that title to king
Charles I. who immediately conferred it on his next brother, Claud Hamilton,
with the precedence of the former creation by patent, Ibidem, and M. S. history
of the family.
bearing date 14th August 1634.

He married Catharine, daughter and sole heiress of Gervais Clifton of Leighton
Broomswold, widow of Esme Stewart duke of Lennox and Richmond, by whom he had
three sons.

1. James, lord Paisley, who died before him, having married a daughter of
William Lenthall of Burford in the county of Oxford, Esquire; speaker of the house
of commons in the long parliament, by whom he had an only daughter, Catharine,
married, 1st, to her cousin, William Lenthall, Esquire; to whom she had two sons:
and, 2dly, to her cousin, Charles earl of Abercorn; of whom hereafter.

2. William, was colonel of a regiment, and killed in the wars in Germany,
without issue.

3. George, who succeeded to his father's estate and honors, and was third
carl of Abercorn; but dying unmarried at Padua in his fourney to Rome, in him
the male-line of the eldest son of James first earl of Abercorn became extinct,
Peerage of Ireland.
we therefore return to

XIII. CLAUD, second son of James first earl of Abercorn, dignified, as already
observed, with the title of lord Hamilton of Strabane, by a charter under the
great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv. ad ann. 1631.
Claudo Hamilton Domino de Strabane, etc. married lady Jean Gordon, daughter of
George marquis of Huntley, by whom he had two sons and two daughters.

1. James, lord Strabane.

2. George, who succeeded his brother.

1. Daughter, Catharine, married, Is It, to James, eldest son of sir Frederick
Hamilton, fourth son of Claud, first lord Paisley: 2dly, to Owen Win of
Lurganbuy, Esquire; and 3dly, to John Bingham of Castlebar, Esquire;

2. Mariana, married to Richard Perkins of Lifford, Esquire;

Claud died anno 1638, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIV. JAMES, third lord Strabane, who, from his loyalty and steady adherence to
the interest of his masters king Charles I. and II. suffered many hardships and
variety of losses.

He was unhappily drowned as he was bathing himself in the river Maine, anno
1655; and having no issue, was succeeded by his brother,

XIV. GEORGE, fourth lord Strabane, who married Elizabeth, daughter, and at
length sole heiress, of Christopher Fagen of Filtrim, Esquire; by whom he had two
sons. Peerage of Ireland, and M. S. history of the family.


1. Claud, his heir.

2. Charles, who succeeded his brother.

1. Daughter, Anne, married to John Broun of Neale, Esquire;

2. Mary, married to Gerard Dillon, esquire; prime sergeant at law to king James
VII.

And dying anno 1668, was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. CLAUD, fifth lord Strabane, and fourth earl of Abercorn, who succeeded as
heir-male to George third earl, as remarked above.

He followed the fortune of king James VII. at the revolution in 1688, attended
that prince in his expedition to Ireland, where he was sworn one of his
privy council, and had a considerable command in his army; in consequence of
which he was attainted of high treason, and his title of lord Hamilton of
Strabane forseited, by the parliament of that kingdom, after king James had
retired into France; and, dying unmarried in 1690, he was succeeded in all his
Scotch honors and titles by his brother, Peerage of Ireland, and M. S. history
of the family.


XV. CHARLES, fifth earl of Abercorn, who got his brother's attainder reversed
in 1692, and was restored to his estate and honors of lord Hamilton of
Strabane in Ireland, which he enjoyed till the general resumption of grants was
made by the English sumption of grants was made by the English parliament.

He married, as already observed, Catharine, only daughter of James lord
Paisley, eldest son of James second earl of Abercorn, and widow of William
Lenthall of Burford, Esquire; by whom he had only one child, who died an infant
before himself. And he dying in 1701, without issue, the male line of the
second son of the first earl of Abercorn failed, whereby the title of lord
Hamilton of Strabane became extinct; and the third son of the first earl dying
without issue, as before observed, the estate and honors of Abercorn devolved
upon the next heir-male, descended of the fourth son of the said-first earl, to
whom we now return.

XIII. Sir GEORGE HAMILTON, fourth son of James first earl of Abercorn, was a
man of steady loyalty, great gallantry, and invariably attached to the interest
both of king Charles I. and II. During the civil war, he exerted himself with
extraordinary courage in the royal cause, under the direction of his
brother-in-law the marquis, afterward duke of Ormond; and, after living
several years in exile, during the usurpation of Oliver Cromwell, he returned at
the restoration of king Charles II. who immediately created him a baronet.

He married Mary, daughter of Thomas viscount Thurles, eldest son of Walter
earl of Ormond, and sister of the first duke, by whom he had six sons and three
daughters.

1. Ibid.
James.

2. Sir George, who was a count and major general in France, and was killed at
the battle of Saverne, having married Frances, daughter and co-heiress of
Richard Fennings of Sandbridge in the county of Hereford, Esquire; maid of honor
to Anne, duchess of York, by whom he had three daughters, all nobly married,
viz. Elizabeth, to Richard viscount Ross; Frances, to Henry viscount Dillon;
Mary, to Nicholas viscount Kingsland.

3. Anthony, who went to France with king James VII. and was there raised to
the rank of a lieutenant general. He is said to be author of some French pieces
that bear the name of count Hamilton.

4. Thomas, who was captain of a ship of war.

5. Richard, who followed king James VII. to France, where he rose to the rank
of a lieutenant general.

6. John, who was killed in the king's service at the battle of Aghrim.

1. Daughter, Elizabeth, married to Philbert count of Gramont, brother to
Anthony duke of Gramont in France.

2. Lucia, married to Sir Donald O'Brian of Leminegh, Bart.

3. Margaret, married to Matthew Ford of Coolgreny, Esquire;

XIV. JAMES HAMILTON, eldest son and apparent heir of Sir George, was a great
favorite of king Charles II. whom he attended during his exile, and was one of
the gentlemen of his bedchamber, and colonel of a regiment; but going a
volunteer aboard the fleet, under the command of James, then duke of York, in
one of his sea-expeditions against the Dutch, he had his leg shot off by a
cannon-ball, of which wound he died on 6th June 1673, (his father being then
alive) and left issue, by Elizabeth his wife, daughter of John lord Culpeper,
Ibid.
three sons.

1. James, afterward earl of Abercorn.

2. Colonel George, who had the command of a regiment at the battle of
Steenkirk, where he was killed, anno 1692, without issue.

3. William Hamilton, esquire; who married Margaret, daughter of sir Thomas
Culpeper, and was ancestor of the Hamiltons of Chilson.

He was succeeded by his eldest son.

XV. JAMES, who also succeeded to his grandfather, anno 1679, and to the
titles and honors of Abercorn, upon the death of earl Charles, in 1701, as
already remarked, and was the sixth earl of Abercorn.

He was appointed one of the grooms of the bedchamber to king Charles II. when
but 17 years of age.

He was one of the lords of the privycouncil to king James VII. and under him
had the command of a regiment of horse.

He came early into the revolution, and was created viscount of Strabane, and
baron of Mount-castle in Ireland, by king William, anno 1701.

He sat in the Scotch parliament anno 1706, Crawfore Peerage.
and continued in it till the union was concluded.

He was also of the privy council to king William, queen Anne, and king George
I. and married Elizabeth, daughter and heiress of sir Robert Reading of Dublin,
Bart. by whom he had six sons, and four daughters.

1. James his heir.

2. John, who died unmarried, and left a considerable estate to his brother
George.

3. George, who was deputy cofferer to the prince of Wales' household, and
member of parliament for Wells in Somerset-snire in England, and married the
daughter and heiress of colonel William Coward of Wells, by whom he had six
sons, and six daughters.

4. Francis, a clergyman, who enjoyed several benefices in Ireland, married
Dorothy, daughter and co-heiress of James Forth of Redwood, secretary to the
commissioners of his majesty's revenue, and had issue.

5. William, who was bred to the sea, and was unfortunately cast away with lord
Belhaven, anno 1721.

6. Charles, comptroller of the green cloth to the prince of Wales, one of the
seven commissioners for stating and examining the public accounts in 1742, and
receiver-general of his majesty's revenues in the island of Minorca, anno 1743.

1. Daughter, lady Elizabeth, married, Is It, to William Brownlaw of Lurgan, Esquire;
2dly, to Martin, count de Kearnie, in France.

2. Lady Mary, married to Henry Cooley of Carberry, Esquire; in the county of
Kildare.

3. Lady Philippa, married, Is It, to the Rev. Benjamin Pratt, dean of Down,
chaplain of the house of commons in Ireland: and, 2dly, to Michael Connel of
London, Esquire;

4. Lady Jean, married to lord Archibald Hamilton, brother of James duke of
Hamilton.

The earl died, anno 1734, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVI. JAMES, seventh earl of Abercorn, who was appointed one of the privy
council of Great Britain by king George II. anno 1738, and of Ireland the year
following.

He married Anne, daughter of colonel John Plummer of Blakesware, in the county
of Hertford, by whom he had six sons, and one daughter.

1. James, now earl of Abercorn.

2. Captain John Hamilton, who had the command of the Lancaster man of war, a
gentleman of singular worth and merit, but unfortunately drowned, as he was
passing in his boat from his ship to the land at Portsmouth, in the flower of
his age, anno 1755.

3. William, died young.

4. George, who is a clergyman of the church of England, and one of his
majesty's chaplains.

5. Plummer, died young.

6. William, lieutenant of the Victory man of war, in which he was, with many
others, unfortunately cast away.

His daughter, lady Anne, was married to sir Henry MacWorth, Bart.

The earl dying in 1744, was succeeded by his eldest son, James, the present
earl.

XVII. JAMES, eighth earl of Abercorn, a lord of the privy council in Ireland,
was called up to the house of lords in that kingdom in March 1735 -- 6.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st and 4th, gules, three cinquefoils; pierced ermin^: 2d and 3d,
argent, a ship with her sails furled up, sable.

SUPPORTERS; two antelopes argent, their horns, ducal collars, chains, and
hoofs, or.

CREST; in a ducal coronet, or, an oak fructed and penetrated transversely in
the stem by a frame-saw, proper; the frame or.

CHIEF SEATS.
Duddingston in Mid-Lothian, and Paisley in Renfrew-shire, Scotland; -- Witham,
in the county of Essex, 32 miles from London, England; -- and Stephens-Green,
near Dublin, Ireland.

SANDILANDS Lord ABERCROMBIE.
AS the rise and descent of the noble and ancient surname of SANDILANDS, is to
be found under the title of Lord Torphichen, we shall deduce the descent of
this honorable family from their immediate ancestor, viz.

Sir JAMES SANDILANDS of Calder. He married, Chart. penes du^em de Roxburgh.
1st, Margaret, daughter and heiress of Andrew Ker younger of Cessford, by
Margaret Hepburn, lady Dirleton, by whom he had a son,

John, ancestor of lord Torphichen.

Sir James married, 2dly, Margaret, daughter and heiress of sir John Kinloch of
Cruvie, Chart. penes dom. Torphichan.
by whom he had a son,

I. JAMES SANDILANDS, the first of this family, who, in right of his mother,
got the estate of Cruvie; and obtained a charter from king James V. Chart. in
pub. archiv. JacoboSandilandi de Cruvie, etc.
of the lands of Petconcardy, before the year 1542.

He married Catharine, daughter of sir William Scot of Balweerie, by whom he
had a Son,

James, his heir, -- and three daughters.

1. Margaret, married to Laurence lord Oliphant.

2. Mary, married to David Forrester of Carden.

3. Helen, married to George Towers of Innerleith.

II. JAMES SANDILANDS, designed of Cruvie and St. Monance, succeeded his
father; and got a charter from queen Mary of some lands in Fife. Ibidem.
He married Elizabeth, daughter of Alexander Meldrum of Segie, by whom he had
three sons and one daughter.

1. James.

2. David, who acquired some lands in Fife, Ibidem.
anno 1586.

3. Andrew, who was tutor to James lord Torphichen, anno 1595.

Elizabeth, Ibidem.
married to John Boswell of Balmuto.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. Sir JAMES SANDILANDS of St. Monance, Ibid. Jacobo Sandilandi de St.
Monance militi, etc.
who got a charter from king James

VI. of the lands of Weddersbie, Woodhead, Bowhouse, Gadwin, etc. dated 1599.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of Robert Bethune of Creich, by whom he had a
son and successor,

IV. Sir WILLIAM SANDILANDS of St. Monance, who got a charter of the lands of
Houston from king James VI. Ibidem.


Also a charter of the lands of Easter and Wester St. Ibidem.
Monance, etc. anno 1608.

And another charter of a great many other lands in Fife. Ibid. Guilielmo
Sandilandi de St Monance, etc.


He married Janet, daughter of -- Bothwell, by whom he had a son,

Sir James Sandilands, -- and two daughters.

1. Margaret, married to sir James Learmonth of Balcomy, one of the senators of
the college of justice.

2. Christian, married to Adam Bothwell of Pitcaly.

He was succeeded by his only son,

V. Sir JAMES SANDILANDS of St. Monance, Ibidem.
who got a charter from king Charles I. of the lands and barony of Fairnyf^at.

Also a charter of the lands and barony of Abercrombie, Ibid. Jacobo domino
Sandilandi de St. Monance militi.
etc.

He was a man of great loyalty and integrity; a firm and steady friend of king
Charles I. for which he was, by that prince, created lord Abercrombie, Chart.
in pub. archiv. ad an. 1647. haeredibus masculis e corpore suo.
by letters patent, dated 12th December. 1647, to him and the heirsmale of his
body.

He married lady Anne Carnegie, daughter of David earl of Southesk, by whom he
had a son and successor,

VI. JAMES, second lord Abercrombie; but he dying without issue, and there
being no descendents of the patentee's body, the honors became extinct.

ARMS.
Two coats, quarterly; 1st and 4th argent, a bend azure, for Sandilands: 2d and
3d argent, a man's heart ensigned with an imperial crown, proper; and on a
chief, azure, three mullets of the first.

GORDON Earl of ABERDEEN.
THough it is highly probable that this noble family is descended from the
great and illustrious house of GORDON, whose origin, grandeur and antiquity, is
fully set forth under the title of Duke of Gordon, yet we cannot pretend to
ascertain their first ancestor.

Mr. Crawfurd, in his lives of the officers of state, mentions sir William
Gordon, who swore fealty to king Edward I. for some lands in the shire of
Berwick, Prynne's collections, v. 2.
anno 1296; and alleges, that these were the lands of Coldingknows, the
ancient inheritance of the family of Haddo, etc.

That this sir William got afterward sundry lands from king Robert Bruce, in
reward of his great merit and faithful services, etc. that he appears to have
been uncle to Alicia, the heiress of Gordon; that he had a son,

Sir William Gordon of Coldingknows, who went from the south to the north of
Scotland, with his cousin sir Adam, when he got the lands of Strathbogie from
king Robert I.

That this second sir William married the daughter and sole heiress of John de
Citharista, lord of the barony of Methlic; Lives of the officers of state, page
266.
and that he was the ancestor of this noble family, etc. -- So far Mr. Crawfurd.

But as we cannot exactly connect the Gordons of Coldingknows with these of
Methlic and Haddo, of whom there are authentic records for above 300 years, we
shall proceed to deduce their descent from undoubted authority.

I. PATRICK GORDON of Methlic, lived in the reign of king James I. and made a
great figure in Scotland in the beginning of the reign of king James II. to
whom he was a firm and steady friend.

He joined the king's forces, under the command of his cousin the earl of
Huntly, against the earl of Crawfurd, Hathornden's hist. in vita Jacobi 2di.
and lost his life in the cause, at the battle of Arbroath, anno 1445.

He left issue, a son and successor,

II. JAMES GORDON of Methlic, who obtained from king James II. on account of
his father's great merit and faithful services, a grant of a part of the barony
of Kelly, Chart. in pub. archiv.
then vested in the crown, by the forfeiture of Alexander earl of Crawfurd.

And being a man of great economy, he acquired several other lands, Ib. and
lives of the officers of state, page 228.
which are still in the possession of the family.

He married -- daughter of -- by whom he had issue, five sons and two daughters.

1. Patrick, his Heir.

2. Robert Gordon of Fetterletter, whose only daughter was married to sir John
Gordon of Gight.

3. Alexander, who was bishop of Aberdeen, after the death of bishop
Elphingston. Spottiswood's church hist.


4. George Gordon of Auchterhouse.

5. James, who was rector of Lonmay and prebendary of Aberdeen.

1. Daughter, Isabel, married to Alexander Allardice of that ilk.

2. Margaret, married to Alexander Frazer of Dorres.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. PATRICK GORDON, promisenously designed of Methlic and of Haddo, who got a
charter under the great seal from king James III. Chart. in pub. archiv. Pat.
Gordon de Methlic, etc.
anno 1481.

Also a charter from king James IV. of the lands of Brokan^h, Ib. ad annum 1505.
Middletown, etc.

And a charter from king James V. of the lands of Knockenblevy, Ibid. ad ann.
1514.
with several others.

He made several acquisitions to his estate from lord Sinclair, the bishop of
Aberdeen, and others; all which are contained in a charter under the great
seal, Ibid.'and chart. penes com. de Aberdeen.
dated anno 1487.

He married Marion, daughter of sir James Ogilvie of Findlater, by whom he had
three sons and two daughters.

1. George, his apparent heir.

2. Alexander Gordon of Braikie.

3. James.

His eldest daughter was married to -- Barclay of Towie.

His second daughter to -- Cumin of Altyr.

He lived to a great age, and died in 1533.

IV. GEORGE, first son and heir-apparent of Patrick Gordon of Methlic and
Haddo, died before his father, having married a daughter of -- Hay of
Dalgittie, by whom he had a son,

V. JAMES GORDON of Haddo and Methlic, who succeeded his grandfather, and got
charters under the great seal, in the reign of king James V. Chart. in pub.
archiv.
of a great many lands, too numerous to be inserted here.

In the beginning of queen Mary's troubles, he was one of those barons who
signed the association for the defense of the young prince, The original of
this association is in the library of the college of Glasgow.
king James VI. anno 1567; but no sooner knew that the queen had been imposed
upon, than he joined the earl of Huntly, who was her lieutenant in the north,
adhered faithfully and firmly to her interest ever after, and obtained from
that princess charters of several other lands and baronies. Chart. in pub.
archiv.


He married Marjory, daughter of sir Thomas Menzies of Pitsodils, comptroller
of Scotland in the reign of queen Mary, by whom he had six sons. They are
mentioned in an entail dated 1555 in the public register.


1. Patrick, his apparent heir.

2. Robert Gordon of Faach.

3. James.

4. David, who was ancestor of the Gordons of Nethermuir.

5. John Gordon of Tilliehilt.

6. Alexander.

He died anno 1582.

VI. PATRICK GORDON, the eldest son and heir apparent, died before his father,
leaving issue, by Agnes his wise, daughter of Alexander Frazer of Muchil,
ancestor of lord Frazer, one son,

VII. JAMES GORDON of Methlic and Haddo, who succeeded his grandfather, anno
1582. He obtained charters from king James VI. of the lands of Kirktown,
Tarvis, Brakla, and Tullielt; Chart. in pub. archiv,
also the lands of Methlic, Haddo, Orchardlie, and many others.

He married Jean, the daughter of William lord Keith, and sister of George
earl-marshal, by whom he had two sons.

1. George.

2. William.

He died in the beginning of the year 1624.

VIII. GEORGE, eldest son and apparent heir of James Gordon of Haddo, etc. died
before his father, Lives of the officers of state and Mr. Mill's collections,
ad ann. 1608.
having married Margaret, daughter of Alexander Bannerman of Elsick, by whom he
had a son,

IX. Sir JOHN GORDON of Haddo, who was served heir to his grandfather, Ibid.
and charta in cancellaria.
anno 1624.

He was a man of great parts, loyalty and magnanimity; and was next in command
to the marquis of Huntly, in conducting the forces that were raised for the
king against the covenanters, anno 1639.

At the battle of Turreff he behaved with great courage and valor; and for his
good services was created a baronet by king Charles I. anno 1642.

This sir John, in many other instances, signalized himself in behalf of his
majesty. In 1643, he defended his house of Kelly against the covenanters, and
being reduced to the last extremity, was obliged to capitulate, which he did
upon honorable terms. But he was no sooner in his enemy's power, than he was
sent to Edinburgh, and imprisoned in the church, which has gone by the name of
Haddo's-hold ever since that time. And though he had the king's commission, and
acted all along by his majesty's authority, yet he was tried, Bp. Guthry's
memories, and lives of the officers of state.
condemned, and executed at the cross of Edinburgh, anno 1644.

His estate was forfeited, and the sequestration continued till after the
restoration.

He left behind him the character of a great and eminent loyalist, and a man in
every respect worthy of the family from whence he was descended.

He married Mary, daughter of William Forbes of Tolquhoun, by whom he had two
sons and one daughter.

1. Sir John, his successor.

2. Sir George, who was first earl of Aberdeen.

His daughter was married to Sir John Forbes of Waterston.

Sir John Gordon of Haddo, his eldest son, was restored to his father's title
and estate immediately after the restoration, and died anno 1665, having
married a daughter of Alexander lord Pitsligo, by whom he had no sons, and but
one daughter, who was married to sir James Gordon of Lesmore, whereby his title
and estate devolved upon his brother,

X. Sir GEORGE GORDON of Haddo, second son of sir John, who being a man of
learning, and particularly eminent for his knowledge in the laws, was made one
of the senators of the college of justice anno 1680, president of the session
in 1681, and lord high chancellor of Scotland in 1682. And having acquitted
himself with honor and reputation in all these high employments, was, by his
majesty king Charles II. in consideration of the untainted loyalty of his
ancestors, the great loyalty and sufferings of his father, and his own constant
zeal and affection to the interest of the monarchy, etc. created earl of
Aberdeen, Chart. in pub. archiv. Haeredibus masculis e corpore suo etc.
viscount of Tormantine, lord Haddo, Methlic, Tarvis and Kelly, by letters
patent, dated 30th Nov. 1682.

He married Anne, Lives of the officers of state p. 427.
daughter and heiress of George Lockhart of Torbrecks, by whom he had two sons
and four daughters.

1. George, lord Haddo, who died, before his father, unmarried.

2. William, afterward earl of Aberdeen.

1. Daughter, lady Anne, married to Alexander earl of Eglington.

2. Lady Martha, married to John Udney of Udney.

3. Lady Mary, married to Alexander lord Salton.

4. Lady Margaret.

He died in the 83d year of his age, anno 1720, and was succeeded by his son,

XI. WILLIAM, second earl of Aberdeen, who was chosen one of the sixteen peers
for Scotland, anno 1721; and was also re-elected to the next British
parliament. In both which he showed himself a true lover of his country.

He married, 1st, lady Mary Lesly, daughter of David earl of Leven, by whom he
had one daughter, lady Anne, married to William earl of Dumfries.

He married, 2dly, lady Susan, daughter of John duke of Athol, by whom he had
one son.

George, now earl of Aberdeen, -- and one daughter,

Lady Catharine, married, 1st, to Cosmo duke of Gordon: 2dly, to colonel
Staats-Long Morris.

The earl married, 3dly, lady Anne, daughter of Alexander duke of Gordon, by
whom he had four sons, and one daughter.

1. William Gordon of Fyvie, Esquire; captain of a troop of dragoons.

2. Cosino, an officer in the guards.

3. Alexander Gordon, Esquire; advocate.

4. Charles.

His daughter, lady Henrietta Gordon, married to Robert Gordon of Haugh-head,
Esquire;.

He died anno 1745, and was succeeded by

XII. GEORGE, third earl of Aberdeen, who was elected one of the sixteen Scotch
peers to the British parliament called to meet in 1747; and again in 1754.

He married miss Catharine Hanson, daughter of Mr. Oswald Hanson late of
Wakefield, in Yorkshire. by whom he has two sons, and four daughters.

1. George, lord Haddo.

2. Mr. William.

Is It daughter, lady Catharine.

2. Lady Anne.

3. Lady Susan.

4. Lady Mary.

ARMS.
Azure, three boar's heads couped, within a double tressure flowered and
counter-flowered with thistles, roses, and flowers de lisses or.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter a man, representing one of the senators of the
college of justice, in robes proper; and on the sinister a minister of state,
in his robes also.

CREST; two arms, from the shoulder, naked, holding a bow proper, to let an
arrow fly.

MOTTO; Fortuna sequatur.

CHIEF SEATS,
Haddo-house, etc. in Aberdeen-shire.

ABERNETHY Lord ABERNETHY.
THE family of Abernethy is of great antiquiry, and made a considerable figure
in Scotland before sirnames were used. And though it is evident there was no
peerage in the family, till Laurence Abernethy of Salton was created a lord of
parliament by king James II. yet, in compliance with the example of our
historians, who have always looked upon them in this rank, on account of the
considerable place they held amongst the great barons, we have here inserted
them in the first part of this work, and have followed the same example in some
other families, which the candid reader will easily discover.

It is the opinion of some antiquaries, that the Abernethies are of Pictish
extraction, and that Alan, or Alexander, one of their ancesters, was a man of
the first rank in the reign of king Malcolm Canmore, Abercromb. (...) (...)
vol. ^. p. 446. Stewar^'s hist. of the royal family.
and married Helen, daughter of Walter first lord high steward of Scotland,
etc. But as this is only tradition, we proceed to deduce their descent by
incontestable documents, from

1. HUGH, who flourished in the reign of king David I. son of king Malcolm
Canmore, who succeeded to the crown of Scotland, anno 1124, and died in 1153.

This Hugh is particularly mentioned in several charters and confirmations of
William the Lion, Chart. penes fa^ de Douglas.
still preserved. He was father of

II. ORME, a man of considerable distinction in the reigns of Mal^olm IV. and
William the Lion, who succeeded him, anno 1165.

He was in possession of the lands of Dunloppin in the reign of king Malcolm,
which appears from a confirmation of these lands to his son Laurence, by king
Alexander III. hereafter mentioned. He had also at that time the lands of
Balbrennin; for we find him, in the next reign, Ibidem.
excambing them, with earl Duncan, for the lands of Glenduogyn and Balmadethyn.

This Orme is witness in a charter of king Malcolm's, Chartulary of St.
Andrews, penes MacFarlane.
with Arnsold bishop of St. Andrews, in or before the year 1162; in which year
that bishop died.

He obtained from king William a grant of the lands of Abernethyn, Ibidem.
in Strathearn, "to him and his heirs, etc." from which his son and successors
assumed their sirnames.

He got also a charter of confirmation from the same prince, Chart. pence fam
de Douglas.
of the lands of Glenduogyn and Balmadethyn, which he received from Duncan earl
of Fife, in exchange for Balbrennin, "to and in favors of Orme the son of
Hugh, etc." to which Andrew bishop of Caithness, Nichol chancellor of Scotland,
Richard de Morvile constable, David Oli^ard justiciar, are witnesses, in or
before the year 1185, in which year the bishop died.

He left issue a son,

Laurence, his heir, -- and a daughter, married to Henry Rule of Balmerino,
Simson's essay on the family of Douglas.
with whom he got a ten merk land of old extent; a merk then being one third of
a pound weight of silver. He was succeeded by his son,

III. LAURENCE, lord Abernethy, who made a donation of the patronage of the
church of Abernethy to the monastery of Arbroath; and legated to the canons
regular of St. Andrews ten shillings yearly, payable out of his lands of
Bambreich, and that with consent of sir Patrick Abernethy his son and heir,
Chartularv of St. Andrews.
whose seal is also appended to the said donation.

He got a charter of the lands of Dunloppin from king Alexander II. "to
Laurence son of Orme, son of Hugh, etc." and bears, that it was conformable to
a charter of king Malcolm, and confirmation of king William, to his father,
Charta penes fam. de Douglas.
in these words: Sicut charta Malcolmi regis, et confirmatio domini regis
Willielmi patri meo, testantur, et confirmant. The witnesses are, William de
Bosch chancellor, Malcolm earl of Fife, William Cumin earl of Buchan, justiciar
of Scotland, John de Maxwell, etc. anno 1222.

He also got a charter of confirmation of the lands of Glendogyn and
Balmadethyn from the same prince; to which William earl of Buchan, Ibidem.
justiciar, Henry de Baliol, chamberlain, Henry de Stirling, etc. are
witnesses, anno 1223.

He was one of the guarantees of a peace between king Alexander II of Scotland,
and king Henry III. Rymer's foed. Angliae, tom. I. p. 428.
of England, anno 1244; and dying soon thereafter, was succeeded by his son,

IV. Sir PATRICK ABERNETHY of that ilk, Chartulary of St. Andrews, dom.
Patricius Abernethy, filius et haeres Laurentii, etc.
who, in a donation to the priory of St. Andrews, is designed son and heir of
Laurence.

He left issue three sons, and one daughter.

1. Hugh, his heir.

2. William Abernethy of Salton, Chartulary of Dryburgh, penes MacFarlane, ad
annum 1628, et chart. in archiv. fam. de Mar, etc.
ancestor of lord Abernethy of Rothemay and Salton, etc.

3. Henry, who is witness in a Chartulary of St Andrews.
charter of king Alexander III. anno 1260.

His daughter, Margaret, was married to Contract penes fam. de Douglas.
Hugh, son and heir to William lord Douglas, eldest brother to William the
Hardy, in 1259; but by him she had no issue.

He died before the year 1257, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. HUGH lord Abernethy, who, together with the earls of Menteith, Mar, Athol,
and Bu^han, surprised king Alexander III. at Kinross, Fordun, vol. II. p. 91.
and carried him captive to Stirling castle, anno 1257.

He was a party contracter for his sister Margaret with Hugh de Douglas, and
gave with her in frank marriage, Charta penes fam. de Douglas.
a twenty merk land, either in his village of Glencorse, or his fen of
Chamberlain-Newton. The contract is dated anno 1259, as before observed.

He made several donations to the monastery of Coupar in Angus, Chartulary of
Cupar.
anno 1268 and 1269; and was witness to a confirmation, Chartulary of
Coldstream, penea MacFarlane.
by king Alexander III. of a donation to the monastery of Coldstream, anno 1270.

He married Mary, an English lady, for whom he obtained a safe conduct from the
king of England, Rymer, tom. II. p. 727.
anno 1269. By her he had a son and successor,

VI. ALEXANDER lord Abernethy, who, with the rest of the nobility of Scotland,
swore fealty to king Edward I. Ibid. p. 571.
of England, anno 1292.

He made a great figure in the reign of king Robert Bruce, though he was
sometimes on the Baliol's side, and often in the English interest against his
country; which, it is thought, he was chiefly induced to by his connections in
England with his mother's friends. And certain it is, he was in great favor
with king Edward II. Ib. tom. III. p. 211.
who appointed him governor on this side of the Forth, and the mountains of
Scotland, and captain general of all his subjects fit to bear arms in those
parts. This deed bears date 15th of June 1310.

He, together with David de Strabogie earl of Athole, and sir Adam Gordon, were
named plenipotentiaries by king Edward, Ibid. p. 300. Abercromby, vol. I. p.
591.
then at York, to treat of a peace with king Robert Bruce, anno 1312.

He left issue three daughters.

1. Margaret, married to John Stewart earl of Angus, Chart. penes fam. de
Douglas. et chart. in pub. archiv.
who got with her the barony of Abernethy, the superiority whereof is still
possessed by the family of Douglas, as representatives of the earl of Angus.

2. Helen, married to David de Lindsay, ancestor of the earls of Crawfurd,
Chart. in pub. archiv^ and father Hay's collections.
with whom he got the barony of Downie in the shire of Angus.

3. Mary, married to Andrew Leslie, ancestor of the earl of Rothes, Cha^ t^
penes comitem de Rothes.
who got with her the lands and barony of Bambreich, in Fife, which was long in
that family's possession.

We shall only here observe, that these three noble families, in consequence of
the marriages above mentioned, have ever since continued to quarter the arms of
Abernethy with their own.

Alexander lord Abernethy dying without sons, in him ended the male line of
Hugh, eldest son of sir Patrick de Abernethy of that ilk, etc. whereby the
representation of that ancient family devolves upon the male-heir of

WILLIAM, second son of the said sir Patrick, ancestor of the Abernethies,
lords of Salton. Vide title Salton, page 603.

ARMS.
Or, a lion rampant gules, surmounted of a ribbon sable.

GORDON Earl of ABOYNE.
THE immediate ancestor of this branch of the family of GORDON was GEORGE,
second marquis of Huntly, the seventeenth generation of that illustrious house,
who married lady Anne. Campbell, daughter of Archibald, seventh earl of Argyle,
by whom he had three sons.

1. George lord Gordon, who was killed at the battle of Aldford, in his
father's lifetime, without issue.

2. Lewis, marquis of Huntly, his father's successor, and ancestor of the
present duke of Gordon.

3. Lord Charles, the first of this family.

I. CHARLES, third son of George, second marquis of Huntly, a man of great
honor and lovalty, adhered firmly to the interest of both king Charles I. and
II. during the time of the civil war, and often exerted his courage in their
service, on which account he suffered many hardships.

Soon after the restoration, king Charles, in consideration of his great and
faithful services, was pleased to raise him to the dignity of the peerage, by
the titles of lord Gordon of Strathaven and Glenlivet, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Haeredib^s masculis, etc. ad ann. 1660.
and earl of Aboyne, by patent to him and his heirs-male, dated 10th September
1660.

He got afterward a charter, under the great seal, Ibidem
of the whole lands and lordship of Aboyne, Chart. Carolo comiti de Aboyne, etc.
dated anno 1661.

He married lady Elizabeth Lion, daughter of John earl of Strathmote, by whom
he had three sons, and one daughter.

1. Charles, lord Glenlivet.

2. George.

3. John.

His daughter, lady Elizabeth, married to John lord Castlehaven, son and heir
of George earl of Cromarty.

He died anno 1680, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. CHARLES, second earl of Aboyne, who married his cousin lady Elizabeth
Lion, daughter of Patrick earl of Strathmore, and died anno 1705, leaving issue
a son,

John, his heir, -- and three daughters.

1. Lady Helen, married to George Kinnaird, Esquire; and was mother of Charles, now
lord Kinnaird.

2. Lady Elizabeth, died unmarried.

3. Lady Grace, married to James Grant of Knockando, Esquire;.

III. JOHN, third earl of Aboyne, succeeded, and married miss Grace Lockhart,
daughter of George Lockhart of Carnwath, Esquire; by lady Eupham Montgomery,
daughter of Alexander earl of Eglington, by whom he had three sons.

1. Charles, lord Glenlivet.

2. John.

3. Lockhart. -- These two last are officers in the army.

He died anno 1732, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. CHARLES, fourth earl of Aboyne, who married lady Margaret Stewart,
daughter of Alexander earl of Galloway, by whom he has a son,

George, lord Glenlivet, -- and two daughters.

1. Lady Catharine.

2. Lady Margaret.

ARMS.
Azure, a cheveron between three boar's heads couped, within a double tressure,
flowered with flowers de lisses within, and adorned with crescents without, or,
for Seton.

SUPPORTERS; two men, armed at all parts, holding each a halberd in his hand
proper.

CREST; a demi-lion rampant azure.

MOTTO; Stant caetera tigno.

CHIEF SEATS.
Aboyne, etc. in A^erdeen-shire.

OGILVIE Earl of AIRLY.
THIS noble family, remarkable for many instances of loyalty to their
sovereigns, and attachment to the interest of their country, is descended from

GILBERT, second son of Gilibred, and brother of Gileh^ist earl of Angus, a man
of high distinction, in the reign of king William the Lion, who succeeded to
the crown of Scotland, anno 1165, and died anno 1214.

He obtained from that prince a charter, Chart. penes fam. de Douglas, and
lives of the offic of state, p. 356.
Gilberto silio comitis de Angus, terrarum de Pourin, Ogilvie, et Kyneithin,
per suas rectas divisas, pro servitio unius milit^s, etc.

He is a frequent witness in his brother earl Gilchrist's charters to the
abbacy of Arbroath, particularly to one granted by him to that convent, of the
church of Monyfod (now Moniseith.) The charter is without date; but as John
bishop of Aberdeen, Chartulary of Arbroath, penes MacFarlane, p. 124.
is also a witness, it must have been granted in or before the 1207, in which
year that bishop died.

1. This GILBERT assumed his surname from his lands and barony of Ogilvie, as
was the custom of those early times; and from him we proceed, by indisputable
evidence, to deduce the descent of this noble family.

He had a son,

II. ALEXANDER de OGILVIE, who succeeded him, and was one of the inquest who
judicially declares, that the lands of Innerpeffer were hold of, and owed suit
of court to, Ibidem.
the abbot of Arbroath, etc. dated at Forfar, 17th February 1250.

He was succeeded by his son,

III. PATRICK de OGILVIE. In a charter of Roger de Quincy, earl of Winton,
constable of Scotland, of a donation to the priory of St. Andrews, this Patrick
de Ogilvy, William de Haya, Chartulary of St. Andrews, penes eund. p. 407.
Gilbert de Ruthven, Alexander de Seton, etc. are witnesses, circa annum 1267.

He was one of the great barons of Scotland that, with many others, was forced
to swear fealty to king Edward I. of England, for his lands in the shire of
Forfar, Prynne's collections. vol. III. p. 654.
in the year 1296.

He lest issue two sons.

1. Sir Patrick, his heir.

2. Sir Robert de Ogilvie, who, according to doctor Abercrombie, Abercromb.
hist. vol. I. p. 637.
was one of king Robert Bruce's firmest friends.

IV. Sir PATRICK OGILVIE of that ilk succeeded his father, and was a man of
singular merit and fortitude. He adhered always firmly to the interest of king
Robert Bruce, and, Inventary of wants in the lawie^s libr. and addington's
collec.
for his loyalty and faithful services, obtained from that great monarch a
grant of the lands of Ketins, pro saciendo quintam partem servitii unius
militis, etc.

He lest issue two sons.

1. Alexander, his heir.

2. Patrick de Ogileir of Wester-Pourie, first of the family of Auchterhouse,
and the direct ancestor of the earls of A^ly, of whom afterward.

Alexander Ogilvie of that ilk succeeded his father in the barony of Ogilvie,
and he was succeeded by his son sir Patrick Ogilvie of that ilk, Chartulary of
Arbroath, ad annum 1348.
of whom the ancient and honorable family of the Ogilvies, promiscuously
designed of that ilk, and of Easter-Pourie, are descended, which subsisted in
the male line till neen the end of the last century, but is now extinct. We
therefore return to

V. PATRICK de OGILVIE of WesterPourie, second son of the above sir Patrick,
who obtained from his nephew, sir Patrick Ogilvie of that ilk, son of his
brother Alexander, to him, and Marjory his wife, Chart. confirm. in pub. archiv.
the lands of Wester-Pourie, in vicecom. de Forfar, quam quondam Malcolmus de
Pourie tenuit et possedit, etc.

His marriage with the above Marjory, only daughter, and at length sole
heiress, of sir Robert Ramsay of Auchterhouse, hereditary sheriff of the county
of Forfar, brought a considerable addition, both of wealth and dignity, to his
family.

He was succeeded by his son,

VI. WALTER OGILVIE of WesterPourie, afterward of Auchterhouse, hereditary
sheriff of Forfar, who came to the possession of that great estate and dignity,
Chart. in pub. archivis.
upon the death of his uncle sir Malcolm Ramsay of Auchterhouse, about the year
1365.

He obtained from king Robert II. unum annuum reditum viginti novem librarum
sterlingarum nobis debitum de thanagio de Kingalty, Ibidem.
(now Kinalty) in vicecomitatu de Forfar, anno 1385.

He lest two sons.

1. Sir Walter, his heir.

2. Patrick, Lives of the offic. of state, et chart. in archiv. sam. de Wemyss.
said to be ancestor of the Ogilvies of Inchmartine, whose son sir Walter,
married the heiress thereof.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. Sir WALTER OGILVIE of Auchterhouse, high sheriff of Forfar, who obtained
from his cousin, Alexander Ogilvie of that ilk, a charter of confirmation of
the lands of Wester-Pourie, Chart. in pub. archiv.
wherein he is designed son of Walter, and grandson of Patrick Ogilvie above
mentioned, uncle to sir Patrick Ogilvie of that ilk.

He also got from sir David Lindsay of Glenesk, who was afterward earl of
Crawfurd, unum annuum reditum viginti librarum sterlingarum levand. Chart. in
rotul. Rob. III.
de terris de Glenesk, Nordesk, et blackcockmore in vicecom. de Forsar et
Kincardine, nono die Martii 1390.

This sir Walter, who was a man of great worth and merit, lost his life in the
sollowing manner: Duncan Stewart, natural son of Alexander earl of Buchan,
having entered the shire of Forfar, or Angus, at the head of a lawless gang of
robbers, in order to plunder the country; the sheriff, accompanied by his
uterine brother, Walter Lighton, ancestor of the family of Ulis-haven, and a
numerous posse of country people, overtook the said robbers, at a place called
Glenbrerith, Fordun, vol. II. p. 420.
in Angus; where, after a smart skirmish, sir Walter and his brother, with
about sixty of their followers, were killed on the spot, anno 1391.

He left issue three sons.

1. Sir Alexander, his heir.

2. Sir Walter of Lintrethan, of whom below.

3. Sir John, Lives of the officers of state.
who got from his brother sir Walter the lands and barony of Innerquharity,
anno 1420. Mill's collections, and Haddington's collections in the lawyer's
library.
He got also a charter from William earl of Angus, wherein he is designed
brother to sir Walter of Lintrethan, of some lands in the barony of Kirriemnir,
anno 1422.

Sir Walter was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. Sir ALEXANDER OGILVIE of Auchterhouse, whose grandson, another sir
Alexander, had only one daughter, Margaret, his sole heiress, who conveyed the
estate and dignity of sheriff to James Stuart, Chart. in pub. archiv. and
Stuart's hist. of the royal family.
earl of Buchan, her husband, who was lord high-chamberlain of Scotland, anno
1471.

The male line of sir Alexander, eldest son of sir Walter of Auchterhouse, thus
ending, the representation devolved upon the next heir-male descended of his
brother sir Walter of Lintrethan, to whom we now return.

VIII. Sir WALTER OGILVIE of Lintrethan, second son of sir Walter of
Auchterhouse, was a man of eminent parts and merit. He was one of the
privy council to king James I. Fordun. Rymer's foedera angliae, tom. X. p. 266.
etc. and chart. in pub. archiv.
and lord high-treasurer of Scotland, anno 1425; master of the king's household,
anno 1430; and one of the commissioners for renewing the truce with England,
anno 1431.

He founded and endowed two chaplainries in the church of Auchterhouse, "For
the safety of his own soul, and that of Walter Ogilvie, knight, his father; and
for the souls of those killed at the battle of Harlaw, Chart. in archiv. Jacobi
I. ad annum 1426. and Haddington's collections.
etc. testibus domino Patricio de Ogilvie, et Davide de Ogilvie nepotibus suis,
et Waltero de Ogilvie filio suo, etc.

He married Isabel de Dureward, heiress of Lintrethan, with whom he got that
barony; and he and his posterity were designed by that title, till they were
raised to the dignity of the peerage: by her he had issue two sons and one
daughter.

1. Sir John, his heir.

2. Sir Walter, ancestor of the earls of Findlater. Vide title Findlater.

His daughter, Giles, was married to Robert Arbuthnot of that ilk.

He died anno 1441, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. Sir JOHN OGILVIE of Lintrethan, who accompanied William earl of Douglas to
England, Rymer, tom. XI. p. 277.
anno 1450, and returned anno 1451.

He got a charter from king James II. erecting his lands into one free barony,
Haddington's collections, and chart. in pub. archiv.
called the barony of Lintrethan, 3d March 1458.

He also got charters, under the great seal, of several lands, anno 1459; and
likewise many others from king James III. Ib. inter ann. 1460, et ann; 1469.
too numerous to be here inserted.

He married Marion, daughter of William lord Seton, by whom he had a son,

Sir James, afterward lord Ogilvie, -- and three daughters.

1. Christian, married to sir John Forbes of Pitsligo.

2. Elizabeth; married to sir Patrick Keith of Innerugie.

3. Marion, married to Henry Stuart of Rosyth.

He died before the year 1480, and was succeeded by his only son,

X. Sir JAMES OGILVIE of Lintrethan, who got a charter of the lands of Kinnell,
Haddington's collections.
etc. anno 1480, which had been apprized by the king from Hugh lord Frazer, etc.

He was a man of great parts, singular merit and integrity, and was often
employed in negotiations of the greatest importance.

He was one of the guarantees of a treaty of peace concluded with the English,
Rymer, tom, XII. p. 243.
anno 1484, and is then designed Jacobus Ogilvie de Airly, miles, etc.

And being highly esteemed both by king and court, Records of parliament in the
lawyer's library.
was created a peer by the title of lord Ogilvie of Airly, 28th April, and sat
as a lord baron in the parliament called by king James IV. 18th May 1491.

Upon the rising of the parliament, he was sent ambassador extraordinary to the
king of Denmark, where he managed matters entirely to his majesty's
satisfaction.

He married, 1st, Elizabeth Kennedy, by whom he had two sons.

1. John, his heir.

2. Alexander, who got a charter, Chart. in pub. archiv.
under the great seal, of part of the barony of Ogilvie, anno 1494.

He married, Chart. penes ducem de Douglas.
2dly, Elizabeth, daughter of Archibald earl of Angus, by whom he had a son,

Walter, ancestor of the Ogilvies of Balfour, -- and a daughter,

Marion, said to have been married to David Bethune, a younger son of the lord
of Balfour in Fise, afterward archbishop of St. Andrews, MacKenzie's lives of
the Scotch writers, vol. III. ad nnn. 1546, and chart. in pub. arch.
and cardinal: by him she had issue several children before he entered into
holy orders. -- Their daughter, Margaret, was married to David lord Lindsay,
afterward earl of Crawfurd, the old earl and the cardinal being the parties
contracters.

He died before the year 1504, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. JOHN, second lord Ogilvie of Airly, who, before his father was raised to
the peerage, was designed John of Ballindoch, which appears by a writ
appointing sir James Ogilvie of Airly, Haddington's collections.
and John Ogilvie of Ballindoch, his son and heir, justiciars, chamberlains and
bailies of Arbroath, after the death of sir John Ogilvie of Lintrethan, anno
1481.

He sat in the parliaments held in Edinburgh the 3d and 16th of February 1505,
Records of parliament.
and is then designed John lord Ogilvie of Airly, etc.

He married Jean, daughter of William lord Graham, ancestor of the duke of
Montrose, by whom he had two sons and two daughters.

1. James, his heir.

2. Anthony, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who was abbot of Glenluce, and witness in a charter from king James V. anno
1514.

1. Daughter, Elizabeth, married to William Wood of Bonytown.

2. Janet, married to -- Lighton of Ulis-haven.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. JAMES, third lord Ogilvie of Airly, who married lady Elizabeth Lindsay,
Lives of the officers of state.
daughter of David earl of Crawfurd, by whom he had three sons and three
daughters.

1. James, his heir.

2. John Ogilvie of Innerkeilor.

3. Archibald.

1. Daughter, -- married to David Lion of Cossins.

2. Isabel, married to David Strachan of Carmelic.

3. Beatrix, married to -- Garden of Leys.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. JAMES, fourth lord Ogilvie of Airly, who married Helen, Chart. in pub.
archiv. ad an. 1519.
daughter of Henry lord Sinclair, by whom he had issue, five sons and four
daughters.

1. James, his heir.

2. John.

3. David Ogilvie of Kinmundie.

4. William.

5. Archibald Ogilvie of Lawton.

1. Daughter, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Marion, married to Patrick lord Gray.

2. Margaret, Ibidem.
married to David Graham of Fintrie.

3. Anne, married to sir Thomas Erskine of Brechin.

4. Helen, married to sir John Ogilvie of Innerquharity.

He died about 1540, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVI. JAMES, fifth lord Ogilvie of Airly, who made an entail of his estate and
barony of Lintrethan, and is therein designed eldest son and heir of the noble
and potent James lord Ogilvie, Ibid. Haddington's collections.
etc. "To himself and the heirs-male of his own body; which failing, to the
heirs-male of his four brothers, John, David, William, and Archibald,
successively; then to John Ogilvie his nephew; then to sir John Ogilvie of
Innerquharity, and Helen Ogilvie, his sister, spouse to the said sir John; then
to John Ogilvie of Innerkeilor, his father's brother, etc. then to Archibald
Ogilvie, another brother of his father, etc. etc. all which failing, to his own
nearest heirs whatsomever," dated 2d December 1566.

He married Catharine, daughter of sir John Campbell of Calder, by whom he had
a son,

James, Lives of the officers of state.
his heir, -- and two daughters.

1. Margaret, married to John Erskine of Dun.

2. Helen, married to John lord Innermeath.

He died before the year 1570, and was succeeded by his only son,

XV. JAMES, sixth lord Ogilvie of Airly, who obtained charters, Chart. in pub.
archiv. inter ann. 1560 and 1584.
under the great seal, Jacobo Ogilvie domino de Erlie, of a great many lands
and baronies.

He was a man of singular endowments, loyalty, and merit, and adhered firmly to
the interest of queen Mary in all her troubles, on account whereof he suffered
a long imprisonment, and many other hardships, all which he bore with great
constancy, till he was released by king James VI. anno 1596.

He was sent his majesty's ambassador to the court of Denmark, Lives of the
officers of state.
to assist at the coronation of king Christiern IV.

He married Jean, M. S. history of the house of Airly in the archives of the
family.
daughter of William lord Forbes, by whom he had six sons and one daughter.

1. James, his heir.

2. Sir John Ogilvie of Craig.

3. David Ogilvie of Pitmouis.

4. Peter Ogilvie of Smiddy-hill, ancestor of the Ogilvies of Clunie.

5. George Ogilvie of Fernault.

6. Sir Francis Ogilvie of Grange, who got a charter under the great seal,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
Francisco filio domini Ogilvie, etc.

His daughter, Margaret, was married to George earl Marishal.

He died anno 1606, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIV. JAMES, seventh lord Ogilvie of Airly, who got a charter under the great
seal, Ibidem.
Jacobo domino Airly, etc. and married lady Jean Ruthven, the daughter of
William earl of Gowrie, Lives of the officers of state
by whom he had a son and successor,

XVII. JAMES, eighth lord Ogilvie of Airly, who got charters, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
under the great seal, of several lands and baronies.

He was a man of great magnanimity and exemplary loyalty; and, "For his own
great merit, and eminent services done to king Charles I. and for the great
loyalty and fidelity of his ancestors, Ibidem. Haeredibus masculis in perpetuum.
etc." was, by letters patent, dated at York 2d April 1639, further dignified
with the title of earl of Airly; the patent being to him and his heirsmale for
ever, etc.

As he had heartily and sincerely espoused the interest of king Charles I* from
the beginning of the civil war, so he continued steadily to adhere to him till
the very last, which made him extremely obnoxious to the parliament, whereby he
suffered many hardships both in his person and estate.

He married lady Isabel Hamilton, Crawfurd's Peerage.
daughter of Thomas earl of Haddington, by whom he had three sons and one
daughter.

1. James, lord Ogilvie.

2. Sir Thomas, a young man of singular valor and loyalty. He raised a
regiment upon his own charges, for the service of his majesty king Charles I.
fought valiantly at their head on several occasions, and had always the good
fortune to come off victorious, till at last he was kiled at the battle of
Inverlochie.

3. Sir David Ogilvie of Clova.

His daughter, lady Helen, married to sir John Carnegy of Balnamoon.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVIII. JAMES, second earl of Airly, who, like many of his noble ancestors, was
a great loyalist, and continued steady in his majesty's interest, during all
the time of the civil war.

He joined the marquis of Montrose as soon as he took the sield, (being then
only lord Ogilvie) and behaved always with great courage and intrepidity; but
was unluckily taken prisoner at the battle of Philiphaugh.

He was a^tewards tried and condemned by the parliament at St. Andrews, but had
the good fortune to make his escape in his sister's dress, the very night
before he was to have been executed; and lived to see the restoration, after
very great sufferings, which he bore with a noble firmness and resolution.

He married, 1st, Helen Ogilvie, daughter of George lord Banff, by whom he had
issue,

David, Ibidem.
his heir, -- and four daughters.

1. Lady Marion, married, 1st, to James lord Cupar: and, 2dly, to John lord
Lindores.

2. Lady Margaret, married to Alexander lord Halkerton.

3. Lady Mary, married to sir John Wood of Bonytown.

4. Lady Helen, married to sir John Gordon of Park.

He married, 2dly, the marchioness-dowager of Huntly, daughter of the lord of
Grant, and mother to the duke of Gordon, but by her he had no issue.

He was succeeded by his son,

XIX. DAYID, third earl of Airly, who married lady Grizel Lion, daughter of
Patrick earl of Strathmore, by whom he had two sons and one daughter. Ibidem.


1. James, his apparent heir.

2. John, who now represents the family.

His daughter, lady Helen.

XX. JAMES, lord Ogilvie, the eldest son, having engaged in the rebellion in
1715, was attainted of high treason; but the estate was saved by being in his
father's person, who was then alive. He was afterward pardoned; and married
Anne, daughter of Mr. David Erskine of Dun, one of the senators of the college
of justice; but dying without issue, was succeeded by his brother,

XX. JOHN, representative of the earls of Airly, and who is still in possession
of the estate.

He married Margaret, eldest daughter and heiress of -- Ogilvie of Clunic,
lineally descended of Peter, fourth son of James sixth lord Ogilvie, by whom he
has two sons and two daughters.

1. David,

2. Walter Ogilvie, Esquire; advocate.

1. Daughter, Elizabeth.

2. Helen, married to Roger Robertson of Ladykirk, Esquire;

XXI. DAVID, the eldest son, commonly called lord Ogilvie, having engaged in
the rebellion in 1745, was attainted of high treason, and escaped to France,
where he has the command of a Scotch regiment, called Ogilvie's regiment.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir James Johnston of Westerhall, baronet, by
whom he has one son,

David, commonly called master of Ogilvie, -- and two daughters.

1. Margaret.

2. Johanna.

ARMS.
Argent, a lion passant guardant gules, crowned with an imperial crown, and
collar'd with an open one.

SUPPORTERS; two bulls sable, unguled and horned vert, with a garland of
flowers about their necks.

CREST; a Gentlewoman, from the waist upward, holding a portcullis.

MOTTO; A FIN.

CHIEF SEATS.
Auchterhouse and Cortachie, both in the county of Forfar.

STUART Duke of ALBANY.
ROBERT STUART, third son of king Robert II. by Elizabeth More, was the first
who enjoyed this title. He was first earl of Menteith, which title he got by
his marriage, and afterward earl of Fife, by the resignation of the countess
thereof.

He was a man of high accomplishments, equally qualified to shine in the arts
of peace, or in the troubles of war; for which reason the king, his father,
being infirm with age, made him governor of Scotland in his own lifetime; and
his brother, king Robert III. after his accession to the crown, Crawfurd's
peerage, and several Scotch writers.
being likewise valetudinary, thought fit to continue him in the regency, and
dignified him with the title of duke of Albany, anno 1399.

Upon the death of king Robert III. his son king James I. being prisoner in
England, the duke of Albany of right became governor of the kingdom for his
nephew; in which office he continued till his death.

He commanded the Scotch army in several engagements against the English,
Crawfurd's peerage, and Stuart's hist. of the family of Stuart.
and always behaved with such courage and conduct, that he generally came off
victorious, though inferior in numbers to the enemy. And as he had discharged
his trust, in all the high offices he enjoyed, with great wisdom, prudence and
integrity, his death, which happened in 1420, was universally lamented.

He married, 1st, Margaret, grandchild and sole heiress of Alan earl of
Menteith, with whom he got the estate and honors: he had by her one son,

Murdoch, Stuart's hist. of the Stuarts.
his heir, -- and five daughters.

1. Lady Isabel, married, 1st, to Alexander earl of Ross: 2dly, to Walter
^aliburton of Dirleton.

2. Lady Marjory, married to sir Duncan Campbell of Lo^how.

3. Lady Elizabeth, married to sir Malcolm Fleming of Cumbernauld.

4. Lady Margaret, married to sir Robert Stuart of Innermeath.

5. Lady Beatrix, married to sir James Douglas of Balvenie, son of Archibald
earl of Angus.

The duke married, Ibidem.
2dly, Muriella, daughter of sir William Keith great marishal of Scotland, by
whom he had four sons.

1. John, earl of Buchan.

2. Sir Robert Stuart, knight.

3. Sir Andrew.

4. John Stuart of Coul, who was also designed earl of Buchan, was a man of
singular merit, and made a great figure in the world. Vide title Buchan Stuart.

MURDOCH, first son of Robert duke of Albany, succeeded to his father's estate
and honors, and also to the government of the kingdom; but he did not inherit
all his father's good qualities. However he was both active and very
instrumental in bringing home king James I. Ibidem.
which was happily accomplished in 1424, and, as earl of Fife, he placed the
king in his chair of state at his coronation in Scoon.

But as the duke became too great for a subject, he was suspected to have a
design upon the crown; and being discovered to be engaged in some secret plots
and transactions, (the nature of them all our historians are silent about,
Fordun. lib. 14. cap. 10* Abercromby, Crawfurd, etc.
probably being very criminal and treasonable) he was, with two of his sons,
tried, condemned and executed, and his estate and honors forfeited to the
crown, anno 1425.

He married Isabel, daughter and heiress of Duncan earl of Lennox, Stuart's
hist. of the royal family.
by whom he had four sons and two daughters.

1. Robert, who was sometime designed duke of Albany, but died before his
father, without issue.

2. Sir Walter.

3. Sir Alexander. -- These two last suffered with their father.

4. Sir James, who retired to Ireland, where, by a lady of the family of the
MacDonalds, he had seven sons, three whereof were legitimated by king James
III. of whom several considerable families are descended; particularly the
families of Evandale and Ochiltree.

Duke Murdoch's first daughter was married to Archibald Campbell of Lochow.

2. Lady Isabel, married to sir Walter Buchanan of that ilk.

The next who enjoyed this high title, was ALEXANDER, Stewart's hist. of the
royal family.
second son of king James II. who was created duke of Albany in 1452. But
having been engaged in a most unnatural rebellion against his brother king
James III. his wicked practices were discovered; his measures broke; and he
himself obliged to retire to France, where he ended his days.

He married, 1st, lady Catharine, daughter of William earl of Orkney and
Caithness, it seems, uncanonically; for they were afterward divorced, Chart.
in pub. archiv. ad annum 1477.
upon account of propinquity of blood; but by her he had a son,

Alexander, who was bishop of Murray.

He married, 2dly, a daughter of the earl of Boulogne, by whom he had a son,

John, duke of Albany, who was a wise, brave, and virtuous prince. He was nine
years governor of Scotland in the minority of king JamesV. and behaved in that
high office with great fidelity and prudence.

By act of parliament he was declared next heir to the crown, Stewart's history
of the royal family.
failing issue of king James V. But upon some discontent happening among the
nobility, he laid down his office, and retired to France, where he died anno
1536, having married Anna de la Tour of the family of Vendosme, by whom he had
no issue: so that the title of Albany lay extinct, until Mary queen of Scotland
bestowed it on Henry lord Darnley, Ibidem.
son of Matthew earl of Lennox and lady Margaret Douglas, daughter of Archibald
earl of Angus by queen Margaret, daughter of king Henry VII. sister of king
Henry VIII. of England, and widow of king James IV. of Scotland, and grand-aunt
to her majesty queen Mary.

This Henry lord Darnley and Man, created duke of Albany and earl of Rose by
queen Mary of Scotland, she afterward took to be her husband; and he, with his
royal consort, were proclaimed king and queen of Scotland, and. c.

The title of Albany was thus again vested in the crown, and continued in it
till king Charles I. conferred it on his son prince Charles, anno 1601; and he
(who was afterward king Charles II.) bestowed that title on his brother the
duke of York, Diploma in pub. archiv.
anno 1660, which he always kept till he became king of Great Britain himself,
anno 1685.

And lately, this illustrious title, together with that of duke of York, was
conferred, by his majesty king George II. on his royal highness prince Edward,
second son of the late Frederick prince of Wales.

ARMS.
Quarterly; 1st and 4th or, a lion rampant gules, and in chief a label of three
points azure, for the title of Albany: 2d and 3d or, a fess cheque azure and
argent, with a label of three points in chief.

KEITH Lord ALTREE.
ROBERT KEIT^, second son of William fourth earl Marishal, being a man of parts
and learning, was made commendator of Deer, in the reig^ of queen Mary, anno
1560; and being in favor with king James VI. Chart. in archiv. Jacobi VI.
got that abbacy erected into a temporal lordship, and himself raised to the
dignity of the peerage, by the title of lord Altree, anno 1587, "To him and the
heirsmale of his body."

In the year 1590, he assisted at the coronation of queen Anne, Rymer. tom.
XVI. pa. 60.
consort to his majesty king James VI.

He married Elizabeth, daughter and heiress of Robert Lundie of Benholm, by
whom he had two daughters.

1. Elizabeth, Chart. in pub. archiv.
married to Alexander Hay of Dalgitty. Nisbet's append.
-- 2. Margaret, married to John Eskine of Dun.

He dying without male-issue, anno 1612, the honors became extinct, and the
estate went to the family of Marishal.

ARMS.
Qarterly; 1st and 4th or, a saltire and chief gules: 2d and 3d, a chief pallee
of six pieces gules and or.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter an unicorn argent, horned and unguled or; and on the
sinister a deer proper.

CREST; a rock proper.

MOTTO; Watch the temptation.

KER Earl of ANCRUM.
THE first person who was dignified with this title, Chart. penes Thom. Dundas
de Fingask.
was sir ROBERT KER, eldest son of William Ker of Ancrum, by Margaret his
spouse, daughter of Alexander Dundas of Fingask, ancestor of the present Thomas
Dundas of Fingask, Esquire; and sir Laurence Dundas, Bart.

This sir Robert was a man of fine parts, and deservedly a favorite at court,
being made gentleman of the bedchamber to king James VI. and continued in the
same office under king Charles I. both which princes he served with
distinguished honor and fidelity.

At length, in reward of his merit, he was created earl of Ancrum, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
by letters patent, bearing date 24th June, 1633.

He married, 1st, Elizabeth, daughter of sir John Murray of Blackbarony, by
whom he had a son, sir William Ker, who became earl of Lothian, on his marriage
with Anne countess and heiress thereof.

He married, 2dly, Peerage of Engl. vol. II. p. 83.
lady Anne Stanley, eldest daughter of William earl of Derby, by whom he had a
son, Charles, his successor in this title.

CHARLES, second earl of Ancrum, succeeded his father, in virtue of the special
limitation of the patent, to the heirs-male of earl Robert's second marriage
with lady Anne Stanley; and dying without issue, the title devolved upon the
family of Lothian, descended of sir William, Report of the lords of session to
the house of peers in 1739.
the son of earl Robert's first marriage, as the patent settled it on the other
heirs-male of the patentee, failing those of the second marriage.

At present it is the title given by courtesy to the eldest son of the marquis
of Lothian. Vide that title, page 419th of this work.

ARMS.
Quarterly; 1st and 4th ermine, on a chief-parti argent and gules, a lion
passant counter-chained: 2d and 3d gules, on a cheveron argent, three stars or
mullets of the first.

SUPPORTERS; two stags proper, collared gules.

CREST; a stag's head and neck couped, argent, collared as the supporters, and
charged with three mullets argent, issuing out of an open crown, or.

MOTTO; Tout droit.

Earl of ANGUS.
THE title of ANGUS was long enjoyed by thanes, who made a great figure in
Scotland for many ages, and were often formidable to our kings.

Macbeth, the usurper, was thane of Angus, and his son Luthacus, who was killed
at Strabogie, Martin's genealogical collections. vol. I. p. 149.
in the beginning of king Malcolm Canmore's reign, about the year 1061, was the
last of that race. -- Soon after his death,

I. GILCHRIST, a man of the first rank, and a great favorite of king Malcolm
Canmore, was created earl of Angus by that prince; and was amongst the first
who enjoyed the title of earl in Scotland. He lived after the year 1120, Ibidem.
having married Finebella, sister of -- thane of Mearns, by whom he had a son,

II. GILIBREDE, second earl of Angus, who succeeded him, and is mentioned by
many of our historians as a great warrior. He lived in the reigns of king David
I. king Malcolm IV. and king William the Lion.

He was one of the chief commanders of the Scotch army (though then but a young
man) with the earls of March and Menteith, when they invaded England in king
Stephen's reign. Ibidem, vol. II. p. 162.
and fought a bloody battle against the English near Northall^rton, about the
year 1138. He was one of the Scotch nobles appointed to settle and adjust all
differences betwixt king William the Lion and king Henry II. Rymer's foed.
A^gliae, tom. I. p. 39.
of England, anno 1174.

He was witness to a charter of king William the Lion, Chartulary of Arbroath,
penes Mac-Farlan^.
together with Joceline bishop of Glasgow, and Matthew bishop of Aberdeen, and
is then designed Gilibredus comes de Angus, etc. anno 1176.

He married --, a daughter of Patrick earl of March, by whom he had six sons.

1. Gilchrist.

2. Magnus, Dalrymple's collections.
created earl of Caithness by king Alexander II. anno 1222.

3. Gilbert, History of the royal family.
ancestor of the Ogilvies. Vide title earl of Airly.

4. Adam.

5. William. -- These two last are designed sons of the earl of Angus,
Chartulary of Arbroath.
ante 1200.

6. Anegus filius comitis Gilibrede, who was at the perambulation of the
marches betwixt the lands of the monastery of Arbroath and the barony of
Kinbluthmund, Ibidem.
23d September 1219.

Earl Gilebrede died about the year 1180, and was succeeded by his eldest son;

III. GILCHRIST, third earl of Angus, who was one of the greatest men of his
time, Buchanan, Lesly, etc.
and performed many glorious exploits in king William's wars.

When the king was a prisoner, the English invaded Cumberland, of which they
imagined to have made an easy conquest; but the brave Gilchrist, who had the
chief command of the Scotch forces, gave them such a warm reception, Ibid. and
Abercrombie, vol. I. p. 260.
that they were obliged to agree to a truce, whereby Cumberland and Huntington
remained in the hands of the Scots.

Soon after this he quelled a most dangerous insurrection in Galloway, Ibid.
which was of more service to his king and country, than many of his other
great actions.

He had the honor to be married to the king's sister, which his merit and
great services highly deserved; but was unhappily led into a suspicion of her
having dishonored his bed, which fatally prompted him to put an end to her
life, whereupon he was obliged to abscond. He was condemned in absence, his
houses demolished, and his estate forfeited.

He wandered long in his own country in the utmost misery and want; till at
last he was accidentally met (in the habit of a peasant) by the king on the
high road to Perth. The king observing something more in his air and mien, Ib.
p. 268, and Boethius in vita regis Gulielmi.
than his dress denoted, spoke to him, and desired to know who he was. The old
general falling on his knees, begged forgiveness; and gave such a lively
account of his misfortunes and sufferings, that the king was greatly moved
therewith, and not only restored him to his honors and estate, but to the same
degree of favor he had formerly enjoyed.

He made a donation to the abbacy of Arbroath of the church of Monifode,
Chartul. of Arbroath.
etc. wherein he is designed Gilchrist comes de Angus, filius Gilebrede, etc.
to which his brother, and Duncan his son, are witnesses. He made several other
donations to the same abbacy, pro salute animae suae, etc.

He married Marjory, Dalrymple's collections.
daughter of Henry prince of Scotland, sister of king William the lion, as
before observed, by whom he had a son,

IV. DUNCAN, fourth earl of Angus, who succeeded him, and confirmed all his
father's donations to the abbacy of Arbroath; Chartul. of Arbroath.
in which confirmation he is designed grandson of Gilebrede, etc.

By Maud his wife, he left a son and successor,

V. MALCOLM; fifth earl of Angus, who mortified to the abbacy of Arbroath,
Ibidem.
some lands in territorio de Kirriemuir, confirmed by king Alexander II. to
which W. de Bosco; chancellor, is a witness, anno 1225.

He married Mary, daughter and heiress of sir Humphrey Berklay, knight, by whom
he had only one daughter,

VI. MATILDA, or Maud, countess of Angus, who succeeded to the estate and
honors; and in a confirmation of the donations made by her predecessors to the
monastery of Arbroath, Ibidem.
she is designed " Matilda comitissa, the great grandchild of Earl Gilchrist,
etc."

She married, 1st, John Cumin, who in her right became earl of Angus; but he
died in France anno 1242, leaving issue only one son,

Bertrald, Chron. of Melrose.
who died a child anno 1243.

She married, 2dly, Gilbert de Umfraville, to whom she also conveyed the
earldom; and as he was head of an ancient and most noble family of that
surname, who had large possessions both in Scotland and England, we shall
deduce their descent from their first settlement in Great Britain.

UMFRAVILLE Earl of ANGUS.
I. SIR ROBERT UMFRAVILLE, lord of Tours and Vian in Normandy, a near kinsman
of William the conqueror, came over to England with that great prince, anno
1066, and had a considerable command in his army; and as William divided his
conquered lands, Hist. of the extinct peerages of England, penes Macfarlane, v.
II. p. 111.
and rewarded his officers according to their merit, so he bestowed upon sir
Robert, the valley, forest, and lordship of Riddisdale, in the county of
Northumberland.

He lived after the year 1100, and left a son,

II. ROBERT de UMFRAVILLE, who is often mentioned in the annals of king Henry
I. Ibidem.
of England.

He was father of

III. GILBERT de UMFRAVILLE, who came to Scotland in the reign of king David I.
with whom he had contracted a friendship while he resided in England; and as he
was in great favor with him, he shared of his bounty, and got from him several
lands in the shire of Stirling, which appears from the donations to the abbacy
of Cambuskenneth. It is therefore certain he settled in Scotland, and survived
that good prince eight or ten years.

He was witness in several charters of king Malcolm IV. Chartul. of St.
Andrews, penes Macfarlane, and Chartul. of Paisly, penes eundem.
betwixt the years 1154 and 1162; and dying before 1165, was succeeded by his
son,

IV. GILBERT de UMFRAVILLE, who appears to have had considerable possessions in
Scotland, where he chiefly resided, though he also had a great estate in
England.

He made a donation to the abbacy of Holyroodhouse of a carucate of land in
Kinnaird in Stirling-shire, Book of original writs, penes Macfarlane.
about the year 1187, pro salute animae suae, etc.

He left a son and successor,

V. RICHARD de UMFRAVILLE, who having great interest in England, was prevailed
upon to join the barons against king John, anno 1201; for which his lands in
England were forfeited, and given to Hugh de Baliol: Hist. of the extinct peers
of England.
but king Henry III. restored him to his castle of Pruden, etc.

He also appears to have resided more in Scotland than in England, and was
succeeded by his son,

VI. GILBERT de UMFRAVILLE, who was in great favor with king Alexander III.
whom he accompanied to York, where they met king Henry of England, and
concluded the marriage betwixt his daughter, Ibidem.
princess Margaret, and king Alexander, anno 1252.

A good historian says, Ibid. and Matt. Paris.
that this Gilbert de Umfraville was a famous baron, guardian, and chief slower
of the North, etc.

He died anno 1262, and left issue a son,

VII. GILBERT de UMFRAVILLE, who succeeded him, and was one of the greatest men
of his time. Hist. of the extinct peers of England, etc.
He joined the barons of England against king Henry III. but was afterward
reconciled to that prince.

He married Matilda, countess of Angus, in whose right he became earl of Angus,
as before noticed, by which he got a vast accession to his estate and interest
in Scotland.

He was one of the magnates Scotiae, that negotiated the marriage between king
Alexander's daughter, Rymer, tom. II. p. 1082.
princess Margaret, and Eric king of Norway, anno 1281.

In 1284 he was one of the Scotch nobles that obliged themselves to maintain
and support queen Margaret's title to the crown, after the death of her
grandfather king Alexander III.

By the said countess of Angus he left issue two sons.

1. Gilbert.

2. Sir Ingelram, who, being a man of great parts, Fordun, v. II. p. 153.
was sent ambassador to France by king John Baliol, anno 1284. He was also one
of the Scotch nobles who signed that famous letter to the pope, Ibid. p. 275.
asserting the independency of Scotland, anno 1320. But we can give no account
of his posterity.

The earl dying anno 1285, was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. GILBERT, second earl of Angus of the name of Umfraville, Rymer, tom. II.
p. 471.
who was one of the great barons that agreed to the marriage of queen Margaret
of Scotland with prince Edward of England, anno 1290.

He was also one of the commissioners chosen by John Baliol to support his
interest against Robert Bruce, Ibid. p. 553.
in the competition for the crown, anno 1292.

After king Robert Bruce began to assert his title to the crown, the earl still
continued firm to the Baliol's interest, and having a great estate in England,
he turned a most implacable enemy to Scotland.

As soon as king Robert had attained the crown, he endeavored to reclaim the
earl of Angus, and bring him over to his party, but all to no purpose, the earl
being entirely devoted to the English interest; for which king Robert deprived
him of his estate and honors in Scotland, and annexed them to the crown, anno
1307, where they remained, till king David bestowed them upon sir John Stuart
of Bonkill, anno 1330, as will be shown hereafter.

This earl had been long in great favor with king Edward I. and was called by
him to the parliament as a baron of England, Hist. of the extinct peer^ of
England, etc.
anno 1295; and he and his posterity, as long as the family subsisted,
continued to sit in the English parliament, though they still retained the
title of earls of Angus.

He did not long survive his forfeiture; but dying anno 1307, Ibidem.
was succeeded in his great estate in England by his son,

IX. ROBERT, third earl of Angus, who, in his father's lifetime, was engaged in
the wars of Scotland; Rymer, tom. III. p. 94* ad ann. 1308.
after which he was joined in commission with William lord Ross of Hamlake, and
Henry lord Beaumont, in the lieutenancy of Scotland.

He sat in the parliament of England from the second of Edward II. anno 1308,
Hist. of the extinct peers, etc.
to the eighteenth inclusive, anno 1326, under the same title, as before
observed.

He left issue two sons.

1. Gilbert.

2. Thomas, who was afterward earl of Angus.

He died about the year 1332, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. GILBERT, fourth earl of Angus, who was one of the sureties for the English
in a treaty with the Scots, Rymer, tom. IV. p. 566.
anno 1333; was very active in the wars against the Scots, and was joined in
commission with Henry lord Percy, Ib. tom. V. p. 177.
and Ralf lord Nevell, to treat of a peace with that nation, in the reign of
Edward III. anno 1340.

He was one of the chief commanders of the English army at the battle of
Durham, anno 1346; and had often the guardianship of the marches.

In 1353, Ib. p. 787.
he was one of the commissioners appointed by the king of England to treat with
the Scots about king David's ransom.

He was summoned to, and sat in the parliament of England, from the sixth of
Edward III. to the fourth of Richard II. anno 1381, Hist. of the extinct peers,
etc.
in which year he died, without issue, and was succeeded by his brother,

X. THOMAS, fifth earl of Angus, who was possessed of the property of
Harbottle, and left issue two sons. Ibidem.


1. Thomas.

2. Sir Robert, of whom afterward.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. THOMAS, sixth earl of Angus, of whom we have nothing memorable, but that
he was father of

XII. GILBERT, seventh earl of Angus, called by some historians earl of Kyme,
Ibidem.
who, in the reign of king Henry V. was one of the chief commanders of that
king's army in France, where he was slain anno 1419, leaving no male issue.

He was succeeded by four daughters, who were heirs-portioners to the greatest
part of his estate.

But his uncle, and heir-male,

XI. Sir ROBERT, Ibidem.
got possession of the lordships of Riddesdale and Kyme; and was made a knight
of the garter.

But he died without issue, in the 15th year of Henry VI. 1437, which ended the
male line of the Umfravilles earls of Angus, Ibidem.
whereby the barony and all their titles of honor became extinct.

ARMS.
Azure, a cinquefoil, within an orle of eight cross crosslets, or.

STUART Earl of ANGUS.
THE next who enjoyed the title of ANGUS in Scotland, after the forfeiture of
earl Gilbert de Umsraville, anno 1307, was sir John Stewart of Bonkill, son of
sir Alexander Stuart of Bonkill, son of sir John Stewart of Bonkill,
Dalrymple's collections.
who was second son of Alexander lord high steward of Scotland, Hist. of the
royal family.
who died anno 1283, and brother of James, lord high steward of Scotland,
grandfather of king Robert II.

I. This sir JOHN STUART of Bonkill was created earl of Angus by king David
Bruce at the solemnity of his coronation, Ibidem.
anno 1330.

He married Margaret, ^hart. pe^^s ducem (...) Douglas.
daughter of sir Alexander Abernethy, knight, by whom he had a son,

Thomas, his heir.

He was killed at the battle of Halidonhill, anno 1333, and succeeded by his
son,

II. THOMAS, second earl of Angus, of the name of Stuart, Rymer, tom. VI. p.
33, 36, 44, 66, etc.
a man of good parts, and often employed to treat with the English, anno 1356
and 1357.

He married Margaret, Chart. in archivis regis Dav. No. 51^ ad ann. 1363.
daughter of sir William Sinclair of Roslin, by whom he had a son,

Thomas, his heir, -- and two daughters,

1. Lady Margaret, married, 1st, to Thomas earl of Mar, to whom she had no
issue: 2dly, Chart. penes ducem de Douglas.
to William earl of Douglas, to whom she had a son, George, of whom afterward.

Second daughter married to sir Alexander Hamilton of Innerwick.

He was succeeded by his only son,

III. THOMAS, third earl of Angus, who married Margaret, daughter and
co-heiress of Donald earl of Mar, but died without issue, anno 1377, whereby
his estate and honors devolved upon his nephew,

George, son of his eldest sister Margaret, and the earl of Douglas before
noticed, Chart. pen. ducem de Douglas.
who, in right of his mother, succeeded to the earldom, and was the first earl
of Angus of the name of Douglas.

He married princess Mary, Original contract, penes ^undem.
daughter of king Robert III. anno 1397, of whom the duke of Douglas is
lineally descended. Vide title Duke of Douglas.

ARMS.
A fess cheque azure and argent, surmounted of a bend sable, charged with three
buckles or.

MURRAY Earl of ANNANDALE.
THE first of this noble family we find upon record, is,

I. Sir WILLIAM MURRAY, knight, who flourished in the reign of king Alexander
III. and was forced, with many others of his countrymen, Prynne's collections,
v. III.
to swear fealty to king Edward I. of England, anno 1296.

He was said to have been descended of the ancient Murrays of Duffus, and
married Isabel, sister of that great patriot Thomas Randolph earl of Murray, by
whom he had two sons.

1. William.

2. Patrick, who is witness to his brother's charter, hereafter narrated.

Sir William lived some time after the year 1300, and was succeeded by his
eldest son,

II. WILLIAM, who got a charter from his uncle Thomas Randolph earl of Murray,
"To William of Murray his nephew, son of sir William Murray, knight, etc. of
the lands and barony of Cumlangum, Ryvel, etc. with their pertinents, lying in
the lordship of Annandale;" to which his brother Patrick, dominus Willie^^nus
de Carlyle, Roger de Kirkpatrick, Umfred de Bosco, John de Johnston, Gilbert de
Johnston his son, Chart. penes vicecom. de Stormont.
etc. are witnesses. This charter is without date, but must have been before
1331, in which year the earl of Murray died.

He was father of

III. GEORGE MURRAY, Mill's collections, penes Macfarlane.
who succeeded him in the lands of Cumlangum, etc. and left issue a son and
successor,

IV. Sir ADAM MURRAY, the first of this family we find designed by the title of
Cockpool, Ibidem.
who made a considerable figure in Scotland in the reigns of king Robert II.
and III.

He was succeeded by his son,

V. Sir JOHN de MORAVIA, designed dominus de Cockpool, Ryvel, et Dundrennan.

There is a collation, by Robert archbishop (...) Glasgow, in favors of Mr.
Alexander Murray, to the parsonage of Ryvel, Chart. penes vicecom. de Stormont.
upon the presentation of sir John Murray of Cockpool, dated 10th January 1406.

He married --, daughter of --, by whom he had issue four sons.

1. Sir Thomas.

2. John..

3. Sir Charles. all successively barons of Cockpool.

4. David, Ibidem.
who got a charter from Archibald earl of Douglas, of the lands of Newton,
lying within the regality of Lauder, anno 1421.

Sir John died anno 1410, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. Sir THOMAS MURRAY of Cockpool, who got from Archibald earl of Douglas,
then superior of Galloway and Annandale, Ibidem.
a charter of the lands of Ryvel, etc.

And also from the same earl, Ibidem.
a charter of the lands of Lack, with their pertinents, dated on the feast of
St. Luke, anno 1420.

He married --, daughter of --, by whom he had issue one daughter,

Mary, who resigned all right and title she had to the lands of Ryvel, etc. as
heir of line to her father, Ibidem.
in favors of her cousin, Cuthbert Murray of Cockpool, the heir-male, anno
1452.

Sir Thomas had six natural sons, viz. Gavin, Charles, Lancelot, Florido,
Herbert, and John Murrays, Ibidem.
all mentioned in a charter of the earl of Douglas to sir Thomas, of the lands
of Ardbigland, anno 1421.

Sir Thomas dying without lawful issue male, anno 1423, was succeeded by his
brother,

VI. JOHN MURRAY of Cockpool, who got an instrument of seisin of the lands of
Rampatrick, Ibidem.
etc. upon a precept from the chancery, dated 14th July 1424.

He died without issue before the year 1438, and was succeeded by his brother,

VI. Sir CHARLES MURRAY of Cockpool, who, Ibidem.
in his brother's lifetime, got a charter from Archibald earl of Douglas, of
the lands of Ardbigland, etc. dated 29th Nov. 1421.

Also an instrument of seisin, in favors o^ sir Charles Murray of Cockpool,
Chart. penes vicecom. de Stormont.
of the lands of Ryvel, etc. dated the last day of November, 1438.

He had issue a son,

Cuthbert, his heir.

He is also said to have had another son, John, Chart. and seisin, penes J.
Murray de Murrayquhat.
whose son, Patrick Murray, got a charter, from Alexander duke of Albany; of
the lands of Murrayquhat, with a seisin following thereon, in favors of the
said Patriek. The seisin is dated 29th April 1470; and of this Patrick, John
Murray of Murrayquhat, Esquire; is lineally descended.

He died anno 1439, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. CUTHBERT MURRAY of Cockpool, who was served heir to his father sir
Charles, Ibidem.
by a brieve out of the chancery, dated 3d of May 1440.

He was a man of good parts, and was employed in several negotiations in the
reigns of king James I. Rymer's faed. Angl.
and II.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of -- lord Borthwick, by whom he had a son and
successor,

VIII. Sir CHARLES MURRAY of Cockpool, Chart. penes vicecom. de Stormont.
who got a charter, under the great seal, of the lands of Howelset, etc. dated
10th Jannary 1449.

Also a charter of the lands of Ryvel, Ibidem.
etc. which were resigned to him by his cousin Mary, as before observed, dated
22d April 1452.

He got likewise charters, Chart. in pub. archiv. inter annum 1450 and 1455.
under the great seal, of the lands of Bread-chappel, and a great many others,
all to be found in our public records.

And being a man of solid understanding and knowledge, Rymer, tom. XI. p. 397.
he was appointed one of the commissioners to treat of a peace with the
English, Ibid. p. 434.
anno 1457; and was also made warden of the marches, anno 1459.

He died anno 1469, leaving issue a son,

IX. CUTHBERT MURRAY of Cockpool, who succeeded him. In his father's lifetime
he got a charter of the lands of Slaquhat in the barony of Cockpool, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
anno 1459.

He was served heir to his father the last day of December 1470. Seisin, penes
vicecom. de Stormont.


There are two instruments of seisin, in favors of Cuthbert Murray of
Cockpool, Ibidem.
of the lands of Ryvel, Howelset, etc. dated in December 1474.

He died anno 1493, leaving issue, by Mariota Menzies his spouse, daughter of
the lord of Weem, a son,

Sir John, who succeeded him.

It is said he had also another son, father of John Murray, Chart. in pub.
archiv. ad ann. 1518.
who got a charter, under the great seal, of the lands of Broughton, and was
ancestor of the Murrays of Broughton.

X. Sir JOHN MURRAY of Cockpool was served and retoured heir to his father,
Seisin, penes vicecom. de Stormont.
in the lands of Cockpool, Ryvel, Rampatrick, etc. all lying in the stewartry
of Annandale, 17th July 1494.

He got a charter, Chart. in pub. archiv.
under the great seal, Johanni Murray de Cockpool, militi, terrarum de
Cockpool, etc. dated anno 1507.

Afterward he got his whole estate erected into one free barony, Ibidem.
and Ryvel into a burgh of barony, by a charter under the great seal, dated
anno 1509.

He left issue a son,

Cuthbert, -- and a daughter,

Blanch Murray, Ibid. ad annum 1525.
married to John Carruthers of Holmonds, an ancient family of Annandale.

He died anno 1526, and was succeeded by his son,

XI. CUTHBERT MURRAY of Cockpool, who, Ibidem.
in his father's lifetime, got a charter, under the great seal, Cuthberto
Murray, filio et haeredi apparenti Johannis Murray de Cockpool militis, et
Janetae Jarden suae sponsae, of several lands lying in the Stewartry of
Annandale, etc. dated 4th January 1516.

He got also a disposition from his father, Ibidem.
to several other lands, 5th June 1525.

By the said Janet Jarden, a daughter of Applegirth, he left issue a son,

Sir Charles, -- and two daughters.

1. Elizabeth, married to Robert lord Crichton of Sanquhar.

2. Agnes, Ibid. ad annum 1538.
married to Simon Carruthers of Mouswald, an ancient family in the shire of
Dumfries.

He died in the year 1552, and was succeeded by his son,

XII. Sir CHARLES MURRAY of Cockpool, Rymer, tom, XV. p. 326.
who was one of the guarantees of a treaty with the English, anno 1552, and was
a zealous promoter of the reformation.

He got a charter from queen Mary, Chart. in pub. archiv. Carolo Murray de
Cockpool militi.
terrarum dominicalium de Mouswald, etc. dated anno 1564.

He was infest in a great many lands, which appears from several seisins, viz.
one in November 1563, In archivis vicecomitis de Stormont.
another in May 1564, a third in September that same year, a fourth in the
1581, etc.

He married Margaret, daughter of Hugh lord Somerville, by whom he had seven
sons and one daughter.

1. Cuthbert, who got from king James IV. In archivis vicecomitis de Stormont.
a charter of the lands of Northfield anno 1589, wherein he is designed eldest
son of sir Charles.

Also a charter of several lands about Annan, Chart. inpub. archiv.
anno 1590; but he died that same year without issue.

2. Sir James, who succeeded his father.

3. Sir George, who was groom of the bedchamber to king James VI. at whose
court he married an English lady of a considerable fortune; but having no
issue, he bequeathed his estate to his youngest brother John, Testament, penes
J. Murray de Murrayquhat.
afterward earl of Annandale, anno 1606, and died soon thereafter.

4. Charles, who married --, daughter of John Johnston of Newby, by whom he had
a daughter, Chart. penes vicecom. de Stormont.
Agnes, married to -- Lindsay of Rascarrol, but died before his elder brother,
anno 1619.

5. Sir David, designed of Clonzaird, Ibidem.
who died without issue before 1621.

6. Sir Richard, who succeeded his brother sir James.

7. John, created earl of Annandale, of whom hereafter.

His daughter, Jean, was married to John Maxwell of Kirkhouse, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
and was mother of -- earl of Dirleton.

Sir Charles died anno 1605, and was succeeded by his son,

XIII. Sir JAMES MURRAY of Cockpool, who was infest in a great many lands
before his father's death.

He got a charter from James Carruthers of S^ariggs, Chart. penes vicecom. de
Stormont.
"To James Murray appearand of Cockpool, of the half merk land of S^ariggs,"
anno 1590.

He got also a seisin of some other lands in September 1596, Ibidem.
etc. and was served and retoured heir to his father on 16th November 1605.

There is likewise a seisin, Ibidem.
in favors of "Sir James Murray of Cockpool, brother-german and nearest heir
to Cuthbert Murray, son and heir apparent to the deceast sir Charles, etc."
dated 5th September 1606.

He afterward got charters under the great seal, of a great many lands, viz.
one in 1607, another in 1610, a third in 1617, etc.

He also got several charters from king James VI. Chart. in pub. archiv. inter
ann. 1606. and. 1616.
domino Jacobo Murray de Cockpule militi, of the lands of Seariggs,
salmon-fishing in Annan, etc. etc. etc.

He married Janet, daughter of sir William Douglas of Drumlanrig, ancestor of
the duke of Queensberry, by whom he had issue three daughters,

1. Margaret, Chart. pen^^ vicecom. (...) Stormont.
married to sir Robert Grierson younger of Lag, to whom she had one son, sir
John Grierson of Lag.

As this sir John had no sons, his eldest daughter, Nicholas, was married to
David Scot of Scotstarvit, who had issue only one daughter, Marjory, by whose
marriage with David 5th viscount Stormont, the Murrays of Cockpool, earls of
Annandale, are lineally represented in the person of the present lord Stormont.

2. Elizabeth, Ibidem.
married, 1st, to John Grierson of Capenoch: 2dly, to William Grierson of
Bargarton.

3. Marian, Ibidem.
married to John Murray of Broughton, Esquire; sir Richard, her uncle, being the
party contracter for her at her marriage, anno 1630.

The three ladies, Margaret, Elizabeth, and Marian, above named, with consent
of their mother dame Janet Douglas, submitted to their uncle, sir John Murray
of Lochmaben, (afterward earl of Annandale) all their title to the estate of
Cockpool, as heirs of line to sir James, 29th June 1621. His brother sir
Richard, as heir-male, claimed the estate, in preference to the daughters of
sir James; Minutes of parliament.
but sir John determined the right to the estate in favors of the heir-male.

Sir James died without male-issue, anno 1620* Whereupon

XIII. Sir RICHARD MURRAY of Cock-pool got a precept forth of the Chancery,
Chart. penes vicecom. de Stormont.
for infefting him as nearest heir-male to the deceast sir James, his
brother-german, etc. dated 2d April 1621.

He was created a baronet by king Charles I. from whom he got a charter under
the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
" Domino Ricardo Murray, baronetto de Cockpool, terrarum et baroniae de
Cockpool, infra regionem Novae Scotiae in America," dated anno 1626.

He got also a charter terrarum baroniae de Lockerbic, Ibidem:
Hutton, Hoddam, etc. dated in 1635.

He died without issue in 1636, and was succeeded by his brother,

XIII. JOHN, Ib. et Chart. penes vicecom. de Stormont.
who was served heir-male and of tailie to sir Richard Murray of Cockpool, his
brother-german, 29th August 1637.

He was first designed by the title of Lochmaben, then of Dundrenan, Chart. in
pub. archiv^
etc. and got several charters, under the great seal, by both these titles,
before he was made a peer.

He was a man of singular accomplishments, great worth and merit, and in high
favor with king James VI. whom he accompanied into England, anno 1603.

He had the honor of knighthood conferred upon him, was made one of the
gentlemen of the bedchamber, and master of the horse.

And was afterward raised to the dignity of the peerage, art (...) e (...)
suo, ^ad ann. 24.
by the titles of viscount Annan and earl of Annandale, by letters patent, to
the heirs-male of his body, dated 13th March 1624.

He was in no less favor with king Charles I. to whom he was a constant and
steady friend.

He acquired a vast estate, id. inter number 1618 ^1625.
which appears by his charters under the great seal, too numerous to be here
inserted.

He died anno 1640, leaving issue, by Elizabeth his spouse, daughter of sir
John Schaw, knight, one son,

XIV. JAMES, second earl of Annandale, who succeeded him, ^bid. ad ann. ^644.
and got a charter under the great seal, Jacobo comiti de Annandale, of several
lands, etc. He retired into England, where he lived privately all the time of
the civil war.

He succeeded also to the honors of Stormont, according to the entail and
patent of that family, anno 1642.

He married lady Elizabeth Carnegie, daughter of James earl of Southesk; but
dying without issue, in December 1658, the honors of Annandale became extinct,
but those of Stormont devolved upon the next heir-male, according to the patent
and substitution in the entail, etc. Vide title Stormont.

ARMS.
Azure, a crescent between three stars, all within a double tressure,
counter-flowered with flower de lisses argent; and a dexter canton of the
second, charged with a thistle vert, crowned or, as an augmentation.

SUPPORTERS; two lions argent, crowned or.

CREST; an angel with wings proper.

MOTTO; Noctesque diesque praesto.

JOHNSTON Marquis of ANNANDALE.
THE Johnstons were a bold and hardy race of men, always distinguished for
their bravery in repelling the insults of the English borderers, and avenging
the injuries done to their country.

They began to make a figure in Scotland in the reign of king Alexander II. who
succeeded to the crown, anno 1214: soon thereafter they became numerous, and
were possessed of considerable estates in many different counties, which is
sufficiently documented by charters under the great seal in the public register.

There were two families of this surname, who both designed themselves by the
title of Johnston of that ilk, viz. those of Annandale in the south, and
Caskieben in the north; but we cannot pretend to connect them with one another.

Hugo de Johnston was proprietor of lands in East-Lothian, Chartulary of
^oltray in the ^awier's libra^^y.
in the reign of king Alexander II. and was father of

John de Johnston, who made a donation to the monastery of Soltray (pro salute
animae suae of part of his lands in East-Lothian, Ibid. fol. 15.
of which it seems the family of Keith were superiors; for the donation is
confirmed by Robert de Keith, great marishal of Scotland to which dominus
Ricardus de Keith, his brother, Adam de Keith, his uncle, John de Keith, etc.
are witnesses. The confirmation is without ^^te, but appears to have been
before the (...) 1285.

Thomas le Johnston, Gilbert de Johnston, and Wauter Johnston, Prynne's
coll^ct. vol. III.
are all found swe^ring fealty to king Edward 1. of England, inter 1292 et
1296; but we can give no further account of their posterity.

We therefore proceed to deduce the descent of this noble family from their
undoubted ancestor,

I. Sir JOHN de JOHNSTON. He was one of the Scotch barons that were forced to
swear fealty to king Edward I. when he had overrun Scotland, Ibid. p. 657.
anno 1296, and is then designed Johannes de Johnston, Chevalier del comitat,
de Dumfries, etc. The abovenamed Gilbert is thought to have been his brother.

Sir John was father of

II. JOHN de JOHNSTON, who flourished in the reign of king Robert Bruce, Charta
penes vicecom^^ de Stormont.
and is particularly mentioned in a charter of Thomas Ranulph, earl of Murray,
of the lands and barony of Cumlangum, which he gave to his nephew Willi^m de
Moravia, etc. The charter must have been granted before 1331, in which ye^r the
earl died.

He lest issue a son and successor,

III. GILBERT de JOHNSTON, who is witness in the same charter with his father
to William de Moravia, Charta penes vicecom. de Stormont.
and dying about the year 1360, was succeeded by his son,

IV. Sir JOHN de JOHNSTON, who made a great figure in the reigns of king David
Bruce and king Robert II.

He engaged and defeated an army of the English, Rymer, Abercrombie, vol. II.
p. 172.
who had invaded Scotland, anno 1370.

He was also one of the guardians of the west marches, anno 1371, Fordun, vol.
II. p. 385.
where he had often an opportunity of exerting his magnanimity and courage
against the English borderers, and was then designed dominus de Johnston.

He died about the year 1382 or 1383, and left issue a son,

V. Sir JOHN JOHNSTON, designed dominus de eodem, miles, who succeeded him.

About this time there were ^o^ty thousand francs sent by the king of France,
Rymer, tom. VII. p. 485.
to be divided amongst the Scotch nobility, his faithful allies, of which sir
John Johnston got three hundred, anno 1385.

This sir John, together with sir John Carlyle, and sir William Stuart of
Castlemilk, were appointed by the earl of Douglas, then chief warden of the
marches, Ib. tom. VIII. p. 57.
sureties for the keeping of a truce with the English, anno 1398.

And dying about the year 1420, was succeeded by his son,

VI. Sir ADAM JOHNSTON, dominus de eodem, who raised his vassals and followers,
joined the Scotch army under the command of the brave earl of Ormond, and
behaved gallantly against the English at the battle of Sark, Abercrombie, vol.
II. p. 340.
where the Scots obtained a considerable victory.

He was afterward very instrumental in suppressing the rebellion of the earls
of Douglas, Crawfurd's peerage, and Home's hist. of Douglas.
for which king James II. made him a grant of the lands of Peddinane in
Lanarkshire, etc.

Mr. Crawfurd says, that sir Adam gave these lands to his cousin Herbert de
Johnston, Crawfurd's peerage.
ancestor of the Johnstons of Westerhall.

There is an instrument of saisin of the twenty merk land of Peddinane, granted
to Matthew Johnston, upon a precept from the chancery, Sasa penes comitem de
Hyndford.
proceeding upon a charter from king James II. dated 19th November 1455.

We find that Herbert de Johnston got several lands in the barony of
Kirkmichael, Haddington's collections.
in Dumfries-shire, from the earl of Crawfurd, for liberating his person out of
the hands of James earl of Douglas, who had taken him captive, believing he
intended to desert his interest, and espouse the king's, anno 1462.

This Herbert was also proprietor of some lands in the barony of Bothwel, which
he resigned to James lord Hamilton, in exchange for the lands of Gladstanes,
Charta ducem ^ milton.
etc. by a charter dated 15th May 1463.

We now return to

Sir Adam, who was often one of the guarantees of treaties of peace with the
English, Rymer, XI. p. 300, 32^.
anno 1449, 1451, etc.

What family his first wife was of, we have not been able to discover, but by
her he had a son,

John, his heir.

He married, Sir Rich ^Maitland hist. of t^^ mily of S^ ad ann. 1.
2dly, lady Janet Dunbar daughter of George earl of March, widow of John lord
Seton, by whom he had another son,

Sir Gilbert Johnston, who married Agnes, daughter and sole heiress of sir
Alexander Elphingston of that ilk, Crawfur^ notes on chanan.
with whom he got the lands and barony of Elphingston. He afterward got a
charter of the lands of Drumry, Chart. in (...) archiv.
" Gilberto de Johnston, de Elphingston, etc. anno 1471," Rymer, (...) 1 XII.
p. 2.
and was one of the guarantees of a treaty of peace with the English, anno 1484.

Sir Adam died anno 1455, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. Sir JOHN JOHNSTON, dominus de eodem, Rymer, t^ XI. p. 3^
who was one of the conservators of the peace with England, anno 1457.

He was also appointed one of the wardens of the marches, and guarantees of a
truce, anno 1459, Ib. p. 434*
and always acted with vigor and intrepidity against the enemies of his
country.

He married Mary, daughter of John lord Maxwell, ancestor of the earls of
Nithsdale, by whom he had two sons.

1. James, his heir.

2. John, Chart. in (...) archiv. of (...) family of An^nandale.
who got from his father the five merk lands of Wamfry, upon the 2d November
1476, which, upon the failure of his issue, returned to the family.

He died before the year 1484, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. JAMES JOHNSTON, dominus de codem, who, as heir to his father, was insest
in the lands of Johnston, Saisin ibid.
anno 1484.

He was also a man of singular resolution, and behaved with particular conduct
and courage at the battle of Kirkconnel, Abercrombi^* vol. II. p. 458.
where he and the lord of Cockpool had the chief command of the Scotch army,
anno 1484.

He left issue a son and successor,

IX. ADAM JOHNSTON, dominus de eodem, who, in his saisin of the lands of
Johnston, is designed son and heir of James Johnston of that ilk, (...) in
(...) fami^^ An^^le.
24th May 1488.

He died anno 1508, having married --, daughter of --, by whom he had a son,

X. JAMES JOHNSTON, dominus de eodem, who succeeded him, (...) in pub. (...).
and got a charter, under the great seal; of the lands of Johnston, etc.
wherein he is designed son and heir of Adam Johnston of that ilk, dated 2d
November 1509.

He got charters from king James V. (...).
of a great many other lands; and, like many of his brave ancestors, was a
strenuous defender of the liberties of our country, and was in great favor
both with king James IV. and V.

He married --, daughter of --, by whom he had issue four sons.

1. John, his heir.

2. Robert.

3. Adam Johnston of Cory.

4. James, ancestor of the Johnstons of Wamfry, ^tract from (...) commis^^^ry
court ^^^ks of ^^mfries.
which is instructed by an agreement betwixt John Johnston of that ilk, and
James Johnston of Wamfry, dated the 12th March 1550, wherein this James is
designed brother-german to the said John.

He died anno 1528, or 1529, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. JOHN JOHNSTON of that ilk, in whose favors there is a seisin of the lands
of Johnston, ^^sina in ^^chiv. familae de An^ndale.
etc. proceeding upon a precept from the chancery, for infefting him as heir
served and retoured to the deceast James Johnston of that ilk, his father,
dated the last of February 1542.

On 2d March thereafter, he resigned his lands of Johnston, in favors of James
his eldest son and apparent heir, ^hart. in ^ub. archiv.
reserving to himself the liferent, and a reasonable tierce to Elizabeth Jardin
his spouse, upon which there passed a charter under the great seal, anno 1543.

He got charters, Ibidem.
under the great seal, of many other lands, too numerous to be here inserted.

He, like his ancestors, was a man of courage, and effectually checked the
inroads of the borderers, which were very frequent in his time.

He signalized himself particularly at the battle of Pinki^, Rymer, tom. XV. p.
326.
anno 1547; and was afterward one of the commissioners appointed to settle the
differences about the disputed lands on the borders, anno 1552.

He married, 1st, Elizabeth, daughter of -- Jardin of Applegirth, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
by whom he had two sons and two daughters.

1. James.

2. Robert, whose son and heir was designed Robert Johnston of Stapleton, Ib.
and writs of the family of Annandale.
who was father of Robert Johnston of Raecleugh, tutor-in-law to James Johnston
of that ilk, anno 1609.

1. Daughter, Dorothea, married to John Maitland of Auchincastle.

2. Margaret, Contract, penes dom. Irvin de Bonshaw, ad annum 1566.
married to Christopher Irving, Esquire; son and apparent heir of Edward Irving of
Bonshaw, Esquire; in Dumfriesshire.

He married, 2dly, Nicolas, daughter of sir James Douglas of Drumlanrig, by
whom he had two sons.

The eldest, Chart. in pub. archiv. ad ann. 1550.
named also James, designed of Lochwood-house.

2. John Johnston of Neist.

He died about the year 1568.

XII. JAMES, Ibidem.
first son and apparent heir of John Johnston of that ilk, married Margaret,
daughter of sir John Hamilton of Samuelton, by whom he had a son,

John, his heir, -- and two daughters.

1. Margaret, married to sir Robert Douglas of Cashogle.

2. Jean, married to William Livingston of Jerviswood.

He died before his father, about the year 1559, and was succeeded by his son,

XIII. JOHN, who succeeded also to his grandfather, Ib. inter annum 1558, and
1582.
anno 1568.

He got charters, under the great seal, of many lands and baronies, in all
which he is designed dominus de eodem.

He was likeways a man of spirit and courage, and of great prudence and
sagacity. Chart. penes marchion. de Annandale.
He was very active in repelling the inroads of the borderers, was appointed
warden of the west marches, and justice general, by king James VI. anno 1579.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir William Scot of Buccleugh, by whom he had
a son,

Sir James, -- and two daughters,

1. Elizabeth, married to Alexander Jardin; younger of Applegirth.

2. Grizel, married to sir Robert Maxwell of Orchardtoun.

He died anno 1586, and was succeeded by his only son,

XIV. Sir JAMES JOHNSTON, who was heir served and retoured to John Johnston of
that ilk, Ibidem.
his father, in the baronies of Johnston, etc. 27th August 1588, and obtained
charters from king James VI. Chart. in pub. archiv. inter ann. 1600. and 1608.
of a great many lands, in which he is designed Jacobus dominus de Johnston,
miles, etc.

He was a man of good parts, and a particular favorite of king James VI. who
conferred the honor of knighthood upon him at the solemnity of the queen's
coronation, anno 1590. Rymer, tom. XVI. p. 60.
He was appointed warden of the west marches anno 1596, in which office he
continued, till he was unhappily killed in a family quarrel, Spottiswood's
history.
by the lord Maxwel, on 6th April 1608.

By Sarah his wife, daughter of John lord Herries, he left issue a son and
successor,

XV. JAMES, (afterward earl of Hartfiel) who got a charter, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
under the great seal, of the lands of Moffatdale, Evandale, etc. anno 1628.

He was a man of great loyalty and integrity, and was in high favor with king
Charles I. Diploma ib.
who raised him to the dignity of the peerage, by the title of lord Johnston of
Lochwood, by patent to his heirs-male, 20th of June 1633, Ibidem.
and created him earl of Hartfiel, by patent to his heirs male, dated 18th
March 1643.

He adhered firmly to the interest of the royal family during all the time of
the civil war, for which he was imprisoned, had his estate sequestrate, and
suffered many other hardships on account of his loyalty.

He married, 1st, lady Margaret Douglas, eldest daughter of William earl of
Queensberry, by whom he had a son,

James, his heir, -- and three daughters.

1. Lady Mary, married, 1st, to sir George Graham of Netherby, by whom she had
sir Richard Graham, first viscount Preston, and several other sons. She
married, 2dly, sir George Fletcher of Huttonhall in Cumberland, but to him she
had no issue.

2. Lady Janet, married to sir William Murray of Stenhope.

3. Lady Margaret, married to sir Robert Dalziel of Glenae.

He married, 2dly, Elizabeth, daughter of sir Samuel Johnston of Elphingston,
baronet. And, 3dly, lady Margaret Hamilton, daughter of Thomas earl of
Haddington, but left no surviving issue by either.

He died in April 1653, and was succeeded by his only son,

XVI. JAMES, second earl of Hartfiel, who, upon the restoration of king Charles
II. was constituted one of the lords of his privy council, and, with his
majesty's approbation, exchanged the title of Hartsiel for that of Annandale;
Diploma in pub. archiv. haeredibus masculis seu ^emellis, etc.
upon which he got a new patent, with the former precedence, " Jacobo comiti de
Annandale et Hartfiel, vicecomiti de Annand, domino Johnston de Lochwood,
Lochmaben, Mos^atdale, Evandale, etc" to his heirs whatsoever, male or female,
dated 13th February 1661.

He got also a charter, under the great seal, Ibid. haeredibus masculis, seu
femellis, sine divisione, etc.
of his whole lands, erecting the same into a lordship, earldom, and regality,
"To him, and his heirs whatsoever," containing a grant of the office of
hereditary constable of the castle of Lochmaben, dated 3d April 1662.

He had also another grant of the office of hereditary steward of the stewartry
of Annandale, etc.

He married lady Henriet, daughter of William marquis of Douglas, by lady Mary
Gordon, his second wife, daughter of George marquis of Huntly, by whom he had
issue two sons and three daughters.

1. William, his heir.

2. John Johnston, Esquire;

1. Daughter, lady Mary, married to William earl of Crawfurd.

2. Lady Margaret, married to sir James Montgomery of Skelmorly.

3. Lady Henriet, married to sir John Carmichael of Bonnytoun.

He died on 7th July 1672, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVII. WILLIAM, second earl of Annandale, and third of Hartfiel, who was
appointed one of the lords of the privy council to king William, one of the
commissioners of the treasury, and president of the parliament of Scotland,
anno 1695, in which high office he acquitted himself to the general
satisfaction, by the candid and distinct manner in which he resumed the
debates. He was further dignified with the title of marquis of Annandale,
Haeredibus suis masculis quibuscunque omni tempore futuro. Registrate 1^t July
1701.
by letters patent to him and his heirs-male whatsover, dated 24th June 1701,
and that same year was appointed high commissioner to the general assembly of
the kirk of Scotland.

He was made president of the council by queen Anne, one of the commissioners
of the treasury, one of the extraordinary lords of session, conjunct secretary
of state, knight of the thistle, anno 1704, and high commissioner to the
general assembly of the kirk of Scotland, anno 1705.

In the parliament 1706, he opposed the union with all his interest, and made
several speeches and protests against it, containing the reason of his dissent;
all which were entered in the records of parliament.

However, after the union was concluded, he was chosen one of the sixteen peers
to represent Scotland in the first British parliament; was re-elected anno
1710, and appointed her majesty's high commissioner to the kirk of Scotland,
anno 1711.

He was also appointed one of the privy council to king George I. keeper of the
privy seal; and was again elected one of the sixteen peers for Scotland, anno
1715.

He married, 1st, Sophia, daughter and heiress of John Fairholm of Craigiehall,
by whom he had two sons and one daughter.

1. James, his heir.

2. Lord William, who died unmarried.

Lady Henrietta, his daughter, was married to Charles earl of Hopetoun.

He married, 2dly, Charlotte, daughter of John Venden-Benpeden of Westminster,
Esquire; by whom he had two sons.

1. Lord George, now marquis of Annandale.

2. Lord John, who was elected member of parliament for the burghs of Dumfries,
etc. anno 1721, and died unmarried anno 1742.

The marquis died the 14th January 1721, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVIII. JAMES, second marquis of Annandale; a man of fine parts, and exquisite
taste in the arts and sciences.

He died at Naples unmarried, anno 1730, and was succeeded by his brother,

XVIII. GEORGE, third marquis of Annandale.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st and 4th, argent, a saltire sable, on a chief gules, three
cushions or: 2d and 3d, or, an anchor in pale gules.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter side a lion argent, armed and langued azure, crowned
with an imperial crown or: on the sinister, a horse argent, furnished gules.

CREST; on a wreath a spur erect or, winged argent.

MOTTO; Nunquam non paratus.

ARBUTHNOT Viscount ARBUTHNOT.
ALL our antiquaries agree, that this is a local surname, and was assumed by
the proprietors of the lands and barony of Arbuthnot in the Mearns, when
sirnames began to be used in Scotland.

The first we find upon record, is,

1. HUGO, promiscuously designed de Arbuthnot and Aberbothenoth, Sir George
Mackenzie's baronage of Scotl. M. S. in the lawyers library, Edinburgh.
who, according to a learned author, got possession of the lands of Arbuthnot,
by marrying the daughter of Osbertus Oliphard, sheriff of Mearns, in the reign
of king Malcolm IV. about the year 1160, from whence he assumed his surname.

Ricardus de Aberbothenoth, Chartul. of Arbroath. Ib.
clericus regis, flourished in the reign of king William the lion; but we
cannot connect him with this family.

The said Hugo had a long contest with the bishop of St. Andrews, about the
property of the Kirktown of Arbuthnot, which was not determined in his time.

He was succeeded by his son,

II. DUNCANUS de ABERBOTHENOTH, Original decree penes vicecomitem de
Arbuthnot, insert in Nisbet's appendix, page 87.
who continued his father's contest with the bishop of St. Andrews about the
property of the Kirktown of Arbuthnot, which was at last determined against him
by an assembly of ecclesiastics held at Perth, anno 1206.

He left issue two sons,

1. Hugo, his heir.

2. Alwinus de Arbuthnot, Chartul. of St. Andrews, penes Walterum Macfarlane de
eodem.
who is witness to a donation to the priory of St. Andrews, in the reign of
king Alexander II.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. HUGO, third baron of Aberbothenoth, who is a witness in a charter to the
monastery of Arbroath, together with his father, Chartul. of Arbroath.
therein designed dominus Duncanus de Aberbothenoth, whereby Robertus filius
Warnebaldi, et Rescinda sponsa sua, gave to the monastery of Arbroath, "totum
feodum nostrum in parochia de Fordun, etc."

He left issue a son and successor,

IV. HUGO de ABERBOTHENOTH, who, on account of the flaxen color of his hair,
was designed Hugo le Blond, dominus de Aberbothenoth.

He was a liberal benefactor to the clergy; Larger Chartulary of Arbroath in
the lawyers library, Edin.
witness his donations to the monks of Aberbrothock anno 1282. The original of
one of these donations, still in the family, has this Hugo's seal appended to
it. The impression is a crescent and a star, which, with very little variation,
is at this day the arms of the family.

He died about the end of the thirteenth century, and was buried amongst his
ancestors at the church of Arbuthnot, where there is a statue of him in stone
at full length, still to be seen.

He married a daughter of the ancient and honorable family of the Morvilles,
by whom he had a son, Orig. et increment. familiae Arbuthnoticae penes
vicecomitem de Arbuthnot.


V. DUNCANUS, fifth baron of Aberbothenoth, who succeeded him, and died at his
mansion house of Arbuthnot in December 1314. Orig. et inerement. familiae
Arbuthnoticae.


He was succeeded by his son, another

VI. DUNCANUS, sixth baron of Aberbothenoth, Ibidem.
who survived his father but a short time, and left issue a son and successor,

VII. HUGO de ABERBUTHNOT, who lived in the beginning of the reign of king
David II. Ibidem.
and left a son and successor,

VIII. PHILIPPUS, eighth baron of Arbuthnot, and the first we find designed
dominus ejusdem.

He, like many of his ancestors, was a liberal benefactor to the church and
clergy; witness his large donations fratribus Carmelburgi de Aberdeen, etc. The
original charter, which is still extant, Chart. in archivis regis Dav.
is dated in April 1355, and is afterward confirmed by king David II. anno
1366.

He married, first, -- Keith, daughter of sir William Keith great marishal of
Scotland, but by her he had no male issue.

He married, 2dly, Margaret, daughter of sir James Douglas of Dalkeith, Chart.
penes comitem de Morton.
ancestor of the earl of Morton, by Agnes Dunbar, daughter of the earl of
March; by whom he had a son,

Hugh, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Margaret, married to William lord Monipenny.

IX. HUGH ARBUTHNOT, dominus ejusdem, succeeded. It seems this Hugh, with
several other gentlemen in the shire of Mearns, upon great provocation, had
been accessory to the killing of John Melvil of Glenbervie; Sir George
Mackenzie's baronage, etc.
and, claiming the privileges of the clan Macduff, was assoilzied from the said
slaughter, as being within the ninth degree of kindred to Macduff earl of Fife.

He married Margaret, Orig. et increment. familiae Arbuthnoticae.
daughter of sir Robert Keith, ancestor to the earl marishal, by whom he had

Robert, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Margaret, married to Andrew Menzies, provost of Aberdeen, ancestor of the
family of Pitsoddils.

He lived to a very great age, and dying anno 1446, was succeeded by his son,

X. ROBERT ARBUTHNOT, dominus ejusdem, who married Giles, daughter of sir
Walter Ogilvie of Lentrethan, lord high treasurer of Scotland, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
ancestor of the earl of Airly, by whom he had six sons and one daughter.

1. David, his heir.

2. Hugh Arbuthnot of Balmaquin and Brycklie, which estate he got by marrying
Janet Balmaquin, Ibid. Orig. et increment. familiae Arbuthnoticae.
heiress thereof.

3. Robert Arbuthnot of Banff.

4. Alexander, who died without issue.

5. James. Ibidem.


6. William.

His daughter Catharine was married to sir John Allardice of that ilk. Chart.
penes vicecom. de Arbuthnot.


This Robert died anno 1450, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. DAVID ARBUTHNOT, dominus ejusdem, who made a great figure in the reign of
king James II. and bore a considerable share in all the transactions of his
time.

He was one of the free barons, Large Chart. of Arbroath. page 74.
upon an inquest, for settling the marches of some lands with the abbot and
convent of Arbroath, anno 1460.

He married -- Durham, Chart. penes vicecom. de Arbuthnot.
daughter of -- Durham of Grange, an ancient family in the county of Angus, by
whom he had two sons and three daughters.

1. Robert, his heir.

2. Hugh Arbuthnot, doctor of medicine, who, being a person of great skill and
knowledge in his profession, Ibidem.
was invited over to France, where he settled, married, and had issue.

1. Daughter Elizabeth, Ibidem.
was married to -- Barclay of Gartly, an ancient family in Aberdeenshire.

2 Giles, married to -- Fraser of Doors.

3. Catharine, married to Alexander Graham tutor of Morphy.

He died anno 1470, and was succeeded by his son,

XII. Sir ROBERT ARBUTHNOT, miles, dominus ejusdem, who, being a person of
great loyalty and integrity, was in high favor with their majesty's king James
III. and IV. as appears from the great number of letters he had from both these
monarchs, Nisbet's append. p. 89.
all written with their own hands, and which are still preserved amongst the
archives of the family; copies whereof may be seen at large in Nisbet's
appendix, to which we refer our readers, who wish to see a fuller account of
this family.

He was likewise a man of great prudence, economy and frugality, and made
several considerable new purchases, which he added to his paternal inheritance,
and for all which he got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
in 1487, 1488, 1493, 1494, etc. and recovered the barony of Fiddes, which had
been out of the family above two hundred years.

He sat in the parliament held by king James III. Records of parliament in the
lawyers library.
at Edinburgh, the 29th of January 1487, and is then designed dominus R^bertus
Arbuthnot de codem, etc.

He was one of the gentlemen upon the inquest, in the service of James Wishart
of Pittarrow, anno 1491, and is witness to the earl marishal's charter to his
second son, Haddington's collections.
of the lands of Troup, anno 1493.

He made several donations to the religious, and founded and endowed a
chaplainry at the church of Arbuthnot, Ibid. and Nisbet, p. 90.
pro salute animae suae, et Mariotae Scrimgeour sponsae suae, etc. etc. dated
in 1505, and confirmed by king James IV. the same year.

He married, 1st, a daughter of sir James Wishart of Pittarrow, an ancient
family in the Mearns, by whom he had one only son,

Ambrose, who died in the flower of his age.

He married, 2dly, Mariota, daughter of sir James Scrimgeour of Dudhope,
ancestor of the earl of Dundee, Ibidem.
by whom he had four sons and six daughters.

1. James, his heir.

2. Mr. Robert Arbuthnot.

3. George Arbuthnot, who died in France without issue.

4. Andrew Arbuthnot of Futhes, Chart. in pub. archiv. ad ann. 1553 et 1555.
who got several charters of lands under the great seal, and married Elizabeth,
daughter of Alexander Strachan of Thorntoun, by whom he had, 1st, Robert his
successor; 2d, Mr. Alexander Arbuthnot, principal of the king's college at
Aberdeen, who was an ornament to his country, for his great learning and
knowledge in all the liberal arts and sciences.

1. Daughter, Elizabeth, married to Thomas Fotheringhame of Pourie.

2. Catharine, married, 1st, to -- Auchinleck of that ilk; 2dly, to Gilbert
Turring of Foveran.

3. Christian, married to Alexander Fraser of Doors.

4. Giles, married to Graham of Morphie.

5. Janet, married to Alexander Falconer of Halkerton, ancestor of lord
Halkerton.

6. Mariota, married to James Bisset of Easter Kinneff.

He died in the year 1506, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. JAMES ARBUTHNOT, dominus ejusdem. He got a charter from king James IV.
dated in 1506, Ibidem.
de baronia, castro, et fortalitio de Arbuthnot, etc.

He also got charters of several other lands and got them all erected into one
free barony, anno 1511. Ibidem.


He married lady Jean Stuart, daughter of John earl of Athole, Stuart's hist.
of the royal family, page 172.
by whom he had two sons and one daughter.

1. Robert, his heir.

2. David, who, having devoted himself to the service of the church, was made
parson of Menmure, but was killed at the battle of Pinkie, anno 1547.

His daughter, Isabel, was married, 1st, to -- Ouchterlonie of Kelly; Chart.
penes comitem de Panmure.
and, 2dly, to Robert Maule of Panmure, ancestor to the earls of that family.

He died in the flower of his age, anno 1521, and was succeeded by his eldest
son,

XIV. ROBERT ARBUTHNOT, dominus ejusdem, a man of great worth and merit, and of
high character in the reigns of king James V. and queen Mary. Chart. in pub.
archiv. inter 1550 and^ 1570.
He had a very considerable estate, which appears by his charters, under the
great seal, of several lands and baronies too numerous to be here inserted.

He married, 1st, a daughter of -- Erskine of Dun, an ancient family in the
shire of Forfar, by whom he had no surviving issue. He married, 2dly, lady
Christian Keith, daughter of Robert lord Keith, Ibidem.
eldest son and heir to William earl marishal, by whom he had four sons and
four daughters.

1. Andrew, his heir.

2. John Arbuthnot of Mandynes.

3. Alexander Arbuthnot of Pitcarles.

4. Robert, who dedicated himself to the service of the church, was parson of
Arbuthnot, and a man of great piety and learning.

1. Daughter, was married to -- Clephan of Carslogie.

2. --, married to -- Straiton of Laurieston.

3. --, married to -- Seymour of Balyordie.

4. --, married to -- Strachan of Brighton.

Robert of that ilk married, Ibidem.
3dly, Helen, daughter of -- Clephan of Carslogie, an ancient family in the
shire of Fife, by whom he had three sons and four daughters.

1. David Arbuthnot of Findowrie.

2. James Arbuthnot of Blackstoun.

3. Hugh Arbuthnot of Auchterforfar.

1. Daughter, --, was married to -- Mortimer of Craigievar, in Aberdeenshire.

2. --, married to -- Ogilvie of Balfour, in the county of Forfar.

3. --, married to -- Lindsay of Barnyards.

4. --, married to -- Ogilvy of Balnaboth.

He died in October 1579, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. ANDREW ARBUTHNOT, dominus ejusdem, who was a man of great prudence and
industry, and made several new acquisitions to his estate, Ibidem.
even in his father's lifetime, viz. the baronies of Arrat, Pitforthy, etc.
etc. for all which he got charters under the great seal, anno 1553, etc. etc.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of sir Alexander Carnegie of Kinnaird, Chart.
in pub. archiv.
ancestor of the earl of Southesk, by whom he had three sons and a daughter.

1. Sir Robert, his heir.

2. James Arbuthnot of Arrat, who married a daughter of -- Livingstone of
Dunipace, by whom he had two sons, viz. sir Robert Arbuthnot of Arrat, who
succeeded to the estate of Arbuthnot upon his uncle's decease, and James, tutor
of Arbuthnot.

3. Patrick Arbuthnot of Chappletoun.

His daughter, Elizabeth, was married to -- Fraser of Doors.

He died in an advanced age, anno 1606, and was succeeded by his son,

XVI. Sir ROBERT ARBUTHNOT of that ilk, who was a man of great parts, both
natural and acquired; and that his royal master had a just notion of his
integrity and abilities, The original, penes vicecom. de Arbuthnot, Copy 112.
and Nisbet's appendix, p. 92.
appears from his majesty's letter to him, (still extant) in relation to the
composing of differences at a general convention, which the king had appointed
to meet at Lithgow in July 1608.

He married lady Mary Keith, daughter of William lord Keith, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
son and heir apparent of William earl marishal, by Elizabeth his wife,
daughter of George earl of Errol, but dying without issue anno 1615, the estate
of Arbuthnot develved upon his nephew,

XVII. Sir ROBERT ARBUTHNOT of that ilk, who was eldest son of his brother
James Arbuthnot of Arrat, as before noticed. He, having got a liberal education
both at home and abroad, by the care of his uncle, returned from his travels
with the character of a polite and accomplished gentleman, and made a very
considerable figure in several parliaments of king James VI. and king Charles I.

He married, 1st, lady Margaret Keith, daughter of George earl marishal, Ibidem.
but she dying soon thereafter, by her he had no issue.

He married, 2dly, a daughter of Simon lord Lovat, by Jean his wife, daughter
of James lord Down, by whom he had four sons and three daughters.

1. Sir Robert, afterward viscount of Arbuthnot.

2. Andrew Arbuthnot of Fiddes.

3. Alexander, a young gentleman of great courage and loyalty, who was killed
at the battle of Dumbar, anno 1650.

4. Simon Arbuthnot of Catterlin.

1. Daughter, Jean, married to sir Alexander Burnet of Leyes.

2. Margaret, married to sir Alexander Carnegie of Pittarrow.

3. Janet, married to William Keith of Hallgreen.

He died in 1633, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVIII. Sir ROBERT ARBUTHNOT miles, dominus ejusdem. Ibidem.
He always adhered firmly to the interest of his majesty king Charles I. who,
for his faithful services, first conferred the honor of knighthood upon him,
and then raised him to the dignity of the peerage, by the titles of viscount of
Arbuthnot, Register of patents in the Chancery.
and lord Innerbervie, by letters patent to his heirsmale, dated 16th November
1641.

He married, 1st, lady Marjory Carnegie, daughter of David earl of Southesk, by
whom he had a son,

Robert, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Margaret, married to sir John Forbes of Monimusk in Aberdeenshire.

He married, 2dly, Catharine, daughter of Hugh lord Lovat, by whom he had
another son, and a daughter.

His son, Alexander Arbuthnot of Knox, married Jean, daughter of Patrick Scot
of Rossie, Esquire, by whom he had a son and successor,

Alexander Arbuthnot of Knox, one of the commissioners of excise in the reign
of king George II. who married Janet, daughter of John Ronald of Larnie, Esquire;
by whom he had two sons,

1. Robert, married to Elizabeth, daughter of John Riddle of Grange, Esquire; by
whom he has three sons, Alexander, John, and Robert.

2. Archibald, married to Margaret Lees, by whom he has two sons, Romeo and
Archibald.

The viscount's daughter, Anne, married William Forbes of Ludquhairn, in
Aberdeenshire.

He died in the year 1659, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIX. ROBERT, second viscount of Arbuthnot, who married, 1st, lady Elizabeth
Keith, daughter of William earl marishal, by lady Elizabeth Seton his wife,
daughter of George earl of Winton, by whom he had a son,

Robert, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Margaret, married to sir Thomas Burnet of Leyes.

He married, 2dly, Catharine, daughter of Robert Gordon of Pitlurg and
Straloch, by whom he had three sons and three daughters:

1. Mr. John Arbuthnot of Fordun, ancestor of the present viscount of
Arbuthnot, of whom afterward,

2. Mr. Alexander, who changed his surname to Maitland, on account of his
marriage with Jean, eldest daughter and sole heiress of sir Charles Maitland of
Pitrichie, and was one of the barons of his majesty's exchequer in Scotland.

3. Mr. Thomas.

1. Daughter, Catharine, married, 1st, to Mr. Robert Gordon of Clunie, and,
2dly, to David Riccart of Riccartoun.

2. Anne, married to Mr. John Horn of Westerhall, advocate.

3. Helen, married, 1st, to John Macfarlane of that ilk; and, 2dly, to Mr. John
Spotswood of that ilk, advocate.

All of them had issue.

He died in 1684, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XX. ROBERT, third viscount of Arbuthnot, who married lady Anne Sutherland,
daughter of George earl of Sutherland, by lady Jean Wemyss, daughter of David
earl of Wemyss, by whom he had two sons and four daughters.

1. Robert, his heir.

2. John, viscount of Arbuthnot, who succeeded his brother.

1. Daughter, Jean, married to captain Crawfurd of Camlurg.

2. Anne.

3. Mary.

4. Margaret. which three last died without issue.

And dying in 1692, was succeeded by his eldest son,

XXI. ROBERT, fourth viscount of Arbuthnot, a man of great parts and
expectation, but died unmarried anno 1710, and was succeeded by his brother,

XXI. JOHN, fifth viscount of Arbuthnot, a man of great honor and probity, who
married Jean, daughter of William Morison of Prestongrange; and dying without
issue in 1756, his estate and honors devolved upon his cousin John Arbuthnot,
son and heir of Mr. John Arbuthnot of Fordun, to whom we now return.

XX. Mr. JOHN ARBUTHNOT of Fordun, first son of the second marriage of Robert
second viscount of Arbuthnot, by Catharine, daughter of Robert Gordon of
Pitlurg, married Margaret Falconer, daughter of sir James Falconer of Phesdo,
one of the senators of the college of justice, by whom he had a numerous issue,
of whom two sons and five daughters are still alive.

1. James, a banker in Edinburgh, who died unmarried.

2. John, who succeeded to the estate and honors of Arbuthnot, upon the death
of the fifth viscount; as before observed.

3. Doctor Thomas Arbuthnot of Ballglessie, physician in Montrose, who married
a daughter of -- Forbes of Thornton, in the county of Kincardine, and has
issue.

1. Daughter, Margaret.

2. Mary, married to John Douglas of Tulliwhillie, and has issue.

3. Jean.

4. Ann.

5. Catharine, married to James More of Invernettie.

XXI. JOHN, sixth viscount of Arbuthnot, married, 1st, May Douglas, daughter
and co-heiress of -- Douglas of Bridgeford, by whom he has no surviving issue.

He married, 2dly, Jean, daughter of Alexander Arbuthnot of Findourie,
descended of David Arbuthnot, eldest son of the second marriage of Robert
Arbuthnot of that ilk, (No. XIV. of this account), by whom he has issue three
sons and two daughters.

1. Robert, master of Arbuthnot.

2. John.

3. Hugh.

1. Daughter, Charlot.

2. Margaret.

ARMS.
Azure, a crescent between three stars, argent.

CREST; on a wreath, a peacock's head couped proper.

SUPPORTERS; two wyverns vert, spouting fire.

MOTTO; laus Deo.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Arbuthnot, in the shire of Kincardine, etc.

CAMPBELL Duke of ARGYLE.
THAT the noble and illustrious name of CAMPBELL is of very great antiquity in
Scotland, is acknowledged by all our historians.

Cambden derives their origin from the ancient kings of Argyle, Cambd. folio
edit. p. 706.
about the sixth century.

Mr. Martin of Clermont, a learned and judicious antiquary, Martin's
genealogical collections, vol. I. p. 53. and vol. II. p. 59.
says, "It is the opinion of some, that they came originally from France, and
assumed their surname about the reign of king Malcolm Canmore."

In the traditional accounts of our bards and senachies, it is said, that their
predecessors were in possession of the lands of Lochow, in Argyleshire, before
the restoration of our monarchy by king Fergus II. anno 404; Mr. Duncanson's
hist. of the family M. S. penes ducem de Argyle. Crawfurd's Peerage, etc.
and that the first appellation they used, was O-Dubhin, which, according to an
early custom, they assumed from Diarmed O-Dubhin, one of their ancestors, who
was a brave and warlike man; and from him, in the Galic language, they are
called Siol Diarmed; that is, the posterity and offspring of Diarmed.

The bards have recorded a long series of the barons of Lochow, descended of
the foresaid Diarmed O-Dubhin, who were renowned both for courage and conduct:
amongst whom was Paul O-Dubhin, lord of Lochow, who was denominated Paul
Inspuran, from his being the king's treasurer. But he having no male issue, his
estate went to his daughter Eva, who being married to Gillespick O-Dubhin, a
relation of her own, he got their name changed to Campbell, to perpetuate the
memory of a noble and heroic action performmed by him for the crown of France,
Ibidem.
in the reign of king Malcolm Canmore.

From this Gillespick, therefore, we shall deduce the descent of the
illustrious family of Argyle.

I. GILLESPICK O-DUBHIN, or CAMPBELL, lord of Lochow, according to the M. S.
history of the family, lived in the reign of king David I. and married Eva,
only daughter and heiress of Paul O-Dubhin before noticed, by whom he had a
son, Ibidem.


II. DUNCAN CAMPBELL of Lochow, who succeeded him, slourished in the reign of
king Malcolm IV. and left issue a son and successor,

III. COLIN CAMPBELL of Lochow, who lived in the reign of king William the
Lion, but of whom we have nothing memorable.

He left issue a son,

IV. GILLESPICK, or, ARCHIBALD CAMPBELL of Lochow, who succeeded him, and
flourished in the end of the reign of king William, Regiam Majestatem, cap. 17.
and beginning of king Alexander II. and is particularly mentioned in the
statutes of that last prince, anno 1214, 1215, etc.

He married Finetta, M. S. hist. of the family of Lovat, penes magistrum
Gulielmum Fraser scribam Edin.
daughter of John Frazer, lord of Tweddale, by whom he had a son and successor,

V. DUNCAN CAMPBELL of Lochow, who, in the reign of king Alexander II. married
a daughter of the family of Cummyn, Martin's genealogical collections.
by whom he had issue two sons,

1. Sir Gillespick.

2. John, Douglas. Walker's chron. Dr. Mackenzie's lives of the Scotch writers,
p. 387, etc.
a man of great learning and knowledge, and a famous author, who flourished
betwixt 1250 and 1286, and was an ornament to his country for learning, etc.

Duncan was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. Sir GILLESPICK, or, ARCHIBALD CAMPBELL, knight, and lord of Lochow, who
made a considerable figure in the end of the reign of king Alexander II. and
beginning of the reign of king Alexander III.

In the charter of erection of the burgh of Newburgh, Chartul. of Lindores,
penes Walterum Mac^arlane, de eodem, p. 205.
this Gillespick Campbell, together with William earl of Mar, John de Lindsay,
John de Haya, William Bisset, etc. are witnesses at Strivling, 4th March 1266.

He married a daughter of William de Somerville, baron of Carnwath, by whom he
had issue a son,

VII. Sir COLIN MORE CAMPBELL, dominus de Lochow, who succeeded him, and was a
renowned and warlike chieftain. He had the honor of knighthood conferred upon
him by king Alexander III. anno 1280; and from him the chief or head of the
family of Argyle is called Macallan-More in the highlands to this day.

In a charter by Malcolm earl of Lennox, Chartul. of Levenax, penes eundem, p.
34.
Johanni de Luss, the witnesses are, dominus Jacobus Senescallus Scotiae,
dominus Reginaldus de Crawfurd, dominus Colinus Campbell, etc. circiter annum
1281.

He was one of the great barons of Scotland that were summoned to Berwick on
the part of king Robert Bruce, Rymer, tom. II. p. 553.
in the competition for the crown betwixt him and Baliol, anno 1292.

It must here be observed, that the Campbells, by this time, were become so
numerous in Scotland, that it is not easy to distinguish them, except when they
are locally designed, there being many of that surname in Prynne's collections,
Prynne's collections, and remarks upon Ragman's roll, p. 26, 31, 32, 36, and 45.
(men of rank) swearing allegiance to king Edward I. of England, betwixt the
years 1291 and 1297, viz. Nicol; or Neil Campbell, Colin de Campbell; Duncan
Campbell del Isles, Thomas Campbell* Dougal Campbell, Arthur Campbell, another
Duncan Campbell, sir Dovenald Campbell, etc.

This sir Colin acquired from sir William Lindsay the lands of Symington in
Ayrshire, Chartul. of Newbottle, penes Walterum Macfarlane de eod. p. 12 and 13.
and made a donation of the superiority thereof to the monks of Newbottle, by a
charter, wherein he is designed dominus Colinus Campbell, miles, filius quondam
domini Gillespick Campbell, etc. anno 1293.

He was slain soon thereafter, at a place called the String of Cowal, in a
conflict betwixt him and the lord of Lorn, leaving issue, M. S. hist. of the
family.
by -- Sinclair his spouse, three sons.

1. Sir Neil, his heir.

2. Sir Dovenald Campbell of Reidhouse or Reidcastle, ancestor of the family of
Loudoun. Vide title Earl of Loudoun.

3. John Campbell, Rymer tom. II. p. 725, ad ann. 1296.
who was bred to the church.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. Sir NEIL CAMPBELL baron of Lochow, who, in his father's lifetime, made a
donation to the monastery of Cambuskenneth, Chartul. of Cambuskenneth, penes
Macfarlane, p. 65. No. 50.
of part of the lands of Menstrie, and is then designed Nigellus Campbell
filius Colini, etc. anno 1282.

He was a man of singular merit, and a true patriot; and tho he submitted to
Baliol's government for some time, yet no sooner did the heroic king Robert
Bruce begin to assert his title to the crown; Abercrombie vol. I. p. 571.
than he joined him most heartily and sincerely, and never afterward deserted
his interest, but did him many great and signal services when he was in the
utmost distress, and assisted at his coronation at Scoon, anno 1306.

He afterward commanded a party of loyalists against the lord Lorn, Barber's
life of K. Robert.
a declared enemy of king Robert and his country, and reduced Argyleshire and
Lorn to the king's obedience.

He entered into a memorable association with sir Gilbert Hay, sir Alexander
Seton, and other loyalists, The original writ is among the archives of the
family of Mar.
wherein they bound themselves till death, to defend the liberties of their
country, and king Robert Bruce's right to the crown against all enemies,
French, English, and Scots; to which they all put their hands and seals, at
Cambuskenneth, the 9th day of September 1308.

After the king was well settle on his throne, sir Neil, being no less an able
statesman than a brave soldier, was employed in several important negotiations
to the king of England; particularly he, with sir John Menteith, Rymer, tom.
III. p. 163.
were appointed plenipotentiaries for Scotland, and Richard de Burgh, earl of
Ulster, etc. for England, anno 1309.

And after the battle of Bannockburn, he, with sir Roger Kilpatrick, Robert
Keith, and Gilbert Hay, Ibid. p. 495.
were sent commissioners, to treat of a lasting peace with king Edward in
person, then at Durham, anno 1314, though at that time it took no effect.

He was likewise one of the great barons at the parliament of Air, Anderson's
Independ.
where the succession to the crown was settled upon the heirs of king Robert
Bruce, anno 1315.

King Robert, on account of his loyalty, great and faithful services, made him
a grant of several lands then in the crown; Chart. penes ducem de Argyle.
all which are contained in a charter under the great seal, the ninth year of
king Robert's reign, anno 1315.

And, as a testimony of his great esteem and regard for sir Neil, he bestowed
upon him in marriage his sister, Ibidem.
lady Mary Bruce, by whom he had two sons.

1. Sir Colin.

2. John, a man of singular worth and merit, and in high favor with his uncle
king Robert Bruce, who dignified him with the title of earl of Athole, Nisbet's
Append. p. 178. and Chart. in pub archiv.
(then in the crown by the forfeiture of David de Strabogie) to him, and the
heirs of his body; but he dying without issue, the honors returned to the
crown, Ibidem.
and were afterward bestowed upon William Douglas, lord of Liddisdale.

Sir Neil dying in the end of the year 1315, or the beginning of 1316, was
succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. Sir COLIN CAMPBELL of Lochow, who also was a great loyalist, and always
adhered to the interest of king Robert Bruce, and his son king David.

He went in the expedition to Ireland, in favors of king Edward Bruce, where
his behavior, for courage and conduct, was so remarkable, that king Robert,
upon his return, rewarded him with a grant of diverse lands, Chart. penes ducem
de Argyle; andLives of the officers of state, p. 41.
by a charter under the great seal, erecting all his lands in Argyleshire into
one free barony; in which he is designed Colinus filius Nigelli; etc.

In the minority of king David Bruce, he raised four hundred men, upon his own
charges, for his majesty's service, and therewith retook the castle of Dunoon,
then in possession of the English, for which the king rewarded him with the
heretable government thereof, Chart. penes ducem de Argyle.
and a yearly pension.

He married a daughter of the family of Lennox, by whom he had three sons and
one daughter.

1. Sir Archibald.

2. John, ancestor of the Campbells of Barbreck, of whom Succoch, etc. are
descended.

3. Sir Dougal Campbell, who, having joined king John Baliol, his estate was
forfeited to the crown, and was afterward bestowed upon his brother sir
Archibald.

His daughter Alicia was married to Allan Lauder of Hatton.

He died anno 1340, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. Sir ARCHIBALD CAMPBELL, baron of Lochow, Reg. Majest. Statutes of K. Dav.
II. Cap. 52, etc.
who adhered always to the interest of king David Bruce, with whom he was in
high favor, and is often mentioned in the public acts of his reign.

He obtained from that prince grants and charters of a great many lands, which
the family still possess, viz.

Charter of confirmation from king David, Chart. penes ducem de Argyle; and
book of charters penes Macfarlane, p. 153.
dilecto et speciali consanguineo suo Giliaspock Campbell, filio quondam Colini
Campbell militis, -- terram nostram de Kilmun, etc.

Also a charter, dilecto et fideli suo domino Gilespyk Campbell, domino de
Lochow, integrum dominium totius baroniae de Molepath, Ibidem.
etc. cum pertinen. dated at Aberdeen, 2d May 1342.

He had likewise a grant of his brother sir Dougal's estate, Crawfurd's Peerage.
which was forfeited to the crown for his adhering to Baliol, as before noticed.

He obtained a grant from John Menteith, dominus de Knapdale et de Arran, Ibid.
Chart. penes ducem de Argyle, and Lives of the officers of state.
of a great many lands, -- dilecto et fideli consanguineo suo Giliaspock
Campbell, domino de Lochow, dated in vigilia sancti Andreae apostoli, 1352.

He likewise obtained from king Robert II. to him, and his son Colin, and his
heirsmale, with consent of John earl of Carrick, the king's eldest son,
officium locumtenentis et commissionem specialem intra Carndrone, usque ad
Polgillip, Chart. in pub. archiv. confirmed by K. James III. to Colin earl of
Argyle.
et Polmefreth, et Lochlonge, infra vicecomitatum nostrum de Ergyle, et
dimidiam partem wardarum, relieviorum, maritagiorum, eschetarum suarum,
amerciamentorum, e^i aliorum lucrorum quorumeunque, et emolumentorum infra
dictas bondas contingen. etc. Lives of the officers of state.


He married, 1st, Mary, a daughter of the family of Menteith: Crawfurd's
peerage, p. 16. and Colvil's hist. of the family of Argyle.
2dly, a daughter of sir John Lawmont.

He lest issue a son and successor,

XI. Sir COLIN CAMPBELL, who in several authentic writs is designed dominus de
Lochow, Lives of the officers of state, p. 42.
and being a man of great courage and resolution, was employed by king Robert
II. in restraining the incursions of the highlanders, who then greatly infested
the western parts of the kingdom, and reducing them to his majesty's obedience,
Ibid. and charta penes ducem de Argyle.
had thereupon a grant from the king of sundry lands, which are still in the
family's possession, and are fully narrated in the lives of the officers of
state.

He married Margaret, Martin's genealogical collections.
daughter of sir John Drummond of Stobhall, and sister of queen Annabel
Drummond, by whom he had three sons and one daughter.

1. Sir Duncan.

2, Colin, Ibid. and Crawfurd's peerage.
who was ancestor of the Campbells of Ardkinglass, of whom are descended the
Campbells of Ardintenie, Dunoon, Carrick, Skipnish, Blyswood, Rochane,
Auchewillen, Dergachie, etc.

3. Donald, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who, in a charter under the great seal, is designed frater Duncani Campbell,
domini de Lochow, 4th August 1442.

His daughter Christian was married to Duncan Macfarlane of Arrochar. Nisbet's
appendix, p. 63.


Sir Colin had also two natural sons, Dugal and Duncan, Crawfurd's peerage.
of whom the Campbells of Dunstaffnage, Enderline, Balvie, Duntroon, and
others, are descended.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. Sir DUNCAN CAMPBELL, baron of Lochow, who was a man of great parts and
abilities, and arrived to high advancements both in honor and estate.

He was the first of the family who was designed by the title of Argyle, and
having great interest with Murdoch duke of Albany, was very instrumental with
that prince in bringing about the release and restoration of king James I.

He got a charter from king Robert III. Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the lands and barony of Menstrie, anno 1393.

He was one of the hostages sent to England for his majesty's ransom, anno
1424; and it is observable, Rymer, tom. X. p. 308 and 327.
that his estate and lord Dalkeith's were computed at 1500 merks sterling per
annum, and none of the other hostages had above 1200.

And being highly esteemed by king James I. Charta penes ducem de Argyle.
he appointed him one of his privy council, his justiciar, and lord lieutenant
of the shire of Argyle, etc.

He was in no less favor with king James II. who not only confirmed all those
offices to him, Ibid. and creations of the nobility.
but raised him to the dignity of a lord of parliament, by the title of lord
Campbell, anno 1445.

He obtained a charter from that prince, Duncano domino Campbell, pro suis
gratuitis servitiis quondam genitori nostro bonae memoriae, et specialiter apud
castrum de Roxburgh, Chart. penes ducem de Argyle. and chart. inpub. archiv.
tempore obsidionis ejusdem, per eundem gratissime impensis, et pro suis
servitiis nobis etiam impensis et impendend. etc. of a vast number of lands (
in dominio nostro de Cowal) in the shire of Argyle, all erected and united into
one free and entire barony, baroniam de Carloch, Rowel, perpetuis futuris
temporibus nuncupand. dated 19th June 1453.

He was a great benefactor to the religious; Ib. and Crawfurd's Peerage.
witness his donations to the monks of the abbacy of Sandale, in Kintyre, and
his founding and endowing the collegiate church of Kilmun, etc.

He married, 1st, Hist. of the royal family, p. 115.
lady Margaret Stewart, daughter of Robert duke of Albany, governor of
Scotland, by whom he had three sons.

1. Celestine, who died young.

2. Archibald, who carried on the line of the family.

3. Sir Colin, who was ancestor of the Campbells of Glenurchy, Vide title
Breadalbine.

He married, Ib. p. 110.
2dly, Margaret, daughter of sir John Stewart of Blackhall, by whom he had also
three sons.

1. Duncan, who was ancestor of the Campbells of Auchinbreck, of whom are
descended the Campbells of Glencardel, Glensaddle, Kilduskland, Kilmarie,
Wester Kaimes, Kilberry, and Duna.

2. Neil, who was ancestor of the Campbells of Ellongreg, of whom sir Neil
Campbell is the representative, and of whose family are descended the Campbells
of Ormandale, etc.

3. Arthur, who was ancestor of the Campbells of Otter, etc.

He died in the end of the year 1453.

XIII. ARCHIBALD, son and apparent heir of lord Duncan, Crawfurd's Peerage.
died before his father, having married Elizabeth, daughter of sir John
Somerville of Carnwath, ancestor of lord Somerville, by whom he had a son,

XIV. COLIN, lord Campbell, who succeeded his grandfather; Creations of the
nobility, in the lawyers library, Edinburgh.
and, being a man of eminent parts and great accomplishments, was in high
favor with king James II. who created him earl of Argyle, anno 1457.

In the beginning of the reign of king James III. Rymer, tom. XI. p. 517.
he was appointed one of the commissioners to treat of a peace with the
English, which they happily concluded anno 1463.

Soon after his return from England, he was constituted master of the king's
household, Ib. p. 541.
anno 1464.

In 1465, he, with lord Boyd, were appointed joint lords of justiciary besouth
the river Forth, Lives of the officers of state.
which office he exercised by himself for many years after lord Boyd's fall.

He was appointed ambassador extraordinary to the court of England, Rymer, tom.
XI. p. 716 and 774.
anno 1471 and 1474.

In 1475, he was again sent one of the commissioners to England, Ib. tom. XII.
page 160.
to treat about repairing some breaches that had been made in the truce, which
they not only adjusted, but got the truce further prorogued till July 1483.

He obtained a grant from the king, dilecto consanguineo suo and consiliario
Colino comiti de Argyle pro singulari favore, etc. and pro suis gratuitis
servitiis, centum and sexaginta mercatas terrarum dominii de Knapdale, una cum
custodia castri de Castlesoame, etc. dicto Colino comiti de Argyle and
haeredibus masculis de corpore suo legitime procreatis, quibus deficientibus,
Duncano Campbell de Glenurcha, Chart. in pub. archiv.
etc. etc. The charter is dated 28th February 1480.

In 1483 the king bestowed upon him the lands of Pinkerton in dominio de
Dumbar, Chart. in pub. archiv. inter 1458 and 1480.
then in the crown, by the forfeiture of Alexander duke of Albany.

He got also chartets under the great seal, Ibidem.
of a vast many lands, too tedious to be here inserted.

Soon after this, Colin earl of Argyle, with the lords Evandale, Glammis,
Fleming, etc. were sent ambassadors to France, to renew the ancient league,
which was accordingly sealed, The original writ is in the public register.
and sworn to, by king Charles VIII. at Paris, on 9th of July 1484, and by king
James in the same manner, at Edinburgh, before the French ambassador.

That same year, he procured an exemption for lord Gray, Chart. penes dom. Gray.
and others of his friends, from attendance on any court, during his absence,
etc.

Upon the earl's return, the king being fully convinced of his great fidelity
and merit, was pleased to appoint him lord high chancellor of Scotland, Lives
of the officers of state.
and soon thereafter, he was named one of the commissioners plenipotentiaries
to the congress at Nottingham, where a truce was agreed to, which should begin
with the rising of the sun on 29th September 1484, and last till the setting of
the sun, Rymer, tom. XII. p. 160:
on 29th September 1487.

In 1485, the lord chancellor, with some others, received a special commission
from the king, to treat of a marriage for his son the prince of Scotland, with
lady Anne de la Pool, daughter of John duke of Suffolk, and niece of king
Richard of England; Ibid. p. 230.
which match was then agreed to by the estates of England, but the short reign
of king Richard, and the revolution, which happened soon afterward prevented
its taking effect.

In the beginning of 1488, when the troubles in Scotland were like to run very
high, the king having entire confidence in the lord chancellor, who had always
been a most faithful and loyal subject, Rymer tom. XII. p. 130.
sent him with some others to king Henry VII. of England, to desire his good
offices and mediation, etc. but nothing from thence could be done in time.

Bishop Elphingston enjoyed the chancellor's office, Safe conduct, Colino
comiti de Argyle cancellario Scotiae, Patricio domino Hailes, etc. in Rymer
tom. XII. p. 340. 6to Mar. 1488.
during his absence on that embassy, viz. from 6th March, till after the 11th
of June 1488, that the king was slain; so that this great man was in England,
while that bloody tragedy was acted, though some historians have asserted the
contrary.

Soon after his return from England, he was again appointed lord chancellor of
Scotland, which office he enjoyed as long as he lived: Lives of the officers of
state. p. 47.
And as he had acted in the highest offices of state at home, and had been
concerned in the most important negociations abroad, so he acquitted himself in
every station of life with honor, fidelity and reputation.

He married Isabel Stewart, eldest daughter and co-heiress of John lord of
Lorn, whereupon he added the galley to the atchievment, Chart. inpub. archiv.
and the designation of dominus Lorne to his other titles.

By her he had issue two sons and seven daughters.

1. Archibald, earl of Argyle.

2. Thomas, ancestor of the Campbells of Lundie in Angus.

1. Daughter, Lady Margaret, married to George lord Seton, ancestor of the earl
of Winton.

2d. Lady Isabel, married to William master of Drummond, ancestor of the family
of Perth.

3. Lady Helen, married to Hugh earl of Eglinton, and had issue.

4. Lady Elizabeth, married to John lord Oliphant, and had issue.

5. Lady Mary, Crawfurd's peerage.
married to Aeneas M'Donald, natural son and heir of tailzie of John earl of
Ross.

6. Lady --, married to Alexander M'Kenzie of Kintail, Mill's collections, p.
50.
ancestor of the earl of Scaforth.

7. Lady Catharine, Chart. in pub. archiv.
married to Torquill M'Leod of Lewis, 1498.

He died anno 1493, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. ARCHIBALD, second earl of Argyle, who was a man of great abilities and
prudence, Chart. in archiv. Jacobi IV. and chartul. of Dumfermline, p. 463.
and was in high favor with king James IV. who made him chancellor of Scotland
in 1494, Chart. in pub. archiv.
chamberlain in 1495, and master of the household in 1498.

He got charters, under the great seal, of a great number of lands and baronies
from anno 1493 to 1512.

He commanded the vanguard of the army at the fatal field of Flowdon, where he
behaved with remarkable valor and intrepidity. He there lost his life with his
royal master and the flower of the nobility of Scotland, on 9th September 1513,
leaving issue by lady Elizabeth his wife, daughter of John earl of Lennox, four
sons and five daughters.

1. Colin, his heir.

2. Archibald Campbell of Skipnish, Chart. in pub archiv. ad ann. 1511.
whose line ended in an heir-female, in the reign of queen Mary.

3. John, who married Moriella, daughter and heiress of John Calder of that
ilk, and was ancestor of the Campbells of Calder, Ibidem.
of whom are descended the Campbells of Ardchattan, Aird, and sir Archibald of
Clunies.

4. Donald, who was ancestor of the Campbells of Kythack in Angus.

1. Daughter, lady Margaret, married to John lord Erskine.

2. Lady Isabel, married to Gilbert earl of Cassilis.

3. Lady Mary, married to John earl of Athole.

4. Lady Jean, Ibidem.
married to John Lawmont of that ilk: And all had issue.

5. Lady Anne, Mill's collections, p. 50.
married to Simon master of Lovat.

XVI. COLIN, third earl of Argyle, succeeded his father, and was appointed one
of the four counselors to king James V. anno 1525.

In 1528 he was made lord lieutenant of the borders, Chart. penes ducem de
Argyle.
warden of the marches, heretable sheriff of Argyleshire, justice general of
Scotland, and master of the king's household: In all which high offices he
behaved with great prudence, candor, and integrity.

He got also charters, Chart. in pub. archiv. inter 1520 and 1550.
from king James V. of a vast number of lands, Colino comiti de Argyle, etc.

He married lady Janet Gordon, daughter of Alexander earl of Huntly, Crawfurd's
peerage.
by whom he had three sons and one daughter.

1. Archibald.

2. John, ancestor of the Campbells of Lochnell, of whom the Campbells of
Balerno and Stonefield are descended.

3. Alexander, who was dean of Murray, and died without issue.

His daughter, lady Margaret, was married, 1st to James Stewart earl of Murray,
natural son of king James IV. and 2dly, to John earl of Sutherland.

He died anno 1542, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVII. ARCHIBALD, fourth earl of Argyle, who was one of the noble Scotch peers,
that strenuously opposed the match betwixt Mary queen of Scotland, and king
Edward VI. of England; believing, that an union betwixt the kingdoms must
necessarily ensue, which could not but be derogatory to the honor of his
country: Upon which a war breaking out with England, Abercromb. hist. of the
campaigns, 1548 and 1549.
he greatly distinguished himself by his valor and conduct both at the battle
of Pinkie in 1547, and at the siege of Haddington in 1548. Chart. in pub.
archiv. inter 1545 and 1555.


He got charters, from queen Mary, Archibaldo comiti de Argyle, of a great
number of lands.

He was the first of quality who embraced the Protestant religion, and
contributed all that was in his power to bring about a reformation.

He married 1st, lady Helen Hamilton, daughter of James earl of Arran, by whom
he had a son,

Archibald, his heir.

He married 2dly, lady Margaret Graeme, daughter of William earl of Menteith,
Chart. in pub. archiv. ad ann. 1542.
by whom he had a son,

Sir Colin Campbell of Boquhan (who carried on the line of this family, of whom
afterward) -- and two daughters.

1. Lady Margaret, married to James Stewart, lord Down.

2. Lady Janet, Chart. in pub. archiv.
married to Hector M'Lean of Dowart.

And dying in 1558, was succeeded by his eldest son.

XVIII. ARCHIBALD, fifth earl of Argyle, who was a man of singular
accomplishments, and a great promoter of the reformation of religion.

In 1559, he went over to France, to supplicate Queen Mary's favor to the
Protestant religion; Biograph.
and immediately upon his return, Britannica.
he entered into an association with the earls, Spottiswood and Calderwood's
church hist.
Glencairn, Morton, etc. for the advancement thereof, which at last they got
established by act of Parliament, anno 1560.

Upon the breaking out of the civil war, he espoused the interest of queen Mary
heartily and sincerely, and was general of her forces at the battle of
Langside, and though the queen's troops were entirely routed, yet he still
persisted in his loyalty and fidelity to her majesty, of which she was so much
convinced, that after she was prisoner in England, Rymer tom. XV. p. 687. ad
ann. 1570.
she nominated the duke of Chattlerault, the earls of Argyle and Huntly her
lieutenants throughout the whole kingdom.

The earl concurred and greatly promoted Ibidem.
every measure that was proposed for the recovery of her majesty's liberty, but
when all their endeavors proved fruitless, he at last submitted to the
authority of king James VI. and was immediately admitted one of the lords of
the privy council, anno 1571.

He was also appointed justice general, keeper of the great seal, and lord high
chancellor of Scotland by a most ample commission from the king, in which are
these words, Fecimus, constituimus, and ordinamus proedilectum nostrum
consanguineum and consiliarium Archibaldum comitem de Argyle, dominum Campbell
etc Lorne, justiciarium nostrum generalem, cancellarium regni nostri, ac magni
sigillinostri custodem, pro omnibus vitae suae diebus, etc. etc. Dated at
Edinburgh the 17th of January, Chart. in pub. archiv. and lives of the officers
of state.
the sixth year of the king's reign 1572. which offices he executed with
universal approbation as long as he lived.

He married 1st, lady Jean Stewart, natural daughter of king James V. whose
body lies interred with her father's in the royal vault in the abbay-church of
Holyroodhouse.

He married 2dly, lady Jean Cunninghame, daughter of Alexander earl of
Glencairn, but by neither had he any issue, and dying in 1575, his estate and
honors devolved upon his brother sir Colin of Boquhan, to whom we now return,

XVIII. COLIN, sixth earl of Argyle, second son of the fourth earl, was
constituted one of the privy council to king James VI. Spottiswood's hist. and
lives of the officers of state.
anno 1577, and lord high chancellor of Scotland, anno 1579.

He married 1st, Janet Stewart, daughter of Henry lord Methven, by whom he had
no issue.

He married 2dly, lady Agnes Keith, daughter of William earl Marishall, widow
of James earl of Murray, by whom he had two sons.

1. Archibald, earl of Argyle.

2. Sir Colin Campbell of Lundie, Bart.

He died anno 1584, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIX. ARCHIBALD, seventh earl of Argyle, who, being a brave officer, was
commander of the forces sent against the earls of Huntly and Errol, at the
battle of Glenliver, anno 1594, where the king's troops were deseated, though
the earl behaved with great courage and conduct.

He suppressed an insurrection of the M'Gregors in 1603, and a more formidable
one of the M'Donalds in the western isles, Ibidem.
anno 1614. For which signal services, Chart. penes ducem de Argyle.
he obtained a grant, from the king, of the whole country of Kintyre, which was
ratified in parliament, Regiam Majestatem, act 6th ad ann. 1609.
anno 1617; and was made heretable commissary of the isles.

In 1618 he went into Spain, and signalized himself in that service against the
states of Holland, Guthry's memoirs.
having assisted at taking of several places of strength.

He got charters, from king James VI. Archibaldo comiti Ergadiae, Chart. in
pub. archiv. inter 1600 and 1630.
of all his lands.

He married 1st, lady Anne Douglas, daughter of William earl of Morton, by whom
he had a son,

Archibald, afterward marquis of Argyle, -- and four daughters.

1. Lady Anne, married to George marquis of Huntly.

2. Lady Annabel, married to Robert earl of Lothian.

3. Lady Jean, married to John viscount of Kenmure.

4. Lady Mary, married to sir Robert Montgomery of Skelmorly.

They all had issue.

The earl married 2dly, Anne, daughter of sir William Cornwallis of Brom,
ancestor of lord Cornwallis, by Lucy, his wife, daughter and co-heiress of John
Nevil lord Latimer, by whom he had a son,

James, -- and a daughter,

Lady Mary, married to James lord Rollo, and had issue.

His son James, who, was a man of great valor and courage, was by king James
VI. created lord Kintyre, anno 1622, and having served Lewis XIII. in his wars
against the Spaniards, where he had the command of a regiment, he acquitted
himself with such honor and reputation, that upon his return home, king
Charles I. was pleased to raise him to the dignity of earl of Irvine in 1642;
Creations of the nobility.
but he dying without heirs-male, the honors became extinct.

The earl died at London in 1638, Guthry's memoirs.
and was succeeded by his eldest son.

XX. ARCHIBALD, eighth earl, afterward marquis of Argyle, who was a man of
great learning and singular endowments.

He was one of the privy council to king Charles I. into whose hand he resigned
the justiciary of all Scotland, anno 1628, which had been in his family for
several ages, reserving to himself and his heirs the jurisdiction of the
western isles and Argyle, and wherever else he had lands in Scotland, all which
was ratisied by act of parliament past in his majesty's presence, anno 1633.
And in respect of his own merit, as well as the remarkable loyalty of his
ancestors, his majesty was pleased to create him marquis of Argyle by letters
patent, dated in November 1641. Chart. in pub. regist.


He afterward got two charters under the great seal, Ib. ad ann. (...).
Archibaldo marchioni de Argyle, etc.

When king Charles's troubles begun, he joined the parliament of Scotland, and
was a zealous asserter of the Presbyterian church government; but after the
horrid murder of the king, he contributed much to the reception and coronation
of king Charles II. on the 1st of January 1650, and had the honor to put the
crown on the king's head at Scoon. But having afterward joined and sided with
Oliver Cromwell (a common fault in those times) he was soon after the
restoration convicted of high treason, Trial of the marquis of Argyle.
Crawfurd's peerage.
condemned by the parliament, and beheaded at Edinburgh on the 27th of May
1661, and his estate and honors forfeited to the crown.

He was a consummate statesman, and one of the ablest politicians of his time.
When he was going to death, he declared his abhorrence of the murder of king
Charles I.

He married lady Margaret Douglas, daughter of William earl of Morton, by whom
he had two sons and three daughters.

1. Archibald, afterward earl of Argyle.

2. Lord Neil Campbell of Armadie, who was twice married, and had issue Dr.
Archibald Campbell, etc.

1. Daughter, lady Anne, died unmarried.

2. Lady Jean, married to Robert marquis of Lothian.

3. Lady Mary, married, 1st, to George earl of Caithness: and, 2dly, to John
earl of Breadalbine.

XXI. ARCHIBALD, lord Lorn, eldest son of the marquis, adhered firmly to the
king's interest, during all the time of the usurpation, and was captain of his
majesty's footguards, anno 1650. He continued to serve the king with great
steadiness and fidelity, and signalized himself upon several occasions against
the parliament's forces; which so incensed Oliver Cromwell against him, that in
April 1654, Cromwell's act of indemnity.
when he granted a general indemnity to the Scots, this lord, with some other
loyalists, were particularly excepted, and he was made prisoner.

During his confinement, Biographia Britannica. p. 1156.
he had his skull accidentally fractured, for which he was obliged to be
trepaned, etc.

Notwithstanding all his sufferings, he never could be prevailed upon to
submit, Crawsurd's peerage, and state tracts.
or come to any composition with Cromwell, till he got his majesty's permission
by general Middleton so to do, which was dated 31st December 1655. He then
returned to his own house, where he lived privately and quietly, still
persisting in his integrity and loyalty, till king Charles II. was happily
restored, anno 1660.

His majesty being perfectly satisfied of this lord's good behavior, was
graciously pleased to restore him to his father's estate, and the honors and
precedence of the ancient earls of Argyle: Diploma in archiv. Caroli II. etc.
The onerous cause in the patent (which is dated in 1663) being for his eminent
loyalty and zeal for the restoration, etc. And he was the ninth earl of Argyle.

Sometime thereafter he was made one of his majesty's privy council, and a
commissioner of the treasury; which offices he discharged with great sidelity;
but as he was a strenuous asserter and firm friend to the Protestant religion,
and Presbyterian church government, he thereby had some considerable enemies at
court.

About the year 1680, the test act passed, whereby all ranks of people were
enjoined, by act of parliament, Test act in the records.
to defend the government in church and state, as presently established, etc.
under the pains of treason, etc. and this act went very ill down with a great
many well-meaning men, particularly with this noble earl, who, having a tender
and scrupulous conscience, could not comply with it in these terms, but offered
to take it with his own explanation, part whereof was in these words:

"I take it, in so far as it is consistent with itself, and the protestant
religion; and I do declare, I mean not to bind up myself in my station, but, in
a lawful way, to endeavor any thing I think for the advantage of the church or
state, not repugnant to the protestant religion and my loyalty; and this I
understand as a part of my oath." Crawfurd's peerage.


This being declared treason by the learned of the law, he was sent prisoner to
the castle of Edinburgh, soon after tried, found guilty, his estate forfeited,
and himself sentenced to suffer death: but he made his escape in the dress of a
lady's page, and got over to Holland, where he remained about four years.
However, in the beginning of king James VII.'s reign, he got some officers and
soldiers together in Holland, with which he invaded Scotland, and landed in
Argyleshire.

He raised about two thousand men, mostly of his own clan. He then emitted a
manifesto, declaring, "That he had not invaded his country for any private
ends, but in defense of his own just right, and for the recovery of his estate,
which was unjustly forfeited in the reign of the late king. And the duke of
York having invaded the religion and liberties of the kingdom, he thought it
not only just, but his duty to God and his country, to oppose his tyrannical
usurpation, and invited all true protestants to join him."

The earl's little army being defeated and dispersed, Scotch comp. p. 103.
and himself taken prisoner, he was again sent to the castle of Edinburgh, and
soon thereafter beheaded at the mercat cross, in consequence of his former
sentence, upon the 30th of June 1685; it being the opinion of the lawyers, that
as he was already dead in law, he could not be tried again for this last act of
rebellion.

He left issue, Crawfurd's peerage.
by lady Mary Stewart his wife, daughter of James earl of Murray, four sons and
two daughters.

1. Archibald, afterward duke of Argyle.

2. John Campbell of Mammore, father of the present duke, of whom afterward.

3. Colonel Charles Campbell.

4. Colonel James Campbell, who married Margaret Lesly, daughter of David lord
Newark; and had issue.

1. Daughter, lady Anne, married 1st to Richard earl of Lauderdale, and 2dly to
Charles earl of Murray.

2. Lady Jean, married to William marquis of Lothian.

XXII. ARCHIBALD, tenth earl, afterward duke of Argyle, eldest son of
Archibald the ninth earl, came over with the prince of Orange, from Holland, in
1688; and was owned by the convention of estates to be earl of Argyle, before
his father's forfeiture was rescinded.

He was a great promoter of the revolution, and was sent to London by the
nobility and gentry of Scotland, with sir James Montgomery and sir John
Dalrymple, to make an offer of the crown of Scotland, in name of the convention
of estates, to the prince and princess of Orange,

Who, on the 11th of April 1689, were crowned king and queen of Scotland; and
on the 11th of May following, the earl, with the other commissioners tendered
the oath of coronation to their Majesty's, which they took accordingly.

He afterward, for the king's service, sen^ over to Flanders a regiment, both
officers and soldiers of his own name and clan, who upon many occasions
signalized their bravery and courage.

This noble earl was made one of the privy council in May 1689, and one of the
lords of the treasury in 1690.

He was also made colonel of the Scotch horse guards, and one of the
extraordinary lords of Session, and, at last for his many eminent services, he
was created duke of Argyle, marquis of Kintyre and Lorne, earl of Campbell and
Cowal, Chart. in cancellaria^. Haeredibus masculis quibuscunque.
viscount of Lochow and Glenisla, lord Inverara, Mull, Morvien and Tyrie, by
letters patent to his heirs-male whatsomever, bearing date at Kensington, the
23d of June 1701.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of sir Lionel Talmash of Helingham, by his wife
Elizabeth, duchess of Lauderdale, daughter and heir of William Murray earl of
Dysart, by whom he had two sons and one daughter.

1. John, duke of Argyle.

2. Archibald, earl of Islay, thereafter duke of Argyle.

His daughter, lady Anne, married James Stewart earl of Bute.

Archibald, first duke of Argyle, died in 1703, and was succeeded by his eldest
son,

XXIII. JOHN, second duke of Argyle, whose genius leading him to a military
life, he went early into the British service, and bravely distinguished himself
through the whole course of queen Anne's wars.

In 1701, he had the command of a regiment of foot; was made one of the
extraordinary lords of session in 1704; one of the knights of the thistle, and
her majesty's high commissioner to the parliament of Scotland, anno 1705.

He remarkably signalized himself at the battle of Ramillies in 1706, and at
the attack of the counterscarp of Menin, of which place he took possession.

He commanded at reducing the fort of Plepondale, assisted at the siege of
Ostend, and was very serviceable at the battle of Audenard, anno 1708.

He assisted at the siege of Lisle (of which city he took possession;) also at
the siege of Ghent and Bruges in 1709.

In the same year he particularly aggrandized himself at the siege of Tournay,
and at the terrible attack of the wood in the great battle of Malplaquet, upon
which desperate command he was ordered by the duke of Marlborough, who, ('it is
alleged) then begun to be jealous of his rising glory.

He was created baron of Chatham, earl of Greenwich in England, and was general
and commander in chief of her majesty's forces in Spain, anno 1710; was
governor of Minorca, and one of the privy council in England, and was made
knight of the most noble order of the garter.

On the death of queen Anne, he was one of the lords justices till the arrival
of king George I. and was soon thereafter made gentleman of the bedchamber,
and groom of the stole to his royal highness George prince of Wales, and
commander in chief of all his majesty's forces in North-Britain.

In 1715, a rebellion broke out in Scotland, and the earl of Mar had the
address to get together no less than six or seven thousand Highlanders, who
marched from Perth about the 12th of November. The duke of Argyle marched out
from Stirling about the same time to oppose them. They came to an engagement at
Sheriffmuir upon the 13th, where the duke of Argyle's courage and conduct was
very remarkable; for though the rebels were far more numerous (and many of the
clans fought very gallantly) yet they were forced to retreat to Perth, and the
duke of Argyle returned to Stirling; however, the rebels never came to a head
again.

In the year 1718, he was made lord steward of the household, and was created
duke of Greenwich, but the patent was limited to the heirs-male of his body.

He was colonel, first, of the queen's regiment of horse, and then of the royal
blue horse guards. He was likeways master-general of the ordnance, and
field-marshal of Great Britain.

He was no less conspicuous for his spirited eloquence in the house of peers,
than for his courage and conduct in the field. He particularly distinguished
himself in the noble defense he made of the privileges of the town of
Edinburgh, when it was moved that they should be taken away, on account of the
murder of captain Porteous.

Upon the whole, he merited the celebrated character which Pope gives him:

ARGYLE, the state's whole thunder born to weild,

And shake alike the senate and the field.

He married, 1st, Mary, daughter of John Brown Esquire; but she died without issue.

He married, 2dly, Mrs. Jean Warburton, one of the maids of honor, both to
queen Anne, and queen Caroline, when princess of Wales, and by her had five
daughters.

1. Lady Caroline, married, 1st, to Francis earl of Dalkeith, eldest son of
Francis duke of Buccleugh. And, 2dly, to Charles Townshend, Esquire; second son to
lord viscount Townshend, now secretary at war.

2. Lady Anne, married to William earl of Strafford.

3. Lady Jane, died young.

4. Lady Betty, married to the honorable James Stewart M'Kenzie, son of James
earl of Bute.

5. Lady Mary, married to Edward viscount Coke, son and heir apparent to the
earl of Leicester.

The Duke died in October 1743, in the 63d year of his age, and having no sons,
the titles of Duke of Greenwich and baron of Chatham expired with him, but he
was succeeded in his estate and other titles by his brother,

XXIII. ARCHIBALD, third duke of Argyle, who was born at Hamhouse, in England,
in June 1682, and was educated at the university of Glasgow. He afterward
applied himself to the study of the law at Utrecht; but upon his father's being
created a duke, he laid aside the scheme of appearing at the bar, and betook
himself to a military life, served under the great duke of Marlborough, was
colonel of the thirty-sixth regiment of foot, and governor of Dambarton castle:
But his genius pointing more strongly to the statesman than the soldier, he did
not continue long in the army, but applied himself chiefly to that study, which
made the after part of his life so shining and conspicuous.

In 1705, he was made treasurer of Scotland, and took his seat in the
parliament, where he made so great a figure, that in 1706 he was nominated one
of the commissioners for the treaty of union, and got a patent, creating him
earl and viscount Islay, lord Oronsay, Dunoon and Arrois, etc.

In 1708; he was made an extraordinary lord of session, was elected one of the
sixteen peers for the first British parliament, and was chosen member to every
future session, excepting that called to meet in November 1713.

In 1710, he was made justice-general of Scotland; and in 1711 he was called to
the privy council.

In 1714, upon the accession of king George I. he was nominated lord register;
and though he had long before given up all command in the army, yet, upon the
breaking out of the rebellion 1715, he again betook himself to arms, in defense
of the house of Hanover, and, by his prudent conduct in the west highlands,
prevented general Gordon, at the head of 3000 men, from penetrating into the
country, and raising levies. He afterward joined his brother at Stirling, and
was wounded at the battle of Dumblane.

In 1725, he got the privy seal, and was trusted with the direction of Scotch
affairs.

In 1734, upon his resigning the privy seal, he was made keeper of the great
seal, which he enjoyed till his death.

Upon the dece^se of his brother, he became dake of Argyle, hereditary justice
general, ^euten^^t, sheriff and commissary of Argyleshire, and the western
isles, hereditary great master of the household, hereditary keeper of
Dunstaffnage, Carrick, and several other castles.

He was a man of great natural and acquired endowments, quick, penetrating, and
thoroughly versant in the knowledge of mankind; of an accurate and distinct
elocution, and a ready judgment. His thorough knowledge of the laws of his
country qualified him to shine in the great council of the nation, and in the
cabinet of his sovereign. His great sagacity and uncommon abilities, pointed
him out as a proper person for the chief management of all Scotch affairs; and
the propriety of the choice will appear from his attention to promote trade and
manufactures, to encourage learning and learned men, and forward every
improvement for the good of his country.

During his administration; the manufacture of linen cloth was raised to an
uncommon pitch, both in quality and quantity. The universities received
distinguishing marks of his favor, by establishing new professions, and in
every shape promoting their good: particularly, he encouraged the profession of
physic in the university of Edinburgh, which is now a school for that science,
famous all over Europe.

He procured from his late majesty, king George II. for the infirmary of
Edinburgh, the invalid money, to the extent of about 8000l. a sum that enabled
the managers of that hospital to enlarge their plan considerably, the utility
of which is daily felt by the numbers of poor patients, both civil and
military, who find relief from this charity.

After 1745, in order to destroy the seeds of future rebellions, he advised his
majesty to employ the highlanders in the army; a proposal worthy of the patriot
who contrived it, magnanimous in the king who approved it, and most honorable
to themselves who executed it; for it must be owned that, to this wise counsel,
it is in some measure owing, that Cape Breton, Canada, etc. etc. are now under
the government of this kingdom, as the courage and intrepidity of these brave
and heroic men, wherever they were called, doubtless contributed greatly to the
conquests.

Such was Archib^^d in a public sphere; nor was he less distinguished in
private life. His eminent learning, and strong natural talents, contributed to
make him pass his hours of recess from business agreeably to himself, and for
the instruction and good of others. He was qualified for every subject of
conversation, with the greatest philosopher, or the meanest and most ingenious
mechanic. For the amusement of the closet, he collected the most valuable
private library in Great Britain, where he unbent his mind from the cares of
ministerial affairs, and added to the immense stock of knowledge he had already
acquired.

The noble and magnificent palace which he has built at Inverara, will stand a
lasting monument of the regard he had for his family, who before had no house
suitable to their dignity.

This great man enjoyed all the faculties of his mind found and entire till his
death, which happened very suddenly, on the 15th day of April 1761, in the 79th
year of his age; and was, according to his own orders, buried at Kilmun, in the
parish of Dunoon in Argyleshire, the burying-place of the family. And having no
issue, his estate and honors devolved upon his cousin and heir-male general
John Campbell, (now duke of Argyle) eldest son and heir of the honorable John
Campbell of Mammore, to whom we now return.

XXII. JOHN CAMPBELL of Mammore, second son of Archibald ninth earl of Argyle,
and brother-german of the first duke, married Elizabeth, daughter of John lord
Elphingston, by whom he had seven sons and six daughters.

1. John, his heir.

2. Charles, who died unmarried.

3. Neil, who died abroad, also unmarried.

4. William, who married Miss Bernard, daughter of -- Bernard, Esquire; and has
issue.

5. 6. and 7. died young.

1. Daughter, Mary, married to James earl of Roseberry.

2. Anne, married to Archibald Edmondstone of Duntreath.

3. Isabella, married to captain Alexander Montgomery.

4. Jean, married to John Campbell of Carrick.

5. Primrose, married to Simon lord Lovat.

6. Elisabeth, died unmarried.

He died anno 1729, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XXIII. JOHN CAMPBELL of Mammore, (now duke of Argyle) who went early into the
army, and in 1713 he commanded the detachment of the troops as a colonel of the
queen's guards, that first took possession of the main guard of Dunkirk, at the
treaty of peace, in order to its being demolished.

During the rebellion in 1715, he served as aid-de-camp to John then duke of
Argyle, who commanded the king's army; and during the rebellion 1745, he had
the honor to command all his majesty's troops and garrisons in the west of
Scotland. He served in the rank of brigadier-general at the battle of Dettingen
in the year 1741, where the British troops were victorious over the French; and
thereafter as major general in sundry other campaigns in Flanders and Germany
during that war; and, while a commone^, was promoted to the rank of
lieutenant general. He was groom of the bedchamber to the late king, while
prince of Wales, and continued to be so to his majesty during the whole of his
reign. He was for many years colonel of the royal Scotch fuzileers, and
thereafter of the royal Scots-grey dragoons, which he now commands. He is also
lieutenant general on the staff in England, and governor of Limerick castle in
Ireland.

His father and he represented the county of Dumbarton in every parliament
since the union. In April 1761, he was re-elected for that county, but
succeeding immediately thereafter to the estate and honors of Argyle, he was,
on the 5th day of May 1761, elected one of the sixteen peers for representing
the peerage of Scotland in parliament, and is now the fourth duke.

In the 1720, he married the honorable Miss Bellenden, daughter of John lord
Bellenden, and maid of honor to the then princess of Wales, by whom he had
four sons and one daughter.

1. John, now marquis of Lorn.

2. Henry, an officer in the army, aid-decamp to general sir John Ligonier, and
killed at the battle of La-felt.

3. Lord Frederick, counselor at law, lately elected member of parliament for
the district of Glasgow, etc. and also for the district of Air, Irvine, etc.

4. Lord William, now an officer in the royal navy.

His daughter, lady Mary, married, 1st, to Charles earl of Aylesbury, by whom
she had one daughter, lady Mary Bruce, married to Charles duke of Richmond and
Lennox. She married, 2dly, general Henry Seymor Conway, brother to the earl of
Hartford, by whom she has also one daughter.

John, marquis of Lorn, eldest son and heir apparent of John fourth duke of
Argyle, being likeways bred to the army, served several campaigns abroad, is
now a major general, colonel of a regiment of dragoons, and of the regiment of
sencible men in Argyleshire. He represented the burghs of Glasgow, Dumbarton,
etc. in the three last parliaments.

On the 3d day of March 1759, he married Elizabeth, duchess dowager of
Hamilton and Brandon, by whom he has issue.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st and 4th, girony of eight pieces, or and sable, 2d and 3d
argent, a galley (or lymphad) sable, sails furled up, flag and pinnets flying,
and oars in action, for the lordship of Lorn.

CREST; on a wreath of his tinctures; a boar's head couped or.

MOTTO; on an escrol, Ne obliviscari^s.

SUPPORTERS; two lions guardant gules, armed and langued azure, standing on a
compartment, whereon are these words, Vix ea nostra voco; behind the shield are
placed a battoon and sword accolle saltireways, the one being gules semee of
thistles or, and ensigned with an imperial crown and the crest of Scotland, and
the other a sword proper, hilted and pommelled or, being the two badges of the
great master household and high justiciar of the kingdom of Scotland.

CHIEF SEATS.
Inverara in Argyleshire, Cambleton in Kintyre, Roseneath in Dumbartonshire,
etc.

Earl of ATHOLE.
THIS is one of the most ancient and most honorable titles in the kingdom of
Scotland. It has been enjoyed by more of the royal family than any other, and
was first conferred upon

I. MALCOLM, son of king Donald VII. brother of king Malcolm Canmore. He was
one of the greatest men of his time, was created earl of Athole by king David
I. and was a consenter and witness to the foundation-charter of the monastery
of Scoon, Buchanan etc. Chartul. of Scoon, penes vicecomitem de Stormont.
by king Alexander I. anno 1115: To which he was afterward a benefactor.

A learned historian says of him, Torpheus's hist. of the earls of Orkney, cap.
22. p. 100.
Omnium Scotiae principum nobilissimus, patruelis quippe Davidis regis Scotiae,
in praesens regnantis, etc.

He married a daughter of Haco earl of Orkney, Ibidem.
by whom he had a son,

II. MALCOLM, second earl of Athole, who succeeded him, Chartul. of Scoon.
and ratified his father's donations to the religious at Scoon.

He also made a donation to the abbacy of Dumfermline, Chartul. of Dumfermline
penes Macfarlane, p. 512.
of the tithes of the church of Mullen, for the safety of his soul, and his
predecessors, kings of Scotland; to which king William is a witness, in 1166.

Also a donation to the priory of St. Andrews, Chartul of St. Andrews, penes
eund. p. 304
of the patronage of the church of Dull, etc. pro salute animae suae and
Kertildae sponsae suae, to which Duncan earl of Fife, Henry and Duncan, his two
sons, are witnesses, ante 1174.

By the said Kertilda he left issue two sons.

1. Henry.

2. Duncan.

And was succeeded by the eldest son,

III. HENRY, third earl of Athole, who confirmed his father's grants to the
abbacy of Dumfermline and St. Andrews, to which last, Ibid. p. 305.
Margareta comitissa, sponsa ejus, Alexander de Seton, Colinus, nepos ejus,
etc. are witnesses.

By the said Margareta comitissa he left issue three daughters.

1. --, whose name is not upon record.

2. Isabel.

3. Ferelith.

The earl dying without male issue, the title of earl returned to the crown,
but was afterward enjoyed by the husbands of the three daughters successively,
as will be shown hereafter.

Immediately upon the death of Henry 3d earl of Athole, king Alexander II.
conferred the honors upon

IV. ALANUS de LONDONIIS, ostiarius regis, who was the fourth earl of Athole,
having married --, eldest daughter of the third earl.

This is attested by a confirmation of Alanus, ostiarius regis comes Atholiae,
Chartul. of Arbroath, penes M'Farlane.
of the wood and forest of Orphack in Aberdeenshire, to the monastery of
Arbroath, which formerly had been given by Thomas de London, ostiarius regis
pater suus, etc. and is afterward confirmed by king Alexander II. Ibidem.
anno 1223.

He dying without issue, that same year, the title was immediately conferred
upon

V. THOMAS of Galloway, fifth earl of Athole, who was son of Uchtred, and
brother of Alan lord of Galloway, and married Isabel, Cambden.
second daughter of earl Henry.

This is attested by donations made and confirmed to the abbacy of Dumfermline,
Chartul. of Dumfermline and book of charters, penes M'Farlane, vol. I. p. 59,
ad annum 1226.
by Thomas de Galouyea, comes Atholiae, and Isabella comitissa, ejus sponsa,
etc.

He died in 1234, and left issue a son,

PATRICK, sixth earl of Athole, who was burnt in his own lodging, in the town
of Haddington, ^ it is said by the instigation of sir John Bisset, Fordun,
Buchanan, Dalrymple's collect. etc.
anno 1242, and having no issue, the title again returned to the crown, but was
immediately con^erred upon

IV. Sir DAVID HASTINGS, who was seventh earl of Athole, having married
Ferelith, third daughter of earl Henry, and aunt to Patrick the sixth earl;
which is instructed by a good author, Fordun, lib. IX. cap. 59.
who says, Post ejus obitum (comitis Patricii) David de Hastingis ejus accipit
comitatum; provenit item sibi ex part uxoris suae, quae erat matertera
Patricii comitis occisi, etc.

In a treaty of peace betwixt king Alexander II. of Scotland, and king Henry
III. of England, we find David de Hastings comes Atholiae, Rymer tom. I. p. 428.
one of the guarantees of the treaty, anno 1244.

There is also an original charter of a donation, Chart. in the lawyers
library, Edinr.
made by Ferelith countess of Athole, to the abbacy of Cupar in Angus, of the
lands of Dunfuther, Pro salute animae suae and aniniae domini David de
Hastings, comitis Atholiae, quondam viri sui, etc.

He died in a pilgrimage to the Holy land, anno 1269, Fordun, lib. X. cap. 27.
leaving issue one daughter, his sole heiress, viz.

Adda, married to John de Strabolgie, descended of Duncan earl of Fife, who got
from king William the Lion, the lands of Strabolgie, which he gave to his
second son,

DAVID, who, from the possession of these lands, assumed the surname of
Strabolgie, of which there are many authentic documents in the chartulary of
Murray, Chartul. of Murray, penes Walterum Macfarlane de eodem. p. 76, 65, 104
and 338, etc.
but we shall here mention only one, viz. A convention betwixt Andrew bishop of
Murray and nobilem virum David de Strabolgie, silium quondam Duncani comitis de
Fife, etc. dated 6th October 1232.

This David was succeeded by his son,

V. JOHN de STRABOGIE, who, having married Adda, as above noticed, was
immediately cinctus cum gladio comitatus Atholiae, etc. and was the eight earl.

This John, comes Atholiae, and Adda comitissa, confirm a donation to the monks
of Cupar, Sir James Balfour's collections in the lawyers library, Edinr.
of the lands of Innmith, quas David comes Atholiae, pater Addae comitissae,
dedit, etc. the confirmation is dated anno 1283.

He was one of the magnates Scotiae that engaged to acknowledge and receive
Margaret, daughter of Eri^ king of Norway, Rymer, tom. II. p. 266.
and grandchild of king Alexander III. as undoubted hei^ to the crown of
Scotland, etc. anno 1284.

He was also one of the judges chosen o^ the side of Robert Bruce, lord of
Annandale, competitor for the crown, Ibid. p. 553.
anno 1292.

And was concerned in all the public transactions of those times on the side of
Robert Bruce, Ibid. p. 558, 594, 644, 776, etc.
anno 1294 and 1296.

He died before the year 1300, leaving issue a son and successor,

VI. DAVID de STRABOGIE, ninth earl of Athole, who married Isabella, daughter
of Richard, natural son of John king of England, by whom he got a vast estate
in that kingdom, Sir James Balfour's collect.
which at last proved the ruin of the family.

He did not long survive his father, but was succeeded by his son,

VII. JOHN de STRABOGIE, tenth earl of Athole, who was one of those worthy
patriots, that joined king Robert Bruce as soon as he began to assert his title
to the crown; and was with him at the battle of Methven, but was afterward
unfortunately taken prisoner, and carried to London.

And, having formerly been obliged, with many of his brave countrymen, to swear
fealty to king Edward I. he was, Dugdale's baronage of England, and all the
Scotch historians.
on that account, tried for high treason, found guilty, condemned, and executed
in the flower of his age, with two of king Robert's brothers, at Westminster,
anno 1308.

He was succeeded by his son,

VIII. DAVID de STRABOLGIE, eleventh earl of Athole, who, for several years,
was a faithful subject, and in high favor with king Robert Bruce.

He was sent prisoner to London, for adhering to king Robert's interest, anno
1306, and is then designed filius and haeres comitis Atholiae, etc. Rymer, tom.
II. p. 1014.
And being afterward released he returned to king Robert, who made him lord
high constable of Scotland, Chartul. of Arbroath.
anno 1311, and conferred many other favors upon him.

But he having large possessions in England, was strongly attached to that
kingdom. At last he withdrew his allegiance from his lawful sovereign and
benefactor, Rymer, tom. IV. p. 437.
joined the interest of the Baliols, and went to England, where he was well
received by king Edward, from whom he got grants of many lands, and pensions to
a considerable extent.

King Robert, on account of the great merit of his ancestors, and sufferings of
his father, was very tender in degrading or forseiting him, and used all
possible means to reclaim him, but in vain.

At length, the office of constable of Scotland, which had formerly been given
during the king's pleasure only, Chart. penes comitem de Errol.
was bestowed upon that worthy patriot sir Gilbert Hay of Errol, here^ably to
him and his heirs for ever, anno 1315.

In 1327, there was a treaty of peace betwixt Scotland and England concluded at
Northamton, whereby it was provided, that no Scotch, or Englishman could
possess lands or titles in Scotland, unless he resided in that kingdom. This
earl then absolutely refusing to return to his allegiance, Rymer, and hist. of
Scotland.
was outlawed, and his estate and titles forfeited to the crown, anno 1327.
Which he resented highly, and was ever after an implacable enemy to his
country. In the minority of king David Bruce, he accepted of the command of a
body of English troops, in favors of Edward Baliol, and was killed at the
battle of Kilblain, anno 1335.

He married Jean or Johanna, Dugdale's baronage of England.
eldest daughter and co-heiress of John Cummin lord of Badenoch, by whom he got
a considerable accession to his estate, and by her had a son,

David de Strabolgie, his heir.

It Is alleged, he had several other sons, who, after their father's
forfeiture, laid aside the surname of Strabogie, but still resided in Scotland.
It Is said also, that of these younger sons, the M'Intoshes, Dusss, and some
other families in the North, are descended.

IX. DAVID de STRABOLGIE, twolsth earl of Athole, still retained that title,
though he resided in England, Rymer, tom. IV. p. 664, tom. V. 177, ad ann. 1340.
and is designed filius and haeres Davidis de Strabogie, comitis Atholiae, and
dilectus, and fidelis consanguineus regis Angliae, etc. etc. in many public
acts.

He married Elizabeth, Dugdale's baronage of England.
daughter of Henry lord Ferrers of Groby, by whom he had two daughters,
co-heiresses to all his estates in England.

1. Elizabeth, Ibidem.
married to sir Thomas Percy, knight, son to Henry lord Percy.

2. Philippa, Ibidem.
married to sir Ralph Percy, a younger son of the same sir Henry.

He died on 22d October 1375, was buried at Ashford in Kent, Book of ancient
funeral monuments, penes M'Farlane.
and was the last earl of Athole of this family.

CAMPBELL Earl of ATHOLE.
THE title of ATHOLE being now in the crown, by the forfeiture of David de
Strabolgie, as before noticed, king Robert Bruce immediately conferred it upon
his own nephew,

Sir JOHN CAMPBELL of Moulin, Dalrymple's historical collections, p. 379.
created earl of Athole, who was second son of sir Neil Campbell of Lochow, by
lady Mary Bruce, sister of the king.

He was a man of singular worth and merit, and in high favor with his uncle
king Robert.

We find him designed earl of Athole in many authentic documents; particularly,
there is a charter, granted by John Campbell comes Atholiae, domino Rogero de
mortuo mari terrarum de Billandre, Chart. penes Rait of Hallgreen, and Mr.
Nisbet, vol. I. p. 294.
confirmed by a charter under the great seal of king David II.

There is also a charter, of king David II. Rober^o de Erskine, militi, domino
ejusdem, of an annuity out of the borough maills of Dundee, Dalrymple's
collections.
and lands of Pitcarrach, then in the crown, by the demise of John Campbell
earl of Athole, etc.

But he dying without issue, the title of Athole again returned to the crown.

DOUGLAS Earl of ATHOLE.
THE next who enjoyed this title, was WILLIAM DOUGLAS, lord of Liddisdale,
eldest lawful son of sir James de Londonia, ancestor of the earl of Morton.

He was invested with the title of earl of Athole by king David II. anno 1341.
Chart. in pub. archiv. Home's hist. of Douglas, Nisbet's append. p. 178.
The heroic exploits and glorious actions performed by this truly great man in
the service of his king and country, being faithfully recorded by Fordun,
Buchanan, and many other Scotch historians; to these we refer our readers.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir John Graham of Abercorn, Ibidem.
etc. Vide title Morton.

And having no male issue, he resigned his title of Athole in favors of Robert
earl of Strathern, great steward of Scotland, afterward king Robert II.
whereby it was again vested in the crown.

WALTER Earl of ATHOLE, STRATHERN, and CAITHNESS.
KING Robert II. was pleased to bestow the earldom of Athole upon the lord
Walter Stewart, Chart. in pub. archiv.
his second son by queen Eupham Ross, anno 1375.

He afterward had both the earldoms of Strathern and Caithness conferred upon
him, and got a charter, under the great seal, Waltero comiti Atholiae and
Cathaniae, Ibidem.
etc.

He married the daughter and heiress of sir David Barclay, lord of Brechin, by
whom he had two sons.

1. David, who died in England, an hostage for king James I.'s ransom, Rymer,
tom. X. p. 308.
and is then designed David primogenitus comitis Atholiae, etc. anno 1424.

2. Alan, earl of Caithness, who was killed at the battle of Inverlochie, anno
1428. Both without issue.

Though this Walter earl of Athole had innumerable honors and favors conferred
upon him by the king and royal family, yet he was the chief actor in that
horrid murder of his nephew king James I. for which he was most justly
condemned and executed, and all his estates and honors were forfeited to the
crown, where the title of Athole remained, till king James II. bestowed it upon
his uterine brother, sir John Stewart of Balveny, etc.

STEWART Earl of ATHOLE.
WE shall here briefly deduce the descent of this great branch of the
illustrious family of STEWART from Alexander, lord high steward of Scotland,
who died anno 1283, and was great grandfather of king Robert II.

I. ALEXANDER, sixth lord high steward of Scotland, married Jean, daughter and
heiress of Angus Macrory, lord of Bute, by whom he had several children.

1. James, his successor, seventh lord high steward of Scotland, grandfather of
king Robert II.

II. 2. Sir JOHN STEWART, who married Margaret, daughter and heiress of sir
Alexander de Bonkyll, knight, whereby he was afterward designed sir John of
Bonkill, etc. He is found, amongst many others of his countrymen, Prynne's
collections, v. III.
swearing fealty to king Edward I. when he had overrun Scotland, anno 1296.

He joined Wallace and Douglas in defense of the liberties of his country, and,
in his brother's absence, Stuart's hist. of the royal family, p. 149.
commanded his vassals and military tenants at the memorable battle of Falkirk,
where he behaved gloriously, and lost his life in that fatal engagement, anno
1298.

By the said Margaret de Bonkill, he left issue seven sons and one daughter.

1. Sir Alexander of Bonkill, of whom Angus, etc.

2. Sir Alan of Dreghorn, of whom Lennox, etc.

3. Sir Walter of Dalswinton, of whom Galloway, etc.

4. Sir James, ancestor of this noble family, Buchan, Traquair, etc.

5. Sir John, of whom Castlemilk, etc. are descended.

6. Hugh.

7. Robert.

His daughter Isabel was married to Thomas Randolf, Ibid. and Abercrombie:
earl of Murray, to whom she brought the barony of Garlies.

III. Sir JAMES STEWART, fourth son of sir John of Bonkyll, Stuart's hist: of
the royal family, p. 168.
was killed at the battle of Halidonhill, anno 1333, leaving issue three sons.

1. Sir John Stewart knight, who died without male-issue.

2. Sir Alan, designed of Ochiltree, who died also without issue.

IV. 3. ROBERT STEWART of Shanbothy and Innermeath, Ibid. p. 169.
who left two sons and one daughter.

1. John, of Innermeath.

2. Robert, ancestor of the Stewarts of Rosyth.

His daughter, Catharine, married John Bethune of Balfour.

V. JOHN STEWART, lord of Innermeath, designed also of Lorn, married the
daughter and co-heiress of John de Ergadia, lord of Lorn, Ibidem.
by whom he had five sons and two daughters.

1. Robert, his successor.

2. Archibald.

3. Sir James, who carried on the line of this family.

4. Alexander, ancestor of the Stewarts of Grantully.

5. William.

1. Daughter, Christian, married to James Dundas of that ilk.

2. Isabel, married to sir William Oliphant of Aberdalgy, ancestor of lord
Oliphant.

VI. Sir JAMES STEWART, called the black knight of Lorn, third son of John lord
of Innermeath and Lorn, All Scotch historians.
married queen Jane, daughter of John duke of Lancaster, son of Edward III.
king of England, and widow of king James I. of Scotland, by whom he had three
sons.

1. Sir John, afterward earl of Athole.

2. James, earl of Buchan.

3. Andrew, bishop of Murray.

VII. Sir JOHN STEWART, first son of sir James and queen Jane, was a man of
extraordinary parts and great capacity, either for peace or war, and in great
favor with his uterine brother king James II. who raised him to the dignity of
the peerage, Haddington's collections.
by the title of earl of Athole, anno 1457.

In a truce concluded betwixt king James and the English, this John earl of
Athole is one of the guarantees, Rymer, tom. XI. p. 397 and 426.
anno 1457; and in another truce, anno 1459.

He got from the same prince a charter of the lordship of Balvenie, etc. in
Banffshire, "To John earl of Athole, and the heirs-male procreate betwixt him
and Margaret his spouse; Charta penes ducem de Athole.
which failing, to the heirs whatsomever of the earl's body; which failing, to
revert to the crown, etc." dated 25th May 1460.

In the year 1463, John Stewart, earl of Athole, Rymer tom. XI. p. 502.
and lord Balvenie, was appointed ambassador extraordinary to the court of
England. He got two charters from king James III. Chart. in pub. archiv.
of several lands; one dated 20th March 1473, the other 7th November 1477,
Johanni comiti Atholiae, avunculo regis, et haeredibus masculis, quibus
deficientibus, haeredibus quibuscunque, etc.

He was lieutenant to his nephew king James; was greatly instrumental in
reducing to his obedience the lord of the isles, then in rebellion; was the
principal manager of a treaty betwixt that king and the rebels in 1488,
delivering himself an hostage for the king's performance of his part; Stuart's
hist. of the royal family, page 171.
and was imprisoned in the castle of Dumbar by that party, etc.

He married, 1st, lady Margaret Douglas, daughter of Archibald duke of Turenne,
and earl of Douglas, called the Fair Maid of Galloway, by whom he had two
daughters.

1. Lady Janet, Nisbet's appendix, p. 184.
married to Alexander earl of Huntly.

2. Lady Catharine, Ib. and sir James Balfour's collect.
married to John lord Forbes.

He married, All documented in Nisbet's append. p. 184 and185.
2dly, lady Eleanor Sinclair, daughter of William earl of Orkney and Caithness,
by whom he had two sons and eight daughters.

1. John, earl of Athole.

2. Andrew, bishop of Caithness.

1. Daughter, lady Elizabeth, married to Andrew lord Gray.

2. Lady Jean, married to sir Robert Gordon of Pitlurg.

3. Lady Catharine, married to Neil Stewart of Bruich.

4. Lady Isabel, married to Alexander Robertson of Strowan, senior.

5. Lady --, married to Donald Robertson of Strowan, junior.

6. Lady Marjory, married to sir John Campbell of Glenurchie.

7. Lady Margaret, to William Murray, ninth baron of Tullibardin.

8. Lady Anne, to John earl of Lennox.

The earl died in an advanced age, anno 1512, and was succeeded by his eldest
son,

VIII. JOHN, second earl of Athole, who married lady Mary Campbell, daughter of
Colin earl of Argyle, by whom he had a son,

John, Ibid. p. 185; all documented.
his heir, -- and five daughters.

1. Lady Janet, married, first, to Alexander master of Sutherland: 2dly, to
Hugh Kennedy of Girvan-mains: 3dly, to Henry Stewart, lord Methven: and, 4thly,
to William lord Ruthven.

2. Lady Helen, married to John lord Lindsay of Byres.

3. Lady Elizabeth, married to Kenneth M'Kenzie of Kintail, ancestor of the
earl of Seaforth.

4. Lady Jean, married to James Arbuthnot of that ilk.

5. Lady Isabel, married to James Herring of Lethinty and Glasclune.

This earl was killed at the battle of Flowdon, stuart's hist. of the royal
family.
anno 1513, and was succeeded by his only son,

IX. JOHN, third earl of Athole, who was a man of great hospitality and
grandeur, and had a vast estate, Chart. inpub. archiv. inter ann. ^1520 and
1530.
which appears by his charters, under the great seal, from king James V.

He married, 1st, Grizel, daguhter and coheir of sir John Rattray of that ilk,
Ibid. and Nisbet's app p. 136
by whom he had two sons and six daughters.

1. John, earl of Athole.

2. Sir James Stewart of Balvenie.

1. Daughter, lady --, married to John Grant of that ilk.

2. Lady Jean, married to sir John Otterburn of Reidhall.

3. Lady --, married to the lord of Balfour.

4. Lady --, married to -- Wood of Balbegno.

5. Lady Elizabeth, married to William Stewart, apparent heir of Grantully.

6. Lady Barbara, married to Robert Menzies, apparent heir of James Menzies of
that ilk.

This earl married, Chart. in pub. archiv.
2dly, Janet, daughter of John lord Forbes, but by her he had no issue.

He died in 1542, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. JOHN, fourth earl of Athole, a man of great honor, Spottiswood's church
hist.
loyalty and integrity. He dissented from the confession of faith drawn up by
the parliament in 1560.

He was one of the queen's privy council, after she came from France, and was
made justiciar in the northern parts; but he joined the other party after the
prince was born, was on the king's side during his minority, and was made
chancellor of Scotland in 1577.

He got charters, under the great seal, Johanni comiti Atholiae, Chart. in pub.
archiv. inter 1550 and 1570.
haeredibus et assignatis suis quibuscunque, of a great many lands too numerous
to be here inserted.

He married, Nisbet's append. p. 188.
1st, lady Elizabeth Gordon, daughter of George earl of Huntly, by whom he had
two daughters.

1. Lady Elizabeth, married, 1st, to Hugh lord Lovat: Ibidem.
2dly, to Robert earl of Lennox and March: and, 3dly, to James Stewart, earl of
Arran.

2. Lady Margaret, married to George lord Abernethy of Salton.

The earl married, 2dly, Margaret, daughter of Malcolm lord Fleming, by whom he
had a son,

John, Ibidem.
his heir, -- and three daughters.

1. Lady Grizel, married to David earl of Crawford.

2. Lady Jean, married to Duncan Campbell of Glenurchy.

3. Lady Anne, married to Francis earl of Errol.

He died suddenly at Stirling, not without suspicion of poison, anno 1579, and
was succeeded by his only son,

XI. JOHN, fifth earl of Athole, who secretly favored the lords against the
court and the earl of Arran, anno 1585, but was appointed one of the privy
council to king James VI. anno 1590.

He married lady Mary Ruthven, Ibid. and lives of the officers of state.
daughter of William earl of Gowrie, by whom he had four daughters.

1. Lady Dorothea, married to William earl of Tullibardin, whose son John came
to be earl of Athole.

2. Lady Mary, married to James Stewart, lord Innermeath, and earl of Athole.

3. Lady Jean, married, 1st, to Henry Stewart, lord St. Colme: and, 2dly, to
Mr. Nicol Ballenden.

4. Lady Anne, married to Andrew Stewart, master of Ochiltree.

The last three had no surviving male-issue.

This earl died in 1594, and having no male-issue, the titles and honors of
earl of Athole were conferred by his majesty upon John Stewart, Chart. in the
regist, of privy seal.
lord Innermeath, by patent, haeredibus masculis de corpore suo legitime
procreatis seu procreandis, quibus deficientibus, nobis nostrisque
successoribus libere reverten. etc. Dated 6th March 1595 -- 6.

This John earl of Athole and lord Innermeath married, first, lady Margaret
Lindsay, sister of David earl of Crawford, by whom he had a son,

James, his heir.

He married, 2dly, lady Mary Ruthven, daughter of William earl of Gowrie,
relict of John, the last earl of Athole, by whom he had no issue; and dying in
1615, was succeeded by his son,

James, earl of Athole, and lord Innermeath, who married lady Mary, second
daughter of John, fifth earl of Athole; and dying without issue anno 1625, the
title of Athole, according to the last mentioned patent, returned to the crown:
But it being afterward found, that the honors of Athole ought to have
descended to the heir-female, upon failure of heirs-male, king Charles I.
therefore conferred them upon John Murray, only son and heir of William, second
earl of Tullibardin, by lady Dorothea Stewart, eldest daughter and heir of John
fifth earl of Athole, consequently heir of line to John the first earl, uterine
brother to king James II. whose honors and estates appear to have been granted
to his heirs whatsomever, according to his charters from the king before and
hereafter mentioned.

MURRAY Duke of ATHOLE, Earl of TULLIBARDIN, etc.
ALL our historians agree; that the surname of MURRAY is amongst the most
ancient of any in Scotland. Some derive their origin from a warlike people
called the Moravii, Martin's genealogical collections, vol. 1st, page 367, etc.
who came from Germany, and are said to have performed many great exploits in
Scotland, in favors of king Corbred I. against the Romans.

Others are of opinion, they assumed that surname from the county of Murray,
where they had large possessions in very early times.

Certain it is, the progenitors of this great and illustrious family had
considerable estates, both in Perthshire and the northern counties, in the
tenth and eleventh centuries. But we shall pass over all traditional accounts,
and proceed to our documents.

I. FRISKINUS de MORAVIA was proprietor of a vast many lands and baronies in
different counties, and made a great figure in Scotland in the reign of king
David I. who succeeded to the crown anno 1124, and died anno 1153.

This Friskin was father of

II. WILLIAM de MORAVIA, who got a charter, under the great seal of king
William the lion, Willielmo de Moravia, ^ilio Friskini, of the lands of
Strabrock, Duffus, Rossile, Inchikel, Macher, Kintrai, etc. All which were
possessed by his father Friskin in the reign of king David I. Quas terras
Friskinus pater suus tenuit, tempore regis David; etc. Chart. penes comitem de
Buchan.
The charter has no date; but as Felix, bishop of Murray, was witness to it, it
must have been granted in or before the year 1171, in which that bishop died.

William had issue two sons, betwixt whom he divided his lands.

1. Hugh.

2. William, of whom the Murrays of Petty, Bothwell, etc. are descended. Vide
title Lord Bothwell.

III. HUGH, the eldest son, got possession of the lands of Dussus; which then
was the chief seat of the family, and had a son;

IV. WALTER, who, in an agreement about the division of some lands with
Archibald bishop of Murray, Chartul. of Murray, penes Macfarlan^, p. 10.
is designed Walterus de Moravia de Duffus, filius quondam domini Hugonis de
Moravia; etc. anno 1226.

Walter was father of

V. FRISKINUS de MORAVIA, who, in an agreement about the marches of some lands
with Simon bishop of Murray, is designed Friskinus de Moravia, dominus de
Duffus, filius Walteri, Ib. p. 92.
etc. anno 1248.

This Friskinus had no male-issue, and but two daughters,

VI. 1. HELEN; married to sir Reynold de Cheyne, who with her obtained the
barony of Duffus. Ib. and Nisbet's append. p. 192.


2. Christian, married to William de Federith.

In a charter by Malise, earl of Strathern, to his sister Annabella of the
lands of Kincardine, the above Friskinus de Moravia de Duffus, together with
sir Malcolm de Moravia, are witnesses. Chart. penes ducem de Montrose.
The charter is dated at Selkirk the 28th of June, the 22d year of king
Alexander II.'s reign, anno Domini 1236.

This sir Malcolm was the undoubted ancestor of the Murrays of Tullibardin, and
was son of sir John de Moravia, high sheriff of Perth, who probably was a
grandson of the first Friskin, and brother of Hugh, though we cannot, at this
distance of time, positively ascertain the relation.

From this sir John therefore (by good authority) we shall deduce the descent
of this illustrious family, which has flourished in Perthshire, with great
luster, about six hundred years.

I. Sir JOHN de MORAVIA, or MURRAY, appears to have been a man of the first
rank; and made a considerable figure in the end of the reign of king William
the lion, and beginning of king Alexander II. who succeeded to the crown of
Scotland anno 1214.

He is particularly named in a donation to the abbacy of Arbroath, Chartul. of
Arbroath, penes Macfarlane, p. 247, and 248.
together with Guido abbot of Lindores, who died anno 1219.

He was sheriff of Perth in the beginning of the reign of king Alexander II.
Ibid. and Chartul. of Murray, penes ^und. and writs of the family of Sutherland.
and had a brother, Gilbert, who was consecrated bishop of Caithness anno 1222.

He died about the year 1225, and left issue a son arid successor,

II. Sir MALCOLM de MORAVIA, who is witness in the charter above-narrated,
penes ducem de Montrose, dated at Selkirk, anno 1236, Sir James Balfour's
collections. Nisbet's append. p. 192.
and appears to have had large possessions in Perthshire, by many authentic
documents still extant.

He was also high sheriff of the county of Perth, and left issue two sons.

1. Sir John.

2. Sir William, who carried on the line of this family.

Sir John de Moravia, Haddington's collections in the lawyer's library.
first son of sir Malcolm, made a donation to the abbacy of Balmerino, of a
tenement in Perth, to which William, his son and heir, is a witness, anno 1280,
but we can trace his genealogy no further.

III. Sir WILLAM de MORAVIA, or MURRAY, second son of sir Malcolm, got a
charter from Johannes de Moravia, Chartul. of Coldingham, penes Macfarlane.
filius and haeres domini Malcolmi, Willielmo de Moravia, frari suo, terrarum
de Aldy, etc.

He got also from his father, sir Malcolm, the lands of Lamabude (now
Langbride) by a charter, Chart. penes ducem de Athole, Chron. de Melross, etc.
in which Archibald bishop of Murray, William de Haya de Locharret, and Michael
de Wemyss, knights, are witnesses.

He married Adda, daughter of Malise, senescal of Strathern, by Muriel his
wife, daughter and heiress of Congal, filius Duncani, filii Malcolmi, etc. by
her he obtained the lands and estate of Tullibardin, Chart. penes ducem de
Athole. Nisbet, p. 193.
which was ratified and confirmed to him by a charter from Henry, son of
umquhil lord Malise, steward of Stathern, "To sir William de Moravia, son of
umquhil sir Malcolm de Moravia, etc." dated on Tuesday, in the eve of All
Saints, in the year 1284; which lands are still in the possession, and
continued to be the chief title of the family, till they succeeded to the
honors of Athole.

This sir William was one of the magnates Scotiae, Rymer, tom. II. p. 553 and
644.
summoned to Berwick by king Edward I. anno 1292, and was forced to yield and
submit, with many more of his countrymen, to the determination of that monarch,
in favors of John Baliol.

By said Adda his wife he left issue a son and successor,

IV. Sir ANDREW MURRAY, second baron of Tullibardin, who made a donation to the
monks of Inchaffrie, Chartul. of Inchaffrie ad annum 1331.
pro salute animae suae, etc. and, who, having joined the interest of the
Baliols against king David Bruce, was tried, condemned, and beheaded at Perth,
anno 1332, leaving issue a son,

V. Sir WILLIAM MURRAY, third baron of Tullibardin, who, upon the resignation
of Adda de Moravia, Chart. penes ducem de Athole.
his grandmother, obtained a new grant of the barony of Tullibardin from Malise
earl of Strathern, then superior thereof, to which William de Montefix,
justiciarius Scotiae, is a witness, who executed that office, anno 1335.

He left issue a son,

VI. JOHN de MORAVIA, fourth baron of Tullibardin, who succeeded him, and got a
grant, Nisber's apend. p. 194
from sir Alexander de Abernethy knight, of the lands of Pickerling in the
barony of Bambreich in Fife, etc.

He was succeeded by his son,

VII. Sir WALTER MURRAY, fifth baron of Tullibardin, who obtained a
ratification and charter of confirmation, Chart. in archiv. regis David.
under the great seal, of the lands of Tullibardin, Concusse, Pickerlingi etc.
dated in 1362.

He also got charters of a great many other lands, which are fully narrated in
Nisbet's appendix, page 198.

This sir Walter gave a considerable donation to the monastery of Culross,
Ibidem.
pro salute animae suae, etc.

He died anno 1390, leaving issue, by Margaret le Baird his spouse, a son,

VIII. Sir DAVID MURRAY, sixth baron of Tullibardin, first designed of Gask,
who succeeded him, and was knighted by king James I. anno 1424.

He founded the collegiate church of Tullibardin, Ib. and chart. penes ducem de
Athole.
and largely endowed it, which afterward became a good provision for the
remote branches of the family.

The arms of this sir David and his lady, dame Isabel Stewart, are still to be
seen in that church.

He got a charter, from king James I. Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the lands of Tullibardin, etc.

He married Isabel, Ib. and Nisbet's append. where they are documented.
daughter of sir John Stewart of Innermeath lord of Lorn, by whom he had five
sons and three daughters.

1. Sir William, his heir.

2. John Murray of Drysall.

3. Patrick, of whom are descended the Murrays of Auchertyre, Woodend,
Balmanno, Glendoick, the earl of Dysart, etc.

4. James, ancestor of the Murrays of Strowan.

5. Alexander, ancestor of the Murrays of Tibbermuir.

1. Daughter, Mariot, married to sir Malcolm Drummond of Cargil in 1445.

2. Isabel, married to Malcolm Drummond of Coneraig.

3. Christian, married to Murdoch Menteith of Rucky, who had one daughter
married to -- Haldane of Gleneagles, and another to -- Napier of Merchiston,
etc.

Sir David died in 1446, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. Sir WILLIAM MURRAY, seventh baron of Tullibardin, who was one of the
greatest men of his time, and was appointed sheriff of Banff, Haddington's
collections.
anno 1457.

He was also sheriff of Perth, under king James II. and III. was knighted by
the latter, and was one of the plenipotentiaries in a treaty with the English,
Rymer tom. XI. p. 423.
anno 1459.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir John Colquhoun of Luss, lord high
chamberlain of Scotland, and by her, it is said, he had seventeen sons, of whom
many different families of the Murrays are descended. Nisbet's appendix, p. 197.


He was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. Sir WILLIAM MURRAY, eighth baron of Tullibardin, who was in high favor
with king James III. and obtained from that prince a charter of the stewartry
of Strathern, and lordship of Balquhidder, anno 1482. It is granted, dilecto
nostro ac familiari militi Willielmo de Moravia, de Tullibardine, etc. which he
got ratified in parliament, Chart. in pub. archiv.
anno 1492.

He was employed in concluding a treaty with the English, Rymer, tom. XII. p.
571.
anno 1495.

He married Catharine, Chart. penes ducem de Athole.
daughter of Andrew lord Gray, by whom he had four sons and two daughters.

1. Sir John, All documented in Nisbet's append.
who married Elizabeth Crichton, but died without issue.

2. Sir William, his father's heir.

3. Sir Andrew Murray, of Arngosk, ancestor of the viscount of Stormont.

4. David Murray of Strathgeith, who married Catharine Edmondstone.

1. Daughter, Christian, married to George lord Seton.

2. Elizabeth, married to Thomas Stewart of Grantully.

Though sir William was now very aged, he still had the favor and esteem of king
James IV, Chart. in pub. archiv. and chart. penes ducem de Athole.
who was pleased to grant him a dispensation, and free him from all further
attendance either on court or on the king's host, anno 1507.

He died 1509, and was succeeded by his son,

XI. WILLIAM, ninth baron, who is designed filius and haeres, quondam domini
Willielmi Murray de Tullibardin, Chart. penes ducem de Athole, and in pub.
archiv. inter 1510 and 1520.
in a charter under the great seal, dated anno 1510. He got also several other
charters from king James IV. of many lands, etc.

He married lady Margaret, daughter of John earl of Athole, Chart. penes ducem
de Athole.
by whom he had three sons and one daughter.

1. William.

2. Andrew Murray.

3. David Murray.

His daughter, Helen, was married to Alexander Seton of Parbroath.

XII. WILLIAM MURRAY, tenth baron of Tullibardin, succeeded his father, and got
a charter, under the great seal in 1542, containing an entail of his estate to
himself in liferent, and to William his son and apparent heir in see, and the
heirs-male of his body; which failing to Alexander and James Murrays his sons,
and the heirs male of their body; which failing, to Andrew Murray,
brother-german to William Murray of Tullibardin, and the heirs-male of his
body; which failing, to David Murray, Chart. in pub. archiv.
brother to the said William, and the heirs-male of his body; which failing, to
William Murray, son to David Murray of Alicht, and the heirs-male of his body;
which failing, to Alexander Murray of Strowan, and the heirs-male of his body;
which failing, to John Murray of Wallacetown, and the heirsmale of his body;
all which failing, to his own nearest and lawful heirs whatsomever.

He married Catharine, daughter of sir John Campbell of Glenurchy, Ibid. ad
annum 1538.
ancestor of the earl of Breadalbine, by whom he had four sons and four
daughters.

1. Sir William.

2. Alexander, a colonel in the service of the States of Holland.

3. James Murray of Purdorvis. Ib. ad annum 1582.


4. Andrew Murray.

1. Daughter, Annabella, married to John lord Erskine, afterward earl of Mar
and regent of Scotland.

2. Eupheme, married, 1st, to Robert Steuart of Rosyth, Ibidem.
2dly, to Robert Pitcairn, commendator of Dumfermline, and, 3dly, to Patrick
Gray of Innergowric.

3. Catharine, Chart. penea dom. Abercairny.
married to Robert Moray of Abercairnie.

4. Jean, Chart. in pub. archiv.
married to James Henderson of Fordel.

He died in 1562, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. Sir WILLIAM MURRAY, eleventh baron of Tullibardin, who was a great
promoter of the reformation, Mr. Keith's collections.
and sat in the parliament 1560, which established the reformed religion.

Upon the queen's return from France in 1561, he got much into her favor, and
had the honor to entertain her majesty several times at his house of
Tullibardin: He was made one of her privy council, and comptroller of the
household in 1565.

He was one of those great barons that entered into an association for the
preservation of the young prince, and for prosecuting the murderers of the
king; Sir James Melvil's memoirs.
and always retained a most dutiful respect, and behaved with the utmost
submission to her majesty.

He, with the master of Erskine, had the tuition of the young king, and were
joint keepers of the castle of Stirling; in which offices he acquitted himself
with great fidelity and universal approbation; Records of council in the signet
office.
and the king, as soon as he took the management upon himself, appointed him
one of his privy council.

He married lady Agnes Graham, daughter of William earl of Montrose, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
by whom he had three sons and two daughters.

1. John, his heir.

2. Sir William Murray of Pitcairly.

3. Mungo Murray of Dunork.

1. Daughter, Margaret, married to sir Robert Bruce of Clackmannan. All
doccumented in Nisbet's append. p. 199.


2. Jean, married to sir John Hepburri of Waughton.

He died in 1583, and was succeeded by his eldest sou,

XIV. Sir JOHN MURRAY, twelfth baron of Tullibardin, who having been bred up
with his majesty king James VI. from their infancy, and being a man of singular
worth and merit, the king always had him in high esteem. He was one of his
privy council, Acts of parliment in 1592.
and master of his household in 1592.

He obtained a charter, under the great seal, containing an entail of his lands
of Letter-Banachy, etc. to himself in liferent, and to his eldest son in fee,
and to the heirs-male of his body; which failing, to his second son, and so to
all his sons, Chart. penes dom. Moray de Abercairny ad annum 1604.
one after another; which failing, to his brother William; which failing, to
his brother Mungo, etc.

His majesty's esteem and regard for him still increasing, he was pleased to
raise him to the dignity of a peer of the realm, Creations of the nobility, in
the lawyers library, Edinburgh. Chart. penes ducem de Athole.
by the title of lord Murray of Tullibardin, by letters patent, dated 25th
April 1604, and earl of Tullibardin on 10th July 1606.

He married Catharine, daughter of David lord Drummond, by whom he had five
sons and four daughters.

1. William.

2. Captain John Murray.

3. Patrick Murray of Castletoun, afterward earl of Tullibardin.

4. Mungo Murray, who became viscount of Stormont by a special provision, but
died without issue.

5. Robert Murray.

1. Daughter, lady Anne, married to Patrick lord Glammis, and earl of Kinghorn.

2. Lady Lilias, married to sir John Grant of that ilk.

3. Lady Margaret, to James Haldane of Gleneagles.

4. Lady Catharine, to David Ross of Balnagowan.

JOHN, first earl of Tullibardin, died in 1609, and was succeeded by his eldest
son,

XV. WILLIAM, second earl of Tullibardin, who, when a young man, together with
his cousin; David viscount of Stormont, had the good fortune to be greatly
instrumental in the rescue of the king at Perth, from the attempt of the earl
Gowrie and his brother against the sacred persori of his majesty, anno 1600.
For that signal service, he got the sheriffship of Perthshire (which had
heretably belonged to the house of Ruthven) conferred upon him during the
king's pleasure; Nisbet's app. p. 200.
and it has mostly continued in the family of Athole ever since.

He married Dorothea, eldest daughter and heir of line of John, fifth and last
earl of Athole of the name of Stewart, by whom he had one son,

John, who afterward became earl of Athole, -- and one daughter,

Lady Anne, married to sir John Moncrief of that ilk.

This earl, a little before his death, knowing that his son was heir of line to
the earldom of Athole, and being unwilling that the estate and honors of
Athole and Tullibardin should be conjoined in the same person, made a
resignation of his title of Tullibardin into the king's hands, Chart. in
cancellaria, 1mo Aprilis 1686.
iu favors of his brother Patrick, in order to make two distinct families,
which was accordingly confirmed, by a patent, under the great seal, Ib.
Haeredibus masculis quibuscunq.
Patricio comiti de Tullibardine, anno 1628.

This Patrick, third earl of Tullibardin, got several charters under the great
seal; Ibidem.
and married Elizabeth Dent, an English lady, by whom he had two sons.

1. James, his heir.

2. William, designed of Redcastle, a youth of great hopes, valor rind honor,
was early engaged in the service of king Charles I. but unfortunately taken
prisoner at the battle of Philiphaugh, and executed at St. Andrews, Bp
Guthrie'^ memoirs.
anno 1646.

Earl Patrick was succeeded by his eldest son,

JAMES, fourth earl of Tullibardin, who got a^ charter, under the great seal,
Jacobo comiti de Tullibardine, Chart. in pub. archiv.
etc. and married, 1st, his cousin lady Anne Murray, fourth daughter of John
earl of Athole; and, 2dly, lady Lilias Drummond, daughter of John, second earl
of Perth, with whom he had two sons, who died unmarried, whereby the estate and
honors of Tullibardin devolved on John earl of Athole, his cousin and nearest
heir-male.

We now return to

William Murray, second earl of Tullibardin, who died anno 1626, and was
succeeded by

XVI. JOHN MURRAY, his only son by lady Dorothea Stewart, eldest daughter of
John fifth earl of Athole, and undoubted heir of line to John the first earl of
that illustrious house.

It seems the writs of the family had not hitherto been carefully looked into,
which occasioned several mistakes in this peerage; but these were all at last
rectified: for, as the estate and honors of Athole, by the charters dated
1460, 1473, and 1477, before recited, in Title, Stewart earl of Athole,
descended to the heirs of the patentee's body whatever, this John's title to
that dignity appears to have been unquestionable; and he was accordingly served
and retoured heir, in the aforesaid title and dignity, to John earl of Athole,
brother uterine to King James II. who was great grandfather's grandfather, or
tritavas to his mother Dorothea. Retour penes ducem de Athole, et in
cancellaria.
The retour, which is dated 6th day of August 1628, bears, that the king was
bound in honor and conscience to ratify and confirm the foresaid honor and
dignity to the said John Murray, etc. etc.

The king accordingly, by a new patent under the great seal, "ratifies the
foresaid service and retour, and admits, receives, and confirms the said John
Murray to the sole undoubted lawful and just title of earl of Athole, with all
the dignities, etc. thereunto belonging, in all time coming, to be enjoyed by
the said John, and his heirs, with the same order of dignity, as it was
possessed by the said John earl of Athole, brother to king James II." And the
patent, which is dated 16th February 1629, Diploma comitatus Atholiae Johanni
comiti, etc. in pub. archiv.
contains a clause of novo damus of the dignity of earl of Athole to the said
John, and his heirs, with salvo, that it should not prejudge his and their
right to the foresaid ancient peerage, etc. etc. etc.

This John earl of Athole was a man of singular worth and probity. As soon as
the civil war broke out, he attached himself entirely to his majesty's
interest, in which he persisted with great firmness and fidelity. He raised
about two thousand of his own men for the king's service, Nisbet's appendix.
and declared he would oppose every measure that was contrary to the honor and
dignity of the crown.

He married Jean, daughter of sir Duncan Campbell of Glenurchie, by whom he had
two sons, -- and one daughter.

1. John, his heir.

2. Mungo, who was lieutenant of his majesty's guards at the restoration.

His daughter, lady Anne, Nisbet's append. p. 202.
was married to her first cousin, James earl of Tullibardin, who died without
issue, as before noticed.

This earl died in 1642, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVII. JOHN earl of Athole, who adhered firmly to the interest both of king
Charles I. and II. In 1653, he raised for the king above two thousand men, for
which he suffered great hardships before the restoration; but, in consideration
thereof, his majesty was pleased to constitute him one of his privy council,
and master of his household, in 1661.

He got a charter under the great seal haereditarii officii senescallatus de
Fife; Chart. in pub. archiv.
was made justice general of Scotland anno 1663, captain of his majesty's
guards in 1670, lord privy seal in 1672, and one of the extraordinary lords of
session. And, in further regard of his eminent services, Chart. in archiv.
haeredibus masculise corpore suo.
he was created marquis of Athole, by letters patent, dated 7th February 1676,
limiting that title of marquis to the heirs-male of his body.

His majesty king James VII. having likeways a great opinion of his loyalty and
merit, gave him the command of the troops sent to suppress the insurrection of
the earl of Argyle in the West.

In the year 1687, he was created one of the knights of the thistle, and the
revolution happening soon thereafter, he retired from all public business, and
spent the remainder of his days, at some of his fine seats in Perthshire, in
great peace and tranquillity.

He married lady Emilia Stanly, daughter of that loyal and valiant patriot
James earl of Derby in England, (who was beheaded for his inviolable attachment
to the royal family in 1651) by his wife lady Charlotte, daughter of Claud duke
de la Tremovile, a duke and peer of France. By her he had six sons, -- and one
daughter.

1. John, his heir.

2. Charles, earl of Dunmore.

3. Lord James Murray of Dowally, who left two daughters, one married to the
lord Rollo, the other to -- Farquharson of Invercauld.

4. Lord William, who became lord Nairn, by marrying the heiress thereof.

5. Lord Edward Murray.

6. Lord Mungo, who died in the expedition to Darien in 1697.

His only daughter, lady Emilia, was married to Hugh lord Fraser of Lovat.

This marquis died in 1703, and was succeeded by his son,

XVIII. JOHN marquis of Athole, a man endowed with many eminent virtues and
qualities. He came early into the revolution, and was made secretary of state
by king William in 1695; created earl of Tullibardin in his father's lifetime
1696, and made his majesty's high commissioner to the parliament anno 1697.

He was appointed one of the privy council to queen Anne, immediately upon her
accession to the crown anno 1702. He was constituted lord privy seal in April,
Chart. in pub. archiv. Haeredibus masculis e corpore suo, quibus deficien.
haeredibus masculis de corpore defuncti Johannis mar^ chionis de Athole sui
patris, ad ann. 1703.
and created duke of Athole 30th June 1703, by patent, to the heirs-male of his
body; which failing, to the heirs-male of the body of John marquis of Athole,
his father. His titles were, duke of Athole, marquis of Tullibardin, earl of
Strath-Tay and Strathardle, viscount of Balquhidder, Glenalmond and Glenlyon,
lord Murray, Balvenie, Gask, etc. He was also made knight of the most noble
order of the thistle.

In 1706, he opposed the union with all his interest, and not only argued and
spoke against every article of it, but he entered several spirited protests
against it, which are preserved in the public records.

After the union was concluded, the duke retired to Perthshire, where he lived
some years in great splendour and magnificence.

In 1712, he again came to court, and was made one of her majesty's privy
council. In 1713, he was made lord privy seal, and was chosen one of the
sixteen peers for Scotland to the third and fourth British parliaments.

He married, 1st, lady Catharine eldest daughter of William and Anne duke and
duchess of Hamilton, by whom he had six sons, -- and one daughter.

1. John marquis of Tullibardin, a youth of great hopes, who was killed at the
battle of Mons in 1709.

2. William marquis of Tullibardin, who, being engaged in the rebellion in
1715, was attainted of high treason, and made his escape to France; but
returning in 1745, was taken prisoner in 1746, and sent to the tower of London,
where he died in 1747, without issue.

3. James, now duke of Athole.

4. Lord Charles, who died without issue.

5. Lord George, who, having engaged in the rebellion 1745, was attainted of
high treason, went abroad, and died at in Holland, anno 1760, leaving issue by
Amelia his spouse, daughter and sole heiress of -- Murray of Strowan and
Glencarse, three sons and two daughters.

1. John Murray, Esquire; married to lady Charlotte Murray, daughter of the present
duke of Athole, and elected member of parliament for the county of Perth in
April 1761.

2. James.

3. George.

1. Daughter, Amelia, married, 1st, to John lord Sinclair; and, 2dly, to James
Farquharson of Invercauld, Esquire;

2. Charlotte.

Duke John's sixth son, lord Basil, died young.

His only daughter of the first marriage, lady Susan, was married to William
earl of Aberdeen, and was mother of the present earl, etc. etc.

He married, 2dly, Mary, daughter of William lord Ross, by whom he had three
sons and one daughter.

1. Lord John, who was elected member for the county of Perth to the three last
parliaments of king George II. is colonel of a regiment, and a
lieutenant general of his majesty's forces.

2. Lord Edward, who married an English lady, by whom he had issue a son, John,
now a captain in the army, and a daughter.

3. Lord Frederick, a captain of the royal navy, who died unmarried.

His daughter, lady Mary, married James lord Deskford, son and heir apparent of
James earl of Finlater and Seafield, and has issue.

William, marquis of Tullibardin, having been attainted of high treason in
1716, as before noticed, the duke, his father, upon a petition, obtained an act
of parliament, settling, after his own death, all the estates and honors
belonging to the family of Athole, on lord James his third son, in the same
manner as if lord William had died before his father, and had never been
attainted. And the duke dying in 1724, the estate and honors devolved
accordingly upon

XIX. JAMES, now duke of Athole, who, at the time of his father's death, was
member of parliament for the county of Perth.

In 1712, he had a company in the first regiment of foot-guards, and afterward
was lieutenant colonel to the earl of Orkney's regiment.

In 1733, he was chosen one of the sixteen peers for Scotland, in the room of
the earl of Sutherland deceased. He was afterward made lord privy seal, one of
his majesty's privy council, and a knight of the most noble order of the
thistle.

Upon the death of the earl of Derby, in 1735, without issue, the estate and
honors of Derby went to sir Edward Stanly his heirmale; but the peerage of
lord Strange in England, the lordship of Man and the Isles, came to the present
James duke of Athole, being heir of line and at law, by which he is possessed
of some of the highest and noblest privileges of any subject in Great Britain.

His grace married, 1st, dame Jean Lanoy, widow of sir Timothy Lanoy in
Middlesex, and daughter of sir John Frederick of Westminster, baronet, by whom
he had a son,

--, marquis of Tullibardin, who died young, -- and two daughters.

1. Lady Jean, married to John earl of Crawfurd, and died without issue.

2. Lady Charlotte, married to her cousin John Murray, Esquire; son of lord George,
as above.

The duke married, 2dly, Jean, daughter of John Drummond of Megginch, Esquire;

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st, azure, three mullets argent, within a double tressure,
flowered and counter-flowered with flowers-de-lis or, for Murray. 2d quarter is
quarterly 1st and 4th, or, a fess-cheque argent and azure for Stewart. 2d and
3d pally of six or and sable for the title of Athole. 3d gules, three legs
armed proper, conjoined at the upper part of the thighs, flexed in a triangle,
garnished and spurred or, for lord of the isle of Man. The 4th as the 1st.

CREST; on a wreath, a demi-savage wreathed about the head and waist vert,
holding in his right hand a dagger proper, the pommel and hilt or, and in his
left a key of the latter.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter side, a lion gules, gorged with a collar azure, and
thereon three mullets argent, for Tullibardin; on the sinister, a savage
wreathed about the head and waist as the crest, his feet in fetters of iron,
and the chain over his right arm.

MOTTO; Forth fortune and fill the fetters,

CHIEF SEATS.
The castle of Blair in Athole, and Dunkel near the river Tay, the castle of
Tullibardin, and Huntingtower, all in Perthshire; the castle of Douglas in the
Isle of Man, and Grosvenor-square, London, etc.

CUMMIN Lord of BADENOCH.
THE surname of CUMMIN is of great antiquity, but the origin is doubtful. Some
deduce them from Hungary, And. Winton's M. S. Chron. of Scotland in the
lawyer's library, Edr.
others say they are of Norman extract.

There were certainly several considerable and flourishing families of that
surname in Scotland in very early times, and many great men amongst them who
were an ornament to their country, though some of them had the misfortune to act
against it.

They flourished for the space of 250 years, viz. from 1080 to 1330, about
which last era they begun to decline; but there arc still some considerable
gentlemen's families in Scotland descended of them.

The first we can give an account of, with any certainty, is

I. COMES ROBERTUS CUMMIN, who appears to have been a man of the first rank in
the reign of king Malcolm Canmore, and was killed with that prince at the
battle of Alnwick, Chron. of Melross.
anno 1093, leaving issue two infant sons.

1. John de Cummin.

2. William, a man eminent for natural and acquired endowments, and highly
esteemed by king David I. Ib. and lives of the officers of state, p. 8.
who constituted him lord high chancellor of Scotland in the beginning of his
reign. In 1142, he was preferred to the episcopal see of Durham by Maud, Ibid.
p. 9. and D^^rymple's Collections, p. 174.
the empress, and died before the year 1159.

II. JOHN de CUMMIN succceded Robert, but we never find him designed Comes,
though he made a considerable figure in the reign of king Alexander I. Martin's
genealogical collections, vol. II. p. 75.
and of this John, it is said, all the Cummins in Scotland are descended.

He was father of

III. Sir WILLIAM CUMMIN, who married Hexetilda, Chartul. of Kelso, penes
Mac^arlane.
grandchild of Donald king of Scotland, and by her had a son and successor,

IV. WILLIAM de CUMMIN, who flourished in the reigns of king Malcolm IV. and
king William the Lion; and, according to Winton, Martin's genealogical
collections, vol. II. p. 75.
was Camerarius to king William; but, according to Mr. Martin and others, he
was ostiarius domini regis, etc.

He was succeeded by his son,

V. Sir RICHARD CUMMIN, who made a donation of the church of Linton-Roderick,
in Tweedale, Register of Kelso, p. 243.
to the monks of Kelso, pro salute Henrici comitis domini sui, etc. before the
year 1152, in which year prince Henry died.

He was one of the hostages sent to England, upon king William's obtaining his
liberty, Rymer, tom. I. p. 39.
anno 1174.

He left issue three sons.

1. Sir John.

2. Sir Walter, Chartul. of Dumfermline penesMacfarlane, p. 210.
who was created earl of Menteith in the beginning of king Alexander II.'s
reign. He was one of the sureties at that prince's marriage, Rymer, tom. I. p.
241.
with Johanna, daughter of John king of England, anno 1220, and married Isabel
countess of Strathern, Home's hist. of Douglas.
etc.

Sir Richard's third son, sir William, was afterward earl of Buchan.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. Sir JOHN, who was called the Red Cummin, and was the first we find
designed lord of Badenoch.

He was a man of great abilities, and was sent ambassador to Lewis IX. king of
France, by king Alexander II. anno 1240, where he negotiated some affairs of
importance, greatly to the king's satisfaction.

According to Cambden, he married Ada, daughter of Patrick Galloway, earl of
Athole; but, according to Buchanan (by whom he is also designed earl of Mar) he
married Mary, daughter of Alan lord of Galloway, by whom he had a son,

John, his heir, -- and three daughters.

1. Jean, Dugdale's baronage of England.
or Johanna, married to David de Strabolgic, earl of Athole.

2. --, married, Crawford's Peerage.
1st, to sir Godfrey de Murray: 2dly, to Alexander de Ergyle, lord of Lorn.

3. --, married to sir Andrew Murray, Ibidem.
lord of Bothwell.

He was succeeded by his only son,

VII. JOHN CUMMIN, lord of Badenoch, called the Black Cummin, inferior to no
subject then in the kingdom for wealth and power, Prynne's collections, v. III.
p. 651.
and was designed John Cummin senior de Badenoch, etc.

He was one of the magnates Scotiae who agreed to stand by, Rymer, tom. II. p.
266.
and support queen Margaret, grandchild to king Alexander III. and defend her
title to the crown of Scotland against all mortals, anno 1284.

He was appointed one of the six governors of this kingdom anno 1286, Ibid. p.
431 and 471.
and agreed to the marriage of the queen with king Edward of England's eldest
son, anno 1290.

After queen Margaret's death, he became one of the competitors for the crown,
as son and heir of John, who was son and heir of Richard, Prynne, vol III. p.
515.
son and heir of William, son and heir of Hexetilda, daughter and heiress of
Gothrick, son and heir of Donald, king of Scotland. But it is well known how
that affair was determined by king Edward of England, in favors of John
Baliol; Rymer, tom II. p. 558.
and we find him soon thereafter swearing allegiance to king Edward I, of
England, as over-lord of Scotland, anno 1292.

However, Ibid. p. 776. liberati sunt Johannes Cummin de Badenoch, et Johannes
Cummin de Badenoch, jun. etc.
both he and his son were carried prisoners to England, and were not set at
liberty till the year 1297, and he died soon thereafter.

He married Marjory daughter of John, and sister of king John Baliol, by whom
he had a son,

John, his heir.

It Is said he had also a daughter married to Archibald Douglas, Home's hist. of
the family of Douglas, Abercrombie, etc.
lord of Galloway, ancestor of the duke of Douglas.

He was succeeded by his son,

VIII. JOHN CUMMIN, lord of Badenoch, who was a man of extensive property,
powerful by his wealth and dependents, cunning, artful and dissembling, fond of
dignity and rank; and, provided he could obtain his wishes, extremely careless
by what means, however base and dishonorable.

Scotland had now for a considerable time groaned under the yoke of English
servitude; Baliol had meanly given up his pretended right to the crown to
Edward; Bruce had secretly intimated to his friends his intention of asserting
his title to the royal dignity, and redeeming the liberty of his country.
Cummin, ever mindful of his own interest, entered into the design, and made a
solemn engagement with Robert to assist him with all his power in mounting the
throne; provided, upon the success of the affair, he should be restored to the
vast possessions his family had enjoyed, which would have aggrandized him much
beyond any other subject, and placed him in a condition little inferior to
royal: but, upon maturer consideration, and weighing the matter in the balance
of self-interest, Rymer, Fordun, Abercrombie, etc. etc.
he began to doubt the event; the attempt was hazardous; he dreaded the
strength of England; every chance seemed against the cause; if it failed, he
was undone: how to mend the step he had taken was to be determined; his own
black heart suggested the detestable remedy, either from the hopes of great
rewards from the English, or perhaps with a view to the crown itself, in virtue
of his mother, who was Baliol's sister; he divulged the whole schemes of the
Scotch patriots to the king of England. Bruce was then in London, but happily
in time discovered he was betrayed, and, not without difficulty, made his
escape to Scotland, where finding clear proof of the villainy of Cummin, he
caused pursue him to the church of Dumfries; whither; from conscious guilt, he
had fled for refuge; and punished him as his crime deserved. Not the house of
GOD, not even the altar; was to be allowed an asylum to protect such infamous
treason and persidy. He fell indeed by too honorable hands, as a hangman or
common executioner should have performed what was done by the Boyd, the
Fleming, and the Lindsay, on 10th February 1306.

Having no issue, he was the last lord of Badenoch, of the name of Cummin.

LINDSAY Earl of BALCARRAS.
AS the rise and descent of the great and ancient surname of Lindsay is to be
found under the Title of Earl of Crawfurd, to that we refer our readers, and
shall here begin with the immediate ancestor of the Lindsays of Edzell, of whom
the earl of Balcarras is the undoubted male representative.

XI. ALEXANDER, second earl of Crawfurd, the eleventh generation of that
illustrious house in a direct male-line, was son of David the first earl, by
lady Catharine Stewart, daughter of king Robert II. He was one of the hostages
for king James I.'s ransom, anno 1424, Rymer, tom. X. p. 307.
was afterward in great favor with that prince, and made a considerable
figure in his reign.

He married Marion daughter and co-heiress of David Dunbar of Cockburn, Chart.
in pub. archiv. ad ann. 1425.
son of George earl of March, by whom he had several sons.

1. David, who died before his father, without issue.

2. Alexander, his successor, whose maleline is also extinct.

3. Walter Lindsay of Edzell, Ibid. and M. S. hist. of the family of Crawfurd,
penes comitem de Balcarras.
ancestor of the present earl of Balcarras, who is now the undoubted heir-male
of the most noble and ancient earls of Crawfurd.

From this Walter therefore we deduce the descent of this noble family.
Extracted from the writs of the family by Mr. Hary Malcolm, a learned antiquary.


XII. WALTER LINDSAY of Edzell, third son of Alexander second earl of Crawfurd,
was a man of great parts and sagacity. He was tutor in law to his nephew David
earl of Crawfurd and duke of Montrose. He purchased the lands of Aird in 1458,
Chart. in the public register.
and acquired also the lands of Winthank, Pitcorthie, Panbride, etc. anno 1472.

He married, 1st, Sophia, daughter of -- Livingston of Saltcoats, by whom he
had no issue.

He married, 2dly, Isabel daughter of William lord Livingston, by whom he had a
son and successor,

XIII. Sir DAVID LINDSAY, designed of Edzell and Beaufort, who got charters,
under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the lands of Kilbride, and several others; and married, 1st, Catharine
daughter of -- Fotheringhame of Powrie, by whom he had a son,

Walter, M. S. hist. of the family of Crawfurd.
his apparent heir; -- and four daughters.

1. Margaret, married to Andrew Straiton of that ilk, or Lauriston.

2. Agnes, married to George Moray of Abercairnie.

3. --, married to sir Robert Menzies of Weem.

4. --, died unmarried.

Sir David married, 2dly, Agnes Ogilvie, widow of Alexander Straiton of
Lauriston, by whom he had no issue.

He married, 3dly, Elizabeth daughter of -- Spence of Bodum, by whom he had a
son,

Sir Alexander Lindsay of Vainvy and Kethick; -- and a daughter,

Janet, married to -- Ramsay of Banabruck. He died in 1527.

XIV. WALTER, Ibidem.
first son and apparent heir of sir David Lindsay of Edzell, a man of great
spirit and fortitude, married -- Erskine, daughter of the lord of Dun, by whom
he had four sons, -- and two daughters.

1. Sir David of Edzell and Glenesk.

2. Alexander Lindsay, Keith's catalogue of the Scotch bishops, p. 119.
who married a daughter of -- Barclay of Mathers, and was father of David
bishop of Ross, who was father of sir Jerome Lindsay, lord lion king at arms.

3. Robert Lindsay of Kirkton.

4. John Lindsay.

1st daughter --, married to sir -- Scot of Balwearie.

2. --, married to -- Anstruther of that ilk.

This Walter was killed at the fatal field of Flowdon, M. S. hist. of the
family of Crawfurd.
anno 1513, his father being then alive, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. Sir DAVID LINDSAY of Edzell and Glenesk, who succeeded also to his
grandfather, anno 1527, and made a great figure in the reign of king James V.
Chart. in pub. archiv. inter 1530 and 1550.
He got charters, under the great seal, of the lands of Auchterallan,
Tulliehilt, Newpark, Auchtertyre, and several other lands and baronies; by
which it appears he was then possessed of a vast estate.

He married, Chart. penes dom. Gray.
1st, Janet daughter of Patrick lord Gray, by whom he had no issue.

He married, M. S. hist. of the family of Crawfurd.
2dly, Catharine daughter of John Campbell of Calder, son of Archibald earl of
Argyle, by whom he had five sons, -- and two daughters.

1. Sir David, his heir.

2. Mr. John Lindsay, ancestor of the earl of Balcarras, of whom afterward.

3. Robert Lindsay of Bath-hall.

4. Sir Walter Lindsay of Balgay, who was killed by David earl of Crawfurd in
1605.

5. Mr. James Lindsay, parson of Fettercairn.

1st daughter, Elizabeth, married to Patrick lord Drummond, ancestor of the
family of Perth.

2. Margaret, Stuart's hist. of the royal family.
married to John lord Innermeath.

It is proper to observe here, that David earl of Crawfurd, who had been
barbarously used by his sons, disponed the estate and honors of Crawfurd to
this sir David Lindsay of Edzell, his nearest heir-male. The disposition is
dated on 20th December 1541. The earl died in 1542, and sir David succeeded to
the estate and honors of Crawfurd accordingly; but he afterward conveyed them
back to the master of Crawfurd, the earl's grandson, upon this express
condition, that the title and estate should return to the family of Edzell,
Mackenzie. M. S. hist. of the family of Crawfurd, and Crawfurd's peerage p. 85.
as next heir-male, failing the male-line of the said master; and at the same
time reserving to himself, for his life only, the title, and such a provision
as supported him according to his quality.

This David, lord of Edzell and earl of Crawfurd, died in September 1558, and
was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVI. Sir DAVID LINDSAY of Edzell and Glenesk, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who got a charter from king James VI. of the lands of Edzell and others, dated
in 1586.

Also a charter of the lands of Garlobank and others, Ibidem.
in vicecomitatu de Forfar, wherein he is designed, David dominus de Edzell,
miles, etc. He got charters of several other lands, too numerous to be here
inserted.

He married, 1st, lady Helen Lindsay, daughter of David earl of Crawfurd, by
whom he had two sons, -- and four daughters.

1. David of Edzell.

2. Alexander of Canterland, whose son John succeeded to the estate of Edzell.

1st daughter, Helen, married, 1st, to -- Melvil of Baldowie, 2dly, to Andrew
Arbuthnot of Feddes, brother to Robert viscount Arbuthnot.

2. --, married to -- Symmer of Bratinstut.

3. -- married to Mr. Lambie.

4. Margaret, Chart. in pub. archiv.
married to sir David Carnegie of Coluthie, ancestor of the earl of Southesk.

Sir David married for his second wife Isabel, daughter of lord Forbes, but by
her he had no issue.

He was a man of good parts and learning, and was made one of the senators bf
the college of justice, upon his brother Mr. John's resignation, who was then
made secretary of state.

He died anno 1620, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVII. Sir DAVID LINDSAY of Edzell and Glenesk, Ibidem.
who got a charter of the lands of Waterston, etc. in his father's lifetime,
and married Margaret daughter of sir -- Wishart of Pittarrow, by whom he had a
son,

Alexander, -- and a daughter,

Margaret, married to James Keith of Benholm, son of George fifth earl
Marishall, to whom she had two daughters; 1. Elizabeth, married to Sir
Archibald Primrose of Dalmeny, ancestor of the earl of Roseberry; 2. Anne,
married to Patrick Smith of Braco, grandfather to David Smith now of Methven,
Esquire;

Alexander, only son and apparent heir of sir David, M S. hist. of the family
of Crawfurd.
died in 1638, having married lady Anne, daughter of David earl of Wemyss, by
whom he had only one child, who died without issue.

And sir David dying in 1648, without any surviving male-issue, was succeeded
by his nephew John, son of Alexander of Canterland, beforementioned, to whom
we now return.

XVII. ALEXANDER LINDSAY of Canterland, second son of Sir David Lindsay of
Edzell and Glenesk, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who got a charter from King James VI. of the lands of Canterland and others,
Ibidem.
married Helen daughter of -- Haldane of Gleneagles, by whom he had a son,

XVIII. JOHN LINDSAY of Edzell and Glenesk, Ibidem.
who succeeded to his uncle sir David, as before observed, and was served and
retoured heir to him anno 1648.

He ought also to have succeeded to Ludovic thirteenth earl of Crawfurd, Ibid.
and M. S. hist. of the family of Crawfurd.
being his undoubted heir-male, but was deprived of these honors for reasons
mentioned at large under the Title, Earl of Crawfurd.

He married, Chart. in pub. archiv. and M. S. hist. of the family of Crawfurd.
1st, lady Jean Carnegie, daughter of John earl of Northesk, by whom he had two
sons, -- and one daughter.

1. David, his heir.

2. Capt. John Lindsay, who was a great loyalist, and adhered firmly to the
interest of the royal family, for which he suffered greatly. He died without
issue.

His daughter was married to -- M'Intosh of that ilk, and had issue.

He married, 2dly, Jean daughter of Alexander lord Spynie, by whom he had no
chldren.

He was succceded by his eldest son,

XIX. DAVID LINDSAY of Edzell, who, in the second parliament of king James VII.
claimed the honors of Crawfurd, as heirmale to Ludovic the thirteenth earl,
but his claim was dismissed, though the reasons do not appear on record.
Memoirs penes comitem de Balcarras.
The family of Balcarras allege, that the duke of Queensberry, then
commissioner, put the negative without instructions, but upon what authority we
cannot pretend to say.

He married Agnes only daughter of James brother-german of -- Graham of Fintry,
M. S. hist. of the family.
by whom he had three sons, -- and one daughter.

1. David, his heir.

2. John. Both died without issue.

3. James. Both died without issue.

His daughter Margaret married Alexander Watson of Atherny, and had issue.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XX. DAVID LINDSAY of Edzell, who likeways dying without issue, anno 1744, in
him ended the male-line of the eldest son of sir David Lindsay of Edzell and
Glenesk, No. XV. of this genealogy. And the earl of Balcarras, next heir-male,
being lineally descended of the second son of the said Sir David, to him we now
return.

XVI. Mr. JOHN LINDSAY, second son of the said sir David Lindsay of Edzell and
Glenesk, was a man of parts and learning. He acquired great knowledge in the
laws, and was made one of the senators of the college of justice in 1584; and
being in great favor with king James VI. Spottiswood's history, and Crawfurd's
peerage.
was made lord privy seal in 1595, one of the commissioners of the treasury,
and secretary of state, in 1596; upon which he resigned his lord of session's
place in favors of his brother sir David, as before noticed. He was also one
of the eight magnates Scotiae who were appointed by the king for the government
of the nation, and were called Octavians.

He acquired the estate of Balcarras (which is still the chief seat of the
family) upon which, Chart. in pub. archiv.
he got a charter from king James VI. anno 1591.

This great man married Margaret, daughter of Alexander Guthry, widow of lord
Borthwick of Lochkill, king's advocate, by whom he had a son,

Sir David, -- and three daughters.

1. Catharine, married, 1st, to sir John Lindsay of Woodhead, Chart. in pub.
archiv. ann. 1577 and 1596.
or Ballinsho, third son of David earl of Crawfurd by Margaret Bethune, by whom
she had colonel Henry Lindsay, who died at Hamburgh in 1639 without issue. --
She married, 2dly, John Brown of Fordel, in vicecom. de Perth.

2. Janet, married to David Auchmoutie of that ilk, and was mother of sir
David, and of a daughter, -- married to -- Kinnear of that ilk.

3. Margaret, married to sir John Strachan of Thornton.

He died of the stone on the 3d September 1598, and was succeeded by his only
son,

XVII. Sir DAVID LINDSAY of Balcarras, who got from king James VI. a charter,
under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the lands of Balcarras, Boswel, Pitcorthy, Innerdivote, Balmakine,
Cumberlands, etc. He was a man of great learning, and employed much of his time
in the study of the arts and sciences, particularly that of chemistry, in which
he excelled most of his cotemporaries.

He was in great favor with king Charles I. who raised him to the dignity of
the peerage by the title of lord Lindsay of Balcarras, Chart. in the public
register.
by letters patent, dated 27th June 1633. He was a great loyalist, and adhered
always to the interest of the royal family with firmness and integrity.

He married lady Sophia Seton, daughter of Alexander earl of Dumsermline, by
whom he had a son,

Alexander, -- and two daughters.

1. Sophia, married to sir Robert Moray, justice clerk in king Charles II.'s
reign.

2. Isabel, married to Thomas Boyd of Pinkhill.

He died in 1641, and was succeeded by his son,

XVIII. ALEXANDER, second lord Balcarras, who was a man of great abilities,
singular prudence, and loyalty, and remarkable for his steady adherence to the
royal family. He acted a principal part in all the great affairs of state
during the time of the civil war. He was created earl of Balcarras, for his
great loyalty and eminent services, etc. 9th January, anno 1651, Chart. in pub.
archiv. haered. masculis, talliae vel provisionis.
by patent, to his heirs-male, of tailzie, and provision, etc.

He was made heretable governor of the castle of Edinburgh, secretary of state,
and commissioner to the general assembly; and persisting in his loyalty went
abroad after the king, and died in Holland on the 30th August 1659.

He left issue, M. S. hist of the family; and Crawfurd's Peerage.
by his wife lady Anne M'Kenzie, daughter of Colin earl of Seaforth, two sons
and two daughters.

1. Charles, both earls of Balcarras.

2. Colin, both earls of Balcarras.

1. Daughter, lady Sophia, married to colonel Charles Campbell, son of
Archibald earl of Argyle.

2. Lady Henriet, married to Sir James Campbell of Auchinbrcck.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

CHARLES, second earl of Balcarras, who dying unmarried in 1662, was succeedcd
by his brother,

XIX. COLIN, third earl of Balcarras, who was an ingenious man, of great
affability, and polite behavior.

Soon after the restoration, he had a troop of an hundred gentlemen given him,
was made one of the lords of the treasury, and had a pension of 1000 l. a year
for life.

He was highly esteemed, both by king Charles II. and king James VII. and was
one of the privy council to both these princes.

After the revolution, he lived several years abroad, where he employed most of
his time in improving his mind by conversing with the learned; and then
returned to his own country, where he lived many years in a hospitable manner
at his house of Balcarras in Fife.

He married, Ibidem.
1st, Margaret, daughter of Lewis de Nassau, lord Beverwart in Holland, who
died of her first child. -- He married, 2dly, lady Jean Carnegie, daughter of
David earl of Northesk, by whom he had a daughter,

Lady Anne, married to Alexander earl of Kellie.

He married, 3dly, lady Jean Ker, daughter of William earl of Roxburgh, by whom
he had a son,

Colin, lord Cumberland, who died unmarried, -- and a daughter,

Lady Margaret, married to John earl of Wigtoun.

He married, 4thly, lady Margaret Campbell, daughter of James earl of London,
by whom he had two sons and two daughters.

1. Alexander, both earls of Balcarras.

2. James, both earls of Balcarras.

1. Daughter, lady Eleanor, married to James Fraser, Esquire; brother of the lord
Salton.

2. Lady Elizabeth, died unmarried.

He died in 1722, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XX. ALEXANDER, fourth earl of Balcarras, who was possessed of many good
qualities. He was a man of stanch honor, great generosity, universal
benevolence and sincere friendship, which qualities acquired him the general
love and esteem of mankind.

In 1734, he was elected one of the sixteen peers to sit in the British
parliament, and was a lieutenant colonel in the army.

He married a daughter of David Scot of Scotstarvit, but died without issue in
1746. He was succeeded by his brother,

XX. JAMES, now earl of Balcarras, who, like many of his noble ancestors, was
employed in his country's service both by sea and land for many years, and
always acquitted himself with honor and reputation; but is now retired to a
country life at his beautiful seat of Balcarras, which he has greatly improved
with fine enclosures, planting, etc.

He married miss Anne Dalrymple, daughter of sir Robert, who was son of sir
Hugh, lord president of the session, by whom he has a numerous issue.

1. Alexander, lord Cumberland,

2. Robert.

3. Colin.

4. James.

5. William.

6. Charles.

1. Daughter, lady Anne.

2. Lady Margaret.

CHIEF SEAT.
At Balcarras in Fife, six miles south of St. Andrews, and twelve miles east
from Kinghorn.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st and 4th, gules, a fess cheque, argent and azure, for Lindsay:
2d and 3d, or, a lion rampant, gules, surmounted of a ribbon, sable, within a
border, azure, for Abernethy, charged with stars, or.

SUPPORTERS; two lions sejant, guardant, gules, each having a collar, azure,
charged with three stars, or.

CREST; on a wreath, a tent proper.

MOTTO; Astra, castra, numen, lumen.

BALLENDEN Lord BALLENDEN.
THIS surname appears to be local, and to have been first assumed by the
proprietors of the lands of Ballenden in the shire of Selkirk.

The immediate ancestor of this noble family was,

I. PATRICK BALLENDEN, who got the lands of Auchinoule from John earl of
Morton; Chart. in pub. archiv.
upon which he got a charter from king James IV. to him and Maryota Douglas his
spouse, their heirs, etc. dated 20th March 1499.

By the said Maryota Douglas he left issue a son,

Thomas, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Catharine Ballenden, married to Oliver Sinclair of Pitcairns, general to king
James V. at the unfortunate battle of Solway. This marriage appears from a
charter, Ibidem.
under the great seal, to Oliver Sinclair, and Catharine Ballenden his spouse,
dated anno 1537.

II. THOMAS BALLENDEN of Auchinoule succeeded his father, List of the officers
of state, in the lawiers library, Edinburgh; and Nisbet, vol. I. p. 334.
and being a man of parts, was in great favor with king James V. who appointed
him director of chancery, and lordjustice-clerk, anno 1541.

He left issue two sons.

1. Sir John.

2. Patrick Ballenden of Stenhouse, sheriff of Orkney, designed brother-german
of Sir John Ballenden justice-clerk, Chart. in pub. archiv.
in two charters, under the great seal, dated in 1568 and 1577.

Thomas dying anno 1546, was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. Sir JOHN BALLENDEN of Auchinoule, who had his father's office of
lord-justice-clerk conferred upon him, Nisbet, vol. I. p. 334, and Crawfurd's
peerage.
which he enjoyed above 20 years, in the reigns of queen Mary and king James VI.

He got a charter, under the great seal, of several lands, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
domino Johanni Ballenden de Auchinoule militi, justiciariae clerico, etc. anno
1577.

He married, 1st, Barbara daughter of sir Hugh Kennedy of Girvan-mains, by whom
he had two sons.

1. Sir Lewis.

2. Adam Ballenden, Keith's catalogue of bishops, p. 79.
doctor of divinity, and bishop, first of Dumblain, then of Aberdeen.

He married, 2dly, Janet daughter of -- Seton of Touch, Chart. in pub. archiv.
and got two charters, under the great seal, to him, and Janet Seton his
spouse, dated anno 1574.

By her he had issue three daughters.

1. Elizabeth, married, Chart. in pub. archiv.
1st, to sir James Lawson of Humbie; 2dly, to sir John Cockburn of Ormistoun,
lord-justice-clerk.

2. Margaret, Stewart's hist. of the royal family, p. 190, 191.
married to William Stewart writer in Edinburgh, and was mother of sir Lewis
Stewart of Kirkhill.

3. Marion, married to John Ramsay of Dalhousie.

Sir John was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. Sir LEWIS BALLENDEN of Auchinoule, List of the lords of session in the
lawiers library, Edinburgh.
who being a man of great knowledge in the laws, was appointed one of the
senators of the college of justice, also lord-justice-clerk, anno 1584.

He got charters from king James VI. of a great many lands, Chart. in pub.
archiv. inter 1578 and 1587.
wherein he is designed, Dominus Ludovicus Ballenden de Auchinoule, miles,
clericus justiciarie, etc. etc.

He got also two charters of the parks, Ibidem.
woods, and the keeping of the palace of Linlithgow, in 1587 and 1590.

He married Margaret daughter of William lord Livingston, by whom he had a son,

Sir James, his heir, -- and one daughter,

Maryota, married to Patrick Murray of Fallahill, ancestor of Philiphaugh,
which appears by a charter, Ibidem.
under the great seal, to them, dated 14th July 1598.

Sir Lewis died anno 1591, and was succeeded by his son,

V. Sir JAMES BALLENDEN, who, in his father's lifetime, was designed by the
title of Broughton, Ibidem.
and got a charter, under the great seal, of Magdalen's lands, lying near
Linlithgow, "Jacobo Ballenden de Broughton, filio and haredi apparenti domini
Ludovici Ballenden de Auchinoule, etc." dated anno 1589.

He married Margaret daughter of sir William Ker of Cessford, sister of Robert
first earl of Roxburgh, by whom he had a son and heir,

Sir William, -- and one daughter,

Margaret, married to Henry lord Cardross, ancestor of the earl of Buchan.

He died in November 1606, and was succeeded by his son,

VI. Sir WILLIAM BALLENDEN of Broughton and Auchinoule, who was a man of good
parts, and of great honor and integrity. He adhered firmly to the royal family
during all the time of the civil war; wherefore king Charles II. in
consideration of his great loyalty and faithful services, raised him to the
dignity of the peerage, Chart. in pub. archiv. Haeredumque suorum masculorum
etc.
by the title of lord Ballenden of Broughton, by letters patent, dated 10th
June 1661, to his heirs-male.

He was appointed heretable usher to the exchequer in Scotland, Chart. in
cancellaria. Haeredibus and assignatis quibuscunque.
by a charter, under the great seal, to him, his heirs, or assignies whatever,
dated 12th December 1663.

He was also nominated one of the lords of the privy council, and
treasurer-depute.

He never married, but, with consent of the crown, made a resignation of his
estate and honors in favors of his cousin, John Ker, fourth son of William
earl of Roxburgh, whereby he became obliged to carry the name and arms of
Ballenden.

He died anno 1670, and was accordingly succeeded by his said cousin,

VII. JOHN, second lord Ballenden, and heretable usher of exchequer, who
married lady Mary More, widow of William earl of Dalhousie, and daughter of
Henry earl of Drogheda in Ireland, by Alice his wife, daughter of William lord
Spencer in England, by whom he had five sons, -- and four daughters.

1. John master of Ballenden, his heir.

2. Ker, who succceded his brother.

3. Robert.

4. William.

5. Sir Henry, appointed gentleman usher to the house of lords.

1st daughter, Margaret, died unmarried.

2. --, married to Ephraim Miller of Hertingforbury, Esquire;

3. Mary, married to the honorable John Campbell of Mammore, Esquire; now duke of
Argyle.

4. Diana, married to John Bulteel of Fleet in Devonshire, Esquire;

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. JOHN third lord Ballenden, and hereditary usher of exchequer, who dying
without issue, at his seat in Hertfordshire, anno 1741, his estate and honors
devolved upon his brother,

VIII. KER fourth lord Ballenden, and hereditary usher of exchequer, who was an
officer in the royal navy, and, anno 1750, married a daughter of Mr. George
Campbell storekeeper at Woolwich, by whom he had a son and successor,

IX. JOHN fifth lord Ballenden, hereditary usher of exchequer, etc. etc.

ARMS.
Gules, a hart's head couped, attired with ten tynes, between three cross
croslets fitchy, or, all within a double tressure, counter-flower'd with
flower-de-lisses of the last.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter side, a lady holding in her right hand a sword
erect, and a pair of scales pendant, both proper; on the sinister, another such
lady holding in her left hand a branch of palm.

MOTTO; Sic itur ad astra.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Broughton-house in Mid-Lothian, and -- in Hertfordshire, etc.

ELPHINGSTON Lord BALMERINO.
THE immediate ancestor of this noble family was son of

ROBERT, third lord Elphingston, who married Elizabeth, daughter of sir John
Drummond of Innerpessry, by whom he had three sons.

1. Alexander, his successor.

2. George, rector of the Scotch college at Rome.

3. Sir James, the first of the family of Balmerino.

I. Sir JAMES ELPHINGSTON, third son of Robert third lord Elphingston, designed
of Barnton, was a man of great parts and abilities, and highly esteemed by king
James VI. who constituted him one of the senators of the college of justice,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
anno 1586, one of the lords of the treasury, then called Octavians, anno 1595,
secretary of state in 1598, and lord president of the session soon thereafter;
in all which high offices he acquitted himself with great integrity, judgment,
and sufficiency.

He was also appointed one of the commissioners to treat of an union with
England, which at that time took no effect.

King James, in consideration of his faithful services and great merit, was
pleased to erect the lands, belonging to the abbacy of Balmerino, into a
temporal lordship and barony, in favors of sir James Elphingston of Barnton,
knight, secretary of state, one of the lords of secret council, and senator of
the college of justice, Chart. in pub. archiv. haeredibus masculis, talliae and
provisionis.
and raised him to the dignity of the peerage, by the title of lord Balmerino,
to him, and his heirs-male, tailzie, and provision, by a charter, under the
great seal, dated the 20th of February 1603.

He was possessed of a great estate, which appears from no less than nine
charters under the great seal, Ib. inter 1661 and 1609.
in the public registers; particularly he purchased from Robert Logan of
Restalrig the lands and barony of Restalrig, anno 1604, upon which lands he got
a charter, under the great seal, Jacobo domino de Balmerinoch, Ibid. ad annum
1605.
terrarum baroniae de Restalrig, dated 16th May 1605.

This circumstance of the purchase of the barony of Restalrig, evidently
disproves a story, which has long prevailed with many, that Logan was forfeited
by the king, after he was dead, for the immediate purpose of bestowing his
lands on his favorite secretary Balmerino; Logan was not forfeited till the
24th June 1609: It Is plain from the above charter, that Balmerino purchased
these lands at least four years before, and it may be further observed, that
though Logan had once a good estate, he appears to have been denuded of all, and
entirely bankrupt some years before his death. For,

His lands of Mount Lothan and Nether Gogar, were purchased by Andrew Logan of
Coatfield, anno 1596.

His lands of Fastcastle, and others in the shire of Berwick, were acquired by
Archibald Douglas of Pittendreich, anno 1602.

His lands of Restalrig, by lord Balmerino, in 1604, as before observed.

And his lands of Quarrelholes, etc. in 1605. Ibidem.
All which is fully instructed by charters under the great seal, etc.

We now return to James lord Balmerino, who married, Ib. ad annum 1592.
1st, Clara, daughter of sir John Menteith of Carse, by whom he had a son,

John, his heir.

He married, 2dly, Margaret, daughter of Hugh Maxwel of Tealing, by whom he had
a son,

James, lord Coupar, ( vide Title, Coupar.) and two daughters.

1. Anne, married to Andrew lord Fraser.

2. Mary, married to John Hamilton of Blair.

He died anno 1612, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. JOHN, second lord Balmerino, who, betwixt 1612 and 1616, Ibidem.
got charters, under the great seal, of his lands of Balmerino, Restalrig, and
many others.

He was likewise a man of great parts and learning. At the beginning of the
civil wars, he was on the parliament's side but he no sooner observed them
making too great encroachments upon the royal prerogative, than he joined the
king's party, and continued steady in his majesty's interest till his death.

He married Anne, daughter of Sir Thomas Ker of Fernyhurst, sister to Andrew
lord Jedburgh and Robert earl of Somerset, by whom he had a son and successor,

III. JOHN, third lord Balmerino, who married Margaret, daughter of John earl
of Loudon, by whom he had a son,

John, his successor

He died anno 1704.

IV. JOHN, fourth lord Balmerino, was a man of eminent parts, great capacity,
and a true lover of his country.

At the parliament 1706, he opposed the union with all his interest; however,
some years after it was concluded, he was elected one of the sixteen peers to
represent Scotland in the British parliaments, called to meet anno 1710 and
1713, and was made general of the mint and sheriff of Edinburgh.

He married, 1st, lady Christian Montgomery, daughter of Hugh earl of
Eglington, by whom he had two sons, and two daughters,

1. Hugh, master of Balmerino, who was killed at the siege of Lisle in 1708,
without issue.

2. James, afterward lord Balmerino.

1st daughter, Margaret, married to sir John Preston of Prestonhall, and had
issue a son, and a daughter.

2. Jean, married to Francis earl of Murray, and was mother of James now earl
of Murray.

He married, 2dly, Anne daughter of Dr. Arthur Ross, archbishop of St. Andrews,
by whom he had two sons, and one daughter.

1. Arthur, afterward lord Balmerino.

2. Alexander Elphingston, died unmarried.

His daughter, --, died also without issue.

This worthy lord died in 1736, and was succeeded by his son,

V. JAMES fifth lord Balmerino, a man of great worth, honor, and integrity. He
was one of the senators of the college of justice, and always behaved with
judgment and impartiality.

He married lady Betty Carnegie, daughter of David carl of Northesk, but died
without issue, and was succeeded by his brother,

V. ARTHUR, sixth lord Balmerino, a man of great honor, courage, and
intrepidity. He was bred to the army, and, in the queen's time, was captain of
a company of foot.

In 1745 he engaged in the rebellion, and, after the battle of Culloden, was
taken prisoner, carried to London, tried before the house of lords, found
guilty of high treason, condemned, and beheaded on Towerhill the 18th of August
1746, in the fifty-eight year of his age, where he behaved with uncommon
constancy and resolution.

As this lord's behavior was magnanimous and great, during his confinement,
and at his execution, we shall take the liberty here to insert a few passages
from a paper published, by the authority of the sheriff of London, after his
death.

A little before he was carried to Towerhill, he demanded an interview with
lord Kilmarnock, who was in the same unhappy situation with himself, which was
granted: After it was ended, the two lords saluted one another, and Balmerino
"bid lord Kilmarnock an eternal happy adieu, and, with a cheerful countenance,
added, My dear lord, I wish I could alone pay the reckoning, and suffer for us
both, etc."

During the time the scaffold was putting in order for the execution of lord
Balmerino, the sheriff, that attended at the first execution, went to
Balmerino's apartments, as a notice to his lordship that his time was come;
upon whose entrance his lordship said, "I suppose lord Kilmarnock is no more;"
and having asked how the executioner performed his duty; upon receiving the
account, said, "Then it was well done; and now, gentlemen, said his lordship, I
will detain you no longer, for I desire not to protract my life." He then
saluted the company, in a manner so cheerful, as drew tears from every eye but
his own, and hastened to the scaffold.

But before we view his lordship on the scaffold, it is but just to the memory
of that great, but unhappy man, to acquaint the public what was his deportment
in his retirement here: 'Twas graceful, without affectation; cheerful, but not
presumptuous: He conversed freely with his friends, twice refreshed himself
with a bit of bread and a glass of wine, and desired the company to drink to
him, Ain degrae ta haiven; but, above all, he called frequently upon God, and
seemed both willing and prepared to die.

When he mounted the scaffold, he did it with so undaunted a step, as surprised
every spectator that was unacquainted with the greatness of his soul.

He walked round the scaffold, bowed to the people, read the following
inscription on his coffin: Arthurus dominus de Balmerino, decollatus 18 die
Augusti 1746, aetatis suae 58; said it was right, and, with seeming pleasure,
looked on the block, which he called his pillow of rest.

He then called for the executioner, who, being introduced to him, was about to
ask his forgiveness; but my lord stopped him, and said, "Friend, you need not ask
me forgiveness, the execution of your duty is commendable;" then presenting the
executioner with three guineas, said, "Friend, I never had much money; this is
all I have; I wish it was more for your sake, and am sorry I can add nothing
else to it but my coat and waistcoat," which he instantly took off, and placed
on his coffin for the executioner. Having prepared himself for the block, he
took his last farewell of them; and, having once more taken a view of the great
number of spectators, his lordship said, "I am afraid there are some who may
think my behavior bold;" and, speaking to a gentleman near him, added,
"Remember, sir, what I tell you; it arises from a confidence in God, and a
clear conscience."

Then observing the executioner with the ax in his hand, took it from him, and
having felt the edge, returned it him again, at the same time showing him where
to strike the blow, and animating him to do it with resolution, "For in that,
friend, said he, will consist your mercy."

His lordship then, with the same surprising countenance, kneeled down at the
block, and having, with his arms extended, said this short prayer, "O Lord,
reward my friends, forgive my enemies, and receive my soul," submitted, and
gave the signal to the executioner.

He married a daughter of Capt. Chalmers, by whom he had no issue, whereby the
male-line of this family is extinct.

ARMS.
A cheveron, sable, charged with three buckles, argent, betwixt three boars
heads, erased gules.

CREST; a dove, argent, with a snake proper linked about its legs.

MOTTO; Prudentia fraudis nescia.

SUPPORTERS; two grissins proper beak'd, and armed, or.

OGILVIE Lord BANFF.
THIS branch of the noble family of Finlater is descended from

Sir WALTER OGILVIE of Finlater and Deskford, who flourished in the reign of
king James II. and left issue two sons.

1. Sir James, his successor.

2. Sir Walter Ogilvie of Boyn.

This sir Walter married Margaret, Chart. in archiv. Jacobi ^3tii.
daughter of sir James Edmonstone of that ilk, by whom he had two sons.

1. Sir George, ancestor of the Ogilvies of Boyn, Rothemay, etc.

2. Sir Walter, progenitor of the family of Banff.

I. Sir WALTER OGILVIE, second son of sir Walter of Boyn, was promiscuously
designed by the titles of Dunlugus and Banff.

In a charter granted to him by George earl of Huntly, of the lands of
Auchannachie, in the forestry of Boyn, Haddington's collections in the lawyer's
library, Edr. p. 262.
he is designed Walterus Ogilvie de Banff, armiger noster, etc. anno 1491;
which charter is confirmed by king James IV. 3d December, anno 1495.

He got also charters, under the great seal, Waltero Ogilvie de Dunlugus,
Chart. in pub. archiv. inter 1520 and 1530.
of the lands of Dunlugus, Castleton, Baldony, Blacklaw, and many others.

He married Alison, daughter and co-heiress of sir Patrick Home of Fastcastle,
by whom he got a considerable estate, and had issue two sons and one daughter.

1. Sir George, his heir.

2. Walter, who got part of the lands of Dunlugus from his father, Ibidem.
by a charter, under the great seal, Waltero, filio Walteri de Dunlugus, etc.

His daughter, Lives of the officers of state.
Magdalene, married to sir Alexander Fraser of Philorth.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. Sir GEORGE OGILVIE of Dunlugus, who, Chart. in pub. archiv.
in his father's lifetime, got charters, under the great seal, of half of the
barony of Dunlugus, and several other lands. He got likewise a charter from
king James VI. Ibidem.
terrarum de Lee, mains de Boyne, cum molendino, etc. anno 1577.

Also a charter, dimidietat. terrarum de Ordnewton and. Auldtown de Ord,
Chancelton, Kilragonie, Boighead, Ibidem.
etc. anno 1579, about which time he had the honor of knighthood conferred
upon him, Ibidem.
and got a charter, Georgio Ogilvie de Dunlugus, militi, terrarum baroniae de
Carnousie, etc. anno 1580.

He got charters, Ibidem.
under the great seal, of many other lands and baronies, too numerous to be
here inserted.

He married Beatrix, Nisbet, vol. I. p. 239. and 302.
daughter of George lord Seton, ancestor of the earl of Winton, by whom he had
two sons and one daughter.

1. Sir Walter, his heir.

2. George, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who got a charter, under the great seal, of the lands and barony of Carnousie,
etc.

His daughter, Janet, married to William Forbes of Tolquhon.

He lived to the uncommon age of an hundred and five years, died in 1612, and
was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. Sir WALTER OGILVIE of Dunlugus, who, Ibidem.
in his father's lifetime, got a charter of the lands of Alwith of Innerichtie,
anno 1596.

He got also a charter, Waltero Ogilvie, filio et haeredi apparenti Georgii de
Dunlugus, dimidietat. terrarum dominicalium de Moncoffer, Dovany, etc. cum
piscaria in aqua de Dovern' dated in 1609.

He married Helen, daughter of sir John Urquhart of Cromertie, by whom he had
two sons and one daughter.

1. Sir George.

2. Walter, who got a charter, Waltero Ogilvie, filio Walteri, Ibidem.
superioritatis firmae and dioriae terrarum de Auchorsk, etc. dated anno 1613.

His daughter Beatrix married to sir Alexander Seton of Pitmedden.

He died before 1617, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. Sir GEORGE OGILVIE of Dunlugus, who got a charter from king James VI.
Terrarum de Newtown and Auldtown de Ord, Ibidem.
Chanceltoun, Kilragavin, Boighead and Budboig de Ord, cum molendino, etc. anno
1617.

He was created a baronet by king Charles I. on 10th July 1627; and that same
year got a charter, Ib. ad annum 1627.
under the great seal, Domino Georgia Ogilvie, baroneto de Banff, terrarum
baroniae de Inchdrewr, etc. comprehending a great many other lands and baronies.

He was a man of singular good parts, a great loyalist, and of remarkable
courage and intrepidity.

He was a firm and steady friend to king Charles I. never deserted his interest
during all the time of the civil war, and signalized himself against the
covenanters, on several occasions, particularly at the bridge of Dee in 1639,
where the loyalists were commanded by Aboyne and Banff, and the covenanters by
the earl of Montrose.

And it is observable, for the honor of this sir George, that he kept 2000 men
together for the king in Aberdeenshire, for some time after the agreement in
1639, Burnet's hist. p. 143, 144.
that Montrose got the command for the king.

And, for his eminent loyalty and many faithful services, his majesty was
plcased to raise him to the dignity of the peerage, by the title of lord
Ogilvie of Banff, Chart. in pub. archiv. Haeredibus masculis e corpore suo.
by letters patent, to the heirs-male of his body, dated 31st August 1642.

After the murder of the king, he still persisted in his attachment to the
royal family, and contributed all that was in his power to bring about a
restoration, which he lived to see accomplished in 1660, and died in 1663. He
married, 1st, Helen, daughter of sir Alexander Irvine of Drum, by whom he had
one daughter,

Helen, married to James earl of Airly.

He married, 2dly, Mary daughter of sir Alexander Sutherland of Duffus, by whom
he had a son,

George, his heir, and two daughters.

1. Mary, married to Walter Innes of Auchluncart.

2. --, married to -- Gordon of Badinscoth.

V. GEORGE, second lord Banff, succeeded, and was also a great loyalist. In his
father's lifetime, he got a charter from king Charles I. Chart. in pub. archiv.
Georgia Ogilvie juniori de Banff, of the lands and barony of Inchdrewr,
comprehending the lands of Laudlaw, etc. with the salmon-fishings on the water
of Doveron, dated in 1626.

He married Agnes Falconer, daughter of Alexander lord Halkerton, by whom he
had two sons and four daughters.

1. George, his heir.

2. Sir Alexander Ogilvie of Forglen, ancestor of the present lord Banff, of
whom afterward.

1st daughter, Agnes, married to Francis Gordon of Craig of Achindore.

2. Mary, married to John Forbes of Balfluig.

3. Helen, married to sir Robert Lauder of Bielmouth.

4. Janet, married to John Leith of Leithhall, to whom she had John Leith of
Leithhall, Patrick, George of Blackhall, Laurence, and Anthony Leiths, and one
daughter. -- Vide the Baronage.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. GEORGE, third lord Banff, who married lady Jean Keith, daughter of William
earl marishal, by whom he had a son and successor,

George, -- and a daughter,

Mary, married to John Joice of Collonaird,

VII. GEORGE, fourth lord Banff, married Helen daughter of sir John Lauder of
Fountainhall, baronet, one of the fenators of the college of justice, by whom
he had two sons.

1. John George, his heir.

2. Alexander, who succeeded his brother.

VIII. JOHN GEORGE, fifth lord Banff, succeeded his father, and married Mary,
daughter of Capt. James Ogilvie, but died without issue, and was succeeded by
his brother,

VIII. ALEXANDER, sixth lord Banff, who being bred to the sea, had the command
of one of his majesty's ships of war, and did his country signal service in
cruising on their enemies, protecting their trade, etc. but died also without
issue, which ended the male line of the eldest son of George second lord Banff,
whereby the estate and honors devolved upon his cousin Alexander, now lord
Banff, grandson of sir Alexander of Forglen, to whom we now return.

VI. Sir ALEXANDER OGILVIE of Forglen, second son of George second lord Banff,
was created a knight baronet anno 1701, and was appointed one of the senators
of the college of justice anno 1706.

He married Mary daughter of sir John Allardice of that ilk, by whom he had
four sons and three daughters.

1. George, married to Jean daughter of Patrick Meldrum of Laithers, but died
without issue.

2. Alexander, father of the present lord Banff.

3. John.

4. Peter.

1st daughter, Agnes, married to sir Alexander Reid of Barra.

2. Mary, married to Andrew Hay of Mountblairic.

3. Helen, married to -- Smollet, son and heir of sir James Smollet of Bonhill.

VII. ALEXANDER OGILVIE, designed junior of Forglen, second son and apparent
heir of sir Alexander of Forglen, married Jean Friend, daughter of squire
Friend of Bellarichie of Ireland, by whom he had a son,

Alexander, now lord Banff, -- and a daughter,

Alexander, junior of Forglen, died before his father, and was succeeded by his
son,

VIII. ALEXANDER, who succeeded also to the honors of Banff, as before
observed, and is the seventh lord.

He married Jean, daughter of William Nisbet of Dirleton, Esquire; by Jean,
daughter of Mr. Robert Bennet advocate, by whom he has issue three sons, and
three daughters.

1. Alexander master of Banff.

2. William.

3. Archibald.

1. Daughter, Jane.

2. Sophia.

3. Janet.

ARMS.
Argent, a lion passant guardant, gules, crowned, or, for Ogilvie: 2d and 3d,
argent, three papingoes, vert, beak'd and member'd, gules, for Home of
Fastcastle.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter, a man in armor with a target, all proper; and on
the sinister, a lion rampant, gules.

CREST; a lion's head erased, gules.

MOTTO; Fideliter.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Inchdreur in the county of Banff, Forglen, etc.

HAMILTON Lord BARGENY.
THE first of the noble family of Bargeny was,

I. Sir JOHN HAMILTON, a natural son of John, Chart. in pub. archiv.
marquis of Hamilton, who was legitimate on 11th March 1600, and was first
designed sir John Hamilton of Letrick, afterward of Bargeny.

He got a liberal education, was a man of fine accomplishments, and acquired
considerable estates in Carrick, particularly the lands and barony of Bargeny,
which is still possessed by the family, and has continued to be their chief
title ever since.

He obtained, Ibidem.
from king Charles I. charters of many lands, domino Johanni Hamilton, domino
de Bargeny militi, etc. inter 1630 and 1635.

He got also a charter of the lands and barony of Cambusnethan, Ibidem.
in which he is designed dominus Johannes Hamilton de Bargeny, senior, etc.
anno 1636.

He married a daughter of doctor Alexander Campbell, bishop of Brechin, by whom
he had a son,

Sir John, -- and four daughters.

1. Catharine, married to sir John Drummond of Machany.

2. Helen, married to sir James Somerville of Cambusnethan.

3. --, married to sir William Weir of Stonbyres.

4. Mary, married to Alexander Cleland of that ilk.

He died anno 1637, and was succeeded by his son,

II. Sir JOHN HAMILTON of Bargeny, a man of singular worth and merit. He was a
great loyalist, and steady friend of king Charles I. during all the time of the
civil war; wherefore, in reward of his great merit and faithful services,
Charta, Haeredibus masculise corpore suo, in archiv. familiae de Bargeny, ad
ann. 1639.
the king was pleased to create him a peer, by the title of lord Bargeny, anno
1639; the patent being to the heirs-male of his body.

In 1648, he put himself in arms, with other loyalists, in order to rescue the
king then a prisoner in the isle of Wight. And after the king's murder, he
still persisted in his loyalty to king Charles II. Act of indemnity, printed in
the appen. to the lives of the officers of state.
on which account he suffered many hardships, and was particularly excepted out
of Oliver Cromwell's act of indemnity, anno 1654.

He married, 1st, lady Jean, daughter of William, marquis of Douglas, by whom
he had a son,

William, his heir, -- and five (...)

1. Margaret, married, 1st, to sir (...) Kennedy of Colzean: 2dly, to sir David
(...) gilvie of Clova; and had issue to both.

2. Anne, married to sir Patrick Houston of that ilk, and had issue.

3. Grizel, who died unmarried.

4. Marjory, married to William Bailie of Lamington.

5. Catharine, married to William Cuninghame of Enterkin, and had issue.

He married, Lodge's peerage of Ireland, vol. I. page 328.
2dly, lady Ulric More, daughter of Henry earl of Drogheda, widow of Henry
Hamilton earl of Clanbrazil in Ireland, by whom he had no issue.

He was succeeded by his son,

III. WILLIAM, second lord Bargeny, who married lady Mary Cunninghame, daughter
of William earl of Glencairn, by whom he had two sons and one daughter.

1. John, master of Bargeny.

2. William, who succeeded his father. His daughter Nicholas, married to sir
Alexander Hope of Carse, and had issue.

IV. JOHN, master of Bargeny, first son and apparent heir of William the second
lord, married a daughter of sir Robert Sinclair of Long-formacus, by whom he
had no sons, and but one daughter,

Johanna, married to sir Robert Dalrymple of North Berwick, of whom more
hereafter.

The master dying in his father's lifetime without male-issue, and the father
(the second lord) dying soon thereafter, his estate and honors devolved upon
his second son,

IV. WILLIAM, third lord Bargeny, who married, 1st, a daughter of sir James
Primrose of Carrington, by whom he had only one daughter,

Grizel, married to Thomas Buchan of Cairnburgh, advocate, by whom she had
three daughters; 1. Mary; 2. Anne; 3. Nicholas.

He married, 2dly, Margaret, daughter of Robert Dundas of Arniston, one of the
senators of the college of justice, by whom he had a son and successor,

V. JAMES, fourth lord Bargeny, who dying without issue, in him ended the
male-line of the patentee's body, whereby the honors became extinct; but the
estate, by a decision of the house of peers, went to John Dalrymple, son of
Johanna, daughter of John the master, preferable to sir Alexander Hope of
Carse, who was son of Nicolas, daughter of William the second lord; and Mr.
Buchan's daughters, whose mother Grizel was daughter of William, third lord
Bargeny, as before observed.

The family of Bargeny being now represented by John, son of the said Johanna,
to ^er we now return.

V. JOHANNA HAMILTON, only child of John master of Bargeny, eldest son of
William the second lord, married sir Robert Dalrymple of North-Berwick, eldest
son of sir Hew, lord president of the session, by whom she had three sons and
two daughters.

1. Sir Hew, who succeeded his grandfather in the estate of North-Berwick.

2. John, who, in right of his mother, got the estate of Bargeny, by a decree
of the house of peers, as before noticed, upon which he was obliged to change
his name to Hamilton.

3. Robert, a physician.

1st daughter, Marion, married to the master of Rae.

2. Elizabeth, married to William Duff of Crumbie, Esquire;

VI. JOHN HAMILTON, Esquire; now of Bargeny, son of Johanna, married lady Anne,
daughter of James earl of Wemyss.

ARMS.
Quarterly; 1st and 4th, Hamilton: 2d and 3d, Arran; all within a bordure
gabonated, argent and azure; the 1st charged with hearts, gules, and the 2d
with mullets of the 1st.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter, an antelope, argent, collar'd, gules, charged with
three cinque-foils, ermine; on the sinister, a savage with a shoulder-belt,
gules, charged with cinque-foils, ermine, and wreathed about the head and
middle with laurels, vert, holding in his left hand a garb, or.

CREST; a crescent, gules.

MOTTO; Je espere.

CHIEF SEAT.
At Bargeny in Carrick.

DOUGLAS Viscount of BELHAVEN.
THE first who enjoyed this title was sir ROBERT DOUGLAS of Spot, son of
Malcolm Douglas of Mains, who was lineally descended of Nicol Douglas, a son of
the family of Dalk^ith, in king Robert II.'s time.

This sir Robert, when a young man, was page of honor to prince Henry, son of
king Charles I. Then he was made his master of horse. After the death of that
excellent prince, he was constituted gentleman of the bedchamber, master of
the household, and one of the privy council to king Charles I.

His majesty was likewise pleased, for his eminent loyalty and faithful
services, to create him viscount of Belhaven, Chart. in pub. archiv. Haeredibus
masculis e corpor^ suo.
by letters patent, dated 24th June 1633, to the heirsmale of his body.

He married Nicolas, daughter of sir Robert Moray of Abercairny, but dying
without issue in January 1639, the honors became extinct.

He was interred in the vestry of the Abbey church of Holyroodhouse, under a
sine and stately monument, with an inscription, wherein most of his remarkable
actions are mentioned. -- Vide Craw^urd's Peerage, p. 35.

HAMILTON Lord BELHAVEN.
THE immediate ancestor of this noble branch of the great and illustrious
family of Hamilton was,

JAMES, first lord Hamilton, who flourished in the reigns of king James I. and
II. was the seventh generation of that ancient house, in a direct male-line,
and married Janet, daughter of sir Alexander Livingston, ancestor of the earls
of Linlithgow, by whom he had issue several sons.

1. James, second lord Hamilton, his successor.

2. Andrew, of whom the family of Belhaven is lineally descended.

I. ANDREW, second son of James, first lord Hamilton, M. S. hist. of this
family, penes dom. Belhaven.
acquired the lands of Broomhill, which continued to be the chief title of the
family till they were nobilitate.

He left issue three sons.

1. John, his heir.

2. Robert, who carried on the line of this family.

3. James Hamilton of Greenhill.

He died about 1480, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. JOHN HAMILTON of Broomhill, who married a daughter of -- Hamilton of
Torrence, Writs of the family penes dom. Belhaven.
by whom he had only two daughters; and having no male-issue, disponed his
estate to James, second lord Hamilton, who generously gave it back to his
brother,

II. ROBERT HAMILTON of Broomhill, second son of Andrew, Ibidem.
who married Isabel, daughter of -- Hamilton of Dalserf, by whom he had a son
and successor,

III. JOHN HAMILTON of Broomhill, who married, 1st, Elizabeth, daughter of --
Hamilton of Udston, by whom he had a son,

John, his heir.

He married, Ibidem.
2dly, Margaret, daughter of -- Dalziel of that ilk, by whom he had another son,

Robert Hamilton of Alanshaw.

And dying about 1550, was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. JOHN, who got charters, under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv. inter
1555 and 1570.
Johanni Hamilton de Broomhill terrarum ecclesiasticarum de Stenhouse, etc.

He married Anne daughter of -- Hamilton of Kilbrachmont, Chart. penes dom.
Belhaven.
in vicecom. de Fife, by whom he had a son and successor,

V. Sir JAMES HAMILTON of Broomhill, who married a daughter of -- Hamilton of
Udston, Ibidem.
by whom he had a son,

VI. Sir JOHN HAMILTON of Broomhill, who succeeded him; and being a man of fine
parts, was in great favor and esteem with king Charles I.

He was a great loyalist, and adhered firmly to the king's interest during all
the time of the civil war, for which his majesty was pleased to raise him to
the dignity of the peerage, Chart. in pub. archiv.
by the title of lord Belhaven and Stenton, by letters patent, dated 18th
December 1647.

In July 1648, he marched into England with the Scotch army under the conduct
of duke Hamilton, and behaved with the utmost resolution at Preston, where the
Scots were routed, but he had the good fortune to escape, and got safe back to
Scotland.

He married Margaret, Writs of the family of Belhaven.
natural daughter of James second marquis of Hamilton, by whom he had three
daughters.

1. Margaret, married to sir Samuel Baillie of Lamington, and had issue.

2. Anne, who carried on the line of this family, of whom afterward.

3. Elizabeth, married to Alexander first viscount of Kingston.

John, first lord Belhaven, having no male-issue, made a resignation of his
estate and honors, in the king's hands, in favors of his cousin, sir John
Hamilton of Biel, who married his grandchild; Chart. in pub. archiv. ^ohanni
Hamilton de Bi^l, militi, baronetto, et haeredibus masculis quibuscunque, etc.
upon which he got a new patent and charter, under the great seal of king
Charles II. "to the said sir John, and the heirs-male of his body; which
failing, to his heirs-male whatsoever." The patent is dated at Whitehall, the
10th day of February 1675.

The lord Belhaven died anno 1679, and, according to the abovementioned
patent, his estate and honors devolved upon the said sir John, who being
married to his grandchild by his daughter Anne, to her we now return.

VII. ANNE, second daughter of John first lord Belhaven, married sir Robert
Hamilton of Silvertounhill, a cadet of his own family, by whom she had an only
child,

VIII. MARGARET, married to the said sir John Hamilton of Biel, who, upon the
death of the first lord, succeeded to his estate and honors as before observed.

John, second lord Belhaven, was eldest son and heir of sir Robert Hamilton of
Pressmanan, one of the senators of the college of justice, descended from the
family of Udston, whose lineal ancestor was Andrew Hamilton, Writs of the
family of Belhaven, and Nisbet, vol. I. page 176.
third son of sir David lord of Cadzow, who flourished in the reigns of king
Robert II. and III.

, This lord was a man of great honor, and integrity, and his behavior in the
parliaments 1681 and 1685 showed him to be a strenuous defender of the
Pr^testant religion.

He was a great promoter of the revolution in 1688, and was very active, at the
convention of estates of Scotland, to get the crown settled upon the prince and
princess of Orange, and had the command of a troop of horse in their service at
the battle of Killiecrankie in 1689.

Upon the accession of king William and queen Mary to the crown, he was
appointed one of their privy council, and soon after one of the commissioners
for executing the office of lord-register.

He was likewise, by queen Anne, constituted one of the lords of her
privy council, and one of the commissioners of the treasury, all which offices
he executed with honor and integrity.

In the parliament 1706, he strenuously opposed the union of the two kingdoms,
conceiving it derogatory to the honor of his country.

Upon that great occasion he made several learned and ^laborate speeches, which
are still preserved, and show the uprightness of his heart, that nothing could
prevail with him to concur with the court in a measure that he judged to be
inconsistent with the interest and independency of his country, for which
posterity do him the justice to celebrate his name with honor, as a patriot,
as well as an orator.

He died soon thereafter, anno 1708, and, by the said Margaret Hamilton, left
issue two sons.

1. John, his heir.

2. James Hamilton, Esquire; advocate, assistant solicitor to the two boards of
customs and excise. This gentleman married Anne, daughter of John Walkingshaw
of that ilk, who died without issue in 1732.

John, second lord Belhaven, was succccded by his eldest son,

IX. JOHN, third lord Belhaven, who was a man of good parts, great, worth and
merit.

He was chosen one of the sixteen peers for Scotland, anno 1715, and a lord of
the bedchamber to George then prince of Wales, afterward king George II.

He had the command of a troop of horse, raised by the county of Haddington, in
the time of the rebellion 1715, and served as a volunteer at the battle of
Dumblain, where he gave distinguishing proofs of his valor and intrepidity.

In 1721 he was appointed governor of Barbados, but unfortunately perished at
sea, in the beginning of his voyage thither, in the Royal Anne galley, near the
Lizard Point, where the ship having struck on the Stag rocks, about midnight,
was staved in pieces, and, of two hundred and forty persons, only two men and a
boy were saved, being drove ashore on pieces of the wreck.

He married Mary, daughter of Andrew Bruce, merchant in Edinburgh, a cadet o^
the family of Earlshall, by whom. he had four sons and one daughter.

1. John, now lord Belhaven.

2. Andrew Hamilton, Esquire; an officer in the army, who died unmarried.

3. James Hamilton, Esquire; advocate, depute-sheriff of the county of Haddington,
and assistant-solicitor to the boards of excise and customs.

4. Robert Hamilton, Esquire; who, betaking himself to a military life, was a major
in the expedition to America, under the late lord Cathcart, and died a
bachelor soon after his return from Carthagena.

His daughter Margaret, was married to Alexander Baird, Esquire; son to sir William
Baird of Newbeath.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. JOHN, fourth lord Belhaven, who is high sheriff of the county of
Haddington, general of the mint, and one of the commissioners and trustees
appointed for the encouragement and improvement of trade, manufactures, and
fisheries, in Scotland.

ARMS.
Gules, a sword erect; in pale, proper, the pommel and hilt, or, between three
cinque-foils, argent.

CREST; on a wreath, a nag's head, couped of the last, and bridled of the first.

SUPPORTERS; two horses, argent, bridled as the crest.

MOTTO; Ride through.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Biel, near Dunbar, in East-Lothian, and Pressmanan, in the same county.

HAY Lord BEWLIE, and Earl of CARLYLE.
THIS noble family deduces its origin from

PETER HAY of Megginch, who flourished in the reign of king James V. and was
descended of the house of Leys, one of the oldest cadets of the illustrious
family of Errol.

He married Margaret, Lives of the officers of state, p. 157.
daughter of -- Crichton of Ruthven, by whom he had three sons and two
daughters.

1. Patrick, his successor, who was father of George earl of Kinnoul,
chancellor of Scotland. -- Vide Title Kinnoul.

2. Sir James of Kingask, the first of this family.

3. Edmund, a man of great knowledge and learning. Ibidem.
He was professor of the civil and canon law, and rector of a college at Doway.

1. Daughter, Catharine, married, 1st, to Robert Moncur of Balumby: 2dly, to
George Drummond of Blair.

2. Janet, Ibid. p. 158.
married to sir Patrick Murray of Auchtertyre.

I. Sir JAMES HAY of Kingask, second son of Peter Hay of Megginch, being a man
of great parts and learning, was highly esteemed by king James VI. from whom he
got a charter of the lands of Grangemuir, Chart. in pub. archiv.
etc. lying in the shire of Edinburgh, and constabulary of Haddington; Jacobo
Hay de Kingask, etc. dated 25th June 1606.

He got also a grant of the whole revenue of the priory of Bewlie, Ibidem.
anno 1607, and was appointed one of the senators of the college of justice,
and comptroller of Scotland, anno 1608; was made one of the lords of the privy
council, and raised to the dignity of the peerage by the title of lord Hay of
Bewlie, anno 1609; Ibidem.
all which appears by a charter, under the great seal of king James VI. granted
to Walter Danielston of Colgreen, cum consensu pradilecti consiliarii sui
Jacobi domini Bewlie computorum rotulatoris, etc. dated 6th April 1610.

He died in 1614, having married Margaret, daughter of John Murray of Polmais,
by whom he had a son and successor,

II. JAMES, second lord Bewlie, who having got a liberal education, was a man
of great accomplishments, both natural and acquired.

He was particularly distinguished and taken notice of by king James VI. even
when a young man, and accompanied that prince into England anno 1603, and
afterward became a mighty favorite. In 1614, upon his father's death, he was
made comptroller of Scotland.

In 1615, Peerage of England.
he was created a peer of England, by the title of lord Hay of Souly, in the
county of York. He was afterward made earl of Carlyle, and viscount Doncaster,
and was the first Scotsman that was dignified with English titles after James
VI. became king of Great Britain.

In 1618, he was appointed ambassador from the British court to the emperor
Ferdinand II. and at his return into England, made report of Frederick count
Palatine's being elected king of Bohemia, and of the state of affairs in those
parts. Lives of the officers of state, p. 157.


He was twice ambassador extraordinary at the court of France; first, to
negotiate, and then to complete the marriage of king Charles I. with his royal
consort princess Henrietta Maria, daughter of king Henry IV. In all which
negotiations he acquitted himself, to the great satisfaction of his royal
master, Ibid. and Rymer. Dugdale's baronage of England, etc.
who made him one of the lords of his bedchamber, groom of the stole, master
of the wardrobe, and knight of the most noble order of the garter.

He was also first gentleman of the bedchamber to king Charles I. from whom he
got a grant of the island of Barbados, which continued in the possession of
the proprietary and his heirs above thirty years.

Anno 1661, Historical account of the British plantations in N. America, vol.
I. p. 131.
the crown purchased it of lord Kinnoul, heir to the earl of Carlyle, etc.

According to my lord Clarendon, he had got above four hundred thousand pounds
in the government's service, all which he enjoyed, and spent most liberally.

He was particularly noted for his elegant and sumptuous way of living and
entertaining. Account of the extinct peers of England, printed in 1711, vol.
II. p. 54, penes Macfarlane.
When in France, he spared ho cost to represent the wealth, and display the
grandeur of the English nation; particularly, at one of his ante-suppers, an
attendant eat for his own share a pie reckoned at 20 l. sterling.

He married, 1st, Honora, daughter and sole heiress of Edward baron Denny,
Ibidem.
by whom he had issue a son,

James, earl of Carlyle, -- and a daughter,

Lady Anne, who died young.

He married, 2dly, lady Lucia Percy, daughter of Henry, earl of Northumberland,
by whom he had a daughter,

Agnes, Lives of the officers of state, p. 157.
married, 1st, to sir George Preston of Craig^^iller; 2dly, to James earl of
Glencairn, and had issue.

He died at Whitehall in 1636, was interred in St. Paul's cathedral, and
succeeded by his son.

III. JAMES, second earl of Carlyle, and third lord Bewlie, Peerage of England,
vol. I. p. 175.
who married lady Margaret Russel, daughter of Francis, earl of Bedford, and
died without succession anno 1660, whereby all his titles of honor became
extinct.

But that of Carlyle was conferred upon Charles Howard, descended of the most
illustrious family of Norfolk, who was created baron Dacres of Gillisland,
Ibid. vol. II. p. 407.
viscount Howard of Morpeth, and earl of Carlyle, by letters patent, dated 20th
April 1661.

STEWART Lord BLANTYRE.
AS this branch of the illustrious family of Stewart is sprung from the ancient
house of Garlies, whose lineal descent from Alexander, lord high steward of
Scotland, is to be found under the title of Earl of Galloway, we shall begin to
deduce the pedigree of this noble family from their immediate ancestor,

Sir ALEXANDER STEWART of Garlies and Dalswinton, the sixth generation in the
account of Galloway, who was a man of dignity and rank, and knighted by king
James II.

He married dam Euphame Graham, by whom he had three sons.

1. Sir Alexander, his successor, ancestor of the earl of Galloway.

2. Sir Thomas, of whom this family is lineally descended.

3. Sir Walter, of whom the earl of Blessington, the Stewarts of Shambully, and
others, are descended.

I. Sir THOMAS STEWART, second son of sir Alexander of Garlies, got from his
father the lands of Minto and Marbottle, Chart. in pub. archiv.
which is confirmed by a charter, under the great seal of king James III. dated
anno 1476.

He married Isabel, daughter and co-heiress of sir Walter Stewart of Arthurlie,
by whom he got large possessions in the shires of Renfrew and Clydsdale; and
got charters, under the great seal, Ibidem.
of the lands of Busby, Househill, and a great many others, to him and Isabel
Stewart, their heirs, etc. dated anno 1489.

By her he had issue two sons and three daughters.

1. Sir John, his heir.

2. William, who was bishop of Aberdeen, and treasurer of Scotland.

1st daughter, Agnes, married to John Stewart of Cardonald.

2. Marion, married to Adam Maxwell of Southbar, son of lord Maxwell.

3. Margaret, married to Charles Pollock of that ilk.

He died anno 1500, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. Sir JOHN STEWART of Minto, who got a charter, Chart. in pub. archiv.
under the great seal, of the lands of Busby and others, to him, and Janet
Fleming his spouse, dated 23d February 1502.

He was a man of great resolution and fortitude, and highly esteemed by king
James IV. whom he accompanied to the field of Flowdon, where he lost his life
with his royal master, anno 1513.

By the said Janet, daughter of David, son and apparent heir of Robert lord
Fleming, he left issue a son and successor,

III. Sir ROBERT STEWART of Minto, who was provost of Glasgow anno 1525. He got
a charter, Ibidem.
under the great seal, of the lands of Minto, Marbottle, etc. to him, and Janet
Murray his spouse, anno 1529.

By the said Janet Murray (a daughter of the family of Polmais) he left issue
four sons and one daughter.

1. Sir John.

2. Robert, prior of Whithorn.

3. Malcolm.

4. Walter.

His daughter, Elizabeth, married to John Maxwell of Calderwood.

He died anno 1554, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. Sir JOHN STEWART of Minto, who was served heir to his father, Retour pen^s
dom. Blantyre.
20th May 1555. He assisted at the coronation of king James VI. anno 1576, was
provost of the town of Glasgow, and had the command of the castle thereof.

He married, Stuart's hist. of the royal family, p. 166.
1st, Janet Hepburn, a daughter of the family of Bothwel, by whom he had a son,

Sir Matheio, his successor, whose male-line is now extinct.

He married, 2dly, Margaret, one of the daughters and co-heiresses of sir James
Stewart of Cardonald, Ibidem.
descended of the illustrious house of Lennox, by whom he had one son,

Walter, who carried on the line of this family, -- and four daughters.

1. Janet, married to sir Archibald Stewart of Castlemilk.

2. Agnes, married to John Wallace of Achans and Dundonald.

3. Marion, married to William Cleland of that ilk.

4. -- married to Alexander Baillie of Carphin, ancestor of Parbroath.

Sir John died anno 1583, and was buried in the cathedral church of Glasgow,
under a stately monument*

V. WALTER, only son of the second marriage of sir John Stewart of Minto,
designed commendator of Blantyre, was a man of great accomplishments, both
natural and acquired, and having been bred; with king James VI. under that
famous scholar George Buchanan, was always in favor and greatly esteemed by
his majesty.

He got charters, under the great seal, Waltero, Chart. in pub. archiv. inter
1587 and 1595.
commendatorio de Blantyre, of all the lordships, baronies, regalities,
offices, etc. which belonged to the episcopal see of Glasgow, with many other
lands and baronies.

In the year 1580, when but a young man, he was made one of the gentlemen of
the bedchamber to the king, Lives of the officers of state, and Stuart's hist.
of the royal family.
and one of his privy council; one of the senators of the college of justice,
and lord privy seal, anno 1582; one of the octavians of exchequer in 1595, and
lord high treasurer of Scotland, anno 1596; all which high offices he
discharged with honor and reputation.

The preamble to the grant of the office of treasurer, Chart. in pub. archiv.
6to Martii 1596.
Waltero, commendatorio de Blantyre, contains many honorable clauses, shows
the particular esteem and regard his majesty had for him, and is fully narrated
in the lives of the officers of state.

We must here observe what is alleged by former authors, that he was not
created a peer till the 10th of July 1606; but this must be a mistake, for he
was certainly raised to that dignity at least seven years sooner, though we
have not seen the patent. This appears from a charter, Ibid. ad ann. 1598.
under the great seal, erecting all his lands, therein mentioned, into one free
barony, to be called the lordship and barony of Blantyre for ever, and is
expressly granted, "Waltero domino Blantyre, the saurario S. D. N. regis,
haeredibus masculis etc." dated 18th January 1598.

In 1604, he was named one of the commissioners to treat of an union with
England, Records of parliament.
which at that time took no effect.

This great man married Nicolas, daughter of sir James Somerville of
Cambusnethan, by whom he had three sons and one daughter.

1. Sir James Stewart, knight of the bath, a youth of great hopes, who, in his
father's lifetime, was killed in a duel by sir George Wharton, anno 1609,
without issue.

2. William, master of Blantyre.

3. Walter Stewart, Esquire; doctor of physic, father of Frances, Stuart's hist. of
the royal family, page 167.
duchess of Lennox and Richmond; and of Sophia, married to Henry Bulkly, Esquire;
master of the household to king Charles II.

His daughter, Margaret, married to George lord Salton.

He died anno 1616, and was succeeded by his son,

VI. WILLIAM, second lord Blantyre, who, in his father's lifetime, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
got charters, under the great seal, Willielmo, magistro de Blantyre, of the
lands and barony of Blantyre, and several others, inter 1608 and 1616.

He married Helen, Stuart's hist, of the royal family.
daughter of sir William Scot of Ardross, by whom he had two sons and one
daughter.

1. Walter, master of Blantyre.

2. Alexander, who succeeded his brother.

His daughter, -- was married to sir John Swinton of that ilk.

He died in 1638, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. WALTER, third lord Blantyre, who married Margaret, Ibidem*
daughter of sir William Muir of Rowallan, but dying without issue, in 1641,
was succeeded by his brother,

VII. ALEXANDER, fourth lord Blantyre, who married Margaret, daughter of sir
John Schaw of Greenock, by whom he had a son,

Alexander, who succeeded him, -- and a daughter,

Helen, Ibidem.
married to James Muirhead of Broadsholm.

VIII. ALEXANDER, fifth lord Blantyre, married, Ibidem.
Is It, Margaret, daughter of sir John Henderson of Fordel, who died without
issue.

He married, 2dly, Anne, daughter of sir Robert Hamilton of Pressmanan, one of
the senators of the college of justice, Ibidem.
and sister of John lord Belhaven, by whom he had issue five sons and four
daughters.

1. Walter, his heir.

2. Robert, who succeeded his brother.

3. John Stewart, Esquire; advocate.

4. James, who died at sea.

5. Hugh Stewart, Esquire;

1st daughter, Marion, married to James Stirling of Keir.

2. Frances, married to sir James Hamilton of Rosehaugh.

3. Helen, married to John lord Gray.

4. Anne, married to Alexander Hay of Drumelzier, Esquire; -- They all had issue.

He died in 1704, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. WALTER, sixth lord Blantyre, who was chosen one of the sixteen peers for
Scotland anno 1710, but died without issue anno 1713, and was succeeded by his
brother,

IX. ROBERT, seventh lord Blantyre, who married, Is It, lady Helen Lion, daughter
of John earl of Strathmore, by whom he had a son,

Alexander, who died young.

He married, 2dly, Margaret, daughter of William Hay of Drumelzier, by whom he
had six sons and four daughters.

1. Walter, his heir.

2. William, the present lord.

3. Alexander.

4. John.

5. James.

6. Charles.

Is It daughter, Margaret.

2. Helen, married to Oliver Colt of Auldhame, Esquire;

3. Marion.

4. Elizabeth, married to William Colquhoun of Garscaden, Esquire;

He died in 1743, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. WALTER, eighth lord Blantyre, a youth of great expectations, who died at
Paris, without issue, in May 1751, and was succeeded by his next brother,

X. WILLIAM, ninth lord Blantyre.

ARMS.
Or, a fess-cheque, argent and azure, surmounted of a bend ingrailed, and in
chief a rose, gules.

CREST; a dove, with an olive leaf in its mouth.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter side, a savage, wreathed about his head and middle
with laurel, and holding over his shoulder a battoon, all proper; and on the
sinister, a lion, gules.

MOTTO; Sola juvat virtus.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Erskine in Renfrewshire; at Cardonnel castle in the same county; at
Leithington in East-Lothian; and at the Craig of Blantyre in Clydsdale.

BORTHWICK Lord BORTHWICK.
THE traditional accounts of the origin of this ancient family are various.
Some say, they are descended of one Andreas, a son of the lord of the castle of
Burtick in Livonia, who accompanied queen Margaret from Hungary to Scotland,
Martin's genealogical collections, vol. II.
anno 1057, and got possession of some lands in the south or west parts of this
country, and that his posterity assumed their surname of Borthwick from the
place from whence this Andreas came: Others are of opinion, that it is a local
surname.

It is evident, from our histories, that they were long a great, numerous, and
flourishing family in Scotland; they had large possessions in lands; and the
noble alliances they made, by their frequent marriages with the greatest
families in the kingdom, sufficiently appear from the following narration: We
shall therefore deduce their descent, by unquestionable authority, from

I. THOMAS de BORTHWICK, who obtained some lands near Lauder, Chart. pen^^ dom.
Andream Lauder de Fountainhall, Bart.
in the shire of Berwick, from Robert Lander of Quarrelwood, in the reign of
king David II. who succeeded to the crown of Scotland anno 1329.

He lest issue a son and successor,

II. Sir WILLIAM de BORTHWICK, who was in possession of the lands of Catkune,
Chart. pen^^ Mr. Sinclair de Herdmanston.
in the reign of king Robert II* which appears from a charter dated in 1378.

He left issue a son,

Sir William, -- and a daughter,

Margaret, married to William Abernethy, ancestor of lord Abernethy, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
of Salton, who was designed, Filia domini Willielmi de Borthwick militis, anno
1413.

He was succeeded by his son,

III. Sir WILLIAM BORTHWICK, who was witness in a charter of James, Chart.
penes ducem de Queensberry.
second earl of Douglas, to his son sir William Douglas, of the lands and
barony of Drumlanrig, etc. circa annum 1387.

He was one of the guarantees of a treaty of peace with the English, Rymer,
tom. VIII. p. 54.
anno 1398, and died soon thereafter, leaving issue a son,

Sir William, -- and two daughters.

1. Janet, married, 1st, to James Douglas, lord Dalkeith; 2dly, to George
Crichton, earl of Caithness.

2. --, married to sir John Oliphant.

IV. Sir WILLIAM succeeded, and was designed Willielmus de Borthwick, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
dominus de eodem, miles, in several authentic writs.

Before this family acquired the lands of Borthwick, they were promiscuously
designed by the titles of Catkune, Legertwood, and Heriotmuir, but were
afterward designed Borthwicks of that ilk.

This sir William was a man of great parts, was often employed in negotiations
of importance, and was concerned in most of the public transactions of his
time. Rymer, tom. VIII. p. 185.
He was one of the commissioners appointed to treat with the English in
December 1400.

He was again appointed one of the commissioners for prolonging the truce anno
1404, Ibid. p. 369.
and obtained a safe conduct to treat with the English about other matters,
particularly with the earls of Fife and Douglas, Ibid. p. 389, 411 and 417.
then prisoners in England, anno 1405.

He got another safe conduct from the king of England, Ibid. p. 584.
Willielmo de Borthwick, de Legertwood, militi, anno 1408.

And got a charter, Chart. in pub. archiv.
from Robert duke of Albany, governor of Scotland, of the lands and barony of
Borthwick, in the shire of Selkirk, which formerly belonged to Robert Scot,
dated 4th day of June 1410.

He was again one of the ambassadors appointed to the court of England in the
years 1411 and 1413. Rymer, tom. VIII. p. 703, and tom. IX. p. 45.


Also, in the year 1421, to treat about the king's liberty, Ibid. tom. X. p.
125.
which is the first time we find him designed dominus de Borthwick.

He was one of the magnates Scotiae that sat on the assize of the duke of
Lennox and Murdoch duke of Albany's two sons, Fordun, vol. II. p. 484.
anno 1424.

This William appears to have been created lord Borthwick before the year 1430;
for, in October that year, Ibid. p. 490.
at the baptism of the king's two sons, there were several knights created,
and, amongst the rest, William, son and heir of William lord Borthwick, was one.

He obtained, from king James I. a license to build a castle upon the lands of
Lochwarret, viz. Chart. in pub. archiv.
Ad construendam arcem in illo loco qui vulgariter dicitur le Motte de
Lochwarret, by a charter, under the great seal, anno 1430. A stately castle was
accordingly built, called Borthwick castle, which afterward became the chief
seat and title of the family.

He was succeeded by his son,

V. WILLIAM, second lord Borthwick, who made a considerable figure when but a
young man. He was one of the hostages for king James I.'s ransom, Rymer, tom.
X. p. 344 and 348.
anno 1424; and having got liberty to return to his own country, we find him
appointed one of the ambassadors to the court of Rome, anno 1425; but it seems
he had again returned prisoner to England; for it appears he only obtained his
liberty anno 1427, Ibid. p. 369.
and had the honor of knighthood conferred upon him anno 1430, as before
observed.

This lord was also a man of knowledge in state affairs, Records of parliament*
sat in the first parliament held by king James II. anno 1437, and in several
other parliaments afterward.

We find him no less than three times sent ambassador to the court of England,
Rymer, tom. XI. p. 423, 426 and 476.
anno 1459 and 1461, and dying soon thereafter, left issue three sons and one
daughter.

1. William, his heir.

2. Sir Thomas Borthwick of Colylaw, Chart. in pub. archiv.
knight.

3. James, who obtained from his father the lands of Glengilt, Ibidem.
on which he got a charter, anno 1467, and was the first of the Borthwicks of
Glengilt.

His daughter, Ibid. ad annum 1463.
Margaret, married to sir John Maxwell of Calderwood.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. WILLIAM, third lord Borthwick, who got a charter, Ibidem.
under the great seal, of the lands of Glengilt, etc. anno 1482.

He sat in the parliament called by king James III. Records of parliament.
to meet anno 1467, who appointed him magister hospitii, and was in several
parliaments thereafter.

He was sent ambassador, with some others, to negotiate a treaty with the
English, Rymer, tom. XI. p. 774, tom. XII. p. 243 and 677.
anno 1473, and on two embassies afterward, anno 1484 and 1498.

He married Maryota de Hope-Pringle, Chart. in pub. archiv.
by whom he had two sons and four daughters.

1. William, his heir.

2. Alexander Borthwick of Nenthorn, of whom the present lord Borthwick is
lineally descended, as will be shown hereafter.

1st daughter, Craw^urd's peerage.
Agnes, married to David earl of Cassilis.

2. Catharine, Chart. in pub. archiv.
married to William earl of Glencairn.

3. Mary, Nisbet's append. p. 72.
married to James Hope-Pringle of Gallashiels.

4. Margaret, Ibid. p. 173.
married to sir Oliver Sinclair of Roslin.

He was killed, with many of his brave countrymen, and their royal leader, king
James IV. at the fatal field of Flowdon, anno 1513, and succeeded by his eldest
son,

VII. WILLIAM, fourth lord Borthwick, who got charters, Chart. in pub. archiv.
inter 1530 and 1536.
under the great seal, of the lands and moat of Lochwarret, Midleton and
Buteland, the lands of Borthwick, Legertwood and Heriotmuir, Willielmo domino
Borthwick, etc.

He married Margaret Hay, daughter of John lord Yester, by whom he had a son,

John, his heir, -- and two daughters.

1. Catharine, Mill's genealogical collections, penes Macfarlane.
married to sir James Crichton of Frendraught, ancestor of viscount Frendraught.

2. Janet, Ibidem.
married to Alexander Lauder, son and heir of Alexander Lauder of Hatton.

He died anno 1542, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. JOHN, fifth lord Borthwick, who was retoured heir to his father, anno
1543, and made an entail of the lordship and barony of Borthwick, failing
heirs-male of his own body, Chart. in pub. archiv.
"to and in favors of Gavin Borthwick of Fenton, and the heirs-male of his
body; which failing, to Michael Borthwick of Glengilt, and the heirs-male of
his body; which failing, to William Borthwick of Soltry, and the heirs-male of
his body, etc." dated 10th January 1544; upon which there passed a charter,
under the great seal, Johanni domino Borthwick, dated 15th of the same month.

It must here be observed, that as the heirsmale of the above John, Gavin, and
Michael, are all extinct, the succession therefore devolves upon the heir-male
of William of Soltry, who was the next person in the substitution, of whom the
present lord Borthwick is the undoubted representative.

This John lord Borthwick was a great loyalist, a firm and steady friend of
queen Mary, and never deserted her interest in her greatest distress, on which
account he suffered many hardships.

He married lady Elizabeth Lindsay, daughter of David earl of Crawfurd, Ibidem.
by Isabel his wife, daughter of -- Lundy of that ilk, by whom he had a son,

William, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Maryota, Nisbet's append. p. 72.
married to Andrew Hope-Pringle of Gallashi^ls.

He died before the year 1572, and was succeeded by his son,

IX. WILLIAM, sixth lord Borthwick, who got a charter, Ibidem.
under the great seal, of the lands, lordship, and barony of Borthwick, the
lands of Moat of Lochwarret, Middleton, Heriotmuir, etc. Willielmo domino
Borthwick, anno 1572.

He married Grizel, Nisbet's append. ad ann. 1582.
daughter of sir Walter Scot, ancestor of the duke of Buccleugh, by whom he had
a son,

X. JAMES, seventh lord Borthwick, who succeeded him. Chart. penes marchionem
de Tweddale.
He married Margaret Hay, daughter of William lord Hay of Yester, ancestor of
the marquis of Tweddale, by whom he had a son,

John, his heir.

And dying anno 1599, was succeeded by,

XI. JOHN, Chart. in pub. archiv.
eighth lord Borthwick, who was charged to enter heir to his father, anno 1602,
and got a charter, under the great seal, of the lands and barony of Heriotmuir,
Lochwarret, etc. Johanni domino Borthwick, etc. anno 1610.

This John, A charter in the records o^ privy seal anno 1632.
with the three preceding generations, are further documented by a charter
from king Charles I. dated anno 1632.

He was a man of great honor and loyalty, and adhered firmly to the interest
of the royal family during all the time of the civil war. Two origina^ letters
of Oliver Cromwell in October and November 1650, with the articles of
capitulation, penes dom. Borthwick.
After the murder of the king, he held out his castle of Borthwick against
Oliver Cromwell, and at last, when he saw no appearance of relief, was forced
to surrender, and obtained very honorable terms, viz. Liberty to march out
with his lady and family unmolested, and got fifteen days time allowed them to
remove their effects.

He married lady Elizabeth Ker, daughter of William earl of Lothian, by lady
Anne his wife, heiress of that earldom, by whom he had a son and successor,

XII. JOHN, ninth lord Borthwick, who got a charter, Chart. in pub archiv.
under the great seal, of the lands and barony of Heriotmuir, etc. Johanni
doinino Borthwick, anno 1663.

He married lady Elizabeth Ker, daughter of Robert earl of Lothian, and died
without issue anno 1672, which ended the male line of William, fourth lord
Borthwick, eldest son of the third lord, whereby the representation devolved
upon the heir-male of Alexander his second son, to whom we now return.

VII. ALEXANDER, second son of William third lord Borthwick, was designed by
the title of Nenthorn, by a charter from the said lord, as superior of the
lands of Nenthorn, in the shire of Berwick, Ibid. ad annum 1495.
"to Alexander Borthwick, his second son, and Margaret his spouse, upon the
resignation of James Wilson, etc. etc." confirmed by a charter, under the great
seal, 27th June 1495.

By the said Margaret, daughter of -- Lawson of Humbie, he left issue a son and
successor,

VIII. WILLIAM BORTHWICK, who was designed by the title of Soltry, in the
entail of John, fifth lord Borthwick, beforementioned, and is further
instructed by a precept of clare constat, Chart. in pub. archiv. ad annum 1522.
to William, son to Alexander Borthwick of Nenthorn, etc. dated 21st March 1522.

He was chamberlain to queen Mary, made a considerable figure in her reign, and
left issue two sons.

1. William, his heir.

2. Alexander, ancestor of the Borthwicks of Sauchland, of whom Patrick
Borthwick, merchant in Edinburgh, is said to be the male representative.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. WILLIAM BORTHWICK of Soltry, instructed by an instrument of seasine, in
favors of William Borthwick of Soltry, son and heir of William Borthwick of
Soltry, his father, of the lands of Scholla and Campslack, proceeding on a
precept of clare constat, Seasine in the public register, ad annum 1550.
by John, fifth lord Borthwick, to his cousin William Borthwick elder, son of
Alexander Borthwick of Nenthorn, etc. dated 10th April 1550.

He lived after the year 1590, and left issue two sons.

1. Colonel William.

2. Alexander, great grandfather of Henry now lord Borthwick,

X. Colonel WILLIAM BORTHWICK, eldest son of William of Soltry, was designed by
the title of Johnstonburn, Chart. in pub. archiv.
etc. He betook himself to a military life, was a colonel under Gustavus
Adolphus, and was father of

William Borthwick, a great loyalist, who raised a company of men in desence of
king Charles I. and left issue a son, colonel William Borthwick, who was killed
at the battle of Ramillies, anno 1706, without issue, which ended the male line
of William of Soltry's eldest son; and as the representation fell to Henry, the
present lord Borthwick, lineally desc^nded of Alexander the second son, to him
we now return.

X. ALEXANDER BORTHWICK, second son of William of Soltry, and brother-german of
colonel William of Johnstonburn, etc.

In a principal assignation, Robert Ker, son to Ralph Ker of Reidpath, to this
Alexander Borthwick, Original penes dominum Borthwick.
he is designed second lawful son to William Borthwick of Soltry, 15th July
1633.

There is a principal minute of sale, Ibidem.
betwixt Alexander Borthwick, brother-german to colonel William Borthwick of
Johnstonburn, and Andrew Haitly of --, of some husband lands in Nenthorn, dated
23d February 1643, etc.

He married Sibilla, daughter of William Cairns of Pilmore, by whom he had a
son and successor,

XI. WILLIAM BORTHWICK, designed of Maysheill and Pilmore, Ibidem.
who is instructed by a disposition from the above Alexander Borthwick, some
time in Johnstonburn, now in Gilkerstoun, to William Borthwick, surgeon
burgess of Edinburgh, his eldest lawful son, of a tenement of land in
Musselburgh, dated 25th January 1666.

He married a daughter of Mr. Henry Stewart of the family of Garntully,
advocate, by whom he had a son,

XII. Captain HENRY BORTHWICK of Pilmore, his successor, Ibidem.
who is instructed by an act extracted in a process before the lords of
session, at the instance of Henry Borthwick of Pilmore, Esquire; decerned and
confirmed heir to the deceast William Borthwick, surgeon burgess of
Edinburgh, his father, 21st November 1702.

He married Mary, daughter of sir Robert Pringle of Stitchell, by whom he had a
son,

Henry, now lord Borthwick.

He was killed at the battle of Ramillies, anno 1706, and succeeded by

XIII. HENRY, tenth lord Borthwick, who, anno 1734, Retour in cancellaria.
gave in his claim for the titles and honors of Borthwick. He proved his
descent as above, was served heir-male to the last lord Borthwick, before an
inquest, anno 1750, and has voted at every election of the peers since 1734.

ARMS.
Argent, three cinque-soils, sable. SUPPORTERS; two angels, proper, winged, or.

CREST; a negroe's head couped, proper.

MOTTO; Qui conducit.

CHIEF SEAT.
Borthwick Castle in Lothian.

MORAY Lord of BOTHWELL.
THough it is acknowledged by our antiquaries, that the surname of Moray is
amongst the most ancient of any in Scotland, yet as their origin is a little
uncertain, of which we have given some hints under the Title of Duke of Athole,
we shall proceed to deduce the descent of this noble family, by authentic
documents, from the first of the name that is to be found upon record in this
kingdom.

I. FRISKINUS de MORAVIA made a great figure in Scotland in the reign of king
David I. who succeeded to the crown anno 1124.

He had large possessions in lands in Murray, Sutherland, and even in the more
southern counties, of which there are many unquestionable vouchers in the
chartulary of Murray, etc. etc.

He left issue two sons.

1. William.

2. Hugo, Chartul. of Murray, p. 156, Chartul. of Arbroath, p. 121, penes
Macfarlane.
who appears to have been ancestor of the family of Sutherland. Vide Title
Sutherland.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. WILLIELMUS de MORAVIA, who was in great favor at the court of king
William, Chartul. of Murray, etc. penes eund.
was witness to many of his charters and donations, and was himself a liberal
benefactor to the religious.

He got from that prince a charter of the lands of Strabrock, Chart. penes
comitem de Buchan.
Duffus, Rossile, Inchikil, Machir, Kintrai, etc. quas terras pater suus tenuit
tempore regis David, etc. This charter is without date, Keith's catalogue of
bishops, p. 80, and sir James Dalrymple's collections.
but as Felix bishop of Murray was witness to it, it must have been betwixt
1165 and 1171, in which last year the bishop died.

There is a charter from Richard bishop of Murray of the lands of Logynanedel
and Logyndykes, Chartul. of Murray, p. 138.
Willielmo, silio Friskini, and haeredibus suis, etc. dated in 1190.

In a charter of king William, de decimis solvendis, Ibid. p. 66.
etc. Willelmus, filius Friskini, together with Matthew bishop of Aberdeen,
William de Lindesai, Robert de London, William de Haya, Ranulphus de Soulis,
etc. are witnesses. This charter is also without date, but, by the witnesses,
must have been betwixt 1185 and 1199, in which last year the bishop of Aberdeen
died.

There is another charter, by king, William, of a donation of the church of
Forres and Dyke, Ibid. p. 73.
to Richard bishop of Murray, and his successors, etc. Testibus comite David
fratre regis, A. abb. de Dumfermling, Willielmo filio Friskini, and Hugone
filio suo, etc.

This William left issue two sons, Hugo and sir William, betwixt whom he
divided his lands.

Hugo de Moravia, the eldest, got the lands of Duffus, Chartul. of Murray, p.
74,79,91,etc.
then the chief seat of the family, of which there are many documents in the
chartulary of Murray. He was father of Walter de Moravia, Nisbet's append. p.
197.
whose only son, Friskinus de Moravia, died without male-issue, whereby the
line of the family was carried on by William's second son,

III. Sir WILLIAM de MORAVIA, the undoubted progenitor of the Morays of
Bothwell, etc. Chartul. of Moray, and Nisbet's append. p. 82.
who, in a charter of king William, is designed Willielmus de Moravia, filius
Willielmi, filii Friskini, etc. The charter has no date, but, as Bricius bishop
of Murray was witness to it, it must have been betwixt 1202, in which year the
bishop was consecrated, and 1214, in which year king William died.

There is a donation sanctae trinitati de Spynie, made by Willielmus de
Moravia, filius Willielmi, filii Friskini, etc. to which Hugh his brother, and
Archibald de Douglas, are witnesses; Chartul. of Moray, p. 100.
and Andrew bishop of Murray confirms donationem illam quam Willielmus, filius
Willielmi, filii Friskini, fecit, ecclesiae de Spynie, etc. about the year 1224.

This William was highly esteemed by king Alexander II. who conferred the
honor of knighthood upon him; and we find him often designed miles, etc.

He married the daughter of sir David Olifard, Chartul. of Glasgow.
son of Walterus de Olifard, justiciarius Loudoniae, and proprietor of the
lands of Bothwell, etc.

With her he got the whole lordship of Bothwell, Chart. penes ducem de Hamilton.
(whereof the lands of Drumsargart were a part) which afterward became the
chief seat and title of the family.

He got with her also the lands of Smallham in the shire of Berwick, Chartul.
of Dryburgh, and remarks on Ragman's roll, p. 26.
etc. and by her he had a son,

Sir Walter, his heir.

It Is said he had several other sons, of whom some considerable families of the
name of Murray are descended; but we cannot pretend to ascertain or connect
them.

He died anno 1225, and was succeeded by his son,

IV. Sir WALTER MORAY, who, succeeding also to the estate and lordship of
Bothwell, in right of his mother; was the first of the name of Moray that was
designed by that title.

In a composition betwixt Andrew, bishop of Murray, Chartul. of Murray, p. 125.
and Gilbertum hostiarium, Walterus de Moravia, filius quondam Willielmi de
Moravia, etc. is a witness, anno 1226.

There is another composition betwixt Andrew bishop of Murray and nobilem virum
Walterum de Moravia, Ibid. p. 79.
filium quondam Willielmi de Moravia, etc. to which Walter de Moravia, son of
Hugo, William de Moravia, Alexander vicecomes de Elgin, etc. are witnesses,
anno 1229.

In a convention betwixt Andrew, bishop of Murray, and David de Strabogie, son
of Duncan earl of Fife, Ibid. p. 76.
Walterus de Moravia, miles, Walterus de Duffus, Walterus de Innes, etc. are
witnesses, anno 1232.

He was one of the magnates Scotiae who were guarantees in a treaty of peace
betwixt king Alexander II. Rymer, tom. I. p. 428.
of Scotland and king Henry III. of England, where he is designed Walterus de
Moravia, miles, filius domini Willielmi, etc. anno 1244.

This sir Walter, with the earls of Fife, Dunbar, Ibid. p. 556.
Carrick, Strathern, and several others, were appointed to settle the marches
betwixt Scotland and England, anno 1255.

He was undoubtedly one of the greatest men of his time, Chartul. of Murray,
etc.
and had vast possessions, which appears from the many donations he made, to
the religious, of lands lying in different counties.

This Walterus de Moravia granted a discharge to the monks of Dryburgh for
ever, of all the multures which they paid out of the lands they held of him,
Chartul. of Dryburgh, penes Macfarlane, p. 98, 99.
in territorio de Smalham, in vicecom^ de Berwick, etc. This writ is dated at
Bothwell, in crastino sancti Matthaei apostoli, anno 1278.

He married a daughter of Malcolm earl of Fife, History of the family of Moray,
penes Abercairny, M. S. p. 16.
by whom he had issue two sons.

1. Sir William.

2. Sir Andrew de Moravia, who succeeded his brother.

Sir Walter died in 1280, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. Sir WILLIAM de MORAVIA, whom we find promiscuously designed de Bothwell and
de Drumsargard, and sometimes by both titles. He was also made panetarius
Scotiae by king Alexander III. with whom he was in great favor.

In the act declaratory of the succession of the crown of Scotland to king
Alexander III. and his heirs, Rymer, tom. II. p. 266.
he is designed Willielmus de Moravia, miles, filius Walteri, etc. anno 1284.

He was one of the magnates Scotiae that wrote to the king of England about the
marriage of his eldest son with queen Margaret of Scotland, Rymer, tom. II. p.
471, and critical remarks on Ragman's roll, p. 16.
and is there designed Guillam de Moreff, de Drumsargard, etc. anno 1290.

He made a donation of the patronage of the church of Woolston to the sea of
Glasgow. Chartul. of Glasgow, and Crawfurd's Peerage, p. 39. Critical remarks,
etc. ad annum 1290 and 1292.
Dominus^ Andreas de Moravia, his brother, and Robert bishop of Glasgow, are
witnesses, and he is therein designed dominus de Bothwell, Drumsargard, and
panetarius Scotiae, etc.

He also gave to the said see the patronage of the church of Smalham, Ibidem.
to which his seal ^s affixed, being three stars, etc.

He was one of the great barons summoned to Berwick, Rymer's foedera Angliae,
tom. II.
as an auditor of the claims of the Bruce and the Baliol, anent the succession
to the crown, in which he is designed dominus de Bothwell, panetarius Scotiae,
etc. anno 1291.

This Willielmus de Moravia, Ibid. p. 547 and 553.
panetarius Scotiae, with Donald earl of Mar, Gilbert earl of Angus, the earl
of Carrick, William de St. Clare, Patrick de Graham, Michael de Wemyss, William
de Moreff, de Tullibardin, etc. were sureties for the delivering up of several
castles to the English, anno 1292.

He made several donations to the religious, Memoirs of the family of Moray,
penes Abercairny, M. S. p. 22, etc.
which appears by five distinct charters in the chartulary of Glasgow, wherein
he is designed dominus Willielmus de Moravia, dominus de Bothwell, and
panetarius Scotiae, dated anno 1292 and 1293.

He was a great patriot, and did many brave actions in the service of his
country; but dying without issue, anno 1294, was succeeded by his brother,

V. Sir ANDREW de MORAVIA, dominus de Bothwell, and panetarius Scotiae, etc.
who was a man of singular courage and intrepidity, and a true lover of his
country. He joined the brave sir William Wallace upon his first taking up arms
in defense of the liberties of Scotland, and had no small share in the glory
acquired by handfuls of Scots against considerable bodies of the English under
the conduct of the glorious Wallace. He particularly distinguished himself at
Stirling, where he had the misfortune to lose his life on the 13th of September
1297, the Scots having obtained a most glorious victory. Fordun says, Fordun,
vol. II. p. 171.
"Ex cusus part, de numero nobilium Scottae, solus Andreas de Moravia, pater
Andreae, nobilis, vulneratus occubuit."

He married a daughter of sir John Cumin lord of Badenoch, Winton's hist^ in
the lawier^ library, Edr.
by whom he had two sons.

1. Sir Andrew, his heir.

2. Sir John de Moravia, (according to Mr. Crawfurd) who got from his father
the lands of Drumsargard, etc. and, as appears from authentic documents, and
the M. S. history of the Moravii panetarii Scotiae, acquired, by the marriage
of Mary, Chart. penes dom. Abereairny.
daughter of Malise earl of Strathern, the lands of Ogilvie and Abercairny in
Perthshire, where he fixed his residence, and from whom is lineally descended
the family of Abercairny, who have, ever since that time, possessed those lands
in a regular course of succession.

Sir Walter was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. Sir ANDREW de MORAVIA, dominus de Bothwell, panetarius Scotiae, designed
the Noble, who inherited all his father's virtues. No age has produced a
greater hero or truer patriot.

He was joined in command with sir William Wallace to march an army into
England, All Scotch historians.
where they performed glorious exploits with surprising courage and conduct,
anno 1298.

As soon as king Robert Bruce began to assert his title to the crown, he joined
him, and never deserted his interest in all his vicissitudes of fortune, Chart.
in pub. archiv. Stuart's hist. of the royal family.
whereby he became so great a favorite of that prince, that he bestowed upon
him in marriage his own sister, lady Christian Bruce, etc.

He was not only a faithful friend and follower of that great monarch, but
continued to adhere firmly and inviolably to the interest of his son king David
Bruce.

He particularly signalized himself at the battle of Duplin, Fordun, vol. II.
p. 307, 310, 312, 316, 320, 321, 332.
anno 1332; and, upon the death of the earl of Mar, in consideration of his
great and eminent qualities, was unanimously chosen regent or governor of
Scotland, in the minority and absence of king David, which high office he
executed with the universal applause and approbation of the whole nation till
his death, which happened anno 1338.

By the said lady Christian Bruce he left issue two sons.

1. John, his successor.

2. Thomas, who succeeded his brother.

VII. JOHN de MORAVIA, dominus de Bothwell, and. panetarius Scotiae, made
several donations to the religious at Elgin out of his lands in the north
country, which are fully narrated in the chartulary of Murray, and he is
particularly designed dominus de Bothwell, and panetarius Scotiae, Chartul. of
Murray, p. 272.
in a donation he made of a chaplainry on the lands of Alterly, which he
largely endowed pro salute animae fuae, etc. dated in April 1351; and dying
anno 1352, without issue, was succeeded by his brother,

VII. THOMAS de MORAVIA, dominus de Bothwell, Rymer, tom V. p. 724.
et panetarius Scotiae, who was nominated one of the hostages to be sent to
England for king David Bruce's ransom, and is designed frater et haeres
Johannis de Moreff, etc. in September 1351, though the king's liberty was not
obtained till six years thereafter.

He was a man of great parts, and singular endowments, and was often employed
in negotiations of the greatest importance.

He was one of the commissioners appointed to treat with the English for king
David's redemption, Ibid. tom. VI* p. 44, 56.
which was happily accomplished anno 1357; and he is then designed Thomas de
Moravia, panetarius Scotiae, etc.

He ratified and confirmed his brother's donations to the religious at Elgin.
Chartul. of Murray, p. 275, ad annum 1353.


And died anno 1366, leaving issue no sons, and but one daughter,

VIII. JEAN de MORAVIA, his sole heiress, who was married to Archibald third
earl of Douglas, lord of Galloway, etc. and brought with her the whole lordship
of Bothwell, etc. into that family. -- Vide Title, Duke of Douglas.

The male line of sir Andrew, eldest son of sir Andrew de Moravia, dominus de
Bothwell, and panetarius Scotiae, (No. VI. of this account) thus ending, Mr.
Moray of Abercairny, the undoubted descendant and representative of sir John de
Moravia abovementioned, is now heir-male of the noble and illustrious lords of
Bothwell, panetar i^ Scotiae, etc. etc.

Vide Title, Abercairny, in the second volume of this work. It may here be
observed, that though the property of the lands of Drumsargard belonged to sir
John de Moravia, yet the family of Bothwell retained the superiority to
themselves, which went with the heir of line to the family of Douglas, together
with the lordship of Bothwell. This is instructed by many authentic documents.

Jean de Moravia, heiress of Bothwell, and countess of Douglas, survived her
husband, and made a donation, In pura viduitate, pro salute animae, recolendae
memoriae Archibaldi comitis de Douglas, quondam viri sui, etc. anno 1401, as is
contained at large in the chartulary of Glasgow.

After her death, her grandson, Archibald, fifth earl of Douglas, added that of
Drumsargard to his other titles, which appears from Erectio praebendarum de
Cambuslang, Torbolton, etc. in ecclesia cathedrali Glasguen. consentiente
mag^isico and potenti domino Archibaldo comite de Douglas, domino de Bothwell,
Drumsargard, etc. etc. anno 1429, a full copy whereof is published in the
appendix to the lives of the officers of state, No. 6. p. 434.

The family of Hamilton having acquired the barony of Drumsargard, continued to
get their charters of these lands confirmed by the earls of Douglas, as
superiors thereof, till that family was forseited in the end of the reign of
king James II. after which the lords Hamilton got charters from king James III.
confirming the lands of Drumsargard, and some others in the lordship of
Bothwell, then in the crown by the forseiture of the earls of Douglas, etc.
which lands they got added and annexed to the barony and lordship of Hamilton,
anno 1463. All which is fully instructed by many original charters amongst the
writs of the family of Hamilton.




RAMSAY Lord BOTHWELL.
SIR JOHN RAMSAY designed (by Hawthornden) of Balmain; was a son of -- Ramsay
of Corston, Creations of the nobility in the advocates library, Edinburgh, and
Hawthornden's history.
who was heirmale of the Ramsays of Carnock; being a man of spirit and good
parts; was a great favorite of king James III. who created him lord of
Bothwell about the year 1486.

He was a firm and steady friend of the king, never deserted his interest, and
was with him when he was murdered anno 1488. It is certain he was not killed
with him, as has been related by former authors; but, being very obnoxious to
the party who had the management of all public affairs at that time, was
outlawed, and his estate and honors forfeited by the convention or parliament,
Hawthornden in vita Jacobi IV.
in the beginning of the reign of king James IV.

However, some time thereafter, he was re-habilitate as to his person and
estates, by a charter, under the great seal, erecting his lands of Balmain,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
Flasky, Esly, and Pitnamore, in the shire of Kincardine, into one free barony,
to him, and his heirs, etc. anno 1510; and of him sir Alexander Ramsay, now of
Balmain, is lineally descended. But he was never restored to his honors, the
lordship of Bothwell having been erected into an earldom, in favors of
Patrick, third lord Hales, immediately after this lord's forfeiture, etc.

HEPBURN Earl of BOTHWELL.
IT is the general opinion of our antiquaries that this is a local surname
taken from the lands and barony of Hebborne, or Hayborne, in the county of
Northumberland, where there were several considerable families of that surname
in very early times; and Ralph Heborne is mentioned as proprietor of these
lands as late as the reign of king Charles II. and probably his posterity still
continue there.

Though the Hepburns made a much greater figure in Scotland than ever they did
in England, yet the precise time of their arrival here is uncertain. The first
of them we find upon record is,

I. ADAM HEBBURN, who remarkably distinguished himself in Scotland in the reign
of king Robert Bruce, with whom he was in great favor, and obtained from that
Prince a charter of the lands of south and north Hales, and Traprene, in the
shire of Haddingtoun, upon the forfeiture of Hugh Gourlay of Beinstone.

As also another charter of the lands of Mordington, Inventary of old authentic
writs, etc. in the advocates library, Edr.
Ronaldstoun, etc. in the shire of Berwick, all holding of Patrick Dunbar, earl
of March, and lying within that earldom.

This Adam Hebburn gave a charter of some lands, Nisbet, vol. I. p. 237.
lying in the village of Mordington, to John Renton burgess of Berwick, anno
1320.

He left issue two sons.

1. Sir Patrick.

2. John Hebburn, who obtained from Patrick Dunbar, earl of March, the lands of
Over and Nether Merkhill in East Lothian, which is confirmed by king David II.
Chart. in archivis regi^ David.
anno 1363. The earl, in that charter, calls him alumnus suus, or
foster-brother. He was ancestor of the family of Waughton, from which are
descended the Hepburns of Smeaton, Berford, Beinstone, Humbie, etc.

Adam was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. Sir PATRICK HEBBORNE of Hales, who got a safe conduct to go to England to
negotiate some affairs of importance, Rymer, tom^. VI. p. 408.
anno 1363, and, amongst other Scotch barons, appends his seal to the act of
parliament which declares John earl of Carrick, Chart. in pub. archiv.
the king's eldest son, the true heir of the crown, etc. anno 1371; and on his
seal, which is still extant, are two lions pulling at a rose, Hay's vindication
of Elizabeth More.
placed on a chiveron, which continued always to be the paternal arms of the
earls of Bothwell.

He, and sir Patrick Hebburn younger of Hales, his eldest son, behaved with
remarkable intrepidity and resolution, and eminently signalized themselves,
Fordun, vol. II. p. 406.
at the famous battle of Otterburn, betwixt James earl of Douglas, and Henry
Percy, eldest son to the earl of Northumberland, the 5th of August 1388.

III. Sir PATRICK HEBBURN younger of Hales, a man of great honor, courage, and
intrepidity, married a daughter and one of the co-heiresses of the de Vallibus,
or Vauses, lords of Dirleton, in the shire of Haddington, by whom he got a
great accession to his estate; Nisbet, and Chart. in pub. archiv.
and, on account of this marriage, the Hepburns of Hales carried the bend in
the 2d and 3d quarters of their armorial bearing. By her he had issue two sons.

1. Sir Adam.

2. Archibald Hepburn, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who got a charter, under the great seal, of the lands of Flemington, etc.

This brave man was killed fighting valiantly against a party of English
commanded by George Dunbar, Fordun, vol. II. p. 433.
earl of March, who was then a rebel to his king and country, at Marstonmuir in
the Merse, 22d June 1402, his father being then alive.

IV. Sir ADAM HEPBURN of Hales, eldest son of sir Patrick, succeeded his
grandfather, and was one of the Scotch barons who went up to Durham to meet his
sovereign king James I. Rymer, tom. X. p. 308, 348.
on his return from England in 1423, and was also one of the hostages for his
ransom 1424.

He was one of the three Scotch commanders who defeated the English at the
battle of Piperden in the Merse, Fordun, vol. II. p. 501.
10th September 1436.

He left issue four sons and two daughters.

1. Patrick, afterward lord Hales.

2. William Hepburn.

3. George Hepburn of Whitsom, from whom are descended the Hepburns of
Riccarton and Blackcastle, etc.

4. John, bishop of Dumblane, and one of the lords of council anno 1467.

1st daughter, Elizabeth, was married to Alexander Montgomery, Crawfurd's
peerage, p. 128.
eldest son and apparent heir of Alexander lord Montgomery, ancestor to the
earl of Eglington.

2. Janet, married to John lord Sommerville.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. Sir PATRICK HEPBURN of Hales, who, during his father's life, was designed
of Dunsyre, in the year 1450.

He acquired from John lord Halyburton the lands of Little Lamberton, Chart. in
pub. archiv. inter 1449 and 1452.
alias Sheriff-bigging, in the shire of Berwick, together with the office of
heretable sheriff of that county, which continued with his successors for
several generations. He also got charters, under the great seal, of the lands
and barony of Hales, East and West Reston, and many others; and being a man of
great merit and fortune, king James III. was pleased to create him a baron or
lord of parliament, Chart. penes com. deErrol.
ante annum 1456.

He was twice appointed one of the conservators of the peace betwixt Scotland
and England anno 1449 and 1459. Rymer, tom. XI. p. 254 and 397.
He was guarantee of another treaty anno 1484, Ib. tom. XII. p. 241 and 340.
and was appointed ambassador extraordinary to the court of England anno 1488.

He was a man of singular resolution and courage, which he had an opportunity
of exerting upon several occasions.

He left issue two sons and two daughters.

1. Adam, lord Hales.

2. George Hepburn, Chartul. of Arbroath, and abbot Miln's lives of the bishops
of Dunkeld.
who being bred to the church, was made dean of Dunkeld, and thesaurer of the
diocese of Murray.

1st daughter, Margaret, married to Patrick Halyburton, Chart. inpub. archivis,
ad annum 1451.
son and heir of John lord Halyburton.

2. Eupheme, married to Andrew MacDougal, Ibidem.
son and apparent heir of Dougal MacDougal of Macherston in the shire of
Roxburgh.

VI. ADAM, second lord Hales, succeeded his father, Ibidem.
during whose life he was designed Adam Hepburn of Dunsyre.

He left issue five sons and four daughters.

1. Patrick, lord Hales, afterward earl of Bothwell.

2. Sir Adam Hepburn of Craigs, knight, who made a considerable addition to his
patrimony, by marrying Elizabeth, daughter and co-heiress of Walter Ogston of
that ilk; and dying without male-issue, his estate was divided amongst his
three daughters.

1. Elizabeth, married to sir Alexander Livingston of Dunipace, in the shire of
Stirling.

2. Helen, married to sir Patrick Hepburn of Waughton in Haddington-shire.

3. Janet, married to James Auchinleck of Kemnie, ancestor of the Auchinlecks
of Balmanno, in the county of Perth.

George Hepburn, third son of Adam second lord Hales, being bred to the church,
was first made provost of the collegiate church of Bothwell, Keith's catalogue
of the Scots bishops, etc. p. 175.
chosen abbot of Arbroath anno 1593, preferred to the office of lord high
treasurer of Scotland anno 1509, and bishop of the Isles in 1511; and, though a
churchman, he was a man of extraordinary courage and resolution, and was slain
at the fatal battle of Flowdon, on 9th September 1513.

4. John Hepburn, a man of great parts and learning, who, being also bred to
the church, Martin's reliquiae Sancti Andreae.
was made prior of St. Andrews, and, in the beginning of the reign of king
James IV. was made privy seal. He founded the Leonardine college of St.
Andrews, and built a fine wall, with turrets at proper distances, round all the
east, and part of the south side of that town, upon his own charges.

5. James Hepburn was first rector of Partoun, and, in 1515, was made abbot of
Dunfermline, and lord high treasurer of Scotland that same year. Keith's
entalogue of bishops, p. 8^
In 1516, he was made bishop of Murray, where he continued till his death in
1524.

1st daughter, Margaret, married to Alexander lord Kilmawers, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
etc. who was created earl of Glencairn in 1488.

2. Agnes, Ibidem.
married to William lord Livingston, ancestor to the earl of Linlithgow.

3. Elizabeth, Ibidem.
married to sir Alexander Home of that ilk, ancestor to the earl of Home.

4. Helen, Nisbet's append. p. 80.
married to John lord Sommerville.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. PATRICK, third lord Hales, who, being a young nobleman of a considerable
fortune, and no less ambition, and of a bold and enterprising genius, became
one of the chief ringleaders of that horrid rebellion against king James III.
which proved so fatal to that monarch.

Upon the accession of king James IV. to the throne, he was prime minister, and
had the sole disposal of all places depending on the state. In the very first
year of that reign he obtained a charter, under the great seal, of the
lordships of Bothwell and Crichton, which were then in the crown by the
forfeiture of the former proprietors, John Ramsay lord Bothwell, and William
lord Crichton; Records of parliament.
which lordships were erected into an earldom 5th October 1488, and the lord
Hales was created earl of Bothwell, Chart. in pub. archiv.
per cincturam gladii, says the original record.

A little after that, he was made hereditary lord high admiral of Scotland;
warden, first of the middle, and then of the west marches; and master of the
king's household. He got charters, Ibidem.
under the great seal, Patricio comiti de Bothwell, of a vast number of lands
and baronies, inter 1492 and 1502.

He was one of the ambassadors sent to England to negotiate a marriage for the
king of Scotland with the princess Margaret, Rymer, ad annum 1502.
daughter of king Henry VII. which afterward took effect.

He married lady Janet Douglas, Chart. penes com. de Morton.
daughter of James earl of Morton, by his wife lady Jean Stewart, lawful
daughter of king James I. by whom he had three sons and three daughters.

1. Adam, his heir.

2. John Hepburn, who, being bred to the church, Keith's catalogue of bishops,
p. 97.
was made bishop of Brechin, anno 1517, where he continued till his death in
1558.

3. Patrick Hepburn, who, being educated by his uncle John, prior of St.
Andrews, became his successor in that priory, anno 1522, and was secretary of
state from 1524 to 1527 inclusive. Ibidem.
He was made bishop of Murray in 1535, which dignity he enjoyed till his death
in 1573.

1st daughter, Chart. in pub. archiv.
lady Janet, married to George lord Seton, and had issue.

2. Mary, Ibidem.
married to Archibald earl of Angus, without issue.

3. Margaret, Ibidem.
married to Henry lord Sinclair, and had issue.

VIII. ADAM, second earl of Bothwell, succeeded his father. He was a man of
great courage and valor, and always adhered to the interest of king James IV.

He was possessed of a vast estate, which appears by his charters and infeftments
in the public registers from 1503 to 1511. Ibidem.
He was killed, Hawthornden's hist. of the James's.
with the king, and many of his brave countrymen, at the battle of Flowdon, in
1513. Chart. in pub. archiv. and Stuart's hist. of the royal family, p. 174.
Having married lady Agnes Stewart, daughter of James earl of Buchan, by whom
he left two sons and two daughters.

1. Patrick, his heir.

2. William Hepburn of Rollandstoun, Chart. in pub. archiv.
in the shire of Berwick.

1st daughter, Ibidem.
Mary, married to sir John Stewart of Minto.

2. Margaret, Ibidem.
married to John Murray of Falahill, hereditary sheriff of Selkirkshire,
ancestor of the family of Philiphaugh.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. PATRICK, third earl, who got a charter, Ibidem.
under the great seal, Patricio comiti de Bothwell, of the lands and barony of
Tamptallon, etc. anno 1528.

He married a daughter of Alexander master of Home, ancestor of the present
earl of Home, by whom he had a son, Patrick, his heir. He died anno 1534.

X. PATRICK, fourth earl, got a charter, under the great seal, Ibidem.
of the lands of Lochwarret, Park-Hakra, etc. Patricio comiti de Bothwell, anno
1537, Ibidem.
and married his cousin Agnes, daughter of Henry lord Sinclair, by whom he had
a son,

James, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Lady Jean, married, 1st, to John Stewart, prior of Coldinghame, to whom she
had Francis, earl of Bothwell, etc. She marrien, 2dly, John Sinclair, earl of
Caithness, whose estate she also heir'd.

He was succeeded by his only son,

XI. JAMES, fifth and last earl of Bothwell, of this family, who was created
duke of Orkney by Mary queen of Scotland, whom he afterward had the honor to
marry.

As a full account of his life and transactions are to be found in several
histories, we shall say no more of him here; but, being accused of the murder
of king Henry, queen Mary's second husband, he underwent a trial, and was
acquitted by his peers, and the sentence was ratified by the parliament in
April 1567.

He was afterward accused of the same crime, was chased out of the kingdom,
outlawed, and forfeited, in the first parliament held by James earl of Murray.

He fled to Denmark, where he died without issue, anno 1577.

STEWART Earl of BOTHWELL.
THE title of Bothwell being now in the crown, by the forfeiture of James the
last earl, king James VI. was pleased to bestow it upon Francis Stewart, Esquire;
son of,

I. JOHN, prior of Coldinghame, natural son of king James V. Stuart's hist. of
the royal family, p. 105.
who married lady Jean Hepburn, daughter of Patrick the fourth, and sister of
James the fifth earl of Bothwell, by whom he had two sons.

1. Francis, afterward earl of Bothwell.

2. John Stewart, Esquire;

He died at Inverness, at a northern circuit with his brothers the earl of
Murray and lord Robert, Ibidem.
anno 1563.

II. FRANCIS, eldest son of the prior, was created earl of Bothwell, and lord
high admiral of Scotland, by king James VI. and got charters, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
under the great seal, of the lands and barony of Hales, Auldumstocks, Morham,
cum officiis vicecom. de Edinburgh principalis, and infra constab. de
Haddington, and vicecom. de Berwick, baliatus de Lauderdale, and officium magni
admiralitatis, etc. Francisco comiti de Bothwell, inter 1584 and 1587.

Chancellor Maitland, being the earl's mortal enemy, got him imprisoned in the
castle of Edinburgh for witchcraft, etc. He made his escape from thence, and
made an assault upon Maitland, in the nightime, at the abbey of
Holyroodhouse, but failing in his attempt, he got sase off, and fled first to
Bute, then to England; at last he returned to Scotland, was pardoned and
received into favor by the king; but falling into some bad practices again,
and being suspected of having a design to seize the king's person, Stuart's
hist: of the royal family.
he was outlawed and forfeited, and again made his escape, went first to
England, then to France, Spain and Italy, in which last place he died, in 1624.

He left issue, by lady Margaret Douglas his wife, daughter of David earl of
Angus, and relict of Walter Scot of Buccleugh, three sons and three daughters.

1. Francis.

2. John, commendator of Coldinghame, who got charters, under the great seal,
Johanni Stewart, Chart. in pub. archiv. inter 1618 and 1621.
filio Francisci comitis de Bothwell, terrarum baroniae de Coldinghame, etc.

3. Henry, who got also a charter of the same barony, Ibidem.
Henrico filio dicti comitis, etc.

1st daughter, lady Elizabeth, married to James, father of William lord
Cranston.

2. Lady Margaret, Stuart's hist. of the royal family, p. 10^ and 106.
married to Alan lord Cathcart.

3. Lady Helen, married to John Macfarlane of that ilk, and by him was mother
of Walter Macfarlane of that ilk.

III. FRANCIS, first son of Francis earl of Bothwell, was restored to his
father's estate and honors, Rehabilitati^ in pub. archiv
by a writ under the great seal, Francisco Stewart, filio primogenito quondam
Francisci comitis de Bothwell, etc. anno 1624.

He married lady Isabel Seton, daughter of Robert earl of Winton, relict of
James first earl of Perth; but whether he had issue or not we never could
learn, so can trace his genealogy no further.

BRECHIN Lord BRECHIN.
DAVID, earl of Huntington and Garioch, son of Henry prince of Scotland, who
was son of king David I. had a natural son, Henry, on whom he bestowed the
lordship of Brechin, from which he assumed his surname, for, Chartul. of St.
Andrews.
in a donation to the canons of St. Andrews, he is designed,

I. HENRICUS de BRECHIN, filius comitis David, etc. and he is mentioned as a
witness in several charters and donations to Dundee, Chartul. of Arbroath.
Scoon, Arbroath, etc.

By Juliana, his wife, he left issue a son,

II. WILLIAM de BRECHIN, who succeeded him, and founded the hospital of
Brechin; Chart. in pull archiv.
in the foundation charter whereof he is designed Willielmus de Brechin, filius
Henrici, filii comitis David, etc.

He made a great figure in the reigns of king Alexander II. and III. and was
employed in most of the public transactions of his time. He was joined in
commission with the earls of Menteith, Rymer's foedera Angliae, ad ann. 1255,
tom. I. p. 566, tom. II. p. 266, 1083, etc.
Buchan, and Mar, to treat with the English de negotiis regni, etc. He was
likeways an arbitrator betwixt sir Peter Maule of Panmuir, domina Christina de
Valoniis, his spouse, Chartul. of Arbroath.
and the abbot of Arbroath, about the settling of their marches, which at last
was amicably adjusted, anno 1254. He was one of the privy council to king
Alexander III.

He married -- Cummin, daughter of William earl of Buchan, by whom he had a son
and successor,

III. DAVID, third lord Brechin, a man of great courage and magnanimity, and
was at the battle of Methven, Rymer.
where he remarkably distinguished himself, anno 1306.

He married -- Bruce, daughter of Robert earl of Carrick, Stuart's hist. of the
royal family, p. 35.
and sister of king Robert Bruce, by whom he had a son,

David, lord Brechin, who succeeded him, -- and a daughter,

Margaret, married to sir David Barclay of Cairns, in vicecom. de Fise, of whom
afterward.

IV. DAVID, Fordun, Buchanan, etc.
fourth lord Brechin, was one of those great men who signed that famous letter
to the pope, asserting the independency of our country, anno 1320; but, having
been guilty of some treasonable practices, particularly of having been privy to
a design of betraying Berwick into the hands of the English, anno 1321, he was
tried, condemned, and executed; and having no issue, his estate and honors
went with his sister Margaret to the above sir David Barclay her husband.

BARCLAY Lord BRECHIN.
IV. SIR DAVID BARCLAY, who became lord of Brechin, by marrying Margaret,
daughter of the third, and sister of the fourth and last lord of the surname of
Brechin, was a man of great valor, and a true lover of his country.

He adhered firmly to the interest of king Robert Bruce, Abercrombie's martial
atchievments.
and did him many signal services. He and his wife gave a considerable donation
to the monks of Balmerino, Register of Balmerino.
for the safety of their souls, etc.

They left issue a son,

Sir David, -- and a daughter,

Jean, married to sir David Fleming of Biggar, Chart. penes com. de Panmuir, ad
annum 1381.
whose only daughter, Marion, was married to William Maule of Panmuir, of whom
more hereafter.

He was succeeded by his son,

V. Sir DAVID BARCLAY, sixth lord of Brechin, who was a great patriot, a man of
singular courage and activity, and performed many glorious actions in favors
of king David Bruce.

He had the missortune to be engaged in some fatal disputes with the
Douglasses, Buchanan.
and at last, at the instigation of William lord of Liddisdale, was put to
death, anno 1348.

He left issue only one child,

VI. MARGARET BARCLAY, who was married to Walter earl of Athole, son of king
Robert II. with whom he got the lordship of Brechin, and added that to his
other titles, Chart. in pub. archiv.
which appears by a charter, under the great seal, Waltero senescallo domino
Brechin, etc.

This Walter was made earl of Athole after the death of his nephew prince
David, and earl of Strathern after the death of his brother.

Margaret, by her said husband, left issue two sons.

1. Sir David.

2. Alan, earl of Caithness, who was killed at the battle of Inverlochie,
without issue, anno 1428, or, according to others, in 1431.

VII. Sir DAVID, the eldest son, designed filius and h^eres comitis Atholiae,
was one of the hostages for the ransom of king James I. Rymer's soedera
Angliae, tom. X. p. 308, 309, etc.
anno 1424, and died in England, leaving issue a son,

VIII. ROBERT, who was concerned in that execrable murder of king James I. of
which bloody scene the earl of Athole, this Robert's grandfather, and the
king's uncle were the chief promoters.

The earl was most justly execute, All Scotch historians.
and all the estates and honors of the family were annexed to the crown.

But sir Thomas Maule of Panmuir claimed the lordship of Brechin, Chart. in
pub. archiv. and penes com. de Panmuir.
as being lineally descended of Jean Barclay, daughter of sir David Barclay
fifth, and sister of the sixth lord of Brechin, and nearest heir to Margaret
Barclay, countess of Athole, to whose heirs it was provided, failing heirs of
her body; but his claim was at that time rejected by the court, though the
family of Panmuir got possession of the lands of Brechin afterward, by
purchase, which is still used as one of the titles of the family, they being
lineal representatives both of the Brechins and Barclays, lords of Brechin.

CAMPBELL Earl of BREADALBINE.
THE immediate ancestor of this great branch of the family of Argyle was,

Sir DUNCAN CAMPBELL of Lochow, (the twelfth generation of that illustrious
house in a direct male-line) created lord Campbell of Argyle by king James II.
who married lady Margaret (or Marjory) Stewart, daughter of Robert duke of
Albany, second lawful son of king Robert II. by whom he had three sons.

1. Celestine, who died young.

2. Archibald, ancestor of the duke of Argyle.

3. Sir Colin Campbell, the first of this family.

1. This sir COLIN was a man of good parts, great courage and magnanimity. He
traveled much into foreign countries, and was one of the knights of Rhodes or
Malta, where, by his valor and conduct, he acquired immortal honor.

He was always a firm friend of the royal family, to whom he was nearly
related, and was at great pains to bring the cruel murderers of king James I.
to condign punishment.

He got the lands of Glenurchy from his father, Chart. in pub. archiv. inter
1468 and 1476.
to which he added several considerable acquisitions afterward, as appears
from many charters in our public records.

Particularly he obtained from the crown a grant of the lands and estate of
Lawers, for his many faithful services, etc. upon which he got a charter under
the great seal. Ibidem.
And though there is a full account of this family to be sound in Nisbet's
appendix, page 221 and. infra, yet we shall here briefly deduce their
genealogy, marriages, and most remarkable occurences, from the first, sir
Colin, to the present earl.

Sir Colin married, 1st, lady Mary Stewart, daughter of Duncan earl of Lennox,
by whom he had no issue.

He married, 2dly, Margaret Stewart, eldest daughter and co-heiress of John
lord Lorn; on account of which marriage this family have always quartered the
arms of Stewart of Lorn with their own. By her he had a son,

Sir Duncan, his heir,

He married, Nisbet's append. p. 222
3dly, Margaret, daughter of Robert Robertson of Strowan, by whom he had
another son,

John, who was bred to the church, and was bishop of the Isles, in 1506, -- and
a daughter,

Margaret, married to sir Archibald Napier of Merchiston.

He took to his fourth wife, Ibidem.
Margaret, daughter of Luke Stirling of Keir, by whom he had a third son,

Sir John, who was ancestor of the Campbells of Lawers, and earl of Loudon, by
a son of this family marrying the heiress thereof.

Of this marriage he had also a daughter,

Helen, married to William Stewart of Balindoran, a grandson of Murdoch duke of
Albany, of whom several families of the name of Stewart in Perthshire are
descended.

Sir Colin died in the beginning of the year 1498, and was succeeded by his
eldest son,

II. Sir DUNCAN CAMPBELL, who, in his father's lifetime, was designed of
Glenurchy, by a charter, Chart. in pub. archiv.
dated 26th February 1480. He was much in favor with king James IV. being a
man of good parts, great courage, and a faithful and loyal subject.

He got from that prince a grant of a royal bailiary, for his faithful
services, dated 3d September 1498; Ibidem.
and also grants of several other lands, as by charters in 1502 and 1503.

He married lady Margaret Douglas, Chart. penes ducem de Douglas.
daughter of George earl of Angus, by whom he had issue three sons and one
daughter.

1. Sir Colin, his heir.

2. Archibald, who was ancestor of the Campbells of Glenlyon.

3. Patrick Campbell, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who, failing issue of his brother Archibald, was next in the substitution to
succeed to the estate of Glenlyon.

His daughter, --, was married to -- Toshach of Monyvaird, an ancient family in
Perthshire.

He accompanied the king to the fatal field of Flowdon, where he lost his life,
with his royal master, anno 1513. He was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. Sir COLIN CAMPBELL of Glenurchy.

a man of great merit and accomplishments. He married lady Margaret Stewart,
Lives of the officers of state, and Stuart's hist. of the royal family.
daughter of John, earl of Athole, uterine brother of king James II. by whom he
had issue three sons and one daughter.

1. Duncan, all successively lairds of Glenorchy

2. John, all successively lairds of Glenorchy

3. Colin, all successively lairds of Glenorchy.

His daughter, Catharine, was married to sir William Murray of Tullibardin.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. Sir DUNCAN, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who married Margaret, daughter of sir John Colquhoun of Luss, by whom he had
only one daughter, Margaret, married to John MacDougal of Raray in Lorn; and
dying in 1534, without maleissue, was succeeded by his brother,

IV. Sir JOHN CAMPBELL of Glenorchy, who got a charter, Ibid. inter annum 1536
and 1540.
under the great seal, of several lands, and married Marian, daughter of sir
Archibald Edmonstone of Duntreath, by whom he had two daughters.

1. Margaret, married to Alexander Home of Argathie.

2. Christian, married to Edward Redheugh of Cultabragin.

Sir John dying without male-issue, was succeeded by his brother,

IV. Sir COLIN CAMPBELL of Glenorchy, a man of prudence, wisdom and sagacity.
He was a great promoter of the reformation, Spottiswood's church hist.
and was joined in commission with the earls of Morton, Gowrie, and others, for
settling and establishing the policy and church government, anno 1573.

He built the house of Taymouth in Breadalbane, which is still the chief seat
of the family. Chart. in pub. archiv.
He got charters, under the great seal, of several lands and baronies, and
married Catharine, Nisbet's appendix.
daughter of William, lord Ruthven, by whom he had issue four sons and five
daughters.

1. Sir Duncan, his heir.

2. Colin Campbell of Ardbeath.

3. Mr. Patrick Campbell of Achinryre.

4. Archibald Campbell, who got part of the ba^ony of Monzie, by marrying the
daughter and heiress of Andrew Toshach of Monzie; but he died without issue.

1st daughter, Beatrix, married to sir John Campbell of Lawers, ancestor of the
earl of Loudoun; the Campbells of Aberuchil being descended of a younger son of
this family.

2. Margaret, married to James, earl of Glencairn, and had a numerous issue.

3. Mary, married to John, earl of Menteith, and had issue.

4. Elizabeth, married to sir John Campbell of Ardkinlas, and had issue.

5. --, married to -- Napier of Merchiston.

Sir Colin died in 1584, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. Sir DUNCAN CAMPBELL of Glenorchy, who, being a man of singular endowments,
and possessed of many excellent qualities, was in great favor with king James
VI. Rymer, tom. XVI. p. 60.
He was one of the great barons who assisted at queen Anne's coronation, anno
1590, Chart. in pub. archiv. inter 1590 and 1600.
and got charters, under the great seal, of several lands.

In the year 1617, he was made heretable keeper of the forests of Mamlorn,
Ibidem.
Berinakan-Sauche, or Bendaskerlie, Finglenbeg, and Finglenmore, with many
ample privileges, which before had been in his family only by temporary gifts
from the crown.

He was made knight baronet in 1627, and high sheriff of the county of Perth
for life.

He married, 1st, lady Jean Stewart, Nisbet's appendix.
daughter of John, earl of Athole, chancellor of Scotland, by whom he had issue
seven sons and five daughters.

1. Sir Colin, his heir.

2. Sir Robert Campbell of Glenfalloch, who succeeded his brother.

3. Duncan, who died young.

4. John Campbell of Achinryre.

5. Archibald Campbell of Monzie, of whom are descended the Campbells of
Lochlan, Finab, and others.

6. Duncan, both died young.

7. Alexander, both died young.

1st daughter, Jean, married to sir John Campbell of Calder, and had issue.

2. Anne, married to sir Patrick Ogilvie of Inchmartin, and had issue.

3. Margaret, married to sir Alexander Menzies of Weem.

4. --, married to -- Irvin of Drum.

5. --, married to -- MacDougal of Donnolioch.

Sir Duncan married, 2dly, Julian, daughter of Patrick, lord Sinclair, by whom
he had a son,

Patrick, who obtained from his father the lands of Edinample, -- and a
daughter,

Jean, married to John, earl of Athole, and had issue.

He died anno 1631, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. Sir COLIN CAMPBELL of Glenorchy, who got a charter, Chart. in pub. archiv.
under the great seal, terrarum baroniae de Lude, etc. He married lady Juliana
Campbell, Retour in the register.
daughter of Hugh, earl of Loudoun, but died without issue, anno 1640, and was
succeeded by his brother,

VI. Sir ROBERT CAMPBELL of Glenorchy, Nisbet's appendix.
formerly of Glenfalloch, who married Isabel, daughter of sir Lauchlan
MacIntosh of Forecastle, captain of the Clanchattan, by whom he had issue five
sons and nine daughters.

1. Sir John; his heir.

2. Sir Colin of Mochaster, ancestor of Colin Campbell of Carwhin, who got a
charter, Chart. in pub. archiv. inter 1664 and 1672.
under the great seal, "Colino Campbell, filio secundo genito domini Roberti
Campbell de Glenorchy, militis, terrarum de Larg,etc."

3. William Campbell of Glenfalloch.

4. Alexander Campbell of Lochdochart.

5. Duncan Campbell of Auchlyne.

1st daughter, Margaret, married to John Cameron of Lochiel, and was mother of
the brave sir Evan Cameron.

2. Mary, married to sir James Campbell of Ardkinlas.

3. Jean, married to Duncan Stewart of Appin.

4. Isabel, married to Robert Irvin of Fidderit, son of Alexander Irvin of Drum.

5. Juliana, married to John MacLean of Lochbowie.

6. --, married to -- Robertson of Lude.

7. --, married to -- Robertson of Fascalzie.

8. --, married to -- Toshach of Monyvaird.

9. --, married to -- Campbell of Glenlyon.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. Sir JOHN CAMPBELL of Glenorchy, who was a man of good parts, great
honor, and universally esteemed. He got charters, under the great seal, Ibidem.
of several lands. He married, Nisbet's appendix.
1st, lady Mary Graham, daughter of William, earl of Menteith, Strathern and
Airth, lord justice general in the reign of king Charles I. by whom he had a
son,

Sir John, afterward earl of Breadalbane, -- and a daughter,

--, married to sir Alexander Menzies of Weem.

He married, 2dly, Christian, daughter of John Muschet of Craighead, by whom he
had several daughters, of whom are deseended Campbell of Stonefield,
MacNaughton of that ilk, Campbell of Airds, and Campbell of Ardchattan, etc.
etc.

He was succeeded by his son,

VIII. Sir JOHN CAMPBELL of Glenorchy, a man of sound judgment, great capacity,
and accounted one of the ablest statesmen of his time. He gave many instances
of his loyalty and attachment to king Charles II. during the usurpation, and
gave great assistance to general Middleton and his forces in the Highlands. He
used his utmost endeavors with general Monk to declare for a free parliament,
which he thought was the most effectual way to restore the king. For all which
his good services, king Charles was pleased to create him a peer, by the title
of earl of Caithness, 28th June 1677, which title he afterward exchanged for
that of Breadalbane, etc. with his majesty's approbation; upon which he got a
new pat^nt, with the former precedence, "To him, and any of his sons, Diploma
in cancellaria, S. D. N. R. ad ann. 1681
by his first wife, whom he should think fit to name, by a writ under his hand,
any time of his life, etc. etc." The words of the patent are, " Creamus, etc.
praefatum Johannem Campbell, and quemcunque ex filiis suis, inter eum and
demortuam dominam Mariam Rich, ejus primam sponsam procreatum, quem dictus
Johannes Campbell, per script^m and denominationem sub manu sua, quocunque
tempore ejus vitae, nominare and designare idoneum judicabit; haeredesque
masculo^ ex corpore dicti sui filii (ita designand.) procreandos; quibus
deficientibus, haeredes masculos procreatos, seu procreandos, ex corpore dicti
Johannis Campbell; quibus deficientibus, propinquiores and legitimos ejus
haeredes masculos; quibus deficientibus, propinquiores and legitimos ejus
haeredes quoscunque, comites de Breadalbane and Holland, vicecomites de Tay and
Paintland, dominos Glenorchy, Benederaloch, Ormelie, and Weik, etc. data 13tio
Augusti 1681."

He was likeways in great savor with king James VII. was one of his privy
council, and served him faithfully while he continued on the throne; but after
he went away, and there appeared no further hopes of his returning, the great
love and affection he had to his native country made him bend all his thoughts
to get peace and tranquillity settled in the nation; and therefore he used his
utmost endeavors to get the clans to lay down their arms, judging it
impossible for them to accomplish their designs.

His behavior at this period of life has been censured by some, though his
conduct in general is sufficiently vindicated.

He was a great enemy to the union in 1706, thinking it inconsistent with the
honor and independency of his country. It is alleged he was engaged with my
lord Mar in the rebellion anno 1715; but his advanced age, and the great
loyalty of his son, the lord Glenorchy, made his conduct in that affair to be
overlooked.

He married, 1st, lady Mary Rich, daughter of the noble and valiant Henry, earl
of Holland in England, by whom he had issue two sons.

1. Duncan, who died unmarried.

2. John, lord Glenorchy, who became his heir.

He married, 2dly, lady Mary Campbell, countess dowager of Caithness, and
daughter of Archibald, marquis of Argyle, by whom he had a son,

Mr. Colin Campbell, who died in the flower of his age. -- He had likeways a
daughter,

Lady Mary, married to Archibald Cockburn of Langton, Esquire;

The earl died in 1716, in the 81st year of his age, and was succeeded by his
son,

IX. JOHN, second earl of Breadalbane, who was one of the sixteen peers for
Scotland to two British parliaments, called to meet in 1734 and 1741; was lord
lieutenant of the county of Perth; and was a firm friend of the present
establishment both in church and state.

He married, 1st, lady Frances Cavendish, daughter and co-heiress of Henry,
duke of Newcastle, but she died without surviving issue.

He married, 2dly, Henrietta, sister to Edward, first earl of Jersey, and
daughter of sir Edward Villiers, knight, son of Edward, viscount Grandison, by
whom he had a son,

John, his heir, -- and two daughters.

1. Lady Charlotte, a lady of fine accomplishments, died unmarried.

2. Lady Harriot, who, in 1736, was appointed one of the ladies of the
bedchamber to their royal highnesses Amelia and Caroline.

This earl died in 1752, and was succeeded by his son,

X. JOHN, third earl of Breadalbane, who, in 1718, was made master of horse to
the princess royal. In 1720 he was envoy extraordinary and plenipotentiary to
the court of Denmark.

In 1725 he was created one of the knights of the bath.

In 1727 he was member of parliament for the burrow of Saltash in the county of
Cornwall; and, after his father's death, was elected one of the sixteen Scotch
peers to the last British parliament, anno 1754.

He married, 1st, lady Amabell de Gray, eldest daughter and co-heiress of
Henry, duke of Kent, by whom he had a son,

Henry, who died young, -- and a daughter,

Lady Jemima, who, in May 1740, was married to the lord viscount Royston,
eldest son and apparent heir of Philip, earl of Hardwicke, lord high chancellor
of Great Britain, and succeeded to her grandfather Henry, duke of Kent, as
marchioness of Gray, in June thereafter.

Her mother, lady Amabell, dying at London, in March 1726, the earl, in 1730,
married, 2dly, Mrs. Arabella Pershall, granddaughter and heiress of sir Thomas
Pershall of Great Sugnal, in the county of Stafford, baronet, by whom he got a
very considerable estate in that county, and by her had issue.

1. George, who died in his infancy.

XI. 2. JOHN, lord Glenorchy, married to Willielmina, second daughter of
William Maxwell of Preston, Esquire; a cadet of the noble family of Nithsdale, and
sister of Mary, countess of Sutherland.

ARMS.
Quarterly; 1st and 4th, girony of eight pieces, or and sable: 2d, or, a
fess-cheque, argent and azure: 3d, argent, a galley, sable, her oars in action,
and her sails furled close.

CREST; on a wreath, a boar's head erased, proper.

SUPPORTERS; two stags of the latter, attired and unguled, or.

MOTTO; Follow me.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Castle-Kelchurn in Glenorchy, Argyleshire; Finlarig and Taymouth in
Breadalbane; St. James's Place, London; and Great-Sugnal in Staffordshire.

WEMYSS Lord BRUNTISLAND.
THE immediate ancestor of this family was,

Sir DAVID WEMYSS of that ilk, the fifteenth generation of the noble and
ancient family of Wemyss, in a direct maleline, who flourished in the reign of
king James V. He married Catharine, daughter of Henry lord Sinclair, by whom he
had two sons.

1. Sir John Wemyss of that ilk, his successor.

2. Sir James Wemyss, who was designed of Caskieberry, which lands he got by
marrying Janet Wardlaw, heiress thereof, descended of the ancient family of
Tory. By her he had issue a son,

James Wemyss of Caskicberry, whose grandson,

Sir James Wemyss of Caskieberry, was made general of the artillery in the
reign of king Charles I. but was deprived of that office by the parliament, for
being at duke Hamilton's engagement, 10th July 1649.

He afterward got an act for making of leather cannon, and several other
engines of war.

He was a steady friend of the royal family, was a colonel of horse under king
Charles II. with whom he was in great favor.

He was father of

Sir James Wemyss of Caskieberry, who was created a lord of parliament for life
by king Charles II. by the title of lord Bruntisland; upon which he got a
charter, Chart. in pub. archiv.
under the great seal, dated at Whitehall 18th April 1672.

He married Margaret countess of Wemyss, daughter of David the second earl, by
whom he had a son,

David, third earl of Wemyss, etc. etc. etc.

Vide Title, Wemyss Earl of Wemyss.

CUMMIN Earl of BUCHAN.
THE immediate ancestor of this noble family was,

V. Sir RICHARD CUMMIN, (the fifth generation of the ancient house of Badenoch)
who flourished in the reigns of king Malcolm IV. and king William the Lion. He
left issue three sons.

1. Sir John, his successor, lord of Badenoch.

2. Sir Walter, afterward earl of Menteith.

VI. 3. Sir WILLIAM, designed dominus de Tindail, the first of this family, who
married Margaret, Chartul. of Arbroath, penes Mactarlane.
daughter and heiress of Fergus earl of Buchan, in whose right he became
possessed of that earldom.

He made a great figure in the reign of king Alexander II. Chartul. of
Coldingham, penes eund. p. 29.
who constituted him justiciar of Scotland, anno 1220; and that same year he
was one of the magnates Scotiae that concluded the marriage betwixt king
Alexander II. of Scotland, Rymer, tom. I. p. 241, ad annum 1220.
and Johanna, eldest daughter of John king of England.

The year thereafter he was one of the Scotch nobles that agreed to the tocher,
Ibid. p. 252.
and settled the jointure of the said princess Johanna, sister of king Henry
III. of England, and he is then designed comes Buchaniae etc. justiciarius
Scotiae, anno 1221.

He was witness also to a charter of Laurence lord Abernethy, Chart. in archiv.
familiae de Douglas.
under the same designation, anno 1222.

He made a donation to the abbacy of Arbroath, Chartul. of Arbroath.
with consent of Margaret, countess of Buchan, his spouse, confirmed by king
Alexander II. anno 1222.

He founded the abbay of Deer in Buchan for Cistertian monks, pro salute animae
suae, etc. and died anno 1233, Obiit Willielmus comes de Buchan, anno 1233, qui
abbatiam de Deer fundavit, etc. Chron. of Melross.
leaving issue, by the said Margaret, a son,

William, his heir, -- and a daughter, --, married to William earl of Mar. She
died in the year 1267. Obiit comitissa de Mar, soror com. de Buchan, anno 1267.
Fordun, vol. II. p. 109.


He was succeeded by his son,

VII. WILLIAM, second earl of Buchan, who was also justiciar of Scotland.

This earl, with some others of his clan, which at that time was very numerous
and powerful, carried off king Alexander III. then about thirteen years old,
from Kinross to Stirling, anno 1255, for which he was forfeited by a meeting of
the estates, Stuart's hist. of the royal family.
but was afterward pardoned, and again received into favor, anno 1258. He
died that same year, leaving issue two sons and five daughters.

1. Alexander, his heir.

2. William, who, Chartul. of St. Andrews, penes Macfarlane, p. 344.
in a donation to the priory of St. Andrews, is designed frater Alexandri
comitis de Buchan, etc. but we can give no account of his posterity.

1st daughter, Chartul. of Kelso, penes eund.
Bridget, married to Patrick Dunbar, earl of March.

2. Egidia, Chartul. of Arbroath.
married, 1st, to Malise earl of Strathen, 2dly, to sir Philip Meldrum, knight,
anno 1262.

3. Agnes, Martin's genealogical collections.
married to Robert de Umsraville, lord of the manor of Ridderdale in England.

4. --, married to William lord Brechin, and had issue.

5. --, married to William lord Soulis, Ibidem.
and had issue two sons, William, and John lord Soulis.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. ALEXANDER, third earl of Buchan, who was one of the greatest men of his
time. He began to make a figure in his father's lifetime, and after his death
was made justiciar of Scotland by king Alexander III.

He was one of the Scotch nobles appointed to hold a convention with the
English to adjust several affairs of state, Rymer, tom. I. p. 670.
anno 1258, and is then designed Alexander comes de Buchan, justiciarius
Scotiae, etc.

In 1284 he was one of the magnates Scotiae that bound themselves to maintain
and defend the right of king Alexander's grandchild, Ib. tom. II. p. 266.
the princess of Norway, to the crown of Scotland, etc. and is then designed
comes de Buchan, constabularius and justiciarius Scotiae. Buchanan, etc.
He was appointed one of the six governors of the kingdom after the death of
king Alexander III. anno 1286.

He was also one of the Scotch nobles that agreed to the marriage of the same
princess, Rymer, tom. II. p. 471, 1083.
then queen of Scotland, with prince Edward, eldest son to the king of England,
anno 1290.

He made many donations to the religious, which appears from the chartularies
of Murray, Arbroath, etc.

He married Elizabeth, or Isabel, one of the daughters and co-heiresses of
Roger de Quinci, earl of Wincester, by Helen his wife, daughter of Alan lord of
Galloway, constable of Scotland, by whom he had two sons.

1. John, his heir.

2. William, who, Book of original writs, penes Macfarlane, vol. II. p. 159.
in an authentic charter, is designed filius junior Alexandri comitis de
Buchan, etc.

He died betwixt the years 1290 and 1292, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. JOHN, fourth earl of Buchan, constable of Scotland, who was also one of
the greatest men in the kingdom. Rymer, tom. II. p. 553, 594.
He was one of the arbiters chosen on the part of John Baliol, in the
competition for the crown between him and the Bruce, anno 1292.

He was sent ambassador to treat of a peace with France, Ibidem.
which was happily concluded, anno 1303.

He married Isabel, daughter of Duncan, earl of Fife, says Mr. Crawfurd; but,
according to others, Martin's collections.
lady Mary, daughter of John Baliol, by whom he had a son,

John, Rymer, tom. IV. p. 5^4, and tom. V. p. 177.
his heir, -- and two daughters.

1. Alicia, married to sir Henry Beaumont in England, who afterward assumed
the title of earl of Buchan.

2. Rosamond, or, Winton's chronicle.
according to others, Margaret, married to sir John Ross, knight.

After king Robert Bruce's accession to the crown in 1306, this earl continued
steady in his attachment to the Baliols, and at last turned an implacable enemy
to his country; for which he was outlawed, and his estate and honors were
forfeited to the crown. He retired to England, where he died anno 1329.

X. JOHN, his only son, married Jean, second daughter of William de Valoniis,
earl of Pembroke, but died without issue, which, it is said, ended the male-line
of the Cummins earls of Buchan. But

Jordanus de Cummin, a relation of this family, got the lands of Inneralachy
from Alexander earl of Buchan, is witness to many of his charters, and is said
to have been ancestor of the Cummins of Culter, who had a charter of these
lands from king James III. Chart. in pu^. archiv.
anno 1477.

STEWART Earl of BUCHAN.
THE title of Buchan continued in the crown from the forfeiture of John the
fourth earl, until king Robert II. bestowed it upon ALEXANDER STEWART, Stuart's
hist: of the royal family.
his fourth son, to whom he gave also the lands and lordship of Badenoch, to be
held by him as freely as John Cummin held the same. He likeways created him
earl of Buchan, anno 1374.

This Alexander earl of Buchan married Eupheme countess of Ross; Chart. in
rotul. Roberti ^di.
but dying without issue, anno 1394, was buried in the chancel of the cathedral
church of Dunkeld; and his brother Robert, Ibid. History of the royal family,
and Lives of the ^fficers of (...).
duke of Albany, governor of Scotland, got his earldom, which he bestowed upon
his valiant son John of Coul, lord of Railston and Tillicultry, who became earl
of Buchan and Ross, and was also chamberlain of Scotland, anno 1406.

He was a man of great abilities either for peace or war, Ibid. Buchanan, etc.
and had the command of 7000 auxiliaries that were sent to France to the
assistance of king Charles VI. where he performed many great and glorious
actions, which are fully related both by Scotch and French historians; and, for
his great merit, he was made constable of France.

After having gained immortal honor to himself and his country in that
kingdom, he was slain at the battle of Verneuil, anno 1424.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of Archibald earl of Douglas, by princess
Margaret, his wife, daughter of king Robert III. by whom he had only one child,

Lady Margaret, married to George lord Seton, ancestor of the earls of Winton;
in consequence of which marriage the Setons have ever since continued to
quarter the arms of Buchan with their own.

This earl having no male issue, the title of Buchan again returned to the
crown; but king James II. gave a pension of forty merks yearly to the said
George lord Seton, and lady Margaret his spouse, and the longest liver of them
two, in lieu of the earldom.

STEWART Earl of BUCHAN.
THE next who was dignified with the title of earl of Buchan was JAMES, son of
sir James Stewart, called the Black Knight of Lorn, the sixth generation, in a
direct male-line, from Alexander lord high steward of Scotland, great
grandfather of king Robert II.

This sir James married queen Jean, Stuart's hist. of the royal family, p. 173.
daughter of John duke of Somerset, son of John of Gaunt duke of Lancaster, son
of Edward III. king of England, widow of king James I. of Scotland, by whom he
had three sons.

1. John, earl of Athole. -- Vide page 49 of this work.

2. Sir James, afterward earl of Buchan.

3. Andrew, bishop of Murray.

I. Sir JAMES STEWART, second son of the Black Knight of Lorn by queen Jean,
and uterine brother of king James II. married, 1st, Margaret, daughter and sole
heiress of sir Alexander Ogilvie of Auchterhouse, heretable sheriff of the
county of Forfar. He got a charter, Chart. in pub. archiv. and Chart. penes
Johannem Erskine de Carnock.
under the great seal, to James Stewart, knight, (the king's uncle) and
Margaret Ogilvie, his spouse, of the lands and barony of Strathalva, and
others, dated 4th March 1466.

He was a man of great accomplishments, both natural and acquired, was a
faithful counselor to king James III. with whom he was in great favor, and
who raised him to the dignity of the peerage, Ibidem.
by the title of earl of Buchan, lord Auchterhouse, etc. anno 1469.

He was appointed warden of the south marches, Lives of the officers of state.
and lord high chamberlain of Scotland, anno 1471.

He got a charter, under the great seal, of the whole earldom of Buchan, Jacobo
comiti de Buchan, Chart. in pub. archiv.
domino de Auchterhouse, avunculo regis, etc. dated 4th October 1477; and a
charter, Chart. penes com. de Traquair.
under the great seal, of the lands and barony of Traquair, dated 3d February
1478.

He got also charters of a great many other lands and baronies, Ibid. et chart.
in pub. arch.
too numerous to be here inserted, inter 1477 and 1488.

He was a most loyal and faithful subject to king James III. and, after his
murder, carried his resentment to the highest pitch against all those who had a
hand in embroiling his affairs.

By the said Margaret Ogilvie, his first wife, he left issue a son,

Alexander, his heir.

He married, Stuart's hist. of the royal family.
2dly, Margaret Murray, a daughter of Philiphaugh, an ancient family in the
county of Selkirk, by whom he had another son,

James, Ibidem.
ancestor of the earl of Traquair, -- and three daughters.

1. Lady Agnes, married, 1st, to Adam earl of Bothwell, 2dly, to Robert lord
Maxwell.

2. Lady Elizabeth, married to John Home of Coldingknows, ancestor of the earl
of Home.

3. Lady Isabel, who had a daughter, Janet, by king James IV. married to
Malcolm lord Fleming.

This James earl of Buchan and lord Auchterhouse, Margaret Ogilvie his spouse,
and sir Alexander Stewart, their son and apparent heir, Chart. pene Johannem
Erskine de Carnock.
granted an obligation to Thomas Ogilvie of Clova, concerning some lands in
Angus, on 30th August 1493, upon which he got a charter; and the earl's seal
bears, quarterly, 1st, three garbs; 2d, a fess cheque; 3d, not distinct; 4th, a
spread eagle.

The earl died before 1499, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. ALEXANDER, Ibidem.
earl of Buchan, who grants a procuratory to William apparent lord Ruthven, and
David Kinneir of that ilk, for resigning several of his lands into the king's
hands, 14th September 1499.

In his father's lifetime he married, 1st, Isabel Ogilvie, but of what family
we know not; and got a charter, Chart. in pub archiv.
under the great seal, to sir Alexander Stewart, son and apparent heir of James
earl of Buchan, and Isabel Ogilvie his spouse, of the lands and barony of
Ketness, Leuchat, etc. anno 1491.

By her he had issue a son,

John, his heir.

He married, 2dly, Margaret, daughter of William lord Ruthven, but by her he
had no issue; and, after his death, she married John Erskine of Dun, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
which appears by a charter, under the great seal, Johanni Erskine, and
Margaretae de Ruthven, comitissae de Buchan, ejus sponsae, of several lands,
anno 1508.

The earl died anno 1505, and was succeeded by his son,

III. JOHN, earl of Buchan, who got a precept from John lord Glammis, Precept
penes Johannem Erskine de Carnock, etc.
superior of the lands and barony of Tannadas, etc. for infefting John Stewart,
as heir to Alexander earl of Buchan, his father, in the lands of Mames and
others in the said barony, 30th May 1506.

He got charters, Chart. in pub. archiv.
under the great seal, of several other lands, Johanni comiti de Buchan, anno
1514.

He was infeft in the lordship of Auchterhouse, baronies of Narva, Chart. penes
Johannem Erskine de Carnock.
Kynalty, Essye, Ketness, etc. all lying in the shire of Forfar, 28th November
1517.

He was one of the privy council to king James V. with whom he was in great
favor.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir John Scrimzeour of Dudhope, by whom he
had two sons and one daughter.

1. John, designed master of Buchan.

2. James Stewart, Esquire; who married Christian, Stuart's hit. of the royal
family, and Chart. penes Johannem Erskine de Carnock.
daughter of John Strange of Baleaskie, by whom he had a son, James, (who
married the countess of Athole, and died without issue) and two daughters,
Margaret and Isabel.

The earl's daughter, --, married to Thomas Dempster of Muiresk, Esquire;

IV. JOHN, master of Buchan, eldest son and apparent heir of earl John,
married, 1st, lady Mary Stewart, daughter of James earl of Murray, by whom he
had no issue.

He married, 2dly, Margaret, daughter of Walter Ogilvie of Boyne, by whom he
had one daughter,

Christian, Ibidem.
afterward countess of Buchan.

The master, with many of the nobility of Scotland, was killed at the battle of
Pinkie, anno 1547, his father being then alive, who dying anno 1551, his estate
and honors devolved upon his grandchild,

CHRISTIAN, countess of Buchan, daughter of John master of Buchan, who, Chart.
penes Johannem. Erskine de Carnock.
in a deed granted to Thomas Copland of Udo, is designed fiar of the earldom of
Buchan, anno 1555.

DOUGLAS Earl of BUCHAN.
V. THE said CHRISTIAN, Stuart's hist. of the royal family, and Chart. in pub.
archiv.
countess of Buchan, married ROBERT, second son of sir Robert Douglas of
Lochleven, and brother-german of William earl of Morton, who, in her right
became earl of Buchan.

They had issue a son,

James, their heir, -- and two daughters.

1. Margaret, married, 1st, to Mr. Richard Douglas, brother to the earl of
Whittinghame, 2dly, to Alexander Iryin of Drum, but died without issue.

2. Elizabeth, married to Andrew Fraser of Murchil, ancestor of lord Fraser.

They were succeeded by their son,

VI. JAMES DOUGLAS, earl of Buchan, who was served heir in general to Robert
earl of Buchan, Retour penes magistrum Erskine de Carnock.
lord Glendouachy, etc. his father, before an inquest of fifteen landed
gentlemen, at Banff, the 2d day of April 1583.

James earl of Buchan is also served heir general of Christian countess of
Buchan, Ibidem.
at Edinburgh, before the macers, 24th day of May 1588.

He married Margaret Ogilvie, daughter of Walter lord Deskford, ancestor of the
earl of Finlater, by whom he had a daughter,

Mary, his sole heiress.

He died 24th August 1601, was buried at Auchterhouse, and succeeded in his
estate and honors by his only child,

MARY DOUGLAS, designed countess of Buchan, Retour penes Johannem Erskine de
Carnock.
in the principal decree of ranking anno 1606, who chose for her curators sir
Walter Ogilvie of Finlater, knight, sir Archibald Douglas of Kilor, knight,
Walter lord Blantyre, William earl of Tullibardin, sir Michael Elphingston,
knight, John Livingston of Dunipace, and John Murray of Touchaddam, 26th April
1615.

This Mary countess of Buchan is served heir in general of James earl of
Buchan, Ibidem.
her great grandfather's great grandfather, at Banss, 29th September 1627.

She is also served heir in general to John earl of Buchan, Ibidem.
her grandfather's grandfather, and to John master of Buchan, her great
grandfather, in the same year 1627.

ERSKINE Earl of BUCHAN.
VII. THE foresaid MARY DOUGLAS, countess of Buchan, married JAMES ERSKINE,
eldest son, of the second marriage, of John earl of Mar, lord high treasurer of
Scotland, by lady Mary Stewart, daughter of Esme duke of Lenox, who, in her
right, became earl of Buchan.

They got charters, Chart. in pub. archiv.
under the great seal, Jacobo comiti Buchaniae, and Mariae Douglas comitissae,
suae sponsae, of the lands and barony of Auchterhouse, and a great many others,
betwixt 1615 and 1618.

This countess Mary resigned the earldom and titles of Buchan in favors of
James Erskine and herself, and the longest liver of them two, in liferent, and
the heirs-male to be procreate betwixt them; whom failing, to the said James's
heir-male whatever. This is confirmed by a charter, Chart. penes comitem de
Buchan.
under the great seal, dated 25th November 1625.

It may here be observed, that, by a decree of the lords of session, 25th July
1628, it is found, that the earls of Buchan had the precedence of the earls of
Eglington, Montrose, Cassilis, Records of parliament.
Caithness, and Glencairn; and this is ratified by parliament, 28th June 1633.

This earl was a man of good parts, great honor and probity, was highly
esteemed both by king James VI. and king Charles I. which last appointed him
one of the lords of his bedchamber; and being a great favorite at court, he
lived most of his time in England.

By the said Mary countess of Buchan he left issue two sons and two daughters.

1. James, lord Auchterhouse.

2. John, who died without issue.

1st daughter, lady Mary, married to Alexander lord Pitsligo, and had issue.

2. Lady Margaret, married to sir James Graham, son of John earl of Menteith.

The countess dying in England, the earl married, 2dly, Elizabeth, daughter of
sir Philip Knevil of Bucknam castle, in the county of Norsolk, baronet, by whom
he had one daughter,

Dorothea, married to -- Walker, in the county of Middlesex, Esquire; and several
other children, who all died young.

He died before the year 1630, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. JAMES, lord Auchterhouse, second earl of Buchan, of the Erskine family,
who was served heir general of Mary Douglas, Chart. penes Johannem Erskine de
Carnock.
countess of Buchan, his mother, on 16th September 1628.

He was served heir general also of Margaret Ogilvie, Ibidem.
countess of Buchan, grandmother of his grandfather's great grandfather, 20th
April 1630, and that same year was served heir in general of Patrick Ogilvie of
Auchterhouse, the great grandfather of his grandfather's great grandfather, etc.

He got a charter, under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Jacobo comiti Buchaniae, terrarum and comitatus de Buchan, baroniae de
Mountblairie, Glendouachy, castri de Banff, etc. etc. anno 1630.

He was a great loyalist, a steady friend of the royal family, and never
deserted their interest during all the time of the civil war, whereby he
suffered many hardships, Bishop Guth rie's memoirs
and was fined by Oliver Cromwell in the sum of 1000l. Sterling, on 12th April
1654.

He married lady Mary Ramsay, daughter of William earl of Dalhousie, by whom he
had a son,

William, his heir, -- and four daughters.

1. Lady Margaret, married, 1st, to -- Fraser of Inneralachy, 2dly, to Charles
lord Fraser.

2. Lady Anne, married to James Canaries, D. D.

3. Lady Henriet, married to Thomas Forbes of Tolquhoun.

4. Lady Jean, married to George Gray of Halkerton, Esquire;

He was succeeded by his son,

IX. WILLIAM, third earl of Buchan, who, in a deed, dated 8th April 1677,
grants procuratory for resigning the honors, etc. Chart. pene Johannem Erskine
de Carnock.
to himself, and the heirs-male of his body; whom failing, to Henry lord
Cardross, and the heirs-male of his body; whom failing, to William, John, and
Charles Erskines, his brothers, suceessively, and the heirs-male of their
bodies; whom failing, to Mr. William Erskine cup bearer to his majesty, and the
heirs-male of his body; whom failing, to sir Charles Erskine of Alveth, and
John Erskine, his brother, successively, and the heirs-male of their bodies;
whom failing, to earl William's nearest heirs-male whatever; whom failing, to
his heirs and assignies whatever. And this deed is ratisied by him 23d October
1678.

This earl was a man of great honor and integrity, and being much in favor
with king James VII. he never deserted his interest, but thought himself bound
in duty to join those who took up arms in favors of the king against the
prince of Orange, for which he suffered greatly, and being at last taken
prisoner by king William's troops, was shut up in Stirling castle, where he
continued confined till he died, anno 1695; and having no issue, his estate and
honors, according to the last mentioned patent, devolved upon David Erskine,
lord Cardross, his next heirmale, of whom the present earl of Buchan is
lineally descended, as will be shown under the title of Earl of Buchan and Lord
Cardross.

ERSKINE Earl of BUCHAN, and Lord CARDROSS.
THE immediate ancestor of this noble family was,

JOHN, earl of Mar, (the thirteenth generation of that illustrious house in a
direct male-line) who was lord high treasurer of Scotland, and highly esteemed
by his majesty king James VI.

Amongst many instances of the royal favor, he had the honor and title of
Cardross conferred upon him, his heirs and assgnies whatsomever, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
by a charter, under the great seal, dated 27th March 1604.

He married, 1st, Anne, daughter of David lord Drummond, by whom he had a son,

John, earl of Mar, his successor.

He married, 2dly, lady Mary Stewart, daughter of Esme duke of Lennox, son of
John lord d'Aubigney, son of John earl of Lennox, whose grandmother was lady
Mary Stewart, daughter of king James II. By this lady he had a numerous issue.

1. Sir James Erskine, who married Mary, countess and heiress of Buchan, in
whose right he became possessed of that earldom; but his male-line is extinct,
as is shown in the preceding title.

I. 2. HENRY ERSKINE, to whom John earl of Mar, his father, "made over,
assigned, and disponed the lordship of Cardross, with all the rights and
privileges thereto belonging, anno 1615;" which was confirmed to him by two
charters, Ibidem.
under the great seal, of the lordship, mains, and barony of Cardross, etc.
inter 1615 and 1618.

He had likeways the abbay of Dryburgh, with the lands and tithes thereof,
bestowed upon him, which, for that purpose, were dissolved from the crown,
Records of parliament.
by a special act of parliament in his favors.

He married Margaret, only daughter of sir James Ballenden of Broughton, and
sister of William, first lord Ballenden, by whom he had a son,

David, his heir, -- and one daughter,

Mary, married to sir John Buchanan of that ilk, and had issue.

He died anno 1636, and was succeeded by his son,

II. DAVID, second lord Cardross, who got charters, under the great seal,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the whole lordship and barony of Cardross, etc. Davidi domino Cardross,
inter 1664 and 1670.

In 1645, he married 1st, Anne, daughter of sir Thomas Hope of Craighall, by
whom he had a son,

Henry, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Margaret, married to William Cunninghame of Boquhan, Esquire; and had issue.

In 1655, he married, 2dly, Mary, daughter of George Bruce of Carnock, sister
of Edward and Alexander earls of Kincardine, by whom he had four sons and three
daughters.

1. Alexander, who died unmarried.

2. Colonel William Erskine, a man of great worth and honor, who was
depute-governour of Blackness castle, and married Magdalen, daughter of sir
James Lumsdain of Innergelly, by whom he had colonel William Erskine of Tory.

3. Colonel John Erskine of Carnock, a man of singular probity, stanch
revolution-principles, and strongly attached to presbyterian church government.
He was lieutenant and governor of Stirling castle, and afterward of
Dumbarton. He was four times married, had several children, and dying anno
1743, was succeeded by his eldest son, Mr. John Erskine of Carnock, advocate,
professor of Scotch law in Edinburgh; who is also married, and has issue. --
Vide Vol. II. of this work.

4. Captain Charles Erskine, who was killed at the battle of Steinkirk, anno
1692.

1st daughter, Veronica, married to Walter Lockhart of Kirkton, Esquire; in the
shire of Lanark, and had issue.

2. Magdalen, married to Alexander Monypenny of Pitmillie, Esquire; in the county
of Fife, and had issue.

3. Mary, died unmarried.

He died anno 1671, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. HENRY, third lord Cardross, who was a great promoter of the revolution,
and a particular favorite of King William. He was one of his privy council,
general of the mint, colonel of a regiment of dragoons, etc. and one of the
commissioners appointed by parliament for treating of an union with England,
which, at that time, took no effect.

He married Catharine, daughter and heiress of sir James Stewart of Strabrock
or Kirk-hill, in West Lothian, Bart. by whom he had four sons and three
daughters.

1. David, afterward earl of Buchan.

2. Mr. Charles Erskine advocate, who married -- daughter and heiress of --
Scot of Edenshead, Esquire; by whom he had a son and two daughters, who all died
young.

3. Captain William Erskine, deputy governor of Blackness castle, who married
Margaret, daughter of colonel John Erskine, deputy governor of Stirling castle,
and had issue, two sons and three daughters.

4. Mr. Thomas Erskine, advocate, who married Rachel, daughter and heiress of
-- Liberton of that ilk, by whom he had issue, three daughters.

Lord Cardross's 1st daughter, Catharine, married, 1st, to sir William Denholm
of Westshiels; 2dly, to Daniel Campbell of Shawfield, Esquire; to whom she had one
daughter.

2. Mary, married to James Nimmo, Esquire; cashier-general of excise, to whom she
had three daughters.

3. Anne, married to Archibald Edmonstone of Duntreath, Esquire; to whom she had
one daughter.

He died anno 1693, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. DAVID, fourth lord Cardross, who, upon the death of his cousin William,
third carl of Buchan, succeeded to that earldom, as next heir male, anno 1695,
as before observed, and was the fourth earl of Buchan of the name of Erskine.

This earl was a man of great honor, and a firm friend to the present
establishment, both in church and state. He was one of the privy council to
King William; also to Queen Anne, who appointed him one of the commissioners of
exchequer, and governor of the castle of Blackness.

In the parliament 1706, he strennously opposed the union, believing it to be
inconsistent with the honor and independency of Scotland; and when he found it
would be concluded in spite of all the opposition it met with, he entered a
solemn protest against it, which, being still upon record, shows the sincere
attachment he had to what he thought the ancient privileges of his native
country. Soon thereafter, he was removed from all his places of public trust:
But, upon the accession of King George I. to the crown, he was appointed one of
the commissioners of trade and police, lord lieutenant of the counties of
Stirling and Clackmannan, and was elected one of the sixteen Scotch peers to
the three succeeding British parliaments, viz. 1715, 1722, and 1727.

In the year 1729, he was appointed his Majesty's high commissioner to the
general assembly of the church of Scotland, and executed all the offices he
enjoyed with fidelity and honor.

He married, 1st, Frances, daughter and sole heiress of Henry Fairfax of Hurst,
in the county of Berks, only son of Henry, second son of Thomas lord Fairfax,
by whom he had nine sons and seven daughters.

1. Henry David.

2. David, lord Auchterhouse.

These two sons died young.

3. Henry David, now earl of Buchan.

4. Fairfax Erskine.

5. George Lewis, born deaf and dumb; but as there has been great pains
bestowed upon his education, he has been taught to speak, though not
articulately; writes well upon any subject, and discovers a wonderful genius
for literature, etc.

6. George Augustus, and three more, died young.

1st daughter, lady Catharine, married to William Fraser of Fraserfield, Esquire;
son of Alexander lord Salton.

2. Lady Francis, married to colonel Gardner.

3. Lady Althea.

4. Lady Willielmina Carolina, who, with three others, died infants.

The earl married, 2dly, Elizabeth, daughter of sir William Blacket, Bart. by
whom he had no issue.

And dying at London, 14th October 1745, was succeeded by his son,

V. HENRY DAVID, fifth earl of Buchan, who married Agnes, daughter of sir James
Stewart of Goodtrees, Bart. by whom he has issue, three sons and two daughters.

1. Stewart, lord Cardross.

2. Henry.

3. Thomas.

1st daughter, lady Agnes.

2. Lady Isabella.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st, azure, three garbs, or; 2d grand quarter, 1st and 4th, azure,
a bend between six cross crosslets fitchy, or; 2d and 3d, argent, a pale,
sable; 3d grand quarter, 1st and 4th, or, a fess-cheque argent and azure; 4th
argent, three lions gemel, gules, surmounted of a lion rampant, sable; and over
all, by way of surtout, an escutcheon, gules, charged with an eagle displayed,
or looking toward the sun in his splendour, placed in the dexter chief point.

Crest, on a wreath a dexter arm, couped below the shoulder, and erect,
grasping a batton, or rugged club, both proper.

Supporters, two ostriches of the latter.

MOTTO, Judge naught.

CHIEF SEAT,
Formerly at Cardross, in Perthshire, now at Uphall in West Lothian, etc.

SCOT Duke of BUCCLEUGH.
ALL our historians agree, that the surname of SCOT is of great antiquity in
this country, and was certainly assumed in the reign of king Malcolm Canmore,
about which time sirnames begun to be frequently used in Scotland; for we find,
by our histories and records, that they were become numerous, and made a
considerable figure soon after that era.

Uchtredus filius Scot, is witness to the inquisition de possessionibus
ecclesiae Glasguen. Chartul. of Glasgow.
in the reign of king Alexander I. who succeeded to the crown in 1107, and died
anno 1124.

Herbertus Scotus is witness to the foundation-charter of the abbay of
Holyroodhouse, Sir Ja. Dalrymple's hist. collect.
by king David I. anno 1128.

In the beginning of king William's reign, we find John Scot bishop of Dunkeld.
Fordun. MacKenzie, Keith, etc.
Some say he was an Englishman, but Dr. MacKenzie makes it plainly appear he
was a Scotsman.

Walterus Scotus, and Walterus, filius Walteri Scot, Sir Ja. Dalrymple, p. 411.
got charters from king William of the lands of Abrishly, etc.

In the same reign, Gilbertus Scotus is witness in a charter of Eschina,
Chartul. of Paisley, in the lawyers library, p. 34.
domina de molla, ante 1177.

And Simon de Scot is witness to a charter of Alan, son of Walter lord high
steward of Scotland, Ibidem, p. 37.
inter 1174 and 1199.

John Scot is witness to a charter of Roger bishop of St. Andrews, Chart. of
Coldinghame, penes M'Farlane.
together with John de Loudon, and Alexander de Dumbar, anno 1193.

And Matthew Scot, a man of great parts and learning, was chancellor of
Scotland in the reign of king William, Fordun, MacKenzie, Keith.
and bishop elect of Dunkeld, etc.

It is needless to trouble our readers with more examples of the antiquity of
the name of Scot; and as we cannot positively ascertain the first ancestor of
the house of Buckcleugh, we shall take the succession of the first four
generations from a M. S. history of that family, M. S. hist. of the family of
Buccleugh, penes M'Farfarlane.
written by a good antiquary, who had perused their old writs, the connection
whereof is submitted to the judgment of our readers, and is as follows:

1. UCHTREDUS filius SCOT, before mentioned, was the progenitor of this
illustrious family, and from him all the Scots in Scotland are descended.

This Uchtredus was witness to the foundation-charters of the Abbays of
Holyroodhouse and Selkirk, Sir Ja. Dalrymple's hist. coll. p. 225.
by king David I. anno 1128 and 1130.

The author of the M. S. does not affirm that this Uchtred had taken Scot for
his surname; only, that being the son of a Scotsman, he was designed filius
Scot, to distinguish him from other Uchtreds, which was a numerous christian
name in Scotland about that time.

He was father of

II. RICHARD, who certainly assumed the surname of Scot, and lived in the
reigns of king Malcolm IV. and king William the lion.

Richardus Scot is witness to a charter of Robert, Ibidem.
bishop of St. Andrews, to the abbacy of Holyroodhouse. This Robert, who
founded the priory of St. Andrews, died anno 1158; so the charter, which has no
date, must have been granted in or before that year.

This Richard is said to have had two sons, Richard and Michael: which was the
eldest we shall not pretend to determine.

Richard carried on the line of this family, and

Michael was the undoubted ancestor of the Scots of Balweary, and had
considerable possessions in lands about Dumfermline before the year 1200,
Chartul. of Dumfermline penes MacFarlane.
particularly the lands of Gascumemefen, etc Vide vol. II. of this work.

III. RICHARD SCOT, son of the above mentioned Richard, in the reign of king
Alexander II. married Alicia, one of the daughters and co-heiresses of Henry de
Molla, by whom he got a fair estate in the county of Roxburgh; Chartul. of
Kelso penes eundem.
out of which he made a donation to the abbacy of Kelso, of eight acres of
land, pro salute animae suae, etc.

He was the first of the surname of Scot we have found settled in the south
country.

He left issue a son and successor,

IV. WILLIAM SCOT, who was witness to a charter of Thomas, Chartul. of
Coldinghame penes eund. p. 169.
prior of Coldinghame, to Robert Brun, together with Walter de Lindesay,
vicecom. de Berwick, William and John Lumsdams, etc. tempore Alexandri II.

He was witness to another charter with the persons before mentioned, Ibidem.
and Walter de Lindsay, son of the above Walter, ante 1249.

He was also witness to a charter of Walterus, senescallus Scotiae, of the
patronages of the churches of Dundonald, Chartul. of Paisley penes eundem, p.
67, 109, 198, etc.
Sanquhar, etc. to the abbacy of Paisley, and to another donation to the said
abbacy, both before the year 1249.

This William wasfather of Sir Richard Scot, etc. Thus far from the M. S. What
follows is documented by unquestionable authority.

V. Sir RICHARD SCOT, said to be the son of the last William, was the undoubted
ancestor of the family of Buckcleugh, flourished, and made a great figure in
the reign of king Alexander III.

He married the daughter and heiress of -- Murthockstone, or Murdiestone of
that ilk, Chart. in pub. archiv.
by whom he got a considerable estate in vicecomitatu de Lanark.

He is one of the great barons of Scotland that swore sealty to king Edward I.
Prynne's collections, vol. III. p. 664.
of England for lands lying in the county of Lanark, anno 1296, and is then
designed Richardus de Scot de Murthockstone, etc. and dying about 1320, was
succeeded by his son,

VI. Sir MICHAEL SCOT of Murthockstone, a man of great worth and merit, and of
singular valor and courage.

He was in high favor with king David, Bruce, Fordun, vol. II. p. 343.
whom he accompanied in his expedition into England, and lost his life in the
service of his country, at the unfortunate battle of Durham, anno 1346.

He was succeeded by his son,

VII. ROBERT SCOT, who, in his father's lifetime, was designed of Rankelburn,
which was the title of the eldest son of Murthockstone for some time thereafter.

He made a considerable figure in the reign of king Robert II. Chart. in pub.
archiv.
and dying before the year 1390, left issue a son and successor,

VIII. Sir WALTER SCOT of Murdieston, and Rankelburn, who was sometimes
designed by the title of Kirkurd, which afterward became the title of the
eldest son of this family.

He was a man of great parts and eminent loyalty, and performed many glorious
actions in the service of his king and country, wherefore king Robert II.
conferred the honor of knighthood upon him; and, with consent of his eldest
son and heir, John earl of Carrick, he changed the holding of his lands and
barony of Kirkurd from ward to blench, Chart. pene ducem de Buccleugh.
by his royal charter granted to Walter, son and heir of Robert Scot, etc.
dated 7th December 1390.

He was killed at the battle of Homildon, Fordun, vol. II. p. 434.
anno 1402, and was succeeded by his son,

IX. Sir ROBERT SCOT of Murdieston and Rankelburn, who, with consent and
approbation of his son and heir, Walter of Kirkurd, made a donation to the
monks of Melrose, Chartulary (...) Melrose.
of the lands of Hinkery of Selkirkshire, pro salute animae suae, etc. 28th May
1415.

He married -- daughter of --, by whom he had three sons.

1. Sir Walter.

2. Robert, Chart. in pub archiv.
designed of Haining in a charter from king James III. of the lands of
Greiviston and Leguillishaunch, dated 5th December 1463.

3. William, Ibidem.
who is witness to a charter of his brother Robert of Haining, of the lands of
Greivistone to Thomas Midlemass, and his heirs, dated 21st November 1476.

Sir Robert died anno 1425, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. Sir WALTER SCOT, Chart. pene ducem de Buccleugh.
who was designed Walter of Kirkurd, knight, and was served heir to his father,
anno 1426.

He exchanged his lands of Murdiestone with Thomas Inglis of Manner, Chart.
pene^ -- Inglis de Murdieston, et chart. in pub. archiv.
for the lands of Branxholm, Branshaw, Whitlaw, Whitrigs, Goldilands, Todishaw,
Todholes, etc. The charter of excambion is dated 23d July 1446.

He also got charters from king James II. Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the lands of Eckford, etc. in Roxburghshire, Waltero Scot de Kirkurd
militi, dated in February 1450.

He was a man of great merit, and was often employed to manage matters of the
highest importance with the English, and always acquitted himself with honor
and fidelity.

He, with the duke of Turenne, earl of Douglas, the earls of Angus, Crawford,
Avendale, Alexander lord Gordon, Walter lord Dirleton, Thomas lord Somerville,
Herbert lord Maxwell of Carlaverock, etc. were the commissioners who settled a
truce with the English, Rymer, tom. II. p. 254.
which was to last from 1438 to 1447, and he was one of the guarantees of the
treaty.

He was very instrumental in suppressing the rebellion of the earls of Douglas,
etc. for which he was rewarded with many lands, viz. the lands of Abington,
Pharholm, Glendonory, etc. in vicecomitatu de Lanark; upon which he got a
charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
wherein his loyalty and faithful services are fully narrated. Dated anno 1459.

That same year he was appointed one of the conservators of the peace with
England, Rymer, tom. II. p. 397,
together with the earls of Athole, Ross, Angus, Huntly, Caithness, etc. etc.

He married Margaret, Chart. penes com. de Morton, et chart. inpub. archiv. ad
ann. 1463.
daughter of -- Cockburn of Henderland, by whom he had three sons,

1. Sir David.

2. James, Chart. in pub. archiv.
designed of Kirkurd and Hassenden, who left issue two sons. Ibidem.
1. David Scot of Hassenden, Chart. penes Will. Scot de Burnhead.
his successor. 2. John, ancestor of William Scot now of Burnhead.

3. Sir Alexander (a great man) was rector of Wigton, Chart. in pub. archiv.
and Abercrombie, vol. II. p. 476.
director of the chancery, and lord register of Scotland, anno 1483, in which
office he continued till he lost his life with his royal master king James III.
Ibidem.
at the field of Stirling, or Bannockburn, anno 1488.

Sir Walter died betwixt 1467 and 1470, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. Sir DAVID SCOT, who, in his father's lifetime, got a charter from king
James III. David Scot, filio et haeredi apparenti Waltert Scot de Kirkurd,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
militis, etc. totas et integras terras de Branxholm, cum pertinen. jacen. in
baronia de Hawick, et vicecomitatu de Roxburgh. Dated in 1463.

He was infeft in the lands of Greenshaw, Chart. penes ducem de Buckleugh.
as heir to his father, on 26th September 1470.

He was a man of fine parts, and made a great figure in the reign of king James
III. being equally qualified for the cabinet and the field; was concerned in
most of the public transactions of his time; was very instrumental in
suppressing the insurrections on the borders; Rymer, tom. XII. p. 246,
and was one of the conservators of the peace with England, etc.

He was one of the Scotch nobles that sat in the parliament held by king James
III. Records of parliament. M. S. in the lawyers lib.
at Edinburgh, anno 1487; and was then designed dominus de Buccleugh, which is
the first time we find any of the family designed by that title.

He married --, daughter of Thomas lord Somerville, by whom he had two sons and
two daughters.

1. David, his apparent heir.

2. Robert, of Alanhaugh, who got a charter from his father of the lands of
Whitechester, Roberto Scot, Chart. penes ducem de Buckcleugh, and chart. in
pub. archiv.
dilecto filio suo, etc. anno 1483, of whom Mr. Scot of Scotstarvit is lineally
descended.

1st daughter, Janet, married to sir James Douglas, Chart. penes ducem de
Queensberry, ad ann. 1470.
son and apparent heir of sir William Douglas of Drumlanrig, ancestor of the
duke of Queensberry.

2. Margaret, Chart. in pub. archiv. ad annum 1489.
married to James Haig of Bemerside.

Sir David died anno 1491.

XII. DAVID, his first son and apparent heir, is mentioned in the foresaid
charter of Robert Scot of Haining to Thomas Midlemass, of the lands of
Grevistone, Chart. in pub. archiv.
wherein he is designed son and apparent heir of David Scot of Branxholm,
knight, etc. Dated anno 1476.

He died before his father, anno 1490, leaving issue a son and successor,

XIII. Sir WALTER SCOT, promiscuously designed of Branxholm and Buckcleugh,
Chart. penes ducem de Buckcleugh.
who was served and retoured heir to his grandfather on 6th November 1492.

This family had now vast possessions in the south of Scotland, Chart. in pub.
archiv. inter 1500 and 1515.
which appears by their charters, under the great seal, of several baronies of
lands granted to Walter Scot of Buckcleugh and Branxholm, knight, etc.

He was one of the witnesses to queen Margaret's getting infeftment of her
jointure, Rymer, tom: XIII. p. 68. and 73.
anno 1503,

He accompanied king James IV. to the fatal field of Floudon, where he
remarkably distinguished himself; and though he had the good fortune to come off
the field alive, where he left many of his brave countrymen dead, yet he did
not long survive it, but died in 1516, having married Elizabeth, daughter of
Walter Ker of Cessford, Chart. penes ducem de Buckcleugh.
widow of Philip Rutherford, son and apparent heir of James Rutherford of that
ilk, by whom he had a son,

XIV. Sir WALTER SCOT of Branxholm and Buckcleugh, who was served heir to his
father on 27th October 1517.

All our historians agree, that this sir Walter was a man of intrepid valor,
Ibid. and chart. inpub. archiv.
magnanimity and courage, and performed many brave actions in the service of
his country, in the minority of king James V.

After that prince begun to take the management of affairs into his own hands,
he thought himself too much confined, and kept little better than a prisoner by
the earl of Angus; wherefore he sent a private message to sir Walter Scot of
Buckcleugh, then one of the greatest men in the south of Scotland, to try to
relieve him.

Buckcleugh, being informed that the king and the earl were coming to Melross
with a considerable train of attendants, raised about 1000 horse of his friends
and followers, in order to rescue his majesty; but Angus having intelligence of
his design, was well prepared to receive him. They came in sight of one another
near Melross, soon came to blows, and a bloody conflict ensued, where several
men of rank fell on both sides, but the earl of Angus had the better.

On his side the brave sir Andrew Ker of Cessford was killed, Buchanan, and M.
S. hist. of the family of Buckcleugh, p. 20.
which afterward occasioned great feuds betwixt the Kers and the Scots. Sir
Walter himself was wounded, and narrowly escaped being taken prisoner. This
action happened on the 18th July 1526.

Though the attempt was not attended with success, yet the king always retained a
grateful sense of what sir Walter intended to have done for him, and he
continued to be in high favor with his majesty as long as he lived.

After queen Mary's accession to the crown, he strenuously opposed, Ibidem.
and greatly suppressed the insurrections on the borders; and the defeat of the
English army, under the command of sir Ralph Ewers and Bryan Stapleton at
Ancrum-hills, was chiefly owing to the prudent conduct of sir Walter Scot, anno
1544.

He got a charter of the lands of Deloraine, Chart. in pub. archiv.
and others, Waltero Scot de Branxholm, militi, anno 1545.

He remarkably signalized his valor and courage at the battle of Pinkie, Rymer.
anno 1547; upon which he got from the queen the estate of Henderland, upon the
forfeiture of sir John Cockburn, and was made warden of the west marches
toward England, in which office he did his country signal service.

He married, 1st, Margaret, daughter of -- Carmichael of that ilk, ancestor of
the earl of Hyndford, by whom he had three sons.

1. David, who died before his father, without issue.

2. Sir Walter, his apparent heir.

3. -- Scot, who served in the wars abroad, where he gained great reputation,
and was a brigadier-general at the siege of Magdeburg, M. S. hist. of the
family of Buckcleugh, p. 22. and life of Dr. Burnet, bishop of Sarum.
anno 1574, and afterward was deputy for the province of Zealand. His grandson,
Apollonius Scot, was president of the high court of justice at the Hague; and
it is said his family still subsists in Holland, and carry the arms of the
family of Buckcleugh, with a suitable difference.

Sir Walter married, 2dly, Janet, daughter of John Bethune of Creich, by whom
he had three daughters.

1. Grizel, married, 1st, to William lord Borthwick; 2dly, to Walter
Cairncross, Esquire;

2. Jean, married to John Cranston of that ilk, ancestor of lord Cranston.

3. Dorothea, married to James Crichton of Cranston-Riddell.

The differences betwixt the Scots and the Kers never having been thoroughly
made up, sir Walter Ker of Cessford meeting sir Walter Scot on the street of
Edinburgh, M. S hist. of the family.
a scu^fle ensued, in which the latter was slain, in October 1552.

XV. Sir WALTER, designed of Kirkurd, son and apparent heir of sir Walter Scot
of Branxholm and Buckcleugh, married Grizel, daughter of John Bethune of
Creich, sister to his father's second wife, by whom he had a son,

Sir Walter, -- and three daughters.

1. Jean, Chart. in pub. archiv.
married to sir Thomas Ker of Fernyhirst.

2. Margaret, Ibidem.
married to sir John Johnston of that ilk, ancestor of the marquis of Annandale.

3. Elizabeth, Ibidem.
married to John Carmichael of Meadowflat, captain of Crawford, whose heir is
the earl of Hyndford.

Sir Walter's lady, dam Grizel Bethune, survived him, and married sir Andrew
Murray of Blackbarony, of whom the Murrays of Blackbarony, Elibank, etc. are
descended.

He died before his father, and was succeeded by his son,

XVI. Sir WALTER SCOT of Buckcleugh, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who succeeded also to his grandfather in 1552, to whom he was served heir,
anno 1553.

He was a man of great honor and fine accomplishments, a firm and steady
friend of queen Mary.

He, with -- Ker of Ferny hirst, in hopes that embroiling matters with England
might serve the queen's party, Buchanan.
made several incursions into the borders about the year 1572, and also
endeavored to take possession of the town of Jedburgh for her majesty.

In 1574, sir Walter, Melvil's memoirs, and M. S. of the family.
with lord Claud Hamilton, and others, surprised the earl of Lennox, and eleven
or twelve of the chief nobility, at Stirling, whom they had almost carried off
prisoners, but were prevented by their own men being too intent upon the
plunder.

And notwithstanding his firm adherence to the queen's interest, yet he always
maintained a fair character, even with those of the opposite party.

He married lady Margaret Douglas, Chart. in pub. archiv. ad annum 1574.
daughter of David earl of Angus; and got a charter, under the great seal,
Waltero Scot; nunc de Branxhohn, filio et h^redi quondam Walteri de Branxholm,
equitis aurati, et dominae Margaretae Douglas suae sponsae, etc. By her he had
a son,

Sir Walter, -- and two daughters.

1. Margaret, married to Robert Scot of Thirlestane, in the shire of
Teviotdale, of whom lord Napier is now the heir.

2. Mary, married to William Elliot of Lairiston, and had issue.

After sir Walter's death, his relict, lady Margaret Douglas, was married to --
Stewart, earl of Bothwell.

He was succeeded by his son,

XVII. Sir WALTER SCOT of Buckcleugh, who, like many of his brave ancestors,
was a man of singular courage and intrepidity; and being in high favor with
king James VI. was knighted, assisted at the coronation of queen Anne, Rymer,
tom. XVI. p. 60.
anno 1590, and was made warden of the marches toward England that same year:
And having a wonderful genius for war, he carried over a regiment to the
Netherlands, Johnston's history.
where he served under that famous general, Maurice prince of Orange, and there
gained immortal honor.

In 1596, sir Walter, with a small number of his followers, Ibidem.
scaled the walls of the castle of Carlisle, and set at liberty William
Armstrong of Kinmount, who had been taken prisoner and confined by the English,
contrary to the laws then subsisting on the borders, which was a most bold and
daring action.

In 1597, Rymer.
he, with Robert Ker of Cessford, were sent hostages to England, for keeping
the peace, etc.

King James, in regard of his great merit and many faithful services, raised
him to the dignity of the peerage, by the title of lord Scot of Buckcleugh, by
patent, dated 16th March 1606.

He got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv. inter 1590 and
1600.
of many lands, Waltero domino de Buckcleugh, etc.

He married Mary, daughter of sir William Ker of Cessford, Ibidem.
sister of Robert first earl of Roxburgh, by whom he had a son,

Walter, -- and two daughters.

1. Mary, married, 1st, to James lord Ross; 2dly, to Alexander earl of
Eglington.

2. Elizabeth, married to John master of Cranston, without issue.

He died in 1611, and was succeeded by his son,

XVIII. WALTER, lord Scot of Buckcleugh, who also being much in favor with
king James VI. Ibidem.
was created earl of Buckcleugh, by letters patent, to his heirs whatsoever,
dated 16th March 1619: And being a man of a warlike genius, and of great valor
and courage, had the command of a regiment under the states of Holland against
the Spaniards, where he acquitted himself with great honor and reputation.

He married lady Mary Hay, daughter of Francis earl of Errol, by whom he had a
son,

Francis, -- and two daughters.

1. Lady Mary, married to John earl of Mar.

2. Lady Jean, married to John Marquis of Tweedale.

And dying in 1633, was succeeded by his son,

XIX. FRANCIS, second earl of Buckcleugh, a man of singular merit, great
loyalty, and a firm friend to the royal family; for which, Cromwell's act of
indemnity, in 1654.
after his death, Oliver Cromwell imposed a heavy sine of 15,000 l. sterling
upon his heir.

He died in 1652, having married lady Margaret Lesly, daughter of John earl of
Rothes, widow of lord Balgonie, by whom he had issue two daughters, lady Mary
and lady Anne.

Lady Mary, countess of Buckcleugh, married to Walter Scot of High Chester,
afterward earl of Terras, but she dying without issue in 1662, the honors and
estate went to her sister,

XX. Lady ANNE SCOT, who, in 1665, was married to James ^itzroy duke of
Monmouth, eldest natural son of king Charles II. by Lucy daughter of Richard
Walters of Haverford, in the county of Pembroke, Esquire; Upon which marriage he
took the name of Scot, Chart. penes ducem de Buckcleugh, et chart. in pub.
archiv.
and they were created duke and duchess of Buckcleugh, by letters patent to
their heirs whatsoever, dated 20th April 1673.

As the life and fatal end of the duke is fully set forth in many different
histories, we shall here only mention some of the most remarkable particulars.

He was born at Rotterdam in 1649, and was bred chiefly at Paris, under the eye
of the queen mother. He had a fine person, and a most graceful behavior, and
was a great favorite of his father, who not only bestowed on him many great
and lucrative posts, but was instrumental in procuring him the above marriage,
which at that time was one of the greatest in the kingdom.

He came to England in 1662, was created baron of Tyndale, earl of Doncaster,
duke of Monmouth, and knight of the garter in 1663; and the next session of
parliament he took his seat in the house of peers.

In 1665, he was made captain of the the king's life guards of horse,
captain general of the king's forces, and had many other instances of the royal
bounty and favor. His brave and gallant behavior in the wars abroad, gained
him the reputation of an able general.

In 1679, there happened an insurrection in Scotland, after the murder of
archbishop Sharp, which was raised by the presbyterians, in hopes of
overturning episcopacy: The duke had the command of the king's troops, and
fought and defeated the rebels at Bothwell-bridge, which put an end to that
rebellion.

He afterward became very popular, especially with the discontented party, and
those who were against the duke of York's succession to the crown, who thought
of nothing less than making the duke of Monmouth king; and though the duke had
been guilty of some very suspicious practices, yet, upon his submission, the
king was pleased to pardon him.

Sometime thereafter, being again banished the court, he retired to Holland,
where he stayed till the king's death in 1684.

In May 1685, being persuaded to attempt the crown, he invaded the country,
from Holland, with seven or eight hundred officers and men; landed at Lyme in
Dorsetshire; and emitted a manifesto or declaration, seting forth, "That he
came in defense of the protestant religion, the laws, rights, and privileges of
England, and invited all people to join him, etc."

The king, being informed of all these proceedings, acquainted his parliament;
whereupon both houses voted an address of thanks to his majesty, and the
commons ordered in a bill to attaint the duke of high treason, which passed
accordingly.

In the mean time, great numbers of people flocked into his army from all
hands, and at Bridgewater, and other places, he was proclaimed king.

The earl of Feversham commanded the king's troops, which were then encamped at
Sedge-muir. On the 6th July, at four in the morning, the duke, with his army,
thought fit to attack him; but they being upon their guard, gave them such a
warm reception, that the duke's army was entirely routed, and himself taken
prisoner.

He was beheaded on Tower Hill the 15th July 1685, leaving issue by the said
duchess of Buckcleugh, four sons.

1. Charles, earl of Doncaster, born in 1672, and died young.

2. James, born in 1674, who, after his father's attainder, was called earl of
Dalkeith, and carried on the line of this family.

3. Henry, born in 1676, created earl of Deloraine.

4. Francis, born in 1678, and died young.

The duchess dowager of Monmouth and Buckcleugh, in May 1688, married to
Charles lord Cornwallis, by whom she had a son,

George, who died young, -- and two daughters.

1. Lady Anne, who also died young.

2. Lady Isabella.

The duchess died in 1732, in the eighty-first year of her age,

XXI. JAMES, earl of Dalkeith, son of the duke of Monmouth, and duchess of
Buckcleugh, married lady Henriet Hyde, daughter of Laurence earl of Rochester,
by whom he had three sons and two daughters.

1. Francis, his heir.

2. James, who died young.

3. Henry, who also died young.

His daughters, lady Anne and lady Charlotte, died unmarried.

He was made knight of the thistle in 1703, and dying in 1704, was succeeded by
his son,

XXII. FRANCIS, earl of Dalkeith, who was made knight of the thistle in 1724,
and succeeded to the honors and title of duke of Buckcleugh, upon the death of
his grandmother the duchess, anno 1732, and was chosen one of the sixteen
peers for Scotland to the next British parliament.

In 1743, he was restored to two of the duke of Monmouth's titles, by act of
parliament, viz. earl of Doncaster, and baron Scot of Tyndale, by which he
became a British peer.

In 1720, he married lady Jane Douglas, daughter of James duke of Queensberry,
by whom he had two sons and three daughters.

1. Francis, earl of Dalkeith.

2. Charles, who died unmarried at Oxford, in 1747.

1st daughter, lady Anne.

2. Lady Jane.

3. Lady Mary.

He died 22d April 1751.

XXIII. FRANCIS, earl of Dalkeith, eldest son of Francis duke of Buckcleugh, in
1742 married lady Caroline Campbell, eldest daughter of John duke of Argyle, by
whom he had four sons and two daughters.

1. John, lord Whitechester, who died young.

2. Henry, the present duke of Buckcleugh.

3. Campbell Scot.

4. James, who died young.

1st daughter, lady Caroline.

2. Lady Frances, born after her father's death.

He died in April 1750, and was succeeded by his son,

XXIV. HENRY, who succeeded also to his grandfather anno 1751, and is now duke
of Buckcleugh, earl of Dalkeith, baron Scot of Buckcleugh and Eskdale, in
Scotland; and a peer of England, by the titles of baron Tindale in
Northumberland, and earl of Doncaster in Yorkshire, etc.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st and 4th, the royal arms of Britain, with a batton sinister,
argent; 2d and 3d, or, on a bend, azure, a star of six points, between two
crescents of the field, gules.

Crest, a stag passant, proper.

Supporters, two maidens richly attired in antique habits, their under-robes,
azure, and the uppermost, vert, and on their head a plume of three feathers,
argent.

MOTTO, Amo.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Dalkeith and East Park, four miles south of Edinburgh; Melrose and
Branxholm in the shire of Roxburgh; Adderbury in Oxfordshire, and Hall-place in
Berkshire.

BALFOUR Lord BURLEIGH.
THE surname of BALFOUR is of great antiquity in the county of Fife, and was
first assumed by the possessors of the barony and castle of Balfour, a
beautiful seat, lying near the confluence of the waters of Ore and Leven.

We find, by our histories and records, that there were several considerable
men of that surname in this country above five hundred years ago.

Ingelramus de Balfour, vicecomes of Fife, is witness to a charter of
mortification to the monastery of Arbroath, Sir Rob. Sibbald's hist. of Fife,
p. 141.
by king Alexander II. dated the 15th year of his reign, anno 1229.

In the same reign, Henricus de Balfour is witness to a donation by Malcolmus
comes de Angus, Ibid. et chartul. of Arbroath.
de terris in territorio de Kirriemuir, to the same monastery. And we find that
Henricus de Balfour obiit, et tumulatur in ecclesia abbatiae de Melross, Chron.
of Melross.
anno 1246.

Michael de Balfour is witness in a charter of Duncan earl of Fife, Char. penes
vicecom. de Stormont.
together with William Wishart bishop of St. Andrews, betwixt 1272 and 1279.

Johannes de Balfour is witness to a charter of William de Valoniis, Chartul.
of St. Andrews, p. 502.
anno 1284.

At king Robert Bruce's parliament, which was held at Air, for settling the
succession to the crown, Sir Rob. Sibbald, etc.
anno 1315, the seals of Michael de Balfour vicecomes of Fife, and David de
Balfour, are appended to that famous act.

In 1347, Chartul. of Melross.
Adam de Balfour obiit, et tumulatur in ecclesia abbatiae de Melross, etc. etc.

It appears from our histories, that the Balsours were a very numerous and
flourishing family in Fife in the reign of king David Bruce, when Johannes de
Balfour, dominus de eodem, miles, died without sons, and left only one
daughter, Margaret, his sole heiress, who married dominus Robertus de Bethune
familiaris regis Roberti II. Sir Ja. Balfour's annals. Sir Rob. Sibbald,
Crawfurd, etc.
who thereby got possession of the barony and manor of Balfour, which his
posterity still enjoys, but he retained the name of Bethune, and of him several
families of that surname are descended.

And though there are many considerable families of the name of Balfour in
Scotland at this day, yet we must here confine ourserves to the families of
Burleigh and Montwhanie, as these two are united in this noble house.

The ancestor of the family of Burleigh appears to have been,

I. MICHAEL de BALFOUR, of whom afterward.

The first of the other family was sir Michael Balfour, Char. penes magist.
Calderwood de Polton.
who obtained the lands of Montwhanie, in exchange for the lands of
Pittencriess, by a charter from king David II. dated in 1353. Of this sir
Michael, was lineally descended sir James Balfour of Montwhanie, Chart. in pub.
archiv. inter 1400 et 1550.
who married the heiress of Burleigh, in the reign of queen Mary, hereafter
mentioned; all documented by charters in our public records. We now return to
the family of Burleigh.

I. MICHAEL de BALFOUR, first of the house of Burleigh, is witness to a
donation of Walter de Moravia to the monks of Culross, together with Thomas
Bisset, Nisbet's append. p. 195.
dominus de Fife, circa annum 1362. He appears to have been father of another,

II. MICHAEL de BALFOUR, Chartul. of the priory of St. Andrews, p. 2.
who is one of the judges in a perambulation of the lands of Kirkness and
Lochore, anno 1395.

He lived after 1420, and was succeeded by his son,

III. Sir JOHN BALFOUR, knight, designed of Balgarvie, who got the lands and
estate of Burleigh erected into a free barony, Char. in arch. Rob. II. Sir Ja.
Balfour, Sir Rob Sibbald, and Crawfurd.
to him and his heirs, by a charter from king James II. anno regni nono, anno
domini 1446. He left issue two sons.

1. Michael, Nisbet, vol. I. p. 169. and Chart. in pub. archiv.
his heir.

2. James, ancestor of the Balfours of Denmiln, Kinnaird, Forret, and others.

IV. MICHAEL BALFOUR of Burleigh succeeded, Chart. in pub. archiv.
and dying about 1490, left issue a son and successor,

V. MICHAEL BALFOUR of Burleigh, who got from his father the lands of Burleigh
in Kinross-shire, the lands of Balgarvie in Fi^e, the mill of Bannockburn, or
Stioch, in Stirling-shire; all contained in one charter under the great seal of
king James IV. Ibidem.
dated 5th July 1490, in which he is designed filius et haeres Michaelis, etc.

He got from the same prince, Ibidem.
a charter terrarum in dominio de Stragartnie.

Also a charter of the lands of Easter Balgarvie. Ibidem.


There is likeways a charter from king James V. Ibidem.
terrarum baroniae de Burleigh, Michaeli Balfour de Burleigh, etc.

He married Margaret daughter of -- Mushet of Tolgart or Burnbank, by whom he
had a son,

VI. DAVID BALFOUR of Burleigh, Ibidem.
who succeeded him, and got a charter from king James V. terrarum de Star, cum
maresia, etc. anno 1527.

Also a charter Davidi Balfour de Burleigh, Ibidem.
terrarum de Kinloch, cum dimidietat. molendan. ejusdem, etc. anno 1528.

He died before 1542, having married Agnes, daughter of -- Forrester of
Corstorphine, ancestor of lord Forrester, by whom he had a son and successor.

VII. Sir MICHAEL BALFOUR of Burleigh and Balgarvie, knight, who was served
heir to his father in 1542, and that same year got a charter of the lands of
Strickinness. Ibidem.


There is also a charter under the great seal of queen Mary, Ibidem.
Michaeli Balfour de Burleigh, militi, dimidietat. terrarum, et villae de
Kinloch, cum molendino, Smiddielands, Brewlands, etc.

He married Christian, daughter of John Bethune of Creich, by whom he had but
one child.

VIII. MARGARET BALFOUR, heiress of Burleigh, who succeeded him, and married
sir James Balfour of Montwhanie, lineally descended from sir Michael Balfour,
who got a charter of the lands of Montwhanie from king David II. anno 1353,
before mentioned.

This sir James of Montwhanie, upon his marriage with the heiress of Burleigh,
was afterward designed by that last title.

He was a faithful subject to queen Mary, who appointed him clerk-register; Sir
Ja. Melvil's memoit
he was also governor of the castle of Edinburgh when the queen surrendered
herself to the lords at Carberryhill.

Before her majesty went to Lochlevencastle, as an instance of her esteem and
regard for sir James, she gave him a small gold bell, with her name on it, and
an enamelled cup and cover, said to have been king Malcolm Canmore's; both
which are now in the possession of Mrs. Balfour, the heir of line of this sir
James.

They had issue five sons and three daughters.

1. Sir Michael, afterward lord Burleigh.

2. Alexander, designed of Balgarvie, of whom there are several descendants in
the male line still subsisting.

3. Sir Henry, who was general in the United provinces, and served under the
prince of Orange with great reputation.

4. William, who went into Ireland, married -- Hamilton, heiress of Glenally,
assumed her name, and one of their descendants was created lord Glenally.

5. David, who was a captain in his brother sir Henry's regiment, and perished
at sea going over to Holland.

1st daughter, -- married to sir Michael Arnot of that ilk.

2. -- married to sir -- Henderson of Fordell.

3. -- married to -- Barclay of Collairny.

IX. Sir MICHAEL BALFOUR, their eldest son, succeeded to both his father's and
mother's estates, Chart in pull. archiv. inte^ ann. 1577 (...) 1600.
and got charters from king James VI. of the barony of Montwhanie, Kirbester,
and several other lands and baronies; and also a charter of the lands and
barony of Burleigh, Ibid. haeredibus maseu lis quibuscun cognomen, e^arma de
Bal four gerenti bus, etc.
to his heirs-male whatever, carrying the name and arms of Baltour, etc. dated
29th November 1606.

He was a man of good parts, and much esteemed by king James VI. who was
pleased to raise him to the dignity of the peerage, by the title of lord
Balfour of Burleigh, anno 1604, according to the M. S. account of the family:
But according to Mr. Crawfurd, anno 1606; and according to sir James Balfour,
sir Robert Sibbald, and Mr. Nisbet, on 16th of July 1607: And though I have not
seen the patent, yet I presume it was to his heirs-general, because his
daughter succeeded to both his estate and honors, as will be shown hereafter;
and he afterward got a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
Michaeli Balfour, domino Balfour de Burleigh, terrarum baroniae de Kilwinning,
etc. to him, et haeredibus et assignatis quibuscunque, dated 7th September 1614.

And being a man of great skill and knowledge in the management of state
affairs, he was employed in several foreign negotiations, and was his majesty's
ambassador at the courts of Tuscany and Lorrain, and acquitted himself with
honor and reputation.

He married Margaret, daughter of -- Lundin of that ilk, by whom he had an only
daughter, his sole heiress, viz.

X. MARGARET, baroness of Burleigh, who succeeded her father in both his estate
and honors, as before noticed.

She married Robert, son of sir Robert Arnot of Ferny, chamberlain of Fi^e, who
thereupon changed his name to Balfour, and, in her right, became possessed of
the lordship of Burleigh.

It Is said, that immediately upon his marriage, he got a letter from the crown,
entitling him to succeed to the honors also; and certain it is he enjoyed
them; for he made a great figure in Scotland as lord Buileigh, during the civil
war in the reign of king Charles I. was deeply engaged on the parliament's
side, and had a great share in all the public transactions of those troublesome
times; for this sir ROBERT, second lord Burleigh, was president to the
parliament that met in June 1640, and again to that in November, that same
year; also to that which met in January 1641; and was made a privy counselor
during life by the parliament, which met in November that year.

He was president to the committee for trying malignants in the north, anno
1644; one of the committee of estates, anno 1645; also one of the commit for
bringing in public money, Rescind. acts of parl. from p. 33 to 102.
and felling malignants lands, anno 1646; and after the murder of the king, he
was one of the colonels of Fi^e, for putting the kingdom in a posture of
defense, anno 1649; and that same year was one of the last committee of
estates, one of the commissioners of exchequer, and one of the lords of the
treasury, etc. All which is fully narrated in the records of those times. Bp.
Guthrie's memoirs, p. 119 and 262.
He was also said to be one of the chief contrivers of the solemn league, and
had several private meetings with Oliver Cromwell, anno 1648.

By the said Margaret, baroness of Burleigh, he left issue a son,

John lord Burleigh, -- and four daughters.

1. Jean, married to David earl of Wemyss.

2. Margaret, married to sir James Crawfurd of Kilbirnie.

3. Isabel, married to Thomas lord Ruthven.

4. -- married to her cousin, -- Arnot of Ferny.

They all had issue.

He died anno 1662, and was succeeded by his son,

XI. JOHN, third lord Burleigh, who married Isabel, daughter of sir William
Balfour of Pitcullo, lieutenant of the tower of London, in the reign of king
Charles I. by whom he had three sons and six daughters.

1. Robert, his heir.

2. John Balfour of Ferny, who was a lieutenant colonel in the reign of king
James VII. and left issue two sons and several daughters. 1. Arthur, who was
father of John Balfour, now of Ferny. 2. John, who succeeding by entail to the
estate of captain William Crawfurd, now carries the name and arms of Crawfurd,
is married, and has issue.

3. Henry Balfour of Dunbog, who was a major of dragoons, had several children,
and is now represented by his son Henry Balfour of Dunbog, Esquire; who is married,
and has a numerous issue.

1st daughter, Margaret, married to Andrew lord Rollo, and had issue.

2. Isabel, who died unmarried.

3. Aemilia, married to sir John Malcolm of Innerteil, and had issue.

4. Jean, married 1st to -- Oliphant of Gask: 2dly, to sir Robert Douglas of
Kirkness, and had issue.

5. Susan, married to Robert Douglas of Strathendry, and had issue.

6. Anne, married to captain Robert Sinclair, but had no issue.

He died 1688, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. ROBERT, fourth lord Burleigh, who was constituted one of the
commissioners for executing the office of lord Register of Scotland, anno 1689.

He married lady Margaret, daughter of George earl of Melvil, by whom he had
one son,

Robert, master of Burleigh, -- and two daughters.

1. Margaret, now representative of the family.

2. Mary, married to Alexander Bruce of Kennet, Esquire; and had issue.

He died anno 1713.

XIII. ROBERT, master of Burleigh, only son of the fourth lord, in the year
1707, had the misfortune to kill a man; for which he was tried before the lords
of justiciary, found guilty, and condemned to suffer death; but he made his
escape from prison in his sister's dress, a few days before he was to have been
executed.

He afterward engaged in the rebellion 1715, was attainted of high treason,
whereby the estate and titles of Burleigh were forfeited to the crown.

He died without issue anno 1757; and had it not been for the above attainder,
the honors would have devolved upon his eldest sister Margaret, as the peerage
appears to have been granted to heirs whatever.

XIII. MARGARET BALFOUR, eldest daughter of Robert fourth lord Burleigh, is now
heir of line of that noble family, and, failing heirs of her body, the
representation devolves upon Mr. Bruce of Kennet, son and heir of Mary, second
daughter of the said lord.

ARMS.
Argent, on a cheveron, sable, an otter's head erased, of the first.

Crest, on a wreath, a rock, and thereon a lady, holding in her right hand the
head of an otter, and in her left the head of a swan.

Supporters, on the dexter side, an otter sejant, proper; on the sinister, a
swan of the last.

MOTTO, Omni solum forti patria.

CHIEF SEAT,
At the castle of Burleigh in Kinross-shire.

STEWART Earl of BUTE.
The first of this noble family was,

1. SIR JOHN STEWART, who obtained from his father, king Robert II. a grant of
a fair estate in the island of Bute, Stuart's hist. of the royal family,
Abercromby, Nisbet, etc.
(the ancient patrimony of the family of Stewart,) with the heretable
sheriff-ship of Bute, Arran, etc. which was afterward confirmed by a charter
from his brother king Robert III. in which are these words: " Robertus dei
gratia, Stuart's hist. of the royal family, and chart. penes com. de Bute.
etc. sciatis nos dedisse, etc. dilecto fratri nostro, Johanni senescallo de
Bute, officium vicecomitatus de Bute, Arran, etc. datum 11mo Novembris, anno
1400."

He got also a charter from his brother, Robert duke of Albany, in these words:
" Robertus dux Albaniae, Ibidem.
gubernator Scotiae, etc. dedisse, etc. dilecto fratri nostro, Johanni Stewart,
vicecomiti de Bute, terras de Fynock, in baronia de Renfrew, etc." dated at
Irvine 1st January 1418.

He married Jean, daughter of sir John Semple of Elieston, Ibidem.
ancestor of the lord Semple, by whom he had three sons.

1. Robert.

2. William of Fynock, of whom afterward.

3. Andrew of Rosline, in the shire of Bute, of whom the Stewarts of Rosline
and Balinshangrie are descended.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. ROBERT STEWART of Bute, Ibidem.
who was one of the privy council to king James II. anno 1440, and left issue a
son and successor,

III. JAMES STEWART of Bute, who, dying without issue anno 1497, was succeeded
by his cousin and heir-male James, son of his uncle William of Fynock, to whom
we now return.

II. WILLIAM, second son of sir John Stewart of Bute, got from his father the
lands of Fynock, Ibid. et chart. in pub. arch.
upon which he got a charter from king James II. and is therein designed son of
sir John, sheriff of Bute, etc. anno 1444.

He left issue two sons.

1. James.

2. William, who afterward got the lands of Fynock.

It has been falsely alleged by several persons, that sir John Stewart of
Bonkle, killed at the battle of Falkirk, anno 1298, was the ancestor of this
family; but the above genealogy, founded on indisputable authority,
sufficiently disproves the assertion.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. JAMES, who succeeded also to the estate and sheriffship of Bute, upon the
death of his cousin James, as before observed.

He obtained, for his good and faithful services, a commission from king James
IV. of the heretable^ constabulary of the castle of Rothsay, Hist. of the royal
family, et chart. penes com. de Bute.
in the isle of Bute; a royal seat, wherein king Robert III. died. The
commission is dated anno 1498.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of John Blair of that ilk, by whom he had two
sons.

1. Ninian.

2. Robert, who married a daughter of John Lamond, and was ancestor of the
Stewarts of Kilchattan, Ascog, etc.

IV. NINIAN, the eldest son, succeeded, was sheriff of Bute, and got a new
grant of the hereditary command of the castle of Rothsay, with a salary of 40
merks yearly, out of the feu-farms of Bute, Kintyre, Cowal, etc. upon which he
got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
from king James IV. anno 1502.

He got also charters from the same prince of several different lands and
baronies, Ibid. Haddington's collections in the lawyer's lib. Edin.
inter 1502 et 1508; particularly, one of the feufarms of Bute, to him and
Janet Dunlop, his spouse, dated in 1506.

He died anno 1508, and, by the said Janet Dunlop, left issue a son and
successor,

V. JAMES STEWART, sheriff of Bute, who was infeft in his estate, Hist. of the
Stewarts, et chart. penes com. de Bute,
and heretable constabulary of Rothsay-castle, 20th of May 1509.

He was afterward made chamberlain of Bute, keeper of the king's forest there,
and got also the lands of Kirktown, in Cumra: All which were confirmed by
charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv. inter 1535 et 1550.
Jacobo vicecom. de Bute. etc.

He married, 1st, lady Mary Campbell, daughter of Archibald earl of Argyle, by
whom he had no issue.

He married, 2dly, Marian, daughter of John Fairly of that ilk, relict of
Thomas Boyd of Linn, brother of Robert lord Boyd, by whom he had two sons.

1. John, his heir.

2. Robert Stewart, who got a charter, under the great seal, Ibid. ad an. 1560.
of the five pound land of Over and Nether Kilspock, etc.

VI. JOHN STEWART, sheriff of Bute, succeeded, and got charters under the great
seal, Johanni vicecomiti de Bute, Ibid. inter 1568 et 1600.
filio Jacobi vicecomitis de Bute, of the lands of Kilchattan, of the lands and
barony of Ardmoleis, etc. etc.

He was a man of parts, and highly esteemed by king James VI. Ibidem.
who appointed him one of the gentlemen of his bedchamber, captain of the
castle of Brodick, and chamberlain of Arran, Stuart's hist. of the royal family.
anno 1580: Which last office he enjoyed only till the family of Hamilton was
restored, anno 1585.

He married, 1st, Mary, daughter of John Campbell of Skipnish, by whom he had a
son.

Sir John, his heir.

He married, 2dly, Fynewald, daughter of sir James MacDonald of Dunveg, Isla,
and Glenns, ancestor of the earl of Antrim in Ireland, by whom he had no issue.

He died anno 1602, and was succeeded by his only son,

VII. Sir JOHN STEWART of Bute, who, being likeways in favor with king James
VI. had the honor of knighthood conferred upon him; Ibidem.
and got charters under the great seal, Johanni vicecomiti de Bute militi, of
several lands and baronies, Chart. in pub. archiv.
between 1602 and 1618.

He married Elizabeth, daughter and coheiress of Robert Hepburn of Foord; with
whom he got the lands of Foord, Ibid. and hist. of the Stuarts.
and several others in Haddington-shire, and by her had issue,

1. Sir James, his successor.

2. Colonel Thomas Stewart, who died in France.

VIII. Sir JAMES STEWART of Bute was a man of fine accomplishments, Ibidem.
and greatly esteemed by king Charles I. who created him a baronet, anno 1627.

He was served and retoured heir to his father, and all these his ancestors,
Ibidem.
anno 1630.

He adhered firmly to the interest of the royal family, during all the time of
the civil war, Minutes of parliament.
and was fined in 5000 merks by the parliament anno 1646. His estate was
afterward sequestrate, and he suffered many other hardships in the time of the
usurpation; but had the good fortune to survive all these troubles, and was
most graciously received by the king at London, after the restoration; but did
not long survive it.

He married Isabella, daughter of sir Dougal Campbell of Auchinbreek, by whom
he had two sons and three daughters.

1. Sir Dougal, his heir.

2. Sir Robert Stewart of Tillicoultry, one of the senators of the college of
justice, who married, and had issue sir Robert Stewart, colonel James Stewart,
etc.

1st daughter, Elizabeth, married to Ninian Bannatyne of Keams.

2. Anne, married to Alexander MacDonald of Sana.

3. Jean, married to Angus Campbell younger of Skipnish.

He died at London anno 1662, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. Sir DOUGAL STEWART of Bute, who married Elizabeth, daughter of sir Thomas
Ruthven of Dunglass, Stuart's hist. of the royal family.
by Mary his Wife, daughter of Alexander, 1st earl of Leven, by whom he had two
sons and three daughters.

1. Sir James, his heir, afterward earl of Bute.

2. Dougal Stewart, Esquire; a gentleman of extraordinary parts and merit; who,
applying himself to the study of the law, soon so distinguished himself in that
profession, that queen Anne was pleased to name him one of the senators of the
college of justice, and one of the lords commissioners of justiciary, anno
1710. He served commissioner in diverse parliaments, both before and after the
union; and discharged that important trust with honor and integrity.

He married Mary, daughter and heiress of John Bruce of Blairhall, by whom he
had five sons and three daughters. 1. James Stewart, Esquire; who married miss
Crawfurd, and has issue. 2. John Stewart, Esquire; who married lady Anne Stewart,
daughter of Francis earl of Murray, and has issue, etc. etc. etc. Vide vol.
II. of this work.

Sir Dougal's 1st daughter, Barbara, married to Alexander Campbell of Barbreck.

2. Margaret, married to Dougal Lawmond of that ilk.

3. -- married to -- Stewart of Auchinsk^och.

He died anno 1672, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. Sir JAMES STEWART of Bute, who was of the privy council to queen Anne, and
was appointed one of the commissioners to treat of an union with England, anno
1702; and being in great favor with her Majesty, was raised to the dignity of
the peerage, Chart. in pub. archiv. Jacobo comiti de Bute, et haered. masculi^
quibuscun.
by the titles of earl of Bute, viscount Kingarf, lord Mountstewart, Cumra, and
Inchmarnock, etc. by patent, to his heirs-male whatever, dated 14th April 1703.

In 1706, he opposed the union with all his interest; and when he discovered
that a majority of the parliament were determined to go in to it, Stuart's
hist. and Crawfurd's peerage.
he left the house, and retired to his seat in the country.

He married, 1st, Agnes, eldest daughter of sir George MacKenzie of Roschaugh,
lord advocate, in the reign of king James VII by whom he had a son,

James, lord Mountstewart, -- and a daughter,

Lady Margaret, married to John viscount of Garnock, and had issue.

He married, 2dly, Christian, daughter of William Dundas of Kincavel, Esquire;
advocate, by whom he had a son,

John Stewart, Esquire; who died at Rome, without issue.

The earl died anno 1710, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. JAMES, second earl of Bute, who, upon the death of his uncle George
MacKenzie, in 1707, succeeded to the estate of Rosehaugh, in right of his
mother.

He was one of the lords of the bedchamber to king George I. one of the
commissioners of trade for Scotland, lord lieutenant of Bute-shire, and one of
the sixteen Scotch peers to the 5th and 6th British parliaments.

He married lady Anne Campbell, daughter of Archibald duke of Argyle, by whom
he had two sons and four daughters.

1. John, lord Mountstewart.

2. James Stewart MacKenzie, who, by the entail of sir George MacKenzie, his
great grandfather, succeeded to the estate of Rosehaugh, and is obliged to
bear the name and arms of MacKenzie. He was elected member of parliament for
Argyle-shire in January 1741, for the shire of Bute in 1747, for the burghs of
Air, etc. in 1754, and for Ross-shire in 1761. He was appointed
envoy-extraordinary to the king of Sardinia in 1759. He married lady Betty
Campbell, one of the daughters and co-heiresses of John duke of Argyle.

The earl's eldest daughter, lady Mary, married to sir Robert Menzies of Weem.

2. Lady Anne, married to James lord Ruthven.

3. Lady Jean, married to William Courtenay, Esquire;.

4. Lady Grace, married to John Campbell younger of Stonefield, Esquire; advocate.

He died anno 1722, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. JOHN, third earl of Bute, who, in 1737, was elected one of the sixteen
peers for Scotland, to the eighth parliament of Great Britain; and, about the
same time, made a knight of the most noble order of the Thistle.

While his present Majesty was prince of Wales, the earl was his groom of the
stole, and held the same place after his Majesty's accession to the crown, till
he was, in March 1761, promoted to be one of the principal secretaries of
state; and sworn of the privycouncil.

In May 1761, he was chosen one of the sixteen peers to the ensuing parliament;
and upon the resignation of her royal Highness the Princess Amelia, he was
appointed ranger and keeper of his Majesty's park at Richmond.

He married Mary, only daughter of Edward Wortley Montague, Esquire; eldest son of
Sidney Wortley Montague, second son of Edward earl of Sandwich. Her mother was
lady Mary Pierpoint, daughter of Evelyn duke of Kingston. By this lady an
immense fortune came to the family of Bute, on the demise of her father, in
January 1761; and soon after, his Majesty was pleased to grant her the dignity
of a baroness of Great Britain, by the title of baroness Mountstewart of
Wortley, in the county of York, and the dignity of baron Mountstewart, to her
lawful issue-male by John earl of Bute, etc.

Of this marriage, the earl has five sons and six daughters.

1. John, lord Mountstewart.

2. James.

3. Frederick.

4. Charles.

5. William.

1st daughter, lady Mary, married to sir James Lowther, baronet.

2. Lady Jane.

3. Lady Anne.

4. Lady Augusta.

5. Lady Caroline.

6. Lady Louisa.

ARMS.
Or, a fess cheque, argent, and azure, with a double tressure, counter-floree,
with flowers de lis, gules.

Crest, on a wreath, a demi-lion, gules.

Supporters, on the dexter side, a horse, argent; on the sinister a stag proper.

MOTTO, Avito viret honor.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Mountstewart in the Isle of Bute, Twicknam in Middlesex, etc.

Earl of CAITHNESS.
SOME historians say, that this title is of very great antiquity, and mention
one Duncan earl of Caithness, in the reign of king Kenneth III. but as we have
no documents of any earls in Scotland for several ages after that era, we
shall pass by these traditional accounts, and proceed to our documents.

The first we find upon record, who enjoyed this title, was one

I. MACWILLIAM, who was designed earl of Caithness, Chartul. of Dumfermline and
Martin's genealogical collections, p. 169.
in a charter granted by king David I. to the monastery of Dunfermline, the
fifth year of his reign, anno 1129. He lived till about 1160, and was succeeded
by his son,

II. HAROLD, whom Spottiswood calls earl of Orkney and Caithness. He was a very
wicked and turbulent man, and committed vast cruelties against John bishop of
Murray, Ibid. Spottiswood's Chapter hist. and chron. of Melross.
for which he was deservedly punished by king William, anno 1179, and his
estate and honors forfeited to the crown.

The next who enjoyed this title, was

I. MAGNUS, son of Gilibred earl of Angus, upon whom king Alexander II.
Dalrymple's collections.
bestowed that title, anno 1222.

He was also designed Magnus, Chartul. of Arbroath, p. 18.
filius comitis Anegus, etc. anno 1227.

He was succeeded by his son,

II. MALCOLM, Martin's genealogical collections.
earl of Caithness, of whom we have nothing memorable, but that he was
succeeded by his son,

III. JOHN, earl of Caithness, who was one of the Scotch nobles that swore
fealty to king Edward I. of England, Prynne's hist. vol. III.
anno 1296.

He had issue one daughter, Isabel; and having no sons, the honors again
returned to the crown.

He died about the year 1330, and his daughter Isabel married to William earl
of Ross, Hist. of Sutherland and Crawfurd's Peerage.
to whom she had only two daughters. 1. Eupham, afterward countess of Ross. 2.
Isabel, married to Alexander Frazer of Philorth.

This title continued in the crown till king Robert II. bestowed it upon his
own son David, (by queen Eupham Ross) whom he created earl of Strathern and
Caithness upon his accession to the crown, anno 1371; but he dying without male
succession, both these titles devolved upon his brother Walter, earl of Athole;
and he resigned the title of Caithness in favors of his son Alan, Hawthorden,
Crawford, Stewart, etc.
who was killed at the battle of Inverlochie anno 1428, or, according to
others, in 1431; and he having no male-issue, the title of Caithness returned
to his father, which, upon his forfeiture, came again to the crown.

CRICHTON Earl of CAITHNESS.
THE immediate ancestor of this family was Sir William Crichton, dominus de
eodem, the fifth generation of that ancient family in a direct male line, who
flourished in the reigns of king Robert II. and III. and left issue two sons,

1. Sir John Crichton, dominus de eodem, his successor.

I. 2. STEPHEN CRICHTON of Cairns, who also left issue two sons.

1. George, afterward earl of Caithness.

2. James, ancestor of the Crichtons of Ruthven, Chart. in pub. archiv.
which is instructed by many charters under the great seal.

II. GEORGE, eldest son of Stephen Crichton of Cairns, is instructed by a
charter from king James I. under the great seal, to " Edward de Crichton of
Krealhouse, Ibidem.
super cartam sibi factam, per Georgium de Crichton, filium et haeredem
Stephani de Crichton de Cairns, de omnibus et singulis terris suis jacen. infra
villam de Lanying, in baronia de Cramond, infra vicecom. de Edin^. tenend. de
dicto Georgio, etc." Dated 2d October 1427.

He was a man of an aspiring genius, good parts, and much esteemed by king
James II. who constituted him lord high admiral of Scotland, and conferred
several other favors upon him, whereby he became possessed of a considerable
estate, Ibid. inter 1440 and 1450.
and got charters, under the great seal, Georgio Crichton, admirallo nostro, of
the lands of Cairns, Brathwell, Blackness, and several other lands and baronies.

We have not been able to discover who was his first lady, but by her he had
issue a son,

James Crichton, who got from his father the lands of Cairns; Ibid. inter 1490
and 1495.
upon which he got charters, under the great seal, Jacobo Crichton de Cairns,
etc. He was ancestor of the Crichtons of Strathurd.

The admiral married, 2dly, Janet, daughter of sir William Borthwick of that
ilk, widow of James Douglas, Chart. penes comitem de Morton.
lord Dalkeith, ancestor of the earls of Morton; and the king's favor for him
still increasing, he was pleased further to dignify him with the title of earl
of Caithness about the year 1450, the honors being limited to the heirs-male
procreate betwixt him and the said Janet Borthwick, his 2d wife; but by her he
had only one daughter, Janet, to whom he gave his lands of Barntoun, which
appears by a charter, under the great seal, Chart. inpu^. archiv. ad a^ number
1452.
" Georgio comiti de Caithness, et Janetae comitissae suae sponsae, et Janetae
filiae dicti Georgii et Janetae, omnes et singulas terras de Barntoun, cum
pertinen. etc. jacen. in vicecom. de Edin." Dated 12th January, 1452.

The earl dying, anno 1455, without male-issue of his second marriage, the
honors returned to the crown, but he was succeeded in the estate of Barntoun,
conform to the preceding charter, by

III. Lady JANET CRICHTON, only child procreate betwixt George earl of
Caithness, and Janet countess thereof, Ibid. ad a number 1460.
married to Robert master of Maxwell, who got with her the lands and barony of
Barntoun, which is instructed by a charter, under the great seal, dated anno
1460.

SINCLAIR Earl of CAITHNESS.
AS the rise and descent of the ancient and illustrious surname of Sinclair is
to be sound under the title of earl of Orkney, we proceed to deduce the descent
of this noble family from their immediate ancestor,

1. WILLIAM SINCLAIR, earl of Orkney, son and heir of Henry earl of Orkney, by
Aegidia, daughter of William Douglas lord of Nithsdale, and princess Aegidia,
daughter of king Robert II. being a man of great authority and power, and
singular accomplishments, was highly esteemed by king James II. who employed
him in the most arduons affairs of state, and he always acquitted himself with
honor and reputation.

He founded and erected a collegiate church near his castle of Roslin, Lives of
the officers of state, p. 34.
which he largely endowed, anno 1441, and for architecture and workmanship, it
is thought a masterpiece of its kind at this day.

He was constituted lord high chancellor of Scotland, Ibid. and chart. inpub.
archiv.
anno 1455, and that same year was sent ambassador to England, to negotiate
some affairs of the utmost importance, which he managed with dexterity and
success; and upon his return, Rymer, tom. II. ad ann. 1456, 1461, and 1471.
anno 1556, got a grant of the ea^ldom of Caithness, and was afterward
promiscuously designed comes Orcadiae et Cathaniae, etc.

He married, 1st, lady Margaret, daughter of Archibald earl of Douglas and duke
of Turenne, Chart. penes ducem de Douglas.
by whom he had a son,

William, designed lord Newburgh, ancestor of lord Sinclair's family, ( vide
title lord Sinclair) -- and a daughter,

Lady Catharine, married to Alexander duke of Albany.

He married, 2dly, Elizabeth, daughter of Alexander Sutherland of Dunbeath,
Lives of the officers of state.
by whom he had four sons.

1. William, in whose favors he resigned the earldom of Caithness.

2. Sir Oliver, ancestor of the Sinclairs of Roslin, who got from his father
the lands, castle, and barony of Roslin, with several others, Ibid. and chart.
inpub. archiv.
which appears by charters in the public register; and it may here be observed,
that the family of Roslin have always contended, that sir Oliver was the eldest
son of the second marriage, though the family of Caithness never yielded it.

The earl's third son, of the second marriage, was sir David Sinclair knight.

4. John, who was bishop of Caithness.

He died before 1480, and, according to the abovementioned resignation, was
succeeded in the earldom of Caithness by his son,

II. WILLIAM, second earl of Caithness, who got a charter, Chart. in pub.
archiv. inter 1480 and 1490.
under the great seal, Willielmo Sinclair, terrarum comitatus Cathaniae; with
charters of many other lands and baronies.

He married Mary, daughter of sir William Keith of Innerugy, by whom he had two
sons.

1. John, his heir.

2. Alexander, Ibid. ad annum 1529.
designed of Stempster, of whom the Sinclairs of Dunbeath are descended.

He was killed, with many of his brave countrymen, at the fatal field of
Floudon, anno 1513, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. JOHN, third earl of Caithness, who got charters, Ibid. ad annum 1526.
under the great seal, Johanni comiti Cathaniae, of a great many lands and
baronies.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of sir William Sutherland of Dussus, Ibidem.
by whom he had a son,

George, his heir.

He was unhappily killed at an insurrection of the inhabitants of Orkney,
Hollinshed's history.
on 29th May 1529, and was succeeded by his son,

IV. GEORGE, fourth earl of Caithness, who was constituted justiciar within the
bounds of Caithness, by queen Mary, anno 1566, and was one of the peers who sat
on the trial of James earl of Bothwell, anno 1568.

He got charters, Chart. in pub. archiv. inter ann. 1565 and 1580.
under the great seal, of several lands and baronies, Georgio comiti Cathanioe,
etc.

He died in an advanced age, anno 1583, leaving issue by lady Elizabeth Graham,
his spouse, daughter of William earl of Montrose, two sons and three daughters.

1. John, master of Caithness.

2. George, who married Margaret, Chart. in pub. archiv.
daughter of William lord Forbes, and was ancestor of the Sinclairs of May.

1st daughter, Hist. of the family of Sutherland.
lady Beatrix, married to Alexander earl of Sutherland.

2. Lady Elizabeth, married, 1st, to Alexander Sutherland of Duffus: Ibidem.
2dly, to Hutcheon M'Kye of Far, ancestor of lord Rae.

3. Lady Barbara, Ibidem.
married to sir Alexander Innes of that ilk.

V. JOHN, master of Caithness, eldest son and apparent heir of the fourth earl,
got an annuity out of the earldom of Caithness, lands and barony of Cleish,
Greenland, etc. upon which he got a charter, Chart. in pub. archiv.
under the great seal, Johanni magistro de Caithness, etc.

He married lady Jean Hepburn, daughter o^ P^trick earl of Bothwell and lord
Hailes, by whom he had four sons and one daughter.

1. George, afterward earl of Caithness.

2. Sir James Sinclair of Murchil, ancestor of the present earl, of whom
afterward.

3. John, ancestor of the Sinclairs of Greenland, now of Ratter.

4. David Sinclair.

His daughter, Agnes, married, 1st, to sir George Home of Coldingknows, Ibidem.
ancestor of the earl of Home: 2dly, to Andrew earl of Errol: 3dly, to
Alexander Gordon of Strathairn.

He died anno 1577, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. GEORGE, who succeeded also to his grandfather, anno 1583, and was fifth
earl of Caithness, Ibid. inter annos 1585 and 1600.
and got charters, under the great seal, of the whole earldom of Caithness,
Georgio comili Cathaniae, etc.

He got also a pension from the king of 90 l. Haddington's collect. in the
lawyers library Edin.
11 s. 4 d. out of the bishops rents of Caithness yearly, during his own life,
and that of his eldest son's, 21st July 1592.

He lived to a great age, and died anno 1643, leaving issue, by lady Jean
Gordon his wife, daughter of George earl of Huntly, two sons.

1. William, lord Berrindale.

2. Francis Sinclair, whose son George succeeded to the earldom of Caithness.

VII. WILLIAM, lord Berrindale, eldest son and apparent heir of the fifth earl,
got a charter, under the great seal, Willielmo Sinclair, Chart. in pub. archiv.
ad an. 1592.
filio et haeredi apparenti Georgii comitis Cathaniae, terras et villas de
Cairns, etc.

He died before his father, having married Mary, daughter of Henry lord
Sinclair, by whom he had a son,

VIII. JOHN, designed master of Berrindale, who got charters, under the great
seal, terrarum baroniae et comitatus de Caithness, Ibid. inter annos 1632 et
1635.
etc. etc. Johanni magistro de Berrindale.

He died anno 1639, having married lady Margaret M'Kenzie, daughter of Colin
earl of Seaforth, by whom he had a son and successor,

IX. GEORGE, who succeeding to his great grandfather, George the fifth earl,
anno 1643, was sixth earl of Caithness, and got charters, under the great seal,
Ibid. ad an. 1662.
Georgio comiti de Caithness, domino Sinclair de Berrindale, terrarum et
comitatus de Caithness, etc.

He married lady Mary Campbell, daughter of Archibald marquis of Argyle; but
dying without issue, the male-line of William lord Berrindale, first son of
George the fifth earl thus ended, and the honors were claimed by the next
heir-male, viz.

VIII. GEORGE, seventh earl of Caithness, son of Francis, second son of the
said fifth earl, who had the title and honors of Caithness allowed him by
parliament; but dying likeways without issue, anno School, the heirs-male of the
body of George the 5th earl thus ended, and the estate and honors devolved
upon John Sinclair of Murchil, Chart. in pub. archiv. ad au. 1592.
the next and undoubted heir-male, being lineally descended of sir James
Sinclair of Murchil, brother of the said fifth earl, to whom we now return.

VI. Sir JAMES SINCLAIR of Murchil, second son of John master of Caithness, who
was first son and heir of George the 4th earl, got a charter, under the great
seal, Jacobo Sinclair de Murchil, Ibidem.
terrarum de Halero, terrarum de Histitro, cum molendino de Scyter, etc.

He married lady Elizabeth Stewart, Stuart's hist. of the royal family, p 104.
third daughter of Robert earl of Orkney, by whom he had issue two sons.

1. Sir James, his heir.

2. Francis, who, betaking himself to a military life, had a considerable
command in Sweden, where he settled, and of him several families there are
descended.

VII. Sir JAMES SINCLAIR of Murchil succeeded his father, and married Jean,
daughter of William Stewart of Mains and Burray, Ibid. p. 12
brother of Alexander first lord Garlies, by whom he had a son,

VIII. JOHN, who, succeeding to the earldom of Caithness, as above noticed, was
the eighth earl, and married Jean Carmichael, of the family of Hyndford, by
whom he had three sons and one daughter.

1. Alexander, his successor.

2. John Sinclair of Murchil, a man of great probity and honor, and one of the
senators of the college of justice.

3. Mr. Francis Sinclair.

His daughter, lady Janet, married to David Sinclair of South-Dun, Esquire;

He died in 1705, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. ALEXANDER, ninth earl of Caithness, who married lady Margaret Primrose,
daughter of Archibald earl of Roseberry, by whom he has a daughter,

Lady Dorothea Sinclair, married to James viscount M'Duff, eldest son and heir
apparent of William earl Fi^e, in the kingdom of Ireland, etc.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st, azure, a ship at anchor, her oars erected in saltyre, within a
double tressure counterflowered, or: 2d and 3d or, a lion rampant, gules: 4th,
azure, a ship under sail, or. And over all, a cross ingrailed, dividing the
four quarters, sable.

Crest, on a wreath, a cock proper.

Supporters, two grissins of the latter, armed and beaked, or.

MOTTO, Commit thy work to God.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Castle-Sinclair, and Thurso castle, in the county of Caithness.

LIVINGSTON Farl of CALENDAR.
THE immediate ancestor of this noble family was,

ALEXANDER, first earl of Linlithgow, who married lady Eleanor Hay, daughter of
Andrew earl of Errol, by whom he had two sons.

1. Alexander, earl of Linlithgow, his successor.

2. Sir James Livingston, afterward earl of Calendar.

This sir James, from his youth, served in the wars abroad, where he acquired
great reputation for his military capacity.

Upon his return home, he was constituted one of the gentlemen of the
bedchamber to king Charles I. Char. in pub. arch. haered. mascul. omni temp.
futuro.
and created lord Livingston of Almond, by patent to his heirs-male for ever,
dated 19th June 1633.

He afterward got the lordship of Calendar, and several other lands about
Falkirk, erected into one free barony, called the lordship and barony of
Calendar, Ibid. haeredibus masculis et assignat. quibuscun.
by a charter under the great seal, to him, his heirs-male and assigneys
whatever, dated 12th June 1634.

He got another charter under the great seal, confirming the former, Jacobo
domino Livingston de Almond et Calendar, haeredibus masculis et assignatis
quibuscunque haereditarie, Ibidem.
dated 2d November 1637; and was created earl of Calendar by patent, Ibidem.
to his heirs-male whatever, dated 6th October 1641; which was again confirmed
to him at Newcastle upon Line, 22d June 1646.

He married Margaret Hay, daughter of John lord Yester, widow of Alexander earl
of Dunfermline, by whom he had no issue.

In the beginning of the civil war, he accepted of a commission in the
parliament's service; but, being truly loyal, he no sooner perceived their
intentions, than he left them, and joined the king, Guthrie's memoirs.
and was named treasurer by his Majesty, but rejected by the parliament 1641,
having refused to be one of their chief commanders.

He was afterward lieutenant general of the Scotch army, when they attempted
to rescue the king, then a prisoner in the isle of Wight, anno 1648; but
failing in the enterprise, he retired to Holland, and his commission, to be
governor of Carlyle, Records of parliament.
was rescinded by the parliament, 16th January 1649. His estate was
sequestrate. He was particularly excepted out of Oliver Cromwell's act of
indemnity, Cromwell's act of indemnity.
anno 1654; and his lady, in his absence, had not the least subsistence out of
his estate, but was allowed to receive the jointure she had by her former
husband, the earl of Dunfermline.

After the restoration, the earl having no prospect of heirs of his own body,
made a resignation of his estate and honors into the king's hands: upon which
he got a new patent in favors of his nephew Alexander, second son of
Alexander, second earl of Linlithgow, and the heirs-male of his body; which
failing, to the second son of George, third earl of Linlithgow, and the
heirs-male of his body; which failing, to Alexander Livingston, son of the
deceast sir Alexander Livingston of Daldirs, in Stirling-shire, etc. etc.
reserving to himself the titles, honors, and dignity of earl of Calendar,
Chart. in pub. archiv. ad annum 1660.
during all the days of his life, etc. This patent is dated at Whitehall the
21st day of November 1660.

He dying anno 1672, was accordingly succeeded in his estate and honors by his
nephew,

ALEXANDER, second earl of Calendar, second son of Alexander second earl of
Linlithgow, who married lady Mary, daughter of William duke of Hamilton; but
dying without lawful issue, anno 1685, his estate and honors, in virtue of the
last mentioned patent, devolved upon his nephew,

ALEXANDER, third earl of Calendar, second son of George, third earl of
Linlithgow, who married lady Anne Graham, daughter of James marquis of
Montrose, by whom he had a son,

James, his heir, -- and two daughters.

1. Lady Henriet, who died unmarried.

2. Lady Mary, married to Mr. James Graham of Airth, and had issue.

He died anno 1694, and was succeeded by his son,

JAMES, fourth earl of Calendar, who, upon the death of his uncle George, third
earl of Linlithgow, anno 1695, succeeded to his estate and honors, whereby
both earldoms were united in his person.

Vide title Linlithgow.

CAMERON Lord FAIRFAX of CAMERON.
CAMBDEN, and all English historians, agree, that the family of FAIRFAX is
amongst the most ancient, and as well allied as any in England.

About the time of the Norman conquest, anno 1066, Lodge's peerage of Ireland,
p, 397. vol. II.
they were seated at Touchester or Torchester in Northumberland, whence they
removed to Yorkshire.

I. RICHARD FAIRFAX, in the sixth year of king John, anno 1205, was possessed
of the lands of Ascham, not far from the city of York.

He was son of John, Ibid. Crawfurd's peerage, Scots compend.
who was son of Henry of Shapenbeck, as per the peerage of Ireland, and he was
succeeded by his son,

II. WILLIAM FAIRFAX, who was living at Ascham in 1223, Ibidem.
and married Alice, daughter and heiress of Nicholas de Bugthorp, by whom he
had a son,

III. WILLIAM FAIRFAX, Esquire; who was bailiff of York in 1249.

He purchased the lands and manor of Walton from Peter de Bruce, which he
afterward made the chief place of his residence.

He married Mary, Peerage of Ireland, p. 398.
widow of Walter Flower, whose father was Took Flower, mayor of York, in the
reign of king Richard I.

He le^t a son,

IV. THOMAS FAIRFAX of Walton, Esquire;: who succeeded him, and married Anne,
daughter and heiress of Henry Sezevaux, mayor of York, Ibidem.
in the reign of king Henry III. by whom he had three sons.

1. John, his successor.

2. William.

3. Bego.

He died in the 12th year of Edward I. 1284, and was succeeded by his eldest
son,

V. JOHN FAIRFAX of Walton, Esquire; who lived in the reigns of king Edward I. and
II. and married Claricia or Clare, daughter and heiress of William Scot, by his
wife, Ibidem.
daughter and heiress of sir Roger Bruce of Walton, by whom he had a son,

VI. THOMAS FAIRFAX of Walton, Esquire; who succeeded him, and married Margaret,
daughter of John Malvis, Esquire; by whom he had issue,

William, his successor, -- and two daughters.

1. Anne, married to -- Marton.

2. Clare, married to sir William Malvis.

He died before 1327, Ibidem.
and was succeeded by his son,

VII. WILLIAM FAIRFAX of Walton, Esquire; who married a daughter of sir William
Roucliffe of Cowthorp, knight, by whom he had two sons and three daughters.
Ibidem.


1. Thomas, his successor.

2. John Fairfax, L. L. D.

1st daughter Margaret.

2. Mary.

3. Alice.

VIII. THOMAS FAIRFAX of Walton, Esquire; succeeded his father. He was living at
Walton in 1350, and married Elizabeth or Margaret, daughter of sir John de
Etton, lord of Gilling; by which marriage the estate of Etton came into this
family, Ibid. p. 399
in the time of king Henry VII.

He left issue five sons.

1. William.

2. Thomas.

3. Guy.

4. John.

5. Richard Fairfax.

He was succeeded by his eldest son.

IX. WILLIAM FAIRFAX of Walton, Esquire; who was patron of the churches of Halnaby
and Scotton, and, per contract in 1395, (18th year of Richard II.) married
Constance, daughter of Peter lord de Malo, or Mauloy, and co-heiress of her
brother Peter, Ibidem.
eighth lord, by whom he had three sons.

1. Thomas.

2. Richard Fairfax, Esquire;

3. Bryan, rector of Longtost, and precentor of the cathedral of York in 1410.

X. THOMAS FAIRFAX of Walton, Esquire; succeeded his father, Ibid. Craw furd's
peerage, and S^ o compend.
and married Margaret, daughter of John, and sister and heiress of Richard
Friston of Marston, Esquire; by whom he had issue six sons.

1. Richard.

2. Guy.

3. George.

4. Thomas.

5. John.

6. Nicholas.

He died in 1415.

XI. RICHARD FAIRFAX of Walton, eldest, succeeded, and flourished in the reigns
of Henry IV. V. and VI. He was chief justice of England, after the 1422, and
married Anastatia or E^stace, Ibidem.
daughter and co-heiress of John Calthorp of Calthorp, Esquire; by whom he had six
sons and three daughters.

William of Walton, his 1st son, was father of sir Thomas of Walton, who was
father of another sir Thomas, who was father of sir Nicholas, who was father of
sir William Fairfax of Walton, who married Jane, daughter and heiress of Bryan
Stapleton of Nottingham and Burton, Esquire; by whom he had sir Thomas, who, by his
majesty king Charles I. was created a peer of Ireland, Peerage of Ireland,
by the title of lord viscount Fairfax of Emely, on 10th February 1628; and
married Catharine, sister of Henry lord viscount Dumbar, and daughter of sir
Henry Constable of Burton, by whom he had Thomas second viscount Fairfax, of
whom the present viscount is lineally descended; and Henry Fairfax, Esquire; who
was father of Henry Fairfax of Hurst, Esquire; whose daughter and sole heiress,
Frances, was married to David earl of Buchan, and was mother of Henry now earl
of Buchan.

Richard of Walton's second son was,

2. Bryan Fairfax, L. L. D. who died without issue.

3. Sir Guido or Guy, of whom afterward.

4. Richard Fairfax a priest.

5. Sir Nicholas Fairfax, a knight of Rhodes.

6. Miles Fairfax, Esquire;.

His three daughters were,

1. Margaret.

2. Anne.

3. Elein.

XII. Sir GUY FAIRFAX, third son of the above Richard, a man of great learning
and knowledge in the laws, was chief justice of the king's bench, in the reigns
of king Edward IV. and Richard III. and, notwithstanding his great attachment
to the house of York, he enjoyed the same office under king Henry VII. and was
also attorney general; and having obtained from his father the lands and manor
of Steeton, he built the castle there, which afterward was the chief seat of
his posterity.

He married Isabel, Ibid. Crawfurd, etc.
daughter of sir William Rither of Rither, by whom he had four sons and two
daughters.

1. Sir William.

2. Thomas, sergeant at law.

3. Guy.

4. Nicholas.

1st daughter Eleanor, married to sir Miles Wilstrop of Wilstrop.

2. Agnes, married to sir John Waterton of Medly, master of horse to king Henry
VI.

Sir Guy died in 1495, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. Sir WILLIAM FAIRFAX of Steeon, who, like his father, was eminent for his
knowledge in the laws, and was made justice of the common pleas by king Henry
VIII.

He married Elizabeth, eldest daughter of sir Robert Manners, ancestor of the
duke of Rutland, (whose grandmother was sister of king Edward IV.) by whom he
had

Sir William, Ibidem.
his heir, -- and four daughters.

1. Elizabeth, married to sir Robert Auchtred.

2. Eleanor, married to sir William Pickering, knight, marshal of England.

3. Anne, married to sir Robert Normanville of Kilnwick in Yorkshire.

4. Dorothy, married to -- Constable of Hexby, Esquire;.

He died in 1514, and was succeeded by,

XIV. Sir WILLIAM FAIRFAX of Steeton, his only son. He was high sheriff of York
the 26th and 31st years of king Henry VIII. and has two letters from that great
monarch, very much for the honor of his family, which are still preserved.

He married Isabella, daughter and heiress of John Thivaits of Thivaits and
Denton in Yorkshire, by whom he got the lands and manor of Denton, which
afterward became the chief seat of the family.

He left issue five sons and five daughters. Peerage of Ireland, p. 400.


1. Sir Thomas, who succeeded his father in the estate and manor of Denton.

2. Francis Fairfax, Esquire;

3. Edward Fairfax, Esquire;.

4. Henry, who married Dorothy, daughter of Robert Ask of Aughton, Esquire; and
had a numerous issue.

5. Gabriel, who got from his father the lands of Steeton, and of whom are
descended the honorable families of Fairfax of Steeton and Newton in
Yorkshire, which still subsist.

1st daughter Anne, married to sir Henry Everingham of Laxton.

2. Mary, married to Robert Rockley of Rockley, Esquire; and had issue.

3. Bridget, married to sir Cotton Gargrave of Hostell, and had issue.

4. Ursula, married to Ralph Valvasor of Hazlewood, Esquire;.

5. Agnes, married to Edmund Eltoft of Farnell in Craven, and of Knotingly,
Esquire;.

Sir William died in 1557, and was succeeded in his estate of Denton by his
eldest son,

XV. Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX of Denton, who was sheriff of York in 1571, and was
knighted by Queen Elizabeth in 1579, and performed many services to his country.

He married Dorothy, daughter of George Gale of Acham-grange Esquire; treasurer of
the mint at York, Peerage of Ireland.
by whom he had five sons and two daughters.

1. Sir Thomas, his heir.

2. Edward of Newhall, an excellent poet, in the reign of king Charles I.
author of several learned and ingenious treatises. He had several children.

3. Henry, both died young.

4. Ferdinando, both died young.

5. Sir Charles Fairfax, colonel of 3000 soldiers at the siege of Ostend, where
his bravery gained him immortal honor, according to Cambden and others, though
he had the misfortune to be killed three days before the surrender of the town.

1st daughter Ursula was married to sir Henry Bellasise, baronet, and was
mother of Thomas viscount Falconberg.

2. Christian, married to John Ask of Aughton, Esquire;.

Sir Thomas died in 1599, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVI. Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX of Denton, who was a person of great honor, virtue,
and skill in the arts both of peace and war.

In 1591 he accompanied Robert earl of Essex to France, in aid of king Henry
IV. against the Spaniards, and had the honor to be knighted in the camp before
Roan, for his bravery and good behavior.

He was employed in several negotiations of importance by queen Elizabeth,
particularly to king James VI. of Scotland, by whom he was highly esteemed.

He was also in great favor with his majesty king Charles I. who was pleased
to create him lord Fairfax of Cameron, in the kingdom of Scotland, by letters
patent, dated 4th May 1627.

He married Helen, daughter of Robert Ask of Aughton, Ibid. p. 406.
Esquire anno 1582, and died in May 1640, Craw^* peerage, and Scots compend.
in the 80th year of his age, leaving issue seven sons and two daughters.

1. Ferdinando.

2. Henry Fairfax, Esquire; whose son, Henry, became lord Fairfax, of whom
afterward.

3. Major William Fairfax, killed in 1621 in defense of the city of Frankendale
in the Palatinate.

4. Colonel Charles Fairfax, ancestor of the family of Menston, etc.

5. John.

6. Peregrine, killed in defense of Rochelle in France.

7. Thomas, slain in Turkey anno 1621.

1st daughter Dorothy, married to sir William Constable, baronet.

2. Anne, married to sir George Wentworth of Wolley, knight.

XVII. FERDINANDO, second lord Fairfax of Cameron, succeeded his father. He was
knighted in 1589.

At the beginning of the civil war, he was made the parliament's general for
the associated county of York. In 1642 he repulsed the earl of Newcastle at
Tadcaster. In January 1643 he routed the lord Byron, with his Irish forces at
Nantwick in Cheshire. In April 1644 he defeated lord Bellasise at Selby, and
took him prisoner, with 1600 of his men. In July thereafter, he commanded the
main battle at Marston-moor, with the earl of Leven, where the king's army,
under prince Rupert, was defeated. He thereupon took possession of the city of
York, of which he was made governor; with orders, that he and his sons should
take in all the garrisons, which still held out, for the king in that country;
and which, in a very short time, they effected.

He married, 1st, lady Mary Sheffield, daughter of Edward earl of Mulgrave,
Ibidem.
ancestor of the duke of Buckingham, by whom he had three sons and six
daughters.

1. Sir Thomas, his successor.

2. Charles, colonel of horse, slain at Marston-moor, on 23d July 1644.

3. John, who died young.

1st daughter Ursula, died unmarried.

2. Elizabeth, married to sir William Craven of Linchwick in Worcestershire.

3. Eleanor, married to sir William Selby of Twisdale in Northumberland.

4. Frances, married to sir Thomas Widdrington of Cheeseburn-grange in
Northumberland.

5. Mary, married to Henry Arthlington of Arthlington, Esquire;.

6. Dorothy, married to Edward Hutton of Popleton, Esquire;.

They all had issue.

His lordship's second wife was Rhoda, daughter and heiress of Thomas Chapman
of Shafford, by whom he had only one child, Ursula, who was married to William
Cartwright of Aynho, Esquire; whose daughter, Rhoda, was married to Henry, second
son of William duke of Devonshire.

Lord Ferdinando died in 1646, and his estate, and all his posts, devolved upon
his son,

XVIII. THOMAS, third lord Fairfax of Cameron, the famous general, so noted in
English history during the civil wars; whose conduct, on the side of the
parliament, to the year 1650, and his concurrence with general Monk, for the
king's restoration, in 1659, are transactions so fully set forth in all the
histories of those distracted times, that it is needless to insert them here.

He married Anne, daughter and co-heiress of sir Horatio Vere, by whom he had
two daughters.

1. Mary, Ibidem.
married to George Villiers duke of Buckingham.

2. Elizabeth, died young.

He dying without male-issue in 1671, his estate and honors devolved upon his
cousin,

XVIII. HENRY FAIRFAX of Oglethorp, eldest son and heir of Henry, second son of
Henry, first lord Cameron.

He married Frances, daughter and heiress of sir Robert Barwick of Tolstone,
Ibidem.
by whom he had four sons and five daughters.

1. Thomas, his successor.

2. Henry, sheriff of York, who, in 1691, married Anne, daughter and co-heiress
of Richard Harrison, Esquire; and had issue.

3. Bryan Fairfax, Esquire;.

4. Barwick.

1st daughter Dorothy, married, 1st, to Robert Stapleton of Wigell, Esquire; 2dly,
to Bennet Sherard, Esquire;.

2. Frances, married to Mr. Rymer.

3. Anne, married to Ralph, son of sir Ralph Ker, in the county of Durham.

4. Ursula, both died unmarried.

5. Mary. both died unmarried.

And he dying in 1680, was succeeded by his son and heir,

XIX. THOMAS, fifth lord Fairfax of Cameron, who concurred heartily in the
revolution in 1688; and, in December that year, was made lieutenant colonel of
the third regiment of horse-guards. In January 1693, he was promoted to the
king's own regiment of horse; and, in 1701, he was made a brigadier-general. He
represented the county of York in several parliaments, and married Catharine,
daughter and heiress of Thomas lord Culpeper, Ibidem.
by whom he had three sons and four daughters.

1. Thomas, his heir.

2. Henry, who succeeded his brother.

3. Robert, a major of the guards, and member of parliament for Maidstone.

1st daughter Margaret, married to doctor David Wilkins, archdeacon of Suffolk.

2. Catharine,

3. Frances,

4. Mary, all died unmarried.

This lord died in 1709, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XX. THOMAS, sixth lord Fairfax of Cameron, who, dying without issue anno 1738,
was succeeded by his brother,

XX. HENRY, seventh lord Fairfax of Cameron, etc.

ARMS.
Or, three bars gemel, gules, surmounted of a lion rampant, sable; argent, a
bend engrailed, gules.

Crest, on a wreath, a lion passant, guardant, of the last.

Supporters, on the dexter side, a lion guardant, sable; on the sinister, a bay
horse.

MOTTO, Fare fac.

CHIEF SEAT.
At Leeds-castle in Kent.

CARLYLE Lord CARLYLE.
THIS surname is of very great antiquity in the south of Scotland, is certainly
local, and was probably first assumed when the town of Carlyle and the northern
counties of England were possessed by the Scots.

The first of them we find upon record, is

I. EUDO de Carlyle, who flourished in the reign of king William the Lion.
Chartul. of Kelso, penes Mac^arlane, p. 182 and 184.
There is a charter of mortification by Eustace de Vescy, of twenty shillings
per annum out of the miln of Sprouston, to the monastery of Kelso, in which
Eudo de Carleolo is a witness, circa annum 1207.

He died about 1230, and was succeeded by his son,

II. Sir ADAM CARLYLE knight, Remarks on Ragman's Roll, p. 43.
who made a considerable figure in the reigns of king Alexander II. and III.
and left issue a son and successor,

III. GILBERT de Carlyle, Prynne's collections, vol. III. p. 661.
who was one of the great barons of Scotland that swore fealty to king Edward
I. of England, anno 1296.

He was succeeded by his son,

IV. Sir WILLIAM CARLYLE, designed of Torthorald and Crunington, who was one of
the greatest men of his time, and always true to the interest of his country.

He married lady Margaret Bruce, Stuart's hist. of the royal family. p. 35.
daughter of Robert Earl of Carrick, and sister of king Robert Bruce.

He obtained from that great monarch a charter, Ibid. and Haddington's
collections.
"Willi^lmo Carlyle, militi, et Margaretae, sponsae suae, sorori nostrae
carissimae, terrarum de Cronington, etc."

Also another charter, Ibid. and Crawfurd's Peerage, p. 66.
terrarum de Conlyn, una cum tenendariis totius baroniae de Torthorald, etc.

By said lady Margaret Bruce he left issue two sons.

1. Thomas.

2. William de Carlyle, who carried on the line of this family, of whom
afterward.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. THOMAS CARLYLE of Torthorald, who was in great favor with king David
Bruce, whom he accompanied in his expedition into England, and there lost his
life in the service of his country at the battle of Durham, anno 1346, leaving
issue only one child,

Susanna.

This appears from a charter of king David Bruce, Chart. in archivis regis
Davidis.
" Roberto de Corry, et Susannae sponsae suae, siliae et heredi quondam Thomae
de Torthorald consanguinei nostri, in nostra praesentia, ad fidem et pacem
nostram apud bellum commissum apud Durham desuncti, omnes terras de Conlyn et
Ruchane, cum pertinen. quae fuerunt quondam Willielmi de Carleolo infra
vicecomitatum de Dumfries, etc."

This charter is dated at Melross 28th October 1363.

The next of this noble family we find upon record, is

VI. Sir JOHN de Carlyle de Torthorald, said to be son of William second son of
sir William of Torthorald, before noticed.

This sir John made a great figure in the reigns of king Robert II. and III.
The earl of Douglas being warden of the marches in king Robert IIId's time,
Rymer, tom. VIII. p. 57.
appointed sir John Carlyle of Torthorald, sir John Johnston of that ilk, sir
William Stewart of Castlemilk, and some others, sureties for the keeping of a
truce with the English, anno 1398.

He died about the year 1400, and was succeeded by his son,

VII. Sir JOHN CARLYLE of Torthorald, who is particularly mentioned in an
indenture entered into betwixt sir Herbert Maxwell, Indenture in Mill's
genealogical collections, penes Macfarlane.
lord of Carlaverock, and John de Sinclair, lord of Herdmanston; submitting the
differences about the property of some lands to the determination of fifteen
gentlemen of rank, of whom sir John de Carlyle and sir William de Preston are
the two first named.

The indenture is signed 19th January 1427, and the decision pronounced 2d June
1428.

He died before 1435, and left issue a son and successor,

VIII. Sir WILLIAM CARLYLE of Torthorald, who was one of the noble knights whom
Fordun calls valentes milites et armigeri, Fordun, vol. II. p. 485.
that were sent to France with six thousand auxiliaries upon the marriage of
king James I.'s daughter, princess Margaret, with the dauphine of France,
afterward Lewis XI. anno 1435.

He died before 1466, and was succeeded by his son,

IX. Sir JOHN CARLYLE of Torthorald, who obtained from king James III. Chart.
in pub. archiv.
a charter of some lands and tenements in Wigtoun, Johanni Carlyle de
Torthorald, anno 1466.

He was in great favor with that prince, Creations of the nobility, M. S. in
bibliotheca juridica, Edr.
who raised him to the dignity of the peerage by the title of lord Carlyle of
Torthorald, anno 1470 or 1471, of which there are many documents, viz.

He is one of the lords of that parliament called by king James III. when there
was a decree pronounced against Hugh lord Fraser, in favors of Alexander
Fleming, on 13th March 1471.

He also sat as a lord at every parliament thereafter till his death.

He got a charter from king James III. Johanni domino Carlyle, Chart. in pub.
archiv. inter 1473 and 1495.
erecting villam de Torthorald, etc. in burgum baroniae, etc. dated 3d December
1473. He got also charters of several other lands and baronies too numerous to
be here inserted.

He was sent ambassador to France in 1477, and, in requital of the vast expense
he had been at in that embassy, had the barony of Duncow (then in the crown by
the forfeiture of Robert lord Boyd) conferred upon him. Simson's collections.


He died anno 1510, leaving issue by Margaret Douglas, of the family of
Drumlanrig, his wife, a son,

John, -- and a daughter, Chart. in pub. archiv. ad annum 1516.


Catharine, married to Simon Carruthers of Moswald.

X. JOHN, master of Carlyle, designed, in a charter under the great seal, Ibid.
ad annum 1507.
son and apparent heir of John lord Carlyle, and Margaret Douglas, etc. but he
died before his father, leaving issue a son,

XI. Sir WILLIAM CARLYLE, who succeeded his grandfather, anno 1510, and was
second lord Carlyle.

He was a man of fine parts, and had the honor of knighthood conferred upon
him by king James IV. Creations of the Nobility, M. S. in the Advocates
library, Edin.
when but a young man, and he is then designed grandson and apparent heir of
John lord Carlyle of Torthorald. At the same time David, son and apparent heir
of John lord Kennedy, Ibidem.
and Robert Cunninghame of Polmais, were created knights.

He lived till the year 1540, having, in his younger days, married Janet,
daughter of John lord Maxwell; upon which he got a charter from John lord
Carlyle, Chart. in pub. archiv.
"To Willam Carlyle his grandson, and Janet Maxwell his spouse, of the lands of
Middleby, etc. anno 1497."

By her he had issue two sons.

1. James, his heir.

2. Michael, who succeeded his brother.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. JAMES, third lord Carlyle, who was one of those noble patriots that
entered into that memorable association, M. S. in the Advocates library, p. 167.
obliging themselves to stand by queen Mary with their lives and fortunes, etc.
anno 1568.

He married Janet, daughter of -- Scrimzeour, constable of Dundee, but dying
without issue, was succeeded by his brother,

XII. MICHAEL, fourth lord Carlyle, who got from king James VI. a charter,
terrarum baroniae de Carlyle, cum castro de Torthorald; in which he is designed
frater et haeres Jacobi domini Carlyle, Chart. in pub. archiv.
etc.

He died before 1580, leaving issue three sons.

1. William, his apparent heir.

2. Michael, ancestor of the Carlyles of Lochartur, of whom afterward.

3. Peter de Carlyle.

XIII. WILLIAM, master of Carlyle, eldest son and apparent heir of Michael
fourth lord Carlyle, married --, daughter of --, by whom he had only one
daughter,

Elizabeth Carlyle.

The master dying in 1572 without maleissue, his father intended that his
second son should have succeeded him, which appears by his charter of
alienation in favors of his son Michael, dated at Torthorald 14th March 1573,
before these witnesses, Adam Carlyle of Brydkirk, Alexander Carlyle his son and
heir apparent, John Carlyle of Brakenquhate, Peter Carlyle, son of the above
lord Carlyle, William Johnston in Templand, Bernard Gordon, James Gordon his
brother, etc.

This is afterward confirmed by a charter, under the great seal, of king James
VI. viz. " Jacobus, etc. Ibidem.
sciatis nos; etc. confirmasse quondam chartam alienationis factam per quondam
consanguineum nostrum Michaelem dominum Carlyle, dilecto filio suo legitimo
Michaeli Carlyle, haeredibusque suis masculis, et assignatis haereditarie de
totis et integris terris baroniae de Carlyle, cum castro, fortalicio de
Torthorald, etc." (Here a great many lands are particularly narrated) and this
charter of confirmation is dated 4th March 1580.

XIV. ELIZABETH, daughter and sole heiress of William master of Carlyle, was
married to sir James Douglas of Parkhead. Vide Title Douglas lord Carlyle of
Torthorald.

It shall only be observed here, that upon the death of Michael fourth lord
Carlyle, his second son and heir-male, Michael, contended long with his niece
Elizabeth for the estate of Carlyle, which was at last determined in favors of
said Elizabeth, the heir of line, for which reason the heir-male never took up
the title, he having no part of the estate. But William Carlyle, late of
Lochartur, was the undoubted heir-male of this noble family, and was served and
retoured heir to the last lord, as follows, viz. William Carlyle of Lochartur,
Retour in Chan. ad annum 1730.
son and heir of the deceast Robert Carlyle of Lochartur, son and heir of the
deceast William Carlyle of Lochartur, son and heir of Michael Carlyle second
lawful son and heirmale of the deceast Michael lord Carlyle, etc. And which
William Carlyle died anno 1756 or 1757, and is succeeded by his brother,

MICHAEL CARLYLE, now of Lochartur.

DOUGLAS Lord CARLYLE of TORTHORALD.
SIR George Douglas of Pittendreich, second son of George master of Angus, and
grandson of George the great earl of Angus, had a natural son,

GEORGE DOUGLAS, the first of this family.

He was a man of good parts, great bravery and courage, M. S. hist. of the
family of Douglas.
and was captain of the castles of Edinburgh and Douglas in the reigns of king
James V. and queen Mary.

He married Elizabeth, daughter and coheiress of James Douglas of Parkhead,
Simson's essays, and Home's hist. of the family of Douglas.
by whom he got the lands and barony of Parkhead in vicecomitatu de Lanark, and
by her had issue three sons and four daughters.

1. Sir James Douglas of Parkhead.

2. Sir George Douglas of Mordington, who was gentleman of the bedchamber to
king James VI. and married Margaret, daughter of Archibald Dundas of Fingask,
by whom he had two sons and a daughter. 1. Sir George Douglas, who was
ambassador from king Charles I. to Poland and Sweden in 1633 and 1635, but died
without issue. 2. James Douglas, who married, and had an only son, who died
also without issue. His daughter, Margaret, was married to sir James Lockhart
of Lee, of whom the Lockharts of Lee, Carnwath, and Castlehill, are descended.

3. John Douglas, doctor of divinity, ancestor of Joseph Douglas of Edrington,
of whom afterward.

1st daughter, Elizabeth, married, 1st, to sir Patrick Home of Ayton; and,
2dly, to sir James Dundas of Arniston.

2. Martha, married to Mr. Robert Bruce of Kinnaird.

3. Mary, married to John Carruthers of Holmains.

4. Christian, married to Edward Sinclair, son and apparent heir of sir William
Sinclair of Roslin.

Sir George was killed at the battle of Pinkie in 1547, and was succeeded by
his eldest son,

Sir James Douglas of Parkhead, who married the before mentioned

XIV. ELIZABETH CARLYLE, daughter and sole heiress of William master of
Carlyle, eldest son of Michael fourth lord Carlyle.

This sir James claimed the peerage of Carlyle, in right of his wife the heir
of line, upon which ensued a long and tedious lawsuit betwixt him and Michael
second son of the said lord Carlyle, the heir-male, as before observed, whereby
both parties almost ruined their estates before it was finally decided.
Crawfurd's Peerage.
Sir James, who was then an old man, being unfortunately killed by William
Stewart, anno 1608, lest issue by Elizabeth the heiress, three sons, viz.

1. Sir James, afterward lord Carlyle.

2. Archibald.

3. John. both died without issue.

He was succeeded by

XV. Sir JAMES DOUGLAS, Remarks up on Ragman^ roll, p. 43.
who, being eldest son of Elizabeth, only daughter and sole heiress of William
master of Carlyle, eldest son of Michael fourth lord Carlyle, as before
noticed, was created lord Carlyle of Torthorald, anno 1609.

He married Grizel, Writs of the family of Kenmure.
daughter of sir John Gordon of Lochinvar, by whom he had a son and successor,

XVI. WILLIAM lord Carlyle of Torthorald, who sold his estate, and died abroad
without issue, which ended the male-line of sir James Douglas, first son of
George, captain of the castles of Edinburgh and Douglas.

The male-line of his second son sir George being also extinct, as is before
observed, his male representative now is

JOSEPH DOUGLAS of Edrington, son of the deceast Joseph Douglas of Edrington,
son of John Douglas doctor of divinity, who was third son of the said captain
George, and brother of sir James, who married the baroness of Carlyle.

Vide Title Edrington in the second volume of this work.

DALZIEL Earl of CARNWATH.
THIS noble family is of great antiquity in the shire of Lanark, where they
flourished, and matched with several of the most considerable families, before
they settled in Dumfries-shire, where they now have their chief residence.

Some are of opinion, that this is a local surname, Remarks upon Ragman's roll,
p. 45.
and was first assumed by the possessors of the lands and barony of Dalziel;
but,

The account of their origin, given by Mr. Nisbet, and other historians, is,
that in the reign of king Kenneth II. a kinsman, and favorite of that king,
being taken prisoner by the Picts, was put to death, and hung up upon a gallows
in view of the Scotch camp. King Kenneth being highly provoked and incensed at
the affront, offered a considerable reward to any of his subjects who would
take down, and carry off the corpse; but, for some time, none would venture to
undertake the dangerous enterprise. At last, a gentleman of more spirit and
courage than the rest, said dal zell, which, in the old Scotch language,
signifies, I dare. He effectually performed it to the king's satisfaction, who
accordingly rewarded him nobly. His posterity assumed the word DALZELL for
their surname, and that remarkable bearing of a man hanging on a gallows for
their arms, with I dare for their motto, in memory of the above brave action,
though they now bear only a naked man proper.

Notwithstanding the great antiquity of this noble family, the first of them we
find upon record is,

I. Sir THOMAS de DALZELL, who was one of the great barons that swore sealty to
king Edward I. Prynne's collect. vol. III. p. 662.
of England, anno 1296.

He was afterward one of these worthy patriots who joined king Robert Bruce;
and always continued steady in his interest till his death.

He left issue a son,

II. Sir ROBERT DALZELL knight, who succeeded him, and was a faithful subject,
and firm friend of king David Bruce, for which he got from that prince a grant.
"To our trusty and well beloved Robert de Dalzell, knight, and the lawful
heirs-male of his body, gotten, or to be begotten, etc. all and haill our lands
of Selkirk, Char. in arch. regis David.
with their pertinents, etc." dated at Edin. the 14th May 1365.

He was one of the Scotch barons that became surety to Haquin king of Norway
and Sweden, that Henry Sinclair earl of Orkney, should faithfully govern the
islands of Orkney, etc. anno 1379, and was afterward sent over to Norway,
Torfeius's hist. of the Orkneys, p. 177.
by the said earl of Orkney, to king Haquin, anno 1380, and died that same
year, immediately after his return home.

He was succeeded by his son,

III. Sir WILLIAM DALZELL, knight, who made a great figure in the reigns of
king Robert II. and III.

In his father's lifetime, he obtained from king David Bruce, Char. in arch.
regis David.
a grant of two pounds Sterling out of the burgh of Lanark, by his royal deed,
dated 13th August 1366.

He is also mentioned in a charter belonging to the earl of Morton, Chart.
penes com. de Morton.
wherein he is designed William de Dalzell, knight, dated anno 1392.

He is a witness in a charter of confirmation of Robert duke of Albany, to
Andrew Hamilton, of the lands of Galstoun, wherein he is designed William de
Dalzell, Chart. in pub. archiv.
lord of that ilk, dated 11th December 1406.

He is also witness in another charter of confirmation of the duke of Albany,
to David de Gardyn, of the lands of Kinninmonth, in which he is designed
William de Dalzell, Ibidem.
knight, etc. anno 1407.

He died anno 1408, leaving issue two sons,

1. George de Dalzell.

2. Sir John, who succeeded his brother.

IV. GEORGE, first son and apparent heir of sir William de Dalzell, lord of
that ilk, got a charter of the lands and barony of Dalzell, to him and the
heirs-male of his body; which ^ailing, to the heirs-male of his father sir
William, Remarks upon Ragman's roll, page 45. et chart. penes dom. Hamilton de
Dalzell.
etc. This is con^irmed by a charter under the great seal of king Robert III.
and dated 5th July 1395; but he died before 1400, without issue, and was
succeeded by his brother,

IV. Sir JOHN de DALZELL, lord of that ilk, second son of the said sir William,
who, being a man of parts, was in great favor with king Robert III. Chart.
penes comitem de Morton.
and had the honor of knighthood conferred upon him when but a young man, anno
1393.

He was joined in commission with some others, Rymer's foed. Angliae.
to treat with the English about renewing the peace; and for his good and
faithful services, he obtained from king Robert III. a charter of the lands and
revenues of St. Leonard's hospital in the burgh of Lanark. The charter is
granted "to our trusty and well beloved John de Dalzell in liferent, Chart. in
arch. Roberti III.
and to his eldest son Walter de Dalzell, and the heirs-male of his body in
fee; which failing, to his second son Adam, and the heirs-male of his body;
which failing, to his third son Robert, and the heirs-male of his body, etc.
dated at Dunfermline, 9th November anno 1400."

He le^t issue three sons, as in the above charter.

1. Sir Walter.

2. Adam de Dalzell, who is witness in a charter of William de Maxweil de
Auchinhede, anno 1423; Chart. in pub. archiv.
and in another charter, wherein he is designed Adam de Dalzell de Elliotstoun,
anno 1426.

3. Sir Robert de Dalzell.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. Sir WALTER de DALZELL, who, in his father's lifetime, was designed Walter
of Ca^lourie, and is particularly mentioned in an indenture betwixt sir Herbert
Maxwell, Indenture in Mill's collect. penes MacFarlane.
lord of Carlaverock, and John de Sinclair, lord of Herdmanstoun, anno 1427.

He le^t issue a son and successor,

VI. Sir PETER de DALZELL, lord of that ilk, who obtained from king James II. a
charter of confirmation of the charter granted by king Robert III. to his
grandfather, of the lands of the hospital of St. Leonard in Lanark, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
etc. dated in 1449.

He died in the beginning of 1450, and was succeeded by his son,

VII. Sir ROBERT DALZELL, who, in a charter to Walter Graham of Walaystoun, is
designed Robert de Dalzell, Ibidem.
lord of that ilk, 31st December 1450.

He left issue a son and successor,

VIII. ROBERT de DALZELL, lord of that ilk, who was unhappily killed in the
town of Dumfrie^, Hollinshed's history.
in a scu^^le betwixt the lords Maxwell and Crichton, anno 1508, leaving issue
a son,

IX. ROBERT DALZELL of that ilk, who succeeded him, and is designed Robert de
Dalzell of that ilk, in a charter to Mr. John Scrimzeour of Glasbu^, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
of the lands and barony of Panbride, dated in 1511.

He is also witness in a charter to William Crichton, Ibidem.
dated in the same year 1511.

He married Margaret Hamilton daughter of --, by whom he had a son,

X. Sir ROBERT DALZELL of that ilk, who obtained from queen Mary a charter of
the lands of Dalzell, Ibidem.
with the mill and pertinents of Lanark, etc. wherein he is designed Robert de
Dalzell, son and heir of Robert de Dalzell of that ilk, and of Margaret
Hamilton, etc. dated 16th August 1559.

He was a faithful and loyal subject to queen Mary, and was one of those worthy
patriots who, upon her majesty's escape out of the castle of Lochleven, bound
themselves upon honor and conscience to stand by and adhere to her interest,
Mr. David Crawfurd's collect. in the lawyer's lib.
against all her rebellious subjects, anno 1568. He was likeways in her
majesty's army at the battle of Langside, where he behaved with singular
conduct and resolution.

He married Janet, daughter of Gavin Hamilton of Raploch, Chart. in pub. archiv.
by whom he had issue a son,

Robert, -- and a daughter,

Christian, married to John Hamilton of Orbiston.

He was succeeded by his son,

XI. Sir ROBERT DALZELL, who, being a man of spirit and genius, and possessed
of an opulent fortune, was knighted by king James VI. and, in consideration of
his own personal merit, and the constant fidelity and loyalty of his ancestors,
was created lord Dalziel by king Charles I. Ibid. haered. masc. e corp. suo.
on 18th September 1628, and earl of Carnwath in 1639, by patent, to the
heirs-male of his body.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir Robert Crichton of Cluny, Ibidem.
by whom he had two sons and one daughter.

1. Robert, his heir.

2. Sir John Dalziel of Glenae, who carried on the line of this family, of whom
afterward.

His daughter, lady Mary, was married to sir James Muirhead of Lachop.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. ROBERT, second earl of Carnwath, who, in his father's lifetime, got a
charter under the great seal, Ibid. ad annum 1632.
Roberto, magistro de Dalzell, terrarum dominii et baroniae de Carnwath, etc.
He was a man of great honor, probity, and loyalty.

In the time of the civil wars, he raised forces, both horse and foot, upon his
own charges, for the service of his majesty king Charles I. which he himself
commanded, fought upon their head, and always behaved with courage and
resolution, for which he suffered greatly, both by sequestration of his estate
of Carnwath, and otherways. He accompanied king Charles II. to the fatal battle
of Worcester, where he was taken prisoner, and was close confined for several
years: all which hardships he bore with great firmness and constancy.

He married Christian, daughter of sir William Douglas of Drumlanrig, Chart. in
arch. (...). de Carn^wath.
ancestor of the duke of Queensberry, by whom he had a son,

XIII. GAWIN, third earl of Carnwath, who succeeded him, Chart. in pub. archiv.
inter 1664 and 1672.
and got charters under the great seal, Gavino comiti de Carnwath, of several
lands and baronies. He married, 1st, Margaret, Chart. in arch. ^am. de South^sk.
daughter of David lord Carnegie, by whom he had two sons and one daughter.

1. James, his heir.

2. John, who succeeded his brother.

His daughter, lady Jean, married to Claud Muirhead of Lachop.

He married, 2dly, lady Mary Erskine, daughter of Alexander earl of Kelly, but
by her he had no issue.

He died in 1674, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIV. JAMES, fourth earl of Carnwath, who married lady Mary Seton, Chart. in
arch. ^am. de Carnwath.
daughter of George earl of Winton, by whom he had one daughter,

Lady Elizabeth Dalziel, married to lord John Hay, son of John marquis of
Tweedale.

And dying in 1683 without male-issue, was succeeded by his brother,

XIV. JOHN, fifth earl of Carnwath, who died unmarried in 1702. The male line
of Robert, second earl of Carnwath, eldest son of Robert, the first earl, thus
ending, the estate and honors devolved upon sir Robert Dalziel of Glenae,
lineally descended of sir John Dalziel of Glenae, second son of the said first
earl of Carnwath, to whom we now return.

XII. Sir JOHN DALZIEL of Glenae, brother-german of Robert, second earl of
Carnwath, married Agnes, daughter of -- Nisbet of Dean, by whom he had a son,

Sir Robert, -- and a daughter.

Mary, married to Alexander earl of Kelly.

He was succeeded by his son,

XIII. Sir ROBERT, who got a charter, under the great seal, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
domino Roberto Dalziel de Glenae, etc. and married, 1st, a daughter of
Sandilands lord Torphichen, by whom he had two daughters.

The first, --, married to -- Ferguson of Isle.

The second, --, married to sir Robert Lowrie of Maxweltoun.

He married, 2dly, lady Margaret, daughter of James earl of Annandale, by whom
he had no issue.

He married, 3dly, Violet, daughter of -- Riddel of Haining, by whom he had
three sons and four daughters.

1. Sir John.

2. Captain James Dalziel, who served in the army under king James VII. but
quitted the service at the revolution, having married -- Graham, by whom he had
a son, John, and a daughter.

3. Colonel Thomas Dalziel, of the Scotch guards, who married Isabel, only
daughter of the second marriage of -- Ferguson of Craigdarroch, by whom he had
a son, David Dalziel, merchant in Glasgow, and three daughters. 1. Jean,
married to Thomas Gibson, Esquire; one of the principal clerks of session, and has
issue. 2. Agnes. 3. Henriet.

Sir Robert's 1st daughter, Agnes, married to sir John Johnston of Westerhall.

2. --, married to Alexander Maxwell of Tinwald, without issue.

3. --, married to --, without issue.

4. --, married to Robert Carruthers of Rammerscales, and had issue.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIV. Sir JOHN DALZIEL of Glenae, who married Henriet, daughter of sir David
Murray of Stanhope, by whom he had two sons and one daughter.

1. Sir Robert, his heir.

2. John Dalziel, Esquire; an officer of rank in the army, who married a daughter
of William Tildslie of Lodge, Esquire; an English lady, by whom he had a son, who
is married, and has a considerable estate in the island of St. Christophers.

His daughter, Mary, married to William viscount Kenmure, and has issue.

XV. Sir ROBERT DALZIEL of Glenae, succeeded to the estate and honors of
Carnwath, being the undoubted heir-male, as before noticed, and was the sixth
earl.

He was a man of good parts and great benevolence, but had the misfortune to
engage in the rebellion in 1715, was taken prisoner at Preston, tried by his
peers, condemned for high treason, and his estate and honors were ^or^eited to
the crown, but he got a pardon for his life.

He married, 1st, lady Grace Montgomery, daughter of Alexander earl of
Eglington, by whom he had a daughter,

Lady Margaret Dalziel.

He married, 2dly, Grizel, danghter of Alexander Urquhart of Newhall, Esquire; by
whom he had a son and heir,

Alexander.

He married, 3dly, Margaret, daughter of John Hamilton of Bangower, Esquire; by
whom he had a daughter, who died young.

He married, 4thly, Margaret Vincent, a Yorkshire lady, by whom he had a son,

Robert.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVI. ALEXANDER, who, had it not been for his father's forfeiture, would have
been seventh earl of Carnwath.

He married miss Elizabeth Jackson, an English lady, and has issue.

ARMS.
Sable, a naked man, with his arms extended, proper.

Crest, on a wreath, a dagger, erect, the pommel and hilt, or.

Supporters, two chevaliers in complete armor, each having a target on his
exterior arm, proper.

MOTTO, I dare.

CHIEF SEAT.
At Kirkmichael in Annandale.

Earl of CARRICK.
THIS is an ancient and honorable title in Scotland. Cambden says, Olim
Carricta suos habuit comites.

In the reign of king William the Lion, we find it conferred upon Duncan, son
of Gilbert, lord of Galloway, about the year 1180, Rex Willielmus totam
Carrictam dedit Duncano, Cambden, p. 693, and Scots chron. M. S. in bibl.
jurid. Edin.
filio Gilberti domini Galovidiae, etc.

I. DUNCAN, first earl of Carrick, son of Gilbert lord of Galloway, founded the
abbay of Crossragwell, and amply endued it out of his own lands, Ibidem.
pro salute animae suae, the 20th year of king William, anno 1185.

He likeways made several donations to the monks of Paisley and Melrose.
Chartul. of Paisley and Melrose.
He lived after the year 1230, and was succeeded by his son,

II. NIGELLUS or NEIL, second earl of Carrick, who was likeways a liberal
benefactor to the religious, Craw^urd's Peerage.
as appears from his donations to the monasteries of Crossragwell, Sandell,
Rymer, tom. I. p. 559.
etc. He is particularly mentioned in the Foedera Angliae as one of the
magnates Scotiae, anno 1255.

He died anno 1256, leaving issue one daughter,

III. MARGARET, countess of Carrick, his sole heiress, married, 1st, to Adam
Kilconath, who, in her right, became earl of Carrick. This earl, with David
Cummin earl of Athole, were sent by king Alexander III. Martin's genealog. vol.
I. p. 167.
to the assistance of king Lewis IX. of France, with 2000 auxiliaries, anno
1258.

He was afterward sent by the same prince to the holy land, with 5000 men,
where he died without issue, anno 1272.

The countess married, 2dly, Robert de Bruce, lord of Annandale, to whom she
brought the title and dignity of earl of Carrick, and was mother, Stuart's
hist: of the royal family.
by him, of the great king Robert Bruce, as will be shown in the following
title.

BRUCE Lord of ANNANDALE and Earl of CARRICK.
HAD the name of BRUCE been distinguished by no other person but the great and
immortal king Robert, he alone is sufficient, not only to ennoble a name but a
nation: but, to his glory and renown, we have that of other kings, and other
heroes to be added, to raise this family to the highest pitch of grandeur
amongst the illustrious houses of the Scotch nobility.

We shall therefore deduce their descent from the Norman conquest of England,
which, we presume, was their first settlement in this island.

Amongst the great number of noble and valiant Normans, that came over to
England with William the Conqueror, anno 1066, none made a greater figure than
Robert de Bruce, the undoubted ancestor of this family.

I. ROBERT BRUIS, Nobilis miles de Normand. Monasticon Anglicnum, v. II. p.
146. in bibl. jurid. Edin.
(or Bruce,) whom sir William Dugdale calls a noble knight of Normandy, seems
to have had no small share in the conquest of England.

And as William divided the conquered lands amongst those of his followers, who
had most remarkably distinguished themselves for conduct and bravery, so none
appears to have got so large a share as this Robert de Bruis; for both Scotch
and English historians agree, that he got possession of the castle and manor of
Skeleton, Abercrombie's hist. Dugdales baronage. Mon. anglic. where most of his
lands are particularly mentioned.
(which became the chief title of his family) with above ninety lordships in
the east, west, and north Ridings of Yorkshire, whereof Gysburn in Cleveland,
(which we shall have occasion often to mention hereafter,) was one.

This Robert died about the year 1100, (some say anno 1094,) and left issue a
son and successor.

II. ROBET de BRUIS, second lord of Skeleton, a man of great worth and honor,
who, having contracted a friendship with king David I. while he resided in
England, and his lady being then dead, by whom he had a son and heir, he came
to Scotland with David, who was a generous prince, and always conferred his
favors upon persons of merit.

We shall observe, that during the reign of king Alexander I. his brother David
was designed comes, and prince of Cumberland, and was superior of the whole
lordship of Annandale. He was also earl of Northumberland, Huntington, Sir Ja.
Dalrymple's col. p. 168. and 176.
and Northampton, in right of his wife Mathilda, which is fully documented from
the register of the episcopal see of Glasgow.

That Robert de Bruis came to Scotland with David, and was accounted one of his
nobles or vassals, is clear from the said register of Glasgow, where comes
David gives centum solidorum in Hardingestra (in Northamptonshire) for
repairing the church of Glasgow. The original writ bears, "with consent of
Mathilda his wife, et procerum et militum meorum Roberti de Brus, Sir William
Dugdales bar. tom. II. p. 447. Sir Ja. Dalrymple's collections.
etc. inter ann. 1120, and 1124."

This alone is sufficient proof of Robert's being in Scotland with David. It is
no less certain, Register of the church of Glasgow, cir^iter ann. 1120.
that he got possession of the lordship of Annandale, of which there are many
documents: and it is affirmed by some historians, that king David procured him
in maririage Agnes Annand, heiress to the rich lordship of Annandale, which
contained all the lands from the bounds of Dunegal and Strathnith, to the lands
of Ranulph de Meschines, then earl of Chester, and lord of Cumberland, which
king David confirmed to him, whereby he came to have large possessions both in
Scotland and in England.

And being a man of great parts, and equally qualified for the cabinet and the
field, was long in high favor both with king David I. of Scotland, and king
Henry I. of England.

In the year 1137, Robert, being at the court of England, king Stephen joined
him in commission with Bernard de Baliol, to endeavor to dissuade or divert
king David of Scotland from his intended invasion of England, for which Robert
used all his interest; but David, either neglecting or despising the advice,
Sir Ja. Dalrymple and Sir William Dugdale.
pursued his former resolutions, and entered England with a considerable army.
Upon which Robert withdrew his allegiance from David for his lands he held of
him in Scotland, and was on the English side at the battle of Standard anno
1138, Monasticon Angli. vol. II. p. 146.
where he took prisoner his own son Robert, whom he had left in Scotland,
Nutrici suae custodiendum emendavit, etc.
and was then about 14 years of age. When his father presented him to the king
of England, he desired him to deliver him to his nurse to be taken care of,
Tom. II. p. 448.
etc.

Sir William Dugdale says, he was more sit to be eating wheat bread with his
mother, than by force of arms to be defending his patrimony of Annandale, etc.

However, the year thereafter a peace was concluded upon very honorable terms
for Scotland, Northumberland having been delivered up to prince Henry, and
Robert continued in friendship and favor with king David ever after.

He was very liberal in his donations to the religious, Monast. Angl. Charta
fundationis prioratus de Gysburn.
having in 29th of Henry I. anno 1129, pro salute animae suae, etc. ^ounded the
monastery of canons regular at Gysburn, in honor of the blessed virgin, which
he endowed with twenty carucates of land, a carucate being then sixty acres.

He gave also to the same monastery the patronage of all the churches within
the lordship of Annandale, viz. the churches of Annand, Lochmaben, Dugdales
baronage, tom. II. p. 447.
Kirkpatrick, Cumbertrees, Renpatrick, Drivesdale, Hoddam, Castlemilk, etc. cum
omnibus pertinentiis singularum ecclesiarum, etc.

He gave likeways to the monks of Whitby in Yorkshire, the church of
Middleburgh, with two carncates and two bovates of land in Newham, Ibid. p. 448.
upon condition that they should place certain monks of their convent there,
which they accordingly did, etc.

He married first Agnes, daughter of Fulco Poynell, Ibidem.
with whom he got the manor of Carleton in England, with the pertinents, etc.
By her he had issue a son,

Adam de Bruce.

He married, 2dly, Agnes Annand, by whom he got the lordship of Annandale in
Scotland, as before noticed; and by her had issue two sons,

1. William de Bruce, who carried on the line of this family, of whom
afterward.

2. Robert de Bruce, who was taken prisoner by his father at the battle of
Standard, as before observed; but we can give no account of his posterity.

This Robert, Monasticon Anglicanum, p. 142.
second lord of Skeleton in England, and first lord of Annandale in Scotland,
according to sir William Dugdale, died anno 1141; Ibid. p. 148. Et sepultus est
apud Gysburn in Cleveland, in monasterio canonicorum quod erat exfundatione
sua, etc.
but according to sir James Dalrymple anno 1143, and was buried at the
monastery of Gysburn.

And as the Bruces lords of Skeleton in England are descended of Adam, eldest
son of the above Robert, we shall briefly deduce the genealogy of that family,
from Monasticon Anglicanum, till their male line failed.

III. ADAM de BRUCE, third lord of Skeleton, first son of Robert, succeeded his
father in the lordship of Skeleton, and in the greatest part of his estate in
England. He and Ivetta his spouse, dedicated the church of Thorp to the
cathedral of York.

He enjoyed his great estate honorably and peaceably all his life, and died
20th March 1167, was buried with his father at Gysburn, and succeeded by his
son, another

IV. ADAM de BRUCE, fourth lord of Skeleton, who also possessed his inheritance
in quiet, and dying in July 1185, was interred with his fathers at Gysburn, and
left issue a son and successor,

V. PETER de BRUCE, fifth lord of Skeleton, who lived in honor and
tranquillility all his life, and died 27th January 1211, was buried at Gysburn
with his fathers, and succeeded by his son, another

VI. PETER de BRUCE, sixth lord of Skeleton, who dying at Marseilles, in his
return from the holy land, 13th September 1267, his body was brought home, and
interred at Gysburn.

He left issue a son and heir,

Peter de Bruce, -- and four daughters.

1. Agnes.

2. Lucia.

3. Margaret.

4. Laderina.

VII. PETER de BRUCE, third of that name, and seventh lord of Skeleton,
succeeded his father, and married Helena de Mildain, by whom he had no issue,
whereby (after his death) his great estate was divided amongst his four
sisters, Monast. Angl.
who were all married, and of whom several of the most considerable families in
England are descended.

The male line of Adam de Bruce, eldest son of Robert, second lord of Skeleton,
and first of Annandale, thus ending about the year 1300, the representation of
that illustrious family fell to Robert earl of Carrick, afterward king Robert
Bruce, who was the undoubted heir male, being lineally descended of the second
son of the said second Robert, to whom we now return.

III. WILLIAM de BRUCE, second son of Robert second lord of Skeleton, succeeded
to the lordship of Annandale in Scotland, in right of his mother, anno 1143,
and to the lands of Harle, Hartness, and Cleveland in England, by his father's
gift, to be held of him, and his successors, lords of Skeleton, etc.

He obtained also from king Henry II. of England, Dugdales's baronage of Eng.
v. II. p. 449.
the privilege of a weekly market, every wednesday, at the manor of Hartspole.

And to show that he looked upon his chief settlement to be in Scotland, he
quitted his father's armorial bearing, and assumed the coat of Annandale, Mr.
Nisbet, v. II. p. 19.
viz, Or, a chief and saltier, gules, etc.

He grants a charter Adamo de Carleolo (one of his vassals) of some lands in
Annandale, wherein he is designed Willielmus de Bruce, Charta penes Michaelem
Carlyle de Lochartur.
dominus vallis Annandiae, etc. The charter is without date; but, by the
witnesses, must have been granted inter 1170, and 1180.

He confirmed the donations, Chartul. of Glasgow.
which had been formerly given by his father to the monks of Gysburn, Sir Ja.
Dalrymple's coll. etc.
of all the churches within the territory of Annandale, etc.

And dying before 1183, was succeeded by his son,

IV. ROBERT de BRUCE, third lord of Annandale, a man of great valor and
magnanimity, and at the same time both pious and religious.

He ratified and confirmed to the abbacy of Gysburn all the grants of his
predecessors in these words: Sciatis me confirmasse Deo et ecclesiae Sanctae
Mariae de Gysburn donationes illas quas fecit Robertus de Brus, avus meus, et
quas idem confirmavit Willielmus de Brus pater meus, Anglia sacra in bibl.
jurid. Edin.
de ecclesia de Annand, de ecclesia de Lochmaben, etc. etc. etc..

This is also confirmed by king William the Lion, testibus Johanne de
Huntington o^ficiali Glasguensi, Henrico silio comitis David, Adam de Carle^lo,
Adam filio Herberti; and many others.

He entered into an agreement with Joceline bishop of Glasgow, with consent of
the abbot and convent of Gysburn, whereby the churches in Annandale were made
over to the sea of Glasgow, to which his son gave his consent, Chartulary of
Glasgow in archivis comitis de Panmure.
according to these words in the indenture: " Test et concedente Roberto de
Bruise filio Roberti de Bruise, etc. circa annum 1190."

He married Isabel, daughter of king William the Lion, Chron. of Melrose ad
annum 1183.
begot upon a daughter of Robert de Avenel, lord of Liddisdale, a man of great
rank, by whom he had a son,

Robert de Bruise.

After his death, his widow married to Robert de Ross, Dugdale's baronage, tom.
I. p. 546.
lord of Werk and Hamluke in England, of whom are descended the Rosses of
Hamluke, Werk, etc.

Robert, Dalrymple's appendix, p. 353.
third lord of Annandale, died anno 1191, and was succeeded by his only son,

V. ROBERT de BRUCE, fourth lord of Annandale, who, on account of his great
valor and merit, was surnamed the Noble.

He married lady Isabel, second daughter of prince David, earl of Huntington
and Chester, son of Henry prince of Scotland, Fordun and all Scotch historians.
eldest son of king David I. brother of king Malcolm IV. and king William the
Lion, by which royal marriage the Bruces of Annandale came to be among the
greatest subjects in Europe; for by this lady (who was one of the three sisters
and co-heiresses of John, surnamed Scot, earl of Huntington, and last count
palatine of Chester, whose only daughter Maud, had been married to prince
David) besides their paternal estates in both kingdoms, Robert came to be
possessed of the manors of Uritile and Hatfield, in exchange for those lands
that descended to his lady, by the death of the earls palatine her brothers,
three whereof, Dugdale's baronage of England. Rymer's foed.
Henry, David, and John, died without issue, she also brought him the lordship
of Garioch in Scotland, and the manors of Connington and Exton in England.

He died in an advanced age, anno 1245, and was interred with his ancestors in
the abbay of Gysburn, under a stately monument, leaving issue by the said lady
Isabel a son and successor,

VI. ROBERT de BRUCE, fifth Lord of Annandale, who, together with John Cummin,
Rymer's foed. Dugdale, vol. II. 450. Sir Ja. Balfour, etc.
were sent to England with auxiliaries, to the assistance of king Henry III.
against the barons, and were both taken prisoners with king Henry and prince
Edward, anno 1264.

After the death of queen Margaret, daughter of the king of Norway, grandchild
and undoubted heiress of king Alexander III. this Robert claimed the crown in
right of his mother.

It was alleged, among many other arguments in his behalf, that it was
customary in Scotland for the brother of the last king to be preferred before
his son; and produced for an example, that Donald, Ibidem. Abercrombie etc.
brother of Kenneth Macalpine, attained the crown preferable to Constantine,
his brother Kenneth's son.

That king Alexander II. (failing heirs of his own body) looked upon Robert
Bruce as his heir, even to the knowledge of Dornagild, his mother's elder
sister, who was then alive, and assented to it, at least did not contradict it,
having no male issue of her own.

And that it was a constant maxim in Scotland, Rymer. tom. II. p. 542. etc. etc.
for the son of the second daughter to be preferred to the heir female of the
eldest daughter. Prynne's coll. vol. III. p. 516, 517.


And further, that king Alexander III. acknowledged this Robert to be next heir
to the crown, failing heirs of his own body; all which he offered to prove by
living witnesses.

But as that subject has been largely handled by several able historians, it is
needless to insist further on it here, since it is well known how king Edward
of England determined the controversy.

Robert, the competitor, married Isabel de Clare, daughter of Gilbert de Clare,
earl of Gloucester and Hartfield, by whom he had three sons and one daughter.

1. Robert de Bruce.

2. Sir Bernard Bruce, who got from his father the lands of Connington in
Huntington-shire, Sir William Dugdale's baronage of England.
and Exton in Rutland-shire, whose male line failed in the end of the reign of
king Edward III.

3. John, ancestor of the Bruces of Clackmannan. Vide Title Elgin and Kincardin.

His daughter Christian, married to Patrick Dunbar earl of March, one of the
competitors for the crown.

As Robert Bruce thought that John Baliol, in the competition for the crown,
was unjustly preferred to him, so he could never be prevailed upon, Baronage of
England. Chron. Walteri abbatis de Gysburn.
either to give up his title, or to acknowledge king Edward to be superior, or
John Baliol to be king of Scotland, but in great discontent retired to England,
where he did not remain long, but returned to his castle of Lochmaben, where he
died, and was buried with his ancestors in the abbay of Gysburn, anno 1295.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. ROBERT de BRUCE, sixth lord of Annandale, afterward earl of Carrick,
who, in his younger years, together with Adam de Kilconath (in right of his
wife, earl of Carrick) accompanied Edward prince of England, He died in 1270,
by the chron. of Melross, and in 1272. by Sir William Dugdale.
and king Lewis I. of France to the holy war, where, by his courage and
conduct, he gained immortal honor, and where the earl of Carrick died, anno
1272, as before noticed.

Robert, after his return, retired to England, where he had a considerable
estate; and though he never would submit to, or acknowledge John Baliol to be
king of Scotland, he continued in the English interest for some time, and with
his son Robert (afterward king of Scotland) contributed greatly to the English
gaining the battle of Dunbar against the loyalists, anno 1296.

He married Margaret, countess of Carrick, daughter and sole heiress of Neil
earl of Carrick, and widow of the foresaid Adam de Kilconath, Chronicle of
Melross.
earl of Carrick, in whose right he also became earl of Carrick, and by her had
issue five sons and seven daughters.

1. Robert Bruce, afterward king of Scotland.

2. Edward Bruce, a brave soldier, who was very serviceable to his brother in
his wars against the English. He was king of Ireland, and was killed at the
battle of Dundalk, anno 1318. Abercromb. and Stuart's history of the royal
family.
He left no lawful issue, but several natural sons, viz. Robert, Alexander, and
Thomas, successively earls of Carrick, of whom afterward.

3. Neil de Bruce, who was taken prisoner by king Edward, sent to London, and
put to death.

4. Thomas,

5. Alexander.

The said Thomas and Alexander were both taken prisoners by Duncan Macdougal in
Galloway, Ibidem.
and put to death by king Edward.

1. Daughter, lady Isabel, married, 1st, to Thomas Randulph of Strathdon, lord
high chamberlain of Scotland, whose son, Thomas Randulph, earl of Murray, lord
of Annandale and the Isle of Man, Several charters in the public register.
guardian of Scotland, etc. was one of the greatest heroes of his time. She
married, 2dly, the earl of Athole; and, 3dly, Alexander Bruce.

2. Daughter, lady Mary, married, 1st, to Sir Neil Campbell, ancestor of the
duke of Argyle; Ibidem.
and, 2dly, to sir Alexander Fraser, lord high chamberlain of Scotland.

3. Lady Christian, married, 1st, to Gratney, earl of Mar; 2dly, to sir
Christopher Seton of Seton, Ibidem, and all Scotch historians.
ancestor of the family of Winton; and, 3dly, to sir Andrew Moray of Bothwell,
chancellor and governor of Scotland.

4. Lady Mathilda, Crawsurd and Stewart.
married to Hugh, earl of Ross.

5. Lady Elizabeth, Ibidem.
married to sir William Dishington of Ardross.

6. Lady Margaret, Ibidem.
married to sir William Carlyle of Torthorald.

7. Lady --, Ibidem.
married to David lord Brechin.

He died anno 1303, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. ROBERT BRUCE, earl of Carrick, seventh lord of Annandale, etc.

In 1297, he joined sir William Wallace; but having large possessions in
England, he submitted to king Edward, and fought against the Scotch army at
Falkirk, anno 1298, where he had a memorable interview with sir William
Wallace, narrated at large by several good historians.

In 1299, he revolted from king Edward, and was made one of the guardians of
Scotland, but was again reconciled to Edward in 1304.

In 1305, he was employed by king Edward, with some other Scotchmen, to settle
the disordered state of their country: the following year he determined to
assert his just title to the crown, was joined by the loyalists or patriots,
and crowned at Scoon on palm sunday, the 27th of March 1306.

Soon thereafter he relieved, and entirely redeemed his distressed country from
the usurpations and tyranny of a foreign power; but as the great actions of
this hero are fully set forth, and recorded by many able historians, and do not
properly fall within the plan of this work, we shall only add, that no age or
country ever produced a man of more eminent qualities, Abercrombie and all
other Scotch historians.
either for peace or war, than the famous and renowned king Robert Bruce.

He married, 1st, lady Isabel, daughter of Donald, and sister of Gratney, earl
of Mar, by whom he had lady Marjory, who was married to Walter, lord high
steward of Scotland, then the greatest man in the kingdom. Their son Robert was
afterward king of Scotland; Ibidem.
and their daughter Egidia, or Giles, married to sir James Lindsay of Crawfurd,
and had issue.

King Robert married, 2dly, Elizabeth, daughter of Henry de Bure, Abercromb.
earl of Ulsterby, by whom he had issue a son,

David, his heir to the crown, -- and three daughters. Chart. in public. regist.


1. Margaret, married to William earl of Sutherland, and had issue.

2. Mathilda, married to Thomas de Issack, whose daughter, Jean, was married to
John de Ergadia, Rymer's soed.
lord of Lorn, of whom are descended the lords of Lorn and Innermeath, the
Stewarts, carls of Athole, Buchan, Traquair, the lord of Gairntully, etc.

3. Elizabeth, Chart. penes Mr. Oliphant of Gask.
married to sir Walter Oliphant, ancestor of lord Oliphant.

King Robert had likeways a natural son, called Robert Bruce, who was a brave
and gallant man, and highly esteemed by his father, who, in many charters,
designs him dilectus filius meus, Chart. penes Mr. Lockhart of Lee.
etc. He was also designed dominus de Liddel or Liddisdale; and it is not
improbable, that it was by his daughter and heiress, that the estate and
lordship of Liddisdale came to that great patriot sir William Douglas, dominus
de Liddisdale.

This Robert was killed at the battle of Duplin, Fordun, etc.
fighting in defense of his king and country, anno 1332.

King Robert Bruce died in June 1329, and was succeeded by his son,

IX. King DAVID BRUCE, who was not then nine years of age. He was a prince
endowed with many excellent qualities, of great courage and conduct; yet he was
not always successful. Abercromb.
He retired to France after the battle of Halidonhill, in 1333, where he
remained till 1342.

After his return, he made several expeditions into England, (to make a
diversion in favor of the French) with very good success; but, at the fatal
battle of Durham, he was wounded and taken prisoner, anno 1346.

He was detained long in England, though many treaties were set on foot by his
faithful and loyal subjects for his liberty, which, at last, Rymer's foed. and
all Scotch historians.
was brought about, and accomplished for a ransom of 100,000 merks Sterling,
anno 1357.

And as the particular transactions of this long reign are fully recorded by
many historians, to these we refer our readers.

He married, 1st, Joanna or Jean, daughter of king Edward II. Autograph. penes
com. de Errol, ad annum 1366.
of England; 2dly, he married the widow of sir John Logie of that ilk; but died
without issue in the castle of Edinburgh, on 22d February 1371, which ended the
male-line of the body of king Robert Bruce, Crawf. peerage, and hist. of the
royal family.
formerly earl of Carrick.

Upon king Robert's accession to the crown, he bestowed the title of earl of
Carrick upon his valiant and faithful brother Edward king of Ireland, Charta in
rotul Roberti I.
who was third earl of Carrick of the Brucian race; and he being killed, as
above, without lawful issue, the king bestowed that earldom upon Edward's
eldest natural son, Robert Bruce, and his heirs-male, he being fourth earl;
and, as he was killed at the battle of Duplin, anno 1332, without male-issue,
the earldom went to his brother,

ALEXANDER, fifth earl of Carrick, who was killed at the battle of Halidonhill,
Ibid. History of the royal family.
anno 1333, leaving only one daughter,

HELEN, Chart. in pub, archiv.
countess and heiress of Carrick, married to sir William Cunningham of
Kilmawers; but she dying likeways without issue, the earldom went to Edward's
third son,

THOMAS, earl of Carrick, Stuart's hist. of the royal family.
who joined Robert Stewart, guardian of Scotland, in 1344, but died also
without issue, whereby the earldom of Carrick fell to the crown.

And as that title was never after conferred upon any but the sons of our
kings, till king Charles I. bestowed it upon James lord Kincleven, we shall
therefore briefly mention those who enjoyed it.

I. JOHN STEWART, eldest son of king Robert II. by Elizabeth More, his first
wife, was created earl of Carrick by king David Bruce. He was afterward king
of Scotland, by the name of king Robert III.

II. DAVID, prince of Scotland, and duke of Rothsay, eldest son of king Robert
III. was created earl of Carrick by his father, but died before him without
issue.

III. Prince JAMES, eldest son of king James III. was created earl of Carrick
by his father, and was afterward king of Scotland, viz. James IV.

IV. ALEXANDER STEWART, fourth son of king James IV. was created earl of
Carrick and duke of Rothsay, and died young, anno 1516.

V. HENRY, prince of Scotland, eldest son of king James VI. was created earl of
Carrick and duke of Rothsay, and afterward Prince of Wales. He died before his
father, without issue, universally lamented, anno 1612, in the 19th year of his
age.

STEWART Earl of CARRICK.
HAVING already given an account of all who enjoyed the ancient and honorable
title of CARRICK, before it was conferred upon John lord Kincleven; and as that
title is now claimed by a baron of England, as being descended of this John, we
proceed to deduce his descent from his immediate ancestor,

I. Sir ROBERT STEWART of Strathdon, Stuart's hist. of the royal family. p. 104.
a natural son of king James V. by Eupham. daughter of Alexander lord
Elphingstone, was created earl of Orkney by king James VI. anno 1581.

He married lady Jean Kennedy, daughter of Gilbert earl of Cassilis, by whom he
had four sons and four daughters.

1. Patrick, earl of Orkney, his successor.

2. John, afterward earl of Carrick.

3. Sir James Stewart.

4. Sir Robert.

1st daughter, lady Mary.

2. Lady Jean.

3. Lady Elizabeth.

4. Lady --.

They were all married. Vide Title Orkney.

II. JOHN, second son of Robert earl of Orkney, being a man of parts, was in
great favor with king James VI. who created him lord Kincleven, Crawfurd's
peerage of Scotland.
anno 1607.

And being in no less favor with king Charles I. was, by that prince, further
dignified with the title of earl of Carrick, anno 1633.

He married lady Elizabeth Howard, Colin's Peerage of England, vol. III. p. 129.
daughter of Charles earl of Nottinghame, and died in 1652, leaving issue only
one daughter,

III. Lady MARGARET STEWART, who was married to sir Matthew Men's, Ibidem.
knight of the bath, by whom she had only one child.

IV. MARGARET MEN'S, who was married to sir John Heath of Braystade in Kent,
Ibidem.
knight, to whom she had no sons, and but one daughter.

V. MARGARET HEATH, who was married to George Verny, lord Willoughby of Brook.

In consequence of which marriage, the family of Brook now claim the title of
earl of Carrick, Ibidem.
this Margaret Heath being the lineal, and only representative of John last
earl of Carrick, her great grandfather.

George Verny, lord Willoughby of Brook, by the said Margaret Heath, Ibid. p.
130.
left issue three sons and one daughter.

1. Thomas, who died before his father, without male issue.

2. Richard, his father's successor.

3. John Verny; Esquire; ancestor of John now lord Willoughby of Brook, of whom
afterward.

Their daughter, Margaret, was married to Anthony Duncomb, Esquire; afterward lord
Feversham.

VI. RICHARD, second son of George lord Willoughby of Brook, succeeded his
father, and married Margaret, daughter of Mr. Nehemiah Walker of Monmouthshire,
by whom he had only one son,

George, Ibidem.
who died an infant.

And he dying without issue, in 1752, was succeeded in his estate and honors
by his nephew John Peyto, son of his uncle John Verny, to whom we now return.

VI. JOHN VERNY, third son of George lord Willoughby of Brook, Ibidem, vol. V.
p. 59.
by Margaret Heath, being bred to the law, was appointed one of the king's
council, anno 1727.

He was member of parliament for Downton, in com. de Wilts, and one of his
majesty's justices for South Wales.

In 1733, he was appointed chief justice of Chester, and in 1738, master of the
rolls, and one of the privy council; and died in 1741, having married Abigail,
only daughter of Edward Hartly of Eyewood, in the county of Hereford, Esquire; one
of the auditors of the impress, by whom he had a son,

VII. JOHN PEYTO VERNY, who succeeded to his uncle George, anno 1752, as before
mentioned, and is now lord Willoughby of Brook.

KENNEDY Earl of CASSILIS.
THE progenitors of this noble and illustrious family, were considerable
proprietors, and had large possessions in the west of Scotland, (particularly
in Carrick) before sirnames were much used in this country.

That a family of rank and figure in Carrick, were the undoubted ancestors of
the KENNEDIES of Cassilis, and that they assumed their surname from their being
head or chief of that family, is sufficiently instructed by the following
connection of authentic documents and charters from father to son: so that these
historians, who allege that the first of this family came from Ireland, must
have been in a mistake.

I. DUNCANUS de Carrick flourished in the reign of Malcolm IV. who succeeded to
the crown of Scotland, anno 1153. Being possessed of a considerable estate in
Carrick, he and his posterity were for some time designed by that name.

He left issue a son and successor,

II. NICHOLAUS de Carrick, who made a donation to the nuns of North-berwick of
the patronage of the church of St. Cuthbert at Maybole, in the reign of king
William the Lion, who succeeded to the crown in 1165, and died anno 1214.

In this donation he is designed Nicholaus de Carrick filius Duncani, Append.
to Nisb. 2d vol. p. 39 et chart. in pub. arch.
etc.

He was succeeded by his son,

III. ROLANDUS de Carrick, who, in the reign of king Alexander II. obtained a
charter from Nigellus earl of Carrick, of the bailiary of Carrick, to be caput
totius prosapiae suae (or chief of his kindred) and to have the command of all
the men in Carrick, under the said earl and his successors, etc. to him and his
heirs for ever; which is afterwrds confirmed by king Alexander III. the 27th
year of his reign, anno 1276; in which he is designed Rolandus de Carrick,
Ibidem.
filius Nicolai, filii Duncani, etc. All which is fully narrated and confirmed
by king Robert II. Chart. in pub. archiv.
anno regni secundo.

This family, being evidently possessed of a large estate, and head of a
considerable tribe or clan, began to be called Kennadies, from the Galic or
Celtic word Kean-na-ty, which signifies head of the house, or chief of the
clan; and in that country the word Kennady is called Kennaty to this day.

There are several charters in the records, wherein the same persons are
designed Carrick in the body, and Kennady on the margin, in the reign of king
Robert II. Ibidem.
by which it is certain that Carrick and Kennady wete promiscuously used by the
heads of this family for a considerable time, though their cadets generally
took the name of Kennady.

Roland was succeeded by his son,

IV. Sir GILBERT de CARRICK, who, in several authentic writs, is designed son
of Roland, particularly in a submission of a difference betwixt him and the
nuns of Northberwick, in which Robert Bruce, earl of Carrick, father of king
Robert Bruce, and Robert bishop of Glasgow were arbiters. He is therein
designed Gilbertus de Carrick, miles, filius Rolandi, etc. and his seal, which
is thereto appended, has the very same shield of arms which the family of
Cassilis carries at this day; which shows, that they had the double tressure
sloree, Nisbet's append. et cart. in pub. arch.
and contraflorce, with flower de lisses to their arms, long before they
matched with the royal family.

This sir Gilbert was often designed Kennady, and had lands in his possession
of the same designation, which appears by the following charter of confirmation
from the earl of Lennox to his son,

V. Sir GILBERT de CARRICK, or Kennady, who succeeded him. There is a charter
of Malcolm earl of Lennox, Chartul. of Levenax, penes MacFarlane, p. 70.
etc. facta Gilberto de Carrick, filio et haeredi domini Gilberti de Carrick,
militis, de terris de Buchmonyn, Kennady, Cromiearne, Blairsode, etc. to which
Malcolm, son of the above earl, sir Adam More, and Gilbert Drummond, are
witnesses.

This sir Gilbert died about the 1290, and was succeeded by his son,

VI. DUNCAN de CARRICK, or Kennady, who made a donation of his patronage of the
church of Kilbryde in Carrick to the nuns of North-berwick, Nisbet's app^nd. p.
39.
wherein he is designed Duncanus filius domini Gilberti de Carrick, militis,
etc.

As he had begun to drop the name of Carrick, and was more frequently designed
by the name of Kennedy, as caput totius prosapiae, so the cadets of the family,
who were now become numerous, followed his example, laid aside the name of
Carrick altogether, and embraced that of Kennedy, of which there are many
examples in our records; but whether any of them were brothers or sons of this
Duncan, I cannot determine, viz.

Alexander Kennedy was chancellor to John Baliol, Remarks on Ragman's roll, p
20.
anno 1295.

John Kennedy swore fealty to king Edward I. Prynne's collections, vol. III. p.
652.
anno 1296.

Hugh Kennedy did the same. Ibid. p. 658.


Fergusius Kennedy, etc. is to be found in the chartulary of Levenax in the
beginning of king Robert Bruce's reign, Chartul. of Levenax, p. 71.
etc. and probably a son of Duncan.

Duncan was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. Sir GILBERT de CARRICK, or Kennedy, who obtained a charter from king
Robert Bruce, which contains a full remission on for his surrendering the
castle of Lochdown to the English; Chart. in pub. archiv.
in which charter he is designed Gilbertus de Carrick, miles, filius Duncani,
etc. ante 1319.

By the same charter, king Robert again receives him into favor, restores him
to the government of the castle of Lochdown, and all the lands thereto
belonging, which have been part of the property of Cassilis ever since. The
witnesses are Edwardus de Brus, Jacobus senescallus Scotiae, Thomas Ranulf,
Joannes de Menteith, Nigellus Campbell, Jacobus dominus de Douglas, Alexander
Fraser, etc. which is afterward confirmed by king Robert II. Ibidem.
anno regni secundo, 1372.

He got also possession of the lands of Dunnure, which afterward became their
chief title; and he was the last of this family who was designed by the name of
Carrick.

He left issue a son and successor,

VIII. Sir JOHN KENNEDY of Dunnure, who, Ibidem.
in many authentic writs, is designed filius Gilberti de Carrick.

He was a man of good parts, was often employed in negotiations of the greatest
importance, and always acquitted himself with fidelity and honor.

He was one of the commissioners appointed to treat with the English at
Newcastle, about king David's redemption, Rymer's foed. tom. V. p. 791.
anno 1354, though it was not completed till 1357.

He got a charter from king David II. Chart. in archiv. regis David.
of several lands in comitatu de Carrick infra vicecomitatum de Air, anno 1360.

He likeways acquired from Marjory, daughter of sir John Montgomery, knight,
the lands and barony of Cassilis, which has been in the family's possession
ever since. The same was ratified by a charter from king David II. Ibidem.
anno 1362.

In the reign of said king David, he founded a church at Maybole, in Carrick,
with a chaplainry, which he largely endowed. The foundation charter, in which
he is designed Johannes Kennedy dominus de Dunnonure, bears, pro salubri statu
mei, Mariae uxoris meae, et liberorum suorum quamdiu egerimus in humanis, et
pro anintabus nostris, etc. to which his seal is appended; also sigillum domini
Gilberti Kennedy, militis, filii sui et haeredis: all which is narrated at
large in a charter of confirmation of king Robert II. testibus Johanne,
primogenito suo, comite de Carrick, Roberto comite de Menteith, Chart. in pub.
archiv. and Mr. Hay's vindication of Elizabeth More, p. 87.
Willielmo comite de Douglas, Johanne de Carrick cancellario Scotiae, Willielmo
de Keith marescallo, Jacobo de Lindsay, Roberto de Erskine militibus, etc.
dated at Dundonald, anno regni primo.

He obtained, from said king Robert, a charter medietat. Chart. in pub. archiv.
baroniae de Dalrymple infra vicecomitatum de Air, quae fuit Malcolmi filii
Adae de Dalrymple, etc. anno 1371.

Also a charter medietat. baroniae de Dalrymple, etc. Ibidem.
cum pertinen. quae fuit Hugonis filii Rolandi de Dalrymple, etc. anno 1377.

By said Mary, his spouse, he left issue three sons.

1. Sir Gilbert.

2. Sir Hugh Kennedy of Ardstincher, Crawfurd's notes upon Buchanan.
who acquired great reputation and honor, for his gallant behavior in the
French wars, against the English, under the command of John Stewart, earl of
Buchan; for which he was honored by the king of France with his arms, Nisbet,
v. II. p. 59.
viz. Azure, three flower de lisses, or, which he and his successors marshalled
in the first and fourth quarters, with those of Kennedy in the second and
third. Mr. Nisbet further says, that the Kennedies of Bargenie, Kirkhill and
Binning, in the shire of Air, are descended of this Sir Hugh, because they
carry the flower de lisses in their arms, Ibidem.
which no other family of the name of Kennedy does; and that the Kennedies of
Bargeny were long proprietors of the barony of Ardstincher, which was the
designation and inheritance of this sir Hugh, etc.

3. John, who appears to have been ancestor of the Kennedies of Culzean. John
Kennedy of Culzean, who got a charter from king James II. Chart. in pub. archiv.
of several lands in Airshire, anno 1449, was his son or grandson, which estate
afterward returned to the family.

Sir John was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. Sir GILBERT KENNEDY of Dunnonure, who, when very young, was one of the
noble Scotch heirs that were sent hostages to England for king David's ransom,
Rymer's foed. tom. VI. p. 35. and 109.
anno 1357.

He got a charter from king Robert II. Chart. inpub. archiv.
villae de Kirkintulloch, dated anno 1373.

He was a man of singular merit, and in great favor with king Robert III. who
first conferred upon him the honor of knighthood, and afterward gave him
grants of a great many lands in the earldom of Carrick, Chart. in pub. archiv.
then in the crown.

There is a confirmation of Duncan earl of Lennox, of a charter granted by
dominus Gilbertus Kennedy, dominus de Dunnure, miles, terrarum de Buchmonyn,
Kennedy, etc. in favors of John Kennedy son of Fergus, etc. anno 1393; to
which dominus Johannes de Maxwell miles, Chartul. of Levenax, p. 71.
dominus de Pollock, Alexander de Levenax, Gilbert de Cochrane, etc. are
witnesses.

He married, 1st, Mary, daughter of sir James Sandilands of Calder, Crawfurd's
notes on Buchanan.
by whom he had two sons.

1. Gilbert, who died in the French service without issue.

2. Thomas, Crawfurd's Peerage, p. 73.
who, according to Mr. Crawfurd, was ancestor of the Kennedies of Bargeny; but
as I have not seen the old writs of that family, I shall not pretend to
determine, whether they are descended of this Thomas, or of sir Hugh of
Ardstincher, as before noticed, though the former appears to me most probable.

Sir Gilbert married, 2dly, Marian, daughter of sir Robert Maxwell of
Calderwood, by whom he had a son,

X. Sir JAMES KENNEDY, who carried on the line of this family, and obtained
from king Robert III. a charter of confirmation of the bailiary of Carrick, to
be caput totius prosapiae, and to have the command of the militia of Carrick,
Chart. in pub. archiv. and Nisbet's append. p. 39.
etc. the king's charter bears, dilecto consanguineo suo Jacobo Kennedy,
militi, etc.

He married lady Mary Stewart, daughter of king Robert III. countess dowager of
Angus, and got a confirmation from the same king, now his father-in-law, of the
lands and barony of Dalrymple, to him and Mary Stewart, the king's daughter,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
his spouse, dated at Dundonald anno 1405.

This sir James was unhappily engaged in a quarrel with his elder brother
Gilbert, in which sir James lost his life (his father being then alive) leaving
issue, by the said lady Mary Stewart, two sons.

1. Gilbert, afterward lord Kennedy.

2. James, who devoted himself to the church, entered into holy orders, and
became a great ornament to his profession. For true piety, and universal
benevolence, he was exceeded by none. Mr. Keith's catalogue of bishops, p. 18.
He was promoted to the sea of Dunkeld anno 1438, and translated to the
bishopric of St. Andrews, anno 1440. He was one of the privy council to king
James II. and chancellor of Scotland in anno 1444.

He was one of the regents of the kingdom in king James III.'s minority, and
had the chief direction of all state affairs, which he managed with such
prudence and discretion, that his whole conduct was universally approven.

He founded St. Salvator's college in St. Andrews, and nobly endowed it. His
other acts of piety and munificence, are too numerous to be here narrated.

He died on 10th May 1466, and was interred in the noble chapel of St.
Salvator's college, in a beautiful and stately monument, which he erected
himself.

We shall sum up this great man's character from Buchanan, who says, Crawfurd's
peerage Buchanan, etc. etc. etc.
"that he surpassed all men in point of authority; that his prudence was held
in the highest estimation; that he was lamented at his death as a public
parent, etc."

XI. GILBERT, first son of sir James Kennedy, and lady Many Stewart, succeeded
his grandfather in all his lands, and obtained from his uncle king James I. a
grant of the hereditary constablewick of the castle of Lochdown, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
dated 14th May 1430.

He obtained from king James II. a charter, constituting him heretable bail^e
of the earldom of Carrick, Ibidem.
caput totius prosapiae suae, etc. to him and his heirs for ever.

He got also from the same prince, Ibid. inter 1440 and 1452.
charters of the lands and barony of Cassilis, and a great many other lands,
too numerous to be narrated here, which shows what a vast estate the family was
then possessed of. He was afterward dignified with the title of lord Kennedy,
Ibidem.
anno 1450.

He was nominated one of the six regents in the minority of king James III.
though his brother the bishop had the chief management of all public affairs.

He married Agnes, daughter of Herbert lord Maxwell, by whom he had a son,

John, lord Kennedy, -- and two daughters.

1. Catharine, married to Alexander lord Montgomery, Ibidem.
ancestor of the earl of Eglington.

2. Marian, Ibidem.
married to sir John Wallace of Craigie.

He was succeeded by his only son,

XII. JOHN, second lord Kennedy, who obtained a charter from king James II.
Johanni Kennedy silio et haeredi dilecti consunguinei nostri Gilberti domini
Kennedy, Ibidem.
terrarum de Garbrach Bordilands, etc. anno 1459.

He was a man of good parts, was of the privy council to king James III. and
was one of the commissioners appointed to treat of a peace with the English,
Rymer. tom. XII. p. 241. and 267.
anno 1484.

He married, 1st, Jean, daughter of Alexander lord Montgomery, by whom he had a
son,

David, afterward earl of Cassilis.

He married, 2dly, lady Elizabeth Gordon, daughter of George earl of Huntly,
widow of William earl of Errol, Chart. in pub. archiv.
by whom he had a son,

Alexander, ancestor of the Kennedies of Gervanmains and Barquhanny, -- and a
daughter, Ibid. ad an. 1495.


Jean, married to Archibald earl of Angus.

He died in 1508, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. DAVID, third lord Kennedy, who, being a man of great honor, courage and
intrepidity, was in high favor with king James IV. from whom he obtained a
charter, -- officium balivatus de Carrick, -- dilecto consanguineo suo Davidi
Kennedy militi et haeredi apparenti dilecti consanguinei sui Johannis domini
Kennedy, Ibidem.
etc. anno 1489.

And a charter of the lands of Bagry and Borlands, Ibidem.
to him and Agnes Borthwick his spouse, and the longest liver, etc.

Also a charter of the lands and barony of Cassilis. Ibidem.


He was likeways one of the privy council to king James IV. Production of the
decree of ranking, ann. 1606. in the lawiers library Edin.
who was pleased further to dignify him with the title of earl of Cassilis,
anno 1509, or inter November 1509, and March 1510.

He married, 1st, Agnes, daughter of William lord Borthwick, by whom he had a
son,

Gilbert, his heir.

He married, 2dly, lady Margaret Boyd, daughter of Thomas earl of Arran, by
lady Mary Stewart, daughter of king James II. but by her he had no issue.

He was killed in the service of his country, at the battle of Flowdon, on 9th
September 1513, and succeeded by his son,

XIV. GILBERT, second earl of Cassilis, who being a man of great
accomplishments, was often employed in foreign negotiations. He was appointed
one of the privy council to king James V. Rymer, tom. XIII. p. 531. and tom.
XIV. p. 20.
and was sent ambassador to England, with the earls of Lennox and Glencairn, to
treat of a peace, anno 1516, and again in 1524.

He joined in the association, with several other noble lords, to rescue the
king out of the hands of the earl of Angus for; which he suffered greatly, and
was put to several hardships by the prevailing party of that time.

He married Isabel, Crawfurd's Peerage and Scots comp.
daughter of Archibald earl of Angus, by whom he had two sons.

1. Gilbert, earl of Cassilis.

2. Quintin, abbot of Crossragwell, who was a man of singular piety, Crawfurd's
Peerage and Scots comp.
and great austerity of manners; and dying in 1564, was canonized for a saint.

The earl was murdered at Prestick, on 22d December 1527, and succeeded by his
eldest son,

XV. GILBERT, third earl of Cassilis, who was highly esteemed by king James V.
and was one of the Scotch nobles that accompanied that prince to the battle of
Solway, anno 1542, where he was taken prisoner, and carried to London, with
many more of his countrymen. Rymer. tom. XIV. p. 796.
He was soon afterward released for a ransom of one thousand pounds sterling.

When a prisoner, he had the opportunity of conversing frequently with king
Henry VIII. who had a particular friendship for him, and showed him several
marks of his favor, by which he gained him over to his party; and he used all
his interest to promote a match betwixt queen Mary of Scotland, and prince
Edward of England, which king Henry had very much at heart, but could not get
effectuate.

In 1554, Lives of the officers of state.
the earl was made lord high treasurer of Scotland, in which office he
acquitted himself with honor and fidelity.

He was afterward one of the Scotch peers that were sent to France, to assist
at the marriage of queen Mary with the dauphine, which accordingly they saw
accomplished, Ibidem.
on the 24th April 1558.

He married --, Crawfurd's Peerage and Scots comp.
daughter of --, by whom he had issue two sons and two daughters.

1. Gilbert, fourth earl of Cassilis.

2. Sir Thomas of Culzean, ancestor of the present sir Thomas Kennedy of
Culzean baronet, Chart. in pub. archiv.
of whom afterward.

1. Daughter, lady Jean, married to Robert Stewart earl of Orkney.

2. Lady Catharine, married to Patrick Vaus of Banburrow, knight.

The earl died at Dieppe, in his return from France, Spotswood's church hist.
28th November 1558, not without suspicion of poison.

XVI. GILBERT, fourth earl of Cassilis, succeeded, and was appointed one of the
privy council to queen Mary, anno 1562, and continued long faithful and steady
to her interest.

Upon the breaking out of the civil war, he joined the queen's sorces, Ibid.
Crawfurd's peerage, Scots compend.
and was at the battle of Langside, where her majesty's troops were entirely
defeat, anno 1568; but he afterward submitted to the authority of the young
king.

He got a charter from king James VI. Chart. in pub: archiv.
Gilberto comiti de Cassilis domino Kennedy, etc. of a great many lands, anno
1575, and 1576.

He married Margaret Lion, daughter of John lord Glammis, by whom he had two
sons.

1. John, earl of Cassilis.

2. Gilbert, designed master of Cassilis, whose son John succeeded to the
earldom, as will be shown hereafter.

He died in 1576, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVII. JOHN, fifth earl of Cassilis, who, being young at his father's death,
was carefully educated by his uncle and guardian sir Thomas Kennedy of Culzean;
and was made lord high treasurer of Scotland, Spotiswood's church hist.
in the room of Walter lord Blantyre, anno 1599.

He obtained a charter from king James VI. Chart. in pub. archiv.
of a great many lands, anno 1599.

He married Jean, daughter of James, lord Fleming, lady dowager of Thirlestane;
but dying without issue, anno 1615, his estate and honors devolved upon his
nephew,

XVIII. JOHN, sixth earl of Cassilis, son of Gilbert the master, who was second
son of Gilbert, fourth earl of Cassilis, before mentioned.

He obtained a charter from king James VI. terrarum de Inch cum piscariis in
lacu, Ibidem.
with many other lands, anno 1622.

He was a man of great honor and integrity, and endowed with many excellent
qualities.

He adhered firmly to the interest of king Charles I. during all the time of
the civil war; and after the murder of the king, he was, with the earl of
Lothian, lord Burleigh, and others, sent commissioners to king Charles II. then
at Breda, upon which his majesty came to Scotland, and was crowned at Scoon,
anno 1651.

After the battle of Worcester, when all the loyalists were dispersed, the earl
of Cassilis could never be pravailed upon to make the smallest concession or
acknowledgment to Oliver Cromwell, Bishop Burnet's history.
even after he was lord protector.

He married, 1st, lady Jean Hamilton, Daughter of Thomas earl of Haddington,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
by whom he had a son, and two daughters, viz.

James, lord Kennedy, who was put in see of the estate, by a charter under the
great seal; but he died before his father without issue.

1. Daughter, lady Margaret, married to docter Gilbert Burnet, bishop of Sarum.

2. Lady Catharine, married to William lord Cochran, son and heir apparent of
William, earl of Dundonald.

He married, 2dly, lady Margaret Hay, daughter of William, earl of Errol, by
whom he had a son,

John, earl of Cassilis, -- and two daughters.

1. Lady Mary Kennedy.

2. Lady Elizabeth.

He died anno 1668, and was succeeded by his son,

XIX. JOHN, Retour in chancery.
seventh earl of Cassilis, who was served heir to his father and brother, anno
1669.

He got a new charter of all his lands upon his own resignation, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
anno 1671. -- He came early into the revolution, and was appointed one of the
privy council to king William, Crawfurd's Peerage, and Scots comp.
anno 1689, and soon afterward was made one of the lords of the treasury.

He married, 1st, lady Susan, daughter of James, duke of Hamilton, by whom he
had a son, -- John, lord Kennedy, and a daughter,

Lady Anne, married to John earl of Ruglen, of whom William, now earl of March,
is heir and representative.

He married, 2dly, Elizabeth, daughter of -- Foix, Esquire; by whom he had a son,
-- James, who died without issue, and a daughter,

Lady Elizabeth.

He died in 1702.

XX. JOHN, lord Kennedy, first son and apparent heir of John seventh earl of
Cassilis, married Elizabeth, daughter of -- Hutchison, Esquire; by whom he had a
son,

John, his heir.

And dying anno 1700, was succeeded by his son,

XXI. JOHN, who succeeded also to his grandfather, anno 1702. He was the
eighth earl of Cassilis, and governor of the castle of Dumbarton, etc.

He married lady Susan Hamilton, daughter of John, earl of Selkirk and Ruglen,
and died without issue, anno 1759, which ended the male line of Gilbert, eldest
son of the third earl of Cassilis, and John, the eighth earl, is, by his own
destination, succeeded in his estate by sir Thomas Kennedy of Culzean, his
undoubted heir male; but the honors being claimed both by him and the earl of
March, the heir of line, the controversy is now depending, and will soon be
determined by the parliament of Great Britain.

And as the male heir enjoys the estate, and carries on the line of the family,
being lineally descended from sir Thomas Kennedy of Culzean, before mentioned,
to him we now return.

XVI. Sir THOMAS KENNEDY of Culzean, second son of Gilbert, third earl of
Cassilis, married Elizabeth, daughter of -- M'Gill of Cranston-Riddel, which
appears by charter under the great seal, domino Thomae Kennedy de Culzean et
dominae Elizabethae M'Gill suae sponsae, Chart. in pub. archiv.
et haeredibus masculis, etc. terrarum baroniae de Culzean, Ibidem.
etc. jacen. in balivatu de Carrick, et vicecomitatu de Air, super resignatione
Davidis M'Gill junioris de Cranston-Riddel, etc. etc. dated 23d February 1591.

And by another charter, Thomae Kennedy de Culzean, militi, et dom. Elizabethae
M'Gill sponsae suae, et haeredibus masculis, super cartam illis factamper
Johannem com. de Cassilis terarum baroniae de Culzean, etc. dated 26th August
1597.

By the said Elizabeth M'Ggil he had issue two sons.

1. James, his successor.

2. Alexander, who carried on the line of this family.

XVII. Precept of clare constat, etc. of the lands of Culzean, etc. dated 5.
Sept. 1606.
JAMES KENNEDY of Culzean, first son of sir Thomas, married Anne Stewart of the
family of --, by whom he had a son,

James, who died without issue, whereby the succession devolved upon,

XVII. Sir ALEXANDER KENNEDY of Culzean, second son of sir Thomas, of which
there are many documents, viz.

Disposition by his brother James to him of the lands of Auchaltan, Chart. in
archiv. familiae de Cassilis.
etc. dated 6th July 1621.

Contract of seal betwixt the said James and this Alexander, of the lands of
Coffe, etc dated 12th June 1622.

Charter by the said James, to the said Alexander, of an annualrent of 120l.
out of Straiton, etc. dated the penu^^ of July, anno praedicto, Ibidem.
etc. etc. etc. in all which he is designed brother-german to the said James.

He married a daughter of -- Kennedy of Ardmillan, by whom he had a son and
successor,

XVIII. Retour in Chancery*
JOHN KENNEDY of Culzean, who was served heir to his father sir Alexander, 8th
February 1656, and died anno 1665, leaving issue by his wife Margaret, daughter
of John lord Bargeny, by lady Jean, daughter of William, marquis of Douglas, a
son,

XIX. Retour in Chancery.
Sir ARCHIBALD KENNEDY of Culzean, who succeeded and was served heir to his
father, in April 1672, and, being in great favor with king Charles II. was
created a baronet, anno 1682.

He married Elizabeth Leslie, Crawfurd's peerage, p. 386.
daughter of David lord Newark, by whom he had two sons, and one daughter.

1. Sir John.

2. David Kennedy, Esquire; an eminent lawier, etc. His daughter Susan, married to
Alexander earl of Eglington, to whom she had a numerous issue.

He died anno 1710, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XX. Sir JOHN KENNEDY of Culzean Bart. who was served heir to his father in
March 1711, Retour in Chancery*
and died in July 1742, leaving issue by his wife, dame Jean Douglas, of the
family of Mains, three sons.

1. Sir John, his successor.

2. Sir Thomas, who now claims the honors of Cassilis.

3. David Kennedy Esquire;, advocate.

XXI. Sir JOHN KENNEDY of Culzean Bart. Ibidem.
was retoured heir to his father, anno 1743,; and, dying without issue anno
1744, was succeeded by his brother,

XXI. Sir THOMAS KENNEDY of Culzean, who, upon the death of John, eighth earl
of Cassilis, succeeded to the estate of Cassilis, as before observed; and, his
descent and propinquity being fully proven before an inquest of fifteen
gentlemen, etc. as above deduced, was accordingly served heir-male to him, on
the 28th day of January 1760; and if the house of peers determines in his
favors, he will be the ninth earl of Cassilis.

ARMS.
Argent, a cheveron, gules, between three cross crosslets, fitchy, sable, all
within a double tressure, flowered and counter-flowered, with flowers de liss,
of the second.

Crest; on a wreath, a dolphin, najant, azure.

Supporters; two swans, proper.

MOTTO; Avise la sin.

CHIEF SEAT.
At Cassilis in Air-shire, etc.

CATHCART Lord CATHCART.
THIS noble family is of very great antiquity in the west of Scotland.

The surname is local, and was first assumed by the proprietors of the lands
and barony of Kethcart in Renfrewshire, as early as the reign of king William
the Lion, who succeeded to the crown anno 1165.

The first of them we find upon record, is

I. Chartul. of Paisley, in the lawyers library, Edr. and preface to Sir James
Dalrymple's collections, p. 66.
REYNALDUS de KETHCART, who is witness in a charter of Alanus filius Walteri,
dapiferi domini regis, of the patronage of the church of Kethcart to the
monastery of Paisley, anno 1178.

He died before 1200, leaving issue a son,

II. WILLIAM de KETHCART, who succeeded him, Chartul. of Paisley penes
Macfarlane, p. 129 and 331.
is witness to the charter whereby Dungallus filius Christini, judicis de
Levenax, excambiates the lands of Knoc, with the abbot of Paisley, for lands
lying near Walkingshaw, in which Alanus filius ejus, Thomas de Pollock, etc.
are witnesses, anno 1199 or 1200.

He was succeeded by his said son,

III. ALAN de CATHCART, whose seal is appended to the resignation of the judge
of Levenax to the abbot and convent of Paisley, Ibid. et chartul. of Levenax
penes eund. p. 125 and 126.
of the lands of Culbethie; to which Galfridus de Marishall, Petrus et Thomas
de Pollock, etc. are witnesses, anno 1234.

In a charter of the great steward of Scotland to sir Adam Fullerton of that
ilk, of the lands of Fullerton, in the bailiary of Kyle, this Alanus de
Cathcart, Mill's genealogical collections, penes eund. p. 133.
dominus Johannes de Lindesay, Johannes de Maxwell, Thomas de Blair, etc. are
witnesses. The charter is dated Thursday before the feast of St. Barnabas, in
June 1240.

He left issue a son,

William de Cathcart, -- and a daughter,

Cecilia, married to John de Perthic, which appears by her donation, Chartul of
Paisley. penes eundem.
to the monastery of Paisley, of all her lands in the village of Ruglen,
wherein she is designed sponsa quondam Johannis de Perthic, etc.

IV. WILLIAM de CATHCART succeeded Alan; and, in the above donation to the
monastery of Paisley, Ibid. p. 81.
is designed Willielmus de Cathcart, frater dictae Ceciliae, etc. to which
dominus Thomas Croc, miles, and several others, are witnesses, anno 1262.

He left issue a son and successor,

V. WILLIAM de CATHCART, who was one of the great barons of Scotland that
submitted and swore fealty to king Edward I. Prynne's coll. vol. III.
of England, anno 1296.

He was succeeded by his son,

VI. Sir ALAN CATHCART, who is designed dominus ejusdem in a donation he made
to the dominicans of Glasgow, anno 1336. He was a man of great honor, Chartul.
of Glasgow, page 61.
courage and loyalty, a sincere patriot, and a firm friend of king Robert
Bruce, under whose conduct he performed many gallant actions, particularly at
the battle of Loudon-hill, Crawf. peerage, and Barber's hist, etc.
where he remarkably distinguished himself, and where the Scots obtained a
complete victory over a strong party of the English.

He married the sister and co-heiress of sir Duncan Wallace of Sundrum, by whom
he had a son,

VII. Sir ALAN, who succeeded him, and was designed dominus Alanus de Cathcart,
Char. in pub. arch.
dominus ejusdem, in several charters of king Robert II. particularly one in
1384, and another anno 1387, which were afterward confirmed by king James I.

In right of his mother, he succeeded also to the baronies of Sundrum and
Auchincrew, in Ayr-shire, which are still in the family's possession.

He left issue a son and successor,

VIII. Sir ALAN de CATHCART, who was a man of great abilities, and made a
considerable figure in Scotland in the reigns of king Robert III. Rymer, tom.
X. p. 509.
and king James I. and was one of the hostages for that last prince's ransom,
anno 1424. He got his father's charters confirmed by the king, Chart. in archiv
Jacobi I.
and died about 1440, leaving issue a son,

IX. ALAN de CATHCART, who slourished in the reign of king James I. but died
before his father, leaving issue two sons.

1. Sir Alan.

2. John de Cathcart, who obtained a charter from king James II. Chart. in pub.
archiv.
of the lands of Bartonholme.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. Sir ALAN CATHCART of that ilk, who succeeded also to his grandfather, anno
1440.

He was a man of great prudence and economy, added large possessions to his
paternal estate, and settled considerable provisions on his younger children.

In 1447, Chart. penes dom. Cathcart, and Crawfurd's Peerage.
he redeemed several lands within the earldom of Carrick from John Kennedy,
lord of the Coffe, that had been wadset by sir Alan Cathcart his grandfather.

He was first knighted by king James II. then raised to the honor of the
peerage by the title of lord Cathcart, Nisbet, vol I. p. 246.
anno 1442.

In a charter to the earl of Errol, Chart. penes comitem de Errol.
anno 1450, he is designed lord Cathcart, etc.

He was also in great favor with king James III. who appointed him warden of
the west marches toward England, Rymer's foed. Angliae.
anno 1481; and that same year granted a charter, under the great seal, Chart.
in pub. archiv.
Alano domino Cathcart, officii marefeodi, etc.

In consideration of his great merit and many faithful services, Ibidem.
he obtained a grant of the barony and constabulary of the castle of Dundonald,
then a part of the royal patrimony, anno 1482.

And, as a further mark of the royal favor, he got a grant of the lands of
Trabath in King's Kyle, Crawfurd's peerage, and Nisbet.
then in the crown by the forfeiture of lord Boyd. He was likewise master of
the artillery, anno 1485.

He lived to a very great age, and died in 1500, having married Janet, daughter
of -- Maxwell of --, by whom he had six sons and one daughter.

1. Alan, master of Cathcart.

2. John Cathcart of Carleton, who obtained a charter from king James III.
Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the office of mair of fee of the earldom of Carrick. His son was Alan
Cathcart of Carleton.

3. Roger Cathcart, who obtained a charter from king James III. of the lands of
Carbieston, Ibidem.
and one from king James IV. of the lands of Gass.

4. Alexander Cathcart, who obtained a charter from king James III. of the
lands of Auchincrove.

5. David Cathcart of Pennysodoch.

Ibidem.
6. Hugh Cathcart, Chart. penes dominum de Cathcart.
ancestor of the Cathcarts of Trevor.

His daughter, Ibidem.
Helen, was married to David Stewart of Craigiehall, in vicecom. de Linlithgow.

XI. ALAN, master of Cathcart, first son and apparent heir of Alan lord
Cathcart, obtained a charter from king James IV. of several lands, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
and died before his father, having married --, daughter of --, by whom he had
a son,

XII. JOHN, second lord Cathcart, who succeeded his grandfather, anno 1500, was
a man of considerable distinction in the reigns of king James IV. and V. He
obtained charters of a great many lands from both these princes, Ibid. and
chart. penes dom. Cathcart.
viz. the lands and lordship of Cathcart, Killoquhane, Auchencroff, Sundrum,
etc.

He died in 1535, having married, 1st, Margaret, daughter of John Kennedy of
Blairquhan, by whom he had a son,

Alan, master of Cathcart.

He married, 2dly, Margaret, daughter of sir William Douglas of Drumlanrig, by
whom he had four sons and four daughters.

2. (and first of this marriage) Robert Cathcart, who got from his father the
lands of Killoquhane, Ibidem.
and married Margaret, daughter and heiress of Alan Cathcart of Carleton,
Ibidem.
of whom the present Carleton is lineally descended.

3. John Cathcart, Esquire;

4. David Cathcart of Duchry, whose grandson, in the reign of queen Mary,
married the daughter and co-heiress of William Cathcart of Carbieston.

5. Hugh, ancestor of the Cathcarts of Corffe.

1st daughter, --, married to John Crawford of Drongan.

2. Elizabeth, married to John Wallace of Craigie.

3. Jean, married to John Shaw of Haily.

4. Margaret, married to John Hunter of Hunterstoun, in vicecom. de Air.

XIII. ALAN, master of Cathcart, eldest son of John lord Cathcart, was a man of
great courage and resolution, in high favor with king James IV. whom he
accompanied to the fatal field of Floudon, where he lost his life, with two of
his brothers, Robert and John, anno 1513.

He married, Chart. penes dom. Cathcart.
1st, Helen, daughter of Robert lord Lyle, by whom he had no issue.

He married, 2dly, Margaret, daughter of Patrick Maxwell of Newark, Ibidem.
by whom he had a son,

XIV. ALAN, third lord Cathcart, who succeeded his grandfather, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
anno 1535. He obtained a charter from king James V. of the lands and barony of
Sundrum, also of Dalmillington; and another charter, of the lordship of
Cathcart, from the same prince.

He married Helen, daughter of William lord Semple, by whom he had a son,

Alan, his successor, -- and a daughter, Char. in arch. Mariae regin.


Mariotte Cathcart.

He was killed at the battle of Pinkie, Chart. penes dom. Cathcart.
anno 1547, and was succeeded by his son,

XV. ALAN, fourth lord Cathcart, a man of great interest and reputation in the
country, and a zealous promoter of the reformation. He joined the king's party
from his very infancy, and was at the battle of Langside against the queen,
anno 1568, where her majesty's troops were routed.

In 1579 he was constituted master of the king's household, Chart. penes dom.
Cathcart.
and had several beneficial grants from the crown during the earl of Morton's
regency, Ibidem.
which were afterward reassumed. He got many charters of his own lands from
king James VI. viz. dimidietatis terrarum de Gass et Gaveston, quatuor market.
terrarum de Easter Carbieston, Chart. in pub. archiv.
terrarum et baroniae de Dalmillington, burgi de Castlemark, et Over et Nether
Carbiestouns, etc.

He made an entail of his whole estate, upon which he got a charter, under the
great seal of king James VI. to himself, and his son Alan the master, and the
heirs-male of their bodies; Ibidem.
which failing, to Gilbert Cathcart of Carleton, and the heirs-male of his
body; which failing, to his own nearest heirs-male whatsoever.

He died in 1618, having married Margaret, daughter of John Wallace of Craigie,
by whom he had a son,

XVI. ALAN, master of Cathcart, who obtained a charter of the lands of
Ballochbrock, Ibidem.
Drumlanfurd, etc.

He died before his father in 1603, having married Isabel, daughter of Thomas
Kennedy of Bargeny, by whom he had a son,

XVII. ALAN, fifth lord Cathcart, who succeeded his grandfather in 1618, and
got a charter of the lands of Dalmillington, burgh of Castlemark, Ibidem.
Over and Nether Carbiestons, etc.

He married, Ibidem.
1st, lady Margaret Hepburn, daughter of Francis, earl of Bothwel, by whom he
had no issue.

He married, 2dly, Jean, daughter of sir Alexander Colquhoun of Luss, by whom
he had a son,

Alan, born in 1628.

He died that same year, and was succeeded by his son,

XVIII. ALAN, sixth lord Cathcart, then but an infant, who proved to be a man
of great probity and honor. He got a charter from king Charles I. of the lands
and barony of Sundrum; and married Marian, Chart in archivis Caroli I.
daughter of David Boswel of Auchinleck, by whom he had three sons.

1. Alan.

2. James Cathcart, Esquire;

3. David Cathcart, Esquire; who was killed in the public service.

He died in 1709; in the 81st year of his age, and was succeeded by his eldest
son,

XIX. ALAN, seventh lord Cathcart, who married Elizabeth, Crawfurd's Peerage.
Scots Compend.
daughter of James, viscount of Stair, by whom he had three sons and one
daughter.

1. Alan, master of Cathcart, a youth of great hopes, who perished at sea, in a
voyage to Holland; much lamented.

2. Charles, afterward lord Cathcart.

3. Major James Cathcart.

His daughter, Margaret, was married to sir Ad^m Whiteford of Blairquhan,
baronet, and had issue.

He died in the 85th year of his age, anno 1732, and was succeeded by his son,

XX. CHARLES, eighth lord Cathcart. In his early youth he betook himself to the
study of arms, and learned the first rudiments of that art under the great duke
of Marlborough, where his genius soon displayed itself, and his actions pointed
the future general.

In 1704, he had a company in general McCartney's regiment of foot, and was
soon after made a captain of grenadiers. In 1706, he was promoted to a troop of
the Royal Scotch dragoons. In 1707, he was appointed brigade-major. In 1709, he
was made major of the royal regiment of dragoons, then commanded by the earl of
Stair. And in 1711, he got a lieutenant-colonel's breviate.

Upon king George I's accession to the throne, he was appointed, first, groom;
next, lord of the bedchamber; also colonel of a regiment of horse in Ireland,
and governor of Duncannon castle.

In 1734, he was elected one of the sixteen peers for Scotland to the eighth
British parliament.

In 1740, when the expedition was resolved upon to attack the king of Spain in
his American settlements, lord Cathcart was pitched upon, as a person whose
conduct and courage fitted him for the command of such an important enterprise,
and accordingly was appointed general in chief. He set sail from Spithead in
October 1740, but, unhappily both for the expedition and the honor of the
nation, he was seized with a dysentery, and died at Dominica, one of the
leeward islands, the 20th of December thereafter.

Charles lord Cathcart had a head that qualified him to shine in that
distinguished rank to which his birth and merit raised him; but he had more: He
had a heart full of benevolence, good will, and friendship for mankind.

He married, 1st, Margaret, daughter of sir John Shaw of Greenock, by whom he
had a son,

Charles, now lord Cathcart, -- and two daughters,

1. Eleanora, married to sir John Houston of that ilk, Bart.

2. Mary Anne, married to William, master of Napier.

He married, 2dly, in 1739, Mrs. Sabine, widow of Joseph Sabine of Tuing, in
Hereford, Esquire; but dying as aforesaid, by her had no issue, and was succeeded
by his son,

XXI. CHARLES ninth lord Cathcart, who also betook himself to a military life,
and soon rose to the degree of a major general, and is adjutant-general to the
forces in North-Britain. He was elected one of the sixteen peers for Scotland
to the two last British parliaments, and was also re-elected on the 5th day of
May 1761, to the present.

He was appointed his majesty's high commissioner to the general assembly of
the church of Scotland, anno 1755, and has been continued every year since.

He married Jean, daughter of lord Archibald Hamilton, by whom he has three
sons and three daughters.

1. William, master of Cathcart.

2. Charles Alan.

3. George.

1. Daughter Jean.

2. Mary.

3. Louisa.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st and 4th, azure, three cross crosslets, fitchy, issuing out of
as many crescents, argent: 2d and 3d, gules, a lion rampant, argent.

Crest; on a wreath a dexter hand, couped above the wrist, and erect, proper,
grasping a crescent as in the arms.

Supporters; two parrots proper.

MOTTO; I hope to speed.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Sundrum in Air-shire, etc. Charlesstreet, Berkelay-square, London.

COLVILE Lord COLVILE of CULROSS.
THE surname of COLVILE is originally from France, and it is the general
opinion of our historians, Goodal's introduction to Fordun's hist. page 60.
that they came from Normandy to England, with William the Conqueror, anno
1066, and to Scotland with king David I. who succeeded to the crown, anno 1124.

There were some considerable families of the name of Colvile in England,
Dugdale's baronage of England. Rymer's foed.
that subsisted several centuries after the conquest, but they appear to be now
extinct.

The first of this noble family we find upon record, is,

I. PHILIPPUS de COLVILE, who slourished in the reigns of king Malcolm IV. and
king William the Lion, which last succeeded to the crown of Scotland, anno 1165.

In a general confirmation of king Malcolm, of all the donations made by his
predecessors to the monastery of Dunfermline, Chartul. of St. Andrews, penes
Macfarlane, p. 193.
Philippus de Colvile, Robert bishop of St. Andrews, Herbert bishop of Glasgow,
Hugo de Morville chancellor, and many others, were witnesses in or before 1159,
in which year Robert, bishop of St. Andrews, died.

In another confirmation by the same Prince, Ibid. p. 258.
of several donations made to the priory of St. Andrews, Philippus de Colvile,
Ricardus de Cummin, etc. are witnesses, anno 1160.

In a convention with king Henry of England, about king William's liberty,
Philip de Colvile is named one of the hostages for the king of Scots, Rymer,
tom I. p. 39.
together with David the king's brother, earl Duncan, earl Waldave, earl of
Angus, Richard de Morville constable, and many others of the chief nobility,
anno 1174; which sufficiently shows, that this Philip was a man of the first
rank in the reign of king William.

He died betwixt 1180 and 1190, leaving issue a son,

II. THOMAS de COLVILE, who succeeded him, Chartul. of Melrose pene Macfarlane,
p. 20.
and, in a donation to the abbacy of Melrose, is designed Thomas filius
Philippi de Colvile, anno 1181.

This Thomas is witness to a charter of Alanus filius Rolandi de Galoveia
constab. Chartul. of Coldingham penes eund. p. 216.
Scotiae inter 1189 et 1200.

He was suspected to have been concerned in a conspiracy against king William,
Chron. of Melrose.
and was imprisoned in the castle of Edinburgh, anno 1210; but, having cleared
himself, and made his innocence appear, he was liberate about six months
thereafter, received into favor again; and he and Gervasius de Avenel, Rymer,
tom. I. p. 184.
were obsides regis Scotiae, anno 1214.

He died anno 1219, Chron. of Melrose. Obiit Tho. de Colvile, etc. ann. 1219.
leaving issue by Amabilis his wife a son and successor,

III. WILLIAM de COLVILE, who, in a donation to the monastery of Newbottle,
Chartul. of Newbottle, penes M'Farlane. p. 3.
is designed Willielmus filius Thomae de Colvile, et Amabilis suae sponsae,
etc. cir. 1224.

This William was proprietor of the barony of Kinnaird, in the shire of
Stirling, which appears by a tack he gave of part of these lands to the abbot
and convent of Holyroodhouse, Chart. penes eundem.
confirmed by king Alexander II. at Edinburgh, the 15th day of September, the
15th year of his reign, anno 1229.

He died before the year 1250, and was succeeded by his son,

IV. Sir JOHN COLVILE, who was proprietor of the lands of Oxnam and Ochiltrie,
Chartul. of Melrose, and Crawfurd's peerage.
in the beginning of the reign of king Alexander III. circa annum 1250.

He left issue two sons,

1. Sir Thomas.

2. Adam de Colvile, whom we find swearing fealty to king Edward I. of England,
Prynne, vol. III. p. 661.
anno 1296.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. Sir THOMAS de COLVILE, designed dominus de Oxnam, Ibidem.
who also swore allegiance to king Edward I. when he had overrun Scotland,
anno 1296.

He afterward got a charter from king Robert Bruce, Chart in rotulis regis
Rob. 1.
of half of the lands of Whitsom, in Berwick-shire, circa 1320.

He left issue two sons,

1. Robert his heir.

2. William, Chartul. of Newbottle. p. 111.
who got a charter under the great seal (from king David Bruce) Wilielmo filio
Thomae de Colvile, etc. circa annum 1339.

Sir Thomas died before 1324, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. ROBERT de COLVILE, Chartul. of Melrose. Remarks upon Ragman's roll, p. 27.
dominus de Oxnam, who was also designed baro baroniae de Ochiltrie, anno 1324.

This Robert is particularly mentioned and designed dominus de Oxnam, Chartul.
of Kelso, p. 444.
in a relaxation, to which Thomas de Boswel is a witness, anno 1330.

He is also witness to a donation to the monastery of Kelso, Ibid. p. 431.
under the same designation, anno 1354.

He was succeeded by his son,

VII. Sir THOMAS de COLVILE, dominus de Oxnam et Ochiltrie.

In a charter of Margaret, Chartul. of Aberdeen; and book of charters, penes
MacFarlane, vol. I. p. 59.
countess of Douglas and Mar, to Alexander Barclay, of the lands of Bourty, in
the regality of Garviach, Thomas de Colvile, miles, filius Roberti is a
witness, anno 1384.

He left issue a son;

VIII. Sir ROBERT COLVILE, dominus de Oxnam et Ochiltrie, who succeeded him,
and is witness in a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
anno 1390.

He was one of the hostages for king James I's ransom, Rymer, tom. X. p. 509.
anno 1424, and is designed Robertus dominus de Oxnam, miles, etc.

He got a charter, under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the lands of Barnwell and Symintoun, in the shire of Air, 26th May 1441.

He married Margaret Colvile, a relation of his own, by whom he had a son and
successor,

IX. Sir ROBERT COLVILE, designed of Ochiltrie, who was put in possession of
these lands in his father's lifetime, Ibidem.
by a charter under the great seal, Roberto filio et haeredi Roberti de Oxnam,
terrarum de Ochiltrie, in vicecommitatu de Air, super resignatione dicti
Roberti, sui patris, etc. dated anno 1441.

There is another charter under the great seal, Margaretae Colvile, Ibidem.
matri Roberti Colvile de Ochiltrie, super cartam sibi factam per dictum
Robertum, anno 1441, of some lands in the barony of Ochiltrie, confirmed 9th
January 1449; also a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
Roberto Colvile de Ochiltrie, militi, et Christianae Chrichton, suae sponsae,
terrarum baroniae de Ochiltrie, et baroniae de Oxnam, etc. dated 16th February
1450.

There is an indenture betwixt Sir Robert Colvile lord of Oxnam, Principal
indenture, penes ducem de Roxbrugh.
and Andrew Ker of Auldtounburn, whereby they are mutually bound to stand by,
assist and defend one another, against all mortals, the king and the earl of
Douglas only excepted, dated Jedworth, 10th June 1453; the Colvile's seal being
entire upon red wax, viz. quarterly 1st and 4th, a fess checque of 3 tracts; 2d
and 3d, a cross moline, proper; crest; a swan's head, supported by two lions
circumscribed, etc.

Sir Robert, by the said Christian, a daughter of sir Robert Crichton of
Sanquhar, ancestor of the earl of Dumfries, left issue two sons,

1. Sir Richard of Ochiltrie, who was slain by the earl of Douglas, Nisbet,
vol. I. p. 117.
for killing John Auchinleck of that ilk, anno 1449, without issue, his father
being then alive.

X. Sir ROBERT his second son, Char. in pub. arch.
succeeded him, and got a charter under the great seal, Roberto de Colvile,
militi, filio et haeredi Roberti de Oxnam, militis, of several lands lying in
the barony of Ochiltrie, dated 9th March 1477.

He had two sons,

1. Sir William his heir.

Robert, said to be his second son, designed senescallus Margaretae reginae,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
got a charter under the great seal, Roberto Colvile et Margaretae Logan, ejus
sponsae, terrarum de Hilton, etc, lying in the barony of Tillicoultry, and
shire of Clackmannan, dated 16th October 1483. He was father of Sir Robert of
Hilton, who carried on the line of this family, of whom afterward.

Sir Robert was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. Sir WILLIAM COLVILE of Ochiltrie and Oxnam, who died anno 1502, leaving
issue only two daughters, his co-heiresses.

1. Elizabeth, married to Robert Colvile of Ravenscraig, a cadet of this family.

2. Margaret, married to Patrick Colquhoun of Drumskeith, Esquire;

Though this sir William died without male issue, and left his estate to his
daughters, yet as sir Robert of Hilton, said to be his heir-male, afterward
acquired their estates, supported the dignity of the family, and was undoubted
ancestor of the present lord Colvile, from him therefore we carry on their
descent.

XII. Sir ROBERT COLVILE, son of Robert of Hilton, steward to queen Margaret,
being a man of parts and merit, was in great favor with, and highly esteemed
by king James IV. who appointed him master of his household, and director of the
chancery.

He got a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
Roberto Colvile de Hilton, directori cancellariae, terrarum de Symintoun,
lying in the bailiarie of Kyle, which were apprised from sir William Colvile of
Ochiltrie; the charter is dated 13th August 1502.

Also a charter to him and Elizabeth Arnot his sponse, Ibidem.
of the lands of Hilton of Cleish, etc. 14th February 1504.

And a charter of half of the lands and barony of Ochiltrie, cum castro,
fortalicio, etc. upon the resignation of Elizabeth Colvile, Ibidem.
eldest daughter of the deceast William Colvile of Ochiltrie knight, with
consent of her husband Robert, son and heir of William Colvile of Ravenscraig,
etc.

Also a charter of half of the lands and barony of Oxnam, Ibidem.
dated 13th April 1508, and 10th April 1509.

This Robert was afterward designed by the title of Ochiltrie, Ibidem.
which appears by charters under the great seal, Roberto Colvile de Ochiltrie
terrarum baroniae de Ochiltrie, and many other lands and baronies, too numerous
to be here inserted.

He attended the king to the fatal field of Floudon, where he lost his life
with his royal master, anno 1513.

By the said Elizabeth Arnot, daughter and co-heiress of Walter Arnot of
Balberton, he left issue two sons,

1. Sir James his heir.

2. Robert, who married Margaret Scougal, and got a charter, Ibidem.
under the great seal, of part of the lands of easter Wemyss, wherein he is
designed brother german of sir James, etc. dated the last day of February,
1539. Also a charter of the lands of Pitkeny, of the same date.

Sir Robert was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. Sir JAMES COLVILE of Ochiltrie, who, being also a man of parts and
learning, was made director of the chancery by king James V. Ibidem.
and one of the senators of the college of justice, at the first institution of
that judicature.

He got four charters under the great seal, Ibidem.
Jacobo Colvile de Ochiltrie, of several lands and baronies, inter 1520 and
1528.

He made a mortification of 10 l. per annum out of his barony of Ochiltrie,
Ibidem.
for a chaplain to serve at the holy altar, etc. anno 1527.

In the year 1530, he exchanged his lands of Ochiltrie, with sir James Hamilton
of Fynart, for the lands of easter Wemyss, which afterward became the chief
title of the family, and is confirmed by no less than five charters, Ibidem,
inter 1530, and 1534.
under the great seal, Jacobo Colvile de easter Wemyss, militi, etc.

He married Alison Bruce, a daughter of the family of Clackmannan, by whom he
had a son,

Sir James his heir, -- and a daughter,

Margaret, Chart. penes magistrum Mart. Lindsay.
married to James Lindsay of Dowhill, Esquire; an ancient family in the shire of
Kinross.

He had also a natural son,

Robert, Chart. in pub* archiv.
who got from his father the lands and barony of Cleish, and was ancestor of
lord Colvile of Ochiltrie.

He was succeeded by his son,

XIV. Sir JAMES, Ibidem.
who got a charter under the great seal, Jacobo Colvile de easter Wemyss,
militi, of the lands and barony of easter Wemyss, etc. 7th November 1554.

Also a charter of the lands of Balgarf and others, Ibidem.
anno 1560, confirmed 3d December 1572.

He married Margaret, daughter of Sir Robert Douglas of Lochleven, ancestor of
the earl of Morton, by whom he had two sons,

1. Sir James, afterward lord Colvile.

2. Alexander Colvile, commendator of Culross, ancestor of the present lord
Colvile, of whom afterward.

He had also a natural son, James, who got from his father the lands of Crummy,
upon which he got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
anno 1606.

Sir James died anno 1580, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. Sir JAMES COLVILE, who got charters under the great seal, of the lands of
east Wemyss, Ibidem.
Buckh aven, Tillicoultry, etc. wherein he is designed filius et haeres quondam
domini Jacobi, etc. anno 1581.

This Sir James betook himself to a military life, and served in the wars in
France under king Henry IV. where, for his bravery and military skill, he
acquired great honor and reputation.

Upon his return home he was well received by the king, and highly esteemed at
court.

He got charters under the great seal, Ibidem.
Jacobo Colvile de east Wemyss militi, of several lands and baronies, anno
1596, and 1597.

And as he was in great favor with his majesty, he obtained a grant of all the
lands of the dissolved abbacy of Culross (his nephew John having resigned the
liferent thereof into the king's hands) got them erected into a temporal
lordship, Ibid. Jacobo domino Colvile, et haered. masc. de corp. suo, quibus
deficien. legit. et propinq. haered. masc. quibuscunq.
and was raised to the dignity of the peerage, by the title of lord Colvile of
Culross, "To him, and the heirs-male of his body; which failing, to his nearest
lawful heirs-male whatever, bearing the name and arms of Colvile." The patent
is dated 20th January 1609.

He married Isabel, daughter of Patrick lord Ruthven, by whom he had two sons,
and one daughter.

1. James, who died before his father, unmarried.

2. Robert, master of Colvile.

His daughter Jean, married to sir James Campbell of Lawers, Lives of the
officers of^^ ^^ate, p. 196.
by whom she had John earl of Loudon, lord high chancellor of Scotland, in the
reign of king Charles I.

He died, anno 1620.

XVI. ROBERT, master of Colvile, son and apparent heir of James first lord
Colvile, got from his father part of the barony of ^ast Wemyss, also the lands
of Tillicoultry, etc. upon which he got charters under the great seal, Chart.
in pub. archiv.
Roberto filio domini Jacobi, etc. 19th December 1598, and 8th January 1599.

He died anno 1615, leaving issue a son,

XVII. JAMES, who succeeded him, and got a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
Jacobo filio quondam Roberti magistri de Colvile terrarum dominii et baroniae
de Culross, dated 9th October, 1616.

He succeeded also to his grandfather, anno 1620, was the second lord, and got
charters under the great seal, Jacobo domino Colvile de Culross, Ibidem.
of several lands and baronies, inter 1620, and 1630.

This lord dying without issue, anno 1640, in him ended the male line of James,
first lord Colvile, eldest son of sir James Colvile of easter Wemyss; and as
the representation and titles of honor, according to the tenor of the
abovementioned patent, devolved upon the next heir-male, descended of the
second son of the said sir James, to him we now return.

XV. ALEXANDER COLVILE, second lawful son of sir James Colvile of easter
Wemyss, and brother german of the patentee, was appointed commendator of
Culross, by a charter under the great seal, granted by Henry and Mary, king and
queen of Scots, magistro Alexandro Colvile, Ibidem.
filio quondam Jacobi Colvile de easter Wemyss militis, pro omnibus diebus suae
vitae, of all and haill the benefice of the abbacy of Culross, etc. 4th
February 1566-7.

He, as commendator of Culross, grants to sir James Colvile of easter Wemyss,
his brother, the feu farm-victual-of Lurg and Kincardin, by a charter, Ibidem.
dated 14th September 1579; which, upon the 21st of the same month, sir James
resigned in favors of his nephew John, as will be shown hereafter.

He married Nicholas, daughter of -- Dundass of that ilk, by whom he had two
sons.

1. John, his heir.

2. Mr. Alexander Colvile, professor of divinity in St. Andrews, who, in a
charter under the great seal, of the lands of Lurg and Kincardin, Ibidem.
is designed brother of John Colvile, eldest lawful son of the deceast
Alexander Colvile, commendator of Culross, etc. 20th March, 1587, which, with
other three charters, are narrated and confirmed by king Charles II. anno 1664.

The commendator died in the end of the year 1579, and was succeeded by his
eldest son,

XVI. JOHN COLVILE, who, in his father's lifetime, was designed by the title of
wester Cumbry, and got a charter from his uncle, sir James Colvile of easter
Wemyss, of the feu-farm-victual of Lurg and Kincardin, 21st September 1579, as
before observed, and in that charter he is designed filius primogenitus
venerabilis viri Alexandri commendatoris monasterii de Culross, Chart. penes
dom. Colvile.
etc.

Immediately upon his father's death, he was appointed commendator of Culross,
and got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
totius beneficii monasterii de Culross, durante vita sua, 17th March 1580; but
he afterward resigned his liferent in the king's hands, in favors of his
uncle sir James, as before noticed.

He got two other charters under the great seal, Ibidem.
of two yards, and some acres of land near Culross, confirmed 15th June, 1581.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of sir James Melvil of Halhill, knight, by whom
he had three sons.

1. Alexander his heir.

2. James Colvile.

3. Mr. Samuel Colvile.

These two last are both mentioned in their father's bond of provision, Penes
dom. Colvile.
5th May, 1643.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVII. Doctor ALEXANDER COLVILE of Kincardin, professor of divinity at Sedan in
France, Ibidem.
designed in the above bond of provision, eldest lawful son of John Colvile of
Cumbry, commendator of Culross, etc.

He married Anne le Blanc, daughter of monsieur le Blanc, of the city of Sedan
in France, by whom he had two sons,

1. John, his heir.

2. Alexander Colvile.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVIII. Mr. JOHN COLVILE of Kincardin, doctor of divinity, Ibidem.
who got a disposition from his father, of the lands of Lurg and Kincardin,
wherein he is designed his eldest lawful son, anno 1665.

He married Mary, daughter of sir George Preston of Valleyfield, Bart, by whom
he had two sons,

1. Alexander, his heir.

2. John Colvile, Esquire;

He died, anno 1677, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIX. ALEXANDER COLVILE of Kincardin, etc.

There is a contract betwixt the Earl of Kincardin, Principal contract penes
eundem.
and Mary Preston, widow of John Colvile of Kincardin, in behalf of Alexander
Colvile, her eldest son, by the deceast Mr. John Colvile of Kincardin,
concerning some feu-duties resting to the said earl, out of the lands of
Kincardin and Lurg, and some acres about Culross. The contract is dated at
Canongate, 6th March 1678.

He married Mary, daughter of sir Charles Erskine of Cambo, Bart. lord lion
king at arms for Scotland, by whom he had five sons, and six daughters.

1. John, afterward lord Colvile.

2. Charles, who is now a major general in the British service.

3. Alexander, collector of his majesty's customs at Inverness.

4. George, who was a doctor of medicine in Dundee.

5. William.

1. Daughter Penelope.

2. Mary.

3. Margaret.

4. Isabel.

5. Anne.

6. Catharine.

XX. JOHN, eldest son of Alexander Colvile of Kincardin, having proved his
descent and propinquity as above, before a jury of fifteen gentlemen upon oath,
was, upon the 3d April 1722, returned next heir-male to James the last lord
Colvile; and therefore, according to the limitation of the dignity by the
patent to the heirs-male of the first lord whatever, his claim and right to the
peerage was sustained. He was admitted a Scotch peer by the parliament of
Great Britain, anno 1722, and was the third lord Colvile of Culross.

He married Miss Johnston of the kingdom of Ireland, by whom he had five sons,
and two daughters.

1. Alexander, now lord Colvile.

2. George, who died in the West Indies without issue.

3. John, a captain in the army,

4. Charles, also a captain in the army.

5. James, Captain of a ship of war, who died in the East Indies.

1. Daughter, Margaret, married to captain Castlemain.

2. Elizabeth, who died unmarried.

John, third lord Colvile, died in the expedion to Carthagena, anno 1740, and
was succeeded by his eldest son,

XXI. ALEXANDER, fourth lord Colvile, who, having been bred to the sea, is now
captain of the Northumberland ship of war, and commodore of an English ^leet in
America.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st, and 4th, argent, a cross moline, sable: 2d, and 3d, gules, a
fess cheque, argent and azure.

Crest; on a wreath, a hind's head proper. Supporters; on the dexter side, a
rinoceros of the latter on the ^inister, a savage covered with a lyon's skin,
holding on his exteriot shoulder a batton.

MOTTO: Oublier ne puis.

COLVILE Lord COLVILE of OCHILTRIE.
THE first of this branch of the noble and ancient family of Colvile, was,

I. ROBERT, son of sir James Colvile of easter-Wemyss, who got from his father
the lands and barony of Cleish, in Kinross-shire, upon which he got a charter
under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Roberto Colvile filio not. Jacobi Colvile de Easter Wemyss militis, of the
lands and barony of Cleish, etc. dated 15th July 1537.

He got also a charter, Ibid. ad an. 1533.
under the great seal, of the lands of Gorgy, and others.

He was a great promoter of the reformation of religion, Knox's hist. of the
Reformation.
in the reign of queen Mary, and a strenuous asserter of the liberties of his
country.

He married Frances Colquhoun, daughter and heiress of Patrick Colquhoun of
Drumskeith, by Elizabeth, Chart. in pub. archiv.
his wife, one of the daughters and co-heiresses of sir William Colvile of
Ochiltrie, by whom he had a son,

Robert, his heir, -- and two daughters.

1. Eupham, married to James Monypennie of Pitmillie.

2. Grizel, Chart. penes Tho. Dundas de Fingask, Esquire;
married to a valiant and loyal gentleman, Andrew Ecklin of Pitadro, in the
county of Fife, anno 1550, who was depute-governor of the castle of Edinburgh,
in the reign of queen Mary.

Robert of Cleish was killed at the seige of Leith, 7th May 1560, and was
succeeded by his son,

II. ROBERT COLVILE, second baron of Cleish, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who got a charter, under the great seal, of several lands, dated 28th
September 1582.

He married Margaret, daughter of James Lindsay of Dowhill Esquire; by whom he had
a son and successor,

III. ROBERT COLVILE, third baron of Cleish, Ibidem.
who got a charter of the lands and barony of Cleish, anno 1599: also a charter
under the great seal, Roberto Colvile de Cleish de carbonibus inter terras de
Torieburn et torrentem earund. Ibidem.
etc. dated the 3d February 1603.

He married Beatrix, daughter of John Haldane of G^eneagles Esquire; by whom he had
two sons, and one daughter.

1. Robert, his heir.

2. David Colvile, Esquire; father of Robert, who succeeded to the honors of this
family, of whom afterward.

His daughter, Margaret, married to David Wemyss of Fingask.

He died in January 1634, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. ROBERT, Chart. in pub. archiv.
fourth baron of Cleish, who got a charter, under the great seal, of the lands
and barony of Cleish, 1st February 1635.

He was a great loyalist, a firm and steady friend of the royal family, during
all the time of the civil war. He was created a baronet by king Charles I. and
raised to the dignity of the peerage by king Charles II. Ibidem.
by the title of lord Colvil of Ochiltrie, by patent to his heirs-male, dated
4th January 1651.

He married Janet, daughter of sir John Wemyss of that ilk, ancestor of the
earl of Wemyss; but dying without issue, anno 1662, his estate and honors
devolved upon his nephew, and heir-male,

V. ROBERT, son and heir of his brother, David, before mentioned, who was
second lord Colvile of Ochiltrie.

He married Margaret, daughter of David Wemyss of Fingask, by whom he had a son,

Robert, his heir, -- and two daughters.

1. Margaret, married to sir John Aiton of that ilk, in the shire of Fife.

2. --, married to the reverend Mr. Logan, minister of the gospel at Torie.

He died anno 1671, and was succeeded by his son,

VI. ROBERT, third lord Colvile of Ochiltrie, who died unmarried, whereby the
honors appear to be extinct.

Robert Aiton Esquire; grandson of sir John Aiton, by the third lord's eldest
sister, is his heir of line, and is now designed Robert Aiton-Colvile of
Craig-Flower, Esquire; is married, and has issue.

ELPHINSTON Lord COUPAR.
THE first who enjoyed this title, was James Elphinston, second son of James,
lord Balmerino, upon whom king James VI. was pleased to bestow part of the
lands belonging to the abbacy of Coupar, which came to the crown by the
dissolution of the religious houses. He erected them into a temporal lordship,
and created him a peer, by the title of lord Coupar, by patent, "to James
Elphinston, Dipl. in pub. archiv.
lawful son of the lord Balmerino, and the heirs-male of his body; which
failing, to his father, and his heirs-male, and of tailzie, contained in his
infeftments of the barony of Balumby, etc." dated anno 1607.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir James Haliburton of Pitcur, knight; but
dying without issue, anno 1669, his estate and honors, in virtue of the above
patent, devolved upon lord Balmerino.

RICHARDSON Lord CRAMOND.
DAME Elizabeth Beaumont, married to sir Thomas Richardson, lord chief justice
of the common pleas in England, was created baroness of Cramond for life, by
king Charles I. and thereafter sir Thomas Richardson, the lord chief justice's
son, is created lord Cramond, and to his heirs-male; in failure of which, to
the heirs-male of his father's body, etc. dated the last day of February 1628.

As this is the first female creation we have ever seen, we have subjoined part
of the patent from the records.

"Carolus, etc. fecisse, creasse et constituisse Elizabetham dominam
Richardson, conjugem domini Thomae Richardson, militis, justiciarii principalis
in foro causarum communi in palatio Westmonasteriensi, pro toto tempore vitae
suae, baronissam de Cramond; ac post illius decessum, creamus perque modum
successionis dominum Thomam Richardson militem, filium et haeredem dicti
principalis justiciarii dominum baronem de Cramond, dando, etc. eidem post
decessum dictae dominae, suisque haeredibus masculis; quibus deficientibus,
haeredibus masculis de corpore dicti domini Thomae Richardson patris, post
decessum praefatae dominae titulum, etc. baronum parliamenti, tenend. et
habend. praefatum titulum domini baronis de Cramond, post decessum praefatae
dominae, cum suffragio in parliamento, dummodo personaliter praesentes fuerint,
et non aliter, etc."

But it does not appear, that any of this family ever sat or claimed to vote in
the Scotch parliament.

CRANSTON Lord CRANSTON.
THE surname of this noble family is of very great antiquity, is certainly
local, and was first assumed by the proprietors of the lands and barony of
Cranston in Mid-Lothian, as soon as sirnames began to be used in Scotland.

They were considerable barons, and had large possessions in the counties of
Lothian, Teviotdale, and Berwick, etc. in very early times, which is
sufficiently documented by their donations to the religious, and charters in
the public records.

In the reign of king William the Lion, we find one of the ancestors of this
noble family, viz.

I. ELFRIC de CRANSTON, Chartul. of Newbottle, and sir James Dalrymple's col.
p. 350.
witness to a convention betwixt Robert de Quincy, and the abbot and convent of
Newbottle, anno 1170; and of this El^ric the present lord Cranston is lineally
descended.

He lived after the year 1200, and was father of,

II. THOMAS de CRANSTON, who flourished in the reign of king Alexander II. and
made a donation to the monastery of Soltray, Chartul. of Soltray in the lawiers
library, Edin.
of some lands lying near Paiston, in East-Lothian, pro salute animae suae, et
antecessorum et successorum suorum, etc. to which sir William de Douglas, sir
Robert Sinclair, Adam de Mackerston, Chartul. of Soltray in the lawiers
library, Edin. No. 15.
etc. are witnesses, tempore Alex. regis II.

He left issue a son and successor,

III. ANDREAS de CRANSTON, who was witness to a charter of Hugo de Riddel,
miles, to the abbacy of Newbottle in the reign of king Alexander III. together
with Willielmus de Sancto Claro; Chartul. of Newbottle, penes MacFarlane, p. 62.
tunc vicecom. de Edinburgh, Willielmus de Haya de Locherwood, Bernard de
Keith, etc. circiter annum 1274.

He left a son,

IV. HUGH de CRANSTON, who succeeded him, Prynne's coll. vol. III. p. 660.
and was one of the Scotch barons that swore fealty to king Edward I. of
England, anno 1296.

He was succeeded by his son,

V. ANDREAS de CRANSTON, Chartul. of Newbottle, p. 66.
the first we find designed, dominus de eodem.

He made a great figure in the reign of king Robert Bruce, was a faithful and
steady friend to that great prince, and never deserted his interest in his
greatest distress.

He left a son and successor,

VI. RADOLPHUS, dominus de CRANSTON, who made a donation to the abbacy of
Newbottle, wherein he is designed Radolphus de Cranston, dominus de
New-Cranston, filius et haeres quondam Andreae domini de Cranston, etc. to
which sir Alexander Seton, Ibid. p. 67.
William and LaurenceAbernethies, etc. are witnesses, 27th May 1338.

He also confirmed his predecessors donations to the monastery of Soltray, viz.
totam illam terrain in territorio meo de Cranston, quam habui ab antecessoribus
meis, etc. to which John, his son and heir, Robert de Keith, Chartul. of
Soltary, No. 54.
great marshal of Scotland, Robert de Lawdre, justiciar of Lothian, Henry de
Sto. Claro, etc. are witnesses, inter ann. 1330 et 1340.

He was succeeded by his son,

VII. JOHN dominus de CRANSTON, Ibidem.
who is particularly named in his father's confirmation to the monastery of
Soltray, before noticed.

He was father of

VIII. THOMAS de CRANSTON, Dalrymple's collections, p. 350.
who got a charter from king David II. of the lands and barony of Cranston, etc.

Also a charter of confirmation from king Robert II. Chart. in archiv. Roberti
II.
of the lands of Fowlersland, Rulewood, etc. in vicecom. de Roxburgh, and the
lands of Paiston, etc. in constab. de Haddington, dated at Cambuskenneth, the
18th January 1381.

He lived after the year 1400, and was succeeded by his son,

IX. THOMAS dominus de CRANSTON, who, being a man of fine parts, was in great
favor with king James I. who sent him, together with William lord Crichton,
etc. his ambassadors extraordinary to negotiate a peace with Eric, king of
Denmark, Norway, and Sweden, according to his commission, Torpheus, p. 204.
dated 8th May 1426, wherein he is designed Thomas de Cranston, scutifer regis,
etc.

In a donation to the monastery of Newbottle, by William de Liberton, Chartul.
of Newbottle, p. 297.
honorabilis vir Thomas de Cranston, etc. is a witness, anno 1429.

He left a son and successor,

X. Sir THOMAS CRANSTON of that ilk, Charta penes dominum de Cavers-Douglas.
who got a charter of confirmation of the lands of Denholm, Stobs, etc. in vice
comitatu de Roxburgh, dated 10th September 1441.

He was appointed one of die Scotch commissioners, Rymer, tom. XI. p. 268.
to settle a peace with the English, 20th April 1450.

He got a charter, under the great seal, Thomae Cranston, Chart. in pub. archiv.
domino de eodem* terrarum laroniae de Greenlaw, jacen* in comitatu Marchiae et
vicecomitatu de Berwick, dated 20th March 1451.

In May thereafter we find a safe conduct granted by the king of England to the
earl of Douglas, and a numerous retinue; sir Alexander Home, James lord
Hamilton, Rymer's foed. (...) XI. p. 284.
sir David Home, Thomas de Cranston, etc. were of the number, anno 1451.

He was appointed one of the wardens of the marches, Ibid. p. 434.
anno 1459, and likeways one of the conservators of the peace upon the borders,
Border laws, p. 44.
anno 1464.

He left issue two sons.

1. Sir William, his heir.

2. --, ancestor of the Cranstons of Glen.

And dying about the year 1470, was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. Sir WILLIAM CRANSTON, Chart. in pub. archiv.
dominus de eodem, who, in a charter under the great seal, to William, lord
Crichton, is designed William Cranston of Creling, son and heir apparent of
Thomas de Cranston, dominus de eodem, dated 7th April 1450.

He was in great favor with king James II. who appointed him coroner of the
shire of Roxburgh, when but a young man; which ^ppears by his commission, under
the great seal, officii coronatoris vicecomitatus de Roxburgh, Ibidem.
to him and his heirs, etc. dated anno 1451, which office continued long in the
family, as will appear hereafter.

He got another charter; under the great seal, Char. in pub. arch.
Willielmo Cranston de Creling, filio et haeredi apparenti domini Thomae
Cranston de eodem, militis, terrarum de Kidston, etc. in vicecomitatu de
Peebles, dated anno 1452.

He got also a charter from sir James Douglas of Cavers, sheriff of Roxburgh,
to and in favors of sir William Cranston of that ilk, knight, Charta penes,
Cavers-Douglas.
of the lands of Denholm, etc. of which Cavers was superior, dated 30th October
1512.

He left issue two sons.

1. John, his heir.

2. Thomas, who got a charter, under the great seal, of the lands of Elburn,
alias Weststead de Langhope, lying in the lordship of Etrick, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
and shire of Selkirk, Thomae Cranston filio secundo genito Willielmi Cranston
de eodem, militis, etc dated 7th June 1535.

He lived to a great age, died in the beginning of the year 1515, and was
succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. JOHN CRANSTON, dominus de eodem, who was served heir to his father,
Saisine penes Cavers-Douglas.
the penult day of October 1515.

He got a precept of clare constat of the lands of Denholm, Fowler's-lands,
Little-rulewood, etc. in vicecomitatu de Roxburgh, from Cavers-Douglas, the
superior, to and in favors of John Cranston, son and heir of sir William
Cranston of that ilk, Chart. ibid.
dated 26th April 1521.

He died in the end of the year 1552, having married Janet Scot, a daughter of
the family of Buccleugh, by a charter, under the great seal, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
Johanni Cranston de ^odem, et Jonetae Scot ejus sponsae, terrarum de Smelholm,
Sprouston, etc. dated 15th June 1526.

By her he had a son,

XIII. Sir WILLIAM CRANSTON, dominus de eodem, who succeeded him, and got a
charter, Ibidem.
under the great seal, terrarum baroniae de New-Cranston, etc. dated 31st May
1553,

In his father's lifetime, he got a charter from Cavers-Douglas, of the haill
lands of Denholm, wherever they ly, etc. to William Cranston of Smaillhome,
Chart. penes Cavers-Douglas.
son and heir apparent of John Cranston of that ilk, dated in April 1553.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of Andrew Johnston of Elphinston, Chart. in pub
archiv.
by whom he had a son,

Sir John, -- and a daughter,

Elizabeth, married to sir -- Douglas of Cavers.

He was succeeded by his only son,

XIV. Sir JOHN CRANSTON, dominus de eodem, who got a charter from sir William
Cranston of that ilk, knight, Johanni Cranston filio suo et haeredi, Chart.
penes Cavers-Douglas.
et Margaretae Ramsay suae sponsae, etc. of all and sundry the lands of
Denholm, etc. dated 24th January 1562.

He got also a charter of confirmation of the above, and several other lands,
"to him and his said spouse in liferent, and to the heirs procreate, or to be
procreate betwixt them in see," Ibidem.
dated at Jedburgh, 28th November 1576.

By the said Margaret, Mill's genealogical coll. penes MacFarlane.
daughter of Nichol Ramsay of Dalhousie, he had issue a son,

John, his apparent heir, -- and seven daughters.

1. Sarah, who carried on the line of this family, of whom afterward.

2. --, married to Cavers-Douglas.

3. --, married to Rutherford of Hunthill.

4. --, married to -- Hamilton of Redhouse.

5. --, married to -- Rigg of Carberrie.

6. --, married to -- Scot of Thirlestane.

7. --, married to -- Elphingston of Hayston.

John, only son and apparent heir of sir John Cranston of that ilk, died before
his father leaving a son,

JOHN de CRANSTON, who is instructed by a charter under the great seal, Chart.
in pub. archiv.
domino Johanni Cranston de eodem, militi, in vitali redditu, etc. necnon,
Johanni Cranston suo nepoti, filio et haeredi apparenti magistri Johannis
Cranston, feodatorii de eodem, etc. terrarum de easter et wester Kirkhops, etc.
etc. dated 15th July, 1591.

This John dying also before his grandfather without issue, and sir John having
no prospect of any male succession, disponed and settled his whole estate upon
his said daughter Sarah, to whom we now return.

XV. SARAH CRANSTON, daughter of sir John Cranston of that ilk, with the
consent and approbation of her father, married sir William, son of sir John
Cranston of Moriston, a cadet of his own family, who, in consequence of this
marriage, Ibidem.
and in virtue of the above disposition and settlement, succeeded to the whole
estate.

Immediately after the marriage, there passed a charter under the great seal,
Ibidem.
Johanni Cranston de eodem, militi, in vitali redditu, et Wilielmo Cranston,
filio legitimo Johannis Cranston de Moriston, et Sarae Cranston suae sponsae,
filiae legitimae dicti domini Johannis de eodem, terrarum de east et west
Kirkhops, cum turre, fortalicio, etc. etc. etc. dated 15th March, 1593.

This sir William, being a man of parts, was in great favor with king James
VI. was long captain of his majesty's guards, and was created a knight, by two
charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub archiv.
domino Willielmo Cranston de eodem, equiti aurato, terrarum baroniae de
Langholm, etc. etc. dated in January, 1610.

He did great service to his country in quelling insurrections, and pacifying
the borderers; in consideration whereof, and on account of his other faithful
services, Chart. penes dominum Cranston.
he was raised to the dignity of the peerage by the title of lord Cranston,
anno 1611.

And got a charter under the great seal, Willielmo domino Cranston, Chart. in
pub. arch^v.
et Sarae Cranston, dominae Cranston, ejus conjugi, et haeredibus inter ipsos
legitime procreatis seu procreandis, terrarum de Lyleston, infra balivatum de
Lauderdale, etc. etc. etc. dated 4th January 1612.

By the said Dame Sarah, lady Cranston, he left four sons, and one daughter.

1. John, his heir.

2. James, ancestor of the present lord Cranston, of whom afterward.

3. Henry.

4. Thomas.

These two last are both mentioned in an entail hereafter narrated.

His daughter Margaret, was married to -- Edgar of Wedderlie.

He died anno 1627, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVI. JOHN, second lord Cranston, who, upon the resignation of William lord
Cranston, and dame Sarah, lady Cranston, his father and mother, got a charter
of the lands of Denholm, Fowlers-land, Little-rulewood, manor, place, Chart.
penes Cavers-Douglas.
etc. "To, and in favors of sir John Cranston, son and heir apparent of
William, lord Cranston, and Sarah, lady Cranston, and Elizabeth Scot, his
spouse, etc." dated the last day of June, 1619.

He got a charter under the great seal, Johanni magistro de Cranston, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
et Helenae, filiae quondam Jacobi domini Lindsay ejus conjugi, terrarum da
Smal-holme, etc. dated 3d April, 1623.

Also a charter, Ibidem.
Johanni domino Cranston, terrarum de Auldinston, Dodes, etc. in vicecomitatu
de Berwick, dated 26th January 1633.

And likewise a charter of the whole barony of Cranston, Ibidem.
etc. dated 9th February, 1635.

He married, First, Elizabeth Scott, daughter of Walter lord Buccleugh; and,

Secondly, Helen, daughter of James lord Lindsay.

But dying without issue, his estate and honors devolved upon his nephew,
William, son of his brother James beforementioned, to whom we now return.

XVI. JAMES, second son of William, first lord Cranston, who, in his elder
brother's lifetime, was designed master of Cranston, got a charter under the
great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Jacobo Cranston, (filio legitimo secundo genito Willielmi domini Cranston, et
Sarae dominae Cranston, suae sponsae) et Margaretae MacGill ejus conjugi,
terrarum dominicalium de Creling, etc. dated in December 1614.

He married, 1st, Margaret, daughter to sir James MacGill of Cranston-Riddel,
by whom he had one daughter.

Margaret, married to -- Craig of Riccartoun.

He married, Stuart's hist. of the royal family. p. 105.
2dly, lady Elizabeth Stewart, daughter of Francis Earl of Bothwell, by lady
Elizabeth Douglas, daughter of David Earl of Angus, by whom he had a son, and
three daughters.

William, designed master of Cranston, who succeeded to his uncle John, second
lord Cranston, as before noticed.

1. Daughter, -- married to -- Cockburn of Clerkington.

2. --, married to -- Elliot of Stobs.

3. --, married to -- Dobie of Stonyhill.

XVII. WILLIAM, third lord Cranston, son of the above James, was put in fee of
the whole estate of Cranston, in his uncle's lifetime, which appears from a
charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
containing an entail, terrarum baroniae de Cranston, etc. etc. etc. viz. "To,
and in favors of John lord Cranston, in liferent, and to William, master of
Cranston (only lawful son of the deceast James master of Cranston, brother
german to the said John) in fee and heritage, and the heirs-male of his body;
which failing, to Henry Cranston, brother german to the said lord, and the
heirs-male of his body; which failing, to Thomas Cranston, also brother german
to the said lord, and the heirs-male of his body; which failing, to George
Cranston of Glen, descended of sir Thomas Cranston of that ilk, and the
heirs-male of his body; which all failing, to the said John lord Cranston his
nearest heirs-male whatsomever, bearing the name and arms of Cranston. Also the
office of coroner of the shire of Roxburgh, etc." dated 17th January, 1638.

He was a man of great honor, loyalty, and integrity, and adhered firmly to
the interest of the royal family, during all the time of the civil war.

He attended king Charles II. to the battle of Worcester, where he had the
misfortune to be taken prisoner, was carried to the tower of London, where he
was long confined, his estate sequestrated, and he was particulary excepted out
of Cromwell's act of indemnity, Printed act of Indemnity.
anno, 1654.

He married lady Mary Lesly, daughter of Alexander, earl of Leven, by whom he
had a son and successor,

XVIII. JAMES fourth lord Cranston, who married Anne, daughter of sir Alexander
Don of Newton, by whom he had two sons.

1. William his heir.

2. Alexander Cranston, Esquire; who died at Darien, without issue.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIX. WILLIAM, 5th lord Cranston, who married lady Jean Ker, daughter of
William, marquis of Lothian, by whom he had seven sons, and five daughters.

1. James, now lord Cranston.

2. William, who died young.

3. Archibald.

4. Alexander.

5. William Henry, a Captain in the army.

6. Charles.

7. George.

1. Daughter, Jane, died young.

2. Anne, married to -- Selby, Esquire;

3. Elizabeth.

4. Jane.

5. Mary.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XX. JAMES, sixth lord Cranston, who married Miss Brown, an English lady, by
whom he has four sons.

1. William, master of Cranston.

2. Brown.

3. James.

4. Charles.

ARMS.
Gules, three cranes, argent.

Crest; a crane sleeping, with the head under its wing, holding up a stone with
its right foot.

Supporters; on the dexter side, a lady richly attired, holding out a bunch of
strawberries to a stag, proper, the supporter on the sinister side.

MOTTO; Thou shall want ere I want.

CHIEF SEAT.
At Creling, in the county of Roxburgh.

CRAWFURD Lord CRAWFURD.
THE surname of Crawfurd is of great antiquity in the west of Scotland, is
certainly local, and was assumed by the proprietors of the lands and barony of
Crawfurd in Clydsdale, as soon as sirnames began to be used in this country.

The immediate ancestor of this family was

I. GALFRIDUS de CRAWFURD, a man of rank and distinction in the reigns of king
Malcolm IV. and king William the Lion, who succeeded Malcolm, anno 1165.

This Galfride, Sir Ja. Dalrymple's coll. and Chartul. o^ Kelso, penes
MacFarlane,
was witness to a charter of Roger bishop of St. Andrews, concerning the
freedom and independency of the monastery of Kelso, anno 1189.

He was witness also to another charter of the same bishop, Chartul. of
Coldinghame penes eundem. p. 107.
to the monastery of Coldingham, inter 1189, and 1202, in which last year the
bishop died.

There flourished about this time Gualterus de Crawfurd, who is likewise
mentioned in a charter of Roger bishop of St. Andrews, Ibid. p. 103.
ante 1202. Whether he was brother to Galfride, or of another family, we cannot
determine, but he appears to have been ancestor of the Crawfurds of Lowden,
Kilbirnie, etc.

Galfridus was father of

II. Sir REGINALD de CRAWFURD, who was witness to a charter of Richard le Bard,
to the monastery of Kelso, together with his three sons, viz.

1. William.

2. John, Chartulary of Kelso, p. 160.
and

3. Adam Crawfurds, anno 1228.

What became of William and Adam, sir Reginald's eldest and third sons, we can
give no account, but he was succeeded by his second son,

III. Sir JOHN de CRAWFURD, Chartul. of Kelso and Newbottle.
designed dominus de eodem, miles, in several donations to the monastery of
Newbottle and Kelso.

He left issue only two daughters,

1. Margaret, married to Archibald lord Douglas, who got with her part of the
lordship of Crawfurd, with several other lands, of whom the earls of Douglas,
Angus, etc. are descended.

His second daughter, married to sir David Lindsay knight (ancestor of the earl
of Crawfurd) who got with her the barony of Crawfurd, which afterward became
the chief title of his family.

Sir John dying without male issue, Chron. of Melross.
anno 1248, in him ended the male line of the first branch of the noble and
ancient family of Crawfurd.

They carried for arms,

Gules; a fess, ermine.

LINDSAY Earl of CRAWFURD.
THE noble and illustrious name of Lindsay is of very great antiquity in
Scotland; but there are many different accounts of their origin.

Some say, that a man of considerable rank and courage, who gave great
assistance to king Kenneth II. in his wars against the Picts, about the year
838, was the first of the surname of Lindsay in this country.

Sir William Dugdale, in his baronage, mentions several considerable families
of the name of Lindsay in England, in the eleventh and twelfth centuries; that
their surname was local, and was first assumed by the proprietors of the lands
and manor of Lindsai, in the county of Essex.

Our best antiquaries therefore are of opinion, that one of these Lindsays,
Lesly, Boethius, Aber^rombie, etc.
having contracted a friendship with king Malcolm Canmore, when in England,
came with him to Scotland, where he settled, and had several lands bestowed
upon him by that generous prince, particularly the lands of Wachopdale, etc.
and that he was progenitor of the Lindsays in Scotland. Certain it is they
began to make a figure in this country, in the reign of king Alexander I. Ib.
and Fordun.
who was son of king Malcolm Canmore, succeeded to the crown, anno 1107, and
died, anno 1124: and in the reigns of king William the Lion, and king Alexander
II. there were a number of patriots and great men of that surname in Scotland,
which is attested by all Scotch historians.

There flourished in the reign of king David I. Sir Ja. Dalrymple's historical
col. p. 351, 2, etc.
two brothers, Willielmus and Walterus de Lindsay, but which of them was the
eldest, we shall not pretend to determine.

I. WILLIELMUS de LINDSAY, was the undoubted progenitor of this noble family,
and is documented by many authentic writs. He appears to have been much about
the court of king David I. who succeeded to the crown, anno 1124, and died anno
1153.

He was witness to most of the charters and donations made by that good prince
to the religious; and also to those of his son Henry, Prince of Scotland.

In a donation of Prince Henry to the monastery of Kelso, Chartul. of Kelso,
penes Macfarlane, p. 208.
Willielmus de Lindsay, together with John bishop of Glasgow, Willielmus nepos
regis, Duncanus comes, Hugo de Morville, Herbertus camerarius, David Olifard,
etc. are witnesses, ante annum 1147, in which year John bishop of Glasgow died.

In a charter of king David I. of a donation to the same monastery, Ibid. p.
320.
Willielmus de Lindesai, prince Henry the king's son, Hugo de Morville, etc.
are witnesses, ante annum 1152, in which year prince Henry died.

In another charter of king David, Chartul. of Newbottle. penes eund. p. I.
of a donation to the monastery of Newbottle, the witnesses are Willielmus de
Lindesai, Willielmus de Somerville, and Henricus comes the king's son, etc.

This William de Lindsay was also witness to a donation of king David, Chartul.
of St. Andrews, penes eund. p. 325.
of the church of Forgund, to the priory of St. Andrews, together with his
brother Walterus de Lindsay, Walterus de Riddel, etc. ante annum 1153.

He made a donation to the monks of Newbottle, of the peat-moss of Locharret,
Chartul. of Newbottle, p. 5.
called Ulnishtrochar, ante annum 1160; a sure proof of his being possessed of
lands in Mid-Lothian.

He is mentioned in many other charters and donations of king David, but it is
needless to insert them here.

He left issue two sons,

1. Sir William his heir.

2. Robert de Lindsay, who got from his father the lands of Locherwood, or
Locharret, which appears from a donation made by this Robert to the monks of
Newbottle, Ibid. p. 7* and 8.
of the peat-moss of Locharret, called Ulnishtrochar, quam pater suus illis
dedit, etc. This is also confirmed by king William; Matthew, bishop of
Aberdeen, Duncan, earl of Fife, and Robert de Quinci being witnesses, inter
annum 1172, and 1195. David filius Roberti dominus de Locharret, Ibidem.
confirms the liberty of the same moss to the monastery of Newbottle; Joceline,
bishop of Glasgow, who died anno 1199, being witness to the confirmation.
Robert dominus de Locharret, son of David, renewed and confirmed the same
donation; and his daughter and heiress, Margaret Lindsay, was married to sir
John Hay, ancestor of the marquis of Tweeddale, who with her got the lands of
Locharret. This is documented by a charter of William, Chartulary of Newbottle,
p. 9.
son of sir John de Haya, dominus de Locharret, confirming to the monastery of
Newbottle, peteram de Locharret, quae vocatur Ulnishtrochar, quam Robertus de
Lindsay, filius David, quondam dominus de Locharret, et ipsius pater illis
dedit, etc. the witnesses are William bishop of St. Andrews, sir Hugh Berkelay,
justiciar of Lothian, William de Sinclair, vicecom. de Edinburgh, etc. inter
annum 1279, and 1298, in which last year the bishop died. ( Vide Title Marquis
of Tweeddale.)

We now return to the first William, who died before 1160, and was succeeded by
his eldest son,

II. Sir WILLIAM de LINDSAY, who is witness in a charter of king Malcolm IV.
Chartul. of Kelso, p. 334.
of a donation to the monastery of Kelso, ante annum 1165, in which year king
Malcolm died.

He was one of the hostages for king William, Rymer, tom. I. p. 39.
at a convention with the king of England, anno 1174.

He is witness also to a charter of the same prince, Ibid. p. 325.
to the said monastery of Kelso, together with Hugh the chancellor, William de
Somerville, Herbert de Maxwell, etc. and is then designed Willielmus de
Lindsay, justiciarius, etc. inter 1189, and 1199, in which last year the
chancellor died.

This sir William appears to have had considerable possessions in lands, both
in the counties of Clidsdale and Mid-Lothian, by his donations to the religious.

Willielmus de Lindsay dedit, in perpetuam eleemosinam, Chartul. of Newbottle,
p. 19.
monasterio de Newbottle, quandam partem terrae suae de Crawfurd, etc. to which
earl David the king's brother, and David de Lindsay his son and heir, are
witnesses, ante annum 1195.

He died betwixt 1195, and 1200, and was succeeded by his son,

III. Sir DAVID de LINDSAY, Book of orig. charters pen. Macfarlane. Vol. I, p.
20.
who is witness to a charter of confirmation of king William, together with
Alexander the king's son, Bricius bishop of Murray, David the king's brother,
Hugo Normanville, Thomas Fraser, etc. anno 1200.

He was also witness to a charter of David earl of Huntington, Chartul. of St.
Andrews, p. 296.
to the priory of St. Andrews, together with Duncan earl of Fise, Malcolm his
son, etc. anno 1202.

He was likewise witness to a charter of confirmation of king Alexander II.
Chartul. of Dunfermline, p. 216.
of all the donations made by his predecessors to the abbacy of Dunsermline,
together with Matthaeus cancellarius, Henricus de Baliol camerarius, Petrus de
Ramsay, Robertus de Haya, etc. anno 1227.

He confirmed his father's donation to the monastery of Newbottle, of a certain
part of the lands of Crawfurd, Chartul. of Newbottle, p. 17 and 18.
which was also confirmed by the king; donationem illam quam pater suus
Willielmus de Lindsay dedit, et quam ipse Willielmus tenuit de Swano filio
Thorae, etc. the witnesses are David frater regis, Walter de Lindsay, David de
Quincy, Robert de Quincy, Alanus de Somerville, etc. By which donation it
appears, that the Lindsays were proprietors of part of the barony of Crawfurd,
before sir David married the heiress thereof.

This sir David was a brave and gallant man, and made a great figure in the
reigns of king William, and king Alexander II.

He married the daughter and co-heiress of sir John de Crawfurd, Chart. in pub.
archiv. and memoirs of Mr. Thomas Crawfurd, M. S.
by whom he got the barony of Crawfurd, which afterward became the chief title
of the family.

By her he had issue three sons,

1. Sir David.

2. Sir William, who flourished in the reign of king Alexander II. Chartul. of
Dunfermline Melrose, Kello, etc.
and was witness to many of his charters, particularly one with Patrick earl of
March, and David Olifard, anno 1234. He was Cancellarius regis, justiciarius
Loudoniae, etc.

3. Gerard de Lindsay, who confirms the donations to the monastery of
Newbottle, Chartul. of Newbottle, p. 23.
quas Willielmus de Lindsay avus suus, et David de Lindsay frater suus
primogenitus fecerunt, etc. testibus domino David de Lindsay, justiciario
Loudoniae, Gilberto Fraser, etc.

Sir David died anno 1230, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. Sir DAVID de LINDSAY, who was the first we find designed dominus de
Crawfurd, though his grandfather was certainly in possession of part of that
barony, as before observed.

This sir David made a great figure, and was in high favor with king Alexander
II. He was one of the guarantees of a treaty of peace betwixt Scotland and
England, Rymer, to^ I. p. 428.
anno 1244.

He made several donations to the religious, and confirmed to the monastery of
Newbottle, Chartul. of Newbottle, p. 22.
totam terram illam in territorio de Crawfurd, quam Willielmus de Lindsay avus
suus dedit in perpetuam eleemofinam, et quam David de Lindsay pater suus
confirmavit dicto monasterio, etc.

He made another donation to the same monastery, Ibid. p. 18 and 19.
pro anima fratris sui Willielmi, quandam partem terrae, in territorio suo de
Crawfurd, to which Reginaldus de Crawfurd vicecomas de Air, Archibald de
Douglas, and John de Crawfurd, are witnesses. Keith's catalogue of bishops, p.
259.
Also a donation to the monastery of Balmerinoch, of an annuity out of his miln
of Kirkhuet, anno 1233. All which are confirmed by two charters of king
Alexander II. viz, donationes illas quas David de Lindsay filius David fecit
monasterio de Newbottle, Ibid. p. 20. and 21.
Balmerinoch, etc. dated in 1238 and 1240, before these witnesses; Patrick earl
of Dumbar, Walter Common earl of Menteith, Walter Olifard justiciar of Lothian,
and John Maxwell chamberlain to the king, etc.

He made many other donations to the religious, Ibid. Lives of the officers of
state, Chartul. of Dunfermline. Sir James Dalrymple, etc.
with which we shall not trouble our readers; but he appears to have been
possessed of several other estates, besides his barony of Crawfurd, viz. the
lands of Byres, Barnwyvel, Garmiltoun, etc. etc.

In the year 1255, Fordun, vol. II. p. 90. Lives of the officers of state, p.
262.
he was appointed great chamberlain of Scotland, and is then designed David de
Lindsay dominus de Crawfurd, etc. He was also that same year appointed one of
the king's privy council, Rymer, tom. I. p. 566.
etc.

The Lindsays, before this era, were become very numerous, and there were many
great men, and some considerable families of that surname, which, at this
distance of time, cannot easily be connected with their chief, viz. Original
writs penes Macfarlane. Chartul. of Newbottle, Levenax, Dunfermline. Lives of
the officers of state, etc.
Willielmus de Lindesay camerarius Scotiae, ante annum 1188. Walterus de
Lindsay, vicecom. de Berwick, temp. Alexandri regis II. Idem in Rymer's Foedera
Angliae, anno 1275. John bishop of Glasgow, et camerarius Scotiae, anno 1279.
Patricius filius domini Hugonis de Lindsay, anno 1280. The Lindsays of
Ormiston, Kirkmichael, Wachop, etc. John Lindsay, governor of Perth.

Johannes de Lindsay was one of the magnates Scotiae that obliged themselvcs to
support and stand by Margaret, Rymer, tom. II. p. 266.
grandchild and heir of king Alexander III. to be queen of Scotland, etc. anno
1284, etc. etc. etc.

We now return to sir David, who left issue two sons.

1. Sir Alexander:

2. Sir William Lindsay of Craigie, Chartul. of Newbottle, and Lives of the
officers of state, p. 262.
which lands he obtained by marrying the daughter and heiress of sir John Hose,
knight, etc.

He died before 1280, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. Sir ALEXANDER de LINDSAY dominus de Crawfurd, Rymer, tom. II. p. 471.
who was one of the Scotch nobles that agreed to the marriage of Margaret queen
of Scotland with prince Edward of England, anno 1290.

He was a great patriot, and strenuous defender of the liberties of Scotland.
Aber^rombie, vol. II. p. 517 and 565.
He joined the brave sir William Wallace, and became one of the sureties for
the good behavior of Robert, (afterward king Robert Bruce) anno 1298, and was
particularly excepted out of an act of indemnity granted by king Edward I. of
England to the Scots, anno 1304.

He died soon thereafter, leaving issue three sons.

1. Sir David, his successor.

2. Sir James de Lindsay, who was with king Robert Bruce at the slaughter of
John Common in February 1305-6, and is designed propinquus, or, near kinsman to
king Robert.

3. Mr. William Lindsay, who was bred to the church, Chartul. of Dunfermline,
p. 499. Lives of the officers of state, p. 268.
and was made great chamberlain of Scotland by king Robert Bruce, anno 1317.

VI. Sir DAVID LINDSAY, dominus de Crawfurd, was one of the great barons of
Scotland who signed that famous letter to the pope; Fordun, vol. II. p. 275.
asserting the independency of our country, anno 1320, and was one of the
guarantees of a treaty of peace with the English, Rymer. tom. III. p. 1025.
anno 1323.

He made a donation to the monastery of Newbottle of some lands in Crawfurd,
and is designed David de Lindsay, Chartul. of Newbottle, p. 10. and 26.
dominus de Crawfurd, filius et haeres quondam domini Alexandri, etc. dated
anno 1328.

He married Helen, daughter and co-heiress of Alexander lord Abernethy, by whom
he got a great accession to his estate, Chart. in pub. archiv. Memoirs of the
family. Nisbet, etc.
viz. the lands of Downie in Angus, Cairny, Dunboig and Countryhills in Fife,
and Chamberlain-Newton in Roxburghshire; and, in consequence of this marriage,
the family quartered the arms of Abernethy with their own.

By her he had issue two sons.

1. David, his apparent heir.

2. Sir Alexander Lindsay, who married Catharine, daughter and sole heiress of
sir John Stirling knight, Haddington's collections.
by whom he got the lands and barony of Glenesk; but he being killed in the
service of his country at the battle of Halidon-hill, without issue, anno 1333,
the barony of Glenesk went to his brother David.

Sir David died in an advanced age, anno 1348.

VII. DAVID, first son and apparent heir of sir David Lindsay, lord of
Crawfurd, succeeded his brother in the barony of Glenesk, as before observed.

He was a youth of great spirit and courage, and highly esteemed by king David
II. whom he accompanied in his unfortunate expedition into England, Fordun,
vol. II. p. 343.
and there lost his life, where his royal master was taken prisoner at the
battle of Durham, anno 1346, leaving a son and successor,

VIII, Sir DAVID LINDSAY, who succeeded also to his grandfather, anno 1348, and
was designed dominus de Crawfurd et Glenesk.

He was a man of great parts, and was often employed by the estates of the
kingdom in negotiations of importance, which he always managed with dexterity
and honor.

He was one of the commissioners appointed to treat with the English about king
David's liberty, Rymer's foed. Angliae, tom. V. p. 657 and 711.
in the years 1349 and 1351, which was not finally accomplished till the year
1357.

He married --, daughter of --, by whom he had issue three sons.

1. Sir James.

2. Sir Alexander Lindsay of Glenesk, who carried on the line of this family,
of whom afterward.

3. Sir William Lindsay of Byres, of whom the present earl of Crawfurd is
descended.

He died anno 1356, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. Sir JAMES LINDSAY, who, being likeways a man of parts, Ibid. tom. V. p.
724,
was one of the commissioners appointed to treat with the English about the
king's liberty, and is then designed filius et haeres apparens domini David,
etc. anno 1351.

He was afterward one of the magnates Scotiae who were invested with full
powers to negotiate the king's redemption, Ibid. tom. VI. p. 43.
which they happily accomplished anno 1357; and he is then designed Jacobus de
Lindsay, dominus de Crawfurd, etc.

He married Aegidia, Stuart's hist. of the royal family, p. 54.
daughter of Walter, lord high steward of Scotland, by Marjory, daughter of
king Robert Bruce, by whom he had issue a son,

Sir James, -- and two daughters.

1. Elizabeth, married to sir John Maxwell of Pollock.

2. Marjory, married to sir Henry Douglas of Lochlevin.

He died anno 1370, and was succeeded by his only son,

X. Sir JAMES LINDSAY, dominus de Crawfurd, who got a charter, Chart. in rotul.
Roberti II.
under the great seal, from king Robert II. Jacobo de Lindsay, nepoti nostro,
militi, of the lands of New-Forest in Galloway, all erected into one free
barony, to him, and his heirs, etc. Dated at Perth 10th August 1374.

He got also another charter from the same prince, Ibid. inter annos 1375 et
1384.
( dilecto nepoti suo) of the whole barony and castle of Crawfurd, etc. to him,
and the heirs-male of his body; which failing, ( dilecto filio suo) David de
Lindsay, knight, and the heirs-male of his body; which failing, to Alexander,
brother to the said David, etc. etc. etc. He got also charters of several other
lands and baronies, too numerous to be here inserted.

This sir James, with his uncle sir Alexander, The origina^ in the publi^
register.
were in the parliament that recognized king Robert III's title to the crown,
anno 1371.

He was twice appointed one of the commissioners to treat with the English in
the years 1374 and 1381, Rymer, tom*. VII. p. 50 ^ 338.
and is then designed Jacobus dominus de Lindsay.

He had the misfortune to kill in a duel sir John Lion, Fordun, vol* II. p. 395.
chamberlain of Scotland, anno 1381, whereby he greatly incurred the king's
displeasure, though he was afterward reconciled to him, and pardoned.

He had a considerable command at the battle of Otterburn under the earl of
Douglas, where the Scots obtained a victory over the English, anno 1388.

He died without issue, anno 1397, and was succeeded by his first cousin and
heir-male, sir David, son of his uncle sir Alexander of Glenesk, to whom we now
return.

IX. Sir ALEXANDER LINDSAY of Glenesk, beforementioned, (second son of sir
David, grandfather of the last sir James,) Char. in arc^^^ regis David.
got from his father the lands and barony of Glenesk, upon which he got a
charter, under the great seal, from king David Bruce, anno 1364.

He got also, from the same prince, charters of the lands and baronies of
Newdesk, Ibidem.
Innercarity, etc. etc. in the shire of Kincardin, inter 1365 and 1368.

He was one of the commissioners appointed to treat about a peace with the
English, Rymer, tom* VI. p. 584.
and settling the marches on the borders, anno 1368.

He was afterward one of the guarentees of a truce with the English, Ibid. p.
63^*
to subsist for fourteen years, anno 1369.

He died before 1378, leaving issue three sons.

1. Sir David, his heir.

2. Alexander.

3. William.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. Sir DAVID LINDSAY, (afterward earl of Crawfurd,) a man of a noble spirit,
and fine accomplishments.

He married lady Catharine Stewart, Stuart's his^ of the royal family, p. 57*
daughter of king Robert II. and got a charter, under the great seal, from that
prince, dilecto filio suo, David de Lindsay, militi, etc. Chart. in r^^tul.
Roberti II. inter 137 and 1384.
of the superiority of the lands of Cambow in Fife. Also charters of the lands
of Strathnairn, in Inverness-shire, with the lands of Glenesk, and others in
the shires of Aberdeen and Forfar. -- All granted to his beloved son, and the
heirs-male of his body; which failing, to Alexander de Lindsay, his
brother-german, and the heirs-male of his body; which failing, to his brother
William, etc. etc. etc.

He got likeways charters from king Robert III. of the lands of Glenesk, Chart.
in rotulis Roberti III. 1391.
and several others: also 40 l. sterling per annum, out of the great customs of
Aberdeen, etc. all granted Davidi Lindsay de Glenesk, militi, dilecto fratri
regis, etc. etc.

He succeeded to his cousin sir James, as before noticed, anno 1397, was
afterward designed Dominus de Crawfurd et Glenesk.

And being in great favor with king Robert III. Chart. in pub. archiv. and
Fordun, v. II. p. 422.
was, by that prince, created earl of Crawfurd, anno 1398.

He was one of the commissioners appointed to treat with the English about a
peace, Rymer, tom. VIII. p. 381.
and obtained a safe conduct from the king of England, Davidi de Lindsay comiti
de Crawfurd, cum centum equitibus in comitiva sua, etc. anno 1404.

He was also named one of the ambassadors extraordinary to the court of
England, Ibid. p. 461,
anno 1406.

By the said lady Catharine Stewart, he left issue five sons, and two daughters.

1. Alexander, his heir.

2. David de Lindsay.

3. William of Cairny.

4. Ingram, who was bishop of Aberdeen, anno 1442.

5. Bernard, who was killed at the battle of Vernoil in France, anno 1424.

1. Daughter, Mathilda, married to Archibald, earl of Douglas, duke of Turenne,
and marishal of France.

2. Elizabeth, married to sir William Douglas of Lochlevin.

The earl died before 1412; and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. ALEXANDER, Rymer's foed. tom. VIII. p. 429.
second earl of Crawfurd, who got a safe conduct to travel through England, anno
1406, and is then designed primogenitus comitis de Crawfurd.

He got afterward a safe conduct to go up to England, Ibid. tom IX. p. 418.
to negotiate some affairs of state, anno 1416, and is then designed comes de
Crawfurd.

In 1421, he was one of the Scotch commissioners sent to treat with the
English, Ibid. tom. X. p. 125, and 307.
about the king's liberty. He became one of the hostages for his ransom, anno
1424; and, being a man of good parts, was afterward in great favor with his
majesty.

He married Mariota, daughter and heiress of David Dunbar of Cockburn, Char. in
pub. arch. ad ann. 1425.
son of George, earl of March, by whom he had issue six sons.

1. David, who died before his father without issue.

2. Alexander, designed master of Crawfurd, who became his father's heir.

3. Walter Lindsay of Edzel, of whom the earl of Balcarras is the lineal
representative.

4. William of Lekoquhy, ancestor of the Lindsays of Evelick.

5. John Lindsay of Pitcairly, who was killed at the battle of Brechin.

6. James Lindsay, who was keeper of the privy seal, anno 1453, and accompanied
Eleanora, daughter of king James I. when she went to be married to Sigismund,
archduke of Austria. -- He married a lady of considerable rank and quality,
near Augsburg, with whom he got a good estate, and whose posterity still
subsist, and have large possessions in that country.

This earl was killed at the battle of Arbroath, Hauthornden Glasg. edit. p. 69.
anno 1445, and was succeeded by his son;

XII. ALEXANDER, third earl of Crawfurd, nicknamed earl Beardy.

He gained the battle of Arbroath, where his father was unhappily killed, anno
1445, as before observed.

He was made heretable sheriff of Aberdeen, and bailie of the abbay of Scoon,
anno 1446.

He was one of the guarantees of a treaty of peace concluded with the English,
Rymer, tom. IX. p. 254, and 286.
and one of the wardens of the marches, anno 1451; and that same year was
appointed one of the ambassadors to the court of England.

But afterward, having engaged in an association with his cousin, the earl of
Douglas, and others, who were in arms against the king, Hauthornden p. 86, and
Buchanan.
he raised a considerable body of men in the north, was encountered by the
king's troops near Brechin, under the command of the earl of Huntly, and was
defeated on 18th May 1452; after which he submitted to the king, and was again
received into favor.

He married Marjory, daughter of sir Alexander Ogilvie of Auchterhouse, by whom
he had two sons, and one daughter.

1. David, earl of Crawfurd.

2. Sir Alexander Lindsay of Auchtermonzie, who succeeded to the earldom, of
whom afterward.

His daughter, Elizabeth, married to sir James Maule of Panmure.

He died anno 1458, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. DAVID, fourth earl of Crawfurd, a man of great parts, steady honor,
loyalty and integrity; was often employed in foreign negotiations, which he
managed with prudence and dexterity, and was dignified with the highest titles
that could be conferred upon a subject.

He was appointed one of the ambassadors to the court of England, Rymer, tom.
XI. p. 549, 575, and 774.
anno 1465; and again in 1466; also in 1473, when a truce was concluded.

He had the chief management of several other negotiations in 1474, 1483, 1484,
and 1485, and always acquitted himself with fidelity and honor.

He was appointed justiciar benorth the Forth, Chart. in pub. archiv.
lord high admiral and great chamberlain of Scotland, and was created duke of
Montrose, May 10th 1488.

In June thereafter, Hathornden, p. 156.
he was one of the chief commanders, on the king's side, at the field of
Bannockburn, where his royal master was slain.

He was then forfeited, by the ruling faction at the time, for his loyalty and
adhering to the interest of his lawful prince; but king James IV. Haddington's
collections,
was pleased to restore him to the estate and honors of Crawfurd, "to him and
his heirs, etc." but to the title of duke of Montrose only for life, September
19th 1489.

He married, 1st, Elizabeth, daughter of James, lord Hamilton, by whom he had
two sons.

1. Alexander, master of Crawfurd, who married lady Janet Gordon, daughter of
George, earl of Huntly, but died before his father, without issue, anno 1492.

2. John, his heir.

He married, 2dly, Margaret, daughter of -- Carmichael of Meadowflat, by whom
he had two daughters.

1. Lady Margaret, married to John Blair, Esquire; to whom she had a son,
Alexander, who obtained from David, Chart. in pub. archiv.
seventh earl of Crawfurd (son and heir of Alexander, sixth earl, uncle,
heir-male, and successor of John, the fifth earl) the lands of Balmyle and
Potento, in Perth-shire, in extinction of his and his mother's right to the
earldom of Crawfurd, as heir of line to the fourth earl, by a charter, under
the great seal, dated anno 1527.

His 2d daughter, lady Elizabeth, married to David Lion of Brakie, Esquire;.

He died anno 1494, and was succeeded by his son,

XIV. JOHN, Rymer, tom. XIII. p. 92.
fifth earl of Crawfurd, who sat in the parliament of Scotland when the queen's
jointure was settled, anno 1504.

He was a man of great honor, courage, and resolution, Hathornden, Abercrombie
etc.
and highly esteemed by king James IV. whom he accompanied to the fatal field
of Flowdon, where he lost his life, anno 1513, having married Mariota, daughter
of Alexander, lord Home, by whom he had no issue, whereby his estate and
honors devolved upon his uncle,

XIII. Sir ALEXANDER LINDSAY of Auchtermonzie, before mentioned, who was sixth
earl. He was second son of the third earl of Crawfurd, and brother of the duke
of Montrose.

He married Margaret, Memoirs of the family of Crawfurd, penes comitem de
Balcarras.
daughter of -- Campbell of Ardkinlas, by whom he had two sons, and one
daughter.

1. David, his heir.

2. Alexander Lindsay, Esquire;

His daughter, lady --, married to sir Archibald Douglas of Kilspindie,
treasurer of Scotland.

He died anno 1517, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIV. DAVID, Chart. penes com. de Errol.
seventh earl of Crawfurd, who married, 1st, lady Mariana Hay, daughter of
William, third earl of Errol, by whom he had two sons.

1. Alexander, master of Crawfurd.

2. John Lindsay, Esquire;

He married, 2dly, Isabel, daughter of -- Lundie of that ilk, by whom he had a
daughter,

Isabel, married to John, lord Borthwick.

XV. ALEXANDER, master of Crawfurd, first son and apparent heir of David,
Crawfurd's peerage.
seventh earl, married Jean, daughter of William lord Sinclair, by whom he had
a son,

David, who succeeded to the earldom, of whom afterward, -- and two daughters.

1. Margaret, married to James lord Ogilvie, ancestor of the earl of Airly.

2. Elizabeth, married to John Erskine of Dun, superintendent.

This Alexander, master of Crawfurd, and his brother John, were extremely cruel
and unnatural to their father. They seized his person, imprisoned and fettered
him, took possession of his houses and revenues; for which they were tried, and
found guilty, at a justice-court, held in Dundee.

The old earl, being most justly provoked, thought fit to disinherit them; M.
S. hist. of the family, and Crawfurd's peerage
and therefore assigned and disponed his estate and honors (with the
approbation of the crown) in favors of his cousin, David Lindsay of Edzel,
who, sailing heirs of his own body, was the next heir-male of the family. The
original disposition, which is still extant, is dated 20th December 1541; about
which time Alexander, the master, was killed in Dundee; and his brother died
without issue.

The earl died in 1542, and was succeeded by the said David Lindsay of Edzel,
in virtue of the above disposition; but he generously conveyed back the estate
and honors of Crawfurd to David, son of the said master, above mentioned, the
lineal heir of the family; but with this express provision, that, failing
heirs-male of this David's body, the estate and honors of Crawfurd should go
to the heirs-male of Edzel, etc.

He likewise reserved to himself the title of earl for life, with a sufficient
provision to support him according to his quality.

He died in the year 1570, M. S. hist. of the family, and Crawfurd's Peerage,
and was succeeded in the estate and honors by

XVI. DAVID, eighth earl of Crawfurd, son of the master, and grandson of David,
th seventh earl.

He married Margaret, Ibid. MacKenzie, and Chart. in pub. archiv.
daughter of cardinal Bethune (the old earl, and the cardinal being the parties
contracters) by whom he had four sons, and one daughter.

1. David, his heir.

2. Sir Henry Lindsay, who succeeded to the earldom, of whom hereafter.

3. Sir Alexander Lindsay, gentleman of the bedchamber to king James VI. and
created lord Spainzie. Vide, Title Spainzie.

4. Sir John Lindsay of Bensho and Woodhead.

His daughter, lady Helen, was married to sir David Lindsay of Edzel.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVII. DAVID, Rymer, tom. XVI. p. 53.
ninth earl of Crawfurd, who got a safe conduct from queen Elizabeth to pass
through England, in his way to France, anno 1590.

He married, 1st, Anne, daughter of Patrick lord Drummond, by whom he had no
issue.

He married, M. S. hist. of the family of Crawfurd, and Stewart's hist. of the
royal family, p. 173.
2dly, lady Grizel Stewart, daughter of John, earl of Athole, by whom he had a
son,

XVIII. DAVID, tenth earl of Crawfurd, who succeeded him, and married Jean Ker,
daughter of Mark, lord Newbottle; but dying in 1621, without male issue, was
succeeded by his uncle,

XVII. Sir HENRY LINDSAY (second son of the eighth earl) who was eleventh earl
of Crawfurd, Ibidem.
and married, 1st, Beatrix, daughter and heiress of George Charteris of
Kinfauns, by whom he had two sons.

1. Sir John Lindsay of Kinfauns, knight of the bath, who died before his
father without issue.

2. George, his heir.

He married, 2dly, Elizabeth, daughter of sir James Shaw of Sauchie, by whom he
had also two sons.

1. Alexander, who died without issue.

2. Lewis, Ibidem.
or Ludovick, who succeeded his brother George.

Earl Henry died in 1623, and was succeeded by his son,

XVIII. GEORGE, twelfth earl of Crawford, who married lady Anne Sinclair,
Ibidem.
daughter of George earl of Caithness; and dying without issue, was succeeded
by his brother,

XVIII. LUDOVICK, thirteenth earl of Crawford, a man of stanch honor and
integrity, who, in his early years, betook himself to a emilitary life; went
into the service of the king of Spain, and soon rose to the degree of a general
officer. But his love to his country, and his attachment to the interest of the
royal family, Rescinded acts of parl. ad annum, 1641.
made him return to Scotland at the breaking out of the civil war, where he
soon distinguished himself so much in his majesty's service; that he was
imprisoned by the parliament, but, by the interest of his friends, was
enlarged, anno 1641.

In 1643, Clarendon, folio edition, v. II. p. 218, 220.
he had the command of a regiment of horse in the royal army at the battle of
Lansdown, where he performed the part of a gallant officer.

He was afterward taken prisoner at Newcastle by the Scotch army, Rescinded
acts of parl. ad annum, 1644.
and sent to Edinburgh, where he was confined by the parliament, his estate
sequestrated, himself condemned to suffer death, and excepted from pardon, anno
1644; but his life was saved by his cousin the earl of Lindsay, lord high
treasurer of Scotland, then a man of great power and interest; upon which he
made a resignation of his estate and honors (failing heirs-male of his own
body) in favors of this John earl of Lindsay, the oldest cadet of his family,
the lord of Edzel, ancestor of the present earl of Balcarras, his then
undoubted heir-male.

Vide, Title Balcarras, page 59.

This deed was made while the earl was in prison, Ibidem.
and ratified by the parliament on 16th July 1644.

It was also confirmed by king Charles II. anno 1650, Bp. Guthrie'^ memoirs.
and again ratified by parliament after the restoration, anno 1661.

The old earl still persisted in his loyalty, was with Montrose at the battle
of Philiphaugh, anno 1645, Rescinded acts of parl. etc.
was excepted from pardon by the parliament, anno 1647, and was again excepted
in the commission to the committee of estates for pardoning rebels, etc. anno
1648.

After the murder of the king, he went abroad, and died in Spain, without
issue; and according to the above mentioned resignation and settlement, his
estate and honors devolved upon John, earl of Lindsay, who thereby became the
fourteenth earl of Crawfurd.

LINDSAY Earl of CRAWFURD and LINDSAY.
THE immediate ancestor of this noble family was,

VIII. Sir DAVID LINDSAY, dominus de Crawfurd et Glenesk, who flourished in the
reign of king David Bruce, was the eighth generation of the illustrious house
of Crawfurd, in a direct male line, and left issue three sons.

1. Sir James, his successor, whose only son died without issue.

2. Sir Alexander, who carried on the line of the family of Crawfurd.

I. 3. Sir WILLIAM, progenitor of this noble family, who got a charter, under
the great seal, from king David II. of the lands and barony of Byres, Char. in
arch. regis David.
in East-Lothian, to him and the heirs-male of his body, etc. dated 17th
January 1366, Creations of the nobility, M. S. in bibliotheca juridica, Edr.
and was created lord Lindsay of Byres by king Robert II. circa ann. 1376.

He was a man of a distinguished character, and was appointed one of the
hostages for keeping a truce with the English, Rymer, tom. VIII. p. 35.
anno 1398.

He founded a chapel dedicated to the Holy Trinity, Chart. confirm. Euphemiae,
comitissae palatinae de Strathearn.
within the cathedral church of St. Andrews, to which he mortified eight pound
Scotch per annum, payable out of the barony of Aldie, in Strathearn, anno 1413.

He married Christian, daughter and sole heiress of sir William More of
Abercorn, in vicecomitatu de Linlithgow, whereupon he assumed three mollets
into his achievement; and exchanged the lands of Dunnotter with sir William
Keith, great marshall of Scotland, for the lands of Struthers, in the county of
Fife, which afterward became the chief seat of the family.

He left issue three sons.

1. John, master of Lindsay.

2. William Lindsay of Garmilton, in vicecomitatu de Haddington, whose son
David was designed by the title of Mount in Fife.

3. Alexander Lindsay.

He died before the year 1424, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. JOHN, second lord Lindsay of Byres, who was one of the hostages for the
ransom of king James I. Rymer's foed. tom. X. p. 308.
anno 1424.

He was of the privy council to king James II. Sir Rob. Sibbald's hist. of Fife.
justiciar of Scotland benorth the river Forth, and one of the ambassadors
extraordinary appointed to treat of a peace with the English, Rymer, tom. XI.
p. 286.
anno 1451.

He sat as a lord baron in the parliaments called by king James II. Records of
parliament.
on 6th March 1457, and 1469.

He married a daughter of Robert Stewart lord of Lorn, Stewart's hist. of the
royal family, p. 169.
by whom he had nine sons, and four daughters.

1. David, his heir.

2. John, who succeeded his brother.

3. George, designed of Erbottle and Barns, who married a daughter of -- Inglis
of Tarvit, by whom he had an only child, Marjory, married to Mr. Andrew Stewart
of Beath, a son of the family of Rosyth.

4. Patrick, who carried on the line of this family, of whom afterward.

5. Walter, who was, first, praeceptor of Torphichen; then lord St. John from
1532 till he died in 1557.

6. James.

7. Alexander.

8. William, who married Margaret Christieson, but died without issue.

9. Archibald Lindsay, who was chantor of Aberdeen. He mortified ten pounds
Scotch per annum, payable out of the Barns of Ceres to the chapel of the Holy
Trinity of St. Andrews, founded by his grandfather.

His 1st Daughter, Christian, married, 1st, to John, son and heir of John lord
Seton; and, 2dly, to Robert lord Kilmawers.

2. Margaret, married to Henry Wardlaw of Tory, Esquire;.

3. Christian, married to Alexander Seton of Parbroath, Esquire;.

4. Mary, married to John Hay, lord of Yester.

He lived to a great age, died anno 1479, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. DAVID, third lord Lindsay of Byres, a great patriot, and a man of
singular worth and merit, Record of parliament.
He sat in the parliaments called by king James III. in February and June 1483,
and October 1487. He adhered firmly to the interest of his royal master, never
deserted him in his greatest difficulties, and was with him when he lost his
life at the field of Stirling or Bannockburn, in June 1488.

He was afterward arraigned by the parliament, before whom he made a bold and
undaunted defense, which is fully recorded in Pitscottie's history, and
sufficiently shows the integrity of his heart, and his firm and steady
attachment to the interest of his king and country.

He married Janet, Chart. in pub. archiv.
daughter and heiress of Walter Ramsay of Carnock and Pitcruvie; but dying
without issue, anno 1490, was succeeded by his brother,

III. JOHN, fourth lord Lindsay of Byres, who got charters under the great seal
from king James IV. Ibidem.
of the lands and barony of Byres and others, inter 1492 and 1498.

He married Mariota, daughter of sir William Baillie of Lamington, Ibid. ad
annum 1495.
by whom he had only two daughters.

1. Margaret, married, first, to Richard lord Innermeath; and, secondly, to sir
James Stuart of Beath, Stuart's hist. of the royal family.
paternal ancestor of the earl of Murray; and heired both their estates.

2. Elizabeth, married to her cousin, sir William Baillie of Lamington,
Nisbet's append. p. 138.
and had issue.

He dying without male issue, anno 1498, was succeeded by his next surviving
brother,

III. PATRICK, fifth lord Lindsay of Byres, fourth son of John the second lord
beforementioned, Rymer, tom. XIII. p. 64. and 92.
who was witness to the settlement of the queen's jointure anno 1504.

He got a charter of confirmation from king James IV. of the lordship of Byres,
Abercorn, Philpston, Duddingston, Craigforth, in Stirling-shire, Chart. in pub.
archiv. and Haddington's collections, p. 339.
Glendovan in Perth-shire, Pitedie and Mount in Fife, Sanquhar-Lindsay in Air,
etc. 1st December 1508.

He was constituted sheriff of Fife, anno 1519.

He married Isabella, daughter of -- Pitcairn, Martin's genealog. p. 237, and
Crawfurd's peerage.
of that ilk, by whom he had three sons.

1. Sir John Lindsay of Pitcruvie, his apparent heir.

2. Patrick, lord of Kirkforthar, ancestor of the Lindsays of Kirkforthar, and
others.

3. William Lindsay of Pyotstoun, of whom are descended Robert Lindsay of
Pitscottie, the historian; also the Lindsays of Wilmerston, and others.

He died anno 1526.

IV. Sir JOHN LINDSAY of Pitcruvie, master of Lindsay, first son and apparent
heir of Patrick the fifth lord, married Elizabeth, daughter of sir Robert Lundy
of Balgony, Ibidem, and lives of the officers of state, p. 368.
lord high treasurer of Scotland, by whom he had two sons, and one daughter.

1. John.

2. David Lindsay of Scotstoun.

His daughter, Janet, was married to sir David Murray of Balvaird.

He died before his father, anno 1525, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. JOHN, who succeeded also to his grandfather, anno 1526, and was the sixth
lord Lindsay of Byres.

He got charters, under the great seal, of the lands of Newton, Chart. in pub
archiv.
Duddingston, Duntarvy, Corstoun, and a great many others, inter 1530 and 1550.

He married lady Helen Stewart, Stuart's hist. of the royal family, and Chart.
in pub. archiv. ad ann. 1526.
daughter of John earl of Athole, by whom he had three sons, and six daughters.

1. Patrick, his heir.

2. Mr. John Lindsay, who died in France.

3. Norman of Kilwhiss, of whom the Lindsays of Newton of Nydie were descended,
but are now extinct.

1st Daughter, Isabel, married to Norman Leslie, master of Rothes.

2. Catharine, married to Thomas Myreton of Cambo.

3. Margaret, married to David Beaton of Melgum, son of the cardinal.

4. Janet, married, 1st, to Henry, master of Sinclair; and, 2dly, to sir
George, son of sir Robert Douglas of Lochlevin.

5. Helen, married to Thomas Fotheringhame of Pourie.

6. Elizabeth, married to David Kinnier of that ilk.

He died anno 1563, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. PATRICK, 7th lord Lindsay, who got charters, Chart. in pub. archiv.
under the great seal, of the lands and barony of Byres, and many others, inter
1570 and 1585.

He was a zealous promoter of the reformation, The original is in the college
of Glasgow.
and was one of the nobles that signed the association in defense of the young
king, anno 1567.

He married Eupham, daughter of sir Robert Douglas of Lochlevin by Margaret
Erskine, sister of John earl of Mar, by whom he had a son,

James his heir, -- and two daughters, Martin's genealogies, and Crawfurd's
Peerage.


1. Margaret, married to James master of Rothes.

2. Maulslie, married to William Ballingall of that ilk.

He died on the 11th January, 1589, and was succeeded by his only son,

VII. JAMES, eighth lord Lindsay of Byres, who, in his father's lifetime, got
charters under the great seal, Jacobo magistro de Byres, filio et haeredi
apparenti Patricii domini Lindsay de Byres, Chart. in pub. archiv.
etc. of several lands, inter 1580 and 1590.

He married lady Eupham Leslie, daughter of Andrew Earl of Rothes by Isabel
Hamilton, daughter of James lord Evandale, Crawfurd's Peerage and Martin's
genealog. p. 288.
by whom he had two sons, and three daughters.

1. Robert, his heir.

2. John, who succeeded his brother.

1. Daughter, Jean, married to Robert Lundie of Balgonie.

2. Catharine, married to John Lundin of that ilk.

3. Helen, married to John lord Cranston.

After his father's death, he got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
Jacobo domino Lindsay de Byres, of several baronies, inter 1590 and 1600.

He died anno 1601, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. ROBERT, ninth lord, who got a charter under the great seal, Ibid. ad
annum 1608.
Roberto domino Lindsay, of the lands and barony of Finhaven, the lands and
forest of Clova, Innerarity, etc, anno 1608.

He married Anne, daughter of Laurence lord Oliphant by Christian daughter of
William earl of Morton, by whom he had only one daughter,

Anne, married to Alexander Falconer, first lord Halkerton.

And dying, November 9th, 1609, without male issue, was succeeded by his
brother,

VIII. JOHN, tenth lord Lindsay, who married lady Christian Hamilton,
Crawfurd's peerage, Scots compend. etc.
daughter of Thomas earl of Haddington, by whom he had a son,

John, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Helen, married to sir William Scot of Ardross.

He died at Bath, 9th July, 1616, and was succeeded by his son,

IX. JOHN, eleventh lord, who, being a man of parts and great interest, was
created earl of Lindsay by king Charles 1. anno 1633.

In the beginning of the civil war he joined the parliament, Rescinded acts of
parl.
and was appointed one of their committee, anno 1640; a privy counselor for
life, anno 1641; and that same year was constituted lord high treasurer of
Scotland by the king, Ibidem.
in the room of the earl of Traquair, and one of the extraordinary lords of
session by parliament.

In 1643, he was appointed, by parliament, Ibidem.
one of the commissioners to treat with the English, and on the 26th July 1644,
he got the earl of Crawfurd's resignation ratified in parliament.

In 1645, he, upon the death of John earl of Lauderdale, Ibidem, and lives of
the officers of state.
was appointed president to the parliament, and one of the committee of estates
for bringing in public money.

But being truly loyal in his heart, and detesting the methods that were used
by the parliament of England, to bring the king into such distress, in 1648 he
made such a vigorous appearance, Ibidem.
in raising forces for the relief of his Majesty, then a prisoner in the isle
of Wight, that in 1649, he was entirely laid aside by the Scotch parliament,
and the office of treasurer was taken from him.

After the murder of his royal master, he adhered firmly to the interest of his
son king Charles II. and carried the scepter at his coronation at Scoon, anno
1650; but having got a commmission from his majesty to raise forces for his
service, he, with several other lords, was surprised at Elliot in Angus by the
English, and sent prisoner to the tower of London, where he continued till the
happy restoration, anno 1660.

King Charles, in consideration of his great losses and sufferings, Lives of
the officers of state, p. 419.
was pleased to restore him to the treasurer's office, 19th January 1661, which
he resigned, in favors of his son-in-law the earl of Rothes, anno 1664.

He likewise got the title of earl of Crawfurd confirmed to him by parliament,
in consequence of the resignation and entail made by Ludovick the last earl, as
mentioned under the title of earl of Crawfurd, whereby he became the 14th earl.

He married lady Margaret, daughter of James marquis of Hamilton by lady Anne
Cunninghame daughter of James earl of Glencairn, Ibidem.
by whom he had issue, two sons, and four daughters.

1. William, his heir.

2. Patrick, ancestor of the present earl of Crawfurd, of whom afterward.

1. Daughter, lady Anne, married to John Duke of Rothes.

2. Lady Christian, married to Thomas earl of Haddington.

3. Lady Helen, married to sir Robert Sinclair of Stevenson.

4. Lady Elizabeth, married to David earl of Northesk. -- And all had issue.

The earl died in 1676, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. WILLIAM, fifteenth earl of Crawfurd, and second of Lindsay, who was a great
promoter of the revolution in 1688.

He got charters, under the great seal, of several lands and baronies in his
lifetime, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Willielmo domino Lindsay, etc, inter 1664 and 1672.

In 1689, he was made president of the privy council, and one of the lords of
the treasury.

He married, 1st, lady Mary Johnston, daughter of James earl of Annandale by
lady Henriet daughter of William marquis of Douglas, by whom he had three sons,
and one daughter.

1. John, his heir.

2. Colonel James, who was killed at the battle of Almanza, anno 1708.

3. Mr. Patrick Lindsay.

His daughter, lady Henriet, was married to William Baillie of Lamington, Esquire;

He married, 2dly, lady Henriet Seton, daughter of Charles earl of Dunfermline
by lady Mary Douglas daughter of William earl of Morton, by whom he had a son,

Thomas Lindsay, Ibidem.
Esquire; -- and six daughters,

1. Lady Anne.

2. Lady Christian.

3. Lady Margaret.

4. Lady Helen.

5. Lady Susan.

6. Lady Catharine, married to Patrick Lindsay, Esquire; descended of the family of
Kirkforthar, who was governor of the Isle of Man, and provost of Edinburgh.

He died, anno School, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. JOHN, sixteenth earl of Crawfurd and third of Lindsay, who being bred to
the army had several considerable commands, and was one of the privy council to
queen Anne, anno 1702.

In 1707, he was made a brigadier general, and was elected one of the sixteen
peers for Scotland, in the first British parliament.

In 1708, he was made a major general; and, in 1710, a lieutenant general.

In 1713, he was appointed colonel of the second troop of
horse-grenadier-guards.

He married Emilia, daughter of James lord Down eldest son of Alexander earl of
Murray, Scots comp.
by whom he had two sons and two daughters.

1. John, his heir.

2. William Lindsay, Esquire; a captain of the royal navy, who died without issue.

1. Daughter, Lady Catharine, married to John Wemyss, Esquire; an officer in the
army.

2. Lady Mary, married to -- Campbell of Glensaddel, and has issue.

He died anno 1714, and was succeeded by his son,

XII. JOHN, seventeenth earl of Crawfurd, and fourth of Lindsay, who betook
himself early to a military life, and was for several years colonel of a
company in the third regiment of foot-guards.

In 1733, he was gentleman of the bedchamber to the prince of Wales, and the
next year got the command of a regiment of foot.

In 1734, he was a volunteer in the imperial army on the Rhine.

In 1739, he was also in the imperial army in a battle against the Turks, when
he received a dangerous wound in his thigh.

In 1740, he had the command of the second troop of horse-grenadier-guards,
after which, he was colonel of the royal Scotch dragoons.

He was one of the sixteen peers for Scotland, in the eighth, ninth, and tenth
British parliaments.

He married lady Jean Murray, daughter of James duke of Athole; she died soon
after the marriage, at the baths at Aix in Germany.

The earl, after struggling several years with the wound in his thigh,
languished and died, anno 1749; and having no issue, the several dignities of
earl of Crawfurd and Lindsay devolved upon his cousin and heir-male, George
viscount Garnock, descended of Patrick, son of John earl of Crawfurd, before
mentioned, to whom we now return,

X. PATRICK, second son of John fourteenth earl of Crawfurd, married Margaret,
daughter and co-heiress of sir John Crawfurd of Kilbirnie in the shire of Air,
upon whom sir John settled his whole estate, to them and their heirs whatever,
they being obliged to carry the name and arms of Crawfurd, etc.

By her, he had issue, three sons, and three daughters.

1. John, his heir.

2. Patrick Crawfurd, Esquire;:

3. Captain Archibald Crawfurd.

1. Daughter, Margaret, married to David earl of Glasgow.

2. Anne, married to Mr. Harry Maule of Kelly, brother and heir of James earl
of Panmure.

3. Magdalene, married to George Dundass of Duddingston, Esquire;

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. JOHN, who was created viscount Garnock by queen Anne, anno 1703. Vide
Title Garnock.

He married lady Margaret Stewart, daughter of James earl of Bute by Agnes
eldest daughter of sir George MacKenzie of Rosehaugh, by whom he had five sons,
and three daughters.

1. Patrick, his heir.

2. John.

3. James.

4. David.

5. Charles.

1. Daughter, Margaret.

2. Anne.

3. Magdalene.

He died anno 1709, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. PATRICK, second viscount Garnock, who married Miss Home daughter of
George Home of Kelly, Esquire; by whom he had issue, two sons, and three daughters.

1. John, a youth of great hopes, who died before his father, without issue.

2. George, his heir.

1. Daughter, Margaret, died an infant.

2. Janet, died unmarried.

3. Christian-Graham, married to Patrick Bogle, Esquire;

He died anno 1737, and was succeeded by his son,

XIII. GEORGE, third viscount Garnock, who, upon the death of John seventeenth
earl of Crawfurd, anno 1749, succeeded to the honors of that noble family, as
before noticed, and is the eighteenth earl of Crawfurd and fifth of Lindsay, by
the name of George Lindsay Crawfurd, earl of Crawfurd, etc.

He married Jean, daughter of Robert Hamilton of Bourtree-hill, Esquire; in the
shire of Air, by whom he has three sons, and two daughters.

1. George, lord Lindsay.

2. Robert.

3. Bute.

1. Daughter, lady Jean.

2. Lady Mary.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st, and 4th, Gules, a fess cheque, argent and azure: 2d and 3d, or,
a lion rampant, gules, suppressed with a ribbon, sable.

Crest; on a wreath, an ostrich, proper, holding in its beak a key, or.

Supporters; two lions sejant, gules.

MOTTO: Endure forth.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Struthers, in the county of Fife, etc.

CRICHTON Lord CRICHTON, Viscount FRENDRAUGHT.
THE noble and ancient surname of Crichton is mentioned by our historians, in
the reign of king Malcolm Canmore, and some antiquaries trace their origin even
higher; but it is probable their surname is local, and was first assumed by the
proprietors of the lands and barony of Crichton in the shire of Edinburgh,
which has been long in the possession of this family.

The first of them we find upon record is Thurstanus de Crichton, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
who is witness to the soundation charter of the abbacy of Holyroodhouse, anno
1128; though it appears from our histories, that there were several great men of
this surname, betwixt the time that this Thurstanus lived and the reign of king
Alexander II. yet as we cannot exactly connect them, we shall deduce their
descent, by authentic documents, from

I. WILLIELMUS de CRICHTON, who flourished in the reign of king Alexander II.
and in a charter of Maldwin earl of Lenox, Chartul. of Levenax, pen*
MacFarlane, p. 44.
to Stephen de Blantyre, is designed Willielmus dominus de Crichton, etc. the
charter is without date, but by the witnesses must have been before 1240.

He lived after the year 1260, and was succeeded by his son,

II. THOMAS de CRICHTON, who was one of those great barons or freeholders that
swore fealty to king Edward I. Prynne's collect. vol. III p. 659.
for lands lying in Mid-Lothian, anno 1296.

By Eda, his wise, he left issue three sons,

1. Nicholaus de Crichton.

2. William, ancestor of the Crichtons of Sanquhar and Dumfries. Vide Title
Dumsries.

3. Thomas Crichton, burgess of Berwick, Chartul. of Newbottle penes
MacFarlane, p.
whose son William makes a donation to the abbacy of Newbottle, for the safety
of the souls his father, Eda his mother, Nicholas, sir John de Crichton,
Chartulary of Newbottle,
etc. The charter is dated 27th May 1388.

Thomas died about 1300, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. NICHOLAUS de CRICHTON, who flourished in the reign of king Robert Bruce,
Ibidem.
and left issue a son and successor,

IV. Sir JOHN, designed dominus de CRICHTON, Ibid. and Nisbet, vol. I. p. 284.
who is mentioned in the above donation of his cousin Thomas, and is witness in
several charters of king David Bruce, wherein he is designed Joannes de
Crichton, miles, etc.

In a charter of Radulphus dominus de Cranyston, Chartul. of Soltray, chart. 54.
Johannes dominus de Crichton is a witness, circa 1340.

And dying before the year 1358, left issue two sons.

1. William de Crichton.

2. John Crichton, who obtained the baronies of Hounam and Crailing, Chart.
penes MacFarlane.
in vicecomitatu de Roxburgh, upon the resignation of William Landales, bishop
of St. Andrews, anno 1367.

Sir John was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. Sir WILLIAM de CRICHTON, who is designed dominus ejusdem, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
in a charter of Alexander Lindsay of Ormiston, confirmed by king David II.
anno 1368.

He obtained from king Robert II. Ibidem.
a charter of the lands of Breadwood, anno 1375.

And is witness in a charter of Alexander de Ramsay, Chartul. of Newbottle, p.
54.
together with William earl of Douglas, anno 1382.

He left issue two sons.

1. Sir John.

2. Stephen Crichton of Cairns, father of George earl of Caithness, and James
Crichton, first of the family of Ruthven.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. Sir JOHN CRICHTON of that ilk, Lives of the officers of state, p. 26.
who married Christian (but of what family we know not) by whom he had a son
and successor,

VII. Sir WILLIAM CRICHTON of Crichton, who was a consummate statesman, and
made a great figure in the reigns of king James I. and II.

He got charters, under the great seal, of a vast number of lands and baronies,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
inter 1430 and 1450.

The first public appearance he made was in 1423, when he went to England, with
some others of the young nobility, Rymer, tom. X. p. 308.
to congratulate king James I. upon his marriage, where he got much into that
prince's favor, and received the honor of knighthood before the solemnity of
his coronation, anno 1424, and was soon thereafter appointed one of his
majesty's privy council, and gentleman of his bedchamber.

Upon king James II's accession to the crown, he was constituted chancellor of
Scotland, by the estates of the kingdom, and had the tuition of the young king
during his nonage. He was made governor of the castle of Edinburgh, and
created lord Crichton, anno 1445, etc.

He founded and endowed the collegiate church of Crichton, Keith's catalogue of
bishops, p. 285.
with consent of sir James Crichton of Frendraught, his son and heir, anno 1449.

As the life and actions of chancellor Crichton, Lives of the officers of
state, p. 26, etc.
are fully set forth in the lives of the officers of state, to that we reser
our readers.

By Agnes, his wife, he left issue a son,

James, -- and two daughters. Ibidem.


1. Elizabeth, married to Alexander earl of Huntly.

2. Agnes, married to Alexander lord Glammis.

And, dying in 1455, was succeeded by his son,

VIII. JAMES, second lord Crichton, who was knighted by king James I. Fordun,
vol. II.
at the christening of his son, king James II. anno 1430.

He married Janet, daughter and coheir of James Dunbar earl of Murray, Lives
of the officers of state, p. 113. and Chart. in pub. archiv.
by whom he got the lands and barony of Frendraught, and was appointed great
chamberlain of Scotland, under the designation of dominus de Frendraught, anno
1440.

And, dying in 1469, left issue three sons.

1. William, lord Crichton, his heir.

2. Gavin, who married Margaret --, by whom he got a great many lands in the
barony of Kirkmichael, Chart. in pub. archiv.
in Dumfries-shire.

3. George Crichton. Ibidem.


He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. WILLIAM, third lord Crichton, who married lady Margaret Stewart, Stuart's
hist. of the royal. family.
daughter of king James II. but having joined his brother-in-law, Alexander,
duke of Albany, in his unnatural rebellion against his own brother, king James
III. Records of parliament.
he was tried by parliament, found guilty of treason, and forfeited, anno 1483.

By the said lady Margaret Stewart he left issue a son,

James, -- and a daughter,

Margaret, Chart. in pub. archiv.
married to George earl of Rothes.

X. Sir JAMES, only son of William, third lord Crichton, got the estate of
Frendraught, upon the resignation of Janet Dunbar, heiress thereof, his
grandmother, which being vested in her person, could not fall under the
forfeiture of William, lord Crichton, her son, anno 1483, beforementioned.

In this deed, Chart. in pub. archiv.
which is dated anno 1492, he is designed James, son and heir of the deceast
William lord Crichton, etc.

He got afterward a charter, under the great seal, Ibidem.
Jacobo Crichton de Frendraught, militi, of the lands of Hilton, Malar,
Kirktoun-Malar, etc. dated 13th December 1511.

Also a charter of the lands of Conzie, and others, Ibidem.
in Aberdeen-shire, dated 15th May 1531.

And another charter, Jacobo Crichton de Frendraught, militi, et haeredibus
suis masculis, taliae, etc. Ibidem.
of the lands and barony of Frendraught, of the lands and barony of
Inverkeithing, and several others in the shires of Aberdeen, Banff, and Perth,
dated 19th November 1535.

He married Catharine, daughter of William lord Borthwick, and died betwixt
1535 and 1539, leaving issue a son,

XI. WILLIAM, who succeeded him, and got a charter, under the great seal,
Ibidem.
Willielmo Crichton de Frendraught, of the lands of Inverkeithing ( alias
Convith) in the shire of Banff, to him and Agnes Abernethy his spouse, etc.
dated the 15th day of August 1539.

By the said Agnes Abernethy, daughter of Alexander lord Salton, he left issue
a son and successor,

XII. Sir JAMES, who got charters under the great seal, Ibidem.
Jacobo Crichton de Frendraught militi, of the lands of Bognie, and others in
the shires of Aberdeen and Banff, inter 1547 and 1569.

He married lady Janet Keith, daughter of William earl Marshal, by whom he had
two sons, and one daughter.

1. James.

2. George, Ibidem.
who got from his father part of the lands and barony of Frendraught, which he
afterward resigned in favors of his nephew sir James.

His daughter Agnes, in a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
is designed daughter of sir James Crichton of Frendraught, future spouse of
John Lesly, son and apparent heir of William Lesly of Tullieferry, dated 8th
September 1572.

Sir James lived to a great age, and died inter 1592 and 1594.

XIII. JAMES, first son and apparent heir of sir James Crichton of Frendraught,
was designed by the title of Auchingowl, and married Janet, Ibidem.
daughter of Alexander Gordon of Lesmore, by whom he had a son,

Sir James, -- and a daughter,

--, married to the lord of Meldrum.

He died before his father, and was succeeded by his son,

XIV. Sir JAMES, who succeeded also to his grandfather, and got a charter under
the great seal, Ibidem.
domino Jacobo Crichton de Frendraught militi, villae et terrarum de Darbey,
etc. in the shire of Aberdeen, 4th January 1594.

He got likeways another charter, under the great seal, of the whole lands and
barony of Frendraught in Aberdeen-shire, the lands and barony of Convith in
Banff-shire; also all and sundry the lands of Auchingowl, Ibidem.
Martoun, Badneyn, Bognie, etc. etc. to him, his heirs-male, and assigneys
whatsomever, dated 10th of August 1599.

He left issue a son,

Sir James, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Mary, married to Patrick lord Oliphant*

He was succeeded by his son,

XV. Sir JAMES CRICHTON of Frendraught, who got a charter from king Charles I.
Jacobo Crichton de Frendraught militi, Ibidem.
villae et terrarum de Monkshill pro principali, et terrarum de Lachintully et
Tullieben in speciali, warrantum, etc. dated in 1633.

He was a great loyalist, and firm friend of king Charles I. who raised him to
the dignity of the peerage, by the title of lord viscount Frendraught, Ibidem.
to him and his heirsmale. The patent is dated 20th August 1642, haeredibus
masculis et successoribus quibuscunque.

He married lady Elizabeth Gordon, Hist. of the family of Sutherland, pen*
comitem de Sutherland.
daughter of John earl of Sutherland (in January 1619) by whom he had four
sons, and three daughters.

1. James, his heir.

2. William.

3. George.

4. Francis.

1. Daughter, Elizabeth.

2. Isabel. Ibidem.


3. Margaret.

XVI. JAMES, second viscount Frendraught, in his father's lifetime, got a
charter of the lands and barony of Frendraught, Chart. in pu^^ archiv.
to and in favors of James Crichton younger of Frendraught, and the heirs-male
of his body; which failing, to William Crichton, his second brother-german, and
the heirs-male of his body; which failing, to George Crichton, his third
brother-german, and the heirs-male of his body which failing, to Francis
Crichton, his fourth brother-german, and the heirs-male of his body; which all
failing, to his father's nearest heir-male whatsomever, etc. The charter is
dated in the month of August 1441.

He married, 1st, lady Margaret Lesly, daughter of Alexander earl of Leven, by
whom he had a daughter,

--, married to sir James MacGill of Rankeillor.

He married, 2dly, Marian, daughter of sir Alexander Irvine of Drum, by whom he
had two sons.

1. James, his heir.

2. Lewis, afterward viscount Frendraught.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVII. JAMES, third viscount Frendraught, who married --, daughter of --, by
whom he had a son, and successor,

XVIII. WILLIAM, fourth viscount Frendraught, who dying without issue, his
estate and honors devolved upon his uncle,

XVII. LEWIS, fifth viscount Frendraught; second son of the second viscount,
who followed the fortune of king James VII. with whom he went to France,
Records of parliament.
and was attainted by parliament; with lord viscount Dundee, in July 1690.

James Crichton of Auchingowl, is now the heir-male of this family, and would
have been sixth viscount Frendraught, had it not been for the last lord's
attainder.

MACKENZIE Earl of CROMARTIE.
AS the rise and descent of the ancient and illustrious name of MacKenzie, is
to be found under the title of Seaforth, we shall deduce the descent of this
noble family from their immediate ancestor,

Sir Colin MacKenzie of Kintail, progenitor of the family of Seaforth, married
Barbara, daughter of James Grant of Grant, by whom he had three sons.

1. Kenneth, who carried on the line of the family of Seaforth.

2. Sir Roderick, the first of this family.

3. Colin, ancestor of the MacKenzies of Kinnock, etc.

I. Sir RODERICK MACKENZIE, second son of sir Colin of Kintail, was a man of
singular prudence, great courage and resolution, and was very instrumental in
civilizing the northern parts of this kingdom, which was of great service to
the nation, and extremely agreeable to his majesty king James VI. who was
pleased not only to confer the honor of knighthood upon him, Crawfurd's
peerage,
but likeways to give him a grant of several lands in the north country, then
in the crown by forfeiture.

He married Margaret, daughter of Torquill MacLeod of Jews, upon which he
added to his armorial bearing, a mountain in a flame, proper. By her he had
issue four sons, and one daughter.

1. Sir John, his heir.

2. Kenneth MacKenzie, first of the family of Scatwell, whose eldest daughter
Isabel married to John MacLeod of Contelich, and was mother of John MacLeod of
Muiravenside, Esquire; etc.

3. Colin MacKenzie, Esquire;

4. Alexander MacKenzie of Baloon.

His daughter, Margaret, married to sir James MacDonald of MacDonald, Bart.

He died in 1625, and was succeeded by his eldest. son,

II. Sir JOHN MACKENZIE, who was created a baronet by king Charles I. anno 1628.

He married Margaret daughter and coheiress of sir George Erskine of Innerteil,
one of the senators of the college of justice, Ibidem.
and brother of Thomas earl of Kellie, by whom he had two sons, and five
daughters.

1. George, his heir.

2. Roderick MacKenzie of Prestonhall, one of the senators of the college of
justice, who married Margaret, daughter of Alexander Burnet archbishop of St.
Andrews, by whom he had a son, Alexander MacKenzie of Fraserdale, who changed
his name to Fraser, on account of his marrying Aemilia baroness of Lovat, by
whom he had a numerous issue.

Sir John's 1st daughter, Margaret, married to Roderick MacLeod of that ilk.

2. Anne, married to Hugh lord Lovat.

3. Isabel, married to Kenneth earl of Seaforth.

4. Barbara, married to Alexander Mac-Kenzie of Garloch.

5. Catharine, married to sir Colin Campbell of Aberuchil.

He died in 1654, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. Sir GEORGE MACKENZIE, a man of singular endowments, great learning, well
versed in the laws and antiquities of our country, and an able statesman.

In 1654, he was joined in commission with general Middleton, by king Charles
II. to raise forces for his majesty's service, which they did, and maintained a
war against the English for above twelve months; but at last, being defeated by
general Morgan, he was forced to capitulate, which he did upon honorable terms.

His majesty, being perfectly sensible of his loyalty and faithful services,
was pleased, soon after his restoration, to make him one of the senators of
college of justice, and one of his privy council, anno 1661.

In 1678, he was constituted justice-general, and in 1681 he was made lord
register.

And being in no less favor with king James VII. his majesty, immediately upon
his accession to the throne, was pleased to create him a peer, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
with the titles of viscount Tarbot, lord MacLeod and Castle-haven, by letters
patent, dated 15th April 1685; and renewed his commission for being lord
register, which office he lost at the revolution; but king William, being no
stranger to his great abilities, was pleased to restore him to the lord
register's office, anno 1692.

About this time he published, from authentic documents and records, his
learned vindication of king Robert III. from the imputation of bastardy; and
rectified an error, which many of our historians had most unaccountably fallen
into.

In the beginning of queen Anne's reign, he was constituted secretary of state,
anno 1702; and on the 1st of January 1703, her majesty advanced him to the
dignity of earl of Cromartie, Ibid. Haered. masculis, taliae, etc.
viscount and earl Tarbot, lord MacLeod and Castle-haven, by patent to his
heirs-male, and of tailzie, etc.

He was afterward made justice-general, which office he resigned in favors of
Archibald, earl of Isla, anno 1710.

He married, 1st, Anne, daughter of sir James Sinclair of May, by whom he had
three sons, and four daughters.

1. John, lord MacLeod.

2. Sir Kenneth MacKenzie of Cromarty, created a baronet with his father's
precedence.

3. Sir James MacKenzie of Roystoun, created also a baronet, and one of the
senators of the college of justice.

1. Daughter, lady Margaret, married to David Bruce of Clackmannan.

2. Lady Elizabeth, married to sir George Brown of Coalstoun.

3. Lady Jean, married to sir Thomas Stewart of Balcaskie.

4. Lady Anne, married to Mr. John Sinclair, brother to the earl of Caithness,
and one of the senators of the college of justice.

He married, 2dly, Margaret, countess dowager of Wemyss, by whom he had no
issue.

He died in 1714, in the 84th year of his age, and was succeeded by his eldest
son,

IV. JOHN, second earl of Cromartie, who, anno 1685, married, 1st, lady
Elizabeth Gordon, daughter of Charles earl of Aboyne, by whom he had no issue;
he married, 2dly, Mary Murray, daughter of Alexander lord Elibank, by whom he
had four sons, and two daughters.

1. George, his heir.

2. Captain Roderick, who, being intended for the navy, was in the fleet in the
bay of Gibraltar anno 1726, and obtained leave of his captain to join the land
forces that were thrown into that garrison, where he remained during the siege:
he soon got a pair of colors, and sometime thereafter a lieutenancy in the
royal dragoons, anno 1740: he was appointed a captain of foot, and in 1745, was
sent, with a detatchment from Ireland, to join the British army, then in
Flanders, and always behaved well; but the regiment in which he was eldest
captain was reduced at the peace of Aix la Chapelle. He married --, and has
issue.

3. William, who likeways betook himself to a military life, and was first in
the service of the states of Holland, in the Scotch brigade, and afterward
accepted of a commission in the East India company's military, anno 1737, and
went with a naval armament against Angria, where he and the whole expedition
perished in a violent hurricane.

4. Patrick, who, being bred to the sea, has acquired a considerable fortune,
in the mercantile way.

1. Daughter, lady Mary, died young.

2. Lady Anne.

He married, 3dly, Anne, daughter of Hugh lord Lovat, by whom he had three
sons, and one daughter.

1. James, who died young.

2. Norman, who was an officer in the Scotch Dutch, and perished at sea, going
from Scotland to Holland with recruits.

3. Hugh, also an officer in the Scotch Dutch. Anno 1757, he raised a company
in Montgomery's battalion of highlanders, and is now eldest captain in that
regiment in America.

Lady Aemilia, married to Archibald Lawmont of that ilk, Esquire; and has issue.

He died in 1731, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. GEORGE, third earl of Cromartie, who, having been engaged in the late
rebellion 1745, raised about four hundred of his clan, who were with him at the
battle of Falkirk; and after their retreat to the north, he, with his son, lord
MacLeod, were surprised and taken by a party of lord Sutherland's militia, at
Dunrobin-castle, on the 15th April 1746.

They were sent prisoners to Inverness, and from thence to London, where the
earl was confined in the tower, tried by his peers, found guilty of high
treason, received sentence of death, and his estate and honors were forfeited
to the crown; but he afterward got a remission for his life.

He married Isabel, daughter of sir William Gordon of Invergordon, Bart. by
whom he has two sons, and seven daughters.

1. John, lord MacLeod, who was convicted of high treason, but was pardoned,
and is now major to a battalion of foot in the service of Sweden, and aid du
camp to his Swedish majesty.

2. George MacKenzie, Esquire; who is an officer in the British army.

1. Daughter, lady Isabel, married to admiral George Murray, brother of lord
Elibank, and has issue a daughter.

2. Lady Mary, married to -- Drayton, Esquire;

3. Lady Anne, married to -- Atkins, Esquire;

4. Lady Carolina, married to -- Drake, Esquire;

5. Lady Jean.

6. Lady Margaret.

7. Lady Augusta.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st, or, a mountain in a flame, proper, for MacLeod; 2d, azure, a
stag's head cabossed, or; 3d, gules, three legs of a man armed, proper,
conjoined in the center at the upper part of the thigh, flexed in triangle, and
the spurs* or; 4th, argent on a pale, sable, an imperial crown within a double
tressure, counter-floree, with flowers de lis, gules.

Crest; on a wreath, the sun in its splendour.

Supporters; two savages, each wreathed about the head and middle with laurel,
and holding a battoon over his shoulder, proper.

MOTTO; Luceo non uro.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Castle-Leod, and New-Tarbat, in Rossshire.

RAMSAY Parl of DALHOTSIE,
ANTIQUARIES do not exactly agree about the origin of the illustrious name of
Ramsay.

Some are of opinion, that it came originally from Germany, the armorial
bearing being an eagle displayed.

Others, with more probability, say, from England; that it is local, and was
first assumed from the lands and abbacy of Ramsay, in Nottinghame-shire, etc.

Certain it is, the Ramsays were settled in this country as early as the reign
of king David I. who succeeded to the crown of Scotland, anno 1124. -- And it
appears, from Rymer's foedaera Angliae, and Prynne's collections, that there
were many considerable families in Scotland of that surname, long before the
reign of king Robert Bruce.

It is evident also from our histories and records, that (besides the Ramsays
in Mid-Lothian) there were many eminent families of that surname in Fife,
Angus, and Perth-shire, in very early times, viz. the Ramsays of Coluthie,
Carnock, Corston, Forthar, Parbroath, Auchterhouse, Balmain, Banff, and many
others, some whereof have been hereditary sheriffs of Angus, sheriffs of Fife,
Edinburgh, etc. and have enjoyed the highest offices in the state; but whether
they are all descended from the Ramsays of Dalhousie, who are certainly the
head or chief of the Ramsays in Midlothian, we shall not pretend to determine,
but shall proceed to deduce the descent of this noble family by authentic
documents, from

I. SIMON de RAMSAY, Char. in pub. arch.
who flourished in the reign of king David I. and Malcom IV. and is witness in
a grant of the church of Livingston, in West-Lothian, by Thurstanus filius
Livingi, to the monastery of Holyroodhouse, anno 1140.

He is also witness to a charter, in the reign of king Malcolm, wherein William
de Morville, constable of Scotland, Chart. of the Episcopal see of Glasgow.
grants the lands of Gilmorstoun in Mid-Lothian, Eudulpho filio Uthredi, etc.
ante 1165, in which year king Malcolm died.

He lived after the year 1170, and left issue a son,

II. WILLIAM de RAMSAY, who succeeded him. Chartul* of Coldinghame penes
MacFarlane, p. 22.
In a charter de liberate ecclesiae de Coldinghame, confirmed by king William
the Lion, this William de Ramsay, Duncan earl of Fise, William de Lindsay,
Robert de London, Henry de Graham, Hugo chancellor of Scotland, Archibald abbot
of Dunfermline, etc. are witnesses, before the year 1198, in which year
Archibald abbot of Dunfermline died.

He left issue two sons.

1. William, his heir.

2. Patrick de Ramsay, who is witness in a confirmation charter of king
Alexander II. Chartul. of Dunfermline, penes eund. p. 216.
to the abbacy of Dunfermline, anno 1227.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. WILLIAM de RAMSAY, who was in great favor, Rymer, tom. I. p. 555.
both with king Alexander II. and III. which last prince constituted him one of
his council, 1st September 1255.

He was also one of the magnates that advised the king to change his ministers,
Ibid. p. 566.
which was accordingly done that same year.

In a charter of Duncan de Lascels, Chartul. of St. Andrews, penes MacFarlane,
p. 412.
confirmed by Alexander de Moravia, this William de Ramsay, John de la Haya,
etc. are witnesses, anno 1260.

He left issue three sons.

1. William.

2. Malcolm, who is witness in a charter of William de Valoniis, Ibid. p. 502.
anno 1284.

3. John, who is witness in the same charter with his brother Malcolm, and also
in the following charters with his brother William.

He died before 1262, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. WILLIAM de RAMSAY, who is witness in a donation by Simon de Kinneir, to
the abbacy of Balmerino, 1st September, the 13th year of king Alexander III.
and is also mentioned in a charter of John of Strathearn, terrarum de Beeth,
etc. signed in the royal apartment in the castle of Edinburgh, in the presence
of king Alexander III. -- Coram dominis Willielmo de St. Claro vicecomite de
Edinburgh, Johanne de Lindes^^ camerario domini regis, domino Ricardo Straiton,
Willielmo de Ramsay, Chartul. of Dunfermline, and Mill's M. S. pen. MacFarlane,
p. 87.
Johanne de Ramsay, Alexandro de Meldrum, Alano de Wachope, Willielmo de
Moravia, Thoma Logan, Alano de Camera, et altis. -- Dated in May 1278.

He died about 1295, and left issue a son and successor,

V. Sir WILLIAM, who, in several authentic writs, is designed Willielmus Ramsay
de Dalwolsy, miles, etc. and is the first we find designed by that title.

He, Prynne's coll. vol. III. p. 662.
with many of his brave countrymen, was forced to swear fealty to king Edward
I. of England, for his lands lying in Mid-Lothian, viz. Dalwolsy, etc. anno
1296; and also for his lands in the shire of Berwick, viz. Fowlden, etc. eodem
anno.

The Ramsays were now become so numerous, that it is not easy to distinguish
what family they belonged to, except when they are locally designed: there are
no less than nine of that surname that swore fealty to king Edward I. Ibidem.
for lands lying in different counties, anno 1296 and 1297.

And though this sir William was afterward obliged to renew the same oath,
Rymer, tom. I. p. 2015.
anno 1304, yet being convinced in his own mind, that an oath imposed by an
enemy, who had the power in his own hands, could not bind him against the
interest of his country, he was amongst the first that joined king Robert
Bruce, when he begun to assert his title to the crown, adhered firmly to his
interest ever after, and performed many brave and heroic actions in the service
of his country, under the conduct of that great prince.

His brave friend and cousin sir Edmund Ramsay was, with others of the chief
nobility, carried to London by king Edward I. Ibidem.
in 1296, but had the good fortune to get back to Scotland in 1297: he also
took the first opportunity of joining king Robert Bruce, and contributed not a
little to the freeing of his country from the oppressions of the English.

Sir William was one of the worthy patriots, who signed that famous letter to
the pope* Fordun, vol. II. p. 275.
asserting the independency of Scotland, anno 1320.

He was succeeded by his son,

VI. Sir ALEXANDER RAMSAY of Dalwolsy, a man of singular sortitude and
resolution: a good historian designs him, Ibid. p. 329 and 334.
nobilis Alexander de Ramsay inter Scotos famosissimus probitate habebatur.

He per^ormed many glorious actions in the wars against the enemies of his
country, in the reign of king David II, particularly, he, with remarkable
courage and conduct, raised the siege of Dunbar, then reduced to great straits
by the English, and soon after surprised and took the strong castle of
Roxburgh, Fordun, vol. II. p. 334.
anno 1342.

King David, being perfectly sensible of his worth and merit, thought he could
never do too much for so great a patriot; he therefore made him constable of
the castle of Roxburgh, warden of the middle marches, and sheriff of the county
of Teviotdale.

This was highly resented by William Douglas, lord of Liddisdale, who having,
by his own valor and conduct, retaken most of these lands from the English,
and reduced that country to the king's obedience, thought none but himself had
any title to the chief offices in those parts; he therefore beset sir
Alexander, when holding a court at Hawick, and suspecting no danger, took him
prisoner, and confined him in his castle of Hermitage, where, Ibid. p. 335.
it is said, he was starved to death, anno 1348.

He left issue a son and successor,

VII. Sir WILLIAM RAMSAY of Dalwolsy, who, like many of his brave ancestors,
lost no opportunity of exerting his courage in the wars against the English.

At the battle of Nisbet, he, with singular prudence and conduct, drew the
English army into an ambuscade, whereby the Scots gained a complete victory,
Ibid. p. 350.
anno 1355: Fordun's words are, miserunt quendam strenuum, et armis probatum,
Willielmum de Ramsay de Dalwolsy, militem, etc.

In a charter of king David II. de libera foresta comitatus de Levenax,
Chartul. of Levenax, penes MacFarlane, p. 16.
William earl of Douglas, Robert de Erskine, and William de Ramsay, knights,
are witnesses, anno 1360.

Sometime thereafter he put his son in possession of his estate of Dalwolsy,
Chart. penes comitem de Dalhousie.
Carington, etc. reserving to himself only a liferent thereof.

He obtained from king David II. for his good and faithful services, Chart. in
archiv. regis David.
an annuity of 20l. Sterling for life, upon which he got a charter under the
great seal, anno 1362.

Also a grant of the lands of Nether-Liberton, Willielmo de Ramsay domino de
Dalwolsy militi, Ibidem.
et Agnetae sponsae suae, etc. by a charter, dated the 24th of October 1369.

He died soon thereafter, leaving issue, by the said Agnes, two sons.

1. Sir Patrick, his heir.

2. David de Ramsay, who got from his father the lands of Innerleith, Chart. in
archiv. Roberti II.
upon which he got a charter, under the great seal, of king Robert II. dated 2d
July 1384.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. Sir PATRICK RAMSAY of Dalwolsy, who, in his father's lifetime, was
designed of Carington.

He made a donation to the abbacy of Newbottle, for the safety of his own soul,
Chartul. of Newbottle, penes MacFarlane p. 53.
and of Margaret his spouse, etc. without date; but as William Douglas, lord of
Liddisdale, was a witness, it must have been granted before 1353, in which year
he died.

In his father's lifetime he made a resignation of his estate of Dalwolsy and
Carington, to and in favors of his grandson Alexander, and the heirs of his
body; which failing, to James his second son, and the heirs of his body; Chart.
penes comitem de Dalhousie.
which failing, to his own heirs whatsomever; upon which resignation Alexander
obtained a charter from king David Bruce, dated 15th June 1367.

Sir Patrick likeways gave the lands of Mamilcroft, with the cote-yard thereof,
lying in the territory of Carington, Chart. in pub. archiv. ad an. 1369.
in vicecom. de Edinburg, Johanni filio Maithaei, etc. This charter is
afterward confirmed by king David, anno regni 40 mo.

He died in 1377, and, by the said Margaret his wife, had issue two sons.

1. Sir Alexander.

2. James, mentioned in his father's resignation.

IX. Sir ALEXANDER, first son and apparent heir of sir Patrick Ramsay of
Dalwolsy, was designed Alexander of Carnock, in the above resignation.

He died before his father, leaving issue a son,

X. Sir ALEXANDER RAMSAY, Chart. penes Sinclair de Herdmonston et Chart. in
pub. archiv.
who succeeded his grandfather, and, in a charter of king Robert II. to
Margaret countess of Mar, dated 2d January 1378, he is designed Alexander de
Ramsay dominus de Dalwolsy, miles, etc.

He made a donation to the abbacy of Newbottle, Chartul. of Newbottle, penes
Macfarlane, p. 54.
pro salute animae suae, et Catharinae sponsae suae, etc. to which William earl
of Douglas, who died in 1384, is a witness.

In a charter of confirmation of the donations made by his predecessors to the
abbacy of Newbottle, Ibid. p. 55.
he is designed Alexander filius domini Alexandri, etc. and, by the witnesses,
the confirmation is also before 1384.

He was inferior to none of his worthy ancestors, for military skill or
personal resolution, Hauthornden's hist. in vita Jacobi I.
and signalized himself particularly in the (...) of his country, at the battle
of Hom^^^on* where he unfortunately lost his life, anno 1401.

By the said Catharine, his spouse, he left issue a son,

XI. ROBERT de RAMSAY, who succeeded him, and is designed dominus de Dalwolsy,
in a charter of the lands of Barmucks, Chart. in pub. archiv.
by Archibald earl of Douglas, to James Dundas of that ilk, anno 1416.

He left issue a son and successor,

XII. Sir ALEXANDER RAMSAY of Dalwolsy, who, when a young man, obtained letters
of safe conduct from the king of England, Rymer's foed. Angliae, tom. X. p. 308.
to accompany king James I. into Scotland, anno 1423, and had the honor of
knighthood conferred upon him at his majesty's coronation, anno 1424.

He was one of the chief commanders with the earl of Angus, Hauthornden's hist.
in vita Jacobi ^mi.
at the battle of Piperden, where the Scots obtained a complete victory over
the English, anno 1436.

He confirmed a charter of the lands of Crichton to John Borthwick, upon the
resignation of Robert Ramsay of Innerleith, Chart. in pub. archiv.
and in this charter, which is dated in 1446, Alexander, his eldest son and
heir, is a witness.

He made an entail of his estate in favors of his grandson Alexander, and the
heirs-male of his body; which failing to his own second son Robert, and the
heirs-male of his body; which failing to his third son George, and the
heirs-male of his body; Chart. penes comitem de Dalhousie.
which failing, to his fourth son William, and the heirs-male of his body, etc.
all which is contained in a charter, under the great seal of king James II.
dated 3d April 1456.

He got a charter from king James III. baroniarum de Dalwolsy et Kerington,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
necnon baroniae de Foulden in vicecom. de Berwick. Also another charter of the
same lands, dated 20th March 1473.

This sir Alexander sat in the parliament of king James III. Extract from the
records of parliament, M. S. in the lawiers lib.
wherein Alexander duke of Albany was forfeited, anno 1479, and is therein
designed dominus de Dalwolsy, etc.

He married --, daughter of --, by whom he had four sons, according to the
above entail.

1. Alexander.

2. Robert.

3. George, who got a charter from king James II. Chart. in pub. archiv.
Georgia Ramsay filio Alexandri Ramsay de Dalwolsy, militis, terrarum de
Dalhousie, to him and Christian Valance his spouse, etc. dated 10th January
1459.

4. William de Ramsay.

He lived to a great age, and died in 1488.

XIII. ALEXANDER RAMSAY, first son and apparent heir of sir Alexander of
Dalwolsy, mentioned in the charter of the lands of Crichton to John Borthwick
before noticed, died before his father, leaving issue a son,

XIV. Sir ALEXANDER RAMSAY of Dalwolsy, Chart. penes comitem de Dalhousie.
who was served and retoured heir to his grandfather, anno 1489.

He was a man of a prodigious stature, vast strength of body, and great
resolution, and embraced every opportunity of exerting his courage against the
enemies of his country.

He married, 1st, lady Margaret Douglas, daughter of George earl of Angus, by
whom he had a son,

Nichol de Ramsay.

He married, Chart. in pub. archiv. ad an. 1508.
2dly, Nicholas Ker, relict of Alexander lord Home, by whom he had a daughter,

Margaret.

He was in great favor with king James IV. whom he accompanied to the fatal
field of Flowdon, where he lost his life with his royal master, on 9th
September 1513, and was succeeded by his son,

XV. NICHOL de RAMSAY, Chart. penes comitem de Dalhousie.
who was served heir to his father in the lands of Dalwolsy and Carington, on
8th November 1513; and in the lands of Carnock in 1532.

He was a faithful and loyal subject to king James V. and always steady to the
interest of queen Mary, in the beginning of whose reign he got a commission of
justiciary on his lands of Dalwolsy and Carington, in vicecom. de Edinburgh,
Ibidem*
and his lands of Fowlden, in vicecom. de Berwick, dated 2d May 1542.

He married Isabel, daughter of William lord Livingston, by whom he had two
sons, and one daughter.

1. George, his heir.

2. William.

His daughter, Janet, married --

He died anno 1554, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVI. GEORGE, dominus de Dalwolsy, who, in his father's lifetime, got a charter
from king James V. Chart. in pub archiv.
Georgia Ramsay filio et haeredi apparenti Nicholai Ramsay de Dalwolsy,
baroniae de Dalwolsy, Carington et Fowlden, dated 20th May 1528.

Another charter, Georgio Ramsay feodatario de Dalwolsy et Elizabethae Hepburn,
suae sponsae terrarum dominicalium de Dalwolsy, Ibidem:
dated 8th May 1536.

Also a charter to them two, duarum terrarum husbandriarum villae de Fowlden et
terrarum de Edislaw, Ibidem.
dated the 14th of March 1553.

Another charter, Georgia Ramsay domino de Dalhousie, Chart. in pub. archiv.
haeredibusque, etc. terras dominicales, sylvas, parkas baroniae de Dalhousie,
dated 6th October 1564.

He was a great loyalist, a firm and steady friend to queen Mary, and was one
of those great barons who entered into that memorable association in her
behalf, on 7th May 1568.

He married Elizabeth, daughterof -- Hepburn of Waughton, by whom he had four
sons, and two daughters.

1. John, his heir.

2. James, who carried on the line of this family, of whom afterward.

3. Alexander, who got from his father the lands of Edglaw, Chart. penes
comitem de Dalhousie.
in the barony of Carington, anno 1560.

4. William, who, in a gift of the escheat of John of Carketthill, Ibidem.
is designed filius domini de Dalhousie, etc. anno 1570.

1st Daughter, Margaret, married to sir John Cranston of that ilk..

2. --, married to sir Walter Riddel of that ilk.

He died in December 1579, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVII. JOHN RAMSAY of Dalhousie, who was served heir to his father the 15th day
of March 1580. Retour in Chancerie.


He got a charter from king James VI. to him and his heirs whatsomever,
terrarum baroniae de Dalhousie, baroniae de Carington et baroniae de Fouldane,
dated the 22d day of October 1589.

He married Marian Ballanden, daughter of sir John Ballanden of Auchinoule; but
died anno 1592, without issue, and was succeeded by his nephew George, son of
his brother James, to whom we now return.

XVII. JAMES RAMSAY, second son of George of Dalhousie, got from his father,
with consent of Nichol his grandfather, a grant of the chaplainry of St.
Leonards, Chart. in pub. archiv.
anno 1548.

He married --, daughter of --, by whom he had two sons.

1. Sir George, who succeeded to his uncle John of Dalhousie, as before noticed.

2. Sir John de Ramsay, who was created viscount Haddington. Vide title
Haddington.

XVIII. Sir GEORGE, afterward lord Ramsay, was served heir to his uncle John,
anno 1601. Ibidem.
His retour bears, quondam Alexander Ramsay de Dalhousie miles, qui obiit nono
die Septembris 1513, a^avus domini Georgii Ramsay de Dalhousie, etc. son of the
great grandson of Alexander, killed at Floudon.

He got a charter from king James VI. Georgio Ramsay de Dalhousie, Ibid. et
chart. penes comitem de Dalhousie.
haeredibusque suis, villae et terrarum de Edington unit* in unam integram
baroniam de Edington, dated 2d March 1593.

In a decreet-arbitral betwixt him and sir George Douglas, Ibidem.
he is designed George Ramsay of Dalhousie, anno 1599.

He got also a charter of a great many lands, Ibidem.
dominae Georgia Ramsay de Dalhousie militi, 23d March 1603.

And in a contract of wadset betwixt him and John viscount of Haddington,
Ibidem.
he is designed his brother-german, anno 1614.

He got a charter, domino Georgio de Dalhousie, militi, Ibidem.
et domino Margaretae Douglas, sponsae suae, terrarum de Balledmouth;
Innnerdevot et Samford, dated 12th September 1615.

He was a man of fine parts, and highly esteemed by king James VI. who first
conferred on him the honor of knighthood, and then created him a peer, Ibidem.
by the title of lord Ramsay of Melross, anno 1618. Upon which he got a
charter, Ibidem.
Georgio domino Ramsay de Melross, militi, terrarum baroniae de Dalhousie et
Melross, etc. dated the 25th day of August 1618.

He afterward, with consent of the crown, changed the title of Melross for
that of Dalhousie, as being the ancient title of the family; Ibidem*
upon which he got a charter under the great seal, Georgio domino Ramsay de
Dalhousie, dated 5th January 1619.

He married, 1st, Margaret, daughter and sole heiress of sir George Douglas of
Ellinhill, Ibidem.
brother of William earl of Morton, by whom he had a son,

William, -- and a daughter,

Margaret, married to William Livingston of Kilsyth.

He married, 2dly, Margaret Ker, daughter of --, Ibidem.
by whom he had two sons.

1. John, who married Giles Baillie.

2. James.

And, dying in 1629, was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIX. WILLIAM lord Ramsay, who, in his father's lifetime, was put in possession
of most part of his estate, upon which he got a charter, Ibidem.
under the great seal, Willielmo filio et haeredi apparenti domini Georgii de
Dalhousie militis, terrarum baroniae de Dalhousie, terrarum baroniae de
Kerington, etc. etc. dated 21st July 1612.

He was a great loyalist, and highly esteemed by king Charles I. Ibid.
Haeredibus mascalis.
who created him earl of Dalhousie, lord Ramsay and Carington, on 29th June
1633, by patent to his heirs-male, etc.

He was appointed high sheriff of Edinburgh, 24th October 1646, Rescinded acts
of parl.
and colonel of the shire of Edinburgh's horse for duke Hamilton's engagement,
4th May 1648.

And afterward, for his steady attachment to the interest of the royal family,
he was fined by Oliver Cromwell in the sum of 1500 l. Bp. Guthrie's memoirs.
Sterling, 12th April 1654.

He married lady Margaret Carnegie, daughter of David earl of Southesk, by
Margaret daughter of sir David Lindsay of Edzell, by whom he had four sons, and
three daughters.

1. George, his heir.

2. Captain John, ancestor of the present earl, of whom afterward.

3. Mr. James Ramsay.

4. Captain William Ramsay.

1st Daughter lady Marjory, married to James earl of Buchan.

2. Lady Margaret, married, 1st, to John Scrimzeour earl of Dundee; and, 2dly,
to sir Henry Bruce of Clackmannan.

3. Lady Magdalene, died unmarried.

He died in 1674, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XX. GEORGE second earl of Dalhousie, who was made bailie of the regality of
Dalkeith, 20th January 1682, and married lady Anne Fleming, Chart penes comitem
de Dalhousie.
daughter of John earl of Wigton, by lady Margaret Livingston, daughter of
Alexander earl of Linlithgow, by whom he had three sons, and three daughters.

1. William.

2. George, whose genius leading him to a military life, by his courage and
conduct he arose gradually from an ensign to the highest commands in the army.
In 1690, after the b^ttle of Valcour, he was made a brigadier and colonel of
the Scotch regiment of guards. In 1693, after the battle of Landin, he was made
a major general. In 1702, he was made a lieutenant general, and commander in
chief of all the forces in Scotland, in which office he died, anno 1705.

3. Robert Ramsay, Esquire;

1st Daughter, lady Jean, married, 1st, to George lord Ross; 2dly, to Robert
viscount Oxenford.

2. Lady Anne, married to James earl of Home.

3. Lady Eupheme, married to Mr. John Hay.

He died anno 1675, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XXI. WILLIAM, third earl of Dalhousie, a man of great honor and probity, who
was by king Charles II. Ibidem.
appointed captain of the militia of the shire of Edinburgh, anno 1678, and
lord high sheriff of the same county, anno 1682.

He married lady Mary, daughter of Henry Moor, earl of Drogheda in the kingdom
of Ireland, by Alice his wife, daughter of William lord Spencer of Wormlington,
in Warwickshire, ancestor of the earls of Sunderland, by whom he had two sons,
and one daughter.

1. George, his heir.

2. William, who succeeded his brother.

His daughter, lady Elizabeth, married to lord Haley, in the kingdom of Ireland.

XXII. GEORGE, fourth earl of Dalhousie, succeeded his father; but had the
misfortune to be killed in Holland, Ibidem.
by one Mr. Hamilton, anno 1696, without issue, and was succeeded by his
brother,

XXII. WILLIAM, fifth earl of Dalhousie, who was appointed high sheriff of
Edinburgh, 24th February 1703. He afterward betook himself to a military life,
and, by his merit, soon distinguished himself in the army.

He was colonel in the Scotch regiment of guards in Spain, where he died, anno
1710, also without issue, Ibidem.
which ended the male line of George, eldest son of William, first earl of
Dalhousie, whereby the estate and honors devolved upon the next heir male,
colonel William Ramsay, son of captain John, to whom we now return.

XX. Captain JOHN RAMSAY, second son of William, first earl of Dalhousie,
married -- Sinclair, daughter of --, by whom he had a son,

XXI. Colonel WILLIAM RAMSAY, who succeeded to the estate and honors of
Dalhousie, as before noticed, and was the sixth earl.

He was served and retoured heir to William, Sa^ine in Chancery.
the fifth earl, on 9th February, 1711.

He was a man of distinguished honor and integrity, and married Jean, daughter
of George lord Ross, by whom he had three sons, and two daughters.

1. George, lord Ramsay.

2. Charles.

3. Malcolm.

1st Daughter, lady Anne.

2. Lady Jean.

He died in October, anno 1739.

XXII. GEORGE, lord Ramsay, first son and apparent heir of William, sixth earl
of Dalhousie, married Jean, daughter of the right honorable Henry Maule of
Kelly, brother-german and heir of James, late earl of Panmure, by whom he had
seven sons, four whereof died young; the three that survived were,

1. Charles, now earl of Dalhousie.

2. George Ramsay, Esquire; advocate.

3. Malcolm.

He died in March anno 1739, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XXIII. CHARLES, who succeeded also to his grandfather earl William, in
October 1739, and is the seventh earl of Dalhousie.

ARMS.
Argent, an eagle displayed, sable, beaked and membered, gules.

Crest; on a wreath, an unicorn's head, couped, argent, horned and maned, or.

Supporters; two griffons, proper.

MOTTO; Ora et labora.

CHIEF SEAT.
At the castle of Dalhousie, four miles south of Edinburgh, etc.

SCOT Earl of DELORAIN.
THE first of this noble family was,

I. Lord HENRY SCOT, third son of James duke of Monmouth, by Anne duchess of
Buccleugh, who, in the 5th year of queen Anne, was created earl of Delorain,
viscount Hermitage, and lord Scot of Golduland, in the shire of Roxburgh, by
letter patent to the heirs-male of his body, dated 29th March 1706.

He was one of the sixteen peers for Scotland, to the 5th, 6th, and 7th
parliaments of Great Britain; and in 1715 was appointed colonel of the 2d troop
of granadier guards.

In 1723, he was made knight of the most noble order of the bath, and soon
thereafter colonel of a regiment of foot, a major general, and gentleman of the
bedchamber to his majesty, which offices he enjoyed till his death.

He married Anne, daughter and heiress of William Duncomb of Battlesden, in
Bedfordshire, one of the lords justices of Ireland in 1693, and comptroller of
the army-accompts to queen Anne. By her he had issue two sons, and one daughter.

1. Francis, his heir.

2. Henry, who succeeded his brother.

His daughter, lady Anne, died young.

The earl died anno 1730, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. FRANCIS, second earl of Delorain, who married twice; but dying without
issue, anno 1739, his estate and honors devolved upon his brother,

II. HENRY, third earl of Delorain, who, from his youth, was disposed to a
maritime life, and was soon promoted to be a captain in the royal navy.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of John Fenwick, Esquire; by whom he had two sons.

1. Henry, now earl of Delorain.

2. John Scot, Esquire;

He died in January 1740, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. HENRY, fourth earl of Delorain, viscount Hermitage, etc.

ARMS.
Or, a bend azure, a star between two crescents of the field, a crescent for
difference.

Crest; on a wreath, a stag trippant, proper.

Supporters; two maidens richly attired in antique habits; their under robe
vert; the the middle one, azure; and the uppermost, gules; and each plumed on
her head with feathers.

MOTTO; Amo.

DENNISTON Lord DENNISTON.
THE surname of Denniston is of very great antiquity in the west of Scotland,
and is said to have been first assumed by one Daniel, who, when sirnames began
to be used in this country, called his lands and possessions Daniel's-town,
after his own christian name, which, Nisbet and Crawfurd.
in process of time, came to be corrupted into Denniston; and it is certain,
that they were for a considerable time promis^uously called Danielsttoun and
Denniston.

In a charter of the barony of Houston, Dalrymple's appendix, p. 337.
in the reign of king Malcolm IV. he is said to be bounded by the lands of
Daniel, etc. which, by the situation, clearly appears to be the lands
afterward called Denniston.

But the surname of Denniston was certainly used before the reign of Malcolm
IV. Chartul. of Paisly p. 127.
for in the inquisition, made by David prince of Cumberland, into the
possessions of the church of Glasgow, Ronaldus Denniston is a witness, anno
1116.

The Dennistons of that ilk, said to be descended of this Ronald, came to have
vast possessions in lands in the shires of Dumbarton, Renfrew, Char. in arch.
regis David. an. 1369 and 1370.
Air, Lanark, Dumfries, etc.

Sir John Denniston, dominus ejusd. is witness, in a charter of a donation by
Robert lord high steward of Scotland, earl of Strathearn, to the monastery of
Paisly, anno 1360.

He married a daughter of Malcolm Fleimng, earl of Wigton, by whom he had a son,

Sir Robert Denniston, Chart. in rotul. Roberti II.
or Danielston; of that ilk, who, upon his own resignation, got two charters,
under the great seal, from king David Bruce, of the lands of Tropwood in
Lanark-shire, Glencairn in Dumfries-shire, etc. quae fuerunt domini Johannis de
Danielston, militis, sui patris, etc.

He was succeeded by his son,

Sir John Danielston, dominus ejusd. who, upon his own resignation, Chart in
archiv. famil. de Houston.
got a charter under the great seal from king Robert II. of the lands and
barony of Mauldesly, de Law, de Kylcadyow, with many others, anno 1375.

He had a son,

Sir Robert Denniston or Danielston, dominus ejusd* miles, Ibid. Roberti III.
who got a grant of the lands of Glencairn from king Robert II. and, upon his
own resignation, got a charter, under the great seal, from king Robert III. of
the lands and baronies of Danielstoun, Finlaystoun, etc. in the barony of
Renfrew, to him and his heirs whatsoever, dated at the castle of Rothsay, 25th
January 1394.

He left issue two daughters.

1. Margaret, Charta penes comitem de Glencairn.
married to sir Robert Cunninghame of Kilmawers, ancestor of the earl of
Glencairn, who got with her the lands and baronies of Danielstoun, Finlaystoun,
Kilmarnock in Dumbarton-shire, and Glencairn in Dumfries-shire.

2. Elizabeth, Chart. penes dominum Willielmum Maxwell de Calderwood:
married to sir Robert Maxwell of Calderwood, who got with her the lands of
Mauldesly, Kilcadyow, Stainly, etc.

This sir Robert dying without male-issue, in him ended the first and principal
branch of this ancient family.

There are still several families of this surname subsisting in the west of
Scotland, of whom Denniston of Cowgreen, in Dumbarton-shire, is said to be
lineally descended of the Dennistons of that ilk, etc. Denniston of Duntraith,
Denniston of Mount-john, etc.

KEITH Lord DINGWALL.
THE immediate ancestor of this noble family was,

Robert lord Keith, eldest son and apparent heir of William, third earl
Marishall, the sixteenth generation of that illustrious house, in a direct
male-line, who was killed at the battle of Flowdon, anno 1513, his father being
then alive.

By lady Elizabeth Douglas, his wife, daughter of John earl of Morton, he left
issue two sons.

1. William, who succeeded his grandfather, and was fourth earl Marishall

2. Robert de Keith, who was appointed abbot of Deer in the end of the reign of
king James V. and died before the year 1560, leaving issue a son,

Andrew de Keith, who being a man of extraordinary parts, and great
accomplishments, was much taken notice of at the court of king James VI. and
soon became a favorite of his majesty, Act of parl. in favor of Andrew Ld.
Dingwall, anno 1584.
who first conferred the honor of knighthood upon him, and then created him a
peer, by the title of lord Keith of Dingwall, anno 1584, by patent to the
heirs-male of his body.

When his cousin, George earl of Marishall, was sent ambassador to the court of
Denmark, to espouse princess Anne a daughter of that crown, as proxy for king
James VI. Andrew lord Dingwall accompanied him, and being a man of a graceful
and fine appearance, added much to the luster of his splendid retinue.

The negotiation was happily accomplished, to the satisfaction of king and
court, anno 1589; but lord Dingwall dying soon thereafter, without issue, the
honors became extinct.

PRESTON Lord DINGWALL.
THE surname of Preston is certainly local, and was assumed by the proprietors
of the lands and barony of Preston, in Mid-Lothian, as soon as sirnames begun
to be frequently used in Scotland.

I. LEOLPHUS de PRESTON flourished in the reign of king William the Lion, who
succeeded to the crown, anno 1165, and died anno 1214. -- He was father of

II. LEOLPHUS de PRESTON, who, in a donation to the monastery of Newbottle,
Chartul. of Newbottle, p. 57.
is designed Leolphus de Preston filius Leolphi, etc. tempore Alexandri regis
II.

He died before the year 1260, leaving issue a son,

III. Sir WILLIAM de PRESTON (designed miles) who succeeded him, and made a
considerable figure in the reign of king Alexander III.

After the death of that great prince, he was one of the magnates Scotiae that
were summoned to Berwick by king Edward I. Rymer, tom. II. p. 553.
in the competition for the crown betwixt Bruce and Baliol, anno 1291.

He was witness also in a charter with Henry de Preston, Chartul. of Newbottle,
p. 184.
domino Willielmo de Sto. Claro vicecom. de Edinburg, etc. anno 1292.

He was succeeded by his son,

IV. NICHOL de PRESTON, Pry^ne vol. III. p. 656.
who was one of the Scotch barons that swore fealty to king Edward I. of
England, anno 1296.

We find other three of this surname, viz. William, Ibid. p. 661. and 662.
Henry, and Thomas de Prestons, swearing allegiance to king Edward that same
year; but we cannot pretend to connect them with this family.

Nichol died in the beginning of the reign of king David II. and was succeeded
by his son,

V. Sir JOHN de PRESTON, a man of singular courage and resolution, and in great
favor with king David Bruce, whom he accompanied in his unfortunate expedition
into England, Rymer, tom. V. p. 534.
and was taken prisoner with him at the battle of Durham, anno 1346; was
several years confined in the tower of London; but was afterward released for
a ransom, and returned to Scotland.

He is witness in a charter of donation to the monastery of Newbottle, by
Patrick de Ramsay, Chartul. of Newbottle, p. 53.
anno 1353, in which he is designed Johannes de Preston, miles, etc.

He was witness also in a charter of confirmation to John Campbell earl of
Athole, Writs in the charter-chest of Craigmiller, and Mr. Mill's collections.
dated the last day of January, the 30th year of king David's reign, anno 1359.

He was appointed one of the Scotch commissioners, Rymer, tom. V. p. 207, and
305.
to treat of a peace with the English, anno 1360, and was again nominated an
ambassador extraordinary, anno 1361.

There flourished in the minority of king David II. a great patriot, said to be
of this family, Ibid. tom. IV. p. 823, and Fordun, vol. II. p. 317. 325, 326,
etc.
though we cannot connect him with it, viz. sir Laurence Preston, who
signalized himself upon several occasions, against the enemies of his country,
inter 1330 and 1340; particularly he, with William de Keith, and Robert de
Gordon, defeated the English under the command of general Talbot, whom they
took prisoner, etc. etc.

Sir John was succeeded by his son,

VI. Sir SIMON de PRESTON, who, in his father's lifetime, Chartul. of
Newbottle, p. 359.
is witness to a charter of a donation to the monastery of Newbottle, in which
he is designed filius et haeres apparens domini Johannis, etc. anno 1360.

He acquired the lands of Craigmiller from John de Capella, Charta inrotul.
Roberti Regis II.
anno 1374, which afterward became the chief seat, and one of the titles of
the family.

He left issue two sons.

1. Sir Simon, his heir.

2. Sir Henry, a man of great parts, and highly esteemed by king Robert II. He
got a share of 40,000 franks, that were sent by the king of France, Rymer, tom.
VII. p. 485, 733, etc.
to be divided amongst his faithful allies the Scots, anno 1335. He was joined
in commission with sir Henry Swinton, sir Henry Douglas, and sir John Dalziell,
to treat of a peace with England, anno 1391; and was again named one of the
ambassadors extraordinary to the same court, anno 1392; but whether he had any
succession or not, we cannot now determine.

Sir Simon was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. Sir SIMON PRESTON, the first we have found designed by the title of
Craigmiller.

He is witness in a charter of a donation to the abbacy of Dunfermline,
Chartul. of Dunfermline p. 337.
wherein he is designed filius Simonis, etc. tempore Roberti regis III.

He left issue two sons.

1. Sir George, his heir.

2. Andrew de Preston, Chart. in pub. archiv.
ancestor of the Prestons of Whitehill, Nisbet, vol I. p. 312.
etc. of whom afterward.

VIII. Sir GEORGE PRESTON succeeded his father, Retour in Craigmiller's
charter-chest and Mr. Mill's collections, etc.
and he and his successors were promiscuously designed by the titles of
Preston, Craigmiller, and Gourton, and were possessed of several other lands
and baronies.

He died on 2d August 1424, leaving issue a son and successor.

IX. JOHN PRESTON of Craigmiller and Gourton, who was served heir to his father
anno 1424, Ibid. and chart. inpub. archiv.
and married Christian Cockburn, a daughter of the family of Langton, by whom
he had a son,

X. WILLIAM PRESTON of Craigmiller, Retour in Craigmiller's charter-chest, etc.
who was retoured heir to his father in the lands of Gourton, anno 1442.

He is witness in a charter of a donation to the abbacy of Dunfermline,
Chartul. of Dunfermline p. 337.
in which he is designed Willielmus dominus de Gourton, etc. anno 1452; and,
dying the same year, was succeeded by his son,

XI. WILLIAM PRESTON of Craigmiller, Retour in the charter-chest of Craigmiller.
who was retoured heir to his father anno 1453.

He got a charter, Willielmo Preston de Craigmiller, Chart. in pub. archiv.
et suis assignatis, de terris quae fuerunt Christianae Cockburn, sponsae
quondam Johannis Preston de Craigmiller, dated at Perth 12th July 1459.

He got other two charters of several other lands and baronies, Ibidem.
anno 1463 and 1471; and dying anno 1474, was succeeded by his son,

XII. Sir SIMON, who got a charter of the lands of Craigmiller, Ibidem.
Simoni de Preston, militi, etc. anno 1475; and was served heir in general to
his father, Retour in the charter-chest of Craigmiller.
anno 1478.

He had issue two sons, and one daughter.

1. Sir William, who got a charter from his father of some lands, to him and
Elizabeth Hepburn his spouse, Chart. in pub. archiv.
anno 1510; but he died without issue, anno 1512.

2. Sir George, his heir.

His daughter, --, married to sir William Sinclair of Herdmandston.

He died anno 1519, and was succeeded by his son,

XIII. Sir GEORGE PRESTON of Craigmiller, Retour in the charter-chest of
Craigmiller.
who was retoured heir to his father, anno 1520.

He got a charter from king James V. Georgio Preston de eodem, militi et
Isabellae Hope-Pringle, Chart. in pub. archiv.
sponsae suae, of several lands and baronies, anno 1538.

By the said Isabel, a daughter of the family of Galashiels, he left issue a
son and successor,

XIV. Sir SIMON of Craigmiller, who got a charter, Chart. in pub. archiv.
to Simon Preston (son to George of that ilk) and Janet Beaton his spouse, of
the barony of Craigmiller in Edinburgh-shire, Balgay in Forfar-shire, etc. etc.
upon his father's resignation, anno 1542:

And a charter of several other lands, Ibidem.
wherein he is designed son and heir of sir George Preston of that ilk, dated
5th June 1543:

Also a charter, Ibidem.
to sir Simon Preston of that ilk, and Elizabeth Menteith his spouse, of the
barony of Preston, etc. anno 1549.

By Janet Beaton, his first wife, he had no issue; but by Elizabeth, daughter
of William Menteith of Carse, he had a son,

XV. DAVID of Preston and Craigmiller who succeeded him, Ibidem.
and got charters, under the great seal, of several lands and baronies in 1576
and 1577.

He left issue three sons, and two daughters.

1. Sir George, his heir.

2. Robert, who succeeded his brother.

3. Sir Richard, created lord Dingwall, of whom more hereafter.

1st. Daughter, --, married, 1st, to James Cunninghame of Drumwhassell; 2dly,
to Walter MacFarlane of Gartarton.

2. Magdalene, married to James Nicholson of Laswade.

He died in February 1593, Retour in Chancery.
and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVI. Sir GEORGE of Preston and Craigmiller, who married a daughter of -- Hay
of Fingask, by whom he had a son,

James, who died before himself, without issue; -- and a daughter,

Elizabeth, married to sir George Buchanan of that ilk; and dying without
male-issue, anno 1609, was succeeded by his brother,

XVI. ROBERT of Preston and Craigmiller, who was served and retoured heir to
his father, Ibidem
who died last infeft and seized in the lands of Craigmiller, etc. 18th May
1625.

This Robert died without issue in December 1639; and his brother lord Dingwall
dying also without male-succession, the male-line of sir George, eldest son of
sir Simon, the seventh generation of this genealogical account thus ended; and
the male-representative of this ancient family is,

David Preston of Whitehill, lineally descended of Andrew, second son of the
said sir Simon, Ibidem.
who was served heir to the last mentioned Robert ( ejus pronepos, trinepos,
etc.) 8th April 1640.

We now return to lord Dingwall.

XVI. Sir RICHARD PRESTON, third son of David of Preston and Craigmiller,
having been educated at court, and a man of fine parts, became a great
favorite of king James VI. who first conferred upon him the honor of
knighthood, then appointed him one of the gentlemen of his bedchamber.

He attended his majesty into England, and was made one of the knights of the
bath on 30th July 1603.

In 1607, he had the constabulary of Dingwall bestowed upon him, and was raised
to the dignity of the peerage, Crawfurd's peerage.
by the title of lord Dingwall, by patent to the heirs of his body, lawfully
begotten, whatsoever.

He married lady Elizabeth Butler, only daughter of Thomas earl of Ormond,
widow of Theobald viscount of Theophelim in Ireland; and he was created earl of
Desmond in that kingdom, Lodge's peerage of Ireland, vol. II. p. 26
on 6th June 1614, by patent to the heirs-male of his body.

By her he had only one daughter,

Lady Elizabeth, his sole heiress; and having no male-issue, the title of
Desmond became extinct.

He was drowned in his passage from Dublin to England, Ibidem.
28th June 1628, and succeeded in the honors of Dingwall by his only child,

XVII. Lady ELIZABETH PRESTON, baroness of Dingwall, Ibid. p. 30 and 37.
married to James duke of Ormond, to whom she had issue eight sons, and two
daughters.

1. Thomas, who died an infant.

2. Thomas, earl of Ossory.

3. James, died in infancy.

4. James, died in childhood.

5. Richard, who was created baron Buttler of Cloughgrenan, viscount Tulloch,
and earl of Arran, on 13th May 1662, with limitation of the honors to the
issue-male of his brother John.

6. Walter, who died young.

7. John, created baron of Aghrim, viscount Clonmore, Ibid. p. 38.
and earl of Gowran, 13th April 1676, and died without issue.

8. James, who also died in infancy.

1st Daughter, lady Elizabeth, married to Philip Stanhope, earl of
Chesterfield, whose only daughter, Ibid. p. 41.
lady Elizabeth, was married to John earl of Strathmore.

2. Lady Mary, married to William Cavendish, duke of Devonshire.

XVIII. THOMAS earl of Ossory, the eldest surviving son, was a man of fine
parts, and made a great figure in his time; but died before his father, anno
1680, having married lady Amelia Nassau, eldest daughter of Lewis lord of
Beverwert, La Lock, Odyke, etc. etc. by whom he had six sons, four whereof
died young, Ibid. p. 41.
and six daughters, three whereof died infants.

1. Surviving son, James, afterward duke of Ormond.

2. Charles, earl of Arran.

1. Surviving daughter, lady Elizabeth, married to William Richard George,
ninth earl of Derby.

2. Lady Amelia.

3. Lady Henrietta, married to Henry D' Auverquerque, earl of Grantham.

XIX. JAMES, eldest surviving son of Thomas earl of Ossory, succeeded his
grandfather James, first duke of Ormond, anno 1688, and was the second duke.

As a succinct account of the life and heroic actions of this truly great man,
Ibid. p. 41 et infra.
is to be found in Mr. Lodge's peerage of Ireland, to that we refer our
readers; and shall only add, that in 1710 he claimed the honor of Dingwall, as
being lineally descended of Richard the first lord. His claim was sustained,
and he voted by proxy for the sixteen Scotch peers elected to sit in the
British parliament, called to meet on the 25th of November the same year.

His grace was impeached by the house of Commons, 21st June 1715, whereupon,
being advised to avoid the impending storm of a parliamentary prosecution, he
retired to France on 8th Angust, and was the 20th of that month attainted,
Ibid. p. 43.
his estate forfeited, and honors extinguished, etc.

But the British parliament passed an act, 24th June 1721, to enable his
brother the earl of Arran, to purchase his estate, which accordingly he did.

The duke married, 1st, lady Anne, eldest daughter to Laurence earl of
Rochester, by whom he had no issue. He married, 2dly, lady Mary, eldest
surviving daughter of Henry duke of Beaufort, by whom he had a son,

Thomas, earl of Ossory, who died anno 1689, in the 9th year of his age.

Also five daughters, whereof ladies Mary, Amelia, and Henrietta, died in their
infancy; and lady Elizabeth died unmarried, anno 1750.

Lady Mary, married to John lord Ashburnham; but died without issue.

XIX. CHARLES, a younger son of Thomas earl of Ossory, and brother-german of
James, second duke of Ormond, was created a peer of Ireland by the titles of
baron Cloughgrenan, viscount of Tulloch, and earl of Arran, by king William,
anno 1693; and also, that same year, a baron of England, by the title of lord
Butler of Weston, etc.

MAXWELL Earl of DIRLETON.
THE immediate ancestor of this noble family was,

JOHN MAXWELL of Kirkhouse, a branch of the ancient and illustrious family of
Nithsdale, who married Jean, daughter of sir Charles Murray of Cockpool, and
sister of James earl of Annandale, by whom he had a son,

Sir James Maxwell of Innerwick, who was introduced to court by his uncle, the
earl of Annandale; and being a man of good parts, and fine address, soon became
a favorite of king James VI. who conferred the honor of knighthood upon him,
and appointed him one of the gentlemen of his bedchamber.

And being no less esteemed by his son king Charles I. was, by that prince, not
only continued in the bod-chamber, but had several other favors bestowed upon
him.

In 1633, Minutes of parliament.
he got a ratification of the barony of Innerwick, to him and Elizabeth
Boussoyne, his spouse, wherein he is called the king's trusty servant, etc.

In 1636, Rescinded acts of parl
he, and John Cunninghame of Barns, had a pension settled on them for keeping a
light on the island of May.

And as a further reward of his loyalty and constant fidelity, the king was
pleased to create him earl of Dirleton, Crawfurd's peerage.
anno 1646, by patent to the heirs-male of his body.

He married Elizabeth de Boussoyne, a foreign lady, by whom he had two
daughters.

1. Lady Elizabeth, married to William second duke of Hamilton.

2. Lady Jean, married to Charles lord Cranburn, son and heir of William earl
of Salisbury, and both had children.

But the earl dying without male-issue, the honors became extinct.

DOUGLAS Duke of DOUGLAS.
IF a long train of illustrious ancestors, distinguished by the highest titles,
and connected with the most august and noble families in Europe, can make any
name remarkable and great, there is no subject can plead a higher claim than
the Douglas; but it is the least part of the glory of this family, that it has
been honored with alliances by marriage into the first rank of nobility in
Scotland, England, and France, even with crowned heads, having matched eleven
times with the royal house of Scotland, and once with that of England.

That, besides the honors conferred on them by their own sovereigns, they have
been dukes of Turenne, counts of Longueville, and marishals of France; they
were more distinguished by their virtue and merit, than by their titles and
opulency, and the luster of their actions outshone the splendor of their birth.

Hence we see them leading the van of our armies in Scotland; supporting, by
their valor, the kingdom and crown of France, tottering on the head of Charles
VII. when reduced to the last extremity by the bravery of the English; raising
the siege of Dantzick, for which they had the highest honors conferred upon
them; conquering the Saracens in Spain; with many other acts of military glory
that have made this family renowned through all the corners of Europe, for
which we must refer to our historians, as our business is more properly
genealogy than biography.

The traditional account of the origin of this noble family, transmitted to us
by historians, is,

About the year of God 770, in the reign of Solvathius king of the Scots, one
Donald Bane, of the western isles, having invaded the Scotch territories, and
routed the royal army, a man of rank and figure came seasonably with his
friends and followers to the king's assistance; he renewed the battle, and
obtained a complete victory over the invader. The king being desirous to see
the man, who had done him so signal a piece of service, he was pointed out to
him by his color or complexion, in these words of the old Galic or Celtic
language, SHOLTO DU-GLASH; in English, Behold that black or swarthy colored
man, from which he was named Sholto the Douglas.

The king royally rewarded his great services, and gave him a grant of several
lands and large possessions in the county of Lanark, which were called Douglas,
and from hence came the surname of the family.

This Sholto is said to have left issue two sons.

1. Hugh, ancestor of the Douglases in Scotland.

2. William, progenitor of the Scoti Duglassii in Italy.

As the illustrious and numerous family of the Scoti in Italy, Umbertus
Locatus, Franc. San (...) etc.
are acknowledged by Italian historians, as well as our own, to be descended of
the Douglases, we shall therefore take the liberty here to give a short account
of them from the best authorities.

Achaius, Abercrombie, vol. I. p. 111 Lib. Ferdun, Ib. II. cap. 15.
king of the Scots, entered into a league with Charlemagne, king of France,
about the year 800, which subsisted inviolate betwixt the two crowns above 800
years. In consequence of this league, Achaius sent his brother William with
4000 auxiliaries to the emperor, who was marching an army into Italy to the
pope's assistance against Desiderius, king of the Lombards, who had invaded the
ecclesiastical territories.

William Douglas, second son of the said Sholto, accompanied him in this
expedition; and, being one of his chief commanders, had a large share of the
glory acquired by the Scots in that enterprise.

After the war was ended, William de Douglas, being indisposed, was left behind
at Placentia, when the auxliaries went home; and being recovered, he married
the daughter of Antonio Spetino, one of the most honorable families in that
country. He settled there, and from him all that great and numerous family of
the Scoti Duglassii are descended, who have always carried the same armorial
bearings with the Douglases in Scotland, Sir George MacK^nzie. Nisbet's
heraldry, etc.
viz* argent, on a chief, azure, two or three stars of the field.

An Italian historian says, Quando Carolo Magno sece l' impresa in Italia
contra Desiderio Re de Longobardi, Franciscus Sansovinus de prima origin delle
ease illustri d' Italia lib. I.
hebbe per suo condutiere di huomini di armi un Guillielmo Scozzese della
familia de conti de Duglasi, etc. which sufficiently shows, that the Scoti in
Italy acknowledge their descent from the Douglases.

And as there was a full account of these Scoti transmitted by Marc Antonio
Scoto, count de Agusano, to William marquis of Douglas, with their descent from
the above period, an exact copy whereof, together with the large genealogical
tree of the Douglases in Scotland, finely done and beautifully illuminate, is
in possession of sir William Douglas of Glenbervy, to that we refer, and return
to the Douglases in Scotland.

And as we cannot, from certain documents, connect their descent, till about
three hundred years after Sholto, we shall pass over the traditional account,
and deduce their genealogy where we have vouchers from history or records.

I. WILLIAM de DOUGLAS, said to be lineally descended from the above Sholto,
was created lord or dominus de Douglas, by king Malcolm Canmore, at a conventus
procerum held in Forfar, according to John Major and Buchanan, in 1057; but,
according to Boethius, anno 1061.

He lived after the year 1100, Hume s hist. of Douglas. Simson's essay on the
family, and M. S. in archivis familiae de Douglas.
and left issue two sons.

1. Sir John de Douglas.

2. Sir William of Glendoning, of whom the Douglases of Strabrock, Pompherston,
Pittendreich, etc. are descended.

II. Sir JOHN, Ibidem.
second lord of Douglas, succeeded, and, in his father's lifetime, was designed
of Douglas-burn; which lands ly in the shire of Selkirk, and were long in the
possession of the family of Douglas.

He flourished and made a figure in the reign of king David I. Ibidem.
and dying about the year 1145, was succeeded by his son,

III. Sir WILLIAM, third lord of Douglas, who, in a charter granted by king
David I. to the town of Air, in the twenty seventh year of his reign, Ibidem.
is designed Willielmus da Douglas dominns de eodem, miles, anno 1151.

He is also witness in another charter with Joceline, Chartul. of Kelso penes
MacFarlane, p. 319.
bishop of Glasgow, which must have been betwixt 1174 and 1199, in which last
year the bishop died.

He married Margaret, daughter of Friskinus de Kerdal, Chartul. of Murray,
ibid. p. 97.
upon the river Spey, by whom he had issue six sons, and one daughter.

1. Archibald, lord of Douglas.

2. Bricius Douglas, who was bred to the church, a man of great piety,
learning, and benevolence. He was, first, prior of Lismahago, then dean of
Murray, before the year 1200, made bishop of that see in 1203, and bestowed
many donations on the religious. Ibid. and Mr. Keith's catalogue of bishops, p.
81.
There is extant a charter of his for repairing the church of Spey, ad
instantiam et petitionem Friskini de Kerdale avunculi sui, etc.

He died in 1222.

3. Alexander Douglas, who is mentioned in several charters of his brother's,
was vicecomes de Elgin ante 1220; and in a composition betwixt A. Chartul. of
Murray, p. 82.
bishop of Murray, and Walter de Moravia, Alexander de Douglas vicecomes de
Elgin, frater quondam Bricii episcopi, is a witness, 9th October 1226.

4. Henry de Douglas.

5. Hugo de Douglas.

The above Henry and Hugo were both designed brothers of bishop Bricius in many
charters; Ibidem.
particularly in carta collationis Willielmi filii Friskini, etc. ante 1222:
and of these brothers several families of the name of Douglas in the north are
descended.

6. Friskinus de Douglas, who, in a charter super ecclesiam de Birny, Chartul.
of Kelso, p. 319.
is designed brother of bishop Bricius, ante annum 1222.

His daughter Margaret was married to sir Harvey Keith, Nisbet's appendix, p. 3.
great marishal of Scotland.

Sir William died before the year 1200, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. ARCHIBALD, fourth lord of Douglas, who appears to have been possessed of a
vast estate; and, Chartul. of Murray, p. 82, 97, 125. etc.
being a man of great parts, was much in favor with king Alexander II. and was
witness to many of his public deeds; -- particularly to a confirmation of a
charter of David de Lindsay, Chartul. of Newbottle, p. 18.
of a donation to the monastery of Newbottle, anno 1220; and in another charter
of confirmation of the earldom of Lennox, Chartul. of Lennox, p. 15.
by the same prince, to earl Maldwin, anno 1238.

He married Margaret, daughter and coheiress of sir John Crawfurd, Crawfurd's
notes on Buchanan, Home, Simson, etc.
dominus de eodem, by which marriage he got a considerable addition to his
estate in lands, etc.

And, dying about 1240, left issue two sons.

1. Sir William, his heir.

2. Sir Andrew de Douglas, ancestor of the earl of Morton. Vide Title Morton.

V. Sir WILLIAM, fifth lord of Douglas, succeeded his father, Chartulary of
Kelso, p. 158 and 171.
and is said, by Home and other historians, to have married Martha, sister of
the earl of Carrick. He is mentioned in several charters betwixt 1240 and 1250.

He was appointed one of the counselors to the king, Rymer, tom. I. p. 566.
anno 1255.

He entered into an indenture or contract with sir Hugh, lord of Abernethy,
whereby Hugh de Douglas, his eldest son and heir, was to marry Margaret, Chart.
in archiv sam. de Douglas.
sister of the said sir Hugh, etc. The indenture is dated in 1259, to which his
brother Andrew de Douglas is a witness.

In a donation by sir Simon Lockhart of Symontoun, to the convent of Kelso,
Chartul. of Kelso, ad ann 1273.
sir William de Douglas, dominus de eodem, is a witness, anno 1273.

He died in 1276, leaving issue two sons.

1. Hugh, his heir.

2. William, who succeeded his brother.

VI. HUGH, sixth lord of Douglas, succeeded his father, and was a man of
singular valor and courage: he, when a young man, eminently signalized himself
at the battle of Largis in Cunningham, where king Alexander III. commanded in
person, and obtained a complete victory over Haco king of Norway, who had
invaded Scotland with a numerous army, anno 1263.

He married Margaret, Chart, in archivis ^am. de Douglas ad ann. 1259
daughter of Patrick, and sister of Hugh lord of Abernethy, as before noticed;
but, dying without issue, was succeeded by his brother,

VI. WILLIAM, seventh lord of Douglas, who, on account of his singular boldness
and intrepidity, was called William the hardy. He was amongst the first men of
rank that joined Sir William Wallace, Hist. of the royal family of Stewart.
and embraced every opportunity of exerting his valor and courage against the
enemies of his country.

He confined William de Abernethy, Fordun, lib II. cap. 2.
etc. in his castle of Douglas, for the slaughter of Duncan earl of Fife, anno
1288.

He was one of the magnates Scotiae that signed a letter to the king of England
about the marriage of queen Margaret of Scotland to his eldest son, Rymer, tom*
II. p. 472.
anno 1290.

In 1295 he was governor of Berwick, then in the hands of the Scots, which he
gallantly defended for a long time against king Edward I. and the English army,
but was at last overpowered, and forced to surrender.

And though almost the whole country was soon after overrun by the English,
yet William lord Douglas was the only man of rank in Scotland that could never
be prevailed upon to submit, Rapin's hist. of England, vol. I. p. 375
or swear ^ealty to a prince who had no title or right to the kingdom, but what
force gave him.

He was thereafter carried prisoner to England, where he remained confined for
seven years.

He married, Hist. of the royal family* p. 519.
1st, Elizabeth, eldest daughter of Alexander sixth lord high steward of
Scotland, great grandfather of king Robert II. by whom he had issue three
sons. Abercombie^ hist. vol. I. p. 450.


1. James, lord Douglas.

2. Hugh de Douglas.

3. Archibald, nicknamed Tyneman, who carried on the line of this family, of
whom afterward.

He married, 2dly, -- daughter of sir William Keith, Nisbet's append. p. 3.
Home, Crawfurd, etc.
great marishal of Scotland.

He married, 3dly, -- daughter of Ferrairs earl of Derby; and, dying prisoner
in England anno 1303, Abercromb. vol. II. p. 497.
was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. JAMES, Nisbet's append. p. 3.
eighth lord of Douglas, well known by the name of good sir James, who, by all
our historians, is allowed to have been one of the greatest heroes of his time.

He joined king Robert Bruce as soon as he began to assert his title to the
crown. He assisted at his coronation at Scoon, anno 1306. and never deserted
him when reduced to the last extremity, but was always assisting to him in his
greatest distress. According to a celebrated author, in omnibus guerris suis
athleta fidissimus. Fordun* lib. 43. cap. 20.


In 1313 he assaulted and took the castle of Roxburgh, Ibidem. lib. 12. cap. 19.
then in the hands of the English.

In June 1314, he commanded the left wing of the Scotch army at the battle of
Bannockburn, and had no small share of the glory gained by the Scots against
the English on that memorable day; where, on account of his gallant behavior,
he received from king Robert the honor of knighthood, under the banner in the
field, which, in these days, was in higher esteem than the peerage.

He was constituted warden of the marches toward England. He often invaded
that country, and always returned with success. According to Fordun, Ibidem.
cap. 25.
he killed three chief commanders, in three different engagements, with his own
hands.

He got a grant from king Robert, to him and his heirs, of the town, castle,
and forest of Jedworth, etc. The charter contains many noble and honorable
clauses: and that it might remain for ever, he was invested with the king's
emerald ring at Berwick the 8th of November, and 19th year of his reign, anno
1324. Chart. in archiv. famil. de Douglas.
There was then added to his armorial bearing, a noble compartment, viz. a
wreath of stakes, in commemoration of his having wreathed in the English in the
said forest, so that they could not escape, Sir George M'Kenzie, Nisbet, etc.
and then defeated them.

He afterward obtained a new charter from king Robert the Bruce, Chart. in
rotulis Roberti I. and chart. in archiv. fam. de Douglas.
of all the lands and town of Douglas, tenement of Kirkmichael, etc. in which
he is designed Jacobus dominus de Douglas, filius et haeres quondam Willielmi
de Douglas, militis, dated at Berwick 11th day of April 1329.

He obtained also, from king Edward of England, Rymer's (...) tom. IV. p. 34,
400.
a right of all the lands and castles that belonged to his father William lord
Douglas, in Northumberland, etc. in May 1329.

King Robert finding him hear his end, and unable to undertake a journey to the
Holy Land, to perform a certain vow he had made, requested his faithful friend
sir James Douglas, that he would carry his heart to Jerusalem, and bury it near
our Savior's sepulcher. Sir James cheerfully undertook the arduous task,
Fordun. lib. 13. cap. 20.
and had the good fortune to execute it, though it cost him his life. For which
the family got added to their armorial bearing, argent, M'Kenzie, Nisbet, etc.
a man's heart, gules, ensigned with an imperial crown, proper.

Sir James, in his expedition to the holy and, took with him three valiant
knights, sir William Sinclair of Rosline, sir William Keith, and sir Robert
Logan, with about two hundred gentlemen of approven courage, (some historians
say a great many more,) but having interred king Robert's heart at the holy
sepulcher, he joined the king of Arragon against the Infidels, and was killed
in Spain on 31st of August 1331, after having been thirteen times victorious
against the Turks and Saracens; Fordun. lib. 13. cap. 21.
and, according to the same author, fifty seven times against the English.

Thus died the brave and valiant sir James Douglas, who, having never married,
left only a natural son.

Archibald de Douglas, a brave and gallant officer, Ibidem. lib. 14. cap. 16.
who accompanied William first earl of Douglas to the battle of Poictiers in
France, anno 1356.

According to the M. S. history of the family, he settled near Bourdeaux,
married there, M. S. in arch. famil. de Douglas.
and was progenitor of some considerable families of the name of Douglas, which
are subsisting in France to this day.

James lord Douglas was succeeded by his brother,

VII. HUGH, ninth lord of Douglas, second son of William the hardy, who never
married, but resigned his lands in favors of his nephew William, afterward
earl of Douglas, anno 1342; Chart. in archiv. famil. de Douglas.
in which resignation he is designed brother and heir of James lord Douglas,
etc.

He was succeeded by his nephew William, son of his brother Archibald, to whom
we now return.

VIII. ARCHIBALD, tenth lord of Douglas, commonly called Tyneman, third son of
William the hardy, obtained from king Robert Bruce, Chart. penes dom. Erikine
1324.
a charter, " Dilecto ac fideli nostro Archibaldo de Douglas, pro homagio et
servitio suo," of the lands of Rattray, Ormond, Cairnglass, etc. in Buchan, in
the shire of Aberdeen, the 80th year of his reign.

Mr. Crawfurd says, that king Robert Bruce, who had conferred the title of
Galloway upon his brother Edward earl of Carrick, Knight's hist. of England,
Tyr. hist. vol. III. Boethius, Peerage, p. 156. Home, Simson, and Maitland's
hist. of Scotland, vol. I. p. 509.
after his death bestowed it upon this Archibald; and that he was afterward
designed lord of Galloway, is attested by many historians, both Scotch and
English.

He was a man of great bravery and courage, of which he gave many proofs in
several rencounters against the English; and though he was not always successful,
yet he still came off with honor even when discomfited.

He was a faithful and steady friend to king David Bruce, and had the chief
command of the Scotch forces against Baliol, whom he totally routed at Annand,
anno 1332, according to Fordun, Fordun. lib. 13. cap. 25.
who designs him Archibaldus de Douglas, frater inclyti Jacobi, a paganis, ut
praemittitur, occisi, etc.

He was appointed governor of Scotland in king David's absence, and at last
lost his life, in the service of his country, at the battle of Halidon-hill,
Ibidem.
anno 1333, leaving issue, by --, Abercrombie and Crawf. peerage, title
Galloway.
daughter of John Cummin, a son,

William, afterward earl of Douglas, -- and a daughter,

Eleanora, married, 1st, to Alexander earl of Carrick, Chart. in. archiv fam.
de Douglas. Chart. penes dom. de Torphichen, ad ann. 1346.
slain at Halidonhill; 2dly; to sir James Sandielands of Calder, who obtained a
charter of the lands of Calder from William earl of Douglas, to him and dam
Eleanor, his sister, in liberum maritagium, etc. and, lastly, to sir Duncan
Wallace, Chart. in archiv. Roberti H. ad annum 1373.
knight.

VIII. WILLIAM, only son of Archibald lord of Galloway, succeeded his father,
anno 1333, and to the estate and lordship of Douglas, upon the death of his
uncle Hugh, anno 1343.

Fordun designs him, Fordun. lib. 14. cap. 6.
filius Archibaldi Tynman fratris herois Jacobi, qui a paganis occisus est,
etc. vir valde bellicosus, etc.

When he was very young, he was at the battle of Halidonhill, where he was
taken prisoner, Rymer's foed. tom. IV. p. 552.
anno 1333.

He got from king David II. a charter, de omnibus terris et possessionibus per
totum regman Scotiae, Chart. in pub. archiv. and in archiv. fam. de Douglas.
de quibus quondam Jacobus dominus de Douglas, avunculu^ et Archibaldus pater
suus obierunt vesliti, etc.

This William was in every respect a great man, a loyal subject, and true
patriot, and was concerned in all the public transactions of his time, both in
peace and war.

He was one of the commissioners appointed to treat with the English at
Newcastle, Rymer, tom. IV. p. 677. and om. V. p. 303.
for which he got a safe conduct for himself and forty horsemen in his retinue,
anno 1335; and again in 1342.

He accompanied the king in his expedition into England in 1346, Home, Simson,
and Maitland's hist of Scotland, p. 537.
and was then created earl of Douglas.

He was taken prisoner with his royal master at the battle of Durham, Rymer,
tom. V. p. 534. and p. 554 and 583.
and was not relieved till the year 1352; for we find him confined prisoner in
the tower of London anno 1347.

Yet we find him one of the nuncii de Scotia that met the English commissioners
at Norham, anno 1351, Ibid. p. 711 and 738.
and in indentura super liberatione Willielmi de Douglas the year thereafter,
1352.

In 1355, Fordun. lib: 14. cap. 15.
he reduced all Galloway, and the south parts of Scotland to the king's
obedience.

In 1356, he was sent to France, by the estates of the kingdom, with three
thousand auxiliaries; was at the battle of Poi^tiers, where he behaved with
remarkable bravery and conduct, was wounded, and narrowly escaped being taken
prisoner with John king of France, Ibid. cap. 16.
by the black prince; after which he immediately returned to Scotland.

In 1357, Willielmus comes de Douglas, was sent to England, as one of the
hostages for king David's ransom. Rymer, tom. VI. p. 108.
This is the first time we find him designed earl in any public record.

In 1361, there was a safe conduct obtained from the king of England to William
earl of Douglas, Ibid. tom. VI. p. 305.
to pass through that country with a retinue of thirty knights; he being one of
the nuncii extraordinary.

In 1363, he obtained another of the same contents; Ibid. p. 554, 570, 614,
633, etc.
and in 1366 he obtained one with only twenty four knights of his retinue; also
another in 1367.

It is alleged, by Fordun's continuator, and other historians after him, that
upon the death of king David Bruce, William earl of Douglas claimed the crown:
but this seems to be a mistake; Notes upon the new edition of Fordun. lib. 14.
cap. 16.
for it is evident, from our histories of these times, that he was in great
favor with king Robert II. from his very accession to the crown, obtained his
daughter in marriage to his son, and performed many brave actions in the
service of his country in that king's reign. Ford. vol. II. c. 43, 46, 47.


He was appointed custos marchiarum by the same prince, with power to settle
all debates betwixt the Douglases and Percies of Northumberland, Rymer, tom.
VII. p. 2.
3d February 1373.

His commission was again renewed, anno 1374, and 1377 de concordatis, super
querela inter nobiles viros Willielmum comit^m de Douglas et de Mar, Ibid. p.
46 and 467.
Archibaldum de Douglas, dominum de Galloway, cancell^rium Scotiae, et Henricum
de Percy, comitem Northumbriae, etc.

At last all differences upon the borders were adjusted, and a truce betwixt
Scotland and England concluded, of which Walter bishop of Glasgow, Ibid. p. 276.
John bishop of Dunkeld, William earl of Douglas, George earl of March, and
Archibald lord of Galloway, were guarantees, anno 1380.

He married, Chart. in archivis fam. de Douglas; and history of the royal
family.
1st, ( ante 1343) lady Margaret, daughter of Donald, sister, and at last sole
heiress of Thomas earl of Mar, by whom he had a son,

James, earl of Douglas, -- and a daughter,

Lady Isabel Douglas, who, after her brother's death, became countess of Mar,
as heiress to her mother. She married, 1st, Malcolm Drummond of Cargill, who,
in her right, was earl of Mar; but by him she had no issue. Chart. in rotul.
Roberti III.
She married, 2dly, sir Alexander Stewart, son of Alexander earl of Buchan, son
of king Robert II. Rymer's faed. angl.
in whose favors she conveyed the earldom of Mar, anno 1404.

The earl having divorced his first lady, Crawfurd's peerage, p. 96 and 308.
married, 2dly, lady Margaret Dunbar, daughter of Patrick, and sister of George
earl of March, by whom he had a son,

Archibald, who obtained from king David II. Chart. in arch. regis David. ad
an. 1369.
a grant of the lands and lordship of Galloway, in the 40th year of his reign;
after which he was designed dominus Galovidiae, till he succeeded to the
earldom of Douglas in 1388.

He married, Chart. in pub. arch. and hist. of the royal fam. of Stewart.
3dly, lady Margaret Stewart, countess of Angus, and dowager of Mar, eldest
daughter and coheiress of Thomas earl of Angus, by whom he had a son,

George Douglas, who succeeded to the earldom of Angus, upon his mother's
resignation, and was ancestor of the earls of Angus, the marquisses, and duke
of Douglas, as will be shown hereafter.

Earl William died in 1384, was buried in the church of Melrose, and succeeded
by his eldest son,

IX. JAMES, second earl of Douglas, who, according to Fordun, was miles
acerrimus, et Anglis semper infestissimus; Fordun. lib. 14. cap. 49.
was also earl of Mar, in right of his mother. He was a man of singular
magnanimity, bravery and resolution, and obtained many signal victories against
the enemies of his country.

At last he invaded England, and was met near Newcastle by the English army,
commanded by the earl of Northumberland's valiant sons, lord Henry and Ralph
Percies, where the memorable battle of Otterburn was fought with incredible
courage and obstinacy on both sides, on 31st July 1388.

The Scots obtained the victory, though far inferior in numbers to the English,
which was chiefly attributed to the remarkable bravery and conduct of their
general the earl of Douglas, Ibidem. cap. 53.
who there lost his life. I shall here add Dr. Abercrombie's words: Abercromb.
vol. II. p. 192.
"The young hero died in the field of battle much regreted, but had been much
more so, had he not been succeeded by his brother Archibald the grim, like unto
himself and the illustrious house from which he descended, etc."

Earl James married lady Isabel Stewart, Hist. of the royal family.
daughter of king Robert II. but by her had only one son, who died an infant,
and was succeeded in the earldom of Douglas by his brother Archibald, and in
the earldom of Mar by his sister Isabel, as before noticed.

IX. ARCHIBALD, third earl of Douglas, and lord of Galloway, Fordun, lib* 14.
cap. 53. cui successit Arch. de Douglas, dominus Galovidiae ad comitatum de
Douglas, etc.
succeeded his brother earl James in 1388, who, on account of his black and
swarthy complexion, was commonly called Archibald the grim.

He was inferior to none of his brave ancestors for magnanimity, resolution and
courage.

He was sent ambassador to France in his father's lifetime, Ibid. cap. 44.
and managed his negotiation with honor, fidelity, and success.

He married Jean, daughter and heiress of Thomas Murray, Chartul. of Glasgow,
and chart. penes ducem de Hamilton.
lord of Bothwell, with whom he got the lordship of Bothwell, superiority of
Drumsargard, etc. and added to his armorial bearing, azure, three stars, within
a double tressure, or. -- By her he had a son,

Archibald, fourth earl of Douglas, -- and a daughter,

Lady Marjory, Fordun. lib. 15. cap. 10.
married to David, prince of Scotland.

He had also another son William, lord of Nithsdale, prince of Danskin, and
duke of Spruce, who, in many charters of king Robert II. Charta in rot. Roberti
II. roll 7th.
is designed Willielmus de Douglas miles, filius Archibaldi de Douglas domini
Galovidiae consanguinei nostri. He was a man of eminent parts, great strength
of body, and undaunted courage: Fordun. lib. 14. cap. 51.
he was often engaged in battles and rencounters against the English, and with
small handfuls of men defeated great multitudes of the enemies.

He performed likeways many glorious actions in foreign countries, for which he
had these high titles of prince, duke, etc. conferred upon him.

King Robert II. on account of his singular probity and merit, bestowed his
beautiful daughter Egidia upon him in marriage, Hist. of the royal family.
and gave him a grant of the lordship of Nithsdale. The charter bears, Dilecto
et fideli nostro Willielmo de Douglas, militi, filio Archbaldi de Douglas
domini Galovidiae, et Egidiae filiae nostrae carissimae, Chart. in pub. archiv.
in matrimonium inter ipsos Willielmum et Egidiam legitime faciendum, etc.

This great man was treacherously assassinated, it is said, by the contrivance
of lord Clifford, leaving only one daughter --, married to Henry Sinclair earl
of Orkney.

The earl dying in 1400, Fordun sums up his character thus: Fordun. lib. 15.
cap. 11.
" Obiit dominus Archibaldus comes de Douglas, dictus grim, sive terribilis,
qui in terrena prudentia, fortitudine, et audacia, conquestu et divitiis
caeteros suo tempore Scotos antecessit, etc."

The countess survived him, and made a donation, in pura viduitate, Carta in
mag. cartul. Glass. ad an. 1401.
pro salute animae suae, necnon animae recolendae memoriae quondam Archibaldi
comitis de Douglas, domini Galovidiae, etc. etc.

He was succecded by his son,

X. ARCHIBALD, fourth earl of Douglas, lord of Bothwel, Galloway and Annandale,
who obtained from Robert duke of Albany, governor of Scotland, a charter of
confirmation of the lordship of Annandale, etc. upon the resignation of George
earl of March, (who was his grand-uncle's son,) to him and the heirs-male of
his body; which failing, to the earl of March, Chart. in pub. archiv.
his heirs, etc. The charter is granted Carissimo consanguineo nostro
Archibaldo comiti de Douglas, domino Galovidiae, etc. dated at Haddington 2d
October 1409.

He, like many of his brave ancestors, distinguished himself in the military
art. Fordun calls him insignissimus belliger, etc.

He was wounded, lost an eye, and taken prisoner at the battle of Homildon,
Fordun, lib. 15. cap. 14 et 16.
anno 1402, but was relieved in 1403.

He defended, the castle of Edinburgh against king Henry and the English army,
and obliged them to raise the siege, anno 1409.

In 1420, he invaded England, laid waste the country, Ibid. cap. 32.
burnt Alnwick, and returned to Scotland with great booty.

Being highly esteemed for his valor and conduct, he was sent to France with a
reinforcement of 10,000 men, according to Fordun, anno 1423, where he had the
chief command, and did such signal service to the crown of France, that king
Charles VII. gave the duchy of Turenne to him, Ibid. cap. 25. Abercromby, etc.
and his heirs for ever, and made him a marishal of France.

He remarkably signalized his valor and courage at the battle of Vernoil,
against John duke of Bedford, Fordun. lib. 15. cap. 35.
where he lost his life, with his heroic son-in-law the earl of Buchan: they
were both buried with great solemnity in St. Gratian's church at Tourney, anno
1424.

He married lady Margaret Stewart, Hist. of the royal family.
daughter of king Robert III. by whom he had two sons and four daughters.

1. Archibald, earl of Douglas.

2, James earl of Abercorn and lord Balvenie, afterward earl of Douglas, who,
Fordun's continuator says, Fordun. lib* 15. cap. 35.
was killed, with his father, at Vernoil; but that must be a mistake, as will
be shown hereafter.

1st daughter, lady Margaret, married to William earl of Orkney.

2. Lady Elizabeth, married to John Stewart, earl of Buchan, constable of
France, and chamberlain of Scotland.

3. Lady Helen, married to Alexander Lauder of Hatton.

4. Lady Mary, married to sir John Glendoning of that ilk.

XI. ARCHIBALD, fifth earl of Douglas, lord of Bothwel, Galloway, and
Annandale, second duke of Turenne, count de Longueville, and marishal of
France, who, in his father's lifetime, was designed earl of Wigton, and
succeeded him anno 1424.

He went to France in 1419, Fordun, lib. XV. cap. 3^.
when a young man, along with the brave earl of Buchan, his brother-in-law,
wiah 7000 auxiliaries: where, having performed many great and heroic actions,
he got the lordship of Longueville bestowed upon him, and was made a marishal
of France.

In 1422, he returned to Scotland for more recruits; but being indisposed, was
not in a condition to go to France with them in 1423, Ibidem:
when his father got the chief command, as before mentioned.

In 1424, he was sent ambassador to England, together with Henry bishop of
Aberdeen, and sir William Hay of Errol, to treat about king James's ransom,
which they happily accomplished, Rymer's foed. Angliae.
and returned to Scotland with their royal master that same year.

He was lord lieutenant, Abercromb. etc. Two original charters penes dominum
Gray.
and governor of the kingdom in the beginning of the reign of king James II.

He married, 1st, lady Matilda Lindsay, daughter of David earl of Crawfurd, by
whom he had no issue.

He married, 2dly, lady Eupheme Graham, daughter of Patrick earl of Strathern,
by whom he had two sons and a daughter.

1. William.

2. David Douglas.

His daughter, lady Margaret, called the fair maid of Galloway, got the estates
of Galloway, Wigton, and Balvenie, etc. and was married, 1st, to her cousin
William; 2dly, to James, (both earls of Douglas,) but she had no issue to
either. She married, 3dly, John earl of Athole, who got with her the lordship
of Balvenie, Hist. of the royal family, Dr. Abercrombie, etc.
to whom she had two daughters; the first married to the earl of Errol, and the
second to lord Gray.

He died in February 1440, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. WILLIAM, sixth earl of Douglas, third duke of Turenne, etc. a youth of a
fine genius, a noble and undaunted spirit, and of great expectation. Soon after
his father's death, he came to a meeting of a parliament at Edinburgh, with a
splendid and numerous retinue, and behaved with all due obedience and
submission; was in great favor with the young king, and gave all the marks of
a sincere, generous, and loyal disposition. However, it seems his grandeur made
him to be looked upon with a jealous eye by the ruling faction at the time,
though he was then only about sixteen years of age.

He and his young brother were invited to an entertainment in the castle of
Edinburgh, by chancellor Crichton: they went without the least suspicion or
distrust, and were both barbarously assassinated, with their trusty friend sir
Malcolm Fleming of Cumbernauld, in the king's presence, Fordun, vol. II. page
514. All Scotch historians relate this fact.
who had the tragical event in the utmost abhorrence, and wept bitterly; but
had not the power to prevent it. This happened upon the 24th November 1440; and
the earl and his brother being both unmarried, the estate and honors devolved
upon their uncle James earl of Abercorn, to whom we now return.

XI. JAMES, seventh earl of Douglas, fourth duke of Turenne, etc. second son of
Archibald fourth, and brother of Archibald fifth earl of Douglas, being a big
corpulent man, was called James the Gross.

He was warden of the marches toward England, Hist. of the royal family, p.
115. and Chart. in archivis familiae de Douglas.
in the reign of king James II. and married Beatrix, daughter of Robert duke of
Albany, governor of Scotland, and is designed dilectus frater meus by Murdoch
duke of Albany, in 1423. By her he had six sons and four daughters.

1. William earl of Douglas.

2. James Douglas of Herriotmuir, who succeeded his brother.

3. Archibald, earl of Murray, a man of singular courage, conduct, and
magnanimity. He had the chief command of the Scotch army at the battle of Sark,
where they obtained a complete victory over the English. He married lady Mary,
daughter and co-heiress of James Dunbar earl of Murray, with whom he got the
earldom.

4. Hugh, earl of Ormond, whose son Hugh was dean of Brechin, and died without
issue.

5. John, lord Balvenie, died without issue.

6. Henry Douglas, went into holy orders.

1st Daughter, lady Margaret, married to James earl of Morton.

2. Lady Beatrix, married to Robert Stewart lord d' Aubigny.

3. Lady Janet, married to Robert lord Fleming, ancestor of the earl of Wigton.

4. Lady Elizabeth, married to -- Wallace of Craigie. The earl lived but three
years after the murder of his nephews; and, dying in 1443, was succeeded by his
eldest son,

XII. WILLIAM, eighth earl of Douglas, fifth duke of Turenne, etc. He had vast
possessions, great superiorities, and an incredible number of vassals and
followers; so that he was envied by some, and dreaded by others.

However, Rymer, tom. II. p. 254.
he was long in great favor with king James II. was one of his privy council
in 1444, and lord lieutenant of the kingdom. He had the disposal of all offices
and places of trust till 1449, that the king took the management into his own
hands; and in that year he was appointed one of the guarantees of a treaty with
the English; but upon some changes happening at court, he laid down all his
employments, and retired to the country, where, it is said, he lived more like a
sovereign prince than a subject, which gave great offense to the king and
ministry. But it seems he was conscious to himself of no ill intentions; and,
apprehending no danger, he went to Rome, Fordun, p. 515.
accompanied with a splendid retinue of gentlemen of the first rank, anno 1450,
being the year of the Jubilee.

The enemies of his family, who had been accomplices in the murder of his
cousins, being jealous of his power, and afraid of his return, endeavored to
instill bad notions, of him into the mind of the king, and got several suits and
processes commenced against his friends and family in his absence, Aberer. v.
II. p. 149 and 150.
which being fully narrated in Doctor Abercrombie's history, we shall here pass
them over.

The earl being informed of what was doing against him, thought proper to make
the best of his way home. He dismissed his grand retinue, and, passing through
England incog. sent a dutiful message to the king, full of obedience and
submission. Ibid. p. 315.
The king accepted it most graciously, received him kindly, and he got again
greatly into his majesty's ^avour.

In April 1451, Rymer. tom. II. page 285.
he was one of the ambassadors sent to England, to confer and make up the
differences about the breaches of the late truce.

After which, having been guilty of some arbitrary proceedings in his own
country, he went to the court of England, where king James was informed he had
been engaged in some treasonable practices.

Upon his return he was ordered to attend the king at Stirling; but, knowing he
had many enemies at court, refused to come without a safe conduct, which the
king granted him in the strongest terms, and most ample form.

He went to Stirling accordingly, was introduced to the king, who retired with
him into a closet, where they had a long conference by themselves.

Doctor Abercrombie acknowledges he answered the king dutifully and
submissively, Abercrombie vol. II. p. 354.
to all the points insisted on, till he desired him to cancel and give up a
treasonable league or association entered into by him, the earl of Crawford,
and others of the nobility:

He answered, That that bond or contract was not in his possession at the time:
that it contained no treason; and that he could not give it up without the
consent of his associates. The king being incensed at his refusal, and not able
to bear such disobedience in a subject, All Scotch historians agree in this
fact.
drew out a dagger, and stabbed the earl to the heart, of which he died
instantly, 2d February anno 1452.

He was succeeded by his brother,

XII. JAMES, ninth earl of Douglas, and sixth duke of Turenne, etc. who, in
resentment of his brother's slaughter, took up arms against his lawful
sovereign, and soon got together a far greater army than the king was able to
raise in so short a space; but how they were dispersed at that time, our
authors give no account.

It is alleged by most of our historians, Boethius, Buchanan, Hauthornden
Home, Crawfurd, etc.
that this rebellion subsisted without intermission till it was entirely
extinguished anno 1455; but as this appears to be a mistake, we beg leave here
to insert some unquestionable documents, which we submit to the judgment of our
readers.

Earl James's rebellion certainly broke out in the end of February 1452; yet we
find this earl not only reconciled to the king, but employed in public
negotiations of state the very year after the rebellion commenced. Follows the
king's commission: "Jacobus D. G. etc. Sciatis, Rymer, tom. XI. p. 324.
quod nos de side legalitate et circumspectione carissimi consanguinei nostri
Jacobi comitis de Douglas et de Annandale, dom. Galovidiae, ae Ricardi, abbatis
monast erii de Dumsermling, et Roberti Liddale de Balmure, primi dapiferi
nostri, plurimum confidentes de avisamento concilii nostri -- Constituimus
ipsos tres aut duos eorundem conjunctim -- nostros ambassiatores et deputatos
speciales -- Dantes eisdem plenariam potestatem -- ad conveniendum tractandum
concludendum, etc. cum Henerico rege Angliae, de et super treuga, etc. etc.
etc. 18vo Aprilis 1453."

The earl and Mr. Liddale went the embassy, and concluded a treaty, viz.
"Indentura treugarum facta inter Richardum comitem Sarum, etc. commissarios
Angliae, et Jacobum comitem de Douglas et de Annandale dom. Galovidiae, et
Robertum de Liddale commissarios Scotiae, Ibid. p. 327 and 334.
etc. etc."

By these two commissioners it was concluded, That a truce entered into in
1451, to continue till 1st August 1454, Ibid. p. 326.
should be further prorogued and continue till 1st August 1457, etc. James earl
of Douglas was one of the guarantees of the treaty, and took instruments
concerning the debateable lands on the borders in behalf of his master king
James. The earl of Salisbury did the same in behalf of king Henry of England,
23d May 1453.

The treaty is approved and ratified by the king, Ibid. p. 339.
5th July 1453.

The earl immediately upon the concluding of the treaty, undertook a pilgrimage
to Italy, accompanied with his brothers, and some other friends, ( volentes
peregre limina Apostolorum visitare,) Ibid. p. 326
and obtained a safe conduct from king Henry for himself and his retinue, (all
particularly named in Mr. Rymer's collections,) to pass and return through
England, per literas per quatuor annos proxime futuros duraturas, etc. The safe
conduct is dated the same day on which the treaty was concluded, viz. 23d May
1453, at London.

Beatrix countess of Douglas, the earl's mother and Margaret countess of
Douglas, Ibid. p. 349 and 350.
his brother's widow, obtained a safe conduct from king Henry to go up to
England, cum duodecim famulis in comitiva, etc. 16th June 1454, about which
time they expected to meet the earl in his return from Italy.

As to what acts of treason the Douglases committed in England about this
period, our historians are silent; but doubtless they were guilty; for a good
author says, "That while the Douglases were in England, Abercombie's martial
achievements, vol. II. p. 360.
at least absent from court, a parliament met at Edinburgh, to which the earl
of Douglas, his mother and brothers were summoned, in order to answer to such
crimes as should be laid to their charge. They refused to obey, upon which they
were declared rebels, and their lands and goods confiscated. The king
immediately took possession of Galloway, without opposition; and because the
people of Douglasdale presumed to resist, he abandoned them and their goods to
the discretion of the soldiers, etc."

It is most certain that the earl, immediately upon his return to Scotland,
commenced a new rebellion, and began to raise forces against the king. He soon
found himself again at the head of an army superior in number to his majesty's.
He went in quest of the royal troops, and overtook them near Abercorn, where
the two armies encamped in sight of one another; but it seems the seeds of
loyalty still took place in the earl's breast, or he was unwilling to spill the
blood of his fellow subjects; for certain it is he declined fighting, at least
was not so forward to engage the royal army as was expected on so favorable an
opportunity; on which account lord Hamilton, and some of the chiefs of his
followers, not only openly upbraided him, but that very night deserted him;
went over to the king's party; were brought before his majesty, Ibid. and
Godscraft.
who graciously received them, accepted their submission, and pardoned them;
whereby the royal army daily increased, and the rebels diminished, which the
king perceiving, for some time avoided coming to blows.

The earl of Angus, a faithful and loyal subject, who detested his cousin's
rebellion, was the king's lieutenant, and commander in chief of the royal army,
finding himself at last able to encounter the rebels, gave them battle at
Ancrum-muir, and entirely routed them, anno 1455.

The earl of Douglas's brother, the earl of Murray, Abercrombie and Fordun,
vol. II. p. 515.
was killed on the spot, his brothers, the earl of Ormond, and lord Balveny,
were taken prisoners, and both beheaded.

The earl himself made his escape to England, where he remained long; and as
all his estates and honors were forfeited to the crown, his majesty was
pleased soon afterward to bestow the whole lands and lordship of Douglas upon
the earl of Angus, Chart. in archiv. fam^^. de Douglas. ad ann. 1457.
his cousin and next heir-male.

The earl, while he staid in England, gave his king and country great
disturbance and trouble; at last the duke of Albany and he, having got
assistance from king Henry, invaded Scotland, anno 1483.

The old earl was taken prisoner, and brought into the king's presence, who,
out of his great goodness and lenity, pardoned his rebellion, and gave him his
life.

He retired to the abbacy of Lindores, where he became a religious and sincere
penitent, and continued a most faithful and loyal subject, as long as he lived.
When the malcontents took up arms in the end of king James the III's reign,
they knowing the old earl's great capacity, either for peace or war, applied to
him to join and head them; but he not only absolutely refused to engage with
them, but used many arguments to make them change their measures, and return to
their duty; and wrote to all his friends and the cadets of his family,
exhorting them to keep steadfast in their loyalty, and to continue in the king's
interest, which many of them did, particularly Cavers Douglas, Original lette^s
and ^^missions, penes Cavers-Douglas.
then sheriff of Teviotdale, a man of great power in the south of Scotland,
who, being himself a good subject, followed the advice of his chief, and joined
the king, on which account he suffered many hardships, though he afterward got
two remissions, one from king James IV. and another from the states.

The earl quite wore out with age and infirmities, died without issue at
Lindores, 15th April 1488, was the last earl of Douglas, and in him ended the
first branch of this noble and illustrious house, whose ruin was chiefly owing
to their grandeur, riches, and power, being rather too great for subjects in a
monarchical state.

The male line of the first and second sons of William, first earl of Douglas,
thus ending, his third son George, who was ancestor of the earls of Angus, and
duke of Douglas, and also heir-male of the earls of Douglas, was the next great
branch of this illustrious family, to whom we now return.

IX. GEORGE, son of William, first earl of Douglas, by lady Margaret Stewart,
countess and heiress of Angus, and dowager of Mar, was put in possession of his
mother's estate and honors when very young, by her resignation in parliament
of the earldom of Angus, lordship of Abernethy, etc. etc. "to and in favors of
George of Douglas, Chart. in archiv. fam. de Douglas.
her son, and the heirs of his body; whom failing, to her sister Elizabeth,
spouse of sir Alexander Hamilton, and the heirs of her body, etc." upon which
this George got a charter under the great seal, from king Robert II. dated 10.
April 1389, to which the king's sons, John earl of Carrick, his primogenitus,
and Robert earl of Fife, etc. were witnesses; and he was the first earl of
Angus of the name of Douglas.

In an original charter of king Robert III. confirming a donation of sir James
Sandilands of Calder, Ibid. ad annum 1398.
he is designed Georgius Douglas comes de Angus, filius bonae memoriae
nobilissimi domini Willielmi comitis de Douglas, et de Mar, etc. And in the
same charter Isabel countess of Mar and Garviauch is designed soror praedicti
Georgii, etc. dated at Lithgow 9th November anno regni octavo.

This earl married lady Mary Stewart, daughter of king Robert III. the king and
his mother, the countess of Angus, being the parties contracters. The original
contract, ib.
The contract bears, "That George of Douglas, lord of Angus, her son and heir,
shall lead into wife a daughter of our lord the king's, etc. etc." and is dated
at Edinburgh 24th May 1397, the investiture being to the heirs-male of the
marriage.

He accompanied his cousin, the earl of Douglas, to the battle of Homildon,
where he was taken prisoner, and died soon thereafter, anno 1402, leaving issue
by the said lady Mary Stewart two sons, and one daughter.

1. William, earl of Angus.

2. Sir George Douglas, who afterward succeeded to the earldom.

His daughter, Chart. penes marchionem de sweedale. Original contract penes
dom. Forbes, ad ann. 1423.
lady Elizabeth, married to sir David Hay of Locharret, ancestor of the marquis
of Tweeddale: she married afterward Alexander lord Forbes.

Lady Mary married thrice after the earl's death: 1st, to sir James Kennedy,
knight; 2dly, to sir William Graham of Kincardine; and, 3dly, to sir William
Edmonston of Duntreath.

X. WILLIAM, second earl of Angus, succeeded his father, and was sent to
England to negotiate his uncle, king James I.'s ransom, anno 1423, Rymer, tom.
X. p. 307.
which was happily accomplished the following year, when the earl had the
honor of knighthood conferred upon him, at the solemnity of the king's
coronation, and was one of the hostages for his ransom.

He was one of the magnates Scotiae, Fordun, lib. XVI. cap. 10.
that sat on the trial of Murdoch, duke of Albany, anno 1424.

He was appointed one of the ambassadors to treat with the English, Rymer, tom.
X. p. 491.
anno 1430, and was made warden of the middle marches by a special commission
from the king, Chart. in archiv. fam. de Douglas.
anno 1433, and had the chief command of the army at the battle of Piperdain,
where the Scots obtained a complete victory over the English, Fordun: lib. XVI.
cap. 25.
commanded by the brave Percy, anno 1436. He married Elizabeth, daughter of sir
William Hay of Locharret, Dispensation penes marchionem de Tweedale, ad ann.
1425.
ancestor of the marquis of Tweeddale, by whom he had a son and successor,

XI. JAMES, third earl of Angus, who was one of the conservators of the peace
with England, Rymer's foed.
in the reign of king James II. and married lady Mary Stewart, daughter of king
James I. but, dying without issue, the estate and honors devolved upon his
uncle George, to whom we return.

X. GEORGE, fourth earl of Angus, second son of George, the first earl, and
brother-german of William, the second earl, was a man of eminent loyalty, a
true patriot, and of great ability, both in the cabinet and the field.

In 1449, Rymer, tom. XI. p. 254.
he was one of the Scotch commissioners that concluded a treaty with the
English at Berwick, and was made warden of the east and middle marches.

He was again appointed one of the ambassadors extraordinary to the court of
England, Ibid. p. 286.
anno 1451.

He had the chief command of the king's forces during the earl of Douglas's
rebellion, which he effectually suppressed, anno 1455; and upon the forfeiture
of that great branch of this illustrious family, Ibid. et chart. in archiv.
fam. de Douglas.
he obtained a grant of the whole lands and lordship of Douglas, being next
heir-male, as before observed, upon which he got a charter, under the great
seal, 8th April anno 1457.

In the year 1459, Rymer, tom. XI. p. 426, 434, etc.
he was again appointed one of the commissioners to treat with the English; a
truce was concluded, and he was made one of the wardens of the marches on the
borders.

About the year 1461, king Henry VI. of England, being dispossessed of his
kingdom by Edward duke of York, retired to Scotland, and was kindly received by
the states, in the minority of king James III. and finding the earl of Angus,
the greatest man then in the kingdom, entered into an indenture with him,
wherein he binds himself to erect into a dukedom or lordship, as much land
betwixt Humber and Trent, as would yield two thousand merles Sterling of yearly
rent, Indenture in archiv. fam. de Douglas. ad ann. 1462.
to the earl and his heirs for ever; and that for his assistance to restore him
to his kingdom, etc. The earl immediately begun to persorm his part of the
contract by a singular gallant action, viz.

Mr. Brisac, with the French troops under his command, being then closely
besieged in the castle of Alnwick, the earl raised an army of ten thousand
horse, marched into England the length of Alnwick, and brought off the French
troops in sight of the whole English army, Lives of the officers of state, p.
53.
and marched with them into Scotland, to the great satisfaction of king Henry.

Upon the death of king James II. he was appointed one of the governors of
king James III. Simson's essay on the family of Douglas.
which office he discharged with honor and reputation.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of sir Andrew Sibbald of Balgonie, in vicecom.
de Fife, by whom he had two sons, and four daughters.

1. Archibald, earl of Angus.

2. George, ancestor of the Douglases of Bonjedworth.

1st Daughter, lady Anne, married to William lord Graham, ancestor of the duke
of Montrose.

2. Lady Elizabeth, married to sir Robert Graham of Fintry, which appears from
the foundation of a chaplainry in the church of Strathdighty.

3. Lady Margaret, married to sir Duncan Campbell of Glenurchy.

4. Lady Isabel, married to sir Alexander Ramsay of Dalhousie.

And dying in 1463, was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. ARCHIBALD, fifth earl of Angus, commonly called the great earl, who was a
man of many eminent qualities, and no less a great statesman than a brave
soldier. He was warden of the east and middle marches, and one of the privy
council to king James III. Char. in pub. arch.^et chart. in archiv: fam de
Douglas.
He got a grant of the lands and castle of Tantallon, all erected into a free
barony, anno 1479.

There is one stain upon this great man's character, viz. he was one of many
more of the nobility that consented to the execution of two of the king's
servants upon Lauder bridge, without legal trial, anno 1481. It is said they
had given the king bad council, and had put him upon many wrong measures in the
management of public affairs; but we find this earl soon in favor with his
majesty, Ibidem.
and appointed warden of the marches the very year thereafter in very ample
form, and with many singular privileges, anno 1482. He was also appointed one
of the commissioners to treat with the English, Rymer's f^ed. tom. XII. p. 172
anno 1483.

In the beginning of king James the IV.'s reign, he was again appointed warden
of the east marches by act of parliament; one of the privy council to his
majesty; and in 1493, was constituted lord high chancellor of Scotland; Lives
of the officers of state
all which offices he discharged with honor, fidelity, and reputation.

1496, he obtained from John earl of Crawfurd a right to the lordship of
Crawfurd, in vicecom. Chart. in archivis familiae de Douglas.
de Lanark, (for which he gave him an equivalent in Angus,) and was insest in
the said lordship, anno 1499. He was one of the guarantees of a treaty with the
English, Rymer, tom. XIII. p. 268.
renewed and confirmed anno 1509.

The earl being a man of great experience and knowledge in military affairs,
the king asked his advice and opinion the day before the battle of Flowdon,
which he gave honestly, and with great judgment, and alleged it was highly
imprudent to fight the English at that time, for which he advanced many strong
arguments; but this wholesome council has been most unjustly censured by some
historians, as proceeding from cowardice or disloyalty, he not being in the
action himself, though it appears from good authority, that nothing but his great
age and infirmities hindered him from going on with the rest; for his two sons,
and about two hundred of his name and family, were killed oh the spot in that
fatal field, on 9th September 1513.

At length, oppressed with years and sorrow for the loss his country had
sustained, in the death of their sovereign, the flower of the nobility, the
fate of his two sons, and so many of his family, Lives of the officer, of
state, etc.
at that unfortunate battle, he retired to a religious house, and died in the
beginning of the year thereafter, viz. 1514.

He married thrice: 1st, Elizabeth, daughter of Robert lord Boyd, Ibidem.
lord high chancellor of Scotland, by whom he had three sons, and three
daughters.

1. George, master of Angus.

2. Sir William Douglas of Braidwood or Glenbervie, who carried on the line of
the family, of whom afterward.

3. Gavin Douglas, bishop of Dunkeld, a man of exemplary piety and great
learning.

1st Daughter, lady Marjory, married to Cuthbert earl of Glencairn.

2. Lady Elizabeth, married to Robert lord Lyle.

3. Lady Janet, married to Robert lord Herries of Terreagles.

He married, 2dly, Catharine, Chart. in pub: archiv.
daughter of sir William Stirling of Keir, by whom he had a son,

Sir Archibald, whose son, sir Archibald Douglas of Kilspindie, was lord high
treasurer of Scotland, Lives of the officers of state.
in the reign of king James the V.

He married, 3dly, Jean, daughter of John lord Kennedy, Chart. in pub archiv.
by whom he had no issue.

XII. GEORGE, master of Angus, eldest son and apparent heir of Archibald, the
fifth earl, was in great favor with king James IV. Ibidem.
from whom he obtained a charter of the lands, castle, and barony of Tantallon,
upon his father's resignation, anno 1489.

Also of the lands of Boncle and Preston. Ibidem.
He was likeways insest in the lordship and barony of Crawfurd, Chart. in
archiv. fam de douglas.
anno 1510.

He married Elizabeth, Chart. in pub. archiv.
daughter of John lord Drummond, by whom he had three sons, and six daughters.

1. Archibald, earl of Angus.

2. Sir George, whose son, David, succeeded to the earldom; of whom hereafter.

3. William, prior of Coldinghame, and abbot of Holyroodhouse.

1st daughter, Elizabeth, married to John lord Yester, ancestor of the marquis
of Tweeddale.

2. Janet, married to John lord Glammis, ancestor of the earl of Strathmore.

3. Margaret, married to sir James Douglas of Drumlanrig, ancestor of the duke
of Queensberry.

4. Alison, married to Robert Blackadder of that ilk.

5. Jean, married to David Home of Wedderburn.

6. Isabel, married to Robert Crawfurd of Auchinames.

He accompanied the king to the fatal field of Flowdon, and there lost his
life, with his royal master, on 9th September 1513.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. ARCHIBALD, who succeeded also to his grandfather, anno 1514, and was
sixth earl of Angus.

He was a man of many noble accomplishments; was highly honored at foreign
courts in the course of his travels, and was made a knight of St. Michael by
king Henry II. of France.

Immediately upon his return home, he applied himself to the business of the
state, sat in the parliament, Rymer, tom. XIII. p. 600.
was one of the Scotch nobles that confirmed a treaty with England, 7th October
1517, and was, by a special act, made one of the counselors to king James V.
anno 1521.

In 1525, he was appointed one of the commissioners to treat with the English;
Ibid. tom. XIV. p. 91.
and in the year 1527, he was made lord high chancellor of Scotland, Chart. in
pub. archiv. and lives of the offiers of state. Rymer, tom. XIV. p. 276.
guardian, and lieutenant of the east and middle marches, and, by act of
parliament, was joined in commission with some others to negotiate a peace with
England, which they happily concluded, anno 1528.

He afterward assumed the sole management of all affairs; and, it is said,
kept the king little better than a prisoner: However, his majesty made his
escape from him, went to Stirling, was joyfully received by the queen mother,
and was immediately attended, and congratulated by the chief of the nobility.

Soon thereafter, the earl of Angus was turned out of all his employments, was
accused of several misdemeanors, outlawed, and attainted of treason.

He retired to England, where he was kindly entertained by king Henry, and
remained there till 1543, that his attainder was repealed by act of parliament,
and he was amply restored to all his estates and honors.

He then returned to Scotland, where he showed himself a true patriot, and
afterward performed many brave actions in the service of his country. Lives of
the offic. of state.


He was a zealous promoter of the match betwixt our young queen and prince
Edward of England, as judging it might put an end to the great animosities that
still subsisted betwixt the two crowns; but it was so strongly opposed by
others of the nobility and great men, that his endeavors proved fruitless.

When the king of England found that the marriage could not be brought about by
fair means, he invaded Scotland with an army, under the command of sir Ralph
Ivers and Brian Layton, in hopes of accomplishing it by force.

The earl of Angus immediately joined the governor, with a great party of his
friends and followers, to oppose the enemies of his country, and the victory
obtained over the English at Ancrum muir, was chiefly ascribed to this earl's
conduct and resolution, Ibidem.
for which the king of England, his brother-in-law, taxed him with ingratitude;
but nothing could prevent him from doing his duty in defense of his country.

He commanded the van of the army at the unfortunate battle of Pinky, where his
brave and gallant brother, sir George, lost his lise, Ibidem.
and where the earl behaved himself with remarkable courage and intrepidity,
though the English obtained the victory, anno 1547.

He was now much in favor at court, and continued to concur with the queen and
governor, in every measure that was for the good of his country, as long as he
lived.

He made a resignation of his estate and honors in the queen's hands; Chart.
in archiv. familiae de Douglas.
upon which he got a new charter under the great seal, in favors of himself in
liserent, and James Douglas his son and apparent heir, and the heirsmale of his
body; whom failing, to his own heirs-male, or assigneys, etc. etc. anno 1547.

He married Margaret, daughter of king Henry VII. sister of king Henry VIII. of
England, and widow of king James IV. of Scotland, by whom he had a son,

James, master of Angus, who died before himself, without issue; -- also a
daughter,

Lady Margaret Douglas, who, with the consent and approbation of her uncle,
Rymer tom^ XV. p. 29.
king Henry VIII. of England, married Matthew earl of Lennox, and was mother of
Henry lord Darnly and duke of Albany, who was father of king James VI. so that
of this earl of Angus, not only the royal family of Great Britain, but most of
the crowned heads in Europe are descended.

He died at his castle of Tantallon, anno 1556, and having no surviving
male-issue, his estate and honors devolved upon his nephew and heir-male,

David Douglas of Pittendreich, son of his brother George, to whom we now
return.

XIII. Sir GEORGE DOUGLAS, second son of George the Master, and brother of
Archibald sixth earl of Angus, married Elizabeth, Chart. in pub. archiv. ad an.
1535.
daughter and sole heiress of David Douglas of Pittendreich, by whom he had two
sons and two daughters.

1. David, afterward earl of Angus.

2. James, who married lady Elizabeth Douglas, daughter of James third earl of
Morton. He succeeded to the earldom of Morton by entail, and was regent of
Scotland, etc. but died without issue. Vide title Morton in this work, and
lives of the officers of state, page 94.

1st daughter, Elizabeth, married to sir John Carmichael of that ilk.

2. Mary, married to sir George Auchinleck of Balmanno.

Sir George was killed at the battle of Pinkie, as before observed, and was
succeeded by his eldest son,

XIV. DAVID, who succeeded also to his uncle Archibald the sixth earl, as
before noticed, and was seventh earl of Angus.

He married Margaret, daughter of Sir John Hamilton of Clydsdale, Crawfurd's
peerage.
brother-german of James duke of Chattelherault, by whom he had a son,

Archibald, earl of Angus, -- and two daughters.

1st, Lady Margaret, married, 1st, to sir Walter Scot of Buckeleugh; 2dly, to
Francis Stewart earl of Bothwell, and had issue to both.

2. Lady Elizabeth, married to John lord Maxwell, (ancestor of the earl of
Nithsdale) afterward earl of Morton; and, dying in 1588, was succeeded by his
son,

XV. ARCHIBALD, eighth earl of Angus, a man of great honor and probity,
surnamed the good earl.

In 1573, he was constituted sheriff of Berwick, and warden of the marches.
Chart. in archiv. fam. de Douglas.
He was afterward appointed lord lieutenant of the borders, which he gallantly
defended for many years.

He married, 1st, lady Margaret Erskine, daughter of John earl of Mar; 2dly,
lady Margaret Lesly, daughter of George earl of Rothes; 3dly, Jean, daughter of
John lord Glammis; and dying without any surviving issue in 1588, the male line
of George master of Angus thus ended, and the estate and honors devolved upon
the next heir-male, viz. sir William Douglas of Glenbervie, lineally descended
of the first sir William; to whom we now return.

XII. Sir WILLIAM DOUGLAS of Braidwood or Glenbervie, second son of Archibald
fifth earl of Angus, Crawfurd's peer. of Scotland, Scots compen. Simson's
essays, etc.
was killed at the battle of Flowdon, with his brother George the master, anno
1513, having married Elizabeth Auchinleck, heiress of Glenbervie, by whom he
had a son and successor,

XIII. Sir ARCHIBALD DOUGLAS of Glenbervie, who was knighted by king James V.
and married, Chart in archivis familiae de Marishal.
1st, lady Agnes Keith, daughter of William Earl Marishal, by whom he had a son,

William, afterward earl of Angus.

He married, 2dly, Mary, daughter of sir Alexander Irvine of Drum, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
by whom he had two sons and one daughter.

1. James, who was parson of Glenbervie, and ancestor of the Douglases of
Whytrigs, Fuchel, Brigton, etc.

2. John Douglas.

His daughter Elizabeth, married to sir Alexander Falconer of Halkerton,
ancestor of lord Halkerton.

He was succeeded by his eldest son William, who succeeded also to the earldom
of Angus, anno 1588, as heir-male to Archibald the eighth earl, as above
noticed.

XIV. WILLIAM, ninth earl of Angus, formerly designed sir William of
Glenbervie, was at first strongly attached to the interest of queen Mary. He
accompanied her majesty in her expedition to the north, and behaved gallantly
at the sight of Corrichie, where the earl of Huntly was slain, anno 1562, but
afterward, inclining to the protestant religion, he became a great promoter of
the reformation.

In the beginning of 1591, he obtained from king James VI. a charter,
confirming all the ancient privileges of the family of Douglas, viz. the first
vote in council or parliament; to be the king's hereditary lieutenant; Chart.
in archiv. fam. de Douglas.
to have the leading of the van of the army in the day of battle; and to carry
the crown at coronations, etc. etc. all to him and his heirs-male, Ibid. et
chart. in pub. arch.
which was again confirmed by a charter under the great seal, anno 1602.

He married Giles, Crawfurd's peerage, Simson's collections, etc.
daughter of sir Robert Graham of Morphy, by whom he had six sons and four
daughters.

1. William, earl of Angus.

2. Sir Robert Douglas of Glenbervie, great-grand-father of the late sir
Robert, father of the present sir William Douglas of Glenbervie, who is now the
last cadet, and nearest heir to the family in the male line, except the
descendents of William earl of Selkirk, son of the first marquis, who married
the duchess of Hamilton.

3. Gavin Douglas of Bridgeford.

4. John Douglas of Barras.

5. Archibald.

6. Duncan.

1st daughter, Margaret, married to sir John Forbes of Monimusk.

2. Sarah, married, 1st, to sir John Strachan of Thornton; and, 2dly, to sir
George Auchinleck of Balmanno.

3. Elizabeth, married to -- Gordon of Clunie.

4. Jean, married to sir James Wishart of Pittarrow.

And, dying in 1591, was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. WILLIAM, tenth earl of Angus, a man of great learning and knowledge, and
particularly well versed in the antiquities of our country, upon which he wrote
several treatises.

He was made the king's lieutenant, to suppress an insurrection, which he
managed with great conduct and dexterity, to the satisfaction of all parties:
But as, about that time, he began to make public profession of the Roman
catholic religion, he was never employed in public business afterward, but
retired to France, died a religieuse, and was buried in the church of St.
Germans under a magnificent monument, anno 1616, having married Elizabeth,
daughter of Laurence lord Oliphant, by Margaret, Crawfurd's peerage, Simson's
collections, etc.
daughter of George earl of Errol, by whom he had three sons and two daughters.

1. William earl of Angus.

2. James, lord Mordington, whose male line is now extinct. Vide Title
Mordington.

3. Sir Francis Douglas of Sandilands, who married a sister of the earl of
Wigton, without succession.

1st daughter, lady Mary, married to Alexander earl of Linlithgow.

2. Lady Margaret, married to sir Alexander Campbell of Calder.

XVI. WILLIAM, eleventh earl of Angus, (afterward marquis) succeeded his
father in 1616.

In the beginning of the reign of king Charles I. he was appointed commander in
chief, and lieutenant of the borders; and being in great favor with his
majesty, Chart. in archiv. fam. de Douglas, haered. mase quibuscunque.
was further dignified with the title of marquis of Douglas, by letters patent,
to his heirs-male whatever, dated 17th June 1633.

He was a great loyalist, though he did not engage in the beginning of the
civil war; but he no sooner discovered the measures the parliament were taking,
and the hardships his majesty was like to be put to, than he took up arms in
defense of his king and country, joined the marquis of Montrose, and remarkably
distinguished himself at the battle of Philiphaugh, where he was taken
prisoner, but sometime afterward obtained his liberty.

After the murder of the king, he continued steady in his loyalty to king
Charles II. Cromwell's act of indemnity, Home, Scotscompen. Simson's essays,
etc.
for which he suffered many hardships, and had a heavy fine imposed upon him by
Oliver Cromwell, anno 1654.

He married, 1st, Margaret, daughter of Claud Hamilton lord Paisley, Chart. in
archiv. fam. de Douglas.
sister of James earl of Abercorn, by whom he had two sons, and three daughters.

1. Archibald, earl of Angus.

2. Lord James Douglas, whose genius leading him to a military life, he served
in the French wars under Lewis XIV. and signalized himself upon several
occasions; particularly at the siege of Doway, where he lost his life the day
he was to have been made a marishal of France.

1st Daughter, lady Margaret, married to William, lord Alexander, eldest son
and heir of the earl of Stirling.

2. Lady Jean, married to John lord Bargeny.

3. Lady Grizel, married to William lord Carmichael.

The marquis married, 2dly, lady Mary Gordon, Ibidem.
daughter of George marquis of Huntly, by lady Henriet Stewart, daughter of
Esme duke of Lennox, by whom he had three sons, and six daughters.

3d Son, and 1st of the second marriage, William, earl of Selkirk, afterward
duke of Hamilton. Vide Title Hamilton.

4. George, earl of Du^barton, whose male-line is extinct. Vide Title Dunbarton.

5. Lord James, a colonel in the army, and a brave soldier, who died without
issue.

4th Daughter, and 1st of the second marriage, lady Henriet, married to James
earl of Annandale.

5. Lady Catharine, married to sir William Ruthven of Dunglass, to whom she had
two daughters; the eldest married to sir Robert Douglas of Glenbervie, and was
mother of the present sir William: the second married to sir Hugh Paterson of
Bannockburn, and was mother of the present sir Hugh, etc.

6. Lady Isabel, married to William duke of Queensberry.

7. Lady Jean, married to James earl of Perth, chancellor of Scotland.

8. Lady Lucy, married to Robert earl of Nithsdale.

9. Lady Mary, died unmarried.

He died in the beginning of the year 1660.

XVII. ARCHIBALD, earl of Angus, first son and apparent heir of William marquis
of Douglas, was engaged on the parliament's side in the beginning of the civil
war; Cart. in arch. fam. de Douglas.
but when he discovered the measures they were pursuing, he returned to his
duty, and continued a faithful and loyal subject till his death.

He assisted at the coronation of king Charles II. anno 1651, and was appointed
lord high chamberlain at that solemnity.

He married, 1st, lady Anne Stewart, daughter of Esme duke of Lennox, the king
and the earl of Angus (afterward marquis of Douglas) being the parties
contractors; Contract amongst the charters of the family of Douglas, et in pub.
archiv.
and by the marriage-articles, which are dated in November 1629, and May 1630,
the whole estate is settled upon the issue-male of that marriage; which
failing, to return to the marquis, this Archibald's father, and his heirs-male,
etc. etc.

By the said lady Anne he had a son,

James, afterward marquis of Douglas, -- and two daughters, who perished at
sea in a voyage to France.

He married, 2dly, lady Jean, daughter of David earl of Wemyss, by whom he had
a son,

Archibald, earl of Forfar, of whom there is now no succession, -- and a
daughter,

Lady Margaret, married to Alexander viscount of Kingston.

He died in 1655, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVIII. JAMES, who succeeded also to his grandfather, anno 1660, and was second
marquis of Douglas.

He was appointed one of the lords of the privy council to his majesty king
Charles II. anno 1670, and continued in that office all his reign, and that of
his brother king James VII.

He married, 1st, lady Barbara Erskine, daughter of John earl of Mar, by whom
he had a son,

James, earl of Angus, a youth of many excellent qualities, and a rare military
genius. He engaged himself early in the wars, and signalized his bravery and
courage upon several occasions, but was unfortunately slain at the battle of
Steinkirk, in the 21st year of his age, universally lamented, anno 1692.

The marquis married, 2dly, lady Mary Ker, daughter of Robert marquis of
Lothian, by whom he had a son,

Archibald, afterward duke of Douglas, -- and a daughter,

Lady Jean Douglas, married to John Stewart, Esquire; now sir John Stewart of
Grandtully, Bart, by whom she had two sons; 1. Archibald, now heir of line of
the family. 2. Sholto, who died young.

The marquis died anno 1700, and was succeeded by his son,

XIX. ARCHIBALD, third marquis, who was created duke of Douglas by queen Anne,
18th April 1703, by patent, to the heirsmale of his body.

He married Margaret, eldest daughter of James Douglas of Mains, Esquire; an
ancient cadet of the house of Morton, but died without issue on 21st July 1761.

Archibald Stewart, Esquire; only surviving son of his sister lady Jean, was served
and retoured heir of line and provision to his uncle Archibald duke of Douglas,
on the 9th day of September 1761, and is now designed Archibald Douglas of
Douglas, Esquire;.

The late duke dying without issue-male, as before observed, the title of duke
became extinct; but that of marquis of Douglas, etc. devolved upon his grace
the present duke of Hamilton, his undoubted heir-male; he being lineally
descended of William earl of Selkirk, eldest son of the second marriage of
William first marquis of Douglas.

The duke of Hamilton was accordingly, upon the 1st of December 1761, served
and retoured heir-male to the said Archibald duke of Douglas, and is now
designed George James duke of Hamilton and Brandon, marquis of Douglas, earl of
Angus, etc. etc. etc.

Vide Title duke of Hamilton.

ARMS.
The armorial bearing of the late duke of Douglas was, quarterly, 1st, azure, a
lion rampant argent, crowned with an imperial crown or, for the earldom of
Galloway. 2d, or, a lion rampant gules, surmounted of a ribband sable, for lord
Abernethy. 3d, argent, three piles gules, for Wishart of Brechin. 4th, or, a
fess cheque azure and argent, surmounted of a bend gules, charged with three
buckles of the first, for Stewart of Bonkle: over all, on an escutcheon argent,
a man's heart gules, ensigned with an imperial crown proper; and on a chief
azure, three stars of the first, the paternal coat of Douglas: above the shield
a crown, helmet, and vollets, befitting their dignity; and in place of a
wreath, a chapeau or cap of state gules, turned up ermine, and upon it for a

CREST; a salamander vert, in the middle of flames of fire.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter side a savage proper, holding a baton erected, and
wreathed about the middle with laurel vert; and on the sinister, a stag proper,
armed and unguled, or; both which supporters stand within a pale of wood,
wreathed and impaled, for a compartment,

MOTTO: Jamais arriere.

CHIEF SEATS.
The castles of Douglas and Bothwell, both in the shire of Lanerk; and Dudhope
in Angus-shire, an ancient noble pile of building, in the middle of a park,
within a mile of Dundee.

SUTHERLAND Lord DUFFUS.
THAT the barony of Duffus was first the property of the Murrays, then of the
Cheynes, is clearly set forth, under the titles of Murray duke of Athole. page
51, and Moray lord Bothwell, page 80 of this work.

And as the rise and descent of the ancient and illustrious name of Sutherland,
is to be found under the title, earl of Sutherland; to that we refer our
readers, and proceed to deduce the descent of this noble family from their
immediate ancestor, viz.

Kenneth, sixth earl of Sutherland, who flourished in the reign of king Robert
Bruce, and lost his life in the service of his country, at the battle of
Halidonhill, Ford. lib. xii. cap. 27.
anno 1333. By a daughter of Donald earl of March, he left issue two sons,

1. William, seventh earl of Sutherland, his successor.

2. Nicholas Sutherland, the first of this family.

I. NICHOLAS, second son of the sixth earl of Sutherland, obtained from his
brother earl William, a grant of the forty pound land of Therbol, anno 1360,
which is confirmed by a charter under the great seal, from king David Bruce,
Char. in arch. regis David.
(the lands being erected into a free barony) to him, and the lawful heirsmale
of his body, holding of the said earl, etc. The confirmation is dated at
Edinburgh, 17th day of October, 1364.

He married Mary, daughter and heiress of Reynald de Cheyne, by whom he got the
lands and barony of Duffus, which afterward became the chief title of his
family; and in consequencc of this marriage, he added the arms of Cheyne,
Nisbet, vol. I. p. 259.
to his paternal coat of Sutherland, viz. gules, three cross crosslets or,
which is still a part of the armorial bearing of Sutherland of Duffus.

By the said Mary Cheyne, he left issue a son,

II. HENRY SUTHERLAND, second baron of Duffus, Chart. penes comitem de
Sutherland.
who succeeded him. He got a charter, upon his father's resignation, of the
lands and barony of Therbol, from the earl of Sutherland, superior thereof, in
the reign of king Robert III.

He was father of

III. ALEXANDER SUTHERLAND, Information for the earl of Sutherland against the
earl of Crawfurd, etc. and Charta penes comitem de Sutherland.
third baron of Duffus, who got a new charter from his chief, John earl of
Sutherland, of the lands and barony of Therbol, etc. proceeding upon the
resignation of his grandfather Nicol, in favors of his son Henry, father of
this Alexander, dated 12th July 1444.

He married Morella, daughter of -- Chisholm of that ilk, Chart. in pub.
archiv. ad ann. 1433.
with whom he got the barony of Quarrelwood, and several other lands; Nisbet,
vol. I. p. 260. and vol. II. p. 20.
whereupon he added to his armorial bearing, a boar's head erased, etc. being
part of the arms of Chisholm.

By her he had issue two sons and one daughter.

1. Alexander his heir.

2. William, who succeeded to the lands of Quarrelwood, in right of his mother,
and carried on the line of this family, of whom afterward.

His daughter Isabel, Writs of the family of Westfield, penes Macfarlane.
married to sir Alexander Dunbar of Westfield, who got with her the lands of
Clunie, Clava, etc. being part of her mother's estate.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. ALEXANDER SUTHERLAND, fourth baron of Duffus, who married -- daughter of
-- by whom he had only one daughter,

Christian Sutherland, Char. in arch. Jacobi IV. ad ann. 1507.
married to William Oliphant of Berrendale.

He dying without issue male, the estate of Duffus devolved upon his nephew
William, his heir male, being son of his brother William, to whom we now return.

IV. WILLIAM SUTHERLAND of Quarrelwood, second son of Alexander, third baron of
Duffus, flourished in the reign of king James III. and was father of

V. WILLIAM, who succeeded to his uncle Alexander, as before observed, and was
fifth baron of Duffus.

He got a charter under the great seal, from king James IV. Chart. in pub.
archiv.
Willielmo Sutherland de Quarrelwood, terrarum baroniae de Duffus, etc. anno
1507.

Also charters from king James V. of several other lands, Ibidem.
inter 1516 et 1520.

He married Janet, Chartul. of Murray, penes MacFarlane.
daughter of sir Alexander Innes of that ilk, by whom he had two sons.

1. William his heir.

2. Alexander, who being bred to the church, was rector of Duffus, dean of
Caithness, etc. and was designed frater germanus Willielmi de Duffus. Ibid. p.
597.


This William was slain at Thurso, Hist. of the earls of Sutherland, p. 77.
by the clan Gun, in the beginning of the year 1529. His lady survived him,
which appears by a sasine, Chartulary of Murray, p. 551.
Jonetae Innes, relictae nobilis viri, Willielmi de Duffus, etc. in August 1529.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. WILLIAM, sixth baron of Duffus, who, in an instrument of sasine of the
lands of Quarrelwood, Ibid. 549.
is designed legitimus haeres Willielmi Sutherland de Duffus, etc., 12th June,
1529.

He got afterward charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
from king James V. Willielmo Sutherland de Duffus, of several lands and
baronies, inter 1535, et 1540.

By -- his wife, he left issue a son,

William his Heir, -- and a daughter,

Elizabeth, Ibid. ad annum 1596.
married to Archibald Douglas of Pittendreich.

He died inter 1580 et 1585, and was succeeded by his son,

VII. WILLIAM, seventh baron of Duffus, who got charters under the great seal,
Ibidem.
from king James VI. Willielmo Sutherland de Duffus, of several lands and
baronies, inter 1585, et 1592.

He got also charters of the lands of Duffus, Brounton, Ibidem.
Saltcoats, etc. inter 1602, et 1606.

He died, inter 1635 et 1640, leaving issue a son and successor,

VIII. ALEXANDER SUTHERLAND of Duffus, Ibidem.
who got charters under the great seal, from king Charles I. domino Alexandro,
etc. of the lands and barony of Duffus and others, inter 1642 et 1646.

He was appointed one of the committee of estates by the parliament, Rescinded
acts of parlt.
20th March 1647, and, after the murder of the king, was nominated one of the
colonels for arming the kingdom, 15th February 1649.

And being a man of great parts and merit, Crawfurd's peerage, and writs of the
fam. of Duffus.
was raised to the dignity of the peerage, by king Charles II. on 8th December
1650, a little before his coronation.

After the restoration, Chart. in pub. archiv.
he got charters under the great seal, Alexandro domino Duffus, haeredibus et
assignatis quibuscunque, terrarum de Kersgill, etc. etc. anno 1668.

He married, first, lady Margaret MacKenzie, daughter of Colin, first earl of
Seaforth, widow of John master of Berrendale, and mother of George, sixth earl
of Caithness; but by her he had no issue.

He married, 2dly, a daughter of sir Roert Innes of that ilk, also without
issue.

He married 3dly, lady Margaret Stewart, daughter of James earl of Murray, by
whom he had a son,

James, his heir; -- and a daughter,

Henrietta, married to George earl of Linlithgow.

He died anno 16.. and was succeeded by his son,

IX. JAMES, second lord Duffus, who married lady Margaret MacKenzie, daughter
of Kenneth, third earl of Seaforth, by whom he had three sons.

1. Kenneth, his heir.

2. James, who was created a baronet, anno 1706, and married Mary, daughter and
heiress of sir George Dunbar of Hemprigs, who thereupon changed his name to
Dunbar.

3. William Sutherland of Rosecommon, Esquire; who married Mary, daughter of
William lord Forbes.

He died anno 1705, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. KENNETH, third lord Duffus, whose genius leading him to a seafaring life,
he soon acquired such great skill and knowledge in maritime affairs, that her
majesty queen Anne gave him the command of the Advice, a 50 gun ship of war, in
which station he so remarkably distinguished himself in several expeditions,
that he did honor to himself and his country, by his conduct, undaunted
courage and resolution.

He had the misfortune to be engaged in the rebellion 1715, but got beyond the
seas, and was attainted by parliament. He was afterward apprehended at
Hamburgh, brought to London, and committed prisoner to the tower, anno 1716,
but was released the year thereafter by the act of grace. He withdrew into
foreign parts, and served as a flag-officer in the Russian fleet.

He married Charlotte, daughter of Eric de Sioblede, governor and admiral of
Gottenburgh in Sweden, by whom he had a son,

Eric his successor, -- and two daughters married in Sweden.

XI. ERIC, who, had it not been for his father's attainder, would have been
fourth lord Duffus.

He married his cousin Elizabeth Sutherland, daughter of his uncle sir James
Dunbar of Hemprigs, Bart, before mentioned, by whom he has two sons and three
daughters.

1. James his heir.

2. Axle Sutherland, Esquire;.

1st daughter Elizabeth.

2. Charlotte.

3. Anne.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st, gules, three stars or: 2d, azure, three cross crosslets fitchy
argent: 3d, azure, a boar's head erased, argent: 4th, as the first.

CREST; on a wreath, a cat sejant, proper.

SUPPORTERS; two savages proper, each wreathed about his head and middle with
laurel, and armed with a batton.

MOTTO; Without fear.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Skelbo in the county of Sutherland, and Elgin-house in the county of Elgin.

CRICHTON Earl of DUMFRIES and STAIR.
THE traditional accounts of the origin of this ancient and illustrious surname
are various. Some deduce them from a noble Hungarian, that came to Scotland
with queen Margaret, in the reign of king Malcolm Canmore.

Others are of opinion, that it is a local surname, and was first assumed by
the proprietors of the lands and barony of Crichton in Mid-Lothian.

Certain it is they were settled, and had possessions in that county, when
sirnames began to be used in Scotland.

Thurstanus de Crichton was witness to the foundation charter of the abbay of
Holyroodhouse, Dalrymple's historical collect. p. 418.
by king David I. anno 1128.

And though we cannot connect this noble family with Thurstanus, yet we shall
deduce their descent from one of his posterity, who was their immediate
ancestor, and proprietor of the lands and barony of Crichton, above five
hundred years ago, which is fully instructed under the title of lord Crichton,
and hereafter by authentic documents.

WILLIELMUS dominus CRICHTON, Chartul. of Levenax, penes MacFarlane, p. 44.
is particularly mentioned in a charter of Maldwin earl of Lennox, in the reign
of king Alexander II. who succeeded to the crown of Scotland, anno 1214, and
died in 1249.

William was succeeded by his son,

I. THOMAS dominus de CRICHTON, who was one of the great barons of Scotland,
that were forced to swear fealty to king Edward 1st of England, Prynne's
collect. vol. III.
for his lands lying in Mid-Lothian, anno 1296.

By Eda his wife, he left issue three sons.

1. Nicolaus de Crichton, ancestor of lord Crichton, and viscount Frendraught.

2. William de Crichton, first of the family of Sanquhar, progenitor of the
earl of Dumfries.

3. Thomas de Crichton, etc. These three brothers, with their father and
mother, are all mentioned in a donation to the monastery of Newbottle, Chartul.
of Newbottle, penes Macfarlane, p. 6^^
made by sir William Crichton, rector of Crichton, son of this Thomas, anno
1388.

II. WILLIAM, second son of Thomas dominus de Crichton, flourished in the reign
of king Robert Bruce, and of his son king David, and was a faithful and loyal
subject to both these princes.

He married Isabel de Ross, daughter and co-heiress of Robert de Ross, lord of
Sanquhar, with whom he got the half of the lands and barony of Sanquhar. This
is confirmed by a charter from king Robert Bruce, Ricardo dicto Edgar, Chart.
in archiv. Roberti I. rotul. I.
etc. cum medietate totius baroniae de Sanquhar, sicut dicta baronia inter
Willielmum de Crichton et Isabellam sponsam suam, portionarios ipsius baroniae,
ratione dictae sponsae ex part una, et ipsum Ricardum ex altera, per literam
de capella nostra, nuper fuit divisa, etc.

The other half of the barony of Sanquhar, Chart. in pub. archiv. and
Dalrymple's collections, p. 419.
was afterward acquired by this family, and became their chief title; and in
consequence of this marriage, they have continued to quarter the arms of Ross
with their own.

He died about 1360, leaving issue by the said Isabel Ross his wife, a son and
successor.

III. WILLIAM de CRICHTON, designed dominus de Sanquhar, who is a witness to a
charter of a donation to the abbacy of Newbottle by Alexander de Ramsay,
Chartul. of Newbottle, penes MacFarlane p. 53.
dominus de Dalwolsy, together with William earl of Douglas, James lord
Dalkeith, Henry his brother, Thomas de Hope-Pringle, etc. about the year 1380.

He lived after the year 1400, and was succeeded by his son,

IV. Sir ROBERT de CRICHTON, third baron of Sanquhar, who being a man of fine
parts, was in great favor with king James I. and II. was of the privy council
to both these princes, and had the honor of knighthood conferred upon him by
the latter.

He got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the lands and barony of Sanquhar, Roberto Crichton domino de Sanquhar
militi, dated anno 1433.

This sir Robert, Ibidem.
lord of Sanquhar, and his cousin sir William Crichton, lord of that ilk, made
a mutual entail; whereby, failing heirs-male of any one of their bodies, their
estates were to go to the others. Ibidem.
Which was afterward confirmed by a charter under the great seal, dated anno
1439.

He married Elizabeth, daughter and heiress of sir William Erskine of Kinnoul
in the shire of Perth, Ibidem.
by whom he got a large accession to his estate, and by her had issue five sons
and two daughters.

1. Sir Robert.

2. Alexander de Crichton, who got from his father the lands of Kilpatrick,
Ibidem.
upon which he got a charter under the great seal, containing an entail, viz.
Alexandro Crichton, filio Roberti Crichton domini de Sanquhar, militis,
terrarum de Kilpatrick, etc. and the heirsmale of his body; Ibidem.
which failing, to Laurence, then to Thomas, and fourthly, to Patrick, etc.
brothers german, etc. dated anno 1463. This Alexander, was ancestor of the
Crichtons of Crawfurdstoun, and of several other families in Nithsdale.

3. Laurence de Crichton, Ibidem.
who got from his father the lands of Burmuchty, upon which he got a charter
under the great seal, dated anno 1467.

4. Thomas de Crichton, who died without issue.

5. Patrick de Crichton, Ibidem.
who, failing heirs of his brother Laurence his body, was to succeed to the
lands of Burmuchty, by the aforementioned charter.

1st daughter, Chart. penes ducem de Queensberry.
Elizabeth, married to sir William Douglas of Drumlanrig, ancestor of the Duke
of Queensberry.

2. Margaret, Chart. in pub. archiv.
married to sir David Herries of Terreagles, which appears by a charter under
the great seal, dated anno 1458.

He died anno 1462, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. Sir ROBERT, afterward lord Crichton of Sanquhar, a man of great merit,
loyalty and intrepidity, who remarkably distinguished himself in the service of
king James III. in his wars against the duke of Albany and the earl of Douglas,
particularly at the battle of Kirkconnel, etc. In recompense whereof, king
James rewarded him with grants of several of the forfeited lands; Ibid. ad
annum 1464, and 1465.
upon which he got charters under the great seal, wherein his great and
faithful services are fully narrated.

He got a charter from king James III. Ibidem.
appointing him vicecomes de Dumfries, dated anno 1464, Ibidem.
and another charter, officii coronatoris de Nithsdale, dated anno 1468.

In the same year, he granted a tack of the two-merk-land of Little-Corko,
Chart. penes vicecom. de Stormont.
to sir Charles Murray of Cockpool, wherein he is designed sir Robert Crichton
of Sanquhar, sheriff of Dumfries.

And being now possessed of a vast estate, and in great favor with the king,
Crawfurd's peerage, and Scots comp.
his majesty was pleased to dignisie him with the title of lord Crichton of
Sanquhar, about the year 1485.

He married lady Marian Stewart, Hist. of the Stewarts, p. 153.
daughter of John, first earl of Lennox, by whom he had a son,

Robert lord Sanquhar, -- and a daughter,

Marian, married to Malcolm Crawfurd of Kilbirnie, ancestor of the Viscount
Garnock.

He died anno 1502, and was succeeded by his only son,

VI. ROBERT, Chart. in pub. archiv.
second lord Crichton of Sanquhar, who got a charter under the great seal,
terrarum de Crawfurdstone, Balmachune, etc. dated anno 1506.

Also a charter, Ibidem.
Roberto domino Crichton de Sanquhar, terrarum baroniae de Sanquhar, Panbride,
etc. dated anno 1507.

He likewise got a charter from king James V. of the lands of Kilpatrick,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
Irongray, etc. to him, and Elizabeth Murray his spouse, etc. dated 1516.

He married Elizabeth, Charta penes vicecom. de Stormont.
daughter of sir Cuthbert Murray of Cockpool, by whom he had a son and
successor,

VII. WILLIAM, third lord Crichton of Sanquhar, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who got a charter from queen Mary, of the lands and barony of Kinnoul in
Perthshire, Willielmo domino Crichton de Sanquhar, et Elizabethae Fleming suae
sponsae, etc. dated 1548.

He married Elizabeth, Ibid. ad an. 1540.
daughter of Malcolm lord Fleming, by whom he had three sons and one daughter.

1. Robert his heir.

2. Edward, who succeeded his brother.

3. John Crichton of Rayhill, who carried on the line of this family, of whom
afterward.

His daughter Agnes, married to sir Andrew Ker of Cessford, ancestor of the
duke of Roxburgh, and of the marquis of Lothian.

He was killed by lord Semple, according to Buchanan, anno 1550, and was
succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. ROBERT, fourth lord Crichton of Sanquhar, Ibidem.
who got a charter under the great seal, Roberto, domino Crichton de Sanquhar,
et Margaretae Cunninghame sponsae suae, of the eight-merk-land of
Glenmucklochis, the twomerk-lands of Farding, etc. dated anno 1558.

He married Margaret Cunninghame, daughter of --, Ibid. ad ann. 1558.
But dying without issue, was succeeded by his brother,

VIII. EDWARD, Chart. penes James Veitch of Elliock, one of the senators of the
college of justice.
fifth lord Crichton of Sanquhar, who married Margaret, daughter of sir James
Douglas of Drumlanrig, by whom he had a son and successor,

IX. ROBERT, sixth lord Crichton of Sanquhar, Chart. in pub. arch.
who got a charter from king James VI. of the lands of Catslack, caster and
wester Mountberringer, etc. dated anno 1581.

Also charters of the lands, lordship and barony of Sanquhar, Ibidem.
in vicecomitatu de Dumfries, and of several other lands, too numerous to be
here inserted, inter ann. 1609 et 1611.

He was much at court, and being very dexterous at all manly exercises, was
taken particular notice of by king James VI.

He was a great master of the art of sencing, and was engaged in a trial of
skill, with one Turner a sencing-master, in which encounter he had the
misfortune to get his eye put out; in revenge whereof he had Turner murdered,
for which he was executed at London, on 29th June 1612. He married Mary,
Peerage of England, vol. III. p. 502.
daughter of sir George Farmer of Easton, in the county of Northampton,
ancestor of the earl of Pomfret, by whom he had no issue, whereby his estate
and honors devolved upon his cousin-german William Crichton, son of his uncle
John of Rayhill, to whom whom we now return.

VIII. JOHN CRICHTON of Rayhill, second son of William, third lord Crichton of
Sanquhar, got a charter of confirmation, under the great seal, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
of the lands of Rayhill, etc. dated 16th May, anno 1611.

He married Mary, daughter of sir John Carmichael of Crawfurd, by whom he had a
son,

IX. WILLIAM CRICHTON of Rayhill, who succeeded as heir-male to his cousin
Robert, 6th lord Crichton of Sanquhar, as before noticed.

He got a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
Willielmo domino Crichton de Sanquhar, terrarum baroniae de Glencairn, dated
anno 1614.

And another charter, terrarum baroniae et dominii de Sanquhar, etc. Ibidem,
and Retour in Chancery.
dated 15th July 1619, proceeding upon a retour, wherein he is designed filius
patrui, et legitimus et propinquior haeres quondam Roberti domini Crichton de
Sanquhar, etc.

He was in great favor with king James VI. who created him viscount Air, anno
1622.

And being no less esteemed by king Charles I. was by that prince raised to the
dignity of earl of Dumfries, Dipl. in pub. archivis. Haer. masc. ex corpore
suo, ad ann. 1633.
viscount Air, lord Crichton of Sanquhar, Cumnock, etc. by letters patent, to
him, and the heirs-male of his body, dated 10th June 1633.

He got also a charter under the great seal, de officiis vicecomitis et
coronatoris vicecomitatus de Dumfries, Chart. in pub. archiv.
dated anno 1640.

He married Eupheme, daughter of James Seton of Touch, Esquire; by whom he had
three sons and two daughters.

1. William.

2. Sir James Crichton of St. Leonards.

3. John, who was a brave soldier, and a colonel in the German wars.

1st daughter lady Mary, married to Edward Swift, viscount Carlingford, in the
kingdom of Ireland.

2. Lady Catharine, married to sir John Charteris of Amisfield.

He died in the year 1641, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. WILLIAM, second earl of Dumfries, a man of great worth and honor, who was
one of the lords of the privy council to king Charles II.

He married Penelope, daughter of sir Robert Swift, of the county of York,
knight, by whom he had two sons and three daughters.

1. Robert, lord Crichton, who died young.

2. Charles, lord Crichton, who carried on the line of this family.

1st daughter, lady Elizabeth, married to Alexander earl of Eglington.

2. Lady Penelope.

3. Lady Mary.

These both died unmarried.

He made a resignation of his honors into the king's hands, Dipl. in pub.
archiv. haered. masc. seu femellis, etc.
and got a new patent, to him and his heirs whatsomever, male or female, with
the precedence of the former creation, dated anno 1690, and died anno 1691.

XI. CHARLES lord Crichton, son and apparent heir of William second earl of
Dumfries, married Sarah Dalrymple, daughter of James first viscount Stair, by
whom he had a son,

William, earl of Dumfries, -- and four daughters,

1st Penelope, afterward countess of Dumfries.

2. Margaret.

3. Mary.

4. Elizabeth.

Charles lord Crichton, dying before his father, was succeeded by his only son,

XII. WILLIAM, who succeeded also to his grandfather, anno 1691, and was third
earl of Dumfries; but dying unmarried, anno 1694, his estate and honors,
according to the tenor of the last mentioned patent, devolved upon his eldest
sister,

XII. PENELOPE, countess of Dumfries, who married colonel William Dalrymple of
Glenmure, Esquire; son of John earl of Stair, by whom she had issue six sons and
two daughters.

1. William, now earl of Dumfries and Stair.

2. John, a youth of great hopes, who betook himself to a military life, and
was a captain of dragoons, but died unmarried.

3. James, afterward earl of Stair, but died without issue, anno 1761.

4. Charles.

5. Hugh.

6. George.

1st daughter, lady Betty, married to John MacDowal of Freugh, Esquire; and has
issue four sons and two daughters.

2. Lady Penelope.

The countess died anno 1742, and was succeeded by her son,

XIII. WILLIAM, fourth earl of Dumfries, who, when a youth, went into the army,
served in the earl of Stair's Inniskilling regiment of dragoons, and in the
third regiment of foot guards twenty-six years.

He was aid-de-camp to the said earl at the battle of Dettingen, anno 1741; was
created a knight of the most noble order of the thistle, anno 1752; and was
appointed the king's high commissioner for investing James, late duke of
Hamilton, with the same order in March 1755.

Upon the death of his brother, James late earl of Stair, he succeeded also to
these honors, anno 1761, and is the fourth earl of Stair.

He married lady Anne Gordon, daughter of William earl of Aberdeen, by whom he
had a son,

William, lord Crichton, a boy of a fine genius, who died at Marybone school,
in the 10th year of his age, much regreted.

The countess died anno 1755, and the earl is still a widower.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st and 4th, or, on a saltire azure, nine lozenges of the first,
for Dalrymple: 2d and 3d, or, a cheveron cheque argent and sable, between three
water budgets of the last, for Ross: and over all, by way of surtout, an
eseutcheon argent charged with a lion rampant azure, for Crichton.

CREST; on a wreath, a dragons head couped vert, spouting fire.

SUPPORTERS; two lions azure, each crowned with an earl's coronet or.

MOTTO; God send grace.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Sanquhar in the county of Dumfries, and at. Dumfries-house in Ayr-shire.

HOME Earl of DUNBAR.
AS the rise and descent of the noble and ancient surname of Home, is to be
found under the title of earl of Home, we proceed directly to the immediate
ancestor of the earl of Dunbar, viz.

I. Sir DAVID HOME of Wedderburn (one of the oldest cadets of the family of
Home) married Isabel, God scroft's hist. of the Homes. Martin's genealog.
collec. vol. II. p. 238, etc. p. 248.
daughter of -- Pringle of Gallashiels, and was killed, with his royal master,
king James IV. at the fatal battle of Flowdon, anno 1513. He had issue several
sons.

1. George, who was killed with his father in the field of Flowdon, without
issue.

2. David, who succeeded his father, and carried on the line, of the family of
Wedderburn.

3. Alexander, ancestor of the earls of Dunbar, to whose issue we shall confine
this narration.

II. ALEXANDER HOME, third son of sir David Home of Wedderburn, got from his
father the lands and barony of Manderston, and left issue a son,

Sir Alexander, his heir.

He is also said to have had another son,

Patrick of Renton, of whom sir John Home, now of Renton, Ibidem.
is lineally descended.

III. Sir ALEXANDER HOME of Manderston succeeded his father, and married Janet,
daughter of George Home of Spot, by whom he had three sons.

1. Sir Alexander, his heir, whose grandson, sir Alexander, became earl of
Dunbar, as will be shown hereafter.

2. John Home of Slegden, who will also be mentioned afterward.

3. Sir George, who was created earl of Dunbar.

IV. Sir GEORGE HOME, third son of sir Alexander of Manderston, was a man of
great parts, learning, and judgment, and a mighty favorite of king James IV.
who appointed him one of the gentlemen of his bedchamber, anno 1585.
Johnston's hist. Melvil's memoirs. Lives of the officers of state, etc.


In 1590 he was knighted, and made master of the wardrobe, and was likeways
constituted lord high-treasurer of Scotland, anno 1601.

He accompanied his majesty into England, Dugdale's baronage of Eng. vol. II.
anno 1603, was made one of his privy council, and created a peer of England by
the title of lord Home of Berwick, on 7th July anno 1604, by patent to the
heirs-male of his body.

He was also created a peer of Scotland by the title of earl of Dunbar, Chart.
in pub. archiv. haered. masc. regist. ann. 1363.
on 3d March, anno 1605, by patent to his heirs-male-general.

He was employed in several negotiations of importance by the king, Lives of
the officers of state.
particularly about settling Episcopacy in Scotland, and always acquitted
himself with fidelity and honor, and greatly to his majesty's satisfaction.

He got charters, Char. in pub. arch.
under the great seal, of several lands, Georgio comiti de Dunbar, domino Home,
etc. inter 1606 et 1609.

He got also a charter, Chart. penes vicecomitem de Stormont.
under the great seal, to him and the heirs-male of his body; whom failing, to
his nearest lawful heirs-male or assignees whatsoever, bearing the surname of
Home, all and haill the six pound land of Smallholm, etc. dated 15th January
1610, with a sasine following thereon, dated 18th April threafter.

He married Catharine, daughter of sir Alexander Gordon of Gight, by Mary his
wife, daughter of cardinal David Bethune, bishop of St. Andrews, by whom he had
two daughters.

1. Lady Anne, Lives of the officers of state
married to sir James Home of Coldingknows, and was mother of James third earl
of Home.

2. Lady Elizabeth, Colin's peerage of England, tom. II. p. 172.
married to Theophilus earl of Suffolk, in the kingdom of England, and had
issue four sons and five daughters.

The earl dying without male issue, 29th January 1611, the title of lord Home
of Berwick became extinct; but that of earl of Dunbar appears to have devolved
upon sir Alexander Home of Manderston, as next heirmale, though the title was
not claimed for several years thereafter.

Soon after the earl's death, Precept and retour from chancery penes vicecom de
Stormont
John Home of Slegden, his immediate elder brother, was infeft in the six pound
land of Smallholm, as nearest and lawful heir-male to the earl, on 20th June
1611, and got a sasine thereon, 29th of the same month; but dying without
issue, anno 1614, we therefore return to the next heir-male.

IV. Sir ALEXANDER HOME of Manderston, eldest brother of George earl of Dunbar
was father of

V. Sir GEORGE HOME of Manderston, who, as taking burden on him for John Home
of Slegden his uncle, entered into a contract with John Murray of Rampatrick in
1611, Penes vicecomitem de Stormont.
registrate in the books of council and session, 6th June 1612.

There is also a procuratory of resignation by sir George Home of Manderston,
and John Home of Slegden, Ibidem.
in favors of John Murray of Rampatrick, dated 9th February 1613.

He got charters, under the great seal, domino Alexandro Home de Manderston of
a great many lands, Chart. in pub. archiv.
inter 1618 et 1621.

By Helen Arnot, Ibidem.
his spouse, he had issue a son and successor,

VI. Sir ALEXANDER HOME, who, in his father's lifetime, got a charter, under
the great seal, Ibidem.
domino Alexandro Home juniori de Manderston, of several lands, anno 1621.

He went abroad, settled in Holland, where he made a considerable figure, and
was governor of Embden: he claimed the title of Dunbar as heir-male to the last
earl; Godscroft's hist of the Homes, and Sir Ja. Dalrymple's historical coll.
p. 409.
was sent over by the states of Holland to congratulate the prince of Orange
upon his being made king of England; and was acknowledged to be earl of Dunbar
by king William, anno 1689.

He died soon thereafter in an advanced age, in Westfriezland, and having no
male-issue, the honors of earl of Dunbar have lain dormant ever since.

ARMS.
Three coats: quarterly, 1st and 4th, vert, a lion rampant, argent: 2d, argent,
three papingoes vert: 3d, argent, three escutcheons vert; and in surtout gules,
a lion rampant argent, within a border, charged with eight crosses of the 2d.

CONSTABLE Viscount of DUNBAR.
WE have good authority to affirm, that no surname or family in England can
boast a more noble descent, Genealogical coll. by D. J. Burton, author of
Monast. Ebor. and Monast. Anglica.
than that of the Constables. A learned and judicious antiquary, by good
vouchers, deduces their pedigree from the Saxon kings of England, the kings of
Scotland, dukes of Normandy, etc.

But we shall only here briefly deduce their descent, from the Norman conquest
of England.

I. -- de CONSTABLE, who appears to have been a man of the first rank in
Normandy, came over to England with William the conqueror, (to whom he was
nearly related,) anno 1066, had a considerable command in his army, and is
mentioned in the roll of Battle-abbay, though his christian name is omitted.
Hist. of Normandy, and Burton's coll.
He obtained from that great prince, in reward of his merit and faithful
services, a share of the conquered lands in England, where he settled, and was
father of

II. ULBERT de CONSTABLE, who flourished in the reigns of king William II. and
Henry I. of England, and married -- de Burton, with whom he got several lands;
and, Monast. Ebor. p. 253.
by her donations to the religious in Swyneabbay, she appears to have had large
possessions.

By her lie had issue a son and successor,

III. Sir ROBERT CONSTABLE, designed of Halsham in Holderness, etc. There is a
charter still preserved in the family, Ibid. chart. 144.
wherein he gave four oxgangs of land in Halsham, to William, son of Utred, his
servant; and on his seal is represented the figure of a man on horseback,
properly accoutered, brandishing his drawn sword in his right hand, etc. which
denotes his being of the equestrian order.

This sir Robert got from William le Gross, Ibid. chart. 134, and 138.
earl of Albemarle, five pound rent charge, etc. 10th Henry II. anno 1164,
which was afterward confirmed to the family by Hawise the countess, anno 1205.

He left issue two sons.

1. Sir Robert, his heir.

2. William Constable, who carried on the line of this family, of whom
afterward.

IV. Sir ROBERT CONSTABLE of Halsham succeeded his father, and was one of the
English knights that acompanied William de Mandeville, earl of Albemarle, to
the holy war. Before he set out on that expedition, he borrowed 160 merks from
the monks of Meaux abbay, Monast. Ebor.
and gave a mortgage on his lordship of Thurlesthorpe and town of Halsham,
until the sum should be repaid; but dying at A^on without issue, anno 1181, was
succeeded by his nephew Robert, son of his brother William, to whom we now
return.

IV. WILLIAM CONSTABLE, Burton's genesis collections.
brother-german of the last sir Robert, married Julian, sister of Thomas de
Alost, by whom he had two sons.

1. Robert.

2. Simon Constable, who married -- Bertram, Ibidem.
and had issue.

William died before his elder brother, and was succeeded by his son,

V. ROBERT, who succeeding also to his uncle sir Robert, Monast. Ebor.
anno 1181, confirmed his mortgage to the monks of Meaux, and made a donation
to the monks of Thornton out of his lands of Halsham, Monast. Anglican. p. 200.
etc.

He married Adelisa, eldest daughter and co-heiress of Fulco de Oyri, lord of
Gedney in Lincolnshire, by whom he had two sons.

1. Sir William, his heir.

2. Sir Fulco de Constable.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. Sir WILLIAM CONSTABLE, designed lord of Halsham and Burton, Monast. Ebor.
chart. 137, 583, etc.
in several original charters, in the reign of king Henry III. who succeeded to
the crown, anno 1216, and died 1272.

He claimed the Grange of Thurlesthorpe; Monast. Ebor.
but afterward quitted it to Meaux abbay, which is confirmed by several
charters still extant.

He got a grant from king Henry III. of a fair or market at Holme, Monast.
Anglican.
anno 1241.

He married Cecilia, daughter of Marmaduke de Twenge, with whom he got a
considerable accession to his estate, by a charter from her brother Robert de
Twenge, Monast Ebor. chart. 172 and 147.
Willielmo Constabulario de Burton, et haered. suis, etc. and to Cecily his
spouse, sister of the said Robert, etc. By her he had issue two sons.

1. Sir Simon, his heir.

2. Galfred Constable, who got from his father several lands; Burton's col.
but dying without issue, anno 1297, his estate returned to the family.

Sir William was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. Sir SIMON CONSTABLE, lord of Halsham and Burton, Monast. Ebor. chart. 53,
173, and 137.
who is witness in a charter of king Henry III. anno 1259, and to another of
king Edward I. anno 1287.

He had grant of free warren in Pagula, Holme, Kaynham, Otteringham,
Thurlesthorpe, Chart. in the tower of London 13 Edw. I. No. 53.
West-halsham, Punchaugh, Burtonconstable, Merton, Benningholm, and many
others, anno 1285.

It appears, by an inquisition after his death, that he had been possessed of
an immense estate of lands, lying in many different counties, of all which
Robert, Ibid. No. 53. and Burton's escheats, p. 62.
his son and heir, was in possession anno 1294.

He married Catharine, relict of sir John Dantly, by whom he had several sons
and daughters; and dying anno 1293, was succeeded by his son,

VIII. ROBERT CONSTABLE, lord of Halsham, etc. Copy from the pipe rolls, penes
doctor Burton.
who married Avicia, daughter and co-heiress of sir Robert de Lascels, by whom
he got a considerable estate, viz. some lands in Ellerton, Essex, Kyrby under
Knol, etc.

By her he had two sons, and one daughter.

1. Sir John, his heir.

2. William Constable.

His daughter, Catharine, married William, son of Philip de Melsa.

He died anno 1337, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. Sir JOHN CONSTABLE of Halsham and Burton, Book of escheats, p. 359.
who also held a vast estate of lands, all particularly mentioned in several
different charters.

He married Albreda, daughter of -- Bulmer, relict of -- St. Quintin, by whom
he had a son,

X. Sir JOHN CONSTABLE of Halsham, Burton-Constable, etc. who succeeded him,
anno 1351, and married Maud, daughter of Robert Hilbon, Burton's col.
Esquire; by whom he had two sons, and one daughter.

1. Sir William, his heir.

2. Thomas Constable who married Margaret, daughter of sir Thomas Manly, Ibid.
ad ann^. 1410.
knight, and had issue.

His daughter, Margaret, married to sir John Copledike of Harrington, Archer's
hist. of Lincolnshire, p. 73.
in com. Lincoln. knight, and had issue.

He died anno 1394, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. Sir WILLIAM of Halsham, Burton-Constable, etc. who, anno 1400 married
Elizabeth, daughter of -- Metham, Burton's col.
by whom he had a son and successor,

XII. Sir JOHN CONSTABLE of Halsham, etc. who married Margaret, daughter and
co-heiress of sir Thomas Umsraville, knight, of Harbottle in Northumberland,
Ibidem.
by whom he had a son,

Sir John, -- and three daughters,

1. Elizabeth, married to sir William Elmen.

2. Janet, married to sir Thomas Lambert.

3. Maud, married to sir William Ryther.

He died anno 1447, and was succeeded by his son,

XIII. Sir JOHN CONSTABLE of Halsham, etc. Mon. Ebor. Burton's coll. etc.
who was made a knight banneret by the duke of Gloucester, anno 1448, and
married Lora, daughter of lord Fitzhugh of Ravenworth-castle, by whom he had
three sons, and three daughters.

1. John, his heir.

2. Sir Ralph, who succeeded his brother.

3. William, who died without issue.

1st daughter, Marjory, married to Robert Holme of Persilholme, Esquire;

2. Margaret, married to John Roos, Esquire;

3. Jean, married to William Mallory, Esquire;

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIV. JOHN CONSTABLE of Halsham, etc. Ibidem.
who married Margaret, daughter of -- Mallory, Esquire; but dying without issue,
was succeeded by his brother,

XIV. Sir RALPH CONSTABLE of Halsham, etc. Ibidem.
who married, 1st, Anne, daughter and co-heiress of Robert Earl, Esquire; by whom
he had three sons, and two daughters.

1. Sir John, his heir.

2. Ralph Constable of Thorntoft, in Richmond-shire, who married, 1st,
Christian, daughter of -- Lazenby of Whitewell, in comitatu de Richmond, Ibidem.
by whom he had several children. He married, 2dly, Elizabeth, daughter of
William Grimston, Esquire; by whom he also had issue.

3. William, who died without issue.

1st daughter, Lora, married to John Hotham of Scarburgh, Esquire;

2. Jean, married to Christopher Hildyard, Esquire;

Sir Ralph married, 2dly, Elizabeth, daughter of -- Tempest, Esquire; by whom he
had no issue.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. Sir JOHN CONSTABLE of Halsham, etc. who made a considerable figure in
England in the reign of king Henry VII.

Anno 1505, he married, Ibid. and several charters in Monast. E^or.
1st, Agnes, daughter of sir Thomas Metham, by whom he had six sons, and two
daughters.

1. Sir John, his heir.

2. Ralph Constable of St. Sepulchers, Esquire;

3. William.

4. Robert Constable of Esington, in Holderness, who married Joan, daughter of
Edmund Frothinghame, of South-Frothinghame, and had issue, of whom the
Constables of Bently and several others are descended.

5. Francis.

6. Brian.

The above Francis and Brian both died without issue.

1st daughter, Catharine, married to Ralph Ellerker of Risby, Esquire;

2. Marjory, married to Brian Napleton of Wighill.

He married, 2dly, Elizabeth, daughter of -- Hedlam, relict of sir John Hotham,
by whom he had two daughters.

1. Anne, married to Brian Palmer of Naburn, Esquire;

2. Elizabeth, married to Christopher Frodingham, Esquire;

He married, Peerage of England.
3dly, Margaret, daughter of Thomas lord Clifford, by whom he had no issue.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVI. JOHN CONSTABLE of Halsham, Burton's coll.
Burton, etc. who married Joan, daughter and co-heiress of Ralph Nevil of
Thornbrigs, Esquire; by whom he had three sons.

1. Sir John, his heir.

2. Ralph of Burstnic-Northpark, who married Frances, daughter of William
Skipnith of Skipnith in Lincolnshire, and had issue.

3. Christopher of Westead, who also married, and had issue.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVII. Sir JOHN CONSTABLE of Burton, Halsham, Extinct peerages of England, vol.
II.
etc. who married, 1st, Margaret, daughter of John lord Scroop of Bolton, by
whom he had four sons.

1. Henry, his heir.

2. Joseph of Upsal, who married Mary, daughter of Thomas Crathorne of
Crathorne, and had issue a son, John Constable, etc.

3. Ralph.

4. John.

The above Ralph and John died without issue.

He married, Ibidem.
2dly, Catharine, daughter of Henry earl of Westmorland, by whom he had a son,

John, who died without issue.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVIII. HENRY CONSTABLE lord of Burton, etc. Burton's coll.
who married Margaret, daughter of sir William Dormer of Ethorp, in
Buckingham-shire, by whom he had a son,

Sir Henry, afterward viscount of Dunbar; -- and four Daughters.

1. Catharine, married to sir Thomas Fairfax of Wilton.

2. Dorothy, married to Roger, son of sir Ralph Leinston of Brough, knight.

3. Margaret, married to sir Edward Stanhope, knight of the bath.

4. Mary, married to Thomas, son of sir William Blackston, knight.

He, dying anno 1608, was succeeded by his only son,

XIX. Sir HENRY CONSTABLE of Burton, Halsham, etc. who, being a man of great
parts and learning, Crawfurd's Peerage, etc.
was highly esteemed by king James VI. who created him a peer of Scotland by
the title of lord viscount of Dunbar, on 14th November 1620, by patent,
haeredibus masculis e corpore suo, etc.

He married Mary, Colin's peerage of England, vol. II. p. 351.
daughter of sir John Tufton of Heathfield in Kent, Bart. and sister of
Nicholas, first earl of Thanet, by whom he had three sons, and two daughters.

1. John, his heir.

2. Matthew.

3. Henry.

The above Matthew and Henry both died without issue.

1st daughter, Ibid. p. 388.
Mary, married to Robert Brudenell earl of Cardigan.

2. Catharine, married to William Middleton of Stockeld, Esquire;

He died anno 1645, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XX. JOHN, second lord viscount Dunbar, who married lady Mary Brudenell, Ibidem:
daughter of Thomas earl of Cardigan, by whom he had three sons, and three
daughters.

1. John, who died before his father unmarried.

2. Robert, who became his father's heir.

3. William, who succeeded his brother.

1st daughter, Cecily, carried on the line of this family, as will be shown
hereafter.

2. Catharine, married to John Moor, Esquire; of Kirktington in Nottingham-shire.

3. Mary, who became a nun.

He died anno 1665, or 1666, and was succeeded by his son,

XXI. ROBERT, third lord viscount Dunbar, who married Mary, Extinct peerages of
England, vol. II. p. 345.
daughter of John lord Bellasis of Worlaby in Line, by whom he had one daughter,

Anne, married to Simon Scroop of Danby,

He married, 2dly, Elizabeth, relict of the earl of Westmorland, by whom he had
no children.

And dying without male-issue, his estate and honors devolved upon his brother,

XXI. WILLIAM, fourth lord viscount Dunbar, who married Elizabeth, daughter of
Hugh lord Clifford of Ugbrooke-Devon.

He dying without issue, the peerage became extinct; but his estate, by entail,
went to his nephew Cuthbert, son of his sister Cecily, to whom we now return.

XXI. CECILY CONSTABLE, eldest daughter of John, second lord viscount of
Dunbar, married to Francis Tunstal, Esquire; of Shargill-castle, by whom he had
three sons, and four daughters.

1. Cuthbert.

2. Marmaduke.

3. Matthias.

The above Marmaduke and Matthias both died without issue.

1st daughter, Mary.

2. Anne.

3. Cecilia.

4. Catharine.

These four daughters were all nuns.

XXII. CUTHBERT, eldest son of Ceciliae Constable, succeeding to the estate of
his uncle William lord viscount Dunbar, as before observed, thereupon assumed
the surname of Constable, and married, 1st, Amy, daughter of Hugh lord
Clifford, by whom he had a son,

William, -- and two daughters.

1. Cecilia, married to Edward Skeldon, Esquire; of Wincester.

2. Winifred.

Cuthbert dying anno 1747, was succeeded by his son,

XXIII. WILLIAM CONSTABLE, Esquire; of Burton-Constable.

ARMS.
The armorial bearing of Constable viscount of Dunbar was, or, three bars
azure, supported on the dexter with a bull sable, and on the sinister with a
lion rampant gules.

CREST; a dragon's head.

MOTTO; sans mauvaise desire.

DOUGLAS Earl of DUNBARTON.
WILLIAM, first marquis of Douglas, married to his second wife lady Mary
Gordon, daughter of George marquis of Huntly, by lady Henriette, daughter of
Esme duke of Lennox, by whom he had several sons and daughters.

1. William, afterward duke of Hamilton.

2. George, afterward earl of Dunbarton.

Lord George Douglas, second son of the second marriage of William first
marquis of Douglas, a man of a rare military genius, was created earl of
Dunbarton by king Charles II. on the 9th March 1675, by patent to the
heirs-male of his body.

In his younger years he went to France, and was appointed one of the pages of
honor to Lewis XIV. but soon went into the army, where, for his remarkable
good behavior, he rose gradually to the rank of a major general, was present
in most of the sieges and actions betwixt the French and the confederates, and,
by his valor and conduct, gained immortal honor.

After the treaty of Nimeguen, he was called over to Britain by king Charles
II. and resided mostly at court during the remainder of that prince's reign,
with whom he was in great favor.

Upon the accession of king James VII. to the crown, anno 1685, he was
appointed commander in chief of all the forces in Scotland; and, in that
station, went against Archibald ninth earl of Argyle, upon his invasion of this
country, and soon put an end to that rebellion, by dispersing the earl's
troops, and taking himself prisoner.

Anno 1687, king James revived the order of St. Andrew, which had lain dormant
for 145 years, and the earl of Dunbarton was elected one of the knights of that
most noble order.

He had the command of the Scotch royal regiment, which then consisted of 5000
men, and adhered firmly to the interest of king James, as long as he staid in
Britain. He afterward followed him to France, and died at St. Germains, anno
1692, leaving issue, by a sister of the duchess of Northumberland, a son,

George, second earl of Dunbarton, who succeeded him. He also betook himself to
a military life, and rose to the degree of a colonel in the British service.

In March 1716, he was appointed envoy extraordinary, by king George I. to the
court of Russia; but dying without issue, the honors became extinct.

ARMS.
The four quartered coats of the family of Douglas, with the paternal arms over
all in a shield of pretense; for distinction, within a border quartered, 1st
azure, three flowers de lis or: 2d gules, three lions passant guardant or: 3d
as 2d: 4th as 1st.

OSBURNE Viscount DUNBLAIN.
AS the descent of this noble family is to be found at large in the peerage of
England, Colins's peerage of Engl. vol. I. page 249.
under the title of Osburne duke of Leeds, we shall proceed directly to their
immediate ancestor,

I. Sir EDWARD OSBURNE, who was created a baronet by king James VI. on 13th
July 1620, was vice president of the council to king Charles I. for the north
of England, and lieutenant general of the forces raised for his majesty in that
part of the country, Ibid. p. 250.
upon the breaking out of the civil war, anno 1641.

He married, 1st, Margaret, eldest daughter of Thomas viscount Falconberg, by
whom he had a son,

Edward, who died in infancy.

He married, 2dly, Anne, daughter of Thomas Walmsly of Dunkelhalgh, in the
county of Lancaster, Esquire; by whom he had a son,

II. Sir THOMAS, his successor, who, adhering to the royal interest, and
cooperating with many others, in order to the happy restoration of king
Charles II. was afterward, by that king, made treasurer of the navy, anno
1671, and one of the privy council, anno 1672; and, as a further testimony of
his majesty's esteem, was, by letters patent, dated 19th July 1673, Crawfurd's
peerage.
created viscount of Dunblain in Scotland; also lord high treasurer of England,
baron of Kiveton in com. Ebor. and viscount Latimer in that kingdom, by patent
to his heirs-male, anno 1674; and, by another patent, Peerage of England, vol.
I. p. 251.
was created earl of Denbigh, anno 1675, and knight of the garter anno 1677.

He was a great promoter of the revolution in 1688; wherefore, upon king
William's accession to the crown, Ibidem.
he was constituted president of the council, anno 1689, marquis of
Caermarthen, and duke of Leeds, anno 1694.

He married lady Bridget, second daughter of Montague Bertie earl of Lindsay,
by whom he had three sons and six daughters.

1. Edward lord Latimer, who was one of the gentlemen of the bedchamber to
king Charles II. Ibid. p. 253.
and married Elizabeth, eldest daughter of Simon Bennet of Beauchampton in com.
Bucks, Esquire; by whom he had two sons, who died young; and he died before his
father, without any surviving issue.

2. Thomas, who died an infant.

3. Peregrine, who became his father's heir.

1st daughter, lady Elizabeth, who died unmarried.

2. Lady Anne, married, 1st, to Robert Coke of Holkam, in Norfolk, ancestor of
the present earl of Leicester; she married, 2dly, Horatio Walpole, uncle to the
first earl of Orford.

3. Lady Bridget, married, 1st, to Charles Fitz-Charles earl of Plymouth; she
married, 2dly, doctor Philip Biss, bishop of Hereford, and had no issue to
either.

4. Lady Catharine, married to James Herbert of Kingley, in Bucks, Esquire; son and
heir of James Herbert, a younger son of Philip earl of Pembroke and Montgomery.

5. Lady Martha, married to Charles, son and heir of John earl of Bath.

6. Lady Sophia, married, 1st, to Donatus lord Obrien, grandson and heir to
Henry earl of Thomond; 2dly, to William Fermer lord Lemster, by whom she was
mother of the present earl of Pomfret.

He died in the 81st year of his age, anno 1712, and was succeeded by his son,

III. PEREGRINE, second duke of Leeds, who, being called by a writ to the house
of peers in England in March 1689, took his place by the title of lord Osburne
of Kiveton, and was created viscount of Dunblain in Scotland, upon the
surrender of his father's patent, 14th March 1694.

He, commanding as an admiral in several expeditions at sea, and, on many
occasions, distinguishing himself by his gallant behavior, was made rear
admiral of the red squadron, and colonel of the first regiment of marines.

He married Bridget, only daughter and heir to sir Thomas Hyde of North Mymins,
in the county of Hereford, Peerage of England, vol. I. p. 254.
knight, by whom he had two sons and two daughters.

1. William-Henry, who died before his father, without issue.

2. Peregrine-Hyde, his father's heir.

1st daughter, lady Bridget, married to the reverend Mr. Williams, prebendary
of Chichester.

2. Lady Mary, married, 1st, to Henry Somerset, duke of Beaufort; 2dly, to
William Cochran earl of Dundonald in Scotland.

He dying anno 1729, was succeeded by his son,

IV. PEREGRINE-HYDE, third duke of Leeds, and viscount Dunblain, who was
summoned to parliament as lord Osburne of Kiveton, anno 1712.

He married, 1st, lady Elizabeth Harley, daughter of Robert earl of Oxford and
Mortimer, lord high treasurer of Great Britain, by whom he had a son,

Thomas, marquis of Caermarthen, his heir.

He married, 2dly, lady Anne Seymour, third daughter of Charles duke of
Somerset, by whom he had another son, who died young.

He married, 3dly, Julian, daughter and coheir of Roger Hale of Halewell, in
the county of Devon; but by her he had no issue; she survived him, and married
Charles earl of Portmore.

The duke dying anno 1731, was succeeded by his son,

V. THOMAS, fourth duke of Leeds, viscount Dunblain, etc. who was one of the
lords of the bedchamber to his late majesty king George II. warden, and chief
justice in air, of all his majesty's forests and chaces south of Trent, and
knight of the most noble order of the garter, etc.

He married lady Mary, daughter of Francis earl of Godolphin, by whom he has
issue two sons.

1. Thomas, marquis of Caermarthen, born 5th October 1747.

2. Lord Francis, born the 29th January 1750-1.

ARMS.
Ermine and azure, a cross or.

CREST, on a wreath of his colors, a tiger passant, argent.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter side a griffin or, and on the sinister a tiger
argent, each gorged with a ducal coronet azure.

MOTTO, Pax in bello.

SCRYMGEOUR Earl of DUNDEE.
ALL our antiquaries agree, that one sir Alexander Carron, a brave and valiant
knight, was the first who enjoyed the surname of Scrymgeour in Scotland; but
our historians differ a little about the era in which he lived. Buchanan, etc.
places it in the reign of king Malcolm Canmore; but Fordun, the best and most
ancient author, says, "That in the beginning of the reign of king Alexander I.
anno 1107, there was a plot laid by the Mearns and Murray men, (then in
rebellion,) to seize the king's person; that a party of them actually beset his
palace in the night; that sir Alexander Carron, one of the gentlemen of his
bedchamber, having timeously discovered it, got his majesty, by some private
passage, safely conveyed away.

The king immediately raised what forces he could, went in pursuit of the
rebels, and came in sight of them on the banks of the river Spey, where they
were encamped in a very great body on the other side.

The water being then extremely high, it was thought impossible, at least, very
hazardous for the king's troops to pass: however, the king being incensed at
the audaciousness of the rebels, and eager to attack them, though they were far
superior in numbers, gave his standard to his trusty friend sir Alexander
Carron, ( quia noverat in viribus et audacia praevalere, Fordun, vol. I. page
285.
says Fordun) who, with it, immediately jumped into the river, got safe
through, fixed the royal standard, and displayed the king's colors on the
other side, in sight of the enemy; upon which the whole body passed. The rebels
seeing a royal army so near, and ready to attack them, were seized with a
panick, took to their heels, and fled with great precipitation, whereby the
king obtained a complete and easy victory; but did not forget to reward the
brave and faithful sir Alexander Carron: he made him a grant of some lands, and
constituted him heretable standard bearer to the kings of Scotland, the office
to him and his heirsmale for ever. He also gave him the surname of Scrymgeour,
(a hardy fighter) which his posterity have enjoyed ever since."

He got likeways a part of the royal arms of Scotland for his armorial bearing,
viz. gules, a lion rampant or, armed and langued azure, Nisbet's appendix, p.
50.
with a sword in his dexter paw proper, hil^ed and pommelled of the 2d; and to
perpetuate the memory of the above action, he took for motto, Dissipate.

Buchanan, in his account of the affair on the water of Spey, Buchanan, lib. 7.
page 199.
says, " Verum rex a suis retentus, Alexandro Carroni, Alexandri, cujus supra
meminimus, filio, partem exercitus dedit, qui subito cum suis amnem ingressus,
audaciae miraculo adeo conterruit hosts, ut passim in fugam statim se
conjecerint, etc. etc."

This sir Alexander Scrymgeour was son of Alexander Carron, Ibid. and Abercrom.
vol. I. p. 238.
often mentioned with honor in the Scotch history.

And though we can give no particular account of his marriage and issue, yet,
as all our historians agree that sir Alexander Scrymgeour, who flourished in
the end of the reign of king Alexander III. was his lineal representative,
therefore we deduce the descent of this noble family from him.

I. Sir ALEXANDER SCRYMGEOUR, heretable standard bearer of Scotland, inheriting
the valor and virtue of his ancestors, joined the brave sir William Wallace,
Abercrombie, p. 529.
in defense of the liberties of his country.

He was also amongst the first who took the field with king Robert Bruce, and
faithfully adhered to him as long as he lived; and obtained from that great
prince, Nisbet's append. p. 50.
in reward of his faithful services, several lands about Innerkeithing in Fyfe,
etc.

He was succeeded by his son,

II. Sir JOHN SCRYMGEOUR, heretable standard bearer, etc. who, like his father,
was a staunch loyalist, and, upon every occasion, exerted his valor against
the enemies of his country, Ibidem.
and at last lost his life at the fatal battle of Duplin, anno 1332, leaving
issue an infant son,

III. ALEXANDER, heretable standard bearer, who succeeded him, Origin. chart.
penes Georg. Constab. scrib. Edin.
and got a charter under the great seal, Alexandro Scrymgeour, etc. of several
lands about Dundee, anno 1357.

We find him employed as one of the commissioners in negotiating a treaty with
the English, Rymer, tom. VI. p. 497.
anno 1366.

I Will got a charter of confirmation, under the great seal, of the lands of
Glastre, and castle thereof, Chart. in arhiv. Rob. II.
to him and Agnes his spouse, upon the resignation of Gilbert de Glastre, dated
3d May 1374.

In another charter, dated the same year, we find him designed Alexander
Scrymgeour of Dudhope, Chart. penes MacFarlane.
etc.

He died anno 1383, and, by the said Agnes, left issue a son and successor,

IV. Sir JAMES SCRYMGEOUR of Dudhope, etc. who was, by king Robert II. made
heretable constable of Dundee, which was afterward always used as one of the
chief titles of the family.

He got a charter under the great seal, upon his own resignation, Chart. in
archiv. Rob. II.
confirming to him, and Aegidia his spouse, the lands of Innerkeithing, etc.
dated anno 1384, which were formerly given, by king Robert Bruce, to his
predecessor, as before observed.

In a deed in favors of sir Patrick Gray lord of Broxmouth, Chart. penes dom.
Gray.
sir James Scrymgeour constable of Dundee is a witness, and his seal is thereto
appended, 16th May 1406.

By the said Aegidia, he had issue a son,

Sir John, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Aegidia, married to James Maitland, Esquire; second son of sir Robert Maitland of
Lethington, ancestor of the family of Lauderdale, who got a charter, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
under the great seal, of several lands, to him and Aegidia Scrymgeour his
spouse, anno 1451.

He was slain fighting against Donald lord of the Isles, Fordun. vol. II. p.
445.
at the bloody battle of Harlaw, anno 1411, and was succeeded by his son,

V. Sir JOHN SCRYMGEOUR of Dudhope, constable of Dundee, etc.

There is an indenture, entered into by sir Andrew Gray lord of Foulis and sir
John Scrymgeour constable of Dundee, Chart. penes dom. Gray.
wherein they submitted all differences betwixt them to the arbitration of John
abbot of Balmerinoch, Alexander Ogilvie sheriff of Angus, etc. 22d February
1422.

He got charters under the great seal, domino Johanni Scrymgeour, Char. in pub.
arch.
militi, constab. de Dundee, of several lands, anno 1444.

There is a donation, made by Andrew lord Gray of Foulis, and sir John
Scrymgeour constable of Dundee, to the abbacy of St. Anthony, anno 1443; and
the said lord Gray obtained a decree before a spiritual court against the said
sir John, Chart. penes dom. Gray.
about the patronage of the church of --, anno 1447.

This sir John, together with Thomas, bishop of Dunkeld, Malcolm and John,
abbots of Arbroath and Lindores, etc. were arbiters in a submission betwixt
Thomas, abbot of Scoon, Chartul. of Scoon penes vicecom. de Stormont, fol. 45.
on the one part, Andrew lord Gray and sir Andrew Ogilvie of Inchmartin on the
other, anno 1456.

Sir John dying before 1468, was succeeded by his son,

VI. Sir JAMES SCRYMGEOUR of Dudhope, constable of Dundee, etc. who, in the
year 1456, became bound to resign the lands of Cuthil, etc. in favors of
Andrew lord Gray, upon payment of fourscore merks, Chart. pene^ dom. Gray.
and is then designed son and heir apparent of sir John Scrymgeour, constable
of Dundee, etc.

He got a charter under the great seal, Jacobo Scrymgeour, militi, filio et
haeredi apparenti Johannis Scrymgeour, Chart. in pub. archiv.
militis, constab. de Dundee, terrarum de Glastre, etc. dated 27th January 1459.

He got afterward charters under the great seal, Ibidem.
Jacobo Scrimgeour, militi constabul. de Dundee, of the lands of Ballegarno,
and others, inter 1468 et 1476.

He entered into an indenture with Andrew lord Gray, Indent. penes dom. Gray.
who is thereby bound to give the constable a piece of land near Dudhope, in
excambion for an equivalent parcel lying on the west side of Craigdale, etc.
20th May 1468.

He married Isabel, daughter of Andrew, third lord Gray, as appears by a
charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Jacobo Scrymgeour, constab. de Dundee, et Isabellae Gray suae sponsae,
terrarum de Dudhope, etc. dated anno 1495.

By her he had issue three sons and one daughter.

1. Sir James his heir.

2. John, who got from his father the lands of Glastre, by several charters
under the great seal, etc. of whom afterward.

3. Alexander, who was ancestor of the Scrymgeours of Kirkton, of whom David
Scrymgeour, Esquire; now of Birkhill, is the representative, etc. as will be shown
hereafter.

His daughter, Marjory, married to John Graham of Balargus, ancestor of the
viscount of Dundee.

He died about the year 1503, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. Sir JAMES, Chart. pene^ dom. Gray.
who, in a sasine of Andrew lord Gray, is designed son and heir of sir James
Scrymgeour, constable of Dundee, 20th February 1504, and got a charter under
the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Jacobo Scrymgeour, militi, constabul. de Dundee, filio quondam Jacobi, etc. of
the lands of Sonayhard, and others, in the shire of Aberdeen, dated 9th June
1507.

He got also charters, under the great seal, of the lands of Dudhope, Ibidem.
Kirkton, and a great many others, inter 1526 et 1530.

He married Mariot Stewart, Martin's genealog. col. vol. II. page 338.
daughter of --, by whom he had three daughters.

1. Elizabeth, married to her cousin James Scrymgeour of Kirkton, son of her
uncle Alexander before mentioned, who carried on the line of this family; of
whom more afterward.

2. Agnes, married to sir William Bruce of Earlshall.

3. Janet, Chart. in pub. archiv.
married to James, third lord Carlyle of Torthorald, by a charter under the
great seal, etc.

This sir James, finding he had no male-issue, made a resignation of his estate
of Dudhope, constabulary of Dundee, etc. to himself in liferent, and "to and in
favors of John Scrymgeour of Gastre, and the heirs-male of his body; which
failing, to his grandson John, son of James Scrymgeour of Kirkton, by his
eldest daughter Elizabeth, and the heirs-male of his body; which failing, to
James Scrymgeour of Fordel, and the heirs-male of his body; which failing, to
-- Scrymgeour of Myres, and the heirs-male of his body, etc. etc. which all
failing, to his own nearest heirs whatsoever;" Ibidem.
and this deed is confirmed by a charter under the great seal, dated 2d May
1541.

Sir James dying without issue-male, anno 1546, was accordingly succeeded by
John Scrymgeour of Glastre, who was then his next heir-male, being son of his
brother John, to whom we now return.

VII. JOHN, second son of sir James of Dudhope, by Isabel Gray, got a charter
under the great seal, Ibidem.
Johanni Scrymgeour de Glastre, et Janetae Ogilvie sponsae suae, of several
lands, anno 1508,

He got also charters, under the great seal, of the lands and barony of
Panbride, and others, inter 1511 et 1513. Ibidem.


By the said Janet Ogilvie he left issue two sons.

1. John, his heir.

2. James Scrymgeour, whose son James is the first person named in an entail by
James the constable, Ibidem.
anno 1587, hereafter narrated.

John dying before the year 1541, was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. JOHN SCRYMGEOUR of Glastre, who, anno 1546, succeeded to the above sir
James, in his estate of Dudhope, constabulary of Dundee, etc. according to the
resignation in 1541, before mentioned.

He was one of the arbiters appointed to determine some differences betwixt the
abbot and convent of Scoon on the one part, Andrew lord Gray, and sir Andrew
Ogilvie of Inchmartin on the other; Chartul. of Scoon, penes vicecom. de
Stormont, fol. 45.
and he is then designed sir John Scrymgeour of Dudhope, constable of Dundee,
etc. 7th February 1556.

He left issue two sons.

1. Sir James, his heir.

2. Gilbert, mentioned in an entail hereafter narrated, but left no succession.

He died about 1575, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. Sir JAMES SCRYMGEOUR of Dudhope, second constable of the house of Glastre,
who succeeded him; and, in his father's lifetime, got a charter, under the
great seal, to James, son and apparent heir of sir John Scrymgeour, constable
of Dundee, Chart. in pub archiv.
and the heirs-male to be procreate betwixt him and Margaret Carnegie, his
future spouse, etc. etc. dated the last day of June 1565.

He got another charter under the great seal, containing a novo damus to and in
favors of "James Scrymgeour of Dudhope, constable and provost of Dundee, and
the heirs-male of his body; which failing, to James Scrymgeour, son of his
uncle James, and the heirs-male of his body; which failing, to John Scrymgeour
of Kirkton, and the heirs-male of his body; which failing, to Gilbert
Scrymgeour, his brother-german, etc. then to James of Fordel, then to David of
Fordie, then to James of the Myres, etc. Ibidem.
which all failing, to his own nearest and lawful heirs-male whatever," dated
15th November 1587.

He got also charters, under the great seal, of several other lands and
baronies, Ibidem.
Domino Jacobo Scrymgeour de Dudhope, militi, constab. de Dundee, etc. dated in
the years 1605 and 1609.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir Robert Carnegie of Kinnaird, ancestor of
the earl of Southesk, by whom he had a son,

Sir John, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Jean, married to sir Thomas Thomson of Duddingston, and had issue.

He was succeeded by

X. Sir JOHN SCRYMGEOUR of Dudhope, third constable of the Glastre family, who,
in his father's lifetime, got a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
Johanni Scrymgeour, apparent. de Dudhope, of the mill and mill-lands of
Kellie, etc. acquired from William Auchterlony of that ilk, and dated 22d June
1609.

He afterward got charters, Ibidem.
domino Johanni Scrymgeour de Dudhope, militi, of the lands and barony of
Dudhope, constabulary of Dundee, lands of Camno, and many others, dated in
December 1617, and January 1618.

He got also a charter of the salmon-fishing in the water of Ericht, Ibidem.
in the barony of Rattray, and shire of Perth, dated 5th February 1622.

He married Margaret Seton, a daughter of the family of Parbroath in Fife, a
cadet of the noble and ancient house of Winton, by whom he had a son and
successor,

XI. Sir JOHN SCRYMGEOUR of Dudhope, constable of Dundee, etc. He was a man of
great worth and merit, and highly esteemed by king Charles I. who raised him to
the dignity of the peerage, Crawf. Nisbet, etc.
by the title of lord Scrymgeour, viscount of Dudhope, etc. anno 1641.

There is a procuratory of resignation of John viscount Dudhope, Chart. penes
Mr. Constable scrib. Edin.
in favor of James master of Dudhope, his son and heir, of the lands of
Dudhope, etc. dated 14th May 1642.

He died soon thereafter, and was succeeded by his son,

XII. JAMES, Ibid. and sasine in cancel.
second lord viscount Dudhope, who was served heir to his father in May 1643.

He accepted of a command in the forces that went to the assistance of the
parliament of England against the king, and was slain at the battle of
Marstonmoor, Chart. penes ducem de Roxburgh.
anno 1644, leaving issue, by lady Mary Ker, daughter of Robert first earl of
Roxburgh, a son,

XIII. JOHN, third viscount Dudhope, who succeeded him, Retour penes Mr.
Constable et in cancel.
and was served heir to his father, James viscount Dundee, 4th November 1644.

He was a man of great honor and integrity, a firm and steady friend of the
royal family.

He was colonel of the Forfar-shire horse that were raised for duke Hamilton's
engagement, anno 1648, and accompanied king Charles II. Rescinded acts of parlt.
to the battle of Worcester, anno 1651; and though he had the good fortune to
make his escape, yet he suffered great and many hardships on account of his
loyalty during the usurpation: But the king, in reward of his constant loyalty
and sufferings, was pleased to create him earl of Dundee, Crawfurd's peerage.
anno 1661, and appointed him one of his privy council.

He married lady Margaret Ramsay, daughter of William earl of Dalhousie, but
dying without issue, anno 1668, in him ended the male line of John of Glastre,
second son of sir James the constable, who died circa annum 1503.

The representation therefore certainly devolved upon John Scrymgeour of
Kirkton, who was not only heir-male, Chart. in pub. archiv.
and of line, but also heir of entail, by two solemn deeds, confirmed by
charters under the great seal, in 1541 and 1587, before recited.

Yet the duke of Lauderdale had interest enough with king Charles II. to
procure a gift of ultimus haeres in favors of his brother sir Charles Maitland
of Hatton, and thereafter got a gift of recognition, whereby Kirkton was
deprived of his just right.

And as David Scrymgeour, now of Birkhill, is the undoubted representative of
that ancient family, we must return to his immediate predecessor,

VI. Sir JAMES SCRYMGEOUR of Dudhope, who married Isabel, daughter of Andrew
lord Gray, and left issue three sons.

1. Sir James.

2. John.

3. Alexander.

We have already shown, that the male line of the first two are extinct, we
therefore proceed to deduce the descent of,

VII. ALEXANDER SCRYMGEOUR, third son of the said sir James, etc. He flourished
in the reigns of king James IV. and V. and left issue a son and successor,

VIII. JAMES SCRYMGEOUR of Kirkton, so designed in sir James the constable's
entail, already narrated, Ibidem.
confirmed by a charter under the great seal, anno 1541.

He married Elizabeth, eldest daughter of sir James Scrymgeour of Dudhope,
constable of Dundee, with whom he got the lands of Ballegarno, etc. which she,
with consent of her said husband, accepted of in full of all right or title she
had, or might have, to any part of the unentailed estate of Dudhope,
constabulary, Chart. penes David Scrymgeour de Birkhill, Esquire;.
etc. as eldest daughter and heir of line to her father, by charter, dated at
Dundee 24th October 1539.

He died anno 1554, and, by the said Elizabeth Scrymgeour, left issue a son,

IX. JOHN SCRYMGEOUR of Kirkton, who succeeded him, and was undoubted heir of
line of the family, Chart. in pub. archiv.
his mother being sir James's eldest daughter, as above.

He married his cousin-german, Agnes, daughter of sir William Bruce of
Earlshall, Martin's collect. and Nisbet's append.
by whom he had three sons and three daughters.

1. John, his heir.

2. Gilbert, who is named in the constable's entail, anno 1587, before
mentioned, but left no succession.

3. George, who died without issue.

1st daughter, Margaret.

2. Isabel.

3. Giles.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. JOHN SCRYMGEOUR of Kirkton, who was the second person in the substitution
of sir James the constable's entail, confirmed by a charter, under the great
seal, anno 1587, before narrated.

He married Marian, Martin's coll. Nisbet's append. etc.
daughter and heiress of Mr. James Fotheringhame, brother of the lord of
Powrie, by whom he had four sons, and three daughters.

1. James, who married Elizabeth Graham, daughter of George, bishop of Orkney,
but died before his father without male-issue.

2. John, his father's heir.

3. Gilbert.

4. William.

1st daughter, Magdalene, married to Mr. Alexander Wedderburn of Kingennie,
clerk of Dundee, and had issue.

2. Margaret, married to William Hunter of Balgay, and had issue.

3. --, married to Robert Kinloch in Dundee.

He died anno 1629, and was succeeded by his son,

XI. JOHN SCRYMGEOUR of Kirkton, who married Jean, Ibid. et chart. penes David
Scrymgeour de Birkhill.
daughter of James M'Gill of Rankeillor, Esquire; by Agnes Clephan, a daughter of
Carslogie, by whom he had three sons, and three daughters.

1. John, his heir.

2. Alexander.

3. Mr. James, who was parson of Currie, and had a son, Mr. Henry Scrymgeour of
Wester-Lochgelly, father of Mr. Henry Scrymgeour, now writer to the signet in
Edinburgh, and of a daughter, Janet, married to John Bethune of Blebo, Esquire;

1st daughter, Marian, married to James Clayhills of Innergowrie, and had issue.

2. Anne, married to John Craigie of Dumbarnie, Esquire; grandfather of John
Craigie now of Halhill, Esquire, etc.

3. Margaret, married to Laurence Craigie of Kilgraston, Esquire; ancestor of John
Craigie, now of Kilgraston, etc.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. JOHN SCRYMGEOUR of Kirkton, who was nearest and lawful heir-male of line
and entail to John earl of Dundee, and ought to have succeeded to the lands and
barony of Dudhope, constabulary, etc. in virtue of the deeds of entail,
charters under the great seal, etc. above narrated; but was most unjustly set
aside, as before observed, though he sold his estate of Kirkton, and spent his
whole fortune in prosecution of his just right; but without success.

He married Magdalene, daughter of Alexander Wedderburn of Kingennie and
Easter-Powrie, afterward called Wedderburn, by whom he had a son,

XIII. Doctor ALEXANDER SCRYMGEOUR, a man of great learning and knowledge in
the liberal arts and sciences. He was professor first of humanity, then of
philosophy, and lastly of theology, in the university of St. Andrews; and
married Janet, only daughter of doctor David Falconer, professor of divinity in
the same university, by whom he had a son,

XIV. DAVID SCRYMGEOUR of Birkhill, Esquire; advocate, sheriff-depute of the county
of Inverness, who is now representative of the ancient family of the
Scrymgeours of Dudhope, constables of Dundee, standard bearers to the kings of
Scotland, etc. etc. etc.

He married Catharine, daughter of sir Alexander Wedderburn of Blackness, by
whom he has four sons, and two daughters.

1. Alexander.

2. John.

3. David.

4. Henry.

1st daughter, Janet.

2. Elizabeth.

GRAHAM Viscount of DUNDEE.
THE immediate ancestor of this branch of the great and ancient family of
Montrose was,

Sir William Graham of Kincardin, who flourished in the reigns of king Robert
III. and king James I. and married, 1st, a daughter of lord Oliphant; 2dly,
lady Mary Stewart, daughter of king Robert III. widow of George earl of Angus,
and James Kennedy of Dunnure, by which last lady he had a son,

I. Sir ROBERT GRAHAM of Strathcarron, who had issue two sons.

1. Robert, ancestor of the Grahams of Fintray.

2. John, the first of this family.

II. JOHN GRAHAM, second son of sir John Graham of Strathcarron, obtained from
Archibald earl of Angus, a grant of the lands of Balargus in Forfar-shire, to
him and Marjory his wife, upon which he got a charter, under the great seal,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
Johanni Graham, terrarum de Balargus, etc. anno 1482.

He there fixed his residence, and by Marjory his wife, daughter of sir James
Scrymgeour, constable of Dundee, left issue a son and successor,

III. JOHN GRAHAM of Balargus, who got a charter, under the great seal, to him
and Margaret Bethune his spouse, Ibidem.
of the ten merk land of Kirkton of Strathdightie, in Forfar-shire, anno 1529.

He also acquired the lands of Claver-house, which afterward became the title
of his family.

By the said Margaret, daughter of John Bethune of Balfour, in Fife-shire, he
had a son,

IV. JOHN GRAHAM of Claver-house, who succeeded him, and in his father's
lifetime got charters, Ibidem.
under the great seal, Johanni Graham juniori de Claver-house et Balargus, of
several lands, anno 1541 and 1542.

He died about 1580, and was father of

V. GEORGE GRAHAM of Claver-house, who married Anne daughter of Robert Lundie
of Balgony, in the county of Fife, by whom he had two sons.

1. Sir William, his heir.

2. Thomas, who got a charter, under the great seal, Ibidem.
of the lands of Potento, Thomae filio quondam Georgii Graeme de Claver-house,
etc.

He died before the year 1620, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. Sir WILLIAM, who got a charter, under the great seal, Ibidem.
domino Willielmo Graham de Claver-house, of the lands of Gotterstoun,
Claypotts, and others, anno 1625.

Also charters of the lands of Tealing, Lundie, Ibidem.
etc. inter 1627 et 1630.

He married Marian, daughter of Thomas Fotheringhame of Powrie, Esquire; in the
county of Forfar, by whom lie had two sons.

1. Sir William, his heir.

2. Walter, ancestor of the Grahams of Duntroon.

He died about 1660, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. Sir WILLIAM, who got charters, under the great seal, Ibidem.
domino Willielmo Graham de Claver-house, militi, ejusque filio et nepoti, of
the lands and barony of Ogilvie, and several others, inter 1661 et 1664.

He greatly improved his estate, and married lady Jean Carnegie, daughter of
John earl of Ethie, sister of David first earl of Northesk, by whom he had two
sons and two daughters.

1. John, afterward viscount of Dundee.

2. Mr. David Graham, who succeeded his brother.

1st daughter, Margaret, married to sir Robert Graham of Morphy.

2. Anne, married to Robert Young of Auldbar.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. JOHN of Claver-house, who, after he had finished the course of his
studies at the university of St. Andrews, greatly improved his excellent parts,
by traveling into foreign countries; and betaking himself to a military life,
he soon discovered an uncommon genius for the art of war.

He was first a volunteer in the French service; but in 1672, he went into that
of the States of Holland, got a cornet's commission in the prince of Orange's
guards of horse, and eminently signalized himself at the battle of Senese,
where William prince of Orange commanded the confederates, and the prince of
Conde the French, in August 1674. -- He immediately got the command of a troop
of horse, and served with great reputation as long as he stayed in that country.

When he came over to Britain, he had particular recommendations from the
prince of Orange to king Charles II. and the duke of York.

The king immediately nominated him captain of one of the three independent
troops, which were raised to bring the dissenters in the western counties into
a compliance with the constitution of the church established by law, anno 1678;
the other two were commanded by the earls of Home and Airly.

In 1682, he was appointed sheriff of Wigton, in Scotland; and in 1683, his
brother David was joined in commission with him.

In 1684, he was constituted captain of the royal regiment of horse.

Upon king James's accession to the crown, in 1685, he was sworn of the privy
council to his majesty.

In the beginning of 1686, he was made a brigadier-general, and had the
constabulary of Dundee, and barony of Dudhope conferred upon him.

When the prince of Orange landed in England, he marched against him at the
head of his regi^ent, king James having first made him a major general,
Crawfurd's peerage, p. 117. where the patent printed at large.
then raised him to the dignity of the peerage, by the title of viscount of
Dundee, by patent to the heirs-male of his body; which failing, to his
heirs-male whatever, dated 12th November, the fourth year of the king's reign.

In the beginning of 1689, he came to Scotland, and sat in the convention of
estates, till he saw a great majority were for forfeiting king James; and
having got private information, that the mob had a design to assassinate him,
he made a complaint to the house; but it not being regarded, and justice denied
him, he thought proper to retire to his house in the country, whereupon the
convention voted him an intercommun'd person, and sent a messenger to require
him to appear before them at Edinburgh; but his lordship did not think it safe
to comply; upon which they sent a party to apprehend him. This forced him to go
to the Highlands for refuge, where, by king James's authority, he raised about
15 or 1600 of the clans, and being joined by about 300 Irish, under the command
of colonel Canon, he was marching south with his little army, when he was
informed that general Mac-Kay was marching against him, with more than double
his number of regulars.

On the 27th of July 1689, they met, and fought at Killicrankie in Athole,
where the Highlanders obtained the victory, though their brave general lost his
life in the action.

By Jean his wife, daughter of William lord Cochran; son and heir of William,
first earl of Dundonald, he had a son,

James, who died an infant.

And leaving no other issue, the honors devolved upon his brother,

Mr. DAVID GRAHAM, second viscount of Dundee; who, having been with his brother
at the battle of Killicrankie, was outlawed and forfeited, anno 1690.

He followed king James to France, and was made knight of the order of St.
Andrew at St. Germains, anno 1692. But dying without issue anno 1700, the
estate and honors, had it not been for the forfeiture, would have devolved upon

William Graham of Duntroon, his cousingerman and heir-male, being son of his
uncle Walter beforementioned.

The posterity of William of Duntroon are still subsisting; but by engaging in
the rebellions 1715 and 1745, where they assumed the titles of viscounts of
Dundee, etc. are now outlawed.

ARMS.
Or, three pyls wavy within a double tressure, counterflowered, sable; on a
chief of the second, three escalops of the first.

COCHRAN Earl of DUNDONALD.
THE surname of Cochran, is certainly local, and was assumed by the proprietors
of the lands and barony of Cochran in Renfrew-shire, soon after sirnames began
to be used in Scotland.

The immediate ancestor of this noble family, was

I. WALDEVUS de COCHRAN, who flourished in the reign of king Alexander III.
Chart. penes ducem de Argyle. Dalrymple's collect. p. 80, etc.
and is witness to the charter which Dungallus, filius Swayn, gave to Walter
Stewart earl of Mentoith, of the lands of Skipnish in Argyleshire, anno 1262.

He died before 1296, and was succeeded by his son,

II. WILLIAM de COCHRAN, Prynne's collections, vol. III. p. 663.
who was one of the Scotch barons, that swore sealty to king Edward I. of
England, anno 1296.

Soon after this era, there was a man of rank named John of Cochran, who made
a great figure in the reign of king Robert Bruce, and got a charter from that
great prince, of the lands of Barbachly, for his good and faithful services,
Chart. penes Harry Cochran de Barbachly; and Nisbet, vol. I. p. 327.
etc. but as we cannot connect him with that noble family, we shall only add
here, that of this John, Harry Cochran, now of Barbachly, Esquire; is lineally
descended.

The above William, was father of

III. JOHN de COCHRAN, who is witness to the election of James abbot of
Paisley, Chartul. of Paisley, penes comitem de Dundonald.
the 17th year of the reign of king David Bruce, anno 1346.

He left issue a son and successor,

IV. GOSELINE de COCHRAN, who made a considerable figure in the reign of king
David Bruce.

He appears to have been in great favor with king Robert II. when earl of
Strathern, and was witness to many of his charters before he succeeded to the
crown of Scotland, particularly to a donation he made to the monastery of
Paisley, of the lands of Sanquhar, Ibid. p. 127.
Cambuslang, Dularigs, etc. anno 1367.

He died in the beginning of 1368.

V. WILLIAM de COCHRAN, son and apparent heir of Goseline, got a charter in his
father's lifetime, Book of original charters penes MacFarlane, vol. I. p. 44.
from John de Lindsay, dominus de Dunrod, of the lands of Long-newton, etc.
Willielmo de Cochran, filio Goselini, etc. anno 1360.

He died before his father, leaving issue a son,

VI. ROBERT de COCHRAN, who succeeded to his grandfather, and made a
resignation of all right and title he had to part of the lands of Kilmahew, in
favors of Donald Nap, son and heir of William Nap, and his attorneys, Malcolm
Fleming lord of Biggar, etc. to which Richard Kinnaird of that ilk, and
Alexander Abercrombie are witnesses. And the resignation, Ibid. p. 402.
in which this Robert is designed dominus ejusd. or lord of that ilk, is dated
anno 1368.

He died before the year 1389, and was succeeded by his son,

VII. WILLIAM de COCHRAN, dominus ejusd. who got a charter from king Robert II.
upon his own resignation, of the lands and barony of Cochran, Chart. penes
comitem de Dundonald.
in vicecom. de Renfrew, to be held as freely, and in as ample a manner, as any
of his predecessors held the same, dated at Kilwinning, the 22d September,
1389. And being in great favor with king Robert III. obtained from that
prince, for his good and faithful services, an annuity of forty shillings
sterling, out of the profits of the burgh of Ruglane, Chart. in archiv. Roberti
III.
dated the 24th day of February, 1391.

About this time, there was one Gilbertus de Cochran, witness to a charter of
Duncan earl of Lennox, to sir Robert Kennedy of Dunnure, Chartul. of Levenax,
penes Macfarlane, p. 71.
dated anno 1391, supposed to be the brother of this William, but we can give
no account of his posterity.

William died in the beginning of 1392, and left issue a son,

VIII. ROBERT COCHRAN dominus ejusd. who succeeded him, and, immediately upon
his father's death, sold his barony of Long-newton, which appears by a charter
of vendition of these lands, Chart. penes comitem de Morton.
to sir Henry Douglas of Lochleven, from Robert, son and heir of William de
Cochran, etc. dated anno 1392.

He lived to a great age, died about 1450, and was succeeded by his son,

IX. ALANUS de COCHRAN, who is witness in a charter of a donation, Chartul. of
Paisley, penes MacFarlane, p. 276.
by Robert lord Lyle, to the monks of Paisley, of a fishing on the river Clyde
at Crokatshot, pro salute animae suae, etc. anno 1452, in which he is designed
Alanus de Cochran, armiger.

He got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in archiv. Jacobi III.
of the lands of Grugfate, etc. anno 1468.

He married -- daughter of --, by whom he had a son,

X. ROBERT de COCHRAN, Crawfurd's peerage. Hist. of Renfrew. Scots comp. etc.
his apparent heir, who died before his father, leaving issue a son,

XI. JOHN de COCHRAN, dominus ejusd. who succeeded his grandfather, Hist. of
the shire of Renfrew, p. 58.
and was infeft and seized in his lands of Cochran, Corseford, etc. anno 1498.

He obtained a license under the great seal, from king James IV. empowering him
to dispose of his lands of Easter-cochran, Ibid. et chart. penes Potterfield de
eodem.
in Renfrewshire, or the lands of Pitfour in Perth-shire, dated at Edinburgh,
31st October 1509.

He accordingly sold part of his lands of Cochran, to James archbishop of
Glasgow, anno 1519, by a deed, Crawfurd's peerage, page 119.
to which his seal is appended, bearing three boars heads erazed, and
circumscribed, sigillum Johannis de Cochran, etc.

He died anno 1538, Chart. penes comitem de Dundonald.
leaving issue by Elizabeth, daughter of John Semple of Fulwood, his wife, a
son and successor,

XII. JOHN COCHRAN of that ilk, Ibid. Hist. of Renfrew, etc.
who was served and retoured heir to his father, 12th May, 1539.

He married Mary, daughter of -- Lindsay of Dunrod, an ancient family in
Renfrewshire, and died anno 1557, leaving issue a son,

XIII. WILLIAM COCHRAN of that ilk, who succeeded him, Chart. in pub. arch.
Willielmo de Cochran, etc.
and got charters under the great seal from queen Mary, of the lands and barony
of Cochran, and several others, inter 1558 et 1560.

He was a man of great sagacity, economy and prudence, and greatly adorned and
beautified the ancient seat of the family of Cochran with large plantations and
buildings.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir Robert Montgomery of Skelmorly, in the
shire of Air, by Mary his wife, daughter of Robert lord Semple, by whom he had
three daughters.

Whether the two eldest (whose names are not come to our knowledge) had any
succession, we cannot pretend to determine; but he was succeeded by

Elizabeth his third daughter, as will be shown hereafter.

William having no appearance of any male issue, made a resignation and entail
of his whole estate, in favors of his daughter Elizabeth, and the heirs-male
of her body, whom failing, to several others particularly specified in the deed
of entail, which is dated, anno 1593, any person so succeeding being obliged to
carry the name and arms of Cochran, etc.

XIV. ELIZABETH, daughter and heiress of William Cochran of that ilk, married
to her cousin Alexander Blair, a younger son of John Blair of that ilk, (an
ancient and honorable family in the shire of Renfrew) by Grizel his wife,
daughter of Robert lord Semple, who, immediately after his marriage, assumed
the name and arms of Cochran, according to the above entail; all which appears
from a charter under the great seal of king James VI. of the lands and barony
of Cochran, Chart. in pub. archiv.
etc. to and in favors of Alexander Cochran, alias Blair, third lawful son of
John Blair of that ilk, and Elizabeth Cochran his spouse, third lawful daughter
of William Cochran of that ilk, dated 7th February 1601.

He got also a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
of several other lands, Alexandro Cochran de eodem, dated anno 1618.

He was a man of singular virtue and probity, and greatly improved the estate
of the family.

By the said Elizabeth Cochran, he left issue seven sons and two daughters.

1. Sir John his heir.

2. Sir William of Cowdon, who succeeded his brother.

3. Alexander, a great loyalist, Hist. of the shire of Renfrew.
and a colonel in the army of king Charles I. whose grandson was lord of
Manshiel.

4. Hugh, ancestor of the Cochrans of Ferguslee, also a great loyalist, who
first served in the wars abroad, Ibidem.
under the great general Gustavus Adolphus, was afterward a colonel in king
Charles I. Guthrie's memoirs.
his army, and was particularly excepted from pardon by the parliament, anno
1646.

5. Sir Bryce Cochran, who was likewise a colonel in the royal army, from the
beginning of the civil war, till he lost his life in the king's service, anno
1650.

6. Arthur, also a captain in the royal army.

7. Captain Gavin, ancestor of the Cochrans of Craigmuir.

1st daughter Elizabeth, married to John Lennox of Woodhead, Esquire;.

2. Grizel, married to Thomas Dunlop of House-hill.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. Sir JOHN COCHRAN of that ilk, a man of singular worth and honor, a firm
and steady friend to king Charles I. was a colonel in his army, and in great
favor with his majesty.

In 1644, he was sent ambassador to solicit assistance from several princes in
behalf of the king, Dr. Wishart's life of Montrose.
and acquitted himself with great prudence, conduct and fidelity.

After the murder of the king, he attended king Charles II. to foreign parts,
who having great confidence in his abilities and loyalty, sent him on a
particular embassy into Poland, anno 1650; but before his return, the king and
his army were overthrown at Worcester.

Sir John remained with his majesty during his exile, and married -- Butler, a
daughter of the family of Ormond; but dying a little before the restoration,
without issue, his estate devolved upon his brother,

XV. Sir WILLIAM COCHRAN of Cowdon, beforementioned, a man of great parts and
learning, and though, in the beginning of the civil war, he appeared to be on
the parliament's side, and was for some time employed in their service, yet he
was inviolably attached to the interest of the royal family. He eminently
distinguished himself in their service upon every occasion; particularly in the
parliament 1647, Minutes of the rescinded acts of parlt.
of which he was a member, and none was more forward than sir William in
raising forces for the relief of the king, who, on account of his great merit
and faithful services, was pleased to raise him to the dignity of the peerage,
Chart. penes comitem de Dundonald, et diploma in Mill's collect.
by the title of lord Cochran, by patent to the heirs-male of his body, dated
at Scarborough, 27th December 1647.

Some little time thereafter he acquired the lordship of Paisley, which became
one of the chief seats of the family, and where he afterward lived in great
splendour and magnificence; and though it is alleged by bishop Guthrie, that he
was one of the Scotch lords who voted for the delivering up of the king to the
English, yet it appears he continued steady in his loyalty, Cromwell's act of
indemnity.
for which the commonwealth of England imposed no less a fine upon him than
five thousand pounds Sterling, anno 1654.

And as none had contributed more heartily and sincerely to bring about a
restoration than lord Cochran, so it was no sooner accomplished than he was
made one of the lords of the privy council to his majesty, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
anno 1660, and got charters, under the great seal, Willielmo domino Cochran de
Paisley et Dundonald, of several lands and baronies, inter 1660 et 1668.

He was also constituted one of the commissioners of his majesty's treasury and
exchequer, and having discharged his duty in every station of life to the
satisfaction of the king and the whole nation, he was further dignified with
the title of earl of Dundonald, Chart. in pub. archiv. Haer. mase. e corpore
suo.
by patent to the heirs-male of his body, dated 12th of May 1669.

He married Eupheme, daughter of sir William Scot of Ardross, in Fife-shire, by
whom he had two sons, and one daughter.

1. William lord Cochran.

2. Sir John Cochran of Ochiltree, ancestor of the present earl of Dundonald,
of whom more hereafter.

His daughter, lady Grizel, married to George lord Ross, and had issue.

The earl died anno 1686.

XVI. WILLIAM lord Cochran, eldest son and apparent heir of William first earl
of Dundonald, married lady Catharine Kennedy, daughter of John earl of
Cassilis, Hist. of Renfrew, p. 60.
by lady Jean Hamilton, daughter of Thomas earl of Haddington, by whom he had
four sons, and three daughters.

1. John, afterward earl of Dundonald.

2. William of Kilmaronock, whose son, Thomas, succeeded to the earldom, as
will be shown hereafter.

3. Thomas of Pollskelly, who married Diana, daughter and heiress of sir David
Cunningham of Robertland, without issue.

4. Alexander of Bonshaw, whose male-line is extinct.

1st daughter, Margaret, married to Alexander earl of Eglington, and had issue.

2. Helen, married to Hugh earl of Sutherland, and had issue.

3. Jean, married, 1st, to John viscount of Dundee; 2dly, to William viscount
of Kilsyth.

And dying anno 1679, was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVII. JOHN, who succeeding also to his grandfather, anno 1686, was second
earl of Dundonald.

He was a man of great probity and honor, Ibid. Crawfurd's peerage.
and married lady Susanna, daughter of William and Anne duke and duchess of
Hamilton, by whom he had two sons.

1. William, his heir.

2. John, who succeeded his brother.

He died in the flower of his age, anno 1691, and was succeeded by his eldest
son,

XVIII. WILLIAM, third earl of Dundonald, who dying unmarried, anno 1705, his
estate and honors devolved upon his brother,

XVIII. JOHN, fourth earl of Dundonald, who was elected one of the sixteen
peers for the British parliament, called to meet in November 1713, and was made
colonel of the fourth troop of horse guards, by her majesty queen Anne.

He married, 1st, lady Anne Murray, daughter of Charles earl of Dunmore, son of
John marquis of Athole, by lady Amelia Stanly, daughter of James earl of Derby,
by whom he had a son,

William, his heir, -- and three daughters.

1. Lady Anne, married to James duke of Hamilton, and was mother of James the
late duke.

2. Lady Susan, married to Charles earl of Strathmore, without issue.

3. Lady Catharine, married to Alexander earl of Galloway, to whom she has a
numerous issue.

He died anno 1720, and was succeeded by his only son,

XIX. WILLIAM, fifth earl of Dundonald, who dying unmarried, anno 1724, in him
ended the male-line of John second earl of Dundonald, eldest son of William
lord Cochran, whereby the honors devolved upon the next heir-male, Thomas, son
of William of Kilmaronock, to whom we now return.

XVII. WILLIAM COCHRAN of Kilmaronock, second son of William lord Cochran,
eldest son of William first earl of Dundonald, was member of parliament for the
burghs of Wigton, etc. and one of the commissioners for keeping his majesty's
signet, etc.

He married lady Grizel Graham, daughter of James marquis of Montrose, by whom
he had a son,

Thomas, his heir, -- and five daughters.

1. Catharine, married to David Smith of Methven, Esquire; in the shire of Perth,
and has issue a son, David, now of Methven, and a daughter, Christian, married
to John Craigie of Dumbarnie, Esquire;

2. Isabella, married to Mr. John Ogilvie of Balbegno, advocate.

3. Anne, died unmarried.

4. Christian.

5. Grizel, married to John Cochran of Ferguslee.

He was succeeded by his son,

XVIII. THOMAS COCHRAN of Kilmaronock, who, upon the death of William the fifth
earl, succeeded to the estate and honors as heir-male, anno 1724, before
noticed, and was the sixth earl of Dundonald.

He married Catharine, daughter of lord Basil Hamilton of Baldoon, by whom he
had a son,

William, his heir, -- and two daughters.

1. Lady Mary.

2. Lady Catharine, married to captain Wood.

He died anno 1737, and was succeeded by his son,

XIX. WILLIAM, seventh earl of Dundonald, who betook himself to a military
life, and was a captain in general Forbes's regiment, with which he went to
America, anno 1757.

He was in the expedition against Cape-Breton, commanded by admiral Boscawen
and major general Amherst, where he lost his life in the service of his country
at the siege of Louisburgh, which surrendered on 26th July 1758.

He having no issue, in him ended the male-line of William lord Cochran, eldest
son of the first earl of Dundonald, whereby the estate and honors devolved
upon Thomas Cochran, lineally descended of sir John Cochran of Ochiltree,
beforementioned, to whom we now return.

XVI. Sir JOHN COCHRAN of Ochiltree, second son of William first earl of
Dundonald, who, Chart. in pub. archiv.
in a charter, under the great seal, is designed filius legitimus secundo
genitus Willielmi comitis de Dundonald, etc. anno 1669.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir Thomas Strickland of Boynton, in
Yorkshire, by whom he had two sons, and one daughter.

1. William, his heir.

2. John Cochran of Waterside, who married Hannah, daughter of -- de Worth of
London, Esquire; by whom he had eight sons, and seven daughters, and who is now
represented by his grandson, William Cochran, Esquire; judge-advocate for Scotland.

Sir John's daughter, Grizel, married to John Ker of Morriston, Esquire; in the
shire of Berwick.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVII. WILLIAM COCHRAN of Ochiltree, who married lady Mary Bruce, eldest
daughter of Alexander earl of Kincardin, by whom he had nine sons, and four
daughters.

1. William, who died before his father, without issue anno 1707.

2. Charles, his heir.

3. John, a lieutenant in the fleet, perished at sea with sir Cloudsley Shovel.

4. Alexander, a captain in the army, who was cast away coming from Holland,
without issue.

5. George, a captain in the army, killed in Spain, anno 1709, without issue.

6. James, a lieutenant general in the British service.

7. Thomas, now earl of Dundonald.

8. Robert, died unmarried, anno 1721.

9. Basil, formerly a captain in the army, and deputy governor of the Isse of
Man under the duke of Athol, now one of the commissioners of excise for
Scotland.

1st daughter, Eupheme, married to colonel John Erskine, brother to sir Charles
Erskine of Alva.

2. Mary; died unmarried.

3. Elizabeth.

4. Anne, married to sir George Preston of Valleyfield.

William of Ochiltree, dying anno 1728, was succeeded by his son,

XVIII. CHARLES COCHRAN of Ochiltree, Esquire; a man of great honor and
hospitality, who, dying unmarried anno 1752, was succeeded by his next
surviving brother,

XVIII. Lieutenant General JAMES COCHRAN, who married --, daughter of --, by
whom he had two daughters.

1. Mary-Anne, married to Robert Sibthorp, Esquire; councillor at law in the
kingdom of Ireland.

2. Elizabeth, married to -- Cary-Hamilton, Esquire; in the same kingdom; but
dy-without issue-male in the beginning of 1758, was succeeded by his brother,

XVIII. THOMAS, who, upon the death of William seventh earl of Dundonald, in
July 1758, succeeded to the estate and honors as heir-male, as before
observed, and is eighth earl of Dundonald.

In his younger years he served in the army, and soon rose to the degree of a
major.

In 1722, he was chosen member of parliament for the shire of Renfrew; and in
anno 1730, was appointed one of the commissioners of excise, which office he
enjoyed for several years.

He married, 1st, Elizabeth, daughter of James Ker of Morriston, Esquire; by whom
he had a son,

William, who died young, -- and a daughter,

Lady Grizel.

He married, 2dly, Jean, daughter of Archibald Stewart of Torrence, Esquire; son of
Alexander Stewart of Torrence, Esquire; grandson of sir Archibald Stewart of
Castle-milk, by whom he has six sons, and one daughter.

1. Archibald, lord Cochran.

2. Charles.

3. John.

4. James.

5. Basil.

6. Alexander.

His daughter, lady Betty.

ARMS.
A cheveron, gules, between three boars heads erazed, azure.

CREST; on a wreath a horse passant, argent.

SUPPORTERS; two gray hounds of the last, collared and leished, or.

MOTTO; Virtute et labor.

CHIEF SEATS
Of the family of Dundonald were, at the castle of Dundonald, in the shire of
Air, and the abbay of Paisley, in the shire of Renfrew.

SETON Earl of DUNFERMLINE.
THE immediate ancestor of this noble family was,

GEORGE, seventh lord Seton, who married Isabel, daughter of sir William
Hamilton of Sorne, and left issue four sons.

1. Robert, his successor, afterward earl of Winton.

2. Sir John Seton of Barns, of whom more hereafter.

3. Alexander, first of this family.

4. Sir William Seton, whose only son died without issue.

I. ALEXANDER, third son of George seventh lord Seton, was a man of good
natural parts, which were greatly improved by a liberal education.

In the course of his travels, he staid a considerable time in Italy, where he
applied himself chiefly to the study of the laws, in which he was a great
proficient, and on that account, and his other rare accomplishments, he became
a great favorite of king James VI. who appointed him one of the extraordinary
lords of session, anno 1585, and one of the senators of the college of justice,
anno 1587, by the title of lord Pluscarty; Register of the privy seal.
the priory whereof had been bestowed upon his father, the lord Seton, by queen
Mary, anno 1565.

Sometime thereafter he was made president of the session, upon the death of
William Baillie, the former president, where he displayed his talents and
knowledge of the laws in a most conspicuous manner.

Upon the dissolution of the monasteries, he had a grant of the whole lands and
tithes of the rich priory of Pluscardin in Murray, to him and the heirs of his
body for ever; and was raised to the dignity of the peerage, Ibidem, and lives
of the officers of state.
by the title of lord Fyvie, to him and the heirs-male of his body; which
sailing, to the heirs-male of sir John Seton of Barns, his immediate elder
brother, Ibidem.
by patent dated in August 1591.

Upon the birth of prince Henry, in 1593, he was entrusted with his tuition
till he went to England, anno 1603.

In 1595, he was made one of the commissioners of the treasury, and was
appointed lord high chancellor of Scotland, upon the resignation of the earl of
Montrose, anno 1604, and was further dignified with the title of earl of
Dunfermline, Ibidem.
by patent, to him and his heirs-male, dated 4th March 1605.

And being a man of great skill in the management of state affairs, was
appointed one of the commissioners to treat of a nearer union with England,
which at that time took no effect.

In 1609, Ibidem.
he was made a privy-counsellor for both kingdoms; and in 1612, he was
appointed his majesty's high commissioner to the parliament of Scotland, etc.

He was possessed of a vast estate, Chart. in pub. archiv.
which appears by his charters under the great seal, of many lands and
baronies, inter 1603 et 1620.

He was chancellor of Scotland for the space of eighteen years, and acquitted
himself in that, and all his other employments, with universal applause.

He married, 1st, Lilias, daughter of Patrick lord Drummond, by Anne his wife,
daughter of David earl of Crawfurd, and by her had issue four daughters.

1. Lady Anne, married to Thomas, second earl of Kelly, and had issue.

2. Lady Isabel, married to John earl of Lauderdale, and was mother of John
duke of Lauderdale.

3. Lady Margaret, married to Colin earl of Seaforth, and had issue.

4. Lady Sophia, married to David lord Balearras, and had issue.

This great man married, 2dly, Grizel Lesly, daughter of James, son and
apparent heir of Andrew earl of Rothes, by whom he had a son,

Charles, who died young, -- and a daughter,

Lady Jean, married to John earl of Tweeddale.

He married, 3dly, Margaret Hay, daughter of John lord Yester, by whom he had a
son,

Charles, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Grizel, who died unmarried.

He died anno 1622, and was succeeded by his son,

II. CHARLES, second earl of Dunfermline, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who got charters, under the great seal, of several lands and baronies, inter
1635 et 1641.

In the beginning of the troubles in king Charles I. his reign, he was engaged
with the covenanters, and was one of the committee of parliament, anno 1640.

He was one of the Scotch commissioners appointed to treat with the king's, in
order to a peace, and was made a privy counselor for life by the parliament
anno 1641. He was also one of the committee of estates, Rescind. acts of parl.
and Guthrie's memoirs.
in the years 1644, 1645, and 1646; but at last returned to his duty, became a
faithful and loyal subject, was trusted by his majesty, and continued steady in
the interest of the royal family ever after.

When he was commissioner to the general assembly, he behaved with great
prudence and moderation, and endeavored all he could to bring the people to a
true sense of their duty.

After the murder of the king, he retired to the country, and lived privately
all the time of the usurpation.

But, upon the first appearance of a restoration, none was more zealous and
forward in expressing their loyalty, and contributing their utmost endeavors
to bring it about; of which king Charles II. was so sensible, that he appointed
him one of the lords of his privy council, immediately after his restoration.

Upon the death of William earl Marishal, he was appointed lord privy seal,
anno 1671.

He married lady Mary Douglas, daughter of William earl of Morton, by lady
Agnes Keith, daughter of George earl Marishal, by whom he had three sons and
one daughter.

1. Alexander, his heir.

2. Charles, who, betaking himself to a maritime life, was killed in one of his
Majesty's ships of war in an engagement against the Dutch, anno 1672.

3. James, afterward earl of Dunsermline.

His daughter, lady Henriet, married, 1st, to William earl of Wigton, and was
mother of John and Charles, earls of Wigton; she married, 2dly, William earl of
Crawfurd, to whom she had a son and six daughters.

The earl died in 1674, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. ALEXANDER, third earl of Dunfermline, who dying unmarried, his estate and
honors devolved upon his brother,

III. JAMES, fourth earl of Dunfermline, a man of great loyalty, honor and
probity, who, being bred in the army, was engaged in several memorable
expeditions, in the service of the States of Holland, where he always behaved
with remarkable conduct and resolution; but, upon his brother's death, he
quitted the service, and returned home, where he lived in great splendour and
magnificence, till the revolution in 1688; but being sincerely attached to the
interest of king James VII. never deserted or forsook him in his greatest
distress.

When lord Dundee declared for king James, and began to raise the Highlanders
for his service, he immediately joined him with a troop of horse, and fought on
their head at the battle of Killicranky, where he behaved with the courage and
conduct becoming so experienced an officer, for which he was outlawed and
forfeited by parliament, anno 1690.

When he found there was no prospect of any thing being done effectually for
the restoration of king James, he followed him to the court of St. Germains in
France, where he had the honor of the most noble order of the thistle
conferred upon him by that prince, and died at St. Germains, anno 1694, having
married lady Jean Gordon, daughter of George marquis of Huntly, by whom he had
no issue, whereby the estate and honors (had it not been for the forfeiture)
would have devolved upon George Seton of Barns, his next heirmale, being
lineally descended of sir John Seton of Barns, to whom we now return.

I. Sir JOHN SETON, second son of George seventh lord Seton, and immediate
elder brother of Alexander first earl of Dunfermline, in whose favors the
honors of Fyvie were limited, failing heirs-male of the patentee's body, as
before observed, got from his father the lands and barony of East-barns, which
were given by king Robert Bruce to the family of Seton, for their good and
faithful services.

He was a man of excellent parts, and in his travels visited most of the courts
in Europe, where he was remarkably distinguished for his polite behavior and
fine accomplishments. He was so highly esteemed at the court of Spain, that
king Philip II. made him master of his household, one of the gentlemen of his
bedchamber, and afterward created him one of the knights of the order of St.
Jago; in memory whereof, he and his successors added to their armorial bearing
a sword, which is the badge of that order. King Philip also settled a pension
of 2000 crowns per annum on him and his heirs.

He was at last called home by king James VI. who did not like to be deprived
of the services of a subject of so much merit; but, immediately upon his
return, appointed him one of the gentlemen of his bedchamber, and comptroller
of his exchequer and treasury in Scotland.

He married Anne, daughter of William sixth lord Forbes, by whom he had two
sons and one daughter.

1. Sir John, his heir.

2. George Seton, Esquire;.

His daughter, Anne, died without issue.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. Sir JOHN SETON of Barns, a man of Singular honor and loyalty, a firm and
steady friend of the royal family.

He was one of the gentlemen of the privychamber to king Charles I. and never
deserted his interest during all the time of the civil war.

He went over to Ireland with the forces that were sent to suppress the
rebellion there, where he purchased a considerable estate from sir Robert
Gordon of Lochinvar.

After his return, he joined the marquis of Montrose, for which he was fined
and imprisoned by the covenanters, anno 1646.

He married, 1st, Isabel, daughter of Gilbert Ogilvie of Powrie, widow of
Kenneth lord Kintail, by whom he had a son,

Alexander, his heir, -- and three daughters.

1. Isabel, married to -- Hepburn of Berford.

2. Margaret, married to -- Sutherland, tutor of Duffus.

3. Lilias, married to James Ramsay of Benholme.

He married, 2dly, Anne, daughter of sir John Home of Northberwick, by whom he
had two sons and one daughter.

1. George, who carried on the line of the family.

2. Charles Seton, Esquire;.

His daughter, Anne, married to John Hay of Aberlady.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. ALEXANDER SETON of Barns, who married a lady of the noble family of
O'Farrel in Ireland; but dying without issue, was succeeded by his brother,

III. GEORGE SETON of Barns, who married a daughter of sir George Suttie of
Balgone, by whom he had a son,

Colonel James Seton, -- and four daughters.

1. Marian.

2. Anne, married to John Don, Esquire;.

3. Catharine.

4. Martha.

IV. Colonel JAMES SETON, only son of George Seton of Barns, heir-male and
representative of the earls of Dunfermline, etc. who, betaking himself to a
military life, is now a colonel in the British service.

He married Susan, daughter of James Murray of Abercairny, Esquire;.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st and 4th or, three crescents gules, within a double tressure,
flowered and counterflowered, or; 2d and 3d argent, on a fess gules, three
cinque foils of the first.

SUPPORTERS; two horses, argent.

CREST; a crescent, gules.

MOTTO; Semper.

GALLOWAY Lord DUNKELD.
THE immediate ancestor of this noble family was,

I. Mr. PATRICK GALLOWAY, who was bred to the church, and was minister of the
gospel, first at Perth, then in Edinburgh, in the reign of king James VI.

He married Mary, daughter of Mr. James Lawson, one of the ministers of the
city of Edinburgh, by whom he had a son,

Sir James.

And dying anno 1624, was succeeded by,

II. Sir JAMES GALLOWAY, who, having acquired the ^ands and barony of Carnbee
in Fife, was designed by that title.

He was a man of fine parts, and became a great favorite of king James VI. who
appointed him master of requests, Dalrymple's Cambden.
when but a young man.

He was continued in the same office by king Charles I. to whom he was a
faithful and loyal subject, Minutes of parliament.
and was also one of the secretaries of state.

He was afterward made clerk to the bills for life; which office was disjoined
from the registers, annexed to his as master of requests, and ratified in
parliament in November 1641.

He had also the nomination of all commissary clerks, Ibidem, and rescinded
acts of parlt.
procurator fiscals, etc. confirmed to him that same year.

The king, in reward of his constant fidelity and faithful services, was
pleased to create him a peer, by the title of lord Dunkeld, by patent, Chart.
in cancellaria.
dated 15th May 1645.

He married a daughter of sir Robert Norter, knight, by whom he had a son,

III. THOMAS, second lord Dunkeld, who succeeded him.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir Thomas Thomson of Duddingston, by Jean,
daughter of sir James Scrymgeour of Dudhope, by whom he had three sons and four
daughters.

1. James, his heir.

2. John Galloway, Esquire;.

3. Andrew Galloway, Esquire;.

1st daughter, Catharine, married to Thomas Forbes of Watertoun, Esquire; in
Aberdeenshire.

2. Margaret, married to Thomas Rattray, Esquire; of Craighall, in Peithshire, and
had issue.

3. Mary, married to the reverend doctor John Falconer, a clergyman, and had
issue.

4. Grizel, married to Patrick Crichton of Ruthven, Esquire; in Perthshire, and had
issue.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. JAMES, third lord Dunkeld, who was bred to the army, and was accounted a
very good officer. He joined lord Dundee, when he raised forces in favors of
king James VII. was with him at the battle of Killicranky, for which he was
outlawed. He retired to the court of St. Germains; was afterward a colonel in
the French service, and was killed in action, leaving issue a son,

James, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Mary, who became a nun in the nunnery of the Val de Grace, Paris.

V. JAMES, who still takes upon him the title of lord Dunkeld, like his father,
betook himself to a military life in the service of France, where he has risen
to the degree of a lieutenant general, and has the reputation of a brave and
gallant officer.

He is married, but has no issue.

MURRAY Earl of DUNMORE.
JOHN marquis of Athole, the seventeenth generation of that illustrious family,
in a direct male line, married lady Amelia Stanly, daughter of that worthy
patriot James earl of Derby in England, by whom he had a numerous issue.

1. John, his heir, afterward duke of Athole.

2. Lord Charles, afterward earl of Dunmore.

I. Lord CHARLES MURRAY, second son of John marquis of Athole, when young,
betook himself to a military life. He was lieutenant colonel to general
Dalziel's regiment of horse, anno 1679; and, upon the death of that general,
got the command of the regiment, and was master of horse to princess Anne,
afterward queen of Great Britain.

Upon the accession of king James VII. to the throne, he was made master of
horse to queen Mary, and was created earl of Dunmore, viscount Fincastle, baron
Murray of Blair, Chart. in pub. archiv.
etc. by patent, dated 16th August 1686, haeredibus masculis e corpore suo, in
perpetuum.

He was deprived of all his offices at the revolution, whereupon he retired to
the country, and led a private life all the reign of king William.

Soon after queen Anne's accession to the crown, he was made one of the lords
of her privy council, the 4th February 1703; and was constituted captain of the
castle of Blackness, upon the removal of the earl of Buchan, anno 1707.

He married Catharine, daughter of Robert Watts of the county of Hereford, Esquire;
by whom he had five sons and three daughters.

1. James, his heir.

2. John, who succeeded his brother.

3. William, who carried on the line of this family.

4. Robert, member of parliament for Wotten Basset, in the last parliament of
king George I. and for Bedcoin in the second parliament of king George II. He
was also brigadier-general, and colonel of a regiment of horse, and died anno
1738, without issue.

5. Thomas, who is colonel of a regiment of foot.

1st daughter, Lady Henriet, married to Patrick lord Kinnaird.

2. Lady Anne, married to John earl of Dundonald.

3. Lady Catharine, married to John lord Nairn.

He died anno 1710, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. JAMES, second earl of Dunmore, who, died soon after his father, without
issue, was succeeded by his brother,

II. JOHN, third earl of Dunmore, who was elected one of the sixteen Scotch
peers to the fourth British parliament, anno 1713, and was appointed colonel of
the third regiment of guards.

But dying also without issue, anno 1752, Was succeeded by his brother,

II. WILLIAM, fourth earl of Dunmore, who married Catharine, daughter of his
uncle William lord Nairn, by whom he had three sons and four daughters.

1. John, now earl of Dunmore.

2. Charles.

3. William, an officer in the army.

1st daughter, lady Margaret.

2. Lady Catharine, married to John Drummond of Logyalmond, Esquire; and has issue
a daughter.

3. Lady Jean.

4. Lady Elizabeth.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. JOHN, fifth earl of Dunmore, who, in May 1761, was elected one of the
sixteen Scotch peers, to sit in the British parliament, etc.

He married lady Charlotte Stewart, daughter of Alexander earl of Galloway, by
whom he has issue two daughters.

1. Lady Catharine.

2. Lady Augusta.

ARMS.
The coat of the duke of Athole, viz. the arms of the Stewarts earls of Athole,
quartered with the paternal coat of Murray, earl of Tullibardine; and, in an
escutcheon over all, a proper difference, taken from his relation to the noble
family of Stanly, earls of Derby, lords of the Isle of Man, etc.

TALMASH Earl of DYSART.
THIS title was first conferred upon a cadet of the illustrious house of
Tullibardine.

Patrick Murray, third son of sir Walter, fifth baron of Tullibardine, was
ancestor of the Murrays of Woodend, in Perthshire.

William Murray, a younger son of that family, was bred to the church, and was
parson of Dysart, in the county of Fyse, in the reign of king James VI. -- He
had a son,

William Murray, (afterward earl of Dysart) a promising boy, and of a sine
genius. His uncle, Mr. Thomas Murray, who was preceptor, and afterward
secretary to king Charles I. introduced the youth to his majesty. They were
much about an age. He had his whole education along with the king; and being of
a lively and sprightly disposition, his majesty conceived a mighty friendship
and affection for him.

Soon after his accession to the crown, he appointed him one of the gentlemen
of his bedchamber, anno 1626.

He was greatly trusted by the king, and employed in several negotiations of
importance, during the troubles of that reign; Minutes of parl. ad ann. 1633,
Guthrie's memoirs, etc.
but it appears he was not faithful to him, having got no less than forty
thousand merks from the parliament, for being in their interest.

The king, however, not being sensible of his infidelity, still continued his
friendship for him, and raised him to the dignity of the peerage, by the titles
of earl of Dysart, Scots comp. Crawsurd's Peerage, etc.
lord Huntingtower, etc. anno 1646, by patent to his heirs-male.

In the year 1650, he, with the earl of Carnwath, were sent with instructions
to the Scotch commissioners at Breda, who were treating with king Charles II.
in order to bring about a restoration, Life of king Char. II. etc.
and he conducted himself in that affair with diligence and fidelity.

He married Elizabeth Bruce, a daughter of the family of Clackmannan, by whom
he had only two daughters.

1. Lady Elizabeth, afterward countess of Dysart.

2. Lady Margaret, married to William lord Maynard of the kingdom of England.

The earl dying without male issue, the honors became extinct, but were
afterward conferred upon his eldest daughter,

Lady ELIZABETH MURRAY, who being in great favor with king Charles II. was by
that prince created countess of Dysart, baroness of Huntingtower, etc. with her
father's precedence, by a new patent, whereof the novo damus bears "to her,
Diplo. in pub. archiv.
or, any of her children she thinks sit to name, by a writ under her hand, any
time of her life, and in case of no such nomination, to her heirs-general, the
eldest to be preferred, etc." dated 5th December, 1760.

She was married, 1st, to sir Lionel Talmash of Hemlingham, in the county of
Suffolk, by whom she had three sons and two daughters, of whom more hereafter.

She married, 2dly, John Duke of Lauderdale, to whom she had no issue.

As the family of Talmash (now Earls of Dysart) have made a considerable figure
in England for several centuries past, it will not be improper here to give an
account of their pedigree, for some generations backwards, taken from English
historians, and briefly narrated in the Scots compendium, printed at London,
anno 1752, page 293, etc.

HUGH TALMASH of Bently, in the county of Suffolk, held that manor of the
crown, and had summons among the knights of that county, to attend king Edward
I. at Berwick, anno 1299. Of him was lineally descended,

I. Sir LIONEL TALMASH of Bently, who flourished in the reigns of king Henry
VI. and Edward IV.

He married Anne, daughter and heiress of the family of Hemlingham, of
Hemlingham-hall in Suffolk, with whom he got that inheritance, and by her had a
son,

II. JOHN TALMASH of Bently and Hemlingham, who succeeded him.

He married Anne, daughter and heiress of Robert Lowth of Santry, in
Humtington-shire, by whom he had a numerous issue, and was succeeded by his
eldest son,

III. LIONEL TALMASH of Bently, who, in the reign of king Henry VIII. was
sheriff of Norfolk and Suffolk, anno 1518.

He married Edith, daughter and heiress of Joice of Creekshall in Suffolk, by
whom he had a son,

IV. Sir LIONEL TALMASH of Bently, who succeeded him, anno 1553, and had the
honor of knighthood conferred upon him by queen Elizabeth.

He married Dorothy, daughter of Richard Wentworth of Nettlested in Suffolk, by
whom he had a son and successor,

V. Sir LIONEL TALMASH of Bently, who was sheriff of Norfolk, anno 1592.

He married Susanna, daughter of sir Ambrose Jermyn of Rushbrook in Suffolk, by
whom he had a son,

VI. Sir LIONEL TALMASH of Bently, who succeeded him, and was created a baronet
by king James VI. anno 1611.

He married Catharine, daughter of George lord Cromwell, by lady Mary Powlet,
daughter of John marquis of Wincester, and by her he had a son and heir,

VII. Sir LIONEL TALMASH, second baron of Bently, who was greatly esteemed in
his county, and was member of parliament for the town of Orford.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of John lord Stanhope of Harrington, in the
county of Northampton, by whom he had a son

Sir Lionel, -- and seven daughters.

He was succeeded by his son,

VIII. Sir LIONEL TALMASH, third baronet of Bently, who married the foresaid
Elizabeth, countess of Dysart, eldest daughter and co-heiress of William Murray
earl of Dysart, to whose heirs the peerage and honors of Dysart were limited,
as before observed. By her he had issue, three sons and two daughters.

1. Sir Lionel, afterward earl of Dysart.

2. Thomas, the brave general in the reign of king William.

3. William Talmash, Esquire;

1st daughter lady Elizabeth, married to Archibald duke of Argyle.

2. Lady Catharine, married, first, to James Stewart lord Down, eldest son and
heir of the Earl of Murray; secondly, to John earl of Sutherland.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. Sir LIONEL, who, in right of his mother, became earl of Dysart, lord
Huntingtower, etc. He was knight of the shire in three parliaments, in the
reign of king William, for the county of Suffolk.

Upon queen Anne's accession to the crown, he was constituted lord lieutenant,
custos rotulorum, and vice admiral of that county. He was also, by her majesty,
offered a baron's patent; but he declined that honor, and was again elected to
serve in parliament; in which post he continued till the union of the two
crowns; but afterward, being a Scotch peer, he could be no longer a member of
the house of commons.

He married Grace, one of the two daughters and coheirs of sir Thomas
Wilbraham of Woodhey, in the county of Chester, Bart. by whom he had a son,

Lionel, lord Huntingtower, his apparent heir, -- and four daughters.

1. Lady Elizabeth, married to sir Robert Cotton of Cumbermore, in the county
of Chester, Bart.

2. Lady Catharine, married to John Bridges, marquis of Caernarvon, heir
apparent to James duke of Chandos.

3. Lady Mary.

4. Lady Grace.

The last two daughters both died without issue.

He died anno 1726.

X. LIONEL, lord Huntingtower, only son and heir apparent of Lionel earl of Die
sart, married --, by whom he had a son,

Lionel, afterward earl of Dysart,

He dying before his father, anno 1712, was succeeded by his said son,

XI. LIONEL, lord Huntingtower, born anno 1707, who, upon the death of his
grandfather, succeeded to the earldom of Dysart, anno 1726, and was made one of
the knights of the most noble order of the thistle in 1743.

He married lady Grace Carteret, eldest daughter of John earl of Granville, by
whom, he has six sons and four daughters.

1. --, lord Huntingtower, etc. born 1734.

2. --, born 1739.

3. --, born 1740.

4. --, born 1743.

5. --, born 1750.

6. --, born 1751.

1st daughter, lady --, born 1732, and died unmarried, anno 1744.

2. Lady Harriot, who died also unmarried.

3. Lady Grace, born anno 1736.

4. Lady --, born anno 1745.

ARMS.
Argent, a fret sable.

CREST; on a wreath, a nag's head couped, argent, between two wings erect, or.

SUPPORTERS; two antelopes proper attired and unguled, or.

MOTTO; Confido conquiesco.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Ham in the county of Surry, at Harrington in the county of Northampton, at
Helmingham in the county of Suffolk, and at Woodhey in the county of Chester.

MONTGOMERY Earl of EGLINGTON.
ALL our antiquaries agree, Hist* de Normandy, Cambden, p. 195. Hollinshed,
etc.
that the surname of Montgomery is originally from France: we shall therefore
deduce the descent of this illustrious family from a noble Norman,

I. HUGH de MUNDEGUMBRIE, a man of the first rank, and a near relation of
Robert duke of Normandy, was father of

II. ROGER de MUNDEGUMBRIE, (designed, by sir William Dugdale, ^ilius Hugonis,)
who came over to England with William the conqueror, anno 1066; and, being one
of his most experienced generals, had the command of the vanguard of his army
at the memorable battle of Hastings, where king Harold was slain.

He there behaved with remarkable courage and conduct, Dugdale's baronage of
England.
for which the conqueror nobly rewarded his faithful services, by bestowing
upon him the territories of Arundel and Shrewsbury, of which last he was
created earl.

He settling with his family in these parts, founded and largely endowed the
abbay of St. Ibidem.
Peter's in Salisbury, where he died anno 1094, having married Mabel, daughter
of William de Talvaise, a great baron in Bolesm, by whom he had five sons.

1. Hugh.

2. Roger.

3. Robert.

4. Philip.

5. Arnulph.

Hugh first son died before his father, without issue.

III. ROGER, second son, succeeded his father in the earldom of Shrewsbury,
(...), p. 10.
and was also created earl of Arundel by king Henry I. immediately upon his
accession to the crown, anno 1100.

But he and his brother Robert having afterward joined their cousin, Robert
duke of Normandy, king Henry's elder brother, who invaded England with a
considerable army, anno 1101, they, thereby incurring king Henry's displeasure,
were both banished, and, with their families, retired to Wales, where they were
kindly received by the prince of that country, Dugdale's baronage.
and, settling there, it is said the county of Montgomery in Wales took its name
from them; but their posterity are long since extinct.

I. PHILIP, fourth son of Roger earl of Shrewsbury, was the undoubted ancestor
and the first of this noble family, who having contracted a friendship with
king David I. when residing in England, came to Scotland with that prince,
Scots compendium, p. 194. Nisbet, vol. I. p. 383.
and, according to Mr. Crawfurd, settled in Teviotdale, but, according to
others, in the shire of Renfrew, where he obtained a fair inheritance, which is
still possessed by his posterity.

He married Margaret, daughter of Cospatrick, earl of March, by whom he had
issue two sons.

1. Robert.

2. Alan de Mundegumrie, Chartul. of Paisley, penes MacFarlane, p. 22.
who is witness to a donation of Henry, de Sto. Martino to the monastery of
Paisley, tempore regis Malcolmi, ante 1165, in which year king Malcolm died.

And dying about 1140, was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. ROBERT de MUNDEGUMRI, who is a witness to the foundation charter of the
monastery of Paisley, Ibidem.
anno 1160.

In a charter of a donation to the said monastery, by Walter lord high steward,
the founder, Ibid. p. 5.
Robertus de Mondegumbri, Richard bishop of St. Andrews, Engelram bishop of
Glasgow, Alexander de Hasting, etc. are witnesses, inter 1164 et 1174, in which
year the bishop of Glasgow died.

And to another charter of the said Walter, Ibid. p. 22.
inter 1173 et 1177.

He died betwixt 1177 and 1180, leaving issue a son and successor,

III. Sir JOHN de MUNDEGUMRI, who married Helen, one of the daughters and
coheiresses of Robert de Kent, Chartul. of Kelso, penes MacFarlane, p. 244.
in Innerwick, with whom he got a considerable accession to his estate, which
appears by a charter on the division of his lands, to which T. prior of
Coldinghame, T. de Colville, Alan de Mundegumri, son of the above sir John,
William de Heriz, etc. are witnesses, circa ann. 1190.

By said Helen Kent he left issue three sons.

1. Sir Alan. Chartul. of Paisley, p. 19, 90, etc.


2. Robert de Mundegumbri, who is witness to many donations to the monastery of
Paisley, betwixt 1200 and 1230.

3. William de Mundegumbri, Chartul. of Kelso, p. 308.
who is witness to a donation of the church of Dunsyre, to the abbot and
convent of Kelso, by Helias, brother to Joceline bishop of Glasgow, betwixt
1180 and 1199.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. Sir ALAN de MUNDEGUMRI, Ibid. p. 232.
who was designed miles in the chartulary of Kelfo, Chartul. of Paisley, p. 37.
57.
and, in his father's lifetime, got a charter of diverse lands in tenemento de
Innerwick, Chartul. of St. Andrews, p. 317.
and is witness to many donations to the monastery of Paisley, circa 1200.

In a donation to that monastery, by Walter, son of Alan lord high steward,
Alanus de Montegumbri, Chartul. of Paisley, p. 46, 67, 142, etc.
William bishop of St. Andrews, Walter bishop of Glasgow, Walter and William de
Lindesay, Malcolm Lockhard, etc. are witnesses, ante 1230, in which year the
bishop of Glasgow died.

He died before 1234, and left issue three sons.

1. Sir Robert.

2. Sir John, who carried on the line of this family, of whom afterward.

3. Alan de Mondegumry, who is mentioned in the register of Paisley.

V. Sir ROBERT MONTEGOMERY succeeded sir Alan, and is likeways designed miles.

In a charter of Alan, son of Walter lord high steward of Scotland, upon an
excambion of the lands of Ingliston, with the lands of Innerurie, etc. the
witnesses are, Robert de Montgomry, Ibid. p. 49.
knight, John his brother, Malcolm Lockard, Malcolm, son of Maldwin earl of
Lennox, David de Lindesay, Alanus de Insula, etc. inter 1240 et 1248.

In a charter of Patrick earl of Dunbar, of a donation to the monks of
Coldingham, Chartul. of Coldinghame penes MacFarlane, p. 59.
dominus Robertus de Montegomery, dominus David de Graham, vicecomes de
Berwick, etc. are witnesses, circa 1258.

And dying without issue, ante 1260, was succeeded by his brother,

V. Sir JOHN de MONTEGOMERY, who was witness to a donation of Walter lord high
steward, Chartul. of Paisley, p. 104.
together with Walter Olisard, justiciar of Lothian, David his brother, Malcolm
Lockard, and Malcolm his son, and several others, inter 1240 et 1250.

He left issue three sons.

1. Sir John.

2. Murthauch de Montegomery, Prynne vol. III. p. 6^8. Remarks upon Ragman's
roll, p. 3.
who swore allegiance to king Edward I. of England, and is designed del conte
de Air.

3. Sir Thomas de Montegomery, knight, who also swore fealty to king Edward I.
anno 1296, but joined king Robert Bruce afterward, Ibidem.
and continued faithful to his interest ever after.

And dying about 1285, was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. Sir JOHN de MONTGOMERY, designed by the title of Eglesham, in the barony
of Renfrew; also del conte de Lanark, in Prynne's collections.

He was one of the great barons of Scotland summoncd to appear at Berwick,
Ibidem.
anno 1291, and was afterward, with many of his countrymen, obliged to swear
fealty to king Edward I. anno 1296.

But being a man of great worth and merit, and a true lover of his country, he
joined king Robert Bruce as soon as he began to assert his title to the crown,
and was engaged with him in many dangerous encounters, where he always behaved
with courage and resolution.

He died anno 1316, leaving issue two sons, and one daughter.

1. Sir Alexander, his heir.

2. Alan de Montgomery, who, in a charter of king Robert I. of the lands of
Stahar, (now Stair,) Chart. in archiv. Roberti I.
is designed Alanus filius quondam Joannis, etc. and his son Alan obtained from
the same prince a charter of the lands of Stair, Nisbet, vol. I. 383.
upon his father's resignation.

His daughter, Marjory, is designed filia Joannis de Montgomery, in a vendition
of part of the lands of Cassilis, Chart. conf. David II.
to sir John Kennedy of Dunnure.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. Sir ALEXANDER de MONTGOMERY, who was knighted by king Robert Bruce, to
whole interest he always adhered with great fidelity, and was no less faithful
to his son king David II.

In a charter of that prince, Ibidem, and Remarks on Ragman's roll, p. 2.
he is designed Alexander de Montgomery, de Eglisham, filius Joannis, etc. anno
1357.

He was one of the commissioners appointed to negotiate with the English,
Rymer, tom. VI. p. 82.
anno 1358.

He married --, daughter of --, by whom he had a son and successor,

VIII. Sir JOHN MONTGOMERY of Egilshame, who married --, daughter and sole
heiress of sir Hugh Eglington of that ilk, by Giles his wife, daughter of
Walter lord high steward of Scotland, and sister of king Robert II. Crawfurd,
Nisbet, Scott compend, etc.
by which marriage he became possessed of the lordships of Eglington, Ardrossan,
etc. in Cunningham.

This sir Hugh de Eglington was the lineal representative of an ancient and
honorable family of that name, who made a considerable figure in the west of
Scotland for many ages, and sir Hugh himself was justiciar of Lothian, anno
1361; but dying without male issue, his great and opulent fortune went with his
daughter to sir John de Montgomery of Egilshame, who thereupon quartered the
arms of Eglington with his own, and afterward was designed by that title.

He was a great patriot, and embraced every opportunity of exerting his courage
in the service of his country; particularly he and his son sir Hugh were
engaged with James earl of Douglas, at the battle of Otte^burn, where the Scots
obtained the victory, though the brave earl was slain, anno 1388.

Sir John signalized himself in a remarkable manner in that engagement, having,
with his own hands, taken prisoner sir Henry Percy, son of the earl of
Northumberland, Ibidem.
with whose ransom he built the castle of Punoon, which was afterward his
chief seat in the lordship of Egilshame.

By his said wife he had issue three sons.

1. Sir Hugh, a youth of remarkable courage and intrepidity, who was slain with
his general, the earl of Douglas, at the battle of Otterburn, without issue.

2. Sir John, his father's heir.

3. Alexander, Chart. penes comitem de Lauderdale.
designed of Bonnington.

He was succeeded by his son,

IX. Sir JOHN MONTGOMERY, promiscuously designed of Eglington, Egilsham, and
Ardrossan, who became one of the hostages for the earl of Douglas, anno 1407,
who had been taken prisoner at the battle of Homildon, anno 1402. Rymer, tom.
VIII. p. (...) and tom X. p. 286.
He was also appointed one of the hostages for king James I.'s ransom, anno
1423, and is then designed dominus Montgomery de Ardrossan, etc. He returned
next year, Rolls of parlt in 1429. Remarks on Ragman's Roll, p. 3.
and received the honor of knighthood at his majesty's coronation, anno 1424.

He was raised to the dignity of a lord of parliament, by the title of lord
Montgomery, anno 1427, and was one of the lords who sat on the trial of Murdoch
duke of Albany, Chart. in pub archiv. ad ann. 1422.
etc.

He died ante 1430, having married Margaret, daughter of Robert lord Maxwell,
by whom he had issue a son,

X. ALEXANDER, second lord Montgomery, who succeeded him, and being a man of
great parts, was in high favor with king James I. who appointed him one of his
privy council, in the year 1425, when but a young man.

In 1430, he was made governor of Kintyre and Knapdale, jointly with sir
Alexander Cunninghame.

He got charters, Chart. in pub. archiv.
under the great seal, of a vast number of lands and baronies, Alexandro domino
Montgomery, inter 1430 et 1450.

In 1441, he was joined in commission with sir Alexander Gordon, Rymer, tom. X.
p. 681, and 658.
and Mr. John Methven, secretary of state, to treat of a peace with the
English, which they happily concluded also in 1437 and 1438.

After the horrid murder of king James I. he became no less in favor with his
son king James II. and was also one of his privy council.

He obtained from that prince several beneficial grants, Crawfurd's peerage, p.
128.
in consideration of his great loyalty and faithful services, etc.

He was again appointed one of the commissioners to treat with the English in
1444, and also in 1447; Rymer tom. XI. p. 229, and 235.
and in all these commissions he is designed Alexander dominus Montgomery, etc.

He was also sent ambassador extraordinary to the court of England, Ibid. p.
254.
anno 1451.

He married Margaret, Chart. penes comitem de Errol.
daughter of sir Thomas Boyd of Kilmarnock, by whom he had issue three sons,
and five daughters.

1. Andrew, his heir, by Scotch authors called Alexander.

2. George, ancestor of the Montgomeries of Skelmorly.

3. Thomas, parson of Eglisham.

1st daughter, Margaret, married to John earl of Lennox.

2. Janet, married to sir John Cunninghame of Kilmawers, ancestor of the earl
of Glencairn.

3. Mary, married to sir Alexander Home of that ilk.

4. Jean, married to John lord Kennedy.

5. Agnes, married to William Cunningham of Glengarnock.

He died inter 1451 et 1454, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. ANDREW, third lord Montgomery. In the year 1445, James bishop of St.
Andrews, Rymer, tom. XI. p. 365.
George bishop of Brechin, Andreas dominus Montgomery, lord Hamilton, etc. were
named ambassadors extraordinary to the court of England, 20th May in the said
year.

And, under the same designation, he was one of the cons^r^atores treugarum,
Ibid. p. 397.
and wardens of the marches, 11th June anno 1457.

This lord Montgomery married Elizabeth, daughter of sir Patrick Hepburn of
^ailes, by whom he had issue three sons.

1. Alexander, his heir.

2. Robert Montgomery of Breadstane, Lodge's peerage of Ireland vol. I. p. 356.
of whom the Earl of Mount-Alexander in Ireland is lineally descended.

3. Hugh Montgomery of Hislot.

He died before 1459, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. ALEXANDER, fourth lord Montgomery, Rymer, tom. XI. p. 426.
who was appointed one of the wardens of the marches, 25th July 1459.

And the year thereafter, Andrew bishop of Glasgow, Thomas bishop of Aberdeen,
Andrew lord Avendale, Alexander lord Montgomery, etc. Ibid. p. 453.
were appointed commissioners to treat with the English, 2d June 1460.

He got charters, Chart. in pub. archiv.
under the great seal, Alexandro domino Montgomery, of several lands, inter
1465 et 1469.

He married Catharine, Ibidem.
daughter of Gilbert lord Kennedy, by whom he had three sons.

1. Hugh, his heir.

2. James Montgomery of Smithston.

3. John Montgomery, Esquire;.

He died anno 1487, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. HUGH, fifth lord Montgomery, who was in high favor with king James IV.
and made one of his privy council upon his accession to the crown, anno 1488.

He obtained a grant of the constabulary of the royal castle of Rothsay, Ibidem.
in 1489.

He got charters, Ibidem.
under the great seal, Hugoni domino Montgomery, inter 1492 et 1500.

And, in consideration of his great merit and faithful services, Ibidem, and
Crawfurd's peerage.
his majesty was pleased to raise him to the dignity of earl of Eglington, anno
1503.

He got charters, Chart. in pub. archiv.
under the great seal, Hugoni, comiti de Eglington, of many lands, inter 1507
et 1510.

He married lady Helen Campbell, daughter of Colin first earl of Argyle, by
whom he had five sons, and six daughters.

1. John, master of Eglington.

2. Sir Neil Montgomery of Linshaw, who got from his father a grant of a great
many lands, Chart. penes Mr. Montgomery of Linshaw.
which are all mentioned in his charter. He married Margaret, daughter and sole
heiress of Quintin Mure of Skeldoun, by whom he got a considerable estate, and
added the arms of Mure to his own. He was ancestor of the Montgomeries of
Linshaw, of whom Robert Montgomery, Esquire; late provost of Edinburgh, now one of
the commissioners of his majesty's customs, is the male representative. Vide
title Linshaw in the II. Vol. of this work.

3. William Montgomery of Greenfield, who married Elizabeth, daughter and sole
heiress of Robert Frances of Stane, by whom he got the lands of Stane, Chart.
in archiv. Jacobi IV. ad ann. 1508.
etc. He was ancestor of the Montgomeries of Auchenhood and others.

4. Hugh, married Jean, daughter and heiress of Robert lord Lyle.

5. Robert, bishop of Argyle.

1st daughter, Margaret, married to William lord Semple.

2. Marjory, married to William lord Somerville.

3. Maud, married to Colin Campbell of Ardkinlass.

4. Isabel, married to John Muir of Caldwall.

5. Elizabeth, married to John Blair of that ilk.

6. Agnes, married to John Ker of Kersland.

XIV. JOHN lord MONTGOMERY, commonly called master of Eglington, first son and
heir apparent of Hugh first earl of Eglington, was unfortunately killed in a
scuffle betwixt the earls of Angus and Arran, Stewart's history of the royal
family. p. 87.
on the street of Edinburgh on 13th April 1520, his father being then alive.

He left issue, Chart. penes comitem de Eglington.
by Elizabeth his wife, daughter of sir Archibald Edmonston of Duntreath, one
son,

Hugh, -- and a daughter.

Christian, married to sir William Douglas of Drumlanrig, ancestor of the duke
of Queensberry.

XV. HUGH, second earl of Eglington, only son of John the master, succeeded his
grandfather, and was at a meeting of the estates when they sent an embassy to
the king of France, to endeavor to get Scotland comprehended in their treaty
with the English, Rymer, tom. XIII. p. 509.
anno 1515; and being a man of extraordinary parts, had the tuition of the
young king James V. entrusted to him by John duke of Albany, when he went to
France to concert measures about carrying on the war with England, Hollinshed's
history.
anno 1520. He acquitted himself so much to his majesty's satisfaction, that he
held him in high esteem ever after.

He got charters, under the great seal, Hugoni, comiti de Eglington, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
of many lands and baronies, inter 1520 et 1540.

In 1536, when king James went to France, to espouse Magdalen, daughter of king
Francis I. he and the earl of Huntly were appointed governors of Scotland.

He married Marian, daughter of George lord Seton, by whom he had a son,

XVI. HUGH, third earl of Eglington, who succeeded him. He was a great
loyalist, and adhered firmly to the interest of queen Mary, in her greatest
distress. He raised forces, was personally engaged for her majesty at the
battle of Langside, where he was taken prisoner, and suffered many hardships on
account of his loyalty; but he afterward submitted to king James VI. was
received into favor, and lived peaceably at home ever after.

He got charters, Ibidem.
under the great seal, of many lands and baronies, between 1578 and 1584.

He married Agnes, daughter of sir John Drummond of Innerpeffry, widow of sir
Hugh Campbell of Lowdon, by whom he had two sons and two daughters.

1. Hugh, his heir.

2. Robert Montgomery of Giffen, who married Margaret, daughter of sir Matthew
Campbell of Lowdon, by whom he had one daughter, Elizabeth, his sole heiress,
who was married to her cousin Hugh earl of Eglington.

Lady Margaret, the earl's eldest daughter, was married to Robert earl of
Winton, and carried on the line of this family; of whom afterward.

Lady Agnes, his second daughter, was married to Robert lord Semple.

He married, 2dly, Helen, daughter of Gilbert lord Kennedy, but by her had no
issue. After his death, Ibidem.
she married Thomas Graham of Knockdolion.

He died anno 1585, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVII. HUGH, fourth earl of Eglington, a youth of great hopes and singular
endowments; but had the misfortune to be murdered, in the flower of his age, by
John Cunningham of Colnheath and his accomplices, on the 12th April 1589, Dr.
Johnston's Sco^^ heroes.
leaving issue by Giles his wife, daughter of Robert lord Boyd, only one son,

XVIII. HUGH, fifth earl of Eglington, who succeeded him.

He obtained a grant to himself, his heirs and assignies, upon the resignation
of Mr. William Melvil, of all the lands and tithes that belonged to the
dissolved abbay of Kilwinning, erecting them into a temporal lordship, together
with the patronages of sixteen parish churches; Ibidem.
all which is fully narrated in the charter.

He married his cousin Elizabeth, daughter and sole heiress of his uncle Robert
Mon^gomery of Giffen, by whom, it is said by former historians, he had no
issue; but this is certainly a mistake; for by her he had one son,

XIX. ROBERT, designed master of Eglington, and son of Hugh the fifth earl, who
was put in possession of the lands and barony of Eastwood in his father's
lifetime, and got two charters of these lands, etc. under the great seal,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
Roberto, magistro de Eglington, etc. but he died before his father, anno 1602,
leaving issue only one daughter,

XX. Lady MARGARET MONTGOMERY, who succeeded her father in the lands and barony
of Eastwood, as will be shown hereafter.

In a charter under the great seal, granted to Alexander, sixth earl of
Eglington, she was designed Domina Margareta Montgomerie, Ibidem.
unica filia et haeres quondam Roberti Montgomerie, magistri de Eglington, etc.
dated the penult day of July 1613.

She was married to Robert lord Boyd, but died without issue. Though she
survived her grandfather several years, and immediately after his death assumed
the titles of Eglington, as his heir of line, yet she afterward yielded them
to Alexander, the sixth earl of Eglington. This appears by a charter of
confirmation, under the great seal, to the said sixth earl; wherein are these
words: Domina Margareta Montgomery, Ibidem.
olim comitissa de Eglington, nunc domina de Boyd, etc. dated 4th March 1615.

Robert, master of Eglington, being now dead, and no appearance of his daughter
lady Boyd's having any children; and lady Margaret Montgomery, countess of
Winton, being heir of line of the family, failing heirs of Hugh, the fifth earl
of Eglington's body, whereby the estates and honors of Eglington and Winton
would both devolve upon the eldest son of lady Margaret; the old earl therefore
made a resignation and entail of his estate and honors (which was afterward
confirmed by the king) to and in favors of sir Alexander Seton, Ibidem.
second son of the said lady Margaret his aunt, dated anno 1603.

The earl dying in 1612, was accordingly succeeded by the said sir Alexander;
we must therefore return to his mother lady Margaret, who was undoubted heir of
line of the last earl, failing issue of the body of his grandchild the lady
Boyd, as before observed.

XVII. Lady MARGARET MONTGOMERY, eldest daughter of Hugh, third earl of
Eglington, was married to Robert earl of Winton, to whom she had several sons.

I. George, who succeeded to the earldom of Winton.

2. Alexander, who succeeded to the earldom of Eglington, in virtue of the
above resignation and entail.

XVIII. ALEXANDER, sixth earl of Eglington, grandson of Hugh the third earl,
thus succeeding, got a charter, under the great seal, ratifying and confirming
all the honors, dignities, and precedence, enjoyed by any former earl of
Eglington. The confirmation is signed by the king, apud palatium de Whitehall,
March 4th 1615; and in the clause of novo damus, Ibidem.
is granted the earldom, una cum omnibus et singulis dignitatibus, honoribus,
privilegiis et immunitatibus quibuscunque, comitibus de Eglington spectan. per
dictum dominum Alexandrum Montgomery, nunc comitem de Eglington, dominum
Montgomery, et haeredes suos masculos, taliae et provisionis antedict. omnibus
temporibus futuris, tenend. gaudiend. et possidend. similiter adeoque libere
sicuti aliqui alii comites de Eglington, ejusdem perprius possiderunt et
gauderunt, etc. This earl afterward acquired from Margaret, only child of
Robert, master of Eglington, the lands and barony of Eastwood, to which she had
succeeded as heir to her father; whereupon he got a charter, Ibidem.
under the great seal, viz. Jacobus, etc. dedisse, etc. praedilecto nostro
consanguineo Alexandro Montgomery comiti de Eglington, domino Montgomery,
haeredibusque suis masculis et taliae, in infeofamento suo comitatus de
Eglington specisicatis, cognomen et insignia de Montgomery gerentibus, totas et
integras terras viginti librat. terrarum antiqui extentus de Eistwode, etc.
quae quidem terra perprius haereditarie pertinuerunt ad dominam Margaretam
Montgomery, ^iliam unicam et haeredem quondam Roberti, magistri de Eglington,
etc. dated the 15th November 1615*

He also got a charter of confirmation, Alexandro, comiti de Eglington,
terrarum baroniae de Kilwinning, etc. which were formerly resigned to Hugh the
fifth earl, as before noticed, dated the same year 1615.

This earl was a man of great valor, undaunted courage and intrepidity, and
was nicknamed Grey-steel.

In the beginning of the unhappy civil war in king Charles I.'s time, he was
engaged on the parliament's side in 1638, and had the command of a regiment
that was sent to Ireland, Guthrie's memoirs.
to suppress the rebellion of the native Irish, in 1642.

But as he was truly loyal in his heart, and had a just abhorrence of the
murder of his majesty, Kingston's history of the fam. of Winton.
he joined the loyalists, and was made captain of king Charles II.'s guard of
horse, anno 1650.

The year thereafter, when he was raising forces in the west country, for his
majesty's service, he was surprised near Dunbarton by a party of English horse,
taken prisoner, and sent to Hull, from thence to Berwick, where he continued
confined till the year 1660; during all which time his estate was sequestrate,
and he suffered many other hardships; all which he bore with a constancy of
mind becoming a great man, till the restoration, when king Charles II. who was
perfectly sensible of his great sufferings, reponed him immediately to all his
estates and honors, anno 1660.

He married, 1st, lady Anne Livingston, daughter of Alexander first earl of
Linlithgow, by whom he had five sons and two daughters.

1. Hugh, his heir.

2. Sir Henry Montgomery of Giffen, who died without issue.

3. Colonel Alexander Montgomery, who died in Ireland.

4. Colonel James Montgomery of Coalsfield.

5. General Robert Montgomery, a man of singular courage and resolution, who
was first engaged on the parliament's side; but having the utmost detestation
to king-killing principles, he became a great loyalist, and gave many eminent
proofs of his valor and conduct in the king's service, particularly at the
battle of Dunbar, on the 3d of April 1650, where he performed the part of a
brave and gallant commander; also at the fatal battle of Worcester, in 1651,
where he was major general of the royal army, and behaving like a hero,
received many wounds, was taken prisoner, and confined in Edinburgh castle, but
made his escape in 1659, got beyond seas to king Charles II. was made one of
the gentlemen of his bedchamber, Chart. in pub. archiv.
and returned with him at the restoration. He married Margaret, daughter of
James viscount of Kilsyth, by whom he had James Montgomery, Esquire; his son and
heir.

The earl's first daughter, lady Margaret, was married, 1st, to John earl of
Tweeddale; and, 2dly, to William earl of Glencairn.

His second daughter, lady Anne, died unmarried.

He married, 2dly, Margaret, daughter of Walter lord Buck^leugh, but by her he
had no issue.

He died in the 73d year of his age, anno 1661, and was succeeded by his eldest
son,

XIX. HUGH, seventh earl of Eglington, who was a man of untainted loyalty,
Bishop of Dunkeld's memoirs.
and continued steady in the interest of king Charles I. from the very
beginning of his troubles to the end.

He raised a troop of horse upon his own charges, when only lord Montgomery,
and marched into England with them, to his majesty's assistance, and fought
valiantly on their head at Longmarston-muir. He was personally engaged in
several other battles and skirmishes in his majesty's service, for which the
lord Montgomery was particularly excepted out of Cromwell's act of indemnity,
Original act of indemnity.
anno 1654: However, he lived to see the restoration happily accomplished, and
had a large share of king Charles II.'s favor, on account of his great loyalty.

He married, 1st, lady Anne, daughter of James marquis of Hamilton, by whom he
had only one daughter,

Lady Anne, married to James earl of Finlater.

He married, 2dly, lady Mary Lesly, daughter of John earl of Rothes, by whom he
had two sons and five daughters.

1. Alexander, his heir.

2. Francis Montgomery of Giffen, who was one of the lords of the privy
council, and one of the commissioners of the treasury, in the reigns of king
William and queen Anne. He married, 1st, lady Margaret Lesly, daughter and sole
heiress of Alexander earl of Leven, by whom he had no issue. He married, 2dly,
Crawfurd's peerage.
Elizabeth, daughter of sir Robert Sinclair of Longformacus, by whom he had two
sons and one daughter. 1. John Montgomery, Esquire; member of parliament for the
county of Air. 2. Colonel Alexander Montgomery, who died of the wounds he
received at the battle of Almanza, anno 1711. His daughter, Elizabeth, was
married to Patrick Ogilvie of Lonmay.

The earl's 1st daughter, lady Mary, was married to George earl of Winton.

2. Lady Margaret, married to James earl of Lowdon.

3. Lady Christian, married to John lord Balmerinoch.

4. Lady Eleanora, married to sir David Dunbar of Baldoon, baronet.

5. Lady Anne, married to sir Andrew Ramsay of Abbotshall, baronet.

He died anno 1669, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XX. ALEXANDER, eighth earl of Eglington, who came early into the revolution,
and was named one of the lords of the privy council to king William, on the 1st
of May 1689.

He married lady Elizabeth, daughter of William earl of Dumfries, Ibidem.
by whom he had three sons and one daughter.

1. Alexander his heir.

2. Major Hugh Montgomery.

3. Major John Montgomery.

His daughter, lady Mary, was married to sir James Agnew of Lochnaw, Bart.

And dying in 1701, was succeeded by his eldest son,

XXI. ALEXANDER, ninth earl of Eglington, a man of good parts and solid
judgment.

In the year 1700, while his father was alive, he obtained a patent to sit and
vote in the Scotch parliament, as lord high treasurer of Scotland. He was one
of the privy council to king William, and one of the commissioners of the
treasury.

He was elected one of the sixteen peers for Scotland to the British parliament
in 1710; also to the parliament in 1713.

He was one of queen Anne's privy council, and one of the commissioners of the
chamberlain court, etc.

He married, 1st, Margaret, daughter of William lord Cochran, son and heir of
William earl of Dundonald, by whom he had two sons, who died young, and four
daughters.

1. Lady Catharine, married to James earl of Galloway.

2. Lady Eupheme, married to George Lockhart of Carnwath, Esquire;.

3. Lady Grace, married to Robert earl of Carnwath.

4. Lady Jean, married to sir Alexander Maxwell of Monreith. They all had issue.

The earl married, 2dly, lady Anne Gordon, daughter of George earl of Aberdeen,
by whom he had only one daughter,

Lady Mary, married to sir David Cunninghame of Milncraig, and has issue.

He married, 3dly, Susanna, daughter of sir Archibald Kennedy of Culzean, Bart.
by whom he had three sons, and seven daughters.

1. James, lord Montgomery, who died unmarried.

2. Alexander, now earl of Eglington.

3. Archibald Montgomery, Esquire; Colonel of a highland regiment of foot, now in
America, and lately appointed governor of Dunbarton castle.

1st daughter, lady Elizabeth, married to sir John Cunninghame of Caprington,
Bart. and has issue.

2. Lady Helen, married to the honorable Francis Stewart, Esquire; son of the earl
of Murray, and had issue.

3. Lady Susan, married to John Renton of Lamerton, Esquire; and had issue.

4. Lady Margaret, married to sir Alexander MacDonald of MacDonald, Bart. and
had issue.

5. Lady Frances.

6. Lady Christian, married to James Murray of Abercairny, Esquire; and had issue.

7. Lady Grace, married to -- Boyne, Esquire;.

The earl died anno 1729, and was succeeded by his son,

XXII. ALEXANDER, tenth earl of Eglington, one of the lords of the bed chamber
to his majesty, and one of the sixteen Scotch peers elected to sit in the
British parliament in May 1761.

ARMS.
Quarterly; 1st and 4th, azure, three flowers de lis, or; 2d and 3d, gules,
three annulets, or, stoned azure; all within a border, or, flowered and
counterflowered, gules.

SUPPORTERS; two dragons vert, vomiting fire.

CREST; a maid, holding in her dexter hand a man's head, and in the sinister an
anchor.

MOTTO; Guard bien.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Eglington, in the county of Air; Ardrossan, in the same county, etc. etc.

BRUCE Earl of ELGIN.
THE origin, grandeur, and antiquity of the great and illustrious name of BRUCE
being fully set ^^rth under the title of Bruce lord of Annandale and earl of
Carrick, to that we shall refer our readers. All the families of that firname
now in Scotland are descended of the Bruces of Clackmannan, (of which this is
the chief and principal branch.) Their immediate ancestor, according to some
historians, was,

JOHN de BRUCE, third son of Robert fifth lord of Annandale, competitor for the
crown, grandfather of the immortal king Robert, and great grandfather of sir
Robert of Clackmannan, who flourished in the reign of king David Bruce. From
him, therefore, we deduce the descent of this noble family, by authentic
documents.

I. Sir ROBERT BRUCE of Clackmannan, Chart. in archiv. famili^e de Clackmannan.
got a charter from king David II. dilecto et sideli consanguineo nostro,
Roberto Bruis, "of the castle and manor of Clackmannan, Gyrmanston, Garclew,
Wester Kennault, Pit^oluden," with a great many other lands; all lying within
the sheriffdom of ^lackmannan, dated 9th December 1359 before these witness,
William bishop of St. Andrews, Patrick bishop of Brechin, chancellor, Robert
lord high steward of Scotland, earl of Strathe^^, the king's nephew, William
earl of Douglas, Willi^m Keith, great marishal of Scotland, Archibald de
Douglas, Walter de Halyburton, and John Harper, knights etc.

He got also a charter under the great seal from the same prince, of the lands
of Gyrmansto^n, Kennet, Chart. in archivis regis David.
and several others in the shire of Clackmannan, contained in the preceding
charter, to him, and the lawful heir-male of his body, dated 20th October 1365.

And another charter, under the great seal, of the lands of Rait in Perthshire,
to the same sir Robert, and the lawful heirs-male of his body, Ibidem.
dated 17th January 1369; in both which charters he is designed the king's
beloved cousin, etc. And certain it is* there was no family of the name of
Bruce then in Scotland, so nearly related to the royal family by blood as that
of Clackmannan.

This family of old carried the arms of the Bruces, lord of Annandale, ^iz.
or, a chief and saltire, gules, with a star or mullet on the chief, Nitbet,
vol. I. p. 144.
to denote their descent from a younger son of that family; but afterward they
laid aside the mullet, and have continued to carry the arms of the Bruces lords
of Annandale simply, as being the head or chief of the Bruces now subsisting in
Scotland, who undoubtedly are all sprung from that illust^ous house.

This sir Robert married dame Isabel Stewart, daughter of sir Robert Stewart,
Stewart's hist. of the royal family, p. 188.
ancestor of the family of Rosythe, by whom he had issue, five sons and one
daughter.

1. Sir Robert, his heir.

2. Edward, ancestor of the Bruces of Airth, of whom the Bruces of (...)
Kinloch, Bunzion, etc. are descended.

3. Alexander, ancestor of the Bruces of Garbot, etc.

4. --, ancestor of the Bruces of Munas, etc.

5. James, who was bred to the church, of which he became a great ornament for
piety and learning. Fordun, and Keith's catalogue of bishops, etc.
He was bishop of Dunkeld, anno 1441, chancellor of Scotland, anno 1444, and
archbishop of Glasgow, anno 1447, in which last year he died.

His daughter Helen, married David Ross of Balnagowan, representative of the
ancient earls of Ross.

He died before the year 1393, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. Sir ROBERT BRUCE of Clackmannan, who, upon his own resignation, got a
charter from king Robert III. of the lands of Rait in Perth-shire, Chart. in
archiv. familiae de Clackmannan.
to himself in liferent, and to David his eldest lawful son, and the heirs-male
of his body in fee; which failing, to his own nearest heirs whatsomever; dated
at Linlithgow, 12th August 1393.

And another charter of the same prince, of the lands of Clackmannan, etc. to
himself in liferent, Ibidem.
and to the said David his lawful son, and the heirs-male of his body, in fee;
which failing, to his son Thomas, and his heirs-male; which failing, to return
to the king, etc. dated 24th October 1394; in both which charters, this sir
Robert is designed the king's beloved cousin, and his son David is so designed
in the last.

He married a daughter of sir John Scrymgeour of Dudhope, M. S. history of the
family, penes commit. de Elgin; and writs of Clackmannan.
ancestor of the earl of Dundee, by whom he had one son,

David, his heir.

His son Thomas Bruce, mentioned in the above charter, M. S. hist. of the fam.
and Nisbet, vol. I. p. 146.
obtained from his father the lands of Wester-Kenneth, which is confirmed by a
charter from king Robert III. anno 1399.

Sir Robert of Clackmannan died anno 1405, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. Sir DAVID BRUCE of Clackmannan, who made a renunciation of the tithes of
the mills of Clackmannan, Chartul. of Cambuskenneth, penes MacFarlane, p. 86.
to the canons regular of Cambuskenneth, dated 6th October 1406, and is then
designed David de Bruce, dominus de Clackmannan.

He married Jean, M. S. hist of the family, Crawfurd, etc.
daughter of sir John Stewart of Innermeath and Lorn, by whom he had issue two
sons.

1. John, his heir.

2. Patrick Bruce, who got a charter, under the great seal, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
of the lands of Hill, dated anno 1449.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. JOHN BRUCE of Clackmannan, of whom there are many documents, Decree in
archiv. fam. deClackmannan, et chartui of Cambuskenneth, p. 129.
viz. a decree of inquest, of certain lands that were in dispute, betwixt John
Bruce, dominus de Clackmannan, and Lucas de S^^iviline, ancester to the family
of Keir, etc. dated 17th April 1425.

There is also an instrument taken by John Bruce of Clackmannan, upon a charge
given by James Kennedy bishop of St. Andrews, Ibidem.
to the inhabitants of Alloa, etc. to contribute toward the reparation of the
kirk of Clackmannan, under pain of excommunication, dated 8th September, 1458.

He made a resignation of his estates of Clackmannan and Rait, in favors of
David Bruis his son and heir, In the archives of the family of Clackmannan.
reserving his own liferent, and a reasonable teirce to Elizabeth Stewart his
wife, during her lifetime, dated at Edinburgh, 26th March 1473, in which year
he died. He married Elizabeth, daughter of David Stewart of Rosyth, by whom he
had issue two sons.

1. David.

2. Robert, ancestor of the Bruces of Cultmalindie in Perth-shire.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. Sir DAVID BRUCE of Clackmannan, who got a charter from king James III. upon
his father's resignation, of the lands of Clackmannan, Rait, etc. wherein he is
designed filius et h^^res quondam Johannis Bruis de Clackmannan, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
dated anno 1473.

He had the honor of knighthood confered on him by king James IV. M. S. hist.
of the family, p. 38.
with whom he was in great favor.

He married first Janet, daughter of sir William Stirling of Keir, by whom he
had one son,

Robert his apparent heir, to whom he gave the lands of Rait in Perthshire; but
he died before his father, leaving issue, by Elizabeth Lindsay his wife, a son,
David Bruce, who resigned all right he had to the estate of Clackmannan, In
archivis familiae de Clackmannan (...) in publicis archivis.
in favors of his uncle David, by his renunciation, dated 1st February 1506.
His male line is now extinct.

Sir David married, 2dly, Marian, daughter of sir Robert Herries of Terreagles,
by whom he had a son,

David, -- and a daughter,

Christian, married to sir James Schaw of Sauchie.

He made a resignation of his estate of Clackmannan, in favors of his son
David, (...) in pub. (...).
reserving a liferent to himself and dame Marian Herries his spouse, dated anno
1497.

He died before 1506, and was succeeded in his estate of Clackmannan by his son,

VI. Sir DAVID BRUCE of Clackmannan, who got a charter under the great seal,
proceeding upon his father's resignation, and his nephew's renunciation, of the
lands and barony of Clackmannan, in which he is designed David Bruis de
Clackmannan, (...)
miles, filius quondam domini David Bruis de Clackmannan, militis, etc. dated
3d February 1506.

He was a man of fine parts, (...)
and possessed of an immense estate, which appears by his charter under the
great seal, inter 1530 et 1540.

He married Jane, daughter of sir Patrick Blackadder of Tulliallan, by whom he
had three sons and four daughters.

1. John, who carried on the line of the family of Clackmannan. Vide title
Clackmannan, in the second volume of this work.

2. Sir Edward Bruce, progenitor of the earls of Elgin, Kincardin, and
Aylesbury.

3. Robert Bruce, designed of Lynmiln.

1st daughter, Alison, married to sir James Colville of Easter-Wemyss.

2. Elizabeth, married to Alexander Dundass of Fingask.

3. Marian, married, first, to Robert Bruce of Airth; and secondly, to Maius
Sinclair of Carberry.

5. Agnes, married to sir James Cunningham of Polmais.

VII. Sir EDWARD BRUCE, second son of sir David Bruce of Clackmannan, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
got a charter under the great seal, of the lands of Bargady, Shiresmyln, etc.
anno 1541.

He afterward acquired the estate of Blairhall, which became the place of his
residence, and title of his family.

He married Alison, daughter of William Reid of Aikenhead, Esquire in vicecomitatu
de Clackmannan, and sister of Robert Reid bishop of Orkney. By this marriage he
had issue three sons.

1. Robert, who succeeded his father in the estate of Blairhall, whose male
line is now extinct.

2. Edward, lord Kinloss, predecessor of the earls of Elgin and Aylesbury.

3. Sir George Bruce of Carnock, of whom the present earl of Elgin is lineally
descended, as will be shown under the title of Elgin and Kincardin.

As Charles, now earl of Elgin, is the undoubted male representative of all
these three brothers, and as the male line of the eldest is extinct sometime
ago, we shall here deduce the line of the other two brothers at large,
beginning with the second son.

VIII. EDWARD, afterward lord Kinloss, second son of sir Edward Bruce of
Blairhall, a man of great abilities, learning and integrity, was bred to the
law, in which he acquired vast knowledge, and was highly esteemed by king James
VI. who sent him ambassador to queen Elizabeth of England, together with the
earl of Mar, to congratulate her majesty upon her success, in repressing that
audacious attempt of the earl of Essex, Spotiswood's hist. p. 463.
anno 1601. He then settled such a correspondence with sir Robert Cecil,
principal secretary of state, that he was eminently instrumental in the
peaceable accession of king James to the crown of England.

Soon after his return to Scotland, king James made him a grant of the
dissolved abbey of Kinloss in Murray, Chart. in pub. archiv.
and erected it into a temporal lordship, to him and his heirs for ever, by
patent dated at Holyroodhouse, 22d February 1603.

He accompanied his majesty into England, and in recompense of his many good
and faithful services, Colin's peerage of England, tom. V. p. 469.
was made master of the rolls for life, by letters patent dated 8th July 1604,
and was one of the lords of the privy council for both kingdoms.

He married Magdalen, daughter of Alexander Clerk of Balbirnie, Esquire in vicecom.
de Fyfe, by whom he had two sons and two daughters.

1. Edward, lord Kinloss.

2. Thomas, who succeeded his brother.

1st daughter, Janet, married to Thomas Dalziel of Binns, Chart. penes dom.
Robertum Dalziel de Binns.
in vicecomitatu de Linlithgow, Esquire; and was mother to general Thomas Dalziel
of Binns, of whom sir Robert Dalziel, now of Binns, is the representative.

2. Christian, married to William Cavendish, earl of Devonshire in England,
Peerage of England, vol. V. p. 470.
of whom the present duke of Devonshire is lineally descended.

He died at London in January 1610, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. EDWARD, second lord Bruce of Kinloss, who was one of the lords of the
bedchamber to the king, Dugdale's baronage of England. v. II.
and was made one of the knights of the bath, at the creation of Henry prince
of Wales, anno 1610.

This young lord had a fatal quarrel with sir Edward Sackville, afterward earl
of Dorset, to decide which they both went over to Flanders, Charendon's hist.
of the rebellion.
and sought under the walls of Antwerp, where lord Bruce was killed, anno 1613,
and having no issue, his estate and honors devolved upon his brother,

IX. THOMAS, third lord Bruce of Kinloss, Retour in Chancery.
who was served and retoured heir to his brother, anno 1613.

This lord was in great favor with king Charles I. attended him into Scotland
at the solemnity of his coronation, where his Majesty was graciously pleased
further to dignify him by the title of earl of Elgin, etc. by letters patent
dated at Holyrood-house, Patent in pub. archiv.
21st June 1633, the honors being limited, haeredibus suis masculis in
perpetuum.

He also created him a peer of England, where he had a considerable estate,
Dugdale, tom. II.
by the title of lord Bruce of Whorlton, in the county of York, 1st August 1642.

He married, 1st, Anne, daughter of sir Robert Chichester of Raleigh, Knt. by
whom he had one son,

Robert, his heir.

He married, 2dly, Diana, one of the daughters and co-heiresses of William lord
Burleigh, Ibid. and Peerage of England, vol. V. p. 470.
son and heir of Thomas earl of Exeter, by whom he had no issue.

And dying, anno 1663, was succeeded by his only son,

X. ROBERT, second earl of Elgin, who having given proofs of his loyalty to
king Charles I. in his troubles, and been instrumental in the happy restoration
of his son king Charles II. Ibidem.
was with Thomas Wentworth earl of Cleveland, constituted jointly or separately
lords lieutenants of the county of Bedford, 26th July 1660.

On the 18th March 1665, he was created baron Bruce of Skeleton, in the county
of York, viscount Bruce of Ampthill in com. de Bedford, and earl of Aylesbury,
in com. de Bucks. And on the 29th March 1667, was constituted sole lord
lieutenant of the county of Bedford.

In the same year, he was appointed one of the commissioners for taking in the
accounts of such moneys as had been raised and assigned to his majesty, Ibidem.
during the late war with the Dutch. And he was one of the six peers, who, with
twelve of the house of commons, were commissioned for that enquiry.

On the 18th October, 1678, he was sworn of the privy council to his majesty,
was one of the gentlemen of the royal bedchamber, and in commission for
executing the office of earl marishal of England, as deputy to Henry duke of
Norfolk.

On the accession of king James to the throne, he was one of the lords that
bore part of the regalia at his coronation, Peerage of England, vo^ V. p. 47.
and on the death of the earl of Arlington; he had the white staff delivered to
him by the king, as lord chamberlain of the household, on 28th July, 1685.

He married Diana, daughter of Henry Gray, earl of Stamford, by whom he had
issue, eight sons, and nine daughters.

1. Edward.

2. Robert.

3. Charles.

4. Henry.

5. Bernard.

The above five, all died young.

6. Thomas, his heir.

7. Robert.

8. James.

These last two survived their father.

1st daughter, lady Diana, married first to sir Seymour Shirly of
Stanton-Harold, in comitatu Leicester, Bart. and secondly, to John duke of
Rutland.

2. Lady Anne, married to sir William Rich of Sunning, in com. Berks, Bart.

3. Lady Christian, married, Is It, to John Rolte, eldest son of sir John Rolte
of Stephenstoun, in com. Devon, knight of the bath; 2dly, to sir Robert Gayer
of Stokepoges, in com. Bucks, knight of the bath.

4. Lady Mary, married to sir William Walters of Sarisden, in com. Oxon. Bart.

5. Lady Arabella, died unmarried.

6. Lady Anne-Charlotte, married to Nicholas Bagenal of Newry, in the kingdom
of Ireland.

7. Lady Henrietta, married to Thomas Ogle, Esquire; only son of sir Thomas Ogle,
governor of Chelsea college.

8. Lady Christian.

9. Lady Elizabeth.

These two last died unmarried.

He died in October 1685, and was succeeded by his eldest surviving son,

XI. THOMAS, third earl of Elgin, and second earl of Ailesbury, who, on 30th
October 1676, married lady Elizabeth, only surviving daughter of Henry lord
Beauchamp, son of William marquis of Hereford, Peerage of Engl. vol. I. page 47.
sister, and at length sole heiress to William duke of Somerset, who was
grandson to Catharine countess of Hereford, daughter, and at length sole heir
to Henry Gray duke of Suffolk and Mary, queen dowager of France, his wife,
youngest daughter to king Henry VII. of England.

By this lady he had issue four sons, and two daughters.

1. Robert, who died young.

2. Charles, lord Bruce.

3. Thomas.

4. Henry.

The two last died young.

1st daughter, lady Elizabeth, married to George earl of Cardigan.

2. Lady Mary, born in 1697, (of whom her mother died in childbed) died in the
year School.

This noble earl appears to have been greatly attached to the interest of the
Stuart family, and never took the oaths to the government after the revolution.
In the year School, after his lady's death, he retired to Brussels, where he
married to his second wife, Charlotte, countess of Sannu, of the ancient and
noble house of Argenteau, in the duchy of Brabant, by whom he had an only
daughter, Charlotte-Maria, married to count Horn, one of the princes of the
empire, to whom she had a numerous issue.

The earl died at Brussels in November 1741, in the 86th year of his age, and
was succeeded by his only surviving son,

XII. CHARLES, fourth earl of Elgin, and third of Ailesbury, who was summoned
by a writ to the house of peers, by the title of lord Bruce of Worleton, the
31st December 1711, in the 10th year of queen Anne.

And his late majesty George II. by letters patent, Ibid. p. 475.
dated the 17th of April, the 19th year of his reign, was pleased to create him
lord Bruce of Tottenham, in Wiltshire; to him and his heirs male, with
limitation of that honor to his nephew, the honorable Thomas Bruce-Brudenel,
youngest son of George late earl of Cardigan and the lady Elizabeth Bruce his
wife, sister to the said Charles earl of Ailesbury.

He married, lst, lady Anne Saville, eldest daughter and one of the
co-heiresses of William marquis of Halifax, by whom he had two sons, and two
daughters.

1. George, who died young.

2. Robert, who married Frances, daughter of sir William Blacket of Newcastle
upon Tyne, Bart. but died before his father without issue.

1st daughter, lady Mary, married to Henry Bridges, marquis of Carnarvon, now
duke of Chandos.

2. Lady Elizabeth, married to the honorable Benjamin Bathurst, Esquire; son and
heir apparent to Alan lord Bathurst.

He married, 2dly, lady Juliana Boil, daughter of Charles earl of Burlington,
by whom he had no issue.

He married, 3dly, Caroline, only daughter of John Campbell, Esquire; major general
of his majesty's forces, by whom he had issue only one daughter,

Lady Mary, married to the duke of Richmond.

And dying without male issue in February 1747, in him ended the male line of
Edward lord Bruce of Kinloss, second son of sir Edward Bruce of Blairhall,
whereby the title of Ailesbury became extinct, Ibid. p. 376.
and the honors of lord Bruce of Tottenham in Wiltshire went to the honorable
Thomas Bruce-Brudenel, youngest son of George earl of Cardigan, according to
the entail in the last mentioned patent to Charles earl of Ailesbury, etc.

But the title of earl of Elgin, in virtue of that patent, devolved upon
Charles, now earl of Elgin and Kincardin, his undoubted heir-male.

BRUCE Earl of ELGIN and KINCARDIN.
THE immediate ancestor of this noble family was,

VIII. Sir GEORGE BRUCE of Carnock, third son of sir Edward Bruce of Blairhall,
and younger brother of Edward lord Bruce of Kinloss, beforementioned under the
title Elgin. He was a man of good parts, great sagacity, and perfectly well
acquainted with the trade and manufactures of our country.

He acquired a considerable estate in the mercantile way, which appears by a
charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Georgia Bruce, terrarum baroniae de Carnock cum molendinis, etc. dated anno
1602.

He was member of parliament for the burgh of Culross, Spotiswood's history.
anno 1603, had the honor of knighthood conferred upon him by king James VI.
and was appointed one of the commissioners to treat of an union with England,
anno 1604.

He married Margaret, daughter of Duncan Primrose of Burnbrae, Esquire; ancestor of
the present earl of Roseberry, by whom he had issue three sons, and four
daughters.

1. Sir George.

2. Mr. Robert Bruce of Broomhall, ancestor of the present earl of Elgin, of
whom more hereafter.

3. Alexander Bruce of Alva, whose only daughter Christian married to -- Milne
of Carriden.

1st daughter, Anne, married to sir James Arnot of Fernie, brother to Robert
lord Burleigh.

2. Magdalen, married to sir John Erskine of Balgony, near Culross.

3. Margaret, married to -- Mercer of Aldie, in Perth-shire.

4. Nicholas, married, first, to sir John Morrison of Dairsie; and, 2dly, to
Mr. John Dick of Braid, son and heir of sir William Dick, provost of Edinburgh.

He died anno 1625, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. Sir GEORGE BRUCE of Carnock, who was served heir to his father anno 1626,
Retour in Chancery.
and married Mary, daughter of sir John Preston of Valleyfield, M. S. history
of the family.
Bart, by whom he had two sons, and three daughters.

1. Sir Edward, afterward earl of Kincardin.

2. Alexander, who succeeded his brother.

1st daughter, Margaret, married to sir John Lumisden of Innergelly.

2. Magdalen, married to sir John Arnot of Fernie.

3. Mary, married to David lord Cardross, ancestor of the present earl of
Buchan.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. Sir EDWARD BRUCE of Carnock, who being a man of great integrity, honor and
loyalty, was by king Charles I. raised to the dignity of the peerage, by the
titles of earl of Kincardin, Chart. in pub. archiv.
and lord Bruce of Torry, by letters patent to him and his heirs-male, bearing
date 26th December 1647.

He died unmarried, whereby his estate and honors devolved upon his brother,

X. ALEXANDER, second earl of Kincardin, who was a man of great parts and
singular endowments. Bishop Burnet, in his history of his own times, says,
Burnet's hist. v. I. p. 103.
"He was the worthiest man that belonged to his country, fit for governing any
affairs, a faithful friend, and a merciful enemy, etc. etc."

He was a great loyalist, and steady friend of the royal family, was highly
esteemed by king Charles II. and was both in his council and in the treasury.

He married Veronica Van Arsan, M. S. of the family, p. 58.
daughter to baron Somersdyke in Holland, by whom he had two sons, and three
daughters.

1. Charles, lord Bruce, who died before his father, unmarried.

2. Alexander, lord Bruce.

1st daughter, lady Mary, married to William Cochran of Ochiltree, son and heir
of sir John Cochran of Ochiltree, ancestor of the present earl of Dundonald.

2. Lady Anne, married to sir David Murray of Stanhope, baronet, and had issue.

3. Lady Betty, married to Mr. James Boswel of Auchinleck, advocate, and had
issue.

He died on 9th July 1680, and was succeeded by his son,

XI. ALEXANDER, third earl of Kincardin, who turned blind, and never married.
He offered a resignation of his honors in the king's hands in favors of his
eldest sister, the heir of line, in prejudice of the heir male, to whom the
honors were limited by patent; but the resignation was never received, and so
could have no effect; and he dying without issue, in him ended the male line of
sir George, eldest son of sir George Bruce of Carnock, whereby, after some
short debate with the heir of line in the parliament 1706, the honors devolved
upon the heir male, sir Alexander Bruce of Broomhall, son and heir of Mr.
Robert Bruce of Broomhall, beforementioned, to whom we now return.

IX. Mr. ROBERT BRUCE of Broomhall, second son of sir George Bruce of Carnock
by Margaret Primrose, who being bred a lawier, and eminent in the profession,
was appointed one of the senators of the college of justice. He married Helen,
daughter of sir John Skeen of Curriehill, one of the senators of the college of
justice, and president of the session in the reign of king Charles I. by whom
he had a son,

Sir Alexander Bruce of Broomhall, and two daughters.

1. Helen, married to sir William Weir of Blackwood, in the county of Lanerk,
Bart.

2. Janet, married to sir Thomas Burnet of Crimond, eldest son of sir Robert
Burnet, lord Crimond, one of the senators of the college of justice at the
restoration of king Charles II.

X. Sir ALEXANDER BRUCE of Broomhall, (afterward earl of Kincardin,) son and
heir of Mr. Robert Bruce of Broomhall, second son of sir George Bruce of
Carnock, undoubted heir male of the third earl, succeeded to the honors,
Records of parliament.
in virtue of the patent to heirs male, which were confirmed to him by a decree
of parliament, anno 1706, and he was the fourth earl.

He was a man of great honor, and a true lover of his country; he strenuously
opposed the union of the two kingdoms, and joined in every measure against it;
he adhered to the duke of Athole's protest, wherein it was set forth, that the
articles of the treaty then on foot were contrary to the honor, interest,
fundamental laws, and constitution of Scotland, the birthright of the peers,
the rights and privileges of the barons, etc. etc. etc.

He married Christian, daughter of Robert Bruce of Blairhall, a near relation
of his own, by whom he had three sons, and five daughters.

1. Robert.

2. Alexander.

3. Thomas.

These three sons were successively earls of Kincardin.

1st daughter, lady Janet.

2. Lady Christian.

3. Lady Helen.

4. Lady Mary.

These four daughters all died unmarried.

5. Lady Veronica, married to Duncan Campbell of Kaims, but died without issue.

XI. ROBERT, first son, and fifth earl of Kincardin, succeeded his father, and
dying without issue, was succeeded by his next brother,

XI. ALEXANDER, second son, and sixth earl of Kincardin, who married, and had
issue one daughter,

Lady Jean, married to John Napier, younger of Kilmahew; but dying without male
issue, was succeeded by his brother,

XI. THOMAS, third son, and seventh earl of Kincardin, a man of good parts,
great honor, and a true patriot.

He married Rachel, daughter of Robert Paunsfort, of the county of Hereford,
Esquire; by whom he had two sons, and three daughters.

1. William, lord Bruce.

2. Thomas, who died without issue.

Is It daughter, Lady Sarah.

3. Lady Christian.

3. Lady Rachel, married to James Drummond of Lundin, heir male and
representative of the noble and illustrious family of Perth, and has issue.

He died at Broomhall, anno 1739, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. WILLIAM, eighth earl of Kincardin, a man of great worth and universal
benevolence. He married Janet, daughter and sole heiress of Mr. James Roberton,
advocate, one of the principal clerks of session, son of Archibald Roberton of
Bedlay, Esquire; descended from Roberton of Earnock, an ancient and honorable
family, in vicecom. de Lanerk, by whom he had issue three sons, and two
daughters.

1. Charles, now earl of Elgin and Kincardin.

2. James, who is bred to the church.

3. Thomas, a captain in the army.

1st daughter, lady Rachel.

2. Lady Christian.

This earl being of a delicate and tender constitution, went to a warmer
climate for his health, and dying at Breast, in the province of Brittany, anno
1740, was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. CHARLES, ninth earl of Kincardin, who, upon the death of Charles the
last earl of Elgin and Ailesbury, succeeded to the titles of Elgin, as before
noticed; and, failing issue of the present lord of Clackmannan, he is the
undoubted heir male and chief of all the Bruces in Scotland.

He married Miss White, only daughter and sole heiress of Mr. Thomas White, an
eminent merchant and banker at London, by whom he has issue two daughters.

1. Lady Martha.

2. Lady Janet.

ARMS
Of Elgin and Kincardin. Quarterly, 1st and 4th, or, a saltyre and chief gules,
on a canton argent, a lion rampant azure, armed and langued gules: 2d and 3d,
quarterly, 1st and 4th, argent, a lion rampant azure; 2d and 3d or, a saltyre
and chief gules.

CREST; a lion passant gules.

SUPPORTERS; two savages proper, wreathed about the head and loins with laurels
vert.

MOTTO; Fuimus.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Broomhall, near Dunfermline, and Dairsie, near Coupar, both in the county
of Fife.

MURRAY Lord ELIBANK.
THIS noble family is sprung from the house of Blackbarony, the head or chief
of an ancient and honorable tribe of the name of Murray, which flourished In
the south of Scotland for many centuries, and from which several considerable
families of that surname are descended.

JOHN de MORAVIA, who was one of the Scotch barons that swore fealty to king
Edward I. Prynne, vol. III. Remarks upon Ragman's ^o^l, page 42.
anno 1296, is said to have been progenitor of the house of Blackbarony; but
not having seen their old writs, we cannot connect him with that family; and
must therefore begin to deduce their descent where we can carry on the line by
authentic documents.

I. JOHN MURRAY of Blackbarony, was a man of distinguished rank and figure in
the reigns of king Robert II. Chart. in pub. archiv.
and III. and is particularly mentioned in a charter hereafter narrated.

He died before 1409, and was succeeded by his son,

II. ALEXANDER MURRAY of Blackbarony; which appears by a charter of Robert duke
of Albany, governor of Scotland, containing an entail of the lands and barony
of Traquare, Shillinglaw, etc. in the shire of Pee^les, "To and in favors of
William Watson, Ibidem.
son of William Watson of Crans^on, and Janet, daughter of John of Caverhill,
his spouse, and the heirs of their bodies; which failing, to Alexander Murray,
son and heir of the deceast John Murray of Blackbarony, and the heirs male of
his body; which failing, etc. etc. etc." The charter is dated 14th March 1409,
before these witnesses, William bishop of Glasgow, Gilbert bishop of Aberdeen,
chancellor, Walter bishop of Breel^in, Archibald earl of Douglas, John Stewart
earl of Bu^han, (the governor's son,) William lord Graham, John Stewart lord of
Lorn, etc. etc.

He left issue a son and successor,

III. MUNGO MURRAY of Blackbarony, Chart. in archiv. fam. de Blackbarony.
who married --, by whom he had a son,

IV. ANDREW MURRAY of Blackbarony, who succeeded him, and by --, Ibidem.
daughter of --, left issue two sons.

1. Mr. John, his heir.

2. Andrew Murray, Esquire;.

And dying about the year 1490, was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. Mr. JOHN MURRAY of Blackbarony, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who got a charter from king James IV. of the lands of Ballincrie^, etc. dated
anno 1511.

He got also from king James V. a charter of the lands of Kingslands, Ibidem.
to John Murray of Blackbarony, etc. dated in 1514.

He married --, daughter of --, by whom he had a son and heir,

VI. Sir ANDREW MURRAY of Blackbarony, who got a charter, Ibidem.
under the great seal, from king James V. of the lands of Ballincrief, etc.
dated in 1527. Ibidem.
He got also a charter of the lands of Poverhow, Fortoun and Fentoun, etc.
dated 1538.

He likeways got charters from queen Mary of the barony of Ballincrief and
several other lands, Ibidem.
all belonging to the estate of Blackbarony.

This sir Andrew is witness in a charter of the lands of Carberry to Hugh Rigg,
Chartul. of Dunfermline, penes Macfarlane, p. 51
etc. dated in 1543.

He married Grizel, daughter of sir John Bethune of Creich, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
in vicecomitatu de Fife, by whom he had three sons and three daughters.

1. Sir John Murray, his successor in the lands of Blackbarony, etc. Vide title
Blackbarony in vol. II. of this work.

2. Sir William Murray of Newton, of whom sir James Murray, general-receiver of
the customs of Scotland, is now the representative.

3. Sir Gideon, first of the family of Elibank.

His three daughters were all honorably married.

VII. Sir GIDEON MURRAY, third son of sir Andrew of Blackbarony, was first
designed by the title of Glenpole, Ibidem.
and got a charter under the great seal, from king James VI. of the lands of
Elibank, alias Eliburn, with a salmon fishing upon Tweed, etc. dated anno 1594.

He got a charter of the lands of Glenpole, Ploro, Ibidem.
Hamlot, Priesthopes, etc. dated anno 1601.

He also got a charter of the lands of Whitebank, domino Gideoni Murray de
Elibank, Ibidem.
militi, dated anno 1607.

He, being a man of parts and learning, was much taken notice of at court, and
was in great favor with king James VI. who constituted him treasurer depute,
anno 1611; and, according to Spotiswood, he was treasurer in effect, for he had
the entire direction of the revenue of the kingdom, which he managed with great
economy, honor, and reputation.

He repaired, and enlarged several of the royal palaces, particularly
Holyroodhouse, Falkland, Linlithgow, Dunfermline, the castles of Edinburgh,
Dunbarton, etc. yet when the king came to Scotland, Spotiswood's hist.
in 1617, there was money enough in the treasury to defray the whole expenses
of the court with great splendour and magnificence.

He married Margaret Pentland, Chart. penes dom. Elibank.
by whom he had two sons and one daughter.

1. Sir Patrick.

2. Walter Murray of Livingston.

His daughter, --, married to sir William Scot of Harden.

He died in 1621, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. Sir PATRICK MURRAY of Elibank, who, being possessed of many eminent
qualities, was also highly esteemed by the king, even when a young man.

In his father's lifetime he was appointed governor of the castle of
Carlaverock, by a commission from king James VI. Chart. in pub. archiv.
Patricio Murray, apparenti de Elibank, castri de Carlaverock custodiam, et
summam quinquaginta librarum sterlingorum pro omnibus suae vitae diebus, etc.
dated 27th June 1611.

He also got a charter, under the great seal, of the lands of Cal^ield, Ibidem.
etc. dated anno 1613.

He afterward became proprietor of a great many other lands, Ibidem.
too numerous to be here narrated, all contained in charters, under the great
seal, in the public records, inter 1620 et 1630, which sufficiently show the
vast estate he was possessed of.

After king Charles I.'s accession to the crown, his great accomplishments made
him also in high favor with that prince, who created him a knight of Nova
Scotia, Ibidem.
anno 1628.

He was a great loyalist, and adhered firmly to the interest of the royal
family during all the time of the civil war; on which account he had some
grievous and heavy fines imposed upon him, and suffered many other hardships
during the usurpation; all which he endured with great fidelity and constancy.

He lent the king a sum of money when at Oxford, for which his majesty's bond
still remains in the family.

The king, in consideration of his faithful services, was pleased to raise him
to the dignity of the peerage, Diploma in pub. archiv. haered. mas^.
by the title of lord Elibank, anno 1643, by patent, to his heirs-male.

And it was not long before he did honor to the rank he was raised to, being
one of the six peers that opposed the delivering up of the king to the English
parliament, Guthrie's memoirs.
anno 1647.

He married, 1st, Elizabeth, daughter of sir James Dundas of Arniston, by whom
he had two sons and one daughter.

1. Patrick, his heir.

2. -- Murray of Spot.

His daughter, Elizabeth, was married to sir Archibald Stirling of Carden.

He married, 2dly, Helen, daughter of sir James Lindsay, gentleman of the
bedchamber to the king, by whom he had two sons and two daughters.

1. Walter, who settled in Ireland after the civil war, and was ancestor of the
Murrays of Ravigny, and others.

2. George Murray, lieutenant colonel to the troop of life guards.

1st daughter, -- married to -- Auchmontie of Gosford.

2. -- married to sir William Murray of Newton.

He died in 1650, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. PATRICK, Regist. of the committee of processes in the laigh parliam.
house, pages 337 and 338, and min: of parliam.
second lord Elibank, who was likeways a zealous loyalist, and, when master of
Elibank, joined the marquis of Montrose, and for his steady adherence to the
royal cause, was fined by the committee of parliament, in the sum of 20,000
merks, anno 1646.

He married lady Elizabeth Stewart, daughter of John earl of Traquair, lord
high treasurer of Scotland, by lady Catharine Carnegy, daughter of David earl
of Southesk, by whom he had two sons and one daughter.

1. Patrick.

2. John Murray, a captain in the army, killed at the battle of Antrim in
Ireland.

His daughter, Elizabeth, married to John Auchmoutie of Gosford.

And dying in 1658, was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. PATRICK, third lord Elibank, who was one of the lords of the privy council
to king James VII. but was laid aside for opposing the repeal of the penal
laws, anno 1687.

He married Anne, daughter of doctor Alexander Burnet, Chart. in pub. archiv.
et penes dom. Elibank.
archbishop of St. Andrews, by whom he had a son,

Alexander, -- and three daughters,

1. Mary, married to John earl of Cromarty.

2. Helen, married to sir John M'Kenzie of Coul.

3. Elizabeth, died unmarried.

XI. ALEXANDER, fourth lord Elibank, married Elizabeth, daughter of Mr. George
Stirling, (brother's son of the lord of Herbertshire) an eminent surgeon in
Edinburgh, and member of parliament for that city when he died.

By her he had five sons and six daughters.

1. Patrick, now lord Elibank.

2. George Murray, Esquire; a rear admiral in the royal British navy, who married
lady Isabel M'Kenzie, daughter of George earl of Cromarty, by whom he has
issue a daughter.

3. Gideon, a clergyman of the church of England.

4. Alexander, who had the misfortune to incur the displeasure of the house of
commons, Records of the house of commons.
by refusing to kneel down at the bar, to receive sentence for some alleged
irregularities at the Westminster election.

5. James, a brigadier general of his majesty's forces, and governor of Quebec
in America.

1st daughter, Barbara, married to sir James Johnston of Westerhall, baronet.

2. Elizabeth, who died unmarried.

3. Anne, married to James Ferguson of Pitfour, Esquire; an eminent councillor at
law, highly distinguished for his probity, integrity, and knowledge in his
profession.

4. Janet, married to major Robert Murray.

5. Mary.

6. Helen, married to sir John Stewart of Gairntully, baronet.

He died in 1735, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. PATRICK, fifth lord Elibank, who, in his youth, betook himself to a
military life, was a lieutenant colonel in the army, and in the Carthagena
expedition, where lord Cathcart went out commander in chief.

He married Maria Margaretta, lady North and Gray, daughter of Mr. Elimut, high
treasurer of the United Provinces.

ARMS.
Azure, three stars, within a double tressure counterflowered argent, and in
the center a martlet or.

SUPPORTERS; two horses argent, bridled gules.

CREST; a lion rampant gules, holding a battle-ax proper.

MOTTO; Virtute fideque.

CHIEF SEATS.
Ballincrief in East Lothian, and Newark in the county of Selkirk.

ELPHINSTONE Lord ELPHINSTONE.
THE traditional account of the origin of this ancient family, is, that one
Peter d'Aelphingstone, a noble Hungarian, came to Scotland with queen Margaret,
got some lands in Mid Lothian from king Malcolm Canmore, which he called after
his own name, and that from him all the Elphinstones in Scotland are descended.

Others, with more probability, think that the surname is local; that these
lands had the name of Elphinstone long before sirnames were much used in
Scotland; and that the proprietors of that barony assumed their surname from
their lands, as was very customary in those early times.

The immediate ancestor of this noble family, and the first of them we find
upon record is,

1. JOHN de ELPHINSTONE, who was possessor of the lands and barony of
Elphinstone, and flourished in the reigns of king Alexander II. and III.

He is witness in a charter Gilberti de Haya, Book of original charters penes
Mac-Farlane, vol. I.
of a donation he made to the religious at Coupar, anno 1250.

He is witness also to a grant of Roger de Quincy, Chartul. of Drybrugh.
earl of Wincester, of a toft of land in Glaswood, to the monks of Drybrugh,
anno 1252.

He died before the year 1263, and was father of

II. ALEXANDER de ELPHINSTONE, who is witness to a donation of sir William
Livingston of Gorgyn, Writs of the monastery of Holyrood house, No. 14.
to the abbacy of Holyroodhouse, anno 1263.

He had issue several sons,

1. Sir John his heir.

2. Alan de Elphinstone, who swore fealty to king Edward I. Prynne's
collections, vol. III. p. 659.
when he overrun Scotland, anno 1296.

3. Duncan de Elphinstone, who also swore fealty to the same king Edward, Ibid.
p. 658.
anno 1296.

He died about the year 1290, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. Sir JOHN de ELPHINSTONE, who is the first we find designed dominus
ejusdem. Ibid. p. 651. and 657.
He was proprietor of several other baronies besides that of Elphinstone, for
he is found swearing fealty to king Edward I. for lands lying in different
counties, anno 1296.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir Christopher Seton of that ilk, by lady
Christian Bruce, Nisbet, vol. I. p. 154.
sister of the immortal king Robert, by whom he had a son,

Alexander his heir.

He is witness to a donation of sir William Livingston of Drumry, Chartulary of
Newbottle, p. 68.
to the monastery of Newbottle, 3d March 1338.

He died soon thereafter, and was succeeded by his son

IV. ALEXANDER ELPHINSTONE, dominus ejusdem, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who, besides his lands in Mid-Lothian, etc. appears to have had a considerable
estate in Stirling-shire, viz. the lands of Kirkumbar, etc.

He married Agnes Airth, with whom he got the lands of Airth-Beg, Remarks on
Ragman's roll, p. 22.
and several others in Stirling-shire, and by her he had a son,

V. ALEXANDER ELPHINSTONE, who exchanged some of his lands in Stirling-shire,
with Alexander More, which is confirmed by a charter under the great seal, in
these words, David, D. G. etc. Alexander de Elphinstone, dominus ejusdem.
Nover^tis me dedisse, etc. Alexandro More, filio quondam domini Ad^ More,
militis, in excambio pro quadam petia terrae in Erthbeg, Chart. in archivis
regis David.
etc. quam quidem terram cum pertinen. dominus Godfridus de Roos, quondam
dominus ejusdem, dedit in feodo et haereditate Alexandro de Elphinstone,
quondam patri meo, etc. The confirmation is dated, 5th June, 1362.

By the said Agnes, he had issue four sons.

1. Sir William his heir.

2. Alexander.

3. Norman.

4. James.

He died before the year 1399, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. Sir WILLIAM ELPHINSTONE, dominus ejusdem, who got a chater from sir
William Lindsay of Byres, Chart. penes dom. Elphinstone, and Remarks on
Ragman's roll.
as superior of several of his lands in Stirlingshire, to him, and the
heirs-male of his body; which failing, to his brother Alexander; then to his
brother Norman; then to James, etc. dated anno 1399.

He had issue three sons.

1. Sir Alexander his heir.

2. Henry of Pittendreich, who carried on the male-line of this family, of whom
afterward.

3. Mr. William, father of that ornament of our country, Lives of the officers
of state.
William Elphinstone bishop of Aberdeen, and chancellor of Scotland in the
reign of king James IV.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. Sir ALEXANDER ELPHINSTONE, dominus ejusdem, Fordun, vol. II. page 501.
Abercrombie vol. II. p. 299.
a man of singular fortitude and intrepidity, who remarkably distinguished
himself at the battle of Piperdain, where the Scots obtained a glorious victory
over the English, and where sir Alexander lost his life, anno 1437, leaving
issue only one daughter,

Agnes, who claimed the whole estate, as heir of line to her father. Her uncle
Henry claimed the same, Crawfurd, Nisbet, etc*
as heir-male, whereupon a heavy lawsuit ensued, which depended long, but was
at last determined by arbitration; the lands of Elphinstone in Mid-Lothian, to
Agnes, and those in Stirling-shire, etc. to Henry; the decree arbitral being
dated, anno 1471.

This Agnes, married to sir Gilbert Johnston, only son of the second marriage
of sir Adam Johnston of that ilk, who got with her the lands and barony of
Elpinstone, by which title he and his successors were afterward designed; but
his male line is now extinct.

VII. HENRY ELPHINSTONE of Pittendreich, second son of sir William, and brother
german and heir-male of sir Alexander, by the said arbitration got the lands of
Pittendreich, Airthbeg, Strickshaw, etc. in the county of Stirling, which were
afterward called the barony of Elphinstone, Crawfurd, Nisbet, and remarks on
Ragman's roll, p. 22.
and confirmed by a charter to himself in liferent, and John his grandson, and
apparent heir, son of the deceast James Elphinstone, his own eldest son, and
the heirs male of his body; which failing, to Andrew Elphinstone of Selmys, his
second son, etc. dated anno 1477.

He had issue two sons,

1. James, his apparent heir.

2. Andrew Elphinstone, Chart. in pub: archiv. ad ann. 1507.
designed of Selmys, in a charter under the great seal, and in the above
confirmation.

He died before the year 1496.

VIII. JAMES, Remarks on Ragman's roll, etc.
first son and apparent heir of Henry Elphinstone of Pittendreich, left issue
two sons,

1. John, his grandfather's heir.

2. Alexander Elphinstone, Esquire;

He died before his father, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. Sir JOHN ELPHINSTONE, of that ilk, who succeeded also to his grandfather,
and got a charter under the great seal, of the lands of Pittendreich, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
Airthbeg, etc. to him, and the heirs-male of his body; which failing, to his
brother Alexander Elphinstone; then to Andrew of Selmys; then to John
Elphinstone, etc. etc. dated 1st February, 1496.

He got also charters under the great seal, Johanni Elphinstone de eodem,
Ibidem.
militi, of several lands in the shires of Stirling, Perth, and Aberdeen,
erected into the barony of Elphinstone, to him, and his lawful heirs-male, etc.
dated in August 1502, January 1503, 1507, etc.

He died before 1509, leaving issue a son and heir,

X. Sir ALEXANDER ELPHINSTONE of that ilk, who, in his father's lifetime, got
charters under the great seal, Ibidem.
Alexandro Elphinstone, filio et haeredi apparenti domini Johannis Elphinstone
de eodem, militis, et Elizabethae Barlow ejus spo^sae, of several lands and
baronies, to them and their lawful heirs-male, etc. dated anno 1507.

He was a man of good parts, great honor and integrity, Crawfurd, Nisbet,
Scots compend.
and highly esteemed by king James IV. who raised him to the dignity of the
peerage, by the title of lord Elphinstone, at the baptism of prince Arthur,
anno 1509.

This is confirmed by a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Alexandro domino Elphinstone, of the lands of Gargunnock, Carnock, Fordel, and
several others in the shires of Stirling, Fife, etc. to him and his heirs-male,
anno 1510.

He got also a charter of the lands of Quarrel, etc. in the county of Stirling,
Ibidem.
29th August, 1512.

And another charter, to him and Elizabeth Barlow, his spouse, Ibidem.
of the lands and barony of Kildrimmie and others, in Aberdeenshire, annexing
them all to the lordship of Elpinstone, anno 1513.

By the said Elizabeth Barlow, who was one of the maids of honor to Queen
Margaret, he left issue a son and heir,

Alexander, lord Elphinstone, -- and three daughters.

1. Isabel, married 1st to David Lindsay of Dunrod; and 2dly, to Robert Maxwell
of Calderwood.

2. Eupheme, married to John Bruce of Cultmalindie.

3. Elizabeth, married to sir David Somerville of Plain.

He accompanied king James IV. to the field of Flowden, and having a great
resemblance of his majesty's person, it is said he rushed in among the thickest
of the enemies, in hopes of saving his royal master's life, by risking his own;
but they were both slain in that fatal battle, anno 1513.

He was succeeded by his only son,

XI. ALEXANDER, second lord Elphinstone, who got a charter, Ibidem:
under the great seal, of the lands of Pittendreich and others, in the shires
of Stirling and Fife, Alexandro domino Elphinstone, et Catharinae Erskine
sponsae suae, dated 27th February 1525.

He was also killed in the service of his country, at the battle of Pinkie anno
1547, Crawfurd's peerage.
and by the said Catharine, daughter of John lord Erskine, he left issue five
sons and three daughters.

1. Robert his heir.

2. John, who was bred to the church, and was parson of Innernochty.

3. James, who, Chart. in pub. regist.
in a charter under the great seal, of the lands of Innerdivot in Fife, is
designed brother german of Robert lord Elphinstone, anno 1599.

4. Sir Michael Elphinstone, who was master of the household to king James VI.

5. William, ancestor of the Elphinstones of Calderhall in Stirling-shire.

1st daughter, Isabel, married to James Hamilton of Haggs, and had issue.

2. Marjory, married to sir Robert Drummond of Carnock.

3. Margaret, married to Alexander Livingstone of Dunipace.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. ROBERT, third lord Elphinstone, who got charters under the great seal,
Ibidem.
Roberto domino Elphinstone et Margaretae Drummond ejus sponsae, of the lands
of Cargath, in Aberdeenshire, and several others, cum piscariis, etc. dated in
1550 et 1553.

By the said Margaret, daughter of sir John Drummond of Innerpeffre, he had
three sons and four daughters.

1. Alexander, master of Elphinstone.

2. George, who was rector of the Scotch college at Rome.

3. Sir James Elphinstone, ancestor of lord Balmerinoch. Vide title Balmerinoch.

1st daughter --, married to Walter lord Deskford, ancestor of the earl of
Finlater.

2. Jean, married to Walter Barclay of Towie.

3. Elizabeth, married to sir Robert Innes of that ilk.

4. Margaret, married to John Cunninghame of Drumquhassel, Esquire;.

When he was a very old man, he got a charter under the great seal, Roberto
domino Elphinstone, et Alexandro magistro, ejus filio et haeredi, of the lands
and barony of Elphinstone, and several others, in Stirling-shire, the lands and
barony of Kildrimmie, etc. in Aberdeenshire, lands in Perth, Fife, etc. all
annexed to the lordship of Elphinstone, dated the 26th March 1601.

He died anno 1602, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. ALEXANDER, fourth lord Elphinstone, who, being a man of extraordinary
parts and learning, and great knowledge in the law, Lives of the offic. of
state. p. 397.
was appointed one of the senators of the college of justice, and lord high
treasurer of Scotland, when only master of Elphinstone, 24th June 1599.

After the king went to England, the lord Elphinstone was, by parliament, named
one of the commissioners to treat of a more complete union betwixt the two
kingdoms, Ibidem.
anno 1604; but at that time it had no effect.

He got a charter under the great seal of the lands of Bothkenner, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
and several others, in Stirlingshire, dated 21st June 1608.

He got also charters under the great seal of many other lands and baronies,
Ibidem.
in 1612, 1613, etc.

He was appointed a privy councillor for life by parliament anno 1641,
Rescinded acts of parlt.
one of the committee for plantation of kirks anno 1644, and one of the
committee of estates in the 1645.

He married Jean, daughter of William lord Livingston, by whom he had four sons
and five daughters.

1. Alexander, master of Elphinstone.

2. James Elphinstone of Barns, who carried on the line of this family, as will
be shown hereafter.

3. John Elphinstone of Wortle, in Aberdeenshire.

4. Michael Elphinstone of Quarrel, in Stirlingshire.

1st daughter, Anne, married to John earl of Sutherland, and had issue.

2. Jean, married to Arthur lord Forbes, and had issue.

3. Elizabeth, married to sir John Bruce of Airth, and had issue.

4. Christian, married to sir Thomas Urquhart of Cromarty.

5. Helen, married, 1st, to sir William Cockburn of Langton; 2dly, to Henry
Rollo of Woodside, Esquire; and had issue to both.

He lived to a great age, died anno 1648, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIV. ALEXANDER, fifth lord Elphinstone, who, in his grandfather's lifetime,
got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Alexandro filio ^eniori legitimo Alexandri magistri de Elphinstone, of the
lands of Kirkton of Kildrimmie, in Aberdeenshire, dated the 15th of December
1593.

He got another charter of the lands of Ardmoir, Ibidem.
Carnock, etc. in Perthshire, dated 14th December 1600.

He also got a charter of the lands of Pettinane, Ibidem.
Drumcrief, and Wesbie, in Lanark and Annandale, dated 19th February 1601.

He got likeways a charter, Ibidem.
Alexandro magistro de Elphinstone, and Elizabeth Drummond his spouse, of the
lordship of Elphinstone, regality of Kildrimmie, etc. etc. in Stirling, Perth,
and Aberdeen, all united into one lordship, dated 5th July 1608.

He survived his father but a year, dying in 1649.

By the said Elizabeth, daughter of Patrick lord Drummond, and sister of James,
first earl of Perth, he left issue only one child,

Lilias Elphinstone, of whom afterward.

And having no male issue, his estate and honors devolved upon his nephew and
heirmale, Alexander, son of his brother James, to whom we now return.

XIV. JAMES ELPHINSTONE of Barns, second son of Alexander, fourth lord
Elphinstone, married --, daughter of --, by whom he had a son,

XV. ALEXANDER, who, succeeding as heir-male to Alexander the fifth lord, as
before observed, was the sixth lord Elphinstone.

He was a great loyalist, a firm and steady friend of the royal family; on
which account he suffered many hardships, Guthrie's memoirs.
and was fined by Oliver Cromwell in the sum of 1000 l. sterling, anno 1654.

He married his cousin-german Lilias Elphinstone, only daughter of his uncle
Alexander, the fifth lord, whereby the heirs-male and of line of this family,
were united. By her he had issue two sons and one daughter.

1. Alexander, his heir.

2. John, who succeeded his brother.

His daughter, Anne, married Walter lord Torphichen.

He died anno 1655, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVI. ALEXANDER, seventh lord Elphinstone, who married Anne, daughter of Dr.
Alexander Burnet, Keith's catalogue of bishops, p. 27.
first bishop of Aberdeen, then archbishop of Glasgow, and afterward of St.
Andrews; but dying without issue, anno 1669, was succeeded by his brother,

XVI. JOHN, eighth lord Elphinstone, who married lady Isabel Maitland, daughter
of Charles earl of Lauderdale, by whom he had three sons and three daughters.

1. Charles, his heir.

2. John, a youth of great hopes, who died unmarried.

3. Captain William Elphinstone, killed at the battle of Preston in Lancashire,
1715.

1st daughter, Elizabeth, married to John Campbell of Mammore, son of
Archibald, the ninth earl, and father of John the present duke of Argyle.

2. Margaret, married to George count Lesly of Balquhain, afterward to sir
James Gordon of Park, and had issue to both.

3. Mary, married to Mr. Thomas Buchan of Cairnbulg, advocate.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVII. CHARLES, ninth lord Elphinstone, who served as a captain in the army
from the year 1706 in Flanders, to the peace of Utrecht, and afterward till
1720.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of sir William Primrose of Carington, baronet,
sister of James, first viscount Primrose, by whom he had four sons and two
daughters.

1. John, who married Marjory Fleming, daughter of sir Gilbert Fleming of Farm,
baronet, and died without issue.

2. James, who died unmarried.

3. Charles, now lord Elphinstone.

4. Archibald, who died on the expedition against Carthagena 1741.

1st daughter, Grizel, married to captain Woodroof Gascoigne, and had issue.

2. Primrose Elphinstone, married to Alexander, now earl of Home, to whom she
had issue a son and daughter.

He died anno 1757, and was succeeded by his son,

XVIII. CHARLES, tenth lord Elphinstone.

He married lady Clementina Fleming, only surviving daughter and heiress of
John earl of Wigton, by lady Mary Keith, eldest daughter of William, ninth earl
Marishal, by whom he has issue four sons and four daughters.

1. John, a captain of the army in America, and was wounded at Quebec.

2. Charles, a youth of great hopes, who unfortunately lost his life on board
the Prince George of 90 guns, admiral Broderick commander, which was burnt at
sea in April 1758, in her voyage from England to Gibraltar.

3. William, in the service of the East India company.

4. Keith, in the navy.

1st daughter Mary.

2. Eleanora.

3. Primrose.

4. Clementina.

ARMS.
Argent* a cheveron sable, betwixt three boars heads erased, gules.

SUPPORTERS; two savages proper, with laurel garlands about their head and
middle, holding in their hands darts, with their heads upwards.

CREST; a lady, from the middle richly attired, holding a castle in her right
hand, and in her left a branch of laurel.

MOTTO; Cause caused it.

CHIEF SEATS
Were at Elphinstone-castle in Stirlingshire, etc.

HAY Earl of ERROL.
THE grandeur and antiquity of the great and illustrious name of HAY being
sufficiently set forth, and attested both by ancient and modern historians, we
shall only hint briefly at the traditional account of their origin, as it is
handed down to us by many eminent authors.

In the reign of king Kenneth III. the Danes having invaded Scotland, about the
year 980, with a great and numerous army, were opposed by king Kenneth, who
gave them battle near Loncartie, in Perthshire, where the Scots were worsted
and fled.

In their flight through a narrow pass, they were met by a brave Scotsman, and
his two sons, who were laboring their ground near by; they stopped them,
encouraged them to rally, telling them it was better and more honorable to die
in the field, fighting for their king and their country, than to fly, and
afterward be killed by the merciless Danes: by thus upbraiding their
cowardice, they were prevailed upon to stop.

There were many gallant men amongst them, who fled more from the desertion of
their companions, than want of courage They joined the brave old man and his
sons, stopped all the flyers, and soon got a considerable body of men together.

The father and his sons having only such arms as their ploughs furnished them
with, led back their countrymen, who returned to the charge. They renewed the
fight, fell upon the Danes, and made a most furious onset, crying aloud, Help
is at hand. The Danes believing that a f^esh army had fallen on them, soon gave
way, whereby the Scots obtained a complete victory, and effectually freed their
country from servitude.

The battle being over, the old man (afterward known by the name of Hay,) was
brought to the king, who gave him and his sons, as a just reward of their
valor and merit, so much land on the side of the river Tay, in the Carse of
Gowrie, as a falcon, set off a man's hand, should fly over before she settled.
She flew over about six miles of ground in length, which was afterward called
Errol, and has been the possession and chief title of the Hays their successors
ever since.

The king further promoted them to the order of the nobility, and assigned them
a coat of arms, viz. argent, three se^tcheons, gules, to intimate that the
father and the two sons had been the three fortunate shields of Scotland.

Thus all ancient Scotch authors: But

It appears from many histories, that there were families of the name of Hay,
both in Italy and France, even before the era of the battle of Loncarty. The
late countess of Errol, as head or chief of the Hays in Scotland, had some time
ago a most elegant letter from the learned -- Hay, archbishop of Marnis,
wherein he mentions the above account of the battle of Loncarty, as a piece of
history contained in the memoirs of the Hays in Italy; but says, that the first
of the Hays in Scotland and Italy came both from Armenia.

There are some other probable accounts of the origin of this noble family,
with which we shall not trouble our readers here, but refer to title, marquis
of Tweeddale.

In the genealogical account of the family of Errol, it is said, that the name
of the brave old man, at the battle of Loncarty, was Thomas, afterward
surnamed Hay; that the name of his eldest son was Sereld Hay; and the name of
his second Achaius. These are said to be the first of the name of Hay in
Scotland, and the ancestors of the Hays of Errol; but as we have no authentic
documents for the next three or four generations, we shall begin to deduce the
descent of this noble family from certain authority, viz, original charters,
and our public records.

I. WILLIAM de la HAYA, said to be lineally descended of the first Thomas,
lived in the reign of king David I. who succeeded to the crown anno 1124, and
died in 1153.

This William was a great man at the court of king Malcolm IV. Chartul. of the
priory of St. Andrews, penes eom. de Panmure.
and is witness in many of his royal deeds, by the title of pincerna domini
regis.

In king Malcolm's original charter to the abbacy of Scoon, Chartul. of Scoon,
Fol. II. III. and IV. penes vice commit. de Stormont.
Willielmus de Haya, Andrew bishop of Caithness, etc. are witnesses. The
charter is without date, but granted inter 1153 et 1165, in which last year
king Malcolm died.

He is witness also to an order or prohibition of the same prince, Chartul. of
Scoon, Fol. VII.
that no person whatsoever shall molest or distress the abbot of Scoon, etc.
ante 1165.

He married Julia or Juliana, sister of Ranulphus de Soulis, Chartul. of Cupar,
Fol. XII.
one of the most considerable families in Scotland at that time, by whom he had
a son,

II. WILLIAM de HAYA, who succeeded him, and made no less a figure at the court
of king William than his father had done at that of king Malcolm.

He was a witness to that convention betwixt king Henry of England and king
William of Scotland, Rymer, tom. I. p. 39.
when the latter obtained his liberty, anno 1174.

He appears to have had large possessions in Perthshire, by the considerable
donations made to the religious by him and his sons.

He gave a grant of some lands to the convent of Cupar, which is confirmed by
king William, Ibidem.
viz. Willielmus de Haya dedisse, etc. de terris de Edinpolis, Deo et sanctae
Mariae, etc. pro salute animae Malcolmi regis, Ranulphi de Soulis, avunculi
sui, etc.

This charter is also without date, but as comes Duncanus justiciarius is a
witness, it must have been betwixt the years 1175 and 1180.

He obtained from the said king William a charter de terris de Herrol, Chart.
penes comitem de Errol, ante 1188.
per suas rectas divisas, et cum omnibus justis pertinentiis, pro servitio
duorum militum, with all the privileges competent to a barony; and as Hugo
bishop of St. Andrews is a witness, it must have been betwixt 1178 and 1188, in
which last year the bishop died.

He married Eva, Chartul. of St. Andrews.
daughter of Alan, hostiarius domini regis, by whom he had issue six sons.

1. David, his heir.

2. William de Haya, who made a donation to the convent of Cupar, pro salute
animae suae, et Adae uxoris suae, necnon pro salute animae Willielmi de Haya
patris, et Evae matris suae, Chartul. of Cupar, F. 15.
etc. of all the lands he had in the Carse, which he had got a domino Davide de
Haya fratre suo, pro homagio et servitio, etc.

3. John, who was designed Johannes de Haya de Ardnaughton, in a donation he
made Deo et sanctae Mariae, etc. de Cupro, of a yair on the river Tay, cum
consensu Petri de Haya, filii sua, pro salute quondam Julianae de Lascells
sponsae suae, Ibid. F. 16.
testibus domino Willielmo de Haya fratre suo, domino Gilberto de Haya nepote
suo.

4. Thomas de Haya, who made a donation to the same abbay, of the right of
fishing with one net upon the river Tay, and that pro salute animae regis
Willielmi, Willielmi de Haya patris sui, Ibidem.
Evae matris suae, et Adae sponsae suae, etc. testibus domino Davide de Haya
fratre suo, Roberto de Haya et Malcolmo de Haya fratribus suis, etc.

5. Robert.

6. Malcolm.

Both attested by the above donation.

William of Herrol died ante 1199, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. Sir DAVID de HAYA, who obtained from king William a charter of the lands
and barony of Errol, wherein he is designed David de Haya filius Willielmi,
Chart. penes com. de Errol. Chron. of Melrose and Fordun.
etc. to be held by him as freely as his father held the same. The charter is
dated at Jedburgh the 17th day of September, to which Hugo cancellarius is a
witness, inter 1189 et 1199; in which last year the chancellor died.

He obtained from king Alexander II. a charter of confirmation of a charter,
Chart. penes comitem de Errol.
granted quondam Willielmo de Haya patri dicti Davidis, etc. The confirmation
is without date; but as Willielmus de Valoniis, camerarius regis, is a witness
to it, Chron. of Melrose.
it must have been in or before 1219; in which year the camerarius died.

He likeways obtained from the said king Alexander, a ratification of an
agreement with William bishop of St. Andrews, about the lands and patronage of
the church of Ecclesdounan, with the same witnesses, Chart. penes comitem de
Errol.
and of the same date of the above charter, viz. ante 1219.

He made a donation to the convent of Cupar, pro anima piae memoriae regis
Willielmi, et pro anima Willielmi de Haya patris sui, et pro salute animae suae
et Helenae sponsae suae, etc. This grant or donation is made with consent of
Gilbert de Haya, Chartul. of Cupar.
his eldest son and heir, and his two brothers Robert and Malcolm are witnesses
to it.

The last deed in which sir David is mentioned, was an agreement with the abbot
and convent of Scoon, about some disputed lands and tithes in the Carse of
Gowrie, in which Gilbert his eldest son is mentioned, and sir John Hay knight,
Malcolm de Hay, with many other honorable persons are witnesses. The deed is
dated anno 1237; Ibidem.
about which time sir David died, Chart. penes com tem de Errol.
having married Helen, daughter of Gilbert earl of Strathern, by whom he had
issue two sons.

1. Sir Gilbert, his heir.

2. William, who obtained from king Alexander III. a charter, Chart. penes Mr.
Hay de Leys.
confirming donationem illam quam Gilbertus de Haya fecit Willielmo de Haya
sratri suo, duarum carucatarum terrae, etc. etc. in feodo de Errol, testibus
Roberto de Mayners camerario, Eymero de Macuswell, Johanne de Vallibus,
Willielmo de Hawden, et Johanne de Herdmanistoun, apud Rokisburgh, 29no
Aprilis, anno regni II. 1251.

This William was witness in two charters of Roger de Quincy, Chartul. of St.
Andrews, and penes com. de Panmure.
and is designed frater Gilberti, etc. anno 1257.

He was ancestor of the Hays of Leys. Vide vol. II. of this work.

IV. Sir GILBERT de HAYA succeeded his father, and was designed dominus de
Errol in a donation, religiosis viris, abbati et conventui de Cupro, etc. pro
salute animae suae; et pro salute omnium antecessorum et successorum suorum; to
which donation his seal is appended, Chart. penes comitem de Errol.
cum Sigillo Nicolai de Haya, filii sui primogeniti, testibus, episcopis Sti
Andreae, Dunkeld, et multis aliis. This sir Gilbert it witness in a charter of
king Alexander III. of a donation to the priory of St. Andrews, Chartul. of St.
Andrews, p. 357.
anno regni secundo, anno domini 1250.

He was one of the new council of state, Rymer, tom. I. p. 566.
appointed by king Alexander III. anno 1255.

He married -- Cummin, daughter of William earl of Buchan, Martin's col.
by whom he had issue two sons.

1. Nicolaus, his heir.

2. Sir John de Haya, Chartul. of St. Andrews, p. 412.
who is witness to a charter of Alexander de Moravia in 1281.

At this time there were so many different families of the name of Hay in
Scotland besides that of Errol, viz. Hays of Lochwarret, Leyes, Naughton, and
others, that it is impossible when we meet with them in history to ascertain
what families they belong to, except those that are locally designed.

For example,

There are to be found in Rymer, and Prynne's collections, from the year 1291,
to 1297, the following Hays, viz.

Sir John de Haya, miles, Prynne, vol. III. p. 650.

Nicolaus de Haya, dominus de Errol, miles, p. 651.

Hugo de la Haya, p. 651.

Gilbert de la Hay of the family of Errol, p. 651.

William de la Haya, Rymer and Prynne, p. 653.

Sir Gilbert Hay of Lochwarret, p. 659.

Edmund de la Haya, p. 657.

Thomas de la Hay, Ibidem.

William de la Hay, de Drummannack, and Nichol de la Hay, p. 662. etc. etc.

Sir Gilbert was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. Sir NICOL de HAYA, Rymer's foed. tom II. p. 266.
dominus de Errol, who was one of the magnates Scotiae, who solemnly bound and
obliged themselves to maintain and defend queen Margaret's title to the crown,
against all mortals, anno 1284.

He was also one of the Scotch nobles, Ibid. p. 471.
that agreed to the marriage of Queen Margaret, with prince Edward of England,
anno 1290.

He was likewise one of the arbiters chosen on the part of king Robert Bruce,
Ibid. p. 553.
in the competition for the crown between him and Baliol, anno 1292; and every
body knows how king Edward I. preferred the latter.

He afterward got a charter from king John Baliol, erecting his lands of
Errol, Inchyrach, Kinspindie, Dronlaw, Pethponts, Cassingray, and Fossy, in
liberam warennam, (a free forestry.) The charter is dated at Lindores, 1st
August, Chart. penes com. de Errol.
the second year of his reign, anno domini, 1293. Testibus, John Cummin, earl
of Buchan, constable of Scotland; Alexander Baliol, chamberlain; Patrick de
Graham, John de Soulis, Walter de Lindsay, militibus, etc.

He got also a charter from Donald earl of Mar, Ibidem.
of the lands and tenement of Dronlaw, to be held of the said Earl pro homagio
et servitio. Testibus, domino Michaele Scott, Willielmo de Haya de Locherward,
the abbots of Scoon and Cupar, etc. This charter is without date, but by the
witnesses, was ante 1295.

In 1302, die dominica, in octavis Sti Martini, Ibidem.
he transacts with Willielmus Auld burgess of Perth, anent the recovery of what
debts were then owing him, and obliges himself to give to the said William
Auld, a third part of all that shall be recovered.

He gave to the abbot and convent of Cupar, in pure and perpetal alms, illam
bovatam terrae in Carse, quam habet ex dono Rogeri filii Boderici, etc. To this
donation Nicolaus his son, rector of the church of Fossenib, is a witness.

He died circa 1303, leaving issue by -- three sons.

1. Sir Gilbert, his heir.

2. Nicolaus de Haya, rector of Fossenib as above.

3. Sir Hugh, Abercrombie, and Barber, p. 22.
a great hero and patriot, who adhered always to the interest of king Robert
Bruce.

VI. Sir GILBERT de HAYA, dominus de Errol, succeeded his father. He was man of
singular merit and resolution, and a true lover of his country. Ibid. p. 571.
He was one of the first great barons of Scotland that joined king Robert
Bruce, and never deserted his interest in all his viciss^tudes of fortune; and
though he had the misfortune to be made a prisoner by king Edward, Rymer, tom.
II. p. 1014.
anno 1306, yet he soon recovered his liberty, and joined the loyalists.

King Robert no sooner had it in his power, than he began to reward his
faithful services, and in 1308, In pub. archiv.
constituted him constable of Scotland, which office was then in the crown, by
the forseiture of David de Strathbogie, earl of Athole; for in a letter from
the magnates Scotiae, to Philip the fair king of France, he is designed
Gilbertus de Haya constabularius Scotiae, etc. 16th March 1308.

He is also designed constabularius Scotiae, Chartul. of Scoon, ad ann. 1133.
in a donation of king Robert to the abbacy of Scoon, dated anno regni septimo.
And being still more and more in favor with that great monarch, he was pleased
to bestow the constabulary heretably to him and his heirs for ever, in feodo et
haereditate cum hostilagiis (a lodging in every burgh where the parliament
sits) ad dictian officiu^^ pertinentibus, Chart. penes com. de Errol.
etc. the charter is dated 12th November 1315.

He was one of the magnates Scotiae, Fordun, vol. II. p. 275.
who signed that famous letter to the pope, asserting the independency of this
kingdom, anno 1320.

He was also one of the Scotch commissioners, Rymer's foed. tom. III. 1025.
that swore to the keeping of a truce with the English, anno 1323.

In a charter, wherein king Robert confirms a donation of king Malcolm to the
abbot and convent of Scoon, Chartul. of Scoon.
dated the 20th of his reign, Sir Gilbert de Haya, constabularius Scotiae,
Chart. in pub. archiv. ad ann. 1328.
is a witness, anno 1326. He is also witness in a charter of king Robert's,
anno regni 22 do. Rymer's foed.
And being a man equally qualified for the cabinet and field, was often
employed by that great prince in foreign negociations, which he always managed
with prudence and dexterity.

He survived his majesty king Robert Bruce, and was no less faithful to his son
king David, M. S. Hist. of the family of Errol.
but had the misfortune to be killed in the service of his country, at the
fatal battle of Halidon-hill, on the 19th July 1333, leaving issue a son and
succcessor,

VII. Sir DAVID de HAYA, dominus de Errol, constabularius Scotiae.

In a charter of king David II. Chartul. of Arbroath.
confirming a donation of Margaret countess of Angus, de terris de Brakie, etc.
to the abbacy of Arbroath, David de Haya, constabularius Scotiae, and many
others are witnesses. The charter is dated at Scoon, ultimo die Octobris, anno
regm 15 to, Fordun, vol. II. p. 343, and Knighton in vita Edwardi III.
anno dom. 1344.

He was killed at the battle of Durham, where his royal master was taken
prisoner, on 16th October 1346.

He married -- daughter and sole heiress of sir John Keith of Innerpessre,
Chart. penes com. de Errol
by whom he had a son,

VIII. Sir THOMAS HAY of Errol, who succeeded him, Rymer tom. VI. p. 619.
and was one of the commissioners appointed to treat with the English about
king David's liberty, anno 1353; and afterward one of the hostages for his
ransom.

He enters into a transaction with sir John Fenton of that ilk, Chart. penes
com. de Errol.
wherein Thomas de Haya, constabularius Scotiae, obliges himself to sease and
invest the said sir John in a twenty-merk land, within the barony of Slains,
etc. The deed is dated on the Vigil of Pentecost, 1368, in presence of Sir
William Keith marishal of Scotland, sir John Hay of Tilliebothil, and many
others.

He acted as lord high constable of Scotland in the parliament, Original acts
in pub. archiv.
where the earl of Carrick's right of primogeniture, and title to the crown,
was acknowledged and recognized, anno 1371.

In the year 1385, Rymer, tom. VII. p. 485.
there were forty thousand francs sent by the king of France, to be divided
amongst his friends and allies the Scots, of which this sir Thomas got four
hundred.

He married lady Elizabeth Stewart, Stewart's history of the royal family.
daughter of king Robert II. and obtained from that prince a charter, carissimo
filio suo, Thomae de Haya, constabulario nostro Scotiae, illas centum libratas
terras cum pertinentibus in tenemento de Slains, Chart. penes comitem de Errol.
et in pub. archiv.
in vic. de Aberdene, quas recolendae memoriae dominus, avus et predecessor
noster, Robertus, Dei gratia rex Scotorum, quondam Gilberto de Haya
haereditarie dedit et concessit, etc. Sir Thomas, upon his own resignation,
gets all his lands de novo erected and united in unam integram et liberam
baroniam, etc. apud Dundee, ultimo die Junii, anno regni septimo, anno dom.
1378. He was served heir to his grandfather, umquhil sir John Keith of
Innerpeffre, per brieve in the archives of the family, dated 19th January, 1389.

By the said lady Elizabeth Stewart, he had issue, two sons and two daughters.

1. Sir William, his heir.

2. Sir Gilbert Hay of Dronlaw. In a charter by sir William Hay of Errol,
Ibidem.
of the lands of Urie to his son William in 1430, this Gilbert, who is a
witness, is designed frater domini Willielmi, etc.

1st daughter, Chart. pene^ comitem de Rothes.
Elizabeth, married to sir George Lesly of Rothes, who, in a charter of king
Robert III. to this sir George, is designed his well-beloved niece, etc.

2. -- married to John Leslie, Discharge of her portion, 14. Ju^y 137^.
son and heir apparent of Andrew Leslie of that ilk.

He died in an advanced age, anno 1406, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. Chart. under the great real ad ann. 1393.
Sir WILLIAM HAY of Errol, who obtained from king Robert III. in his father's
lifetime, a grant dilecto nepoti suo Willielmo de Haya, filio et haeredi domini
Thomae de Haya, wherein he promises to his nephew, not to ratify or approve of
any alienations to be made by sir Thomas his father, from the date thereof,
without consent of the said William, and the king's council, etc. The charter
is dated 19th March, the third year of the king's reign.

He obtained from Robert duke of Albany, governor of Scotland, a discharge and
acquittance, etc. carissimo nepoti suo, Willielmo de Haya de Errol,
constabulario Scotiae, relevium suum nobis debitum de omnibus terris suis,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
quas de domino rege tenet in capite ubicunque, per mortem domini Thomae Haya
patris sui nuper defuncti, dated at Perth 3rd August 1406.

He was named one of the hostages for king James, when he was coming to
Scotland, anno 1421.

He was one of the commissioners appointed to treat with the English about the
king's redemption, Rymer tom: X. p. 125, 307, 325, and 332.
anno 1423. He is then designed dominus de Errol et de Hay, and became one of
the hostages for his ransom. M. S. account of the family of Errol, and a
decrect of parliament in 1429.


He had the honor of knighthood conferred upon him at the king's coronation,
anno 1424, was created a lord of parliament in 1427, Rymer, tom. X. p. 491.
and was appointed one of the wardens of the marches, anno 1430.

He died ante 1436, and had issue two sons.

1. Gilbert, his apparent heir.

2. William, Chart. penes comitem de Errol.
to whom he gave the lands of Urie, to him and the heirs of his body; which
failing, to return to the family.

X. GILBERT his eldest son, Rymer, tom. VIII. p. 736, and tom. X. p. 325.
went to England an hostage for Murdoch duke of Albany, anno 1412, and is then
designed filius et haeres apparens domini Hay constabularii Scotiae, etc.

He afterward went a hostage to England for king James I.'s ransom, anno 1424,
and died there, his father being still alive.

He married Alicia, daughter of sir William Hay of Yester, Chart. penes
marchionem de Tweedale, and Rymer, tom. X. p. 364.
who got a safe conduct from the king of England to go up to her husband, anno
1426, and by her he had a son,

XI. WILLIAM, who succeeded his father in 1436, Chart. in pub. archiv.
and got charters, under the great seal, of a vast many lands, Willielmo domino
Hay de Errol, inter 1436 et 1446.

Amongst the archives of this family, there is a writ or instrument, whereby it
appears, that this sir William, lord Hay of Errol, obtained the patronage of
the church of Turresf in Buchan, Instrumentum penes com. de Errol.
in lieu of the patronage of the church of Errol, which, the instrument says,
had been insidiously wrested from sir William Hay of Errol, his grandfather, (
avus suus,) etc. The deed is dated anno 1446.

He grants a charter, Chart. penes Marchionem de l'weedale.
de terris de Achmore, to sir David Hay of Yester, his uncle, ( avunculo suo,)
anno 1452.

This William lord Hay of Errol being, like many of his brave ancestors, a man
of eminent loyalty, and in high savor with his majesty king James II. was, in
consideration of his great merit and faithful services, Crawfurd's peerage,
page 139.
raised to the dignity of earl of Errol, anno 1452.

In March 1453, he accepts of a resignation of the lands of Urie, from his
uncle William Hay, in which he is designed comes de Errol.

He was one of the Scotch commissioners that concluded a treaty with the
English, Chart. penes comitem de Errol, and Rymer. tom. XI. page 403.
anno 1457, and is then designed Willielmus comes Erroliae, constabularius
Scotiae, etc.

He ratifies and confirms a deed and grant to William Hay of Urie, Chart. penes
comitem de Errol.
by Alan Kinnaird of that ilk, apud castrum de Slains, 15th March 1470.

He married Beatrix Douglas, daughter of James lord Dalkeith, Chart. penes
comitem de Morton.
by whom he had issue three sons, and two daughters.

1. Nicol, his heir.

2. William, who succeeded his brother.

3. Gilbert Hay.

1st daughter, Contract ad ann. 1457, penes com. de Errol.
lady Elizabeth, married, 1st, to Patrick, son and apparent heir of Andrew lord
Gray; 2dly, to George lord Gordon, afterward earl of Huntly, per an obligation
granted by William earl of Errol, her brother, Ibid. ad ann. 1475.
to George earl of Huntly, her husband.

2. Lady Margaret, Ibid. ad ann. 1501.
married to William Fraser of Philorth, ancestor of lord Salton, per a writ,
wherein she is designed sister of William earl of Errol.

The earl died in 1470, and the countess, his widow, made a donation to the
convent of Gray-friars in Dundee, which bears, per nobilem et potentem dominam
Beatricem Douglas, relictam quondam Willielmi comitis de Errol, Ibidem.
pro salute animae suae, et pro animabus quondam Willielmi comitis de Errol,
sponsi sui, et Willielmi comitis de Errol filii sui, dated 25th November 1482.

XII. NICOL, second earl of Errol, succeeded his father in 1470. Rymer's foed.
He was one of the privy council to king James III. and was appointed one of
the commissioners to treat of a peace with England, anno 1472.

He got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Nicolao comiti Erroliae et Elizabethae comitissae, terrarum de Cassilis, etc.
etc. inter 1470 et 1476.

He married lady Elizabeth Gordon, Chart. penes comitem de Errol.
daughter of Alexander earl of Huntly; but died without issue, on 6th January
1476, and was succeeded by his brother,

XII. WILLIAM, Ibidem.
third earl of Errol, who, in an instrument taken on an obligation granted by
Alexander Ogilvy of Auchterhouse, sheriss of Angus, is designed Willielmus
comes de Errol, on 5th December 1476.

He married, 1st, lady Isabel Gordon, daughter of George earl of Huntly,
Discharge of her portion, ad ann. 1478. penes com. de Errol.
by whom he had issue three sons, and one daughter.

1. William, his heir.

2. Thomas Hay of Logyalmond, whose son succeeded to the earldom, of whom
afterward. Contract, penes comitem de Errol, ad ann. 1501.


3. John Hay of Broganlesh.

His daughter, lady Beatrix, married to Alexander Keith, son and apparent heir
of sir William Keith of Innerugie.

The earl married, 2dly, lady Elizabeth Leslie, daughter of George earl of
Rothes, Ibid. contract ad ann. 1485.
by whom he had one daughter,

Lady Mariana, Writs of the family of Crawfurd, and infeftment penes com. de
Errol, ad ann. 1510.
married to David Lindsay, son and apparent heir of sir Alexander Lindsay of
Auchtermonzie, afterward earl of Crawfurd.

He died about 1490, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. WILLIAM, fourth earl of Errol, who was a man of eminent qualities, great
honor and probity.

As an instance of the high estimation he was held in abroad, Penes com. de
Errol.
he had a letter sent him by Pope Alexander VI. notifying his election to the
popedom, dated 7mo. calendas Septembris, anno 1492.

He was sheriff of Aberdeen, and had great dependencies, Ibidem.
and bonds of manrent, from some of the principal families in the country.

He died in 1506, having married lady Janet, daughter of John Stewart earl of
Athole, Stewart'shift. of the royal family, p. 172.
by lady Margaret his spouse, daughter of Archibald earl of Douglas, and duke
of Turenne, by whom he had a son and successor,

XIV. WILLIAM, fifth earl of Errol, who, in his father's lifetime, was designed
William of Caputh, and master of Errol.

He obtained from king James IV. Chart. penes comitem de Errol.
a gift of the ward and relief due to the crown by the decease of his father,
dated 18th January 1507, and was served heir to his father in the lands of
Petponts, Ibidem.
on 21st September that same year.

He got charters under the great seal of several lands and baronies, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
inter 1510 et 1513.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of William, first lord Ruthven, by whom he had
a son,

William, his heir, -- and two daughters.

1. Lady Marian, Ibidem.
married to William earl of Crawfurd.

2. Lady Isabel, Chart. penes comitem de Errol, ad ann. 1522.
married to sir William Forbes of Tolquhon.

He, with a great many of his friends, and almost all the gentlemen of his
name, accompanied king James IV. to the battle of Flowdon, where they all lost
their lives, with their royal master, on 9th September 1513.

He was succeeded by his son,

XV. WILLIAM, M. S. in the university of Glasgow.
6th earl of Errol, who, according to Mr. Calderwood's church history, was a
man of great parts, integrity and merit.

He was one of the commissioners sent to France, to endeavor to get the Scots
included in their treaty with the English, anno 1515.

He was also, Rymer's foed. tom. XIII. p. 509, and 551.
with some others, sent by the estates of Scotland to the king of England, with
their refusal to comply with his desire, in removing the duke of Albany from
the guardianship of their young king, anno 1516.

There are several charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Willielmo comiti Erroliae, et Helenae comitissae, of many lands and baronies,
inter 1520 et 1535.

He married lady Helen Stewart, Stewart's hist. of the royal family, p. 155.
daughter of John earl of Lennox, by whom he had a son,

William, who died before himself, without issue, -- and a daughter.

Lady Jean Hay, who became heir of line of this illustrious family, of whom
more hereafter.

The earl dying, without any surviving male issue, before the year 1535, in him
ended the male-line of the body of William fourth earl of Errol, eldest son of
the third earl. The earldom, constabulary, etc. therefore devolved upon George,
son of Thomas Hay of Logyalmond, before mentioned, to whom we now return.

XIII. THOMAS HAY, second son of William third earl of Errol, got the estate of
Logyalmond, by marrying Margaret Logie heiress thereof. In a charter of king
James IV. of the lands and barony of Logyalmond, to him et Margaretae dominae
de Logyalmond his spouse, Chart. in pub. archiv. ad ann. 1493.
he is designed Thomas de Hay, filius dilecti consanguinei nostri Willielmi
comitis de Errol.

He left issue a son,

XIV. GEORGE, who succeeding to the earldom of Errol, as before observed, was
the seventh earl, and obtained from king James V. a charter under the great
seal, of the whole estate and heretable constabulary, as next heirmale to
William the last earl. The narrative bears, that the king was desirous that the
earldom of Errol, and constabulary of Scotland, should remain and continue
haeredibus masculis, cum cognominibus de Hay, in omnibus temporibus futuris,
prout fuerunt temporibus elapsis. Chart. in pub. archiv.
The charter is dated 13th December 1541.

This earl, while he was lord of Logyalmond, married, 1st, Margaret, daughter
of sir Alexander Robertson of Strowan, Dispens. pen. com. de Errol.
by whom he had four sons and two daughters.

1. Andrew, his heir.

2. John, Genalog. hist. of the house of Errol.
who succeeded to the ancient family of the Hays of Muchils.

3. George Hay of Ardlethan. Ibidem.


4. Mr. Thomas Hay, Ibidem.
parson of Turreff in Buchan.

1st daughter, Lady Elizabeth, was married to William Keith, Writs of the
family of Marishal, ad ann. 1543.
son and heir of William, sourth earl Marischal, and was mother of George the
fifth earl.

2. Lady Margaret, Contract penes com. de Errol, ad ann. 155^.
married to Laurence master of Oliphant.

He got charters under the great seal, Georgio de Logyalmond; Chart. in pub.
archiv.
then Georgio comiti Erroliae, of the lands and barony of Slains, and many
others, inter 1532 et 1545.

He married, 2dly, Helen, daughter and coheiress of Walter Bryson of Pitcullen,
Ibid. ad ann. 1567.
in vic. de Perth, by whom he had one daughter.

Lady Jean, married, 1st, to John Leslie of Balquhain; 2dly, to sir James
Balfour, brother to Michael first lord Burleigh, who was himself created Lord
Glenaly in Ireland by king James VI.

This earl died anno 1563, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. ANDREW, eighth earl of Errol, who married the forementioned lady Jean
Hay, only daughter and heiress of William, sixth earl of Errol, Several writs
in the archiv. of the family.
whereby the heirs-male and of line of this noble family were united, the king
himself having been a great promoter of this marriage.

In his father's lifetime he got charters, under the great seal, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
Andreae magistro Erroliae, of the lands of Slains, Errol, etc. etc. inter 1552
et 1560, and got afterward charters of other lands, Andreae com. Erroliae,
inter 1570 et 1577.

By the said lady Jean he had issue, three sons and one daughter.

1. Alexander, who died before his father without issue.

2. Francis, his heir.

3. Thomas, who died without issue.

Their daughter, lady Eleanor, married to Alexander earl of Linlithgow.

The earl married, 2dly, lady Agnes Sinclair, Ibidem.
daughter of George earl of Caithness, by whom he had a son,

Sir George Hay of Killour, whose grandson succeeded to the earldom as
heir-male, as will be shown afterward.

This earl was one of the privy council to queen Mary, to whom he was always a
faithful and loyal subject.

He died in 1585, and was succeeded by his son,

XVI. FRANCIS, ninth earl of Errol, who was a man of great probity and merit.
He always continued sirm in the Roman Catholic religion, on which account he
suffered greatly; his houses were demolished, his lands plundered, and himself
imprisoned.

He got charters under the great seal, Francisco comiti Erroliae, Ibidem.
of several lands, inter 1586 et 1592.

He, with lord Huntly, were the chief commanders at the memorable battle of
Glenlivet, where he behaved with remarkable courage and intrepidity, and
defeated the king's troops under the command of the earl of Argyle,
Spotiswood's church history, p. 408.
who were far superior in numbers, anno 1594.

However, he was after wards reconciled to the court, and got much into favor
with king James VI. who appointed him one of the commissioners to treat of an
union with England, Ibidem.
anno 1604.

He married, 1st, lady Anne Stewart, Stewart's history of the royal family.
daughter of John earl of Athole; 2dly, lady Margaret Stewart, second daughter
and co-heiress of James earl of Murray the regent, Writs of the family of Errol.
but had no issue by either.

He married, 3dly, lady Elizabeth Douglas, daughter of William earl of Morton,
by whom he had three sons and eight daughters.

1. William, his heir.

2. George, who died at Avignon in France.

3. Francis, who got a charter under the great seal, anno 1630, but died in
1631, without issue.

1st daughter, lady Anne, married to George second earl of Winton.

2. Lady Christian, married to John earl of Mar.

3. Lady Elizabeth, married, 1st, to Hugh lord Semple; 2dly, to James lord
Mordington.

4. Lady Mary, married to Walter earl of Buckcleugh.

5. Lady Sophia, married to John Gordon viscount of Melgum, son of George
marquis of Huntly.

6. Lady Isabel.

7. Lady Margaret.

8. Lady Helen.

The last three died unmarried.

The earl dying on 14th July 1631, was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVII. WILLIAM, tenth earl of Errol, who having been brought up at court, and
educated in the protestant religion, was in great favor with king Charles I.

He acted as constable in Scotland, at his coronation in the abbay of
Holyroodhouse, on 18th June 1633.

He lived in so splendid and grand a manner, that he brought great encumbrances
on the family, which obliged them to sell their old paternal estate in the
Carse of Gowrie, reserving only some superiorities, which are still in the
family.

He married lady Anne Lion, daughter of Patrick earl of Kinghorn, by whom he
had a son,

Gilbert, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Lady Margaret, married, 1st, to Henry lord Ker, son and heir of Robert first
earl of Roxburgh; 2dly, to John earl of Cassilis, who was lord privy seal in
the reign of king Charles I.

He died anno 1636, and was succeeded by his son,

XVIII. GILBERT, eleventh earl of Errol, who was too young to be engaged in the
beginning of the troubles of king Charles I. 's reign, but was a staunch
loyalist, had a pension settled on him in 1639; was colonel of horse for
Aberdeenshire for duke Hamilton's engagement, Rescinded acts of pa^lt.
anno 1648; and none appeared more forward and zealous for a restoration than
he did, to which he contributed all that was in his power.

He waited on the king at Aberdeen, was most graciously received, and raised a
regiment for his majesty's service on his own charges.

King Charles II. being perfectly sensible of his loyalty, constituted him one
of his privy council, anno 1661, and he always behaved with prudence, candor
and modederation.

He married lady Catharine Carnegy, daughter of James earl of Southesk, by whom
he had no issue.

Upon which he made a resignation of his whole estates, honors, dignities,
heretable constabulary, etc. in favors of himself, and the heirs-male of his
body; which sailing, to sir John Hay of Killour, his cousin and nearest
heir-male, and the heirs-male of his body; which failing, to his own nearest
and lawful heirs what somever; upon which a charter was past and expede under
the great seal, Charta in cancellaria.
anno 1674.

He dying without issue that same year, the male-line of the first marriage of
Andrew eighth earl of Errol thus ended, and the estate and honors devolved
upon the next heir-male, viz. sir John Hay of Killour, lineally descended from
sir George before mentioned, to whom we now return.

XVI. Sir GEORGE HAY of Killour, only son of the second marriage of Andrew,
eighth earl of Errol, married Elizabeth, daughter of sir Patrick Cheyne of
Eslemont, an ancient family in the shire of Aberdeen, by whom he had a son and
successor,

XVII. Sir ANDREW HAY of Killour, who married Margaret, daughter of Patrick
Kinnaird of Inchture, sister of George first lord Kinnaird, by whom he had a
son,

Sir John Hay of Killour, who succeeded to the earldom of Errol, as before
observed.

XVIII. JOHN, twelfth earl of Errol, (formerly sir John of Killour) married
lady Anne Drummond, daughter of James earl of Perth, by whom he had three sons
and two daughters.

1. Charles, his heir.

2. James.

3. Thomas.

All these sons died without issue.

1st daughter, lady Mary, who succeeded to the earldom of Errol.

2. Lady Margaret, who carried on the line of this family, as will be shown
hereafter.

Earl John died anno 1705, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIX. CHARLES, thirteenth earl of Errol, a man of singular honor and probity.

In the parliament 1706, he opposed the union with all his power and interest,
as believing it derogatory to the honor and independency of Scotland, and
entered a solemn protest against it, which still remains upon record, viz.

"I Charles earl of Errol, heretable lord high chancellor of Scotland, do
hereby protest, that the office of high constable, with all the rights and
privileges of the same belonging to me heretably, and depending upon the
monarchy, sovereignty, and ancient constitutions of this kingdom, may not be
prejudiced, etc. etc. etc."

In the year 1708, he was made prisoner on account of the French invasion; and,
though in a bad state of health, was kept closs confined in the castle of
Edinburgh till the affair was over.

He never married, died in 1717, and was succeeded by his eldest sister,

XIX. Lady MARY, countess of Errol, eldest daughter of John the twelfth earl,
who married Alexander, son of sir David Falconer,

lord president of the session, anno 1682, and brother of Alexander lord
Falconer of Halkertoun.

But she dying without issue, anno 1758, the estate and honors devolved upon
James lord Boyd, grandson of her sister,

XIX. Lady MARGARET HAY, second daughter of John twelfth earl of Errol, before
mentioned, who married James earl of Linlithgow and Calendar, to whom she had
only one daughter,

XX. Lady ANNE LIVINGSTON, undoubted heir of line of the noble and ancient
family of the Livingstons, earls of Linlithgow and Calendar, who married
William earl of Kilmarnock, to whom she had issue three sons.

1. James, lord Boyd.

2. Mr. Charles.

3. Mr. William.

XXI. JAMES lord Boyd, eldest son of lady Anne Livingston, only child of lady
Margaret Hay, second daughter of John twelsth earl of Errol, upon the death of
Mary countess of Errol, without issue, succeeded to the estate and honors, as
before noticed, and is the fourteenth earl of Errol.

He married Miss Rebecca Lockhart, eldest daughter of Alexander Lockhart, Esquire;
an eminent councillor at law, and brother of George Lockhart of Carnwath, Esquire;
by whom he has one daughter,

Lady Mary.

ARMS.
Argent, three escutcheons, gules.

CREST; on a wreath, a falcon proper.

SUPPORTERS; two men in country habits, each ho ding an ox-yoke over his
shoulder.

MOTTO; Serva jugum.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Slains, in the county of Aberdeen, etc. etc.

CHURCHILL Lord EYMOUTH.
THE immediate ancestor of this noble family was,

I. Sir WINSTON CHURCHILL, Colin's peerage of England. tom. I. p. 360.
descended from an ancient family, seated at Churchill in Somersetshire, from
whence they had their surname.

Sir Winston's eldest surviving son was,

II. JOHN CHURCHILL, Esquire; afterward duke of Marlborough, lord Eymouth, etc. of
whom, and his descendants, we are now to treat.

This John, in his early youth, betook himself to a military life, which so
well suited his genius, that from an ensign in the footguards, he rose to the
chief command, not only of all the forces in Great Britain, but of the
confederate army in Flanders, where he performed so many great and glorious
actions in the reign of queen Anne, that if they were not recorded by many
faithful cotemporary historians, posterity would scarce believe them.

As it is inconsistent with the brevity of this work to enumerate all the
glorious martial achievements of this great man, Ibidem.
we shall only here insert what is incribed on a monumental pillar at Blenheim,
near Woodstock in Oxfordshire, the chief seat of his family.

The castle of Blenheim was founded by queen Anne,
In the fourth year of her reign,
In the year of the Christian era 1705;
A monument designed to perpetuate the memory of the
Signal victory
Obtained over the French and Bavarians,
Near the village of Blenheim,
On the banks of the Danube,
By John Duke of Marlborough;
The hero not only of his nation, but his age;
Whose glory was equal in the council and in the field;
Who, by wisdom, justice, candor, and address,
Reconciled various, and even opposite interests;
Acquired an influence, which no rank, no authority
Can give,
Nor any force but that of superior virtue;
Became the fixed important center,
Which united in one common cause
The principal states of Europe;
Who, by military knowledge, and irresistible valor,
In a long series of uninterrupted triumphs,
Broke the power of France,
When raised the highest, when exerted the most:
Rescued the empire from desolation;
Asserted, and confirmed the liberties of Europe.
Philip, a grandson of the house of France, united to the interests, directed
by the policy, supported by the arms of that crown, was placed on the throne of
Spain. King William III. beheld this formidable union of two great, and once
rival, monarchies. At the end of a life spent in defending the liberties of
Europe, he saw them in their greatest danger. He provided for their security in
the most effectual manner. He took the duke of Marlborough into his service.

Ambassador extraordinary and plenipotentiary,

To the States General of the united provinces. The duke contracted several
alliances before the death of king William. He confirmed and improved these. He
contracted others, after the accession of queen Anne; and reunited the
confederacy, Peerage of England, vol. I. p. 361.
which had been dissolved at the end of a former war, in a stricter and firmer
league.

Captain general and commander in chief Of the forces of Great Britain,

The duke led to the field the army of the allies. He took, with surprising
rapidity, Venlo, Ruremonde, Stevenswaert, Liege, etc. etc. etc.

His first promotions were owing to the duke of York, who had conceived a
particular friendship for him; and in the reign of king Charles II. Diploma in
Cancellaria.
he was created lord Churchill of Eymouth in Scotland, the 21st December 1682,
by patent, haeredibus masculis ex corpore suo.

Upon king James's accession to the crown, he was immediately made gentleman of
his bedchamber, Peerage of England, vol. I p. 365.
captain of a troop of his lifeguards, and created a peer of England, by the
title of baron Churchill of Sandridge, in Hertfordshire, 14th May 1685.

He came early into the revolution, and became a favorite of king William, who
made him also one of the gentlemen of his bedchamber, and created him earl of
Marlborough, 9th April 1689.

In the first year of queen Anne, he was appointed captain general of all his
majesty's forces, both at home and abroad, and further dignified with the
titles of duke of Marlborough, Ibidem.
marquis of Blandford, etc. 14th December 1702. These honors were afterward
limited to his daughters, and the heirs-male of their bodies successively, by
act of parliament, anno 1706.

He married Sarah, daughter and one of the co-heiresses of Richard Jennings of
Sandridge, in the county of Hertford, Esquire; by whom he had one son,

John, who died at Cambridge, anno 1705, without issue; -- also four daughters.

1. Lady Henrietta, who, in consequence of the said act of parliament, became
duchess of Marlborough upon the death of the duke, and was married to Francis
earl of Godolphin; but the dying without male-issue, anno 1733, these honors
devolved upon her nephew Charles, son of her sister,

III. Lady ANNE, second daughter of John duke of Marlborough, married to
Charles Spencer earl of Sunderland, whose son Charles succeeded to his aunt lady
Henriet, and became duke of Marlborough, of whom afterward.

3. Lady Elizabeth, who was married to Scroop Egerton, duke of Bridgewater, to
whom she had two sons who died young, and a daughter, lady Anne, married to
Wriothesly duke of Bedford.

4. Lady Mary, married to John duke of Montague.

John duke of Marlborough died anno 1722, and was succeeded by his daughters,
as above.

IV. CHARLES earl of Sunderland, son and heir of Charles Spencer, earl of
Sunderland, by lady Anne, second daughter of John duke of Marlborough, upon the
death of his aunt lady Henriet, became duke of Marlborough, marquis of
Blandford, etc. anno 1733, as before observed.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas lord Trevor, by whom he had three
sons, and two daughters.

1. George, marquis of Blandford.

2. Lord Charles Spencer.

3. Lord Robert.

1st daughter, lady Diana.

2. Lady Elizabeth.

Earl Charles died anno 175 --, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. GEORGE, now duke of Marlborough, etc.

ARMS.
Sable, a lion rampant, argent, in a canton of St. George of the 2d; a cross,
gules, being an augmentation.

CREST; on a wreath, a lion couchant, guardant, argent, sustaining with his
dexter paw a pennon, gules, charged with a sinister hand couped at the wrist,
and crect, argent.

SUPPORTERS; two wyverns, gules, each gorged with a plain collar, having an
oval shield pendant therefrom, upon the breast garnished, or; the dexter
charged with St. George's badge argent, a cross gules, and the sinister with
St. Andrews, viz. sable, a saltire, argent.

MOTTO; Fiel pero desdecado.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Blenheim in Oxfordshire, near Woodstock; and at Holloway-house at St.
Albans, in the county of Hertford.

KING Lord EYTHEN.
THE surname of King is of great antiquity in Scotland. Origin. chart. penes
MacFarlane, vol. I. p. 147.
Robertus dictus King is witness in a charter of king Alexander II. anno 1247.

The immediate ancestor of this family was,

I. WILLIAM KING, who flourished in the reign of king James IV. Chart. in pub.
archiv.
was proprietor of the lands of Barrocht, and others, in Aberdeenshire, and
lest issue a son,

James, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Helen, married to John Murray, who got a charter, Ibidem.
under the great seal, to him and Helen King his spouse, of the lands of
Leithhead, etc. anno 1547.

He was succeeded by his son,

II. JAMES, who got a charter, under the great seal, Jacobo King (filio
Willielmi King de Barrocht) et Isabellae Cray ejus spousae, Ibidem.
of the lands of Tullow, in the lordship of Garrioch, in Aberdeen-shire, upon
his father's resignation, dated 29th February 1538.

He got afterward charters, under the great seal, of the lands of Barrocht,
Westerhouse, and others, Ibidem.
inter 1543 et 1550.

By the said Isabel Gray he left issue two sons, and one daughter.

1. William.

2. Mr. Alexander King, advocate, who got charters, under the great seal, of
the lands of Burnhouse, Ibidem.
and others, inter 1584 et 1587.

His daughter, Janet King, got a charter of the lands of Wray, Ibidem.
in vitali redditu, anno 1586.

III. WILLIAM, first son and apparent heir of James King of Barrocht, died
before his father, leaving issue a son,

IV. JAMES KING of Barrocht, who succeeded his grandfather, and got charters,
under the great seal, Jacobo King filio Willielmi, etc. of the lands of
Barrocht, Tullow. Westerhouse, Ibidem.
Essenhead, etc. inter 1584 et 1587.

He left issue a son,

V. Sir JAMES KING of Barrocht, who succeeded him, and was afterward designed
by the title of Birness, Ibidem.
in the county of Aberdeen.

He was a man of great worth and honor, and his genius leading him to a
military life, he went abroad to push his fortune in the German wars, under
that great general Gustavus Adolphus, where he acquired such great reputation
for his skill in the military art, that he rose to the rank of a
lieutenantgeneral, and was in high favor with that great prince.

But upon the breaking out of the civil war in England, being a great loyalist,
he immediately repaired to the king, who constituted him general of his army
against the parliament's forces, which he conducted with such prudence and
dexterity, that his majesty, in reward of his faithful services, Crawfurd's
peerage.
was pleased to raise him to the dignity of the peerage of Scotland, by the
title of lord Eythen, 28th March 1642.

In 1644, Rescinded acts of parl. and Guthry's memoirs
he was forfeited by the Scotch parliament, his estate ordered to be
sequestrate, and himself excepted from pardon; but that was afterward repealed
by an act in his favors, 19th February 1647.

Whether he had any posterity, or what became of him afterward, we can give no
account; but the honors have never been claimed since his death.

CAREY Viscount FALKLAND.
THE ancestors of this noble family made a great figure in England, long before
they were raised to the dignity of the peerage of Scotland, and were anciently
seated at Cockington, in the county of Devon.

Sir John Carey, knight of the shire for that county, was chief baron of the
exchequer, anno 1387.

His great grandson, sir William Carey of Cockington, sided with king Henry
VI. at the battle of Tewksbury, for which he was beheaded, anno 1471. From him
was descended,

I. Sir EDWARD CAREY of Berkhamsteed, in the county of Hertford, the immediate
ancestor of this noble family.

He was master of the jewel-office to king James VI. and left issue a son,

Sir Henry, his heir, -- and two daughters.

1. Anne, Peerage of England.
married to Francis Leak, earl of Scarsdale.

2. Frances, Ibid. vol. I. p. 459.
married to George Manners, earl of Rutland.

II. Sir HENRY CAREY of Berkstead, succeeded his father, and was the first who
brought the news of the death of Queen Elizabeth to Scotland, anno 1603,
whereupon king James appointed him one of the gentlemen of his bedchamber, and
comptroller of his household.

When his son Charles was created prince of Wales, sir Henry was made a knight
of the Bath, anno 1616.

He was afterward created a peer of Scotland, by the title of viscount
Falkland, Chart. in pub. archiv.
10th November 1620; which title, with his naturalization, were confirmed by
king Charles I. by a diploma, Hemico Carey vicecom. de Falkland, anno 1627.

And, being a man of great parts and abilities, was appointed deputy governor
of Ireland, Ibidem.
where he acquitted himself with great dexterity and moderation.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of sir Laurence Taunfield, lord chief baron of
exchequer, by whom he had a son,

Lucius, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Anne, married to James, earl of Home.

He died anno 1633, Dugdale's baronage of England.
and was succeeded by his son,

III. LUCIUS, second viscount Falkland, a man of great parts, Ibidem.
and fine accomplishments, a firm and steady friend of the royal family. He was
chosen member of parliament for Newport, in the county of Southampton, anno
1640. And being greatly, and deservedly, in high esteem with his majesty, he
was advanced to be one of the principal secretaries of state, upon the removal
of sir Henry Vane, which high office he executed with universal applause; but
afterward, out of his great zeal for his majesty's service, venturing himself
too far at the battle of Newbury, he there lost his life on the 20th September
1643, in the 34th year of his age, greatly regreted by the king and all good
men.

We shall sum up that great man's character in the words of the celebrated
author of the history of the grand rebellion, lord Clarendon:

"The lord Falkland was a man of immense wit and judgment, and an admirable
memory, that retained all it read and heard, which he theatrically set forth
upon every occasion.

He was superior to all those passions and affections which attend vulgar
minds, being of that inimitable sweetness and delight in conversation, of so
flowing and obliging goodness to mankind, and of such integrity of life, that
if there was no other brand upon this odious and cursed civil war than that one
single loss, it must be infamous and execrable to all posterity."

By Alicia his wife, daughter of Richard Morison, Esquire; of Tooly-park in the
county of Leicester, Ibidem.
he had a son,

IV. HENRY, third viscount Falkland, who succeeded him, and was also a man of
great abilities, and well versed in every kind of literature. He was a
particular friend of the muses, and a great patron of poetry, of which his own
performances show he was an ornament.

Immediately after the restoration, he was chosen a member of the house of
commons, for Arundel in Suffex, Hist. of England.
and appointed lord Lieutenant of the county of Oxford, but he died in the
flower of his age, anno 1664, as much missed when dead, as beloved when living,
says our author, leaving behind him a son and successor,

V. ANTHONY, fourth viscount Falkland, who, in the latter end of the reign of
king Charles II. and that of king James VII. was paymaster of the forces.

He came early into the revolution, was sworn one of the privy council to king
William, Ibidem.
anno 1691, and was twice a commissioner of the admiralty.

He died anno 1694, and was succeeded by his only son,

VI. LUCIUS HENRY, fifth viscount Falkland.

He married, Scots compend. p. 352.
1st, Dorothy, daughter of Francis Molineux of the city of London, Esquire; by whom
he had four sons,

1. Lucius Charles, his heir.

2. --

3. --

4. --

He married 2dly, Ibidem.
Miss Dillon, daughter of lord Dillon in the kingdom of Ireland, a
lieutenant general in the French service.

He died in France, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. LUCIUS CHARLES, sixth viscount Falkland.

In April 1734, Salmon's abridgment, p. 114, and peerage of Ireland.
he married, first, Jane, daughter and heir of Richard Butler, Esquire; an eminent
conveyancer in London, widow of the lord Vilhers, son to the earl of Grandison
in Ireland, by whom he had two sons and four daughters.

1. --, master of Falkland.

2. Lucius Ferdinand Carey, Esquire; who is now appointed governor of Goree, on the
coast of Africa.

1st daughter, Jane.

2. Frances. Salmon's abridgment.


3. Mary.

4. Charlotte.

In the year 1752, he married, 2dly, Sarah, daughter and heir of Thomas Inwen,
Ibidem.
Esquire; widow of Henry earl of Suffolk.

ARMS.
Quarterly; 1st and 4th argent, on a bend sable, three roses of the field,
barbed and seeded, proper; 2d argent, a fess between six annulets gules; 3d the
arms of France and England quarterly, with a border compone, argent and azure:

CREST; on a wreath, a swan proper.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter side an unicorn argent, his horns, mane, tufts and
hoofs or; on the sinister, a lion guardant, proper, his ducal crown and plain
collar or.

MOTTO; In utroque fidelis.

OGILVIE Earl of FINLATER.
AS the origin of the noble and ancient surname of Ogilvie, is to be found
under the title Airly, page 11th of this work, we proceed to deduce the descent
of this noble family, from their immediate ancestor, viz.

VIII. Sir WALTER OGILVIE, the eighth generation of that illustrious house, in
a direct male-line, married Isabel de Durward, heiress of Lintrethan, by whom
he had two sons,

Sir Walter and sir John. -- Sir John succeeded to the estate of Lintrethan,
and was ancestor of the earls of Airly. -- Sir Walter, designed of Auchleven,
was the first of this family.

I. Sir WALTER OGILVIE of Auchleven, flourished in the reigns of king James I.
and II.

In 1437, he married Margaret, daughter and sole heiress of sir John Sinclair,
Martin's genealogical collections, vol. II. p. 95.
lord of Deskford and Finlater, with whom he got both these baronies, which
afterward became the chief titles of his family; and, in consequence of this
marriage, he added the arms of Sinclair of Deskford to that of Ogilvie, viz.
argent, Nisbet, vol. I. p. 302.
a cross engrailed sable.

He then got two charters under the great seal, Waltero Ogilvie de Deskford,
militi, of the lands and baronies of Deskford, Finlater, etc. the first dated
in January, Chart. in pub. archiv.
the other in August 1440.

He obtained from king James II. a license to fortify his castle of Finlater,
with an embattled wall, Ibidem.
and all other necessaries for a place of strength, by a writ under the great
seal, anno 1455.

By the said Margaret Sinclair, he left issue two sons and one daughter.

1. Sir James, his heir.

2. Sir Walter Ogilvie of Boyne, of whom the lord Banss, and William Ogilvie of
Strathearn, lord high treasurer of Scotland, and others are descended, Vide
title Banss, page 67th of this work.

His daughter, Elizabeth, married to Nicolaus Dun of Rathey, Ibidem.
which appears by a charter under the great seal to them, anno 1487.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. Sir JAMES, who was promiscuously designed of Finlater and Deskford, and
had the honor of knighthood conferred upon him by king James III.

He got a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
Jacobo Ogilvie de Finlater, militi, of the lands of Blareshanach, etc. anno
1473.

He got afterward charters, Jacobo Ogilvie de Deskford, Ibidem.
militi, of several other lands and baronies, a fishing on the water of Ythan,
etc. inter 1474 et 1478.

He acquired the constabulary of Cullen, by a disposition from John Hay, upon
which he got a charter from king James III. Ibidem.
dated anno 1481.

He married Mary, Martin's collections, and Crawfurd's peerage.
daughter of sir Robert Innes of that ilk, by whom he had four sons and five
daughters.

1. Sir James, his heir.

2. Gilbert Ogilvie of Glashaugh.

3. Alexander, who was killed at the battle of Flowdon, anno 1513.

4. George, who was bred to the church. 1st daughter, Margaret, married to
James Abercrombie of Birkenbog.

2. Marian, married to Patrick Gordon of Haddo, ancestor of the earl of
Aberdeen.

3. Catharine, married to William Crawfurd of Federat, in the shire of Aberdeen.

4. Elizabeth, married to John Grant of Freughie.

5. Mary, married to Alexander Urquhart, sheriff of Cromarty.

He died before the year 1490, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. Sir JAMES OGILVIE of Deskford, knight, who got a charter, under the great
seal, Chart. in put archiv.
of the lands and barony of Kethmore, etc. anno 1490.

Also two charters of the lands of Darthalzie, Langmuir, and several others,
with the sishing of Rathey on the water of Deveron, Ibidem.
in Banff-shire, anno 1494 and 1497.

He married lady Agnes Gordon, daughter of George earl of Huntly, Martin and
Crawfurd.
by whom he had five sons and two daughters.

1. Alexander, his heir.

2. James.

3. John.

4. Patrick.

5. George.

The above four sons are all mentioned in an entail hereafter narrated.

His 1st daughter, Chart. in pu archiv.
Elizabeth, was married to sir James Dunbar of Westfield.

2. --, married, 1st, to the lord of MacIntosh; Contract penes comitem de
Finrater.
2dly, to -- Monro of Foulis; and, 3dly, to a son of the lord Lovat, and had
children to them all.

He died anno 1510, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. ALEXANDER OGILVIE, promicuously designed of that ilk, Deskford, and
Finlater.

He got a charter under the great seal, Alexandro de Deskford, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
of several lands, anno 1511.

He got also a charter, whereby the lands and baronies of Finlater, Deskford,
Kethmore, Glenfudich, Auchindoun, and many others too numerous to be here
inserted, with the fishings on Deveron and Ythan, constabulary of Cullen, etc,
in the shires of Banff and Aberdeen, and the lands of Ballhall, and others in
the shire of Forfar, were all erected into one free barony, to be called the
barony of Ogilvie, "To and in favors of the heirs-male of his own body; which
failing, to James, John, Patrick, and George Ogilvies, his brothers-german;
Ibidem.
which failing, to Gilbert Ogilvie his uncle, etc. etc. which all failing, to
his own nearest heirs-male whatever, dated 22d May 1517."

He married, 1st, Janet Abernethy, daughter of Alexander lord Salton, Ibid. ad
ann. 1509.
by whom he had a son,

James Ogilvie of Cardell, -- and a daughter, Elizabeth, Contract penes comitem
de Finlater, ad ann. 1526.
married to Alexander Irvine of Drum, Esquire;.

He married, 2dly, Elizabeth Gordon, sister of the earl of Huntly, which
appears by two charters under the great seal, Alexandro Ogilvie de eodem,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
et Elizabethae Gordon suae sponsae, of the lands of Scafield, Finlater,
Deskford, etc. dated anno 1541 and 1545.

By her he had only one daughter,

Margaret Ogilvie, married to John Gordon, third son of Alexander earl of
Huntly, upon whom, by evil counsel, and the instigation of his wife, he was
prevailed upon to settle his whole estates of Deskford, Finlater, etc. in
prejudice of his son James of Cardell, the said John Gordon being obliged to
carry the name and arms of Ogilvie. The substitution runs thus: Ibidem.
"To himself and Elizabeth Gordon his spouse, in liferent, and in see to the
said John Gordon, and the heirs-male of his body; which failing, to James and
Adam Gordons, his brothers; then to Walter Ogilvie of Boyne; then to Walter of
Dunlugas; then to lord Ogilvie, etc. anno 1546."

John Gordon having been engaged at the battle of Corrichie, where his father
was killed, anno 1562, was beheaded at Aberdeen, and sorfeited; the estates of
Deskford, etc. were thereupon claimed by the Gordons, in virtue of the deed of
settlement of Alexander abovementioned; but queen Mary, out of her great
goodness and love to justice, restored the whole estate to James Ogilvie of
Cardell, the rightful owner, and confirmed it to him by a charter under the
great seal, as will be shown hereafter.

V. JAMES OGILVIE of Cardell, though deprived as above of the family estate, in
his father's lifetime, got the baronies of Broadlands, etc. in Inverness-shire;
upon which he got a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
"to James Ogilvie, son and apparent heir of Alexander Ogilvie of that ilk, and
Janet Gordon his spouse, dated 16th February 1534."

Upon the death of John Gordon, as above mentioned, this James of Cardell, who
then served queen Mary as steward of her household, came over from France to
recover the estate, which belonged to him by birthright, but was now claimed by
the Gordons, as before mentioned. At this time there appears to have been a
submission to queen Mary of Lorrain, then regent, who pronounced a
decreet-arbitral betwixt the parties. This decreet-arbitral is not now to be
found; but it is mentioned in the second decreet-arbitral which restored the
estate to the right owner. This first decreet-arbitral, it would appear, was
unfavourable for James of Cardell, who, upon queen Mary's coming over from
France, raised a reduction thereof in the courts of law. These proceedings
caused great animosities betwixt the families of Gordon and Ogilvie, in which
the friends of both were mostly embarked. To this was owing the scuffle that
happened in the streets of Edinburgh betwixt John Gordon and the above James,
who is there designed lord Ogilvie of Airly, mentioned in Robertson's history,
vol. I. page 245.

When queen Mary made her progress into the north country, she was attended by
James of Cardell, who was extremely active and instrumental in bringing the
MacIntoshes, and others of his friends, as well as the Ogilvies from Angus, to
her assistance.

On the 8th February 1563, queen Mary, out of her regard to James of Cardell,
Ibidem.
granted him a charter, under the great seal, of the lands and baronies of
Deskford, Finlater, etc. "to James Ogilvie of Cardell, son and heir of
Alexander Ogilvie of that ilk, etc."

Notwithstanding this charter, it seems the Gordons still claimed part of the
Ogilvies lands; but at last all differences between the families were ended by
a submission to the following persons, arbiters, viz. James earl of Bothwell,
and sir John Ballenden, justiceclerk, on the part of the earl of Huntly, James
and Adam Gordons, his brothers, and William Maitlend, younger of Leithington,
and Mr. John Spence, his majesty's advocate, for James Ogilvie, the queen being
overs-woman; and by their decreet-arbitral, which is dated 23d March 1566, the
lands and barony of Deskford, etc. Decree. arbitral penes comitem de Finlater.
as contained in the above charter, were affirmed to the said James Ogilvie,
and the lands of Auchindoun and Kethmore, to the said Adam Gordon.

The lands and superiorities in Strathearn and Strathnaven, and the other lands
in the shires of Nairn and Inverness, had been seized by the Gordons, at the
same time that they took possession of the rest of the estate of this family.
These lands and superiorities came soon thereafter into the hands of the
regent, earl of Murray, and have been possessed by that family ever since; but
there is no distinct, or at least certain, account of the cause of the regent's
getting possession of them.

He was one of those Scotch barons who entered into an association to stand by
and support the queen with their lives and fortunes, M. S. in the lawiers
library Edinburgh.
anno 1568.

He married, 1st, Janet, daughter of sir Robert Gordon of Lochinvar, without
issue; he married, 2dly, dame Marian Livingston, of the family of Linlithgow,
one of the ladies who attended queen Mary to France; and it is of her the
family was continued. Amongst the family papers is a charter, 13th of February
1558, of the lands of Findochty, granted to him and her by Mr. George Hay,
Chart. penes comitem de Finlater.
rector of Rathven, and a charter of confirmation thereof by Francis and Mary,
20th June 1559.

By the said dame Marian Livingston, his second wife, he had a son,

VI. ALEXANDER, who married Barbara Ogilvie, daughter of sir William Ogilvie of
Boyne. He got from his father several lands in Inverness-shire, upon which he
got a charter under the great seal, "to Alexander Ogilvie, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
son and apparent heir of James Ogilvie of Cardell, and Barbara Ogilvie his
spouse, dated 19th September 1557."

He died before his father, leaving issue, by the said Barbara, a son,

VII. Sir WALTER OGILVIE of Finlater and Deskford, who succeeded his
grandfather, and got a charter under the great seal, "to Walter Ogilvie,
grandson and apparent heir of James Ogilvie of that ilk, Ibidem.
of the lands of Finlater, Deskford, etc. reserving the liserent to the said
James; and failing heirs-male of Walter's body, to Alexander Ogilvie of Boyne;
then to George Ogilvie of Dunlugas; then to the heirs whatever of the said
James of that ilk, dated 8th May 1567."

He being a man of parts and learning, was highly esteemed by king James VI.
who conferred the honor of knighthood upon him, anno 1590; after which he got
a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
domino Waltero Ogilvie de Finlater, militi, of the lands and barony of
Kethmore, Auchindoun, etc. 26th July 1594.

Also a charter, to him and Mary Douglas his spouse, terrarum dominicalium de
Pitmedden, Ibidem.
etc. dated 1st August 1595.

He got likeways charters of the lands and baronies of Finlater, Greenhills,
Scotstoun, etc. etc. Ibidem.
6th July 1615.

And being possessed of an opulent fortune, and in great favor with his majesty,
he was raised to the dignity of the peerage, by the title of lord Ogilvie of
Deskford, Sir George MacKenzie's baronage, etc.
4th October 1616.

He married, 1st, Agnes, daughter of Robert lord Elphingston, by whom he had
only one daughter,

Christian, married to sir John Forbes of Pitsligo.

He married, 2dly, lady Mary Douglas, daughter of William earl of Morton, by
whom he had a son,

James, his heir -- and two daughters.

1. Margaret, Contr. penes comitem de Finlater.
married, 1st to James Douglas earl of Buchan; 2dly, to Andrew eighth lord Gray.

2. Mary, married to sir John Grant of that ilk.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. JAMES, second lord Deskford, who, in his father's lifetime, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
got a charter, Jacobo magistro de Deskford, of several lands in Banffshire,
20th July 1623.

He was afterward created earl of Finlater by king Charles I. 20th February
1638, Diploma ib. h^ered. masc. ex corp. suo.
by patent, to the heirs-male of his body.

He got charters under the great seal, Jacobo comiti de Finlater, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
of a great many lands and baronies, anno 1641.

He appears to have been deeply engaged on the parliament's side, and was by
them made a privy councillor for life, Rescinded acts of parlt.
and one of the committee for stating the debts of the nation, in November 1641.

He got a ratification of the bailiary of Strathislay, and was appointed one of
the committee of the North for prosecuting the malignants, anno 1644; one of
the committee of estates, anno 1645, and one of the commissioners for selling
malignants lands, Ibidem.
anno 1646.

He married lady Elizabeth Lesly, daughter of Andrew earl of Rothes, by whom he
had two daughters.

1. Lady Elizabeth, afterward countess of Finlater, who married sir Patrick
Ogilvie of Inchmartin, of whom more hereafter.

2. Lady Anne, married to William earl of Glencairn.

The earl having no male-issue, obtained a new patent from king Charles I.
Crawfurd's peerage.
conferring the honors of Finlater, after his death, upon his daughter lady
Elizabeth, and her said husband sir Patrick of Inchmartin, to them, and the
heirs-male of their bodies, etc. and they succeeded accordingly.

This sir Patrick being one of the oldest cadets of the family of Ogilvie, we
shall here briefly deduce his descent from his immediate ancestor,

Sir Walter Ogilvie of Auchterhouse, who flourished in the reigns of king
Robert II. and III. was the sixth generation from the first of the family of
Ogilvie, in a direct male line, and left issue two sons.

1. Sir Walter of Auchterhouse, his successor.

2. Patrick.

I. This PATRICK, ancestor of the family of Inchmartin, left issue a son and
successor,

II. Sir WALTER OGILVIE, who married Margaret, daughter and co-heiress of sir
John Glen knight, Chart. penes com. de Finlater, and lives of the officers of
state, page 246.
by Isabel his wife, daughter and co-heiress of sir Alen Erskine of Inchmartin,
whose ancestor got these lands, by marrying the daughter and heiress of sir
Patrick Inchmartin of that ilk, secretary to king Robert Bruce, and afterward
killed at the battle of Duplin, anno 1332. He got with her the lands and barony
of Inchmartin, which afterward became the chief title of his family, and by
her left issue a son,

III. Sir ANDREW OGILVIE of Inchmartin, Chart. in archiv. fam. de. Wemyss.
who was knighted by king James II. anno 1442, and, by Marjory his wife, Lives
of the office. of state.
(of what family we know not) left issue a son,

IV. Sir DAVID, who succeeded him, and got a charter from king James III.
domino Davidi Ogilvie, etc. Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the lands and barony of Inchmartin, in the shire of Perth, anno 1468.

He married Marian Hay, daughter of -- by whom he had issue two sons and one
daughter. Lives of the offic. of state.


1. Alexander, who died before his father, without issue.

2. James, who became his father's heir.

His daughter, Contract pen. dom. Gray, ad ann. 1503.
Christian, married to Patrick, fourth lord Gray, without issue.

He was succeeded by his son,

V. JAMES, who got a charter from king James IV. Chart. in pub. archivis.
terrarum baroniae de Inchmartin, etc. anno 1512.

He married Isabel, a daughter of lord Oliphant, by whom he had a son,

VI. Sir PATRICK OGILVIE of Inchmartin, who succeeded him, Ibidem.
and got a charter from king James V. of the lands of Balgillo, and many
others, anno 1538.

He got also a charter from queen Mary, terrarum dominicalium de Drimmy, Ibidem.
etc. anno 1548.

He married, Stewart's hist. of the royal family, page 170.
1st, Marian Stewart, daughter of Thomas lord Innermeath, by whom he had a son,

William, his heir apparent.

He married, 2dly, Janet, daughter of Patrick, fourth lord Gray, Chart. in pub.
archiv. ad ann. 1541.
by whom he had two daughters.

1. Margaret, married to Patrick Hay of Megginch, Ibidem.
ancestor of the earl of Kinnoul.

2. Janet, married to John Kinnaird of that ilk.

VII. WILLIAM, only son and apparent heir of sir Patrick of Inchmartin, married
Elizabeth, daughter of Patrick Kinnaird of Inchture, ancestor of lord Kinnaird,
and died before his father, Lives of the offic. of state.
anno 1558, leaving issue, by the said Elizabeth Kinnaird, a son,

VIII. Sir PATRICK, who succeeded his grandfather, and got a charter, under the
great seal, domino Patricio Ogilvie, etc. Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the lands and barony of Inchmartin, and others, anno 1593.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir George Haliburton of Pitcur, Lives of the
offic. of state
by whom he had two sons.

1. Sir Patrick, his heir.

2. William, who having been witness to the slaughter of Patrick Kinnaird of
Inchture, got a remission under the great seal, Willielmo Ogilvie, filio
legitimo Patricii Ogilvie de Inchmartin, etc. Chart. in pub. archiv.
dated 8th December 1594.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. Sir PATRICK, who, in his father's lifetime, got a charter from king James
VI. Patricio, juniori de Inchmartin, Ibidem.
et Annae Campbell suae sponsae, baroniae de Inchmartin, etc. dated 8th January
1611.

He died before the year 1624, leaving issue, by the said Anne, daughter of sir
Duncan Campbell of Glenorchie, ancestor of the earl of Breadalbane, a son,

X. Sir PATRICK OGILVIE, who succeeded him, and got a charter under the great
seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the lands and barony of Inchmartin, and several others, in Perthshiue,
dated 1st July 1624.

He married lady Elizabeth Ogilvie, eldest daughter of James first earl of
Finlater, who, with the approbation of the crown, succeeded to the honors,
Lives of the offic. of state, p. 247.
as before observed, and was the second earl of Finlater.

He was a man of great honor and merit, a steady loyalist, and suffered many
hardships on account of his attachment to the interest of the royal family. He
was excepted from pardon by Oliver Cromwell, Cromwell's act of indemnity.
and fined in fifteen hundred pounds sterling, anno 1654.

He died anno 1658, leaving issue, by the said lady Elizabeth, countess of
Finlater, a son and successor,

XI. JAMES, third earl of Finlater, who married, 1st, lady Anne Montgomery,
only daughter of Hugh, seventh earl of Eglington, by lady Anne, daughter of
James second marquis of Hamilton, by whom he had three sons and one daughter.

1. Walter, lord Deskford, who died before his father, unmarried.

2. James, his heir.

3. Colonel Patrick Ogilvie of Lonmay, who married Elizabeth, daughter of Mr.
Francis Montgomery of Giffen, and had issue.

His daughter, lady Anne, married to George Allardice of that ilk, and had
issue.

He married, 2dly, lady Mary, daughter of William second duke of Hamilton, by
whom he had no issue.

He died anno 1711, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. JAMES, fourth earl of Finlater, born anno 1664, a man of extraordinary
parts, rare accomplishments, and great knowledge of the laws.

Immediately after his return from his travels, he entered advocate with great
applanse, anno 1685, and was chosen member to the convention of estates for the
burgh of Cullen, anno 1689, where he made a remarkable speech in favors of
king James VII. and was one of the five members that dissented from the act for
forfeiting him; Lives of the offic. of state, p. 247.
but after the government was settled under king William, he went into all the
measures of the court, and soon became a favorite of his majesty; and being an
eminent lawyer, was made solicitor for the crown, sheriff of Banff, and
knighted anno 1693.

In the beginning of 1695, he was appointed secretary of state, in conjunction
with the earl of Tullibardine, afterward duke of Athole, who having resigned,
he acted as sole secretary until lord Carmichael was joined with him.

In the year School, he was appointed president of the parliament, Charta penes
comitem de Finlater.
(the earl of Marchmont chancellor, being then commissioner) and he was at the
same time created viscount Seafield.

In 1700, he was appointed his majesty's high commissioner to the general
assembly of the church of Scotland, and was thrice preferred to the same high
dignity afterward, viz. in 1703, 1724, and 1727.

In 1701, he was created earl of Seafield.

He continued secretary of state all king William's reign; and upon queen
Anne's accession, that office was continued to him until November 1702, when he
was made chancellor.

In 1703, he was made a knight of the thistle; and in 1704, he was again made
secretary of state, in conjunction with the duke of Roxburgh, and at the same
time he presided in parliament.

In the same year 1704, he was again appointed chancellor: in which office he
continued till the union was completed, having been first commissioner for
Scotland at the treaty of union, and presided in the Scotch parliament that
ratified it.

In 1708, he was appointed chief baron of the court of exchequer in Scotland,
Ibidem.
with a salary of 3000 l. per annum.

After the union took place, he was appointed one of the privy council in
England, and was continued to be one of that number all his life. He was chosen
one of the sixteen Scotch peers to the first British parliament, and was
re-elected to the second, third, sixth, and seventh.

In 1713, he was again appointed chancellor, and keeper of the great seal in
Scotland; and during all the periods in which he enjoyed the office of
chancellor, he presided in the court of session. In which learned court, he
remarkably displayed his eloquence, and great abilities in the law, and a
peculiar talent of dispatch in business, and shortening law suits.

The family estate having been reduced by cautionry, and other incidents, so
low as to be almost bankrupt, he paid all his father's debts without
composition; and though he lived always in a manner suitable to his high
stations, yet by a prudent economy, he greatly increased his family estate.

This earl of Finlater and Seafield married Anne, daughter of sir William
Dunbar of Durn, baronet, by whom he had two sons and two daughters.

1. James, now earl of Finlater.

2. Mr. George Ogilvie, who being bred to the law, acquired great knowledge in
that profession, and entered advocate, but died without issue.

1st daughter, lady Elizabeth, married to Charles earl of Lauderdale, and had
issue.

2. Lady Janet, married, 1st, to Hugh Forbes, Esquire; son and heir apparent of sir
William Forbes of Craigyvar, baronet, of the county of Aberdeen; she married,
2dly, William Duff of Braco, Esquire; now earl Fife, of the kingdom of Ireland, to
whom she had no issue.

He died anno 1730, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. JAMES, fifth earl of Finlater and Seafield. In the year 1734, he was
chosen one of the sixteen peers, and made one of the lords of police.

In the year 1737, he was promoted to be vice admiral of Scotland; in which
office he has continued ever since.

He was chosen one of the sixteen peers for Scotland to all the successive
parliaments until the 1761, when, by reason of his age, he chose to retire from
public business; but because of the zeal he had shown upon every occasion for
the service of the present royal family, and the preservation of the
constitution, his majesty has been graciously pleased to continue him in the
office of vice admiral.

He married, 1st, lady Elizabeth Hay, daughter of Thomas earl of Kinnoul, by
whom he had a son,

James, lord Deskford, -- and two daughters.

1. Lady Margaret, married to sir Ludovick Grant of that ilk, baronet, and had
issue.

2. Lady Anne, married to John earl of Hopeton, and had issue.

He married, 2dly, lady Sophia Hope, daughter of Charles earl of Hopeton, by
whom he has no issue.

JAMES lord Deskford, son and apparent heir of James fifth earl of Finlater,
was appointed one of the trustees for improving manufactures, fisheries, etc.
and for managing the annexed forfeited estates.

He married lady Mary Murray, daughter of John duke of Athole, by whom he has
issue two sons.

1. James, master of Deskford, etc.

2. John Ogilvie, Esquire;.

ARMS.
Quarterly; 1st and 4th argent, a lion passant guardant gules, crowned with an
imperial crown proper; 2d and 3d argent, a cross ingrailed sable.

CREST; on a wreath, a lion rampant gules, holding between his paws a plum-rule
erect proper.

SUPPORTERS; two lions guardant gules.

MOTTO; Tout jour.

CHIEF SEATS,
At Cullen and Deskford in Banff-shire, and St. James's place, London.

FORBES Lord FORBES.
THAT this noble and ancient family has flourished in Scotland above five
hundred years, appears both from our histories and records, though some
traditional accounts deduce their origin and descent much higher.

Mr. Martin of Clermont, a learned and judicious antiquary, says, that one
Solvathius Forbes, Martin's genesis collect. v. II. p. 17.
married Moravilla, daughter of king Gregory the great, about the year 870, and
that all the Forbes's in Scotland are descended of him.

Other historians say, that one Achonacher, a man of rank, who came from
Ireland, having killed a monstrous wild boar, took the name of For-bear,
Nisbet, vol. I. p. 327.
which was afterward turned to Forbeas; that he was ancestor of the Forbes's,
and that they took the boar's head for their armorial bearing, in memory of
their having killed the boar.

Cambden says, that one of the name of Bois, in king John Baliol's time, after
kiling a mighty wild boar, Cambd. fol. edit. p. 712.
was called For-bois, which afterward was turned to Forbes; but this must be a
mistake, (at least as to the era,) for there were Forbes's in Scotland long
before that time.

It is alleged by others, with more probability, that Forbes is a local
surname, and was first taken up by the proprietors of the lands and barony of
Forbes, soon after the reign of king Malcolm Canmore, about which time several
men of rank in Scotland assumed their sirnames from the lands they possessed,
and were progenitors of some of the most considerable families in the kingdom.

We shall therefore pass over the traditional accounts, and deduce the descent
of this noble family, by authentic documents, from the first of them we find
upon record, viz.

I. JOHN de FORBES, a man of rank and figure, who flourished in the reign of
king William the Lion. He possessed the lands and barony of Forbes, and was
father of,

II. FERGUS de FORBES, who got a charter from Alexander earl of Buchan, Chart.
penes dom. Forbes, and book of orig. charters, penes M'Farlane, vol. I. p. 158.
Fergusio, filio Johannis de Forbes, totum et integrum tenementum de Forbes,
cum pertinent. jacent. in vicecomitatu de Aberdeen, etc. to which charter
William Cummin, the earl of Buchan's brother, and John Cummin, his eldest son,
etc. are witnesses, about the year 1236; and of this Fergus all the Forbes's in
Scotland are descended.

He le^t issue a son and successor,

III. ALEXANDER FORBES, who was a man of great magnanimity and courage, and a
true lover of his country. He was captain and governor of the castle of
Urquhart, which he gallantly defended against king Edward I. of England,
Abercrombie, vol. I. p. 516.
to the very last extremity, and on no terms could be prevailed on to
surrender. In the end the castle was taken by storm, and the whole garrison,
with himself and all his sons, were put to the sword, anno 1303; but happily
his lady being with child was delivered of a son, who succeeded him, and
carried on the line of this family.

This son, who was also named

IV. ALEXANDER FORBES, when a young man, Lumisden's M. S. hist. of the family
of Forbes, Scots compend. and chart. penes dom. Forbes.
joined king Robert Bruce, performed many brave actions in his service, and
never deserted his interest; for which, and in regard of the great sufferings
of his family, and his own eminent loyalty, he obtained a grant of several
other lands from that great monarch, to him and his heirs for ever.

He was no less faithful to king David Bruce, Ibidem and Crawfurd's peerage.
and adhered firmly to his interest, till he lost his life in his service at
the fatal battle of Duplin, anno 1332.

He was also succeeded by a posthumous son,

V. Sir JOHN FORBES of that ilk, who made a great figure in the reigns of king
Robert II. Ibidem, and chart. in pub. archiv.
and III. and acquired from Thomas earl of Mar several lands in
Aberdeen-shire, which he got confirmed to him by a charter under the great seal
of king Robert II. anno 1373.

He obtained likeways a grant of the lands of Findrossie, Chartulary of Murray,
penes MacFarlane, p. 145.
by a charter Johanni de Forbes domino ejusdem, et Margaretae sponsae suae,
dated 19th July 1378.

In the fifth year of king Robert III. he was constituted justiciar* of
Aberdeen-shire, and coroner of that county.

He is witness in a charter of Isabel countess of Mar, of the lands of
Bonjedworth to Thomas Douglas, Charta pene^ comitem de Morton.
in which he is designed Johannes Forbes de eodem, miles, dated anno 1404.

By the said Margaret, (but of what family we know not,) he left issue four
sons.

1. Sir Alexander, his heir.

2. Sir William Forbes* knight, ancestor of lord Pitsligo. Vide title Pitsligo.

3. Sir John Forbes, thane of Formartin, ancestor of the Forbes's of Tolquhon,
Foveran, Waterton, Culloden, and many others.

4. Alexander, Lumisden's M. S. and chart. in pub. archiv.
ancestor of the Forbes's of Brux, and of several other families. Vide vol. II.
of this work.

He died anno 1405, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. Sir ALEXANDER, Chart. penes dom. Forbes, and book of originalcharters,
penes MacFarlane, v. I. p. 164.
afterward lord Forbes, who got an assignation to certain lands from William
de Camera, dominus de Findowne, Alexandro domino Forbes, etc. dated anno 1419.

He was a great patriot, of an undaunted spirit, and was one of those Scotch
he^^es that went to France as volunteers to oppose the English under king Henry
V. who carried king James I. then their prisoner, along with them, in hopes of
making the Scots desert their old allies, and come over to them; but without
success. Lord Forbes carried with him, in his own retinue, forty lances and
one hundred horse, which sufficiently shows the grandeur of this family at that
time; and it was chiefly owing to his valor, lord Gordon's, and some others,
Abercrombie, vol. II. p. 256.
that the Scots obtained a glorious victory over the English at Bauge in Anjou,
anno 1421.

He returned to Scotland immediately after that battle, Rymer, tom. X. p. 153.
and obtained a safe conduct to wait upon the king in England, and is then
designed dominus de Forbes, in the end of that year 1421.

He obtained a grant from John earl of Buchan, to him and Elizabeth Douglas his
spouse, Chart. penes dom. Forbes.
and their heirs, of the lands of Meigle, Fintray, Blacktown, Balcross, etc.
anno 1423.

Also a charter of the lands and barony of Forbes, Ibidem.
from Murdoch duke of Albany, governor of Scotland, Alexandro domino Forbes et
Elizabethae Douglas sponsae suae, consanguineae nostrae (gubernatoris)
carissimae, etc. dated anno 1424.

All which was confirmed by a charter, under the great seal, of king James I.
domino Alexandro Forbes militi, Chart. in pub. archiv.
domino de Forbes, et Elizabethae sponsae suae, etc. dated 6th October 1429.

He obtained a bond of man-rent from sir Alexander Ogston, Penes dom. de Forbes.
lord of that ilk, who obliged himself to attend him with three horsemen
against all mortals, the king's majesty only excepted, dated 20th May 1426.

He entered into an indenture with Robert lord Lyle of Duchale, who gives to
Alexander lord Forbes his part of the lands of Strathdee, Kindrocht, Ibidem,
and book of charters, p. 172.
etc. with all their pertinents, to be holden of the said Robert in blanch
farm, as soon as Robert shall recover possession of half the lands of Mar, etc.
And in like manner the said Alexander gives to the said Robert his lands of
Clunie and Whitefield, lying in Strathern and Angus, to be holden of the earl
of Angus, etc. dated anno 1444.

This sir Alexander was certainly created lord Forbes long before this era,
though we cannot fix the precise time; for he was so designed in Rymer anno
1421, in the above charter of Murdoch duke of Albany, anno 1424; also in his
son's protest in 1445, hereafter mentioned. There is likeways in the register
of the sheriff-court-books of Aberdeen, a precept by king James II. Creations
of the nobility, in the lawiers library. Edinr.
to his well-beloved cousin Alexander lord Forbes, of all arrearages and rests
of his last accounts in the shire of Aberdeen, etc. dated 12th July 1447.

He married lady Elizabeth Douglas, daughter of George earl of Angus, by lady
Margaret Stewart, daughter of king Robert III. and obtained an obligation from
William earl of Angus, Charta in archiv. fam. de Douglas, and book of charters,
p. 167.
her brother, nobili viro Alexandro de Forbes militi* domino ejusd. et
Elizabethae sponsae suae, sorori et haeredi dicti comitis, etc. dated anno 1423.

He got also a charter from king James I. to him and Elizabeth his wife,
Haddington's coll. p. 146.
of the barony of Forbes, Logie, Muchil, and many others, all erected into one
barony, etc. dated 6th October 1430.

By her he had issue two sons, and three daughters.

1. James, his heir.

2. Mr. John Forbes, provost of St. Giles's church, Edinburgh.

1st daughter, Annabeila, married to sir Andrew Gray of Foulis, ancestor of
lord Gray.

2. Margaret, married to -- of Fyvie.

3. Elizabeth, married to -- Irvine of Drum.

He died anno 1448, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. JAMES, second lord Forbes, who, in his father's lifetime, was designed
master of Forbes, the common appellation of a lord of parliament's eldest son:
This is instructed by a protest taken by him in parliament, viz. Jacobus
magister de Forbes, filius et haeres Alexandri domini Forbes, protestatus est,
quod si decretum contra Jacobum comitem Angusiae contigerit esse promulgatum,
Instrument penes dom* Forbes; and book of charters, p. 170.
quod illud nullum sibi generaret praejudicium ex successione praedicto comiti
Angusiae, etc. Testibus (to the notar's instrument) nobilibus et potentibus
dominis, Henrico domino de Dalkeith, Williclmo domino de Somerville, Andrea
domino Gray, Patricio domino Glammis, etc. dated anno 1445.

This agrees with the earl of Angus's bond and tailzie of his estate, Charta in
archiv. fam. de Douglas.
failing heirs of his own body, to James master of Forbes, son and heir of
Alexander lord Forbes, by his sister Elizabeth Douglas, etc.

This lord obtained from king James II. Penes dom* Forbes, and book of
charters, p. 169.
a license, dilecto consanguineo suo Jacobo domino Forbes, ad construendum
turrem seu sortalitium dictum Drumynor vulgariter nuncupat. Forbes in dominio
de Forbes in^ra vicecomitatum de Aberdeen, etc. dated 14th May 1456.

He married lady Egidia Keith, daughter of William first earl Marishal, by whom
he had three sons, and one daughter.

1. William, master of Forbes.

2. Duncan, ancestor of the Forbes's of Corsindae, Monimusk, Kilmuck, Lesly,
etc.

3. Patrick, ancestor of the Forbes's of Corse, Craigyvar, etc. in Scotland,
and of the earls of Granard in Ireland.

His daughter, Giles, was married to Malcolm Forbes of Tolquhon.

He died about the year 1470, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. WILLIAM, third lord Forbes, who married lady Christian Gordon, Charta
penes dom. Forbes.
daughter of Alexander earl of Huntly, by whom he had three sons, and one
daughter.

1. Alexander.

2. Arthur.

3. John.

The above three sons were all successively lords Forbes.

His daughter, Christian, married to William lord Ruthven.

He died soon after his-father, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. ALEXANDER, Chart. in pub. archiv.
fourth lord Forbes, who got a charter, under the great seal, of the lands and
barony of Forbes, to him and Elizabeth his wife, dated 9th July 1477.

He was a man of great honor and loyalty, and a true patriot: he took up arms,
and raised all his vassals and friends, to revenge the murder of king James
III. and was joined by the earls Marishal and Huntly, who were no less zealous
than himself: Abercrombie, vol. II. p. 494.
but their measures were all disconcerted by the defeat of the earl of Lennox
at Tillymoss, who had raised two thousand men on the same account, anno 1488.

He afterward submitted to king James IV. and was received into favor.

He married lady Elizabeth Boyd, daughter of Thomas earl of Arran; but dying
without issue, was succeeded by his brother,

IX. ARTHUR, Chart. in pub. archiv.
fifth lord Forbes, who married Elizabeth Lion, daughter of John lord Glammis;
but dying also without issue, before 1505, his estate and honors devolved upon
his brother,

IX. JOHN, sixth lord Forbes, who got a charter from king James IV. Ibidem.
Johanni domino Forbes, terrarum de Meigle, Fintray, Blackstown, Belcross, etc.
quae ^uerunt Alexandri Forbes militis, proavi dicti Johannis, etc. dated 1st
December 1505.

Also a charter allowing him to build a castle upon the hill of Kynedward,
dated 6th April 1509. Ibidem.


And a charter of the lands and barony of Fudes, in vicecomitatu de Aberdain,
to him and Christian Lundin his spouse, dated 6th February 1510.

He got charters from king James V. Ibidem.
of many other lands, too numerous to be here inserted, inter 1520 et 1535.

He married, 1st, lady Catharine Stewart, daughter of John earl of Athole,
Stewart's hist. of the royal family, p. 182.
by whom he had a son,

James, who died young, -- and a daughter,

Elizabeth, married to -- Grant of that ilk.

He married, 2dly, Christian, daughter of sir John Lundy of that ilk, by whom
he had a son,

William, his heir, -- and four daughters.

1. Margaret, married to Andrew Fraser of Muchil, ancestor of lord Fraser.

2. Elizabeth, married, 1st, to Gilbert Keith of Troup; and, 2dly, to Alexander
Innes of that ilk.

3. Marjory, married to Gilbert Forbes of Brux.

4. Christian, Chart. in pub. archiv. ad annum 1527.
married to William lord Ruthven.

He married, 3dly, Elizabeth Barlow, widow of Alexander lord Elphingston, by
whom he had a son,

Arthur, designed of Putachie, -- and a daughter,

Janet, married, 1st, to John earl of Athole; 2dly, to Alexander Hay of
Dalgity; and, 3dly, to William Leslie of Balquhain.

He died anno 1547, and was succeeded by his son,

X. WILLIAM, seventh lord Forbes, who, in his father's lifetime, Ibidem.
got a charter, under the great seal, Willielmo magistro de Forbes, terrarum
baroniae de Fudes, dated anno 1539.

And a charter, terrarum baroniae de Forbes, Awford, etc. dated anno 1545.

Also charters of several other lands, Ibidem.
inter 1578 et 1584.

He was in great favor with king James V. Ibidem.
who appointed him one of the gentlemen of his bedchamber, when but a young
man.

He married Elizabeth, Lumisden's M. S. history of the family of Forbes, and
chart. in pub. archiv.
daughter and coheiress of sir William Keith of Innerugy, by whom he had six
sons, and eight daughters.

1. John, master of Forbes.

2. William Forbes of Foderhouse.

3. James Forbes of Lethinty.

4. Robert Forbes, prior of Monimusk.

5. Arthur Forbes of Logic.

6. Abraham Forbes of Blackstown.

1st daughter, Jean, married to James lord Ogilvie of Airly.

2. Elizabeth, married to Henry lord Sinclair.

3. Christian, married to George Johnston of Caskieben.

4. Isabel, married to John Gordon of Pitlurg.

5. Catharine, married to -- Barclay of Gartly, in vicecomitatu de Aberdeen.

6. Margaret, married to George Sinclair of May, son of George earl of
Caithness.

7. Barbara, married to Alexander Allardice of that ilk.

8. Anne, married to sir John Seton of Barns.

He died anno 1593, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. JOHN, eighth lord Forbes, who got from king James VI. Chart. in pub.
archiv.
a charter of the lands and barony of Forbes, etc. Johanni domino Forbes, etc.
dated anno 1598.

He married, 1st, lady Margaret Gordon, daughter of Alexander earl of Huntly,
by whom he had a son,

John, who entered into holy orders abroad, and died without issue, -- and two
daughters.

1. Jean, married to William Cummin of Earnside.

2. Margaret, married to George Sinclair of Dunbeath.

He married, 2dly, Janet, daughter of James Seton of Touch, by whom he had a
son,

Arthur, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Catharine, married to -- Gordon of Rothemay.

XII. ARTHUR, ninth lord Forbes, suceeded his father, Ibidem.
and married Jean, daughter of Alexander lord Elphingston, Lumisden's M. S.
hist. of the family of Forbes.
by whom he had five sons, and three daughters.

1. Alexander, his heir.

2. Colonel John Forbes.

3. Colonel William Forbes.

4. Captain Arthur.

5. Captain James.

These two last were killed in the German wars.

1st daughter, Barbara, married to George earl of Seaforth.

2. Anne, married to -- Forbes of Echt.

3. Elizabeth, married to -- Skeen of that ilk.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. ALEXANDER, tenth lord Forbes, who, in his father's lifetime, got a
charter from king James VI. Alexandro magistro de Forbes, Chart. in pub. archiv.
filio et haeredi apparenti Arthuri domini Forbes, terrarum baroniae de
Fintray, etc. dated anno 1619.

His genius leading him to a military lise, he went over to Germany, and served
under the great Gustavus Adolphus, where he acquired the reputation of a brave
and gallant officer, and arrived to the degree of a lieutenant general.

Upon the breaking out of the civil war in Great Britain, he returned to his
native country, had a considerable command in the army that was sent over to
suppress the rebellion in Ireland.

He was one of the colonels of foot in Aberdeen-shire, for duke Hamilton's
engagement, Rescinded acts of parlt.
anno 1648; and, after the murder of the king, had the same office in that
shire, for putting the kingdom in a posture of defense, anno 1649.

He married, 1st, Anne, daughter of sir John Forbes of Pitsligo, by whom he had
a son,

William, master of Forbes, and several others who died young.

He married, 2dly, Elizabeth, daughter of -- Forbes of Rires, Lumisden's
history of the Forbes's, and peerage of Scotland.
in vicecom. de Fife, by whom he had two sons and three daughters that came to
maturity, and eight others that died young.

1. Colonel James Forbes.

2. Captain Arthur Forbes.

1st daughter, Christian, married to John Forbes of Balflug.

2. Mary, married, 1st, to Hugh Rose of Kilravock; and 2dly, to -- Kinnaird of
Cowbine.

3. Anne, who died unmarried.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIV. WILLIAM, eleventh lord Forbes, who married Jean, Ibidem.
daughter of -- Campbell of Calder, by whom he had issue, three sons and two
daughters.

1. William, his heir.

2. Arthur Forbes of Breda, without issue.

3. Mr. Archibald Forbes of Putachie.

1st daughter Mary, married, 1st, to William Sutherland of Rosecommon, son of
James, second lord Duffus; and 2dly, to sir Robert Gordon of Gordonston.

2. Elizabeth, married to -- Leith of Whitehaugh.

And dying in 1691, was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. WILLIAM, twelfth lord Forbes, who, coming early into the revolution, was
constituted one of the lords of the privy council to king William, in May 1689;
captain of a troop of horse; and soon after colonel of a regiment of dragoons.

He was also one of the privy council to queen Anne, and lieutenant colonel of
the horse guards, commanded by the duke of Argyle.

He married Anne, daughter of James Brodie of that ilk, by whom he had two
sons, and one daughter.

1. William, his heir.

2. James, who succeeded to the honors, of whom afterward.

His daughter Mary, married to John Ogilvie of Balbegno, Esquire;

He died, anno 1716, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVI. WILLIAM, thirteenth lord Forbes, who married Miss Dorothy Dale, daughter
of William Dale, Esquire; of Covent Garden, Westminster, by whom he had a son,

Francis, his heir, -- and three daughters.

1. Mary, who died young.

2. Jean, married to captain James Dundass younger of Dundass.

3. Elizabeth, married to doctor John Gregory, professor of medicine in king's
college, Aberdeen.

He died anno 1730, and was succeeded by his only son,

XVII. FRANCIS, fourteenth lord Forbes, who died a minor, unmarried, anno 1734,
and was succeeded by his uncle James beforementioned, to whom we now return.

XVI. JAMES, fifteenth lord Forbes, second son of William, the twelfth lord,
married, 1st, Mary Forbes, sister of Alexander, lord Pitsligo, widow of John
Forbes of Monimusk, by whom he had a son,

James, now lord Forbes, -- and three daughters.

1. Sophia, married to Charles Cummin of Kinninmount.

2. Mary, married to James Gordon of Cowbardie, Esquire;

3. Anne, married to Thomas Erskine of Pittodrie, Esquire;

He married, 2dly, Elizabeth, daughter of sir James Gordon of Park, Bart. by
whom he had no issue.

He died anno 1761, and was succeeded by his son,

XVII. JAMES, sixteenth lord Forbes, who married Catharine Innes, only daughter
of sir Robert Innes of Orton, Bart. by whom he has a daughter.

ARMS.
Azure, three boars heads couped argent, muzled gules.

CREST; on a wreath, a stag's head erazed, proper.

SUPPORTERS; two greyhounds argent, each having a plain collar gules.

MOTTO; Grace me guide.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Castle Forbes and Putachie, in Aberdeenshire, etc.

ASHTON, Lord ASHTON of FORFAR.
AS a full account of this noble and ancient family is to be found in many
English histories, we shall here briefly deduce their descent, as contained in
the Scots compendium, being all taken from English authors.

I. RALPH de ASHTON, in the county of Stafford, flourished in the beginning of
the reign of king Henry III. who succeeded to the crown of England, anno 1216.

He was father of

II. ROGER de ASHTON, who obtained from Roger de Maland, Hist. of England, and
Scots compend. p. 427.
bishop of Litch^ield, the keeping of the game of Cankwood in Staffordshire,
anno 1260, which has continued with his posterity ever since.

He married Sibil, daughter of James de La^^da, by whom he had issue a son and
successor,

III. Sir JOHN de ASHTON, who was knight of the shire for Stafford, the 7th of
Edward III. anno 1327.

He was succeeded by his son,

IV. ROGER de ASHTON, who was also knight for Staffordshire, the 23d of the
same prince, anno 1350.

He was father of

V. JOHN de ASHTON, who was made sheriff of Staffordshire by king Edward III.
about the 1370, and was succeeded by his son,

VI. Sir THOMAS ASHTON, who served in parliament as knight for Staffordshire,
the 10th of Henry IV. anno 1409, and was also made sheriff of the county.

He married Elizabeth, sister and heir to Reginald de Leigh, by whom he got a
great estate, and by her had issue a son,

VII. Sir ROGER de ASHTON, who was returned knight for Staffordshire, by the
commissioners of the county, to serve in parliament the 12th of Henry VI. anno
1434.

He married Joyce, sister and co-heiress of Baldwin de Freville, by whom he had
a son and heir,

VIII. ROGER de ASHTON, who married Isabel, daughter of sir William Brereton in
the county of Chester, by whom he had a son,

IX. JOHN de ASHTON, who succeeded him, and was sheriff of the county of
Stafford, in the reigns of Edward IV. and Richard III.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of John Delves of Dodington, Esquire; by whom he
had a son,

X. Sir JOHN de ASHTON, who at the marriage of prince Arthur, eldest son of
king Henry VII. was made knight of the bath.

This sir John, in the 4th of Henry VIII. anno 1513, went in the expedition
into Britanny, and assisted that king at the siege of Terouin and Tournay, as
also at the battle of Spurs that same year; and for his conduct and bravery was
made a knight banneret in the open field.

He married Joan, daughter of sir William Littleton, by which marriage he got
the manor of Wanlip, etc. and by her he had issue two sons.

1. Sir Edward, his heir.

2. William Ashton, Esquire;

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. Sir EDWARD ASHTON, who was several times sheriff of the county of
Stafford, and married Joan, daughter of Thomas Bowls, Esquire; by whom he had a son,

Sir Walter, his heir, -- and three daughters.

1. Catharine, married to sir William Chitwynd of Ingstree, in the county of
Stafford.

2. Mary, married to sir Simon Harcourt, of Stanton Harcourt in Oxfordshire.

3. Frances, married to Robert Needham of Shenton, in Leichestershire, ancestor
of viscount Kilmurry.

He died anno 1568, and was succeeded by his son,

XII. Sir WALTER ASHTON, who was knighted by queen Elizabeth.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of sir James Levison.

He died anno 1589, leaving issue a son and successor,

XIII. Sir EDWARD ASHTON, who was also knighted and appointed sheriff of
Staffordshire, an office that had been enjoyed by all his ancestors, since the
time of king Edward III.

He married Anne, daughter of sir Thomas Lucy knight, by whom he had a son,

XIV. Sir WALTER ASHTON, who succeeded him, and at the coronation of king James
I. of England, was made a knight of the bath, anno 1603, and a baronet, 1611.

In 1622, he was sent with the earl of Bristol to the court of Madrid, to
conclude a marriage treaty with Charles prince of Wales, and the eldest
daughter of that crown; where, to support the glory of his country, he spent
the greatest part of his own estate, though that marriage never took effect.

However, Diploma in pub. regist.
king Charles I. being sensible of his faithful services, created him a peer of
Scotland, by the title of lord Ashton of Forfar, 8th November 1628, by patent,
haeredibus masculis in perpetuum.

He died anno 1639, having married Gertrude, daughter of sir Ralph Sadler of
Standon, in the county of Hartford, by whom he had a son and successor,

XV. WALTER, second lord Ashton of Forfar, who was a great loyalist, and trusty
servant to king Charles I.

When Litchfield was besieged by the parliament's forces, he was joined in
commission with sir Thomas Tildesly the governor. They sent a letter to the
king at Newcastle, with a safe hand, to which he returned the following answer:

Newcastle, 6th June, 1646. My lord Ashton and Tildesly,
The greatest of my misfortunes is, that I cannot reward such gallant and loyal
subjects as you are, as I ought or would. For the present, (I deal freely with
you,) I can give you no relief; but I desire you to hold out till Oxford be
surrendered, which will be ranked among the good services done by you to

Your assured friend, Charles R.


Oxford being surrendered soon thereafter, and no conditions obtained for them,
lord Ashton retired, and lived privately in the country till the restoration;
after which he succeeded to the estate of Standon, beforementioned, and got a
grant thereof from king Charles II. to him and his heirs, with a weekly market,
and two several sairs in the year, at the town of Standon, without being
accountable to the exchequer, etc.

He married lady Mary Weston, daughter of Richard earl of Portland, lord
treasurer of England, by whom he had a son,

XVI. WALTER, third lord Ashton of Forfar, who married Eleanor, daughter of sir
Walter Blunt, knight, by whom he had a son,

Walter, his heir.

He died anno 1714, and was succeeded by his son,

XVII. WALTER, ^ourth lord Ashton of Forfar, who married lady Mary Howard,
sister to Thomas duke of Norfolk, by whom he had several children.

1. James his heir, etc. etc.

He had a daughter married to Robert Wield, Esquire;

He died anno 1746, and was succeeded by his son,

XVIII. JAMES, fifth lord Ashton of Forfar, who married lady Barbara Talbot,
eldest daughter of George earl of Shrewsbury, by whom he had son.

He died anno 1755, and was succeeded by his son,

XIX. WALTER, sixth lord Ashton of Forfar, etc.

ARMS.
Argent, a fess; and in chief, three lozenges sable.

CREST; on a wreath, a bull's head couped, of the last.

SUPPORTERS; two Roman knights completely armed, their faces, hands, and knees
bare.

MOTTO; Numini et patriae asto.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Standon in the county of Hartford, and at Tizhall in Staffordshire.

DOUGLAS Earl of FORFAR.
ARCHIBALD earl of Angus, eldest son and apparent heir of William, first
marquis of Douglas, married 1st lady Anne Stewart, daughter of Esme duke of
Lennox, by whom he had a son,

James, afterward marquis of Douglas.

He married, 2dly, lady Jean Wemyss, daughter of David earl of Wemyss; and on
3d April, 1651, when king Charles II* was in Scotland, he was created earl of
Ormond and Forfar, lord Bothwell and Hartside, these honors being limited to
his heirs-male by the said lady Jean Wemyss; and by her he had also a son,

II. ARCHIBALD, who, accordingly upon his father's death, Dipl. in pub. archiv.
succeeded to those titles, anno 1655. But after the restoration, he got a new
patent, confirming the titles of earl of Forfar, lord Windale and Hartside, to
him, and the heirs-male of his body, 2d Oc^. 1661.

He came early into the revolution, was named a privy councillor to king
William, and one of the commissioners for executing the office of lord privy
seal.

He was also of the privy council to queen Anne, and was by her appointed one
of the commissioners of the treasury, in which office he continued till the
dissolution of that court by the union.

He married Rabina, daughter of sir William Lockhart of Lee, ambassador
extraordinary from king Charles II. to the court of France. By the said Rabina,
he had a son,

Archibald, his heir.

He died in 1712, and was succeeded by the said

III. ARCHIBALD, second earl of Forfar, who betaking himself to a military
life, soon rose to the degree of a lieutenant colonel, and was with the duke of
Argyle at the battle of Sheriff-muir, anno 1715, where he received several
wounds, of which he died a few days thereafter, without issue, whereby his
honors became extinct.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st, and 4th, argent, a man's heart crowned, proper; on a chief
azure, three stars of the 1st. 2d, and 3d, four coats quarterly, 1st MacDoual,
2d Abernethy, 3d Wishart, 4th Stewart, as born by the Duke of Douglas.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter side, a savage with a chain about his neck, pendant;
to it a crowned heart, proper; on the sinister, a b^ck collared with three
mullets.

CREST; a phoenix in a slame.

MOTTO; Extinctus orior; and on the compartment, Jamai^ arrier.

CHIEF SEAT.
At Bothwel-castle in Lanerk-shire.

FORRESTER Lord FORRESTER.
THIS surname, which is of great antiquity, is taken from the office of
forester, or keeper of the king's forests, their armorial bearings being
hunting horns, etc.

There was an ancient family of the surname of Forrester in the Merse, designed
of Renton, which long ago ended in an heiress, married to Ellim of Ellimford;
which family again ended in another heiress, married to the ancestor of sir
John Home, now of Renton.

The immediate ancestor of this noble family was

I. Sir ADAM FORRESTER, who flourished in the reign of king David Bruce, from
whom he got a charter, under the great seal, of the lands of Whitburn, Chart.
in king David's book.
in the constabulary of Linlithgow, to him and his heirs, etc. dated the 17th
of August 1365.

He got another charter from the same prince, upon the resignation of William
de Seton, Ibidem.
terrarum villae de Nudriff, (Niddery) in the said constabulary, to him, and
the heirs-male of his body, dated anno 1370.

This sir Adam has been possessed of an immense estate, Chart. in archiv.
Robert II.
for he got from king Robert II. no less than six charters, under the great
seal, of different lands and baronies; besides, one of the lands and barony of
Corstorphine, Ibidem.
which he acquired from sir William More of Abercorn, anno 1377, which
afterward became the chief title of his family.

He was a man of great parts, was made lord privy seal anno 1390, Rymer tom.
VII. and VIII.
and was six or seven time; employed to negotiate treaties with the English,
betwixt the 1394 and 1404.

He married Agnes, Ni^bet's append. p. 269.
daughter of John Dundas of Fingask, by whom he had two sons.

1. Sir John, his heir.

2. Thomas, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who got a charter, under the great seal, of the lands of Drylaw, upon sir
John's resignation, Thom^e Forrester sratri suo, etc. dated in 1406.

Sir Adam died in the end of the year 1405, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. Sir JOHN, who got a charter from Robert duke of Albany, governor of
Scotland, of the lands and barony of Uchtertyre, in the shire of Stirling, upon
the resignation of sir John Drummond of Cargill, ^bidem.
to and in favors of sir John Forrester of Corstorphine, and Margaret his
spouse, dated 6th March 1407.

He acquired from Henry Sinclair earl of Orkney, an annuity of twelve merks per
annum, out of his lands and coal-works of Dysart, until he is repaid of thirty
nobles, which he lent the earl in his great necessity, etc. Upon which he got a
charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
dated in December 1407.

He was one of the commissioners appointed to treat with the English about the
king's liberty, Rymer, tom. IX. p. 341. tom. X. pages 266, 308, etc.
anno 1416, and again in 1423; he was also one of the hostages for his ransom,
1424.

He was in great favor with king James I. who made him, Lives of the offic. of
state. p. 310.
first, master of his household, then lord high chamberlain of Scotland, 1425.

He was afterward employed in several negotiations with the English, Ibid. and
Rymer.
and made many considerable donations to the religious.

By the above charter in 1407, it appears he married, 1st, Margaret; but of
what family, or whether or not he had children by her we can give no account.

He married, 2dly, lady Jean Sinclair, daughter of Henry earl of Orkney, Chart.
in pub. archiv.
by whom he had two sons and two daughters.

1. Sir John, his heir.

2. Henry Forrester of Liberton, Ibidem.
etc.

1st daughter, Janet, married to sir Robert, then son and heir-apparent of
Herbert lord Maxwell of Carlaverock. Ibidem.


2. Elizabeth, married to sir Alexander Lauder of Hatton, knight.

He died anno 1440, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. Sir JOHN, who, in his father's lifetime, got a charter, Ibidem.
under the great seal, Johanni Forrester, filio et haeredi apparenti domini
Johannis Forrester, camerarii Scotiae, etc. of several lands, inter 1425 et
1430.

He married Marian Stewart lady Dalswinton, Stewart's hist. of the royal fam.
p. 160.
widow of sir John Stewart, knight, by whom he had two sons.

1. Archibald, his heir.

2. Matthew Forrester, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who got a charter from king James III. of the lands of Barnton, etc. anno 1487.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. ARCHIBALD FORRESTER of Corstorphin, who married Margaret Hepburn, Chart.
penes ducem de Ro^burgh.
daughter of Patrick lord Hailes, by whom he had a son and successor,

V. Sir ALEXANDER, who got a charter from king James III. Chart. in pub. archiv.
domino Alexandro Forrester de Corstorphine, militi, of several lands and
baronies, dated anno 1477.

He got charters of many other lands, Ibidem.
inter 1480 et 1500.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir Duncan Forrester of Gardyn, by whom he
had a son,

VI. JAMES, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who succeeded him, and got many charters from king James V. Jacobo Forrester
de Corstorphine, etc.

He married Janet, daughter of -- Lauder of Hatton, by whom he had two sons.

1. Sir James, his heir.

2. Henry, who succeeded his brother.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. Sir JAMES FORRESTER of Corstorphine, Chart. in cancellaria.
who dying without issue-male, anno 1587, his estate devolved upon his brother,

VII. HENRY FORRESTER of Corstorphine, who married Helen Preston, a daughter of
the family of Craigmillar, in Edinburghshire, by whom he had a son,

VIII. GEORGE, who, being a man of parts, honor, and probity, was in great
favor with king Charles I. who created him a baronet, anno 1625, then raised
him to the dignity of the peerage, Records of parliament.
by the title of lord Forrester of Corstorphine, 22d July 1633, by patent to
his heirs-general.

He was also appointed high sheriff of the shire of Edinburgh.

He got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Georgio domino Forrester de Corstorphin, of the lands and barony of
Torwood-head, and many others, inter 1634 et 1640.

He married Christian, daughter of sir William Livingston of Kilsyth, by whom
he had several daughters.

1. Helen, married to William lord Ross.

2. Jean, married to James Baillie of Torwood-head, son of lieutenant general
William Baillie.

3. Lilias, married to William Baillie, another son of the said
lieutenant general William, and who carried on the line of this family.

George, first lord Forrester, having no issue, made a resignation of his
estate and honors in the king's hands, and got a new patent, to himself in
li^erent, and after his decease, "To and in favors of his daughter Jean, and
her husband, the said James Baillie, Records of parliament.
and the heirs procreate betwixt them; which failing, to the nearest and lawful
heirs-male of the said James whatever; they carrying the name and arms of
Forrester; the said James being designed master of Forrester during George's
life, etc." This patent is dated 13th August 1650.

George, first lord Forrester, dying soon thereafter without male-issue, was
accordingly succeeded by his son-in-law,

IX. JAMES BAILLIE alias FORRESTER, second lord, who, after the death of his
first wife, the said Jean, married, 2dly, lady Jean Ruthven, only daughter of
Patrick earl of Forth and Brentford, but dying without issue by either, his
estate and honors, according to the last mentioned patent, devolved upon his
brother and heir-male,

IX. WILLIAM, third lord Forrester, who, by the said Lilias, daughter of the
first lord, left issue a son and successor,

X. WILLIAM, fourth lord Forrester, who married a daughter of sir Andrew Birnie
of Saline, one of the senators of the college of justice; and he dying anno
1705, by her left a son and heir,

XI. GEORGE, fifth lord Forrester, who went into the army, signalized himself
in the government's service at Preston in Lancashire, anno 1715, and was made
colonel of the 4th troop of horse guards.

He married Charlotte, daughter and coheiress of Anthony Row, Esquire; in the
county of Oxford, by whom he had two sons and two daughters.

1. George, his heir.

2. William.

His daughter --, married to Patrick Haldane of Bearcrofts, Esquire; advocate.

The other --, married to -- Stirling of Herbertshire, Esquire;.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. GEORGE, sixth lord Forrester, who dying without issue, was succeeded by
his brother,

XII. WILLIAM, seventh lord Forrester, who was a chaplain in the royal navy,
but dying unmarried, anno 1748, the title appears to be extinct.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st and 4th argent, three buffalo's horns sable, stringed gules,
for the name of Forrester; 2d and 3d azure, nine mullets or, for Baillie.

CREST; on a wreath, a talbot's head crazed argent.

SUPPORTERS; two talbots of the last.

MOTTO; Spero.

CHIEF SEATS
Were at Torwood in the shire of Stirling, and Corstorphine within two miles of
Edinburgh.

PATRICK RUTHVEN Earl of FORTH in Scotland, and BRENTFORD in England.
THE immediate ancestor of this great man was,

I. WILLIAM, second son of William, created lord Ruthven, anno 1487.

He got from his father the lands of Bandean, Chart. in pub. archiv.
in Perthshire, upon which he got a charter from king James V. anno 1528.

He got also another charter, Willielmo Ruthven et Agnetae Crichton sponsae
suae, Ibidem.
dated 1536.

By the said Agnes Crichton, he left issue a son,

II. WILLIAM RUTHVEN of Bandean, who succeeded him. He was father of

III. PATRICK, afterward earl of Forth, who being of a military genius, went
abroad when young to push his fortune in the German wars, and served under that
great general Gustavus Adolphus; where, for his conduct and bravery, he rose to
the rank of a lieutenant general, and gained to himself immortal honor: But
hearing of the troubles in his own country, and being strongly attached to the
interest of the royal family, he returned home, and immediately joined the
loyalists. Minutes of parliament.
The king being no stranger to his character, created him lord Ruthven of
Ettrick, anno 1639, and made him governor of the castle of Edinburgh, which he
held out for the king, and absolutely refused to surrender; for which he was
forfeited by the parliament in June 1640; Ibidem.
but by general Lesly's interest, his forfeiture was taken off in November
1641. He immediately repaired to the king in England, who made him general of
his army, Records of parliament.
and created him earl of Forth, 27th March 1642, by patent to the heirs-male of
his body.

At the battles of Edgehill, Brentford, and Newberry, he performed the part of
a prudent and experienced general; and, in consideration of his eminent
services, the king was pleased to create him a peer of England, by the title of
earl of Brentford, etc. anno 1645.

He was again forfeited, Guthry's memoirs.
and excepted from pardon by the parliament, and died in an advanced age, anno
1651, leaving issue only one daughter,

IV. Lady JEAN RUTHVEN, married to James lord Forrester, who dying also without
issue, all the titles became extinct.

ARMS.
Argent, three bars gules.

FRASER Lord FRASER.
THE immediate ancestor of this branch of the noble and ancient family of
Fraser was,

I. ANDREW FRASER of Muchil, in Aberdeenshire, who ^lourished in the reign of
king James V. Chart. in pub. archiv.
and married Margaret, daughter of John sixth lord Forbes, by whom he had a son
and heir,

II. ANDREW FRASER of Muchil, who married Elizabeth, Ibidem.
daughter of Robert Douglas earl of Buchan, by whom he had a son,

III. ANDREW, who succeeded him, and being a man of parts and learning, was in
great favor with king Charles I. Diploma in pub. archiv.
who raised him to the dignity of the peerage, by the title of lord Fraser,
19th June 1633, by patent haeredibus masculis e corpore suo.

He afterward got charters under the great seal, Andreae domino Fraser, Ibidem.
of the lands and barony of Duris, and others, inter 1634 et 1636. In which
last year he died, having married Anne, daughter of James lord Balmerino, by
whom he had a son and successor,

IV. ANDREW, second lord Fraser, who appears to have been engaged on the
parliament's side during the troublesome reign of king Charles I.

He was one of the committee sent to the north for prosecuting malignants,
Rescinded acts of parl.
19th July 1644.

He was one of the committee of estates in 1645; Ibidem.
and he and his son the master were both in the last committee, anno 1649.

He got charters from king Charles II. Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the lands and barony of Stainywood, etc. anno 1662.

He married Anne, daughter of -- Haldane of Gleneagles, by whom he had issue,

Andrew, his heir.

He died anno 1674, and was succeeded by his son,

V. ANDREW, third lord Fraser, who married Catharine Fraser, Crawfurd's peerage.
daughter of Hugh lord Lovat, widow of Robert viscount of Arbuthnot, by whom he
had a son,

VI. CHARLES, fourth lord Fraser, Ibidem.
who succeeded him, and married lady Mary Erskine, daughter of James earl of
Buchan, and died without issue.

ARMS.
Azure, three fraizes argent.

CREST; a mount full of strawberries, leaved, flowered, and fructuate, proper.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter a falcon, and on the sinister a heron proper.

MOTTO; All my hope is in God.

MACDUFF Thane and Earl of FYFE.
AS there are many full and elaborate accounts of this great and ancient
family, wrote by good historians, we shall here briefly deduce their descent
from the best authorities.

Fifus Duffus, or Fyfe MacDuff, was a man of vast wealth and power in the reign
of king Kenneth II. and gave that prince great assistance in his wars with the
Picts, about the year 834.

After they were subdued (about the year 840) king Kenneth gave to this
MacDuff, in reward of his great and eminent services, Sir James Balfour's
description of Fife.
all the lands then called Otholinia, which he himself had conquered from the
Picts, which extended from Fife-Ness to Clackmannan, from east to west, from
the river Forth on the south, to the river Tay and Earn on the north.

This great tract of land he called Fi^e, after his own name, according to
these words of Boethius, Boeth. lib. X. p. 199.
regio ad id tempus Otholinia a Fi^o Duffo, in Fifi nomen concessit, etc.

As he was now proprietor of all Fyfe, he was also appointed heretable thane
thereof, the highest jurisdiction then known in Scotland under our kings; which
dignity was enjoyed by his posterity in a direct male-line to that hero and
eminent patriot MacDuff, the eighth thane, and first earl.

I. MACDUFF, eighth thane, afterward earl of Fyfe, was one of the greatest and
most powerful subjects in the kingdom; and as he was no less good than great,
he was consequently much dreaded by MacBeath the usurper.

The great share he had in bringing about king Malcolm Canmore's restoration,
and his killing MacBeath with his own hand, are facts so well known, that it is
needless here to insist on them.

And as Malcolm was a prince both generous and grateful, he did not fail to
reward his benefactor according to his merit: Fordun, vol. I.
He confirmed to him the county of Fyfe, and created him earl thereof at his
first conventus procerum held at Forfar, anno 1057; or, according to others,
anno 1061.

He likeways conferred on him many great and noble privileges, all to descend
to his posterity, viz.

1st, To have the honor of placing the kings of Scotland in the chair of state
at their coronation.

2d, That they should lead the van of the royal army in the day of battle.

3d, That if any within the ninth degree of relation to his family, should be
guilty of manslaughter, Ibid. vol. I. p. 252.
he should be free by ^lying to Cross MacDuff (a sanctuary or place of girth)
upon paying twenty-four merks of silver for the death of a gentleman, and
twelve for that of a plebeian, etc.

This last privilege was often claimed and obtained; particularly by sir Hugh
Abernethy, sir Alexander Murray of Abercairny, Spens of Wormiston, etc.

This great man was succeeded by his son,

II. DUFFAGAN, Chartulary of Scoon, penes vicecom. de Stormont, and sir James
Dalrymple's collections.
second earl of Fyfe, who is a witness to many charters of king Alexander I.
and assents to a charter of mortification to the Trinity Church of Scoon, 1115.

He was succeeded by his son,

III. CONSTANTINE, Ibidem, and chartularies of Dunfer^line and St. Andrews, etc.
third earl of Fy^e, who was witness to a charter of Edelrad, anno 1120; also
to a charter of mortification to the monastery of Dunfermline.

He, dying anno 1127, was succeeded by his son,

IV. GILLMICHAEL, fourth earl of Fyfe, Ibidem.
who is witness to the foundation charter of the Abbay of Holyrood-house, anno
1128; also to several other charters of king David I.

He left issue two sons.

1. Duncan, his heir.

2. Hugo, of whom the family of Wemyss is lineally descended. Vide title earl
Wemyss.

He died anno 1139, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. DUNCAN, fifth earl of Fyfe, who is witness to many charters of king David
I. C^artulary of Dunfermline, etc.
and he himself was a liberal benefactor to the religious.

He had issue a son,

Duncan, his heir.

It is said he had also several other sons, of whom the Wemysses, M. S. hist.
of Clanchatton.
MacIntoshes, Duffs, Fyfes, etc. are descended; but we have never seen any
document for this.

Earl Duncan died anno 1154, and was succeeded by his son,

VI. DUNCAN, sixth earl of Fyfe, who made a great figure, and was justiciar of
Scotland in the reign of king William the Lion.

He founded a monastery for nuns at North-Berwick, Ibid. Chartul. of Coldstream
etc.
and made many other donations to the religious.

He was one of the Scotch nobles at the convention with the king of England,
Rymer, tom. I. p. 39.
when king William obtained his liberty, anno 1174.

He left issue several sons.

1. Malcolm, his heir.

2. Duncan, whose son Malcolm became earl of Fyfe, upon the death of his uncle
Malcolm the seventh earl, as will be shown hereafter.

3. David, designed in several authentic writs, ^hartulary of Moray.
filius Duncani comitis de Fife, etc. whose son John became earl of Athole.
Vide title earl of Athole.

Earl Duncan died anno 1203, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. MALCOLM, Chron. of Melross, and (...) of Moray.
seventh earl of Fife, who ^ounded and largely endowed the abbacy of Culross,
in Perth-shire, anno 1217.

He made a donation to the episcopal see of Moray, Ibid. p. 4.
to which Duncan and David, his brothers, are witnesses.

He dying without male-issue, anno 1230, was succeeded by his nephew Malcolm,
as before observed.

VIII. MALCOLM, eighth earl of Fyfe, son of Duncan, Fordun, vol. II p. 58.
second son of the sixth earl, succeeded to the earldom, Rymer, tom. I. p. 377
and 428.
as above, and was one of the guarantees of a treaty with the English, anno
1237, and to another in 1244.

He was appointed one of the privy council to king Alexander III. Ibid. p. 566.
upon the change of the ministry, anno 1255.

He married a daughter of Lewelin king of Wales, Fordun, vol. II. p. 58.
by whom he had a son,

Colban, his heir, -- and a daughter,

--, married to sir Walter Murray of Bothwel.

He died anno 1266, Ibid. p. 104.
and was succeeded by his son,

IX. COLBAN, ninth earl of Fyfe, who survived his father only four years, Ibid.
p. 113.
and died anno 1270, leaving issue a son,

X. DUNCAN, tenth earl of Fyfe, who being but eight years old when his father
died, Ibidem.
the king took the charge of his education till he should be of age.

He was one of the Scotch nobles that took an oath, obliging themselves to
stand by, Rymer, tom. II. p. 266.
and maintain the right and title of king Alexander's grandchild to the crown,
failing heirs-male of his body, anno 1284.

After the death of king Alexander III. this earl was chosen one of the six
guardians of the kingdom; Fordun, vol. II. p. 148.
but was basely put to death by sir Patrick Abernethy, and sir Walter Percy,
anno 1288, leaving issue a son,

XI. DUNCAN, eleventh earl of Fyfe, who lost his life in the service of his
country, at the battle of Falkirk, Ibid. p. 175.
anno 1298; and, though not above twenty years of age, left issue a son,

XII. DUNCAN, Rymer.
twelfth earl of Fyfe, who married Mary de Monthermer, niece to king Edward I.
of England.

He was one of the Scotch nobles that signed the famous letter to the pope,
Fordun, vol. II. p. 275.
asserting the independency of Scotland, anno 1320.

He was taken prisoner at the unfortunate battle of Duplin, Ibid. p. 305, and
306.
anno 1332; after which he was compelled to put the crown upon Edward Baliol's
head at Scoon that same year.

He died soon thereafter, leaving issue a son,

XIII. DUNCAN, thirteenth earl of Fyfe, who attended king David Bruce in his
unlucky expedition into England, Rymer's f^^d.
and was taken prisoner with him at the battle of Durham, anno 1346.

He afterward got liberty to return to Scotland, Ibid. tom. V. p. 671.
to procure sufficient hostages, or to raise money for his own ransom, anno
1350.

We can trace him no further; but he is said to have died about the year 1353,
leaving issue, by Mary his wife, only one daughter,

XIV. ISABEL, his sole heiress, who married, 1st, sir William Ramsay, knight,
who, it is said, in her right, became earl of Fyfe; but of that we have seen no
documents. By him she had no issue.

She married* Stewart's history of the royal family, p. 56.
2dly, Walter Stewart, second son of the first marriage of king Robert II. who
died also without issue, anno 1360.

She married; 3dly; sir Thomas Bysset of Upsetlington, and does not yet seem to
be designed comitissa. There is a charter of confirmation, under the great
seal, in these words: David D. G. etc. sciatis nos vidisse intellexisse, etc.
quandam cartam, viz. omnibus hanc cartam visuris, Chart. in archis regis David.
etc. Thomas Bysset dominus de Upsetlington, miles, etc. dotasse Isabellam de
Fife dominam ejusd. ante matrimonium inter me et ipsam Isabellam, etc. in tota
baronia de Gles^lume, etc. etc. anno 1362.

About a year thereafter, he got a new charter from the same prince, narrated
at length in sir Robert Sibbald's history of Fife, p. 97* in which are these
words:

David D. G. etc. sciatis nos dedisse dilecto et fideli nostro Thomae Bysset,
militi, totum comitatum nostrum de Fife, etc. tenend. etc. eidem Thomae et
haeredibus suis masculis inter ipsum et Isabellam de Fife, etc. quibus
deficientibus, volumus quod totus praedictus comitatus, etc. ad nos et haeredes
nostros libere revertatur, etc. etc. dated in June 1363, anno regni 34.

She had no issue by any of her husbands; but resigned the whole earldom of
Fife in favors of Robert duke of Albany; we shall therefore here insert part
of an indenture narrated at large in sir Robert Sibbald's history of Fife, p.
97. viz.

"Indenture betwixt Robert Stewart, earl of Menteith, and Isabel countess of
Fife, etc. That the said countess does acknowledge the said earl to be her
lawful heir apparent, as well by the tailzie made by umquhil Duncan earl of
Fife, her father, to Alan earl of Menteith, grandfather of the lady Margaret,
spouse of the said Robert now earl, as by the tailzie made by the said lady
Isabel herself, and her umquhil husband Walter Stewart, the son of the said
Robert earl of Menteith, to the foresaid earl, by which, upon the said earl's
assisting her in the recovery of her earldom, which she by force and fear had
otherways resigned; and that when the said earldom is recovered, and the
countess has got possession of it, she shall presently resign it in the king's
hands, to infeft the earl himself in it, etc. etc. etc." This deed is dated the
penult day of March 1371.

Robert duke of Albany succeeded to the earldom accordingly, which at last was
annexed to the crown, by the forfeiture of his son duke Murdoch, anno 1425.
Vide title duke of Albany.

Sir Robert Sibbald, p. 98. says, "There were several cadets of the MacDuffs,
earls of Fife, viz. the predecessor of the earls of Wemyss, of MacIntosh or
Clanchatton, of Toshach of Monyvaird, of the barons of Finday, Craigton, and
others of the name of Duff, etc. etc."

ARMS.
Or, a lion rampant gules.

Lord of GALLOWAY.
THE inhabitants of this county were of old governed by their own lords and
princes, according to Cambden, who says, Galovid^a olim suos principes et
dominos habuit; Cambden, p. (...).
but we shall begin to deduce their descent, only where we have authentic
documents.

I. FERGUS, lord of Galloway, flourished in the end of the reign of king
Malcolm Canmore, and lived till near the end of that of king Malcom IV. who
died anno 1165.

He made a great figure in his time, being very rich and powerful, and had been
engaged with the English against his country; Fordun, vol. I. p. 450.
but at last submitted, and delivered his own eldest son Uchtred to the king,
as an hostage for his good behavior in time coming.

He was a great benefactor to the religious. He founded the monastery of
Dundrenan, Chron of Melrose, etc.
anno 1142; also the priory of Whitehorn, and made several donations to the
monastery of Holyrood-house, etc.

He at last turned a religieuse himself, Ibidem, and Fordun,
retired to the last named monastery, anno 1160, and died soon thereafter,
leaving issue two sons.

1. Uchtred.

2. Gilbert.

II. UCHTRED, second lord of Galloway, succeeded his father, and in many
authentic writs is designed filius et haeres Fergusii, etc. He was a true
patriot, and stood always firm to the interest of his country; Fordun, vol I.
p. 471.
but his brother Gilbert being more in the English interest, got assistance
from them, made Uchtred prisoner, and at last cruelly put him to death, and
took possession of his whole estate; but Gilbert dying anno 1185,

III. ROLAND, son of his brother Uchtred, got possession of his own
inheritance, and was third lord of Galloway.

He was a faithful and loyal subject, Ibid. p. 491.
and was always in great favor with king William.

He married Eva, daughter, Chron. of Melross, p. 16. Eva comitissa uxor Rolandi
de Galloveia, etc.
and at last sole heiress of Richard de Morvile, constable of Scotland, whereby
he got not only a great accession to his estate, but had also the dignity of
constable transferred to his family.

He founded the abbay of Glenluce in Galloway, Keith's bishops, p. 257.
anno 1190.

By the said Eva he left issue two sons, and one daughter.

1. Alan, his heir.

2. Thomas de Galloway, who married Isabel, second daughter of Henry earl of
Athole, by which marriage he came to be earl of Athole.

His daughter, Ada, married to sir Walter Bysset.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. ALAN, fourth lord of Galloway, who was also constable of Scotland.

He founded the abbacy of Tungland, Chartulary of Melross, etc.
and gave vast donations to the religious.

He married, 1st, a daughter of Hugh de Lacy, Fordun, vol. II. p. 58.
an Irish lady, by whom he had no issue.

He married, 2dly, Margaret, eldest daughter of David earl of Huntington,
brother to king Malcolm IV. and king William the Lion, by whom he had three
daughters.

1. Helen, married to Roger de Quincy, earl of Winchester, without issue.

2. Christian, married to William de Fortibus, earl of Albermarle, also without
issue.

3. Dervegild, married to John Baliol, lord of Bernard castle.

Lord Alan dying without male-succession, anno 1234, Chron. of Melross.
and his two eldest daughters dying without issue, the greatest part of his
estate came to

V. DERVEGILD, his third daughter, who married John Baliol, as above.

She dying anno 1269, left issue a son,

VI. JOHN BALIOL, afterward king of Scotland, of whom there is now no
succession.

Dervegild is said also to have had a daughter, married to John Cummin, lord of
Badenach, whose only daughter married Archibald tenth lord Douglas, father of
the first earl.

This Archibald was also designed lord of Galloway, which title continued long
in the family of Douglas. Vide title duke of Douglas.

STEWART Earl of GALLOWAY.
AS the rise, descent, grandeur and antiquity of the illustrious and royal
family of Stewart, is fully recorded and transmitted to posterity by many
historians, we shall proceed directly to the immediate ancestor of this noble
family, which has the honor to be among the first cadets of that illustrious
house.

ALEXANDER, sixth lord high steward of Scotland, Si^son's collections, and
chart. penes Mr. Stewart de Phisgil, nunc penes com. de Galloway, and Stewart's
hist. of the royal family, p. 50.
obtained from king Alexander III. a grant of the lands of Gairlies, anno 1263.

He married Jean, daughter and heiress of Angus MacRori^, lord of Bute, and
died in 1283, leaving issue two sons.

1. James, seventh lord high steward of Scotland, grandfather of king Robert
II. the first Scotch king of the name of Stewart, of whom the whole of the
royal family is descended.

2. Sir John Stewart of Bonkill, the immediate ancestor of this family.

I. Sir JOHN STEWART, second son of Alexander, sixth lord high steward of
Scotland, Ibidem, Scot^ compend* and hist. of the Stewarts.
got from his father the lands of Gairlies, etc.

He was a great hero and patriot, and was one of those noble worth^es, who,
upon the death of king Alexander III. entered into that memorable bond or
association, whereby they bound themselves to stand by one another, Dugdale's
baronage of England.
in defense of their country, and whoever should by right of blood succeed to
the crown of Scotland. The obligement is dated, 20th December 1286. Rymer, tom.
II. p. 553.


He was one of the Scotch nobles chosen on the part of Robert Bruce, in his
competition for the crown with John Baliol, anno 1292.

After he had performed many great actions in the service of his country, he
was killed fighting gallantly against the English, at the battle of Falkirk,
anno 1298, having married Margaret, Stewart's hist. of the royal family, p. 158.
daughter and heiress of sir Alexander Bonkill of that ilk, in whose right he
came to be possessed of a great many lands, particularly the barony of Bonkill,
by which title he was afterward designed.

By his said lady, he left a numerous issue, viz.

1. Alexander Stewart of Bonkill, afterward earl of Angus, whose male line is
extinct.

2. Sir Alan Stewart of Dreghorn, ancestor of the Stewarts of Darnly, earls and
dukes of Lennox. The last duke of the male-line of that family, dying without
issue in 1672, king Charles II. grandson of king James VI. son of Henry lord
Darnley, son of Matthew earl of Lennox, was then the next heir-male.

3. Sir Walter Stewart of Dalswinton, who carried on the line of this family.

4. Sir John Stewart of Jedburgh, of whom several considerable families are
descended, and whose grandson married the heiress of Dalswinton, as will be
shown hereafter.

5. Sir James Stewart of Preston, etc. -- and a daughter,

Isabel, married to the brave Thomas Randulph earl of Murray, with whom he got
the barony of Gairlies, which again returned to the family, as will appear
afterward.

II. Sir WALTER STEWART third son of sir John Stewart of Bonkill, was one of
those patriots who joined king Robert Bruce, Haddington's collect. and
Stewart's hist. of the royal family, p. 16.
as soon as he began to assert his title to the crown, and performed many
gallant actions against the enemies of his country, under that great prince,
from whom he obtained a grant of the lands and barony of Dalswinton, pro bono
et fideli servitio sibi impenso, as the charter bears.

He also got the barony of Gairlies conveyed back to him, by John Randulph earl
of Murray, son of the said Thomas, Haddington's collect. hist. of the royal
family, etc.
his brother-in-law, by a charter, in which he is designed dilectus avunculus
noster.

He was succeeded by his son,

III. Sir JOHN STEWART of Dalswinton, who adhered as firmly to the interest of
king David Bruce, as his father had done to that of king Robert.

He accompanied him in his expedition into England, Rymer, tom. V. p. 534.
and was taken prisoner with him at the battle of Durham, anno 1346.

He had the good fortune to be relieved soon thereafter, which appears from an
original charter, granted by John Crawfurd of Dalgarnock, Chart. penes dominum
de Craigdarroch.
to John Ferguson of Craigdarroch, of the miln of Balmachene in Dumfries-shire,
in which this sir John de Dalswinton, with his two sons Walter and John, are
witnesses.

He was likewise one of the great barons sent to England, Rymer, tom. VI. p. 35.
as hostages for king David's ransom, anno 1357.

He married -- by whom he had issue two sons.

1. Walter.

2. Sir John, both mentioned in the above charter of John Crawfurd of
Dalgarnock.

IV. Sir WALTER the eldest, designed lord of Dalswinton and Gairlies, succeeded
his father, and made a great figure in the reigns of king Robert II. and III.

He got from the king of England, a pension of 100 merks sterling, to be paid
yearly out of the exchequer during his life, and that of Isabel his spouse,
upon condition that he should serve him the king of England, against all men
whatsomever, Rymer.
the king of Scotland only excepted. The obligation or indenture is dated 27th
April 1392.

He left issue no sons, and but one only daughter, viz.

V. Dame MARIAN STEWART, daughter and sole heiress of sir Walter Stewart of
Dalswinton and Gairlies, who was married to her cousin John Stewart, son of sir
William Stewart of Jedburgh, sheriff of Teviotdale, and one of the greatest
heroes of his time. He was son of sir John Stewart of Jedburgh, fourth son of
sir John Stewart of Bonkill, younger brother of sir Walter of Dalswinton, great
grandfather of this Marian.

He, in right of his wife, became possessed of the lands and baronies of
Dalswinton, Chart. pene^ comitem de Galloway, and Stewart's hist. of the royal
family, p. 100.
Gairlies, etc. which appears by their contract, dated anno 1396, and of this
marriage, the present earl of Galloway is the lineal heirmale.

In 1418, they* with mutual consent and assent, give and dispone from them and
their heirs, to sir John Stewart lord of Greyton and his heirs, the lands and
barony of Callie, in the stewartry of Kirkcudbright, which went with Elizabeth
Stewart, Simson's collections, and Chart. penes Lennox de Woodhead.
his daughter and sole heiress, to her husband Donald Lennox, son of Duncan,
the last earl of Lennox of that line; of which Donald, the Lennoxes of Woodhead
and Callie are lineally descended.

The had issue one son,

William of Dalswinton, etc.

Dame Marian Stewart, heiress of Dalswinton, survived her first husband, and
married 2dly, sir John Forrester of Corstorphin, great chamberlain of Scotland,
which appears from a donation made by her, with consent of the said sir John
her spouse, Chartulary of Glasgow, in the lawiers library Edinr.
and William Stewart her son and apparent heir, of the church of Kirkmahoe in
Galloway, to be a prebendary of Glasgow. This deed is dated in 1424.

VI. Sir WILLIAM STEWART of Dalswinton and Gairlies, succeeded his father and
mother: he was a man of good parts, and in great favor with king James II. who
conferred the honor of knighthood upon him anno 1443. Chart. in pub. archiv.


He married Dame Eupheme Grahame, by whom he had four sons.

1. Andrew, who got a charter under the great seal, Ibid. ad ann. 1458.
Andreae Stewart filio et haeredi apparenti domini Willielmi de Dalswinton,
etc. but he died before his father without issue.

2. Sir Alexander who became his heir. Ibid. ad ann. 1466.


3. Sir Thomas Stewart of Minto, of whom the lord Blantyre, and several other
considerable families are descended.

4. Sir Walter Stewart of Tongrie, of whom the earl of Blessington, the
Stewarts of Bonkill, Shambelly, etc. are descended.

Sir William was succeeded by his son,

VII. Sir ALEXANDER STEWART of Gairlies, Ibidem.
who obtained a grant of the barony of Dalswinton from his father, anno 1454,
in whose lifetime he resigned some lands in Teviotdale, Ibidem, and hist. of
the royal family, p. 161.
in favors of Alexander Scott of Howpaslet, which was confirmed by a charter
under the great seal, anno 1465.

He married Elizabeth Stewart, by whom he had two sons.

1. John, who married Elizabeth, daughter of sir John Shaw of Hallie, Ibidem.
but died without issue before his father.

2. Alexander of Gairlies.

He died anno 1477, and was succeeded by his son,

VIII. ALEXANDER, who in his father's lifetime was designed Alexander of
Gairlies, which continued to be the chief title of the family till they were
made earls of Galloway.

He married Elizabeth, M. S. hist of this family, penes com. de Galloway, and
hist. of the Stewarts.
daughter of sir Archibald Douglas of Cavers, heretable sheri^^ of Teviotdale,
by whom he had two sons and two daughters.

1. Sir Alexander of Gairlies.

2. Walter Stewart of Barelay.

1st daughter, Agnes, married to John lord Maxwell.

2. Janet, who was second wife to John Dunbar of Mochrum, of which marriage
Dunbar of Baldoon was descended.

He died in 1501, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. Sir ALEXANDER STEWART of Gairlies, who was in great favor with king James
IV. Ibidem.
from whom he received the honor of knighthood, and was killed in the service
of his country, with his royal master, at the fatal battle of Flowdon, anno
1513, leaving issue, by Elizabeth Kennedy his wife, one son, viz.

Sir Alexander of Gairlies, M. S. hist. of the family of Galloway.
-- and sixteen daughters.

1. Janet, married to sir John Kennedy of Culzean, and had only one daughter,
married to Gilbert earl of Cassilis.

2. Christian, married to captain James Stewart of Cardonald.

3. -- married to -- Towers of Innerleith, in vicecom. de Edinburgh.

4. -- married to -- Douglas of Pompherston in West-lothian.

5. -- married to -- Moultray of Seafield, in vicecom. de Fyfe.

6. -- married to -- Lundy of Balgony, ibidem.

7. -- married to -- Hannay of Sorbie in Galloway.

8. -- married to Alexander Adair of Kilhill in Wigton.

9. -- married to Finlay Campbell of Corsehill in Galloway.

10. -- married to Thomas Kennedy of Bargenie.

11. -- married to -- Lockhart of Bar in Airshire.

12. -- married to -- Kennedy of Blairquhan, ibidem.

13. -- married to -- Crichton of Naughton in Fyfe.

14. -- married to -- Johnston of that ilk.

15. -- married to -- Cairns of Orchardtown.

16. Elizabeth, married to Thomas MacDowal, son and heir apparent of Uthred
MacDowal of Garthland.

X. Sir ALEXANDER STEWART of Gairlies, succeeded his father anno 1513, and made
a great figure in the reign of king James V. He was one of his privy council,
and was sent ambassador extraordinary to king Henry VIII. of England, and
acquitted himself with honor, fidelity and reputation.

He, when a young man, with consent of his curators, Robert lord Maxwell,
Chart. in pub. archiv. ad annum 1521.
etc. married Catharine, daughter of sir James Crichton of Cranston-Riddel, who
died soon thereafter without issue.

He married, 2dly, Margaret, daughter and heiress of Patrick Dunbar of
Clugston, by whom he had two sons and one daughter.

1. Alexander, his apparent heir.

2. John, Charta penes Mr. Stewart of Phisgal, ad annum 1510.
parson of Kirkmahoe, progenitor of the Stewarts of Phisgal.

His daughter, Margaret, married, 1st, Patrick Agnew of Lochnaw, Chart. in pub.
arch. ad ann. 1550.
and had issue; 2dly, Patrick Mackie of Larg.

He married, 3dly, his cousin Catharine, daughter of Walter Stewart of Barclay,
M. S. history of the family of Galloway.
by whom he had three sons and one daughter.

1. Robert Stewart, who married, 1st, Elizabeth, daughter and co-heiress of
James Stuart of Cardonald; 2dly, Marian, daughter of the earl of Eglinton, but
died without issue.

2. Anthony Stewart, parson of Penninghame, M. S. hist. of the family of
Galloway, and Chart. in pub. archiv.
who married Barbara, daughter of Alexander Gordon bishop of Galloway, by whom
he got the lands of Clarie, anno 1566, and had issue.

3. William Stewart of Bargrenan, who married and had issue.

His daughter, Helen, married, 1st, to William Gordon of Murefode, ancestor of
viscount Kenmure; 2dly, to John Glendoning of Drumraik,

Sir Alexander made an entail of a great many of his lands, to himself in
liferent, and to Alexander his eldest son and apparent heir, and the heirs-male
of his body, in see; which failing, Ibidem.
to his second son John, brother german of the said Alexander, and the
heirs-male of his body, etc. etc. all contained in a charter under the great
seal, dated anno 1541.

Sometime after, he made an entail of his other lands, Register of the
privy seal, ad annum 1557.
to his heirs-male, and to the same effect and purposes as above, upon which he
passed another charter.

XI. ALEXANDER, younger of Gairlies, first son and apparent heir of sir
Alexander, was a man of great bravery and spirit, and a mighty promoter of the
reformation: Calderwood's church hist.
He sent a challenge to the famous sir William Kirkaldy of Grange, governor of
the castle of Edinburgh for the queen, who wisely evaded the combat, not out of
cowardice, but because he knew his life was of the utmost consequence to her
majesty.

He was appointed commissioner for the kirks of Nithsdale, and was a member of
the convention or parliament that met in 1560.

He was knighted when Henry lord Darnly was made earl of Ross, and was one of
those who signed a protection, together with queen Mary's privy council, to the
earl of Murray, to come and discover the pretended conspiracy against his life,
anno 1565.

He adhered firmly to the interest of king James VI. Hist. of t^^ royal famil^
p. 162.
in his minority, and was slain with the regent Lennox at the surprise of the
town of Stirling, anno 1571, his father being then alive.

By Catharine his wife, daughter and one of the co-heiresses of William lord
Herries of Terreagles, he left issue a son,

XII. Sir ALEXANDER STEWART of Gairlies, who succeeded his grandfather, Ibidem.
and was in great favor with his majesty king James VI. who conferred the
honor of knighthood upon him, at the solemnity of his queen's coronation, anno
1590.

He married, 1st, Christian, daughter of sir William Douglas of Drumlanrig,
ancestor of the duke of Queensberry, by whom he had two sons, and three
daughters.

1. Alexander, afterward earl of Galloway.

2. William Stewart of Mains, ancestor of the Stewarts of Burray in Orkney.

1st daughter, Helen, married to John Douglas of Stanhouse.

2. Jean, married to John Kennedy of Culzean.

3. Nicolas, married to John Dunbar of Mochrum.

He married, 2dly, lady Elizabeth Douglas, daughter of David earl of Augus,
dowager of Robert lord Maxwell, by whom he had no issue.

He died anno 1596, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. Sir ALEXANDER STEWART of Gairlies, a man of eminent parts, great
loyalty, and integrity; he was first knighted, then raised to the peerage by
king James VI. Chart penes comitem de Galloway.
by the title of lord Gairlies; the patent being to him, and the heirs-male of
his body, and bearing date 19th July 1607.

The king's esteem and favor for him still increasing, he was further
dignisied with the title of earl of Galloway, Ibidem.
by a new patent, dated 9th September 1623.

He was likewise a steady and firm friend of his majesty king Charles I. was
one of his privy council, and never deserted his interest.

He married Grizel, daughter of sir John Gordon of Lochinvar, ancestor of
viscount Kenmure, Crawsurd. Scots comp. endium, etc.
by Elizabeth his wife, daughter of John Maxwell lord Herries, ancestor of the
earl of Nithsdale, by whom he had two sons and one daughter.

1. Alexander, lord Gairlies.

2. Sir James Stewart, baronet, afterward earl of Galloway.

His daughter, lady Anne, married to sir Andrew Agnew of Lochnaw, baronet.

XIV. ALEXANDER, lord Gairlies, first son and apparent heir of Alexander first
earl of Galloway, died in 1638, having married lady Margaret Graham, daughter
of William earl of Monteith and Airth, lord justice-general, and president of
the council, in the reign of king Charles I. by whom he had a son,

Alexander, lord Gairlies, who dying unmarried in 1642, was succeeded by his
uncle sir James Stewart, baronet, before mentioned, who was served heir to
Alexander lord Gairlies, Crawf. Scots compend. and Simson's collections.
son and heir of Alexander earl of Galloway, etc. on 5th December 1643.

The earl, who lived to a great age, died in 1649; and was succeeded by his
second son,

XIV. JAMES, second earl of Galloway, a man of untainted loyalty, who, after
the murder of the king, adhered firmly to the interest of his son king Charles
II. for which he suffered greatly.

In the year 1654, when Oliver Cromwell gave an act of indemnity to the Scots,
this noble lord, for his strong attachment to the royal family, Cromwell's act
of indemn. hist. of the royal family, etc.
was fined in four thousand pounds sterling, which he was forced to pay.
However, he had the good fortune to outlive the usurpation; and, for his great
sufferings and personal merit, was highly esteemed by, and in great favor with
king Charles II.

He married Nicholas, daughter of sir Robert Grierson of Lag, Scots compend.
and history of the royal family.
by whom he had issue three sons and one daughter.

1. Alexander, lord Gairlies.

2. Robert Stewart of Reimston.

3. William of Castlestewart, who married Elizabeth, daughter and heiress of
John Gordon of Cardonness.

His daughter, lady Grizel, married to Alexander viscount Kenmure.

He died anno 1671, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. ALEXANDER, third earl of Galloway, who married lady Mary Douglas, daughter
of James earl of Queensberry, by whom he had six sons and two daughters.

1. Alexander, lord Gairlies.

2. James, who succeeded his brother.

3. Brigadier John Stewart of Sorbie.

4. Andrew, who died in the expedition to Darien in 1699.

5. William.

6. Robert Stewart, Esquire;.

1st daughter, lady Margaret, married to sir John Clerk of Pennycuik, baronet,
one of the barons of exchequer.

2. Lady Henriet, married to William earl of Glencairn.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVI. ALEXANDER, fourth earl of Galloway, who dying unmarried in 1694, his
estate and honors devolved upon his brother,

XVI. JAMES, fifth earl of Galloway, who was a man of good parts, great honor
and integrity, and a true lover of his country.

He was one of the lords of the privy council to queen Anne, and married lady
Catharine Montgomery, daughter of Alexander earl of Eglington, by whom he had
four sons and four daughters.

1. Alexander, now earl of Galloway.

2. James, a major general of his majesty's forces, and colonel of the 37th
regiment of foot, was twice member of parliament for the shire, and twice for
the burghs of Wigton, etc.

3. William, also an officer in the army, and was member for the burghs of
Wigton, etc. to the 9th British parliament.

4. George.

1st daughter, lady Margaret, married, 1st, to James earl of Southesk; 2dly, to
John lord Sinclair.

2. Lady Eupheme, married to Alexander Murray of Broughton, Esquire;.

3. Lady Catharine.

4. Lady Anne.

The two last died unmarried,

He died anno 1747, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVII. ALEXANDER, sixth earl of Galloway, who is one of the lords of police,
etc.

He married, 1st, lady Anne Keith, daughter of William earl Marishall, by whom
he had two sons and one daughter.

1. Alexander master of Gairlies, who died at Aix-la-chapelle unmarried.

2. James, who died young at Dalkeith school.

His daughter, Mary, married to Kenneth lord Fortrose, son and heir of the late
earl of Seasorth.

He married, 2dly, lady Catharine Cochrane, daughter of John earl of Dundonald,
by whom he had four sons and six daughters.

1. John, lord Gairlies, now member of parliament for Morpeth, in England.

2. George, who was a captain in the army, and killed at Ticonderago in
America, anno 1758, much regreted.

3. William, who died young.

4. Keith.

1st daughter, lady Catharine, married to her cousin, James Murray of
Broughton, Esquire;.

2. Lady Susanna.

3. Lady Margaret, married to Charles earl of Aboyne.

4. Lady Euphemia.

5. Lady Henriet.

6. Lady Charlotte, married to William earl of Dunmore.

ARMS.
Azure, a fess cheque azure and argent, surmounted of a bend gules, within a
double tressure, flowered and counter-flowered, with flowers de lis of the last.

CREST; on a wreath, a pelican feeding her young in the nest, proper.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter side, a savage, wreathed with laurel about the
temples and middle, holding a battoon over his shoulder, all proper; and on the
sinister, a lion rampant gules.

MOTTO; Virescit vulnere virtus.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Gairlies, Glenish, Glasserton, and Clary, all in Wigton-shire.

CRAWFORD Viscount GARNOCK.
THE immediate ancestor of this noble family was,

I. GUALTERUS de CRAWFORD, who flourished in the reign of king William the
Lion. He was cotemporary with Galfridus, ancestor of the Crawfords, lords of
that ilk.

This Gualterus was witness to a charter of Roger bishop of St. Andrews, Chart.
of Coldinghame penes MacFarlane, p. 103.
confirming a donation to the monastery of Coldinghame, inter 1189 et 1202, in
which last year the bishop died.

He was succeeded by his son,

II. Sir REGINALD de CRAWFORD, who made a great figure in the reign of king
Alexander II. by whom he was highly esteemed.

He was appointed heretable sheriff of the county of Air; which honorable
office was long enjoyed by his posterity.

In a donation of Walter, son of Alan lord high steward of Scotland, of the
lands of Dalmulin, to the monastery of Paisley, Chart. of Paisley penescom. de
Dundonald.
sir Reginald de Crawford sheriff of Air, Walter bishop of Glasgow, etc. etc.
are witnesses, anno 1220.

He is witness, with several others, to a donation by the same Walter lord high
steward, ecclesiae de Dundonald, Ibidem.
etc. and as the said bishop is also a witness, it must have been in or before
1232, in which year the bishop died.

He is likeways witness to a donation of David de Lindsay to the monastery of
Newbottle, of some of his lands, Chartulary of Newbottle, p. 19.
in territorio suo de Crawford, inter 1227 et 1232.

He married Margaret, daughter and heirless of James Loudoun of that ilk, with
whom he got the lands and barony of Loudoun, in Airshire, which afterward
became the chief title of his family.

By her he left issue two sons.

1. Sir Hugh, his heir.

2. Sir John, ancestor of the family of Garnock.

Sir Reginald died about the year 1250, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. Sir HUGH CRAWFORD of Loudoun, heretable sheriff of the county of Air,
whose great grandson sir Reginald, died without male-issue, anno 1303, ( vide
title earl of Loudoun) whereby the representation of the first branch of this
ancient family devolved upon the male descendents of,

III. Sir JOHN CRAWFORD, second son of the said sir Reginald, who having
acquired a part of the lordship and barony of Crawford, from sir John the
proprietor, gave it the name of Crawford-john; by which title he was afterward
designed, though it was not the greatest part of his estate, but because most
of the lordship of Crawford went to the Douglas's and the Lindsays, by their
marriage with sir John's daughters, as observed under the title lord Crawford,
page 152 of this work.

Sir John got a safe conduct and protection from king Henry III. to go into
England, anno 1255, Rymer tom. I. p. 559.
and is then designed Johannes de Crawford, miles, etc.

He left issue a son,

Sir Reginald, -- and a daughter,

Margaret, to whom he gave the half of his lands of Crawford-john, as will be
shown hereafter.

IV. Sir REGINALD, only son of sir John, in a donation to the monastery of
Paisley, by James, lord high steward of Scotland, is designed dominus
Reginaldus de Crawford, Chartul. of Paisly.
miles, etc. anno 1288.

He is witness to another donation of the same lord high steward, together with
Robert bishop of Glasgow, Ibidem.
anno 1294.

He was a great patriot, a firm and steady friend of king Robert Bruce, from
whom (for his good and faithful services) he got a grant of the lands of
Crumshuc in Cunningham, which had been formerly possessed by John Baliol.
Chart. in pub. archiv. Rob. regis I.
The charter is without date, but appears to have been granted about the year
1320.

He was succeeded by his son,

V. ROGER de CRAWFORD, who accompanied king David Bruce in his expedition into
England, Rymer, tom. V. p. 534.
and was taken prisoner with him at the battle of Durham, anno 1346.

He left issue a son,

VI. MALCOLM de CRAWFORD, who married the daughter and co-heiress of Malcolm
Galbraith of Greenock, an ancient family in those parts, Crawfurd's peerage.
by whom he got a considerable accession to his estate, and by her had issue a
son,

VII. ROGER de CRAWFORD, who succeeded him, and got a charter under the great
seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
from king James I. of some lands in Kyle, anno 1425.

He left issue a son and successor,

VIII. JOHN de CRAWFORD, who got a charter from king James II. of his lands in
Kyle, Ibidem.
in which he is designed Johannes filius Rogeri, etc. anno 1445.

He was succeeded by his son,

IX. MALCOLM CRAWFORD of Greenock, who married Marjory, only daughter and
heiress of sir John Barclay of Crawford-john; and she being lineally descended
of Margaret only daughter of sir John Crawford of Crawford-john, No. III. of
this account, to her we now return, and shall briefly deduce her descent.

IV. MARGARET, only daughter of the said sir John, Remarks on Ragm. roll, p. ^4.
got from her father the half of the lands of Crawford-john, as before
observed, and married sir Walter Barclay, who got with her these lands, which
afterward became one of the titles of his family.

They left issue a son,

V. DAVID BARCLAY, Ibidem.
who we find possessed half of the lands of Crawford-john, anno 1357.

He was father of,

VI. Sir HUGH BARCLAY, Ibidem, and chart. in pub. archiv.
designed of Kilbirnie, also dominus dimidiae baroniae de Crawford-john, anno
1397.

He was succeeded by his son,

VII. Sir ADAM BARCLAY, who, in a charter from king James I. Ibidem.
is designed Adam filius domini Hugonis de Kilbiruy, miles, anno 1429.

He left issue a son and successor,

VIII. Sir JOHN BARCLAY of Kilbirnie and Crawford-john, who died without male
issue, anno 1470, and whose only daughter and heiress Marjory, married to
Malcolm Crawford of Greenock, as before observed, whereby the heirs-male, and
of line of this family were united.

To the said Malcolm therefore we now return.

IX. MALCOLM CRAWFORD of Greenock, son of John de Crawford, the eighth
generation of this family, in a direct male line, married Marjory Barclay, as
above, with whom he got the lands and barony of Kilbirnie, Crawford-john, etc.
and in consequence of the marriage, Nisbet, vol. I. p. 56.
he quartered the arms of Barclay of Kilbirnie with his own.

He got a charter from king James IV. Malcolmo Crawford de Greenock, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
terrarum de Kilbirnie, dimidietat. baroniae de Crawford-john, etc. etc. 4th
May 1499.

By the said Marjory, he left issue four sons and one daughter.

1. Robert, his heir.

2. James, first of the Crawfords of Minnock, in the shire of Air.

3. Thomas.

4. John.

His daughter, Isabel, married to sir Adam Cunningham of Caprington, knight.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. ROBERT CRAWFORD, who, in his father's lifetime, got a charter from king
James IV. of the lands and barony of Kilbirnie, Crawford-john, Ibidem.
etc. in which he is designed filius et haeres apparens Malcolmi, etc. anno
1499.

He got another charter, under the great seal, to him and Margaret Semple, his
spouse, of the lands of Easter-Greenock, Chart. in pub. archiv.
etc. anno 1506.

He died anno 1513. By the said Margaret, a daughter of sir Thomas Semple of
Elliotstone, he left issue a son,

XI. LAURENCE CRAWFORD of Kilbirnie, who suceeded him, and being a man of good
parts, and possessed of an opulent fortune, made a considerable figure in his
time.

He exchanged the lands of Crawford-john, the ancient inheritance of his
family, Chart. penes comitem de Crawford.
with sir James Hamilton of Fynart, for the lands of Drumry, anno 1528.

He founded a chaplainry at Drumry, and made several donations to the religious.

He married Helen, daughter of sir Hugh Campbell of Loudoun, ancestor of the
earl of Loudoun, by whom he had six sons and two daughters.

1. Hugh, his heir.

2. William, who died without issue.

3. Robert, of whom there is now no succession.

4. John, designed of Greenock-Easter, whose male-line is extinct.

5. David, of Campbell, of whom there are no male descendents.

6. Captain Thomas, who was ancestor of the Crawfords of Jordanhill, of whom
more hereafter.

1st daughter, Catharine, married to David Fairly of that ilk.

2. Isabel, married to Gavin Blair of Hally.

Laurence died anno 1547, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. HUGH CRAWFORD of Kilbirnie. He was a staunch and steady friend of queen
Mary, Ibidem.
and sought in her cause at the battle of Langside, anno 1568; for which he was
afterward obliged to take a remission from the regent.

He married, Ibidem.
1st, Margaret, daughter of sir John Colquhoun of Luss, by whom he had a son,

Malcolm, his heir.

He married, Ibidem.
2dly, Elizabeth, daughter of David Barclay of Ladyland, by whom he had another
son,

William, of whom there are no descendents, -- and three daughters.

1st daughter, Margaret, married, 1st, to James Galbraith of Kilcroich; 2dly,
to sit Auly MacAulay of Arncaple.

2. Marian, married to John Boil of Kelburn, ancestor of the earl of Glasgow.

3. Elizabeth, married to David Brodie of Castletoun, Esquire;.

He died anno 1576, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. MALCOLM CRAWFORD of Kilbirbirnie, Chart. penes comitem de Crawfurd.
who married Margaret, daughter of John Cunningham of Glengarnock, Esquire; by whom
he had two sons, and one daughter.

1. John, his heir.

2. Alexander Crawford, Esquire; of whom there is now no succession.

His daughter, --, married to William Cunningham of Legland, ancestor of sir
William Cunningham, Bart.

He died anno 1592, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIV. JOHN, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who got a charter, under the great seal, ( Johanni Crawfurd de Kilbirnie,) of
the lands and baronies of Kilbirnie, Easter-Greenock, etc. anno 1600.

He married Margaret, daughter of John Blair of that ilk, by whom he had three
sons and two daughters.

1. John, his heir.

2. Malcolm Crawford of Newton.

3. James Crawford of Knightwood.

Of these two last there is no male succession.

1st daughter, Margaret, married to Hugh Kennedy of Ardmillan.

2. Jean, married, 1st, to John Lindsay of Blacksolme; 2dly, to John Buchanan
of Drumiekill.

He died anno 1622, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. JOHN CRAWFORD of Kilbirnie, who rebuilt the house of Kilbirnie, in the
year 1627.

He married lady Mary Cunningham, daughter of James, Crawfurd's peerage.
seventh earl of Glencairn, by whom he had two sons, and two daughters.

1. Sir John, his heir.

2. James, who died unmarried.

1st daughter, Anne, married to Alexander Cunningham of Corsehill.

2. Margaret, married to colonel William Crawford, elder brother of Thomas
Crawford of Carse, but had no issue.

He died anno 1629, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVI. Sir JOHN, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who got a charter, under the great seal, of several lands in Air-shire, anno
1637.

Also a charter, Ibidem.
domino Johanni Crawford de Kilbirnie, militi, of the lands and barony of
Kilbirnie, etc. anno 1642.

He had the honor of knighthood conserred upon him by king Charles I. Reseind.
acts of parlt.
and was one of the committee of parliament, anno 1644; also in 1645.

He had the command of a regiment of foot during the time of the civil war; but
lived quite retired under Oliver Cromwell's usurpation.

He lived to see the happy restoration, and was elected a member of the
parliament which met in January 1661, John earl of Middleton being his
majesty's high commissioner.

He married, 1st, Margaret, daughter of Robert lord Burleigh, by whom he had no
issue.

He married, 2dly, Magdalene, daughter of David lord Carnegie, by whom he had
two daughters.

1. Anne, married to sir Archibald Stewart of Blackhall, Bart.

2. Margaret, who married Patrick, second son of John, fourteenth earl of
Crawfurd, and carried on the line of this family, of whom more afterward.

Sir John dying in the end of 1661, without sons, his next male-heir was
Cornelius Crawford of Jordanhill, grandson of captain Thomas, sixth son of
Lawrence Crawford of Kilbirnie, No. XI. of this account, whose heir-male is now
male representative of the ancient Crawfords of Kilbirnie, etc.

We now return to the last sir John.

XVI. Sir JOHN CRAWFORD of Kilbirnie having no male-issue, as before observed,
made an entail of his whole estate upon his daughter Margaret and her husband,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
Patrick Lindsay, and their heirs general, they carrying the name and arms of
Crawford of Kilbirnie, etc.

He was accordingly succeeded by his said daughter,

XVII. MARGARET CRAWFORD, etc. who, dying anno 1680, left issue, by the said
Patrick, three sons and three daughters.

1. John, afterward viscount of Garnock.

2. Patrick Crawford, Esquire;.

3. Captain Archibald Crawford.

1st daughter, Margaret, married to David earl of Glasgow.

2. Anne, married to Mr. Harry Maule of Kelly, brother and heir of James earl
of Panmure.

3. Magdalene, married to George Dundass of Duddingston, Esquire;.

They were both succeeded by their eldest son,

XVIII. JOHN CRAWFORD of Kilbirnie, who came early into the revolution, and was
chosen member of parliament for the shire of Air, anno 1693, and continued in
it all the life of king William.

Upon the accession of queen Anne to the throne, he was again chosen member for
the country of Air, and was appointed one of the privy council to her majesty,
who was pleased to dignify him with the title of viscount of Mount-Crawford,
Ibid. et penes com. de Crawfurd.
which he afterward changed for the title of Garnock, the patent being
provided to his heirs-male whatever.

He married lady Margaret Stewart, daughter of James earl of Bute, by whom he
had five sons, and three daughters.

1. Patrick, his heir.

2. John.

3. James.

4. David.

5. Charles.

1st daughter, Margaret.

2. Anne.

3. Magdalene.

He died anno 1709, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIX. PATRICK, second viscount Garnock, who married Miss Home, daughter of
George Home of Kelly, Esquire; by whom he had two sons, and three daughters.

1. John, a youth of great hopes and spirit, who died before his father,
without issue.

2. George, who became his heir.

1st daughter, Margaret.

2. Janet.

These two daughters died unmarried.

3. Christian, married to Patrick Bogle, Esquire;.

Patrick dying anno 1737, was succeeded by his son,

XX. GEORGE, third viscount Garnock, who succeeded to the honors of Crawford,
upon the death of John, seventeenth earl, anno 1749, and is now designed George
Lindsay-Crawsurd, earl of Crawsurd and Lindsay, viscount and baron Garnock,
baron Crawfurd and Spiney, etc.

He married Jean, daughter of Robert Hamilton Esquire; of Bourtreehill, in the
country of Air, by whom he has issue three sons, and two daughters.

1. George, lord Lindsay.

2. Robert.

3. Bute.

1st daughter, lady Jean.

2. Lady Mary.

Vide title Lindsay earl of Crawfurd for the arms of that family.

ARMS.
The armorial bearing of the viscount Garnock, is, quarterly, 1st and 4th,
gules, a ssesse ermine; 2d and 3d azure, a cheveron between three crosses patee
or.

CREST; on a wreath, a ermine couchant proper.

SUPPORTERS; two greyhounds of the last. MOTTO; Sine labe nota.

CHIEF SEAT,
At Kilbirnie in Air-shire.

ABERCROMBIE Lord GLASFORD.
ALEXANDER ABERCROMBIE of Fetternier, in Aberdeen-shire, descended of the
ancient family of Abercrombie of that ilk, in Fife-shire, married Jean,
daughter of John Seton of Newark, by whom he had several sons.

1. Francis.

2. John Abercrombie, Esquire;.

3. Doctor Patrick Abercrombie, a learned antiquary, author of the martial
achievements, etc.

Francis Abercrombie, son of the said Alexander, married Anne baroness of
Semple, and was himself created lord Glasford for life, by king James VII. the
fifth day of July 1685.

By the said baroness he had issue several children.

1. Francis, who succeeded his mother in the estate and honors of Semple. Vide
title lord Semple.

BOIL Earl of GLASGOW.
THE surname of Boil is of very great antiquity in the west of Scotland, of
which the Boyles of Kelburn, the immediate ancestors of this noble family were
undoubtly the chief. They had large possessions in Air-shire, and flourished
with luster five centuries ago; but not having seen their writs, we cannot
pretend to connect their decsent.

Richard Boil, lord of Caulburn, or Kelburn, had an acquittance from Walter
Cummin Copper-plate of the original charter in Mr. James Anderson's collect.
lord of Rowgallan, de quadraginta solidis annui redditus, etc. in quibus
dictus Ricardus, et antecessores ejus, mibi et antecessoribus meis annuat^m
sol^ere ^enebantur. To which d^minus Galsridus de Ross, Willielmus de Keith,
William abbot of Kilwinning, William Semple, and Adam son of Uchtride, are
witnesses, tempore Alexandri III. who succeeded to the Crown, anno 1249.

He married Marjory, Sir George MacKenzie's collections.
daughter of sir Robert Cummin, knight, of Rowallan, by whom he had two sons.

1. Richard de Boil, who is amongst the Scotch barons that swore seal^y to
King Edward I. Prynne, vol. III. p. 659.
for lands lying in the country of Air, anno 1296.

2. Robert, who also swore allegiance to the said king Edward the same year.
Ibid. p. 658.


The next of this ancient family we find upon record, is,

HUGO de BOIL, no doubt of the same family, Chart. of Paisley, penescom^ de
Dundonald.
who made a considerable donation to the monastery of Paisley, 7th February
anno 1399.

Of this Hugh was descended in a direct male-line, Crawfurd's peerage.
John Boil of Kelburn, who flourished in the reign of king James III. of whom
afterward.

There were several other families of the name of Boil, descended from the
Boyles of Kelburn, before the reign of king James III. viz.

The Boyles of Wamsray in Dumsries-shire.

The Boyles of Raysholm in Airshire, etc. etc. etc.

1. JOHN BOIL of Kelburn, a man of rank and sigure in the reign of king James
III. was at least the sixth or seventh generation from the first Richard.

This John was a great loyalist, Ibidem.
a firm and steady friend to that prince, and lost his life with his royal
master, at the field of Bannockburn, anno 1488, leaving issue a son,

John, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Catharine Boil, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who got a charter of the lands of Bisholme, anno 1513.

He was succeeded by his son,

II. JOHN BOIL of Kelburn, who married Agnes, a daughter of the family of
Ross, by whom he had two sons.

1. John, his heir.

2. Robert, who got from his father the lands of Balloch-martin, Ibidem.
in the isle of Cumra-major, upon which he got a charter under the great seal,
Roberto Boil, etc. anno 1554.

He got a charter under the great seal, Johanni Boil de Kelburn, Ibidem.
of several lands, anno 1536.

He lived to a great age, and had an exemption from king James V. Ibidem.
excusing him from attending the royal army in time of war.

He died anno 1549, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. JOHN, who in his father's lifetime got a charter from king James V.
Ibidem.
Johanni Boil juniori de Kelburn, of the lands of Bellekewen, in the isle of
Cumra-major, etc. anno 1536; and, that same year, was made hereditary crownary
of that island.

He got also charters of the lands and barony of Kelburn, Ibidem.
and several others, betwixt the years 1543 and 1549.

This John had issue two sons.

1. David, his apparent heir.

2. John Boil of Halkshill, whose great grandson married the heiress of
Kelburn, and carried on the line of this family, as will be shown hereafter.

IV. DAVID, first son and apparent heir of John Boil of Kelburn, married Jean,
daughter of John Fraser of Knock, Crawfurd's peerage.
an ancient family in the shire of Air, and dying before his father, left issue
by the said Jean Fraser a son,

V. JOHN BOIL of Kelburn, who succeeded his grandfather.

He was a great loyalist, and adhered firmly to the interest of Queen Mary,
during all the time of the civil war.

He got afterward charters from king James VI. of the lands and barony of
Kelburn, Chart. in pub. archiv.
South-Balloch, and several others, inter 1592 and 1598.

He married Marian, daughter of Hugh Crawford of Kilbirnie, by whom he had a
son,

John, his heir, -- and six daughters.

1. Jean, married to William Barclay of Pearston, in the shire of Air.

2. Marian, married, 1st, to Matthew Ross of Haining; 2dly, to doctor James
Law, archbishop of Glasgow.

3. Margaret, married to Robert Bruce of Auchenbowie, in the shire of Stirling.

4. Elizabeth, married to Robert Semple of Milbank in Renfrew-shire.

5. Agnes, married to Robert Boil of Balloch-martin in the shire of Bute.

6. Mary, married to William Hamilton, Esquire; in the county of Down in Ireland.

They all had posterity.

He died about the year 1610, and was succeeded by his son,

VI. JOHN BOIL of Kelburn, who being a man of parts and great knowledge of the
laws, Acts of par^t.
was joined in commission with several of the first quality, to revise the
practice of our law in Scotland, anno 1630.

He was strongly attached to the royal family, and adhered most zealously to
their interest, during all the time of the civil war, on which account he
suffered a long banishment, and many other hardships.

He married Agnes, only daughter of sir John Maxwell of Pollock, by whom he had
only one daughter,

VII. GRIZEL his sole heiress, who married her cousin, David Boil of
Halkshill, descended of John Boil of Halkshill, brother german of her great
grandfather; to him therefore we now return.

IV. JOHN BOIL of Halkshill, second son of John of Kelburn, Notes on
Crawfurd's peerage.
(No. III. of this account,) married Christian, daughter of -- Wallace of
Cairn-hill, by whom he had several sons,

1. David, his heir.

Of the other sons, the Boyles of Bellekewen, Pottray, etc. are descended.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. DAVID BOIL of Halkshill, who got a charter under the great seal, of the
lands of Sagedach, and married Christian, Chart. in pub. archiv.
a niece of lord Boyd, by whom he had a son and heir,

VI. JAMES BOIL of Halkshill, who married Margaret, Notes on Crawsurd's
peerage.
daughter of David Crawfurd of Bedlane, by whom he had a son and successor,

VII. DAVID BOIL of Halkshill, who married Grizel, daughter and sole heiress
of John Boil of Kelburn, Chart. in pub. archiv.
as before observed, and by her he had three sons and one daughter.

1. John, their heir.

2. James, who married Jean, daughter and heiress of Mr. Robert Barelay, with
whom he got the lands of Mont gomerstoun.

3. Patrick Boil, Esquire;.

His daughter Grizel, married to William Wallace of Shewalton in Ayr-shire.

He got a charter under the great seal, Davidi Boil de Kelburn, et Grisellidae
Boil eju^ sponsae, Ibidem.
filiae legitimae et haeredi, quondam Johannis hannis Boil de Kelburn, et
Johanni Boil, filio legitimo dicti Davidis, et Grisellidae, etc. etc. dated
13th January 1671.

He died soon thereafter, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. JOHN BOIL of Kelburn, a man of great abilities. He was chosen member
for the shire of Bute, to the parliament 1681, where his royal highness James
duke of York sat high commissioner, Records of parliament.
and he continued a member without interruption till his death.

He married Marian, daughter of sir Walter Stewart of Allanton in Lanerk-shire,
by whom he had two sons and one daughter.

1. David, afterward earl of Glasgow.

2. William Boil, Esquire; one of the commissioners of the customs for Scotland.

His daughter Margaret, married to sir Alexander Cunninghame of Corse-hill,
baronet.

He died anno 1685, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. DAVID BOIL of Kelburn, who was member for the shire of Bute, to the
convention of estates in 1689, when the prince of Orange was declared king of
Scotland.

He was appointed one of the privy council to his Majesty, anno School, and was
created a lord of parliament, by the title of lord Boil, 31st January 1699.

Upon queen Anne's accession to the throne, he was appointed treasurer-depute,
2d January 1703; and on the 12th April that same year, he was further dignified
with the titles of earl Glasgow, viscount Kelburn, lord Boil of Stewarton,
etc. by patent haeredibus masculis quibuscunque.

He was appointed one of the commissioners for the treaty of union, anno 1706,
and concurred heartily with the court in every measure, till that great work
was concluded.

He was constituted her majesty's high commissioner to the general assembly of
the church of Scotland, for that year 1706, and enjoyed the same dignity for
four succeeding years afterward.

He was also appointed lord register for Scotland, anno 1708.

He married, 1st, Margaret Crawfurd, sister of John viscount Garnock, by whom
he had three sons.

1. John, his heir.

2. Patrick Boil, Esquire; a man of great honor and probity, who was many years
one of the senators of the college of justice, and died anno 1761.

3. Charles Boil, Esquire;

He married, 2dly, Jean, daughter and sole heiress of William Mure of Rowallan,
by whom he had two daughters.

1. Lady Jean, married to major general sir James Campbell, brother to Hugh
earl of Loudoun, whose son takes the name of Mure, as representing his mother
an heiress.

2. Lady Anne.

He died anno 1733, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. JOHN, second earl of Glasgow, who married Helen, daughter of William
Morrison of Prestongrange, Esquire; by whom he had issue two sons and six daughters.

1. John, now earl of Glasgow.

2. Patrick, who succeeded his uncle in the estate of Shewalton, and married
miss Mure, daughter of -- Mure of Caldwall, Esquire; She died without issue.

1st daughter, Lady Janet.

2. Lady Margaret.

3. Lady Jean.

4. Lady Marian, who died unmarried.

5. Lady Catharine.

6. Lady Helen.

He died anno 1740, and was succeeded by

XI. JOHN, third earl of Glasgow, who, anno 1745, married Elizabeth, daughter
of George lord Ross, by whom he has issue, a son,

John, lord Boil, -- and two daughters.

1. Lady Betty.

2. Lady Jean.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st, and 4th, or, an eagle displayed gules; 2d, and 3d, parted per
bend cronette, argent and gules. Over all, by way of surtout, an escutcheon or,
charged with three stags horns gules.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter side, a savage proper; on the sinister, a lion
rampant, parted per bend crenelle, or and gules.

CREST; an eagle, with two heads and necks displayed, parted per pale crenelle,
or and gules.

MOTTO; Dominus providebit.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Kelburn and Rowallan in Ayrshire.

CUNNINGHAME Earl of GLENCAIRN.
THIS noble family is of very great antiquity in the west of Scotland, but our
antiquaries are not agreed about their origin.

Frederic Van Bassen, a learned Norvegian, who wrote an account of the origin
of several Scotch families, M. S. in the advocate's library, Edr.
says, that one Malcolm son of Friskin, assisted Malcolm prince of Scotland,
(afterward king Malcolm Canmore) to make his escape from the tyranny of
Macbeath, who had murdered his father king Duncan; and, being hotly pursued,
he took shelter in a barn, where Malcolm concealed the prince, by forking straw
or hay over him. The pursuit being over, the prince made his escape to England,
accompanied by his faithful Malcolm.

Prince Malcolm was no sooner in possession of his kingdom, than he rewarded
his preserver with the Thanedom of Cunninghame, from which his posterity
assumed their surname, and took a shake-fork for their arms, with Over fork
over for their motto, to perpetuate the memory of this happy escape.

Cambden says, that the Cunninghames came originally from England, which
possibly may be true, Cambden, folio edition, p. ^^3.
for there came several persons of rank from that country to Scotland, with
king Malcolm Canmore, and we find Cunninghames settled in the shire of Air,
very soon thereafter.

Sir George MacKenzie is of opinion, that the surname is local, and was first
assumed by the proprietors of lands in Cunninghame, where the ancestors of this
noble family had great possessions in very early times; and having the office
of master of horse in the king's stables, took for their armorial figure, Sir
George MacKenzie's heraldry.
the instrument wherewith hay is thrown up to the horses, viz. a shake-fork,
with Over fork over for their motto: but we shall submit these conjectural
accounts to the judgment of our readers, and deduce the descent of this
illustrious family, by authentic documents, from the first of them we find upon
record, viz.

I. WARNEBALDUS or VARNEBALDUS de CUNNINGHAME, who flourished in the reigns of
king Edgar, and king Alexander I. which last succeeded to the crown of
Scotland, anno 1107, and died anno 1124.

This Warnebaldus was proprietor of the lands and barony of Kilmaurs, Chron. of
Melross, chartul. of Kelso, Chartul. of Paisley, etc. penes MacFarlane.
in the bailiary of Cunninghame, and shire of Air, which has been one of the
chief titles of the family ever since; and of him all the Cunninghames in
Scotland are descended.

He left issue two sons.

1. Robert, his heir.

2. Galfridus de Cunninghame, Chartulary of Scoon, penes MacFarlane, p. 157.
who is witness in a charter of king Malcolm IV. of a donation to the abbacy of
Scoon, inter 1153 et 1165, in which last year king Malcolm died.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. ROBERT de CUNNINGHAME de Kilmaurs, who made a donation to the abbacy of
Kelso, Chartulary of Kelso, p. 249.
by a charter, in which are these words: Roberius filius Warnebaldi, etc.
dedisse* etc. ecclesiae Stae Mariae de Kelsau, etc. ecclesiam de Kilmaurs, et
villam meam de Cunninghame, cum dimidia carucata terrae, ad ipsam ecclesiam
pertinen. pro salute animae meae, etc.

This donation is afterward confirmed by Richard de Morville, Ibid. p. 251,
and chron. of Melrose.
constable of Scotland, anno 1162.

Robertus filius Warnebaldi, Book of original ch^rters penes MacFarlane. vol.
II. p. 1.
is also witness to a charter of Richard de Morville, constable of Scotland,
Henrico de Sto Claro terrarum de Herdmanston, anno 1162.

He married Rescinda, daughter and heiress of sir Humphrey de Barclay of
Gairntully, which appears by a donation made by the said Rescinda, Chartulary
of Arbroath, penes ^und.
to the abbacy of Arbroath, of the lands of Glenfarquharland, with consent of
Robert de Cunninghame, son of Warnebald her husband, etc. tempore regis
Malcolmi, ante 1165.

By the said Rescinda, he left issue a son,

III. Sir ROBERT CUNNINGHAME de Kilmaurs, the first we find designed dominus.
He confirmed his father's donations to the abacy of Kelso, in these words:
Robertus filius Roberti, filii Warnebaldi, Chartulary of Kelso, p. 250.
etc. sciatis me confirmasse monachis de Kelsau donationem quam pater meus
fecit ecclesiae de Kilmaurs, villae de Cunninghame, etc. to which Richard de
Morville constable of Scotland, is a witness.

All which donations are confirmed by Ingelram bishop of Glasgow, Ibid. p. 251.
in or before the year 1174, in which year the bishop died.

Sir Robert lived after 1200, and left issue three sons.

1. Robert.

2. William, who is documented by a confirmation of a donation to the monastery
of Paisley, Chartulary of Paisley, p. 17. 18.
by David bishop of St. Andrews, in which William de Cunninghame, Thomas de
Graham, etc. are witnesses. David was bishop from 1233 to 1253.

3. Sir James, who is vouched by a donation of the church of Largyss to the
monastery of Paisley, Chartulary of Paisley, page 198.
wherein dominus Jacobus Cunnynghame, miles, Robertus de Sympill, etc. are
witnesses, ante 1247.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. ROBERT CUNNINGHAME of Kilmauis, who, in a confirmation of a donation to
the monastery of Paisley, Ibid. p. 51.
is called Robertus filius et haeres domini Roberti Cunninghame de Kilmaurs,
etc. circa 1240.

He left issue two sons.

1. Henry.

2. Richard de Cunninghame, Nisbet's append. p. 44.
who is witness to a charter granted by Alan lord of Galloway, of the lands of
Stevensone, Crosbie, and Monoch, to Hugh de Crawford, ancestor of the earl of
Loudoun.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. HENRY CUNNINGHAME OF Kilmaurs, who was a brave warrior, and behaved
gallantly at the battle of Largs, where king Alexander III commanded in person,
and obtained a complete victory over Haco king of Norway, anno 1263.

He got a charter from king Alexander, Ibidem.
of the lands of Kilmaurs, anno 1264.

He married -- Riddel, heiress of Glengarnock, by whom he had issue two sons.

1. William.

2. Galfridus, ancestor of the Cunninghames of Glengarnock, of whom several
other families are descended.

Henry dying before 1268, was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. Sir WILLIAM CUNNINGHAME of Kilmaurs, of whom there are many documents.

In the determination of a dispute betwixt the abbots of Melross and Kelso,
Chart. of Coldinghame penes MacFarlane, p. 153.
he is designed dominus Williehnus de Cunninghame, miles, anno 1269.

He is also witness to a charter of Malcolm earl of Lennox, Chart. of Levenax,
penes eund. p. 39.
circa 1275.

He left issue a son and successor,

VII. EDWARD CUNNINGHAME of Kilmaurs, Chartulary of Paisley.
who mortified the lands of Grange to the monastery of Kilwinning, and died
before 1290, leaving issue two sons.

1. Gilbert.

2. Richard, ancestor of the Cunninghames of Polmais, Nisbet, vol. I. p. 196.
etc.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. GILBERT CUNNINGHAME of Kilmaurs, who is witness in a charter of Malcolm
earl of Lennox, together with James lord high steward of Scotland, Chartulary
of Levenax, p. 34.
Reginaldus de Crawford, Colinus de Campbell, Finlaus de Houstone, etc. anno
1290.

He was one of the magnates Scotiae chosen upon the part of Robert Bruce lord
of Annandale, Rymer, tom. II. p. 533
in the competition for the crown betwixt him and Baliol, anno 1292.

He left issue three sons.

1. Sir Robert.

2. Sir James, who obtained from king Robert Bruce a charter, Chart. in archiv.
Rob. I.
dilecto et fideli suo Jacobo Cunninghame, militi, etc. terrarum de Hassenden,
etc. He was ancestor of the Cunninghames of Belton and Hassendean, and his son
Nigellus, Ibidem.
was the first of the family of Barns, which appears by a charter of king
Robert II. dated 1376.

3. Sir Donald, who swore fealty to king Edward I. Nisbet's append. p. 45.
of England, anno 1296, and was ancestor of the Cunninghames of Skuloch,
Auchtermarkar, Caddel, Quarrelton, Bellhearhim, Newton, etc.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. Sir ROBERT CUNNINGHAME of Kilmaurs, who appears to have had large
possessions, both in the south and west parts of Scotland; and though he was
forced to swear fealty to king Edward I. of England, when he had overrun the
greatest part of this country, Prynne's collect. vol. III. p. 662.
anno 1296, yet no sooner did king Robert Bruce begin to assert his title to
the crown, than, like a true patriot, he joined him, and continued steady in
his interest ever after.

He got a charter of confirmation from that great prince, of the lands of
Lambruchton, Grugere, etc. Chart. in archiv. Rob. I.
with their pertinents, dilecto et fideli suo Roberto de Cunninghame, militi,
superiori dominii terrarum et tenementorum de Lambruchton, etc. in Cunninghame,
dated 1319.

He left issue two sons.

1. Sir William.

2. Sir Andrew, Chartulary of Levenax.
who got a charter of the lands of Kilfassane and Ballindalloch from Malcolm
earl of Wigton, and was ancestor of the Cunninghames of Drumwhistle, Nisbet's
append. p. 297.
Ballindalloch, Balbougie, etc.

He died about 1330, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. Sir WILLIAM CUNNINGHAME of Kilmaurs, who is witness to a donation to the
monastery of Kelso, Chartulary of Kelso, p. 436.
in which he is designed dominus Willielmus Cunninghame, miles, etc. anno 1350.

He was one of the Scotch nobles proposed by the estates of Scotland for king
David's ransom, Rymer, tom. V. p. 791.
anno 1354.

Who he married for his 1st lady, does not appear upon record, but by her he
had issue four sons.

1. Robert; who was one of the noble Scotch heirs sent to England for king
David's ransom, when he obtained his liberty, anno 1357; and he is then
designed Robertus de Cunninghame, Ibid. tom. VI. p. 35.
filius et haeres domini Willielmi, etc. but he died before his father without
issue.

2. Sir William, his father's heir.

3. Thomas, ancestor of the Cunninghames of Caprington, Nisbet's append. p. 44.
of whom are descended the Cunninghames of Enterkin, Legland, etc.

4. Sir Andrew, who got from king David Bruce a charter of an annuity of two
merks sterling, Chart. in archiv. reg. David.
out of the lands of Kindinny, in Perthshire, dated anno 1368. Also a charter
from king Robert II. anno 1373.

Sir William married, 2dly, Helen Bruce, countess of Carrick, and in her right
was earl of Carrick; which appears by a charter of king David, dilecto
consanguineo nostro Willielmo de Cunninghame, Ibid. sir Ja. Dalrymple, p. 360.
militi, totum comitatum nostrum de Carrick, dated anno 1362: but she dying
without issue, the title of Carrick afterward fell to the crown.

N. B. The name of Cunninghame was by this time become so very numerous in
Scotland, that it is not easy to distinguish what families they belonged to,
except when they are locally designed.

Sir William died before 1384, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. Sir WILLIAM CUNNINGHAME of Kilmaurs, Fordun, vol. II. p. 399. ad ann. 1384.
who, according to a good historian, was a brave and gallant knight, and always
behaved with great courage and resolution against the enemies of his country.

In the year 1385, there were forty thousand francs sent to Scotland by the
king of France, Rymer's foed. tom. VII. p. 485.
to be distributed amongst the nobles, his faithful allies, of which sir
William got five hundred.

He is witness in two donations to the monastery of Paisley, wherein he is
designed dominus Willielmus Cunninghame de Kilmaurs, Chartulary of Paisley,
pages 223 and 235.
vicecom. de Air, etc. anno 1393 et 1404.

He founded the collegiate church of Kilmaurs, and largely endowed it, with a
provost and eight prebends, anno 1403.

He married Elizabeth, Original contract of division, pen. dom. de Pollock, ad
ann. 1404.
daughter and coheiress of sir Robert Denniston of that ilk, by whom he got a
vast estate, viz. the baronies of Glencairn, Finlayston, Kilmarnock, Redhall,
Collington, etc. By her he had issue three sons.

1. Sir Robert.

2. William, Crawfurd's Peerage and Nisbet.
ancestor of the branch of Cunninghame-head.

3. Henry de Cunninghame, who remarkably distinguished himself at the battle of
Beauge, Ford un, v. II. p. 461.
where the Scots obtained a glorious victory over the English, anno 1421.

The father dying anno 1418, was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. Sir ROBERT CUNNINGHAME of Kilmaurs.

He was appointed one of the hostages for the ransom of king James I. Rymer.
who conferred the honor of knighthood upon him, anno 1424.

He was one of the judges that sat upon the trial of Murdoch duke of Albany,
Fordun, vol. II. p. 483.
anno 1425.

This sir Robert, together with Alexander lord Montgomery, got a joint
commission for the government of Kintyre, Knapdale, etc. with power to grant
remissions, Chart. in pub. archiv.
set tacks, hold courts of justice, appoint lieutenants, and apply escheats and
unlaws to their own use, 10th August 1430.

He married Janet, daughter of Alexander lord Montgomery, by whom he had two
sons.

1. Alexander, afterward lord Kilmaurs and earl of Glencairn.

2. William, Ibid. ad ann. 1458.
ancestor of the Cunninghames of Waterstoun, etc.

XIII. ALEXANDER dominus de Kilmaurs succeeded, Preface to sir James
Dalrymple's collections, and Records of parliament.
and being a man of extraordinary parts, was in great favor with, and highly
esteemed by king James II. who created him a lord of parliament, by the title
of lord Cunninghame of Kilmaurs.

He afterward got a charter, Chart. in pub. archiv.
under the great seal, Alexandro Cunninghame, domino de Kilmaurs, of several
lands.

And being in no less favor with king James III. was appointed one of the
lords of his privy council.

He was a faithful and loyal subject, and never deserted the king's interest in
all his vicissitudes of fortune; Ibidem, and Chart. penes comitem de Glencairn;
to him, et successores sui, omni tempore suturo.
for which, and in consideration of his many good and faithful services, he was
further dignified with the title of earl of Glencairn, etc. to him and his
heirs for ever, 28th May 1488.

He married Margaret, daughter of Patrick Hepburn, lord of Hailes, by whom he
had four sons.

1. Robert, earl of Glencairn.

2. William, Chart. in pub. archiv.
ancestor of the Cunninghames of Craigends, of whom are descended the
Cunninghames of Robertland, Camcairn, ^edlane, and Auchinhervie, of whom
Balquhain and Auchinyards are descended.

3. Alexander de Cunninghame. Ibidem.


4. Edward.

The last two are both mentioned in a charter under the great seal, anno 1483.

He was killed with his royal master, king James III. at Bannockburn, on 11th
of June 1488, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIV. ROBERT, second earl of Glencairn, who married Elizabeth, daughter of John
lord Lindsay of Byres, Chart. in pub. archiv.
ancestor of the earl of Crawfurd, by whom he had issue a son and successor,

XV. CUTHBERT, third earl of Glencairn, who was one of the privy council to
king James IV. Ibidem.
anno 1509, and got charters under the great seal, of a great number of lands
and baronies, Cuthberto comiti de Glencairn, etc.

He married lady Marjory Douglas, Charta in archiv. fam. de Douglas.
daughter of Archibald earl of Angus, ancestor of the duke of Douglas, by whom
he had a son,

XVI. WILLIAM, fourth earl of Glencairn, who succeeded him; and, in his
father's lifetime, got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Willielmo magistro de Glencairn, terrarum de Muirhouse, Miltoun, etc. anno
1527.

After his father's death, he got also charters, under the great seal, Ibidem.
Willielmo comiti de Glencairn, of many other lands and baronies.

He was a man of great parts, knowledge, and judgment, and was, by the lords of
the regency, Ibid. and lives of the officers of state.
in the minority of king James V. appointed lord high treasurer of Scotland,
when he was but a young man.

He was taken prisoner by the English at the battle of Solway, Rymer.
anno 1542, and paid one thousand pound sterling for his ransom.

He was a great favourer of the reformation, and was joined in commission with
sir George Douglas, and others, to treat with the English about a marriage with
queen Mary and prince Edward of England, afterward king Edward VI. Ibid. and
sir R. Sadler's letters.
anno 1543, which king Henry VIII. had much at heart; but it met with great
opposition, and never took effect.

He married, 1st, Catharine, daughter of William lord Borthwick, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
by whom he had no issue.

He married, 2dly, Margaret Campbell, daughter and heiress of John Campbell of
West-London, Lives of the offic. of state, and chart. iu pub. archiv.
by whom he had issue five sons, and one daughter.

1. Alexander, lord Kilmaurs.

2. Andrew, ancestor of sir Alexander Cunninghame of Corsehill, Bart.

3. Hugh, ancestor of the Cunninghames of Curlung, and others.

4. Robert, minister of the priory of Fell, in vicecom. de Air, and was
ancestor of the Cunninghames of Montgreenan.

5. William, bishop of Argyle.

His daughter, lady Elizabeth, married to sir John Cunninghame of Caprington,
Bart.

He died anno 1547, and was succeeded by his eldest son.

XVII. ALEXANDER, fifth earl of Glencairn, a man of great piety and
benevolence, and was called the good earl.

He went early into the reformation of the church, of which he was a zealous
promoter, and was a strenuous asserter of king James VI.'s title to the crown,
after queen Mary's resignation.

Upon the dissolution of the religious houses, he obtained a grant of the abbay
of Kilwinning, of which one of his sons came to be titular commendator.

He got charters, Chart. in pub. arch.
under the great seal, of a vast number of lands.

He married, 1st, lady Jean, daughter of James earl of Arran, Ibidem.
and duke of Chattelherault, by whom he had two sons, and one daughter.

1. William, lord Kilmaurs.

2. Andrew, prior of Lesmahagoe.

His daughter, lady Margaret, married to John Wallace of Craigie, in vicecom.
de Air.

He married, 2dly, Janet, daughter of sir John Cunninghame of Caprington, by
whom he had a son,

Archibald, commendator of Kilwinning, Ibidem.
-- and a daughter,

Lady Jean, married, 1st, to Archibald earl of Argyle; and 2dly, to sir
Humphrey Colquhoun of Luss.

He died anno 1574, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVIII. WILLIAM, sixth earl of Glencairn, who married Janet, daughter of sir
James Gordon of Lochinvar, Lives of the offic. of state.
ancestor of lord viscount Kenmure, by whom he had two sons, and four daughters.

1. James, lord Kilmaurs.

2. John Cunninghame of Ross, Esquire; who got a charter, Chart. in pub. archiv.
under the great seal, Johanni Cunninghame filio Willielmi comitis de
Glencairn, terrarum de Cambuskeith, extenden. ad december librat. terrarum, etc.
anno 1627.

He was ancestor of the Cunninghames of Aikenbar, in vicecomitatu de Dunbarton,
of which family Alexander Cunninghame, Lion register, ad ann. 1754.
clerk to the signet in Edinburgh, is the heir-male.

1st daughter, lady Jean, married, 1st, to George Haldane of Gleneagles; 2dly,
to -- Kilpatrick of Closeburn; and, 3dly, to -- Ferguson of Craigdarroch.

2. Lady Margaret, married to sir Hector MacLean of Dowart, Bart.

3. Lady Elizabeth, married, 1st, to James Crawford of Auchinames; and, 2dly,
to Alexander Cunninghame of Craigends.

4. Lady Jean, married to John Napier of Kilmahew.

XIX. JAMES, seventh earl of Glencairn succeeded, Chart. in pub. archiv.
and got a charter, under the great seal, Jacobo comiti de Glencairn, terrarum
baroniae de Stevenson, etc. and being a man of parts and learning, was in great
favor with king James VI.

He was one of the lords of his privy council, and was appointed one of the
commissioners to treat of a nearer union with England, anno 1604.

He married, 1st, Margaret, daughter of sir John Campbell of Glenurchie, Lives
of the offic. of state.
by whom he had two sons, and six daughters.

1. William, lord Kilmaurs.

2. John Cunninghame of Camskeith.

1st daughter, lady Jean, died unmarried.

2. Lady Catharine, married to sir James Cunninghame of Glencarnock.

3. Lady Margaret, married, 1st, to sir James Hamilton of Evandale; and, 2dly,
to sir James Maxwell of Calderwood.

4. Lady Anne, married to James marquis of Hamilton.

5. Lady Mary, married to John Crawford of Kilbirnie.

6. Lady Susan, married to sir Alexander Lauder of Hatton.

He married, 2dly, lady Agnes Hay, daughter of James lord Bewlie and earl of
Carlisle, Ibid. p. 157.
relict of sir George Preston of Craigmiller, by whom he had no issue.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XX. WILLIAM, eighth earl of Glencairn, who, Chart. in pub. archiv.
in his father's lifetime, got charters, under the great seal, of a great many
lands, Willielmo domino Kilmaurs, etc.

He married lady Janet Ker, daughter of Mark earl of Lothian, by whom he had
two sons, and five daughters.

1. William, his heir.

2. Colonel Robert Cunninghame, who was a great loyalist during the usurpation,
Ibidem.
for which king Charles II. after his restoration, appointed him his usher, in
August 1660.

1st daughter, lady Margaret, married to sir Ludovick Stewart of Minto.

2. Lady Elizabeth, married, 1st, to David Beaton of Creich; and, 2dly, to --
Chisholm of Cromlix.

3. Lady Jean, married to -- Blair of that ilk.

4. Lady Marian, married to James earl of Finlater.

5. Lady Anne, died unmarried.

This earl died in 1631, Chart. in cancellaria.
and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XXI. WILLIAM, ninth earl of Glencairn, a man of singular worth and merit.

He was one of the privy council to king Charles I. from whom he got a
ratification of the titles and honors of Glencairn, as conferred upon his
predecessor Alexander the first earl, by king James III. his majesty's atavus,
in which all the privileges, dignities, etc. in his former patent are fully
narrated, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Willielmo nunc comiti de Glencairn, haeredibusque suis et successoribus omni
tempore futuro, etc. dated 21st July 1637.

He got also other two charters, Ibidem.
under the great seal, Willielmo comiti de Glencairn, of several lands.

Though this earl did not appear to act strenuously for his majesty's interest,
in the beginning of his troubles, yet he was far from engaging on the other
side.

In the convention 1643, he joined the duke of Hamilton, and others, and
vigorously opposed the nation's sending an army into England, Lives of the
offic. of state.
to join the parliament's forces under the obligation of the solemn league and
covenant, for which he had a letter of thanks under his majesty's own hand,
acknowledging the service he had done him, and assuring him he never would
retract any thing he had granted, either in religion or liberty, to his
subjects in Scotland, etc. The original letter is still preserved in the family.

Upon the death of sir Thomas Hope of Carse, Ibidem.
he was made justice-general, in 1646.

In 1648, he was very zealous in engaging the nation to endeavor to rescue the
king from his confinement.

He was deeply concerned in duke Hamilton's engagement, for which, after the
duke's deseat, the then ruling faction turned him out of his office of
justice-general, and conferred it upon the earl of Castilis.

After the murder of the king, he got a commission from king Charles II.
appointing him general and commander in chief of all the ^orces he could raise
for his majesty's service, which, upon general Middleton's arrival, he
willingly resigned in his savours.

In 1653, he received a new commission from king Charles II. impowering him to
raise men, etc. which he effectually did, and gave great uneasiness to general
Monk; in consequence whereof he received a letter under king Charles's own hand
from Paris, which is still preserved, Ibid. p. 217. and 218.
is very honorable for the family, and may be seen in the lives of the
officers of state, copied from the original, as also the abovementioned letter
from king Charles I. together with a full account of this great man's conduct.

We shall only add, that, immediately after his majesty's restoration, the
earl, in consideration of his many faithful services, was made sheriff of Air,
and bailie of the stewarty of Kyle, in October 1660, and was constituted lord
high chancellor of Scotland, on 19th of January 1661, which high office he
exerced with honor and reputation till he died in July 1664.

He married, 1st, lady Anne Ogilvie, daughter of James earl of Finlater, by
whom he had four sons, and four daughters.

1. William, lord Kilmaurs, a youth of great expectation, who died in the
eighteenth year of his age, much regreted.

2. James, lord Kilmaurs, who married lady Elizabeth, daughter of William duke
of Hamilton, who likeways died before his father without issue.

3. Alexander, who became his father's heir.

4. John, who succeeded his brother, and carried on the line of this family.

1st daughter, lady Jean, married to William earl of Kilmarnock.

2. Lady Margaret, married to John lord Bargenie.

3. Lady Anne, died unmarried.

4. Lady Elizabeth, married to William Hamilton of Orbiston.

The chancellor married, 2dly, lady Margaret Montgomery, daughter of Alexander
earl of Eglington, widow of John earl of Tweedale; but by her had no issue, and
was succeeded by his third son,

XXII. ALEXANDER, tenth earl of Glencairn, who married Nicholas, daughter and
co-heiress of sir James Stewart of Strabrock and Kirkhill, by whom he had but
one daughter,

Lady Margaret, married to John earl of Lauderdale.

And dying without male-issue, his estate and honors devolved upon his brother,

XXII. JOHN, eleventh earl of Glencairn, who was retoured heir to his brother,
anno 1670, Retour in chancery.
and got a charter, under the great seal, of several lands, Johanni comiti de
Glencairn, etc.

In king James's parliament 1686, he opposed the repealing of the penal laws,
and came early into the revolution.

In May 1689, he was appointed one of the lords of the privy council to king
William, and colonel of a regiment of ^oot. And, by her majesty queen Anne, he
was appointed captain and governor of Dunbarton-castle.

He married, 1st, lady Jean Erskine, daughter of John earl of Mar, by whom he
had a son,

William, lord Kilmaurs.

He married, 2dly, Margaret, daughter and heiress of John Napier of Kilmahew,
relict of Patrick Maxwell of Newark, by whom he had no issue.

And dying anno 1703, was succeeded by his only son,

XXIII. WILLIAM, twelfth earl of Glencairn, who was one of the lords of the
privy council to queen Anne, and captain and governor of the castle of
Dunbarton.

He married lady Henrietta Stewart, daughter of Alexander earl of Galloway, by
whom he had eight sons, and four daughters.

1. -- who died young.

2. William, lord Kilmaurs, who succeeded his father.

3. Mr. John.

4. Mr. James, died an infant.

5. Mr. Malcolm-Fleming.

6. Captain Alexander, who was an officer in the army, and died in Jamaica,
anno 1739.

7. Mr. Charles.

8. Mr. James.

1st daughter, lady Margaret, married to Nicol Graham of Gartmore, Esquire; and had
issue.

2. Lady Henriet, married to John Campbell of Shawfield, Esquire;.

3. Lady Mary.

4. Lady Catharine.

XXIV. WILLIAM, thirteenth earl of Glencairn, betaking himself to a military
life, soon rose to the degree of a lieutenant colonel in the army.

He married Miss Macguire, by whom he has four sons, and two daughters.

1. William, lord Kilmaurs.

2. Mr. James.

3. Mr. John.

4. Mr. Alexander.

1st daughter, lady Henriet.

2. Lady Elizabeth.

ARMS.
Argent, a shake-sork sable.

SUPPORTERS; two rabbets proper.

CREST; an unicorn's head couped.

MOTTO; Over fork over.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Kilmaurs in Cunningham, and Finlayston in Renfrew-shire, on the banks of
the river Clyde.

GORDON Duke of GORDON.
THOUGH there are many elegant histories of this ancient and illustrious
family, written by learned and judicious antiquaries, yet they differ greatly
as to their origin and first settlement in this island.

Some bring them from Greece to Gaul, and from thence to Scotland, at least a
thousand years ago; others bring them from Italy; others from Spain, Flanders,
etc.

Certain it is, there were many considerable families of the name of Gordon in
France, long before the Norman conquest of England, whose posterity we shall
have occasion to mention hereafter, and whose descendents are subsisting in
France to this day.

The most probable conjecture therefore is, that some of these Gordons came to
England with William the Conqueror, anno 1066, and to Scotland with king
Malcolm Canmore, or his son king David I. for it is well known, that the
ancestors of several of the best families in this kingdom are of Norman
extract, and came to Scotland with one or other of these princes.

It is also said, that in the reign of king Malcolm Canmore, a valiant knight,
of the name of Gordon, came to Scotland, and was kindly received by that
prince; and having killed a wild boar, which greatly infested the borders, the
generous Malcolm gave him a grant of several lands in the Merse, or
Berwickshire, which he called Gordon, after his own surname. He settled there,
took the boar's head for his armorial bearing, in memory of his having killed
that monstrous animal; that he was progenitor of all the Gordons in Scotland;
and mention is made of Adam de Gordon the father, and Adam his son, in the
reigns of the said Malcolm and David.

It is most certain the Gordons were making no small figure in Scotland
immediately after that era; we shall therefore insist no more on the historial
accounts; but proceed to deduce the descent of this great and most noble
family, by unquestionable authority, from their immediate ancestor.

I. RICARDUS de GORDON, said to be grandson of the knight who killed the boar,
or son of the second Adam. He was a man of considerable distinction in Scotland
in the reigns of king Malcolm IV. and king William the Lion, who succeeded
Malcolm, anno 1165.

He was undoubtedly proprietor of the lands and barony of Gordon, and others,
in Berwickshire, which is instructed by a donation he made, "To St. Mary's
church of Kelso, Chartulary of Kelso, in the Lawyer's library, Edin. and
printed in the appendix to Mr. Gordon's hist. of the family of Gordon.
and the monks serving God there, and to the church of St. Michael in his
village of Gordon, (a bounded piece of his lands and estate of Gordon, lying
contiguous to the churchyard of Gordon,) in a free and perpetual alms; and
grants to whatever minister they shall place in the said church of Gordon, all
the ordinary privileges of pasturage, moss, muir, and other conveniences that
the inhabitants of the lands of Gordon enjoyed, etc."

This deed has no date, but by the subsequent confirmations, appears to have
been made inter 1150 et 1160.

He died about the year 1200, and was succeeded by his son,

II. Sir THOMAS de GORDON, who, by his charter, confirms all the donations made
by his father, Ibidem.
to God and St. Mary's church at Kelso, and to the Monks serving God there,
etc. and that in as full, free, and ample a manner as expressed in the deeds of
his father; and he is then designed Thomas de Gordon, filius Ricardi, etc.

Cotemporary with this Thomas, there flourished in France, Bertram de Gordon,
who wounded with an arrow king Richard I. Hovedon's history, p. 791.
of England, before the castle of Chalons, of which he died, anno 1199.

About this time lived also Adam de Gordon in Scotland. This appears by a
charter of confirmation, in which Richard bishop of St. Andrews confirms to the
abbacy of Kelso, in a free and perpetual alms, the church of Gordon, with the
whole of its parish, ( viz. of Gordon and Spotiswood,) and in which he, at the
desire of the abbot and monks, pointed out a churchyard or burial place to
that parish; Chartulary of Kelso, and Gordon's appendix.
but granting liberty to the inhabitants of the other half of the lands of
Gordon, belonging to Adam de Gordon, to take their sacrament, and bury either
there, or, at their pleasure, in their mother church of Home, etc.

Richard was bishop of St. Andrews, from 1163 to 1178, so this deed must have
been made within that space.

If this Adam was not a younger son of Richard, he was certainly a near
relation of the family, Ibid. and chartul. of Cold-stream.
seeing he possessed part of the lordship of Gordon. He is a frequent witness
in charters and donations to the monastery of Kelso, in the reign of king
William the Lion, and was probably grandfather of Adam, who married the heiress
Alicia, etc.

Thomas died in the reign of king Alexander II. and was succeeded by his son,

III. Sir THOMAS de GORDON, who, by a charter, Chartulary of Kelso.
confirms to the monks and abbot of Kelso, all the donations and concessions
made to them by Richard de Gordon his grandfather, and Thomas his father, etc.

In two other charters granted by him, with consent of Marjory his wife, to the
said abbot and monks of Kelso, for the salvation of his own soul, Ibidem, and
Gordon's appendix.
and that of his wise and daughters, his ancestors and successors, etc. he
confirms all his father's and grandfather's donations, and grants them several
other privileges and possessions, in his lordship of Gordon, and commits his
body to them, Chartulary of Coldstream.
to be buried at Kelso as they shall see meet.

He also makes a donation to the religious at Coldstream, of pasturage upon the
lands of Thorndyke and Gordon, tempore Alexandri II. and is then designed
filius domini Thomae, militis.

This sir Thomas is mentioned in two other charters to the monastery of Kelso,
Chartulary of Kelso.
anno 1258, in which he is designed dominus Thomas de Gordon, miles, etc.

Pontius de Gordon, of a considerable family in Normandy, lived about this
time. In a convention with king Henry III. of England, this Pontius did homage
to king Henry, pro castro et honor de castellania de Gordon, in Normandy, and
for all his other castles and lands which he held of the king of France, and
that he shall hold these lands in the same manner of the king of England,
Rymer, tom. I. p. 761.
as he held them formerly of the king of France, for which king Henry grants
him many noble privileges, anno 1263.

Sir Thomas de Gordon had no male issue, and was succeeded in his whole lands
and estate by his daughter,

IV. ALICIA de GORDON, Chartulary of Coldstream and Kelso.
who, in many charters, is designed daughter and heiress of sir Thomas, etc.

She married her cousin Adam de Gordon, who, in the beginning of the reign of
king Alexander, in a donation to the monastery of Coldstream, is designed Adam
filius Adae de Gordon, Ibidem.
and was probably the grandson of Adam, proprietor of part of the estate of
Gordon, before mentioned; by which marriage the whole lordship of Gordon was
now united in one family.

This Adam mortified to the monastery of Dryburgh, a bounded piece of land,
lying in his territory of Fawns, in Berwickshire, for the salvation of his own
soul, Chartulary of Dryburgh penes MacFarlane.
the soul of Alicia his spouse, his ancestors and successors, etc. ante annum
1270.

When king Alexander III. sent one thousand auxiliaries to king Lewis of
France, to attend him in his expedition to the Holy Land, anno 1270, Adam de
Gordon was one of the chief commanders, and lost his life in that enterprise,
leaving issue by the said Alicia, a son,

Sir Adam, their heir.

Alicia survived her husband, which appears by her charter of confirmation to
the religious in Kelso, in these words: Alicia de Gordon, Chartulary of Kelso,
and Gordon's appendix.
filia et haeres quondam domini Thomae de Gordon, militis, in pura viduitate,
etc. pro salute animae meae et animarum fratris mei, et Adae de Gordon quondam
sponsi mei, etc. confirmasse, etc. omnes donations, etc. a domino Ricardo
proavo meo, five a domino Thoma quondam avo meo, five a domino Thoma quondam
patre meo, etc. to which deed her seal is appended.

V. ADAM, designed dominus de Gordon, succeeded Adam and Alicia, his father and
mother, and confirms all the donations of his predecessors to the religious at
Kelso.

This Adam appears to have had some property in England, whether his own
inheritance, or in right of his wife, who was an English lady, cannot now be
determined; but in a writ, dated at Westminster the 14th June 1287, he, as a
subject of England, is ordered to meet Edmund earl of Cornwall, king Edward's
lieutenant, at Gloucester, in order to give advice and assistance in certain
great affairs of state, which should be communicated at meeting, but whether he
obeyed the summons or not is uncertain.

He was always on the Baliols side, which probably proceeded both from
inclination and interest, for most of his lands then held of that prince, or of
the earls of March, his fast friends; but he died before king John (as he is
then called) resigned the sovereignty of Scotland to king Edward I. Rymer, tom,
II. p. 727.
for Marjory his wife obtained a safe conduct from king Edward to go up to
England, and is then designed Uxor quondam Adae de Gordon, anno 1296.

By the said Marjory, (but of what family we know not) he left issue a son and
successor,

VI. Sir ADAM de GORDON, dominus ejusdem, who was certainly one of the greatest
men of that age, being equally qualified for the cabinet and the field.

As all the Gordons in Scotland appear to be descended of this sir Adam, and as
he is variously represented by different authors, we shall endeavor to trace
his conduct, step by step, from authentic documents, and submit his character
to the judgment of our readers.

The first appearance he makes is, his assisting the brave sir William Wallace,
then guardian of Scotland, in his expedition into Galloway, who, Ibidem.
having made himself master of the castle of Wigton, gave the keeping of it to
sir Adam, anno 1297.

About that time he acquired the lands of Glenkenns, Chart. in archiv. fam. de
Kenmure.
etc. in Galloway, which he gave to his second son William, as will be shown
hereafter.

He was afterward appointed warden of the marches by the guardians of
Scotland, in the absence of John Baliol then their king; Rymer.
for to him is intimated, as warden aforesaid, a truce concluded betwixt
Scotland and England, at Dumfries, 30th October 1300.

In 1305, sir Adam, for being along with John Cummin lord of Badenoch, sometime
guardian of Scotland, is fined by king Edward of England, Ibidem.
then acting as over-lord of Scotland, in three years rent of his estate, for
adhering to the Baliol's party.

In 1308, sir Adam de Gordon, John de Moubray, Alexander de Abernethy, Robert
de Keith, and Henry Haliburton, are sureties for the good behavior of William
bishop of St. Andrews, whose relief out of prison they had procured.

About this time sir Adam settled a difference that had long subsisted, betwixt
him and the abbot and convent of Kelso, whereby he got liberty to build a
chapel for the use of his family, in any place of his parish of Gordon he
should think fit: Chartulary of Kelso, and Gordon's appendix.
he then made a donation to the church of Kelso, with consent of Anabella his
wife, of a bounded piece of ground on his lands of Gordon, etc. and he is there
designed filius et haeres quondant Adae, etc. 1308.

In January 1312, David earl of Athole, sir Adam de Gordon, Rymer, tom. III. p.
300.
and Alexander de Abernethy, are appointed plenipotentiaries by king Edward, to
treat of a peace with king Robert, which at that time took no effect.

In April 1313, he, with the earl of March, were sent to England by Baliol's
party, Ibidem.
to endeavor to get some of their grievances redressed.

And in November thereafter, Ibidem.
he is again employed by king Edward to negociate a peace with king Robert,
which was the last of his actions in favors of the Baliol party. King John
died in 1314, and we find sir Adam ever after, one of king Robert's firmest and
most respected friends.

He obtained from Thomas Randolph, earl of Murray, a grant of the lands and
barony of Stitchell, Chart. penes dom. Robertum Pringle de Stitchell.
in Roxburgh-shire, which king Robert ratified and confirmed to him and his son
William, by his charter, dated at Perth, 28th June 1315.

King Robert knowing sir Adam to be a man of great abilities, joined him in
commission with sir Edward Odard de Mombuisson, to go to Rome, to manage the
affair of his excommunication with the pope; Fordun.
and they carried with them that famous letter from the nobility of Scotland to
his holiness, asserting the independency of their country, anno 1320.

King Robert afterward, in reward of his faithful services, gave a grant to
him and his heirs, of the noble lordship of Strabolgie, etc. in Aberdeen-shire,
then in the crown by the forfeiture of David de Strabolgie, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
earl of Athole, which was afterward confirmed to his family, by several
charters under the great seal, as will be shown hereafter.

Sir Adam fixed his residence there, and gave these lands and lordship the name
of Huntly, which has been one of the chief titles of his family ever since.

By the said Annabella his wife, he left issue four sons and one daughter.

1. Sir Alexander, his heir.

2. William, to whom he gave the lands of Glenkenns in Galloway, and Stitchell
in Roxburgh-shire, of whom the family of Kenmure, and several others in the
south of Scotland, are descended. Vide title viscount Kenmure.

3. John.

4. Thomas.

The last two went into the service of the church, Rymer, tom. III, p. 396.
and obtained letters of recommendation to the pope, from king Edward of
England, anno 1313.

His daughter Mary, was married to sir Walter Hamilton, Chart. in rotul. Rob. 1.
ancestor of the duke of Hamilton, as appears from a charter under the great
seal, anno 1319.

Sir Adam was at last killed in the service of his king and country, at the
battle of Halidon-hill, anno 1333, and was succeeded by

VII. Sir ALEXANDER GORDON, now designed of Huntly, a great patriot, a firm and
steady friend to king David Bruce, and who had behaved gallantly at the battle
of Halidonhill, where his father was killed, though he had the good fortune to
escape. Abercrombie, vol. II. p. 98.


He attended king David in his unfortunate expedition into England, and was
slain at the battle of Durham, where his royal master was taken prisoner, anno
1346.

He was succeeded by his son,

VIII. Sir JOHN GORDON of Huntly, who was also a great loyalist, and was taken
prisoner with king David, at the foresaid battle of Durham. Rymer tom. VI. p.
30 and 82.
He was not released, till the beginning of 1357, and then the earl of Douglas
was one of his sureties, where Elizabetha uxor Johannis de Gordon, is mentioned.

He obtained from the said king David, Chart. penes ducem de Gordon.
a confirmation of the lands and lordship of Strathbogie, which had been
granted by king Robert I. to his grandfather, ( avo suo) dated 20th March 1358.

He died soon thereafter, leaving issue by the said Elizabeth, a son and
successor.

IX. Sir JOHN GORDON of Huntly, a great warrior, and of an undaunted spirit. He
with his own vassals and followers, Abercrombie vol. II. p. 171
, routed a considerable body of the English, under the command of sir John
Lilburn, whom he took prisoner at Carram, anno 1372.

Immediately after this he surprised and took prisoner sir Thomas Musgrave,
Ibid. p. 172.
governor of Berwick, but released him soon thereafter.

He got a new charter from king Robert II. confirming the lands and lordship of
Strathbogie, to him and his heirs, quas terras, Robertus illustris rex Scotiae,
Chart. in rotul. Robert II.
praedecessor noster, dedit quondam Adae de Gordon militi, proavo dicti
Johannis, ratione forisfacturae, David de Strathbogie, etc. dated 10th July
1376, after which he was designed lord Gordon of Strathbogie or Huntly.

In the year 1378, sir John Gordon, along with the earl of Douglas came up with
another considerable body of the English, Abercrombie vol. II. p. 178.
under the command of sir Thomas Musgrave, and killed or took prisoners every
man of them.

This great man lost his life with his brave general the earl of Douglas,
Gordon shist. of this family, vol. I. p. 30.
at the battle of Otterburn, anno 1388.

He was succeeded by his son,

X. Sir ADAM GORDON, dominus de Gordon and Huntly, who was inferior to none of
his brave ancestors in magnanimity and courage.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of sir William Keith, Ibid. and Crawfurd's
peerage.
great marishal of Scotland, by whom he had only one daughter,

Elizabeth his sole heiress.

He was killed at the battle of Homildon, anno 1402, and was succeeded in his
whole great and opulent estate by his daughter,

XI. ELIZABETH, who married sir Alexander Seton, second son of sir William
Seton of that ilk, Chart. penes ducem de Gordon, et in pub. archiv.
ancestor of the earls of Winton, who thereupon got charters from Robert duke
of Albany, governor of Scotland, of the baronies of Gordon, Huntly, and many
others, Alexandra Seton, etc.

He was afterward designed Alexander Seton, lord of Gordon and Huntly, and by
the said Elizabeth, left issue two sons and one daughter.

1. Alexander, afterward lord Gordon and earl of Huntly.

2. William, ancestor of the Setons of Meldrum, etc. in vicecom de Aberdeen.

His daughter Elizabeth, was married to Alexander earl of Ross.

He died before the year 1421, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. ALEXANDER lord Gordon, who was a man of great parts and abilities.

He was one of the commissioners appointed by the estates of the kingdom, Rymer
tom. X. p. 127, ^ 327.
to treat with the English about king James's liberty, anno 1421, and is then
designed Alexander de Seton dominus de Gordon. He was afterward one of the
hostages for his ransom, anno 1423.

He was appointed one of the ambassadors extraordinary, Ibid. p. 677 688, 702,
etc.
to treat with the English about a peace, anno 1437. They concluded a truce,
anno 1438; and he was again sent to England to treat of a final peace, anno
1439.

He got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Alexandro Seton, filio et haeredi Elizabethae de Gordon, dom. de eodem, anno
1439.

This Alexander lord Gordon, grants a charter to James de Forbes, Haddington
collections.
son and heir apparent of Alexander lord Forbes, of the lands of Corsindie,
etc. 30th September 1444.

He married, 1st, Jean, daughter of Robert master of Keith, son and apparent
heir of William first earl marishal, by whom he had no issue.

He married, 2dly, Giles, daughter and heiress of John Hay of Tullibody, in
Clackmannan-shire, by whom he had a son,

Sir Alexander Seton, who succeeded to his mother's estate, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
and was ancestor of the Setons of Touch, and got a charter under the great
seal, Alexandro fratri Georgii comitis de Huntly, etc.

He married, 3dly, Elizabeth, daughter of William lord Crichton, chancellor of
Scotland, by whom he had three sons and three daughters, who all took the name
of Gordon.

1. George, who became heir to his estate and honors.

2. Sir Alexander Gordon of Midmar, ancestor of the Gordons of Abergeldie.

3. Adam Gordon, who was dean of Caithness. 1st daughter, Crawfurd's Peerage.
Janet, married to James Dunbar earl of Murray.

2. Elizabeth, married to William third earl marishal.

3. Christian, married to William lord Forbes.

This Alexander lord Gordon having performed many great services to his
country, in the minority of king James II. was by that prince created earl of
Huntly, anno 1449, the honors being limited to the heirs-male of his last
marriage with Elizabeth Crichton, they being obliged to carry the name and arms
of Gordon, etc.

He afterward got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Alexandro comiti de Huntly, domino Gordon et Badenoch, of the lands of
Strathbogic, (Huntly) Aboyne, Glentanner, Glenmuck, the lordship of Badenoch,
Lochaber, Forest of Enzie, etc. in the north, with Huntly and Gordon, etc. in
the shire of Berwick, inter 1451 et 1457.

He was employed in several negotiations to the court of England, Rymer, tom.
XI. p. 286, 297, 403, 426, etc.
inter 1451 et 1458.

After the commencement of the earl of Douglas's rebellion, he raised a
considerable army of his own friends and vassals, for the king's assistance,
Abercrombie, vol. II. p. 357.
and defeated the earl of Crawfurd, one of the earl of Douglas's chief
associates, near Brechin, who immediately after submitted to the king, whereby
the Douglas's rebellion was soon thereafter entirely crushed.

This worthy patriot died at a great age, in 1470, and was succeeded in his
estate and honors by the eldest son of his last marriage.

XIII. GEORGE, second earl of Huntly, who got charters, Chart. in pub. archiv.
under the great seal, of many lands and baronies, Georgio comiti de Huntly,
etc. inter 1473, et 1476.

He was for a long time a steady friend of king James III. Records of
parliament, and lives of the officers of state.
and was one of his privy council; but he afterward joined the lords on the
other side, though he was always against every violent measure.

Upon king James IV.'s accession to the crown, he was sworn one of the privy
council, and was constituted lord lieutenant of the northern parts of Scotland
beyond the river North-Esk, Chart. in pub. archiv.
anno 1491.

He being highly esteemed, and in great favor with his majesty, was
constituted lord high chancellor of Scotland, in the year 1498, Ibidem.
and continued in that high office till the year 1502, that he resigned the
seals, which, with the office of chancellor, were immediately given to the
king's brother the duke of Ross; Ibidem.
but he, in lieu thereof, had a grant of the castle, et lacum castri de
Inverlochy, by a charter, under the great seal, dated in 1505.

He sat in the parliament that settled the jointure upon queen Margaret that
same year. Rymer's foed. tom. XIII. p. 92.


He married, 1st, lady Jean Stewart, daughter of king James I. Lives of the
officers of state, p. 57.
widow of James earl of Angus, by whom he had four sons, and six daughters.

1. Alexander, his heir.

2. Sir Adam Gordon, lord of Aboyne, who married Elizabeth, countess and
heiress of Suth^rland, by which marriage he became earl of Sutherland.

3. Sir William, ancestor of the Gordons of Gight, who was slain at Flowdon,
anno 1513.

4. Sir James Gordon of Letterfury, admiral of the king's fleet, anno 1513.

1st daughter, lady Catharine, married, 1st, to Perkin Warbeck, the pretended
duke of York; 2dly, to sir Matthew Cradock in Wales, of whom the earl of
Pembroke is descended.

2. Lady Janet, married, 1st, to Alexander lord Lindsay, son and heir of David
earl of Crawfurd; 2dly, to Patrick lord Gray.

3. Lady Mary, married to sir William Sinclair of Westerhall.

4. Lady Sophia, married to sir Gilbert Hay of Killmalloch, knight.

5. Lady Agnes, married to sir James Ogilvie of Finlater.

6. Lady Eleanora, married to -- Crichton of Innernytie.

He married, 2dly, lady Elizabeth Hay, daughter of William earl of Errol, by
whom he had no issue.

He died anno 1507, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIV. ALEXANDER, third earl of Huntly, who, in his father's lifetime, got
charters, under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the lands of Huntly, Gordon, and many others, inter 1503 et 1508.

He was one of the guarantees of a treaty of peace with the English, Rymer,
tom. XIII. p. 268.
anno 1509; and being in great favor with the king, was nominated one of his
privy council: and indeed he had not a braver nor a more faithful subject in
his whole kingdom.

He accompanied his majesty to the fatal field of Flowdon, and though he gave
his opinion against fighting at that time, where so many disadvantages were
obvious, yet when he found the king was determined, he yielded to his majesty;
and having the command of the right wing of the army, performed wonders, and
drove all before him that stood in his way; but the left wing, and the main
body, were not so successful, being overpowered with numbers, and the king and
the slower of the nobility being killed, Abercromble.
he was at last obliged to give way, and with great difficulty made his retreat
in the evening.

In the minority of king James V. he was appointed lord lieutenant of the
north, beyond the river Forth; and in the year 1517, was joined in commisstion
with the earls of Angus, Arran, and Argyle, as governors of the young king.

He married lady Janet Stewart, daughter of John earl of Athole, Crawfurd's
peerage.
by whom he had three sons and four daughters.

1. John, lord Gordon, his apparent heir.

2. Alexander, to whom he gave the lands of Strathdown. He was ancestor of the
Gordons of Clunie.

3. William, who, applying himself to the service of the church, was first
chancellor of the church of Elgin, and afterward bishop of Aberdeen.

1st daughter, lady Janet, married to Colin earl of Argyle.

2. Lady Jean, married to Patrick, fourth lord Gray.

3. Lady Isabel, married to -- lord Innermeath.

4. --, married to -- Menzies of Weem.

He died anno 1523.

XV. JOHN, lord Gordon, first son and apparent heir of Alexander, third earl of
Huntly, in his father's lifetime got charters under the great seal, Johanni
domino Gordon, Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the lands of Badenoch, castle of Ruthven, and many others, inter 1507 et
1510.

He married Jean, Stewart's hist. of the royal fam. p. 83.
natural daughter of king James IV. by Margaret, daughter of John lord
Drummond, by whom he had two sons,

1. George, afterward earl of Huntly.

2. Alexander, who, by queen Mary, was appointed bishop of Galloway.

He died anno 1517.

XVI. GEORGE, eldest son of John lord Gordon, succeeded his grandfather earl
Alexander, anno 1523, and was fourth earl of Huntly.

He was a man of a sine genius, and excellent natural parts, which were greatly
improved by a liberal education and traveling.

He got charters, Chart. in pub. archiv.
under the great seal, of a vast number of lands, lordships and baronies, inter
1530 et 1540.

In 1535, the king appointed him one of his privy council, and also constituted
him one of the regency, when he went to France, in order to espouse princess
Magdalene, daughter of king Francis I. The lords regents were James archbishop
of St. Andrews, Gavin archbishop of Glasgow, chancellor, George earl of Huntly,
William earl of Montrose, Hugh earl of Eglington, and Robert lord Maxwell,
whose ample commission is fully narrated in the lives of the officers of state,
Lives of the offic. of state, page, 82.
and is dated at Stirling, 29th August 1536.

The king, upon his return, having entire confidence of the loyalty and
fidelity of this earl, constituted him lieutenant of the north, and
captain general of the forces that were raised to oppose the English under the
command of sir Robert Bowis, whom he pursued closely, Ibid. p. 83.
defeated the whole party at Haldenrig, and took their general prisoner.

King Henry VIII. then sent a much greater force to the borders, under the
command of the duke of Norfolk; but the brave earl of Huntly, by his prudence,
dextrous conduct, and frequent skirmishes, so hemmed him in, that he never
durst advance two miles on this side of the Tweed.

After the death of the king, the earl of Huntly was, by act of parliament,
appointed one of the lords of the privy council, to the earl of Arran, the
governor; and upon the death of Cardinal Bethune, Ibidem, and records of
parliament.
he was constituted lord high chancellor of Scotland: his commission, and the
great seal were delivered to him in open parliament on 10th June 1546.

He had a considerable command at the unfortunate battle of Pinkie; and though
he behaved with the utmost conduct and resolution, was taken prisoner, and sent
to England; but made his escape from Morpeth about one year thereafter,
returned immediately to Scotland, and went directly upon the administration of
the chancellor's office.

He always strenuously opposed the match betwixt queen Mary and the prince of
England, Ibidem.
and accompanied the queen dowager to France, when she went to visit her
daughter; was made a knight of the ancient order of St. Michael by king Francis
I. and upon his return, had a grant of the earldom of Murray, then in the
crown, by the death of earl James, the queen's natural uncle.

When the queen dowager was made regent, she gave the great seal to Monsieur
Rubie, a Frenchman; which, upon queen Mary's return from France, was delivered
back to the chancellor, but her Majesty was pleased to give the earldom of
Murray to her natural brother the prior of St. Andrews, and created him earl of
Murray; between whom and the chancellor, there was always a mortal enmity.

When the queen went on an expedition to visit the northern parts of her
dominions, it was alleged the earl had amind to apprehend her majesty's
person, and get her out of the hands of the earl of Murray; Lives of the offic.
of state. p. 87.
he had got together about 1500 men, but the queen having been joined by some
MacKenzies, Monros, Frasers, and MacIntoshes, attacked Huntly near Corrichie,
where he was deseated, and himself killed, anno 1562.

His son, sir John, was executed the next day at Aberdeen; another of his sons,
sir Adam, was pardoned; but the earl's estate and honors were forfeited to the
crown for treason, though her majesty was pleased to reverse the forfeiture,
Ibidem, and records of parliament.
and restore his son to the whole estates, honors, and dignities of the
family, anno 1567.

By Elizabeth, daughter of Robert lord Keith, son and apparent heir of William
third earl Marishal, he had issue seven sons and three daughters.

1. George, afterward earl of Huntly.

2. Mr. James, who went into holy orders, and died at Paris, anno 1620.

3. Sir John Gordon, designed of Finlater or Deskford, who was executed as
above, without issue.

4. Sir Adam Gordon of Auchindoun, who died without issue, anno 1580.

5. Sir Patrick of Auchindoun, who was slain at the battle of Glenlivet, anno
1594.

6. Mr. Robert.

7. Mr. Thomas.

1st daughter, lady Margaret, married to John, eighth lord Forbes.

2. Lady Jean, married, 1st, to James earl of Bothwell; 2dly, to Alexander earl
of Sutherland; 3dly, to Alexander Ogilvie of Boyne.

3. Lady Elizabeth, married to John earl of Athole.

XVII. GEORGE, fifth earl of Huntly, was restored to all his estates, and
honors of his ancestors, anno 1567, as before observed.

Though his forfeiture was not reversed in parliament till 1567, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
yet we find him in great favor with her majesty before that time, who
appointed him lord high chancellor of the kingdom, on 20th march 1565; which
high office he held till the queen resigned the government; Ibid. and lives of
the officers of state.
then the earl of Murray conferred it upon his good friend the earl of Morton.

Upon the breaking out of the civil war, he adhered to the queen's interest
with great firmness and fidelity, and was appointed commander in chief of all
the forces raised, or to be raised in the north for her majesty's service. He
soon got together a considerable body, both of horse and foot, which gave the
other party a great deal of trouble; but they being strongly supported by the
queen of England, Huntly was forced to come to an accommodation with the earl
of Morton, Ibid. and records of parlt.
then regent, anno 1573.

The earl after this retired to his country feat, where he lived all the rest
of his days, without meddling any more in public affairs.

He married lady Anne Hamilton, daughter of James duke of Chattelherault, by
whom he had a son,

George, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Lady Jean, married to George earl of Caithness.

He died in May 1576, and was succeeded by his son,

XVIII. GEORGE, sixth earl of Huntly, who continuing steady in the Roman
catholic religion, he, the earls of Angus, Errol, and others, were unjustly
suspected to have had some correspondence with the Spaniards, Rymer, tom. XVI.
p. 198 and 305.
about the time of their armado, and of course became obnoxious to the court.

The king was very sensible that these noble earls were no enemies, either to
himself or the country, but were only arming in defense of their religion and
estates, and was unwilling to drive them to extremities. The earl of Bothwell
was then in actual rebellion; the king, therefore, in the beginning of the year
1594, Ibid. p. 247.
proposed that the general assembly should order it to be intimate from the
pulpits, that he was determined to prosecute, according to law, the earl of
Bothwell, and all his rebellious subjects, etc.

The ministers answered, and insisted, that he should first prosecute the
enemies to God and religion, Ibid. p. 248.
viz. the earls of Angus, Huntly, and Errol, the lord of Strathdon, and sir
James Chisholm, and then prosecute the traitors and rebels against himself, etc.

There was therefore an army levied, and sent north against these earls, under
the command of Archibald earl of Argyle, the king's lieutenant. All Scots
historians.
They came to an engagement near Glenlivet; the king's troops were defeated,
and some persons of rank killed on both sides, in October 1594

However, the earls were soon thereafter pardoned, and Huntly got so much into
the king's favor, that he obtained from his majesty a grant of the dissolved
abbacy of Dunsermline, was constituted lord lieutenant of the north, and raised
to the honor of marquis of Huntly, Chart. in pub. archiv.
by patent, dated 17th April 1599.

He got charters, under the great seal, (Georgio marchioni de Huntly,) Ibidem.
of many lordships and baronies, inter 1608 et 1625.

He married lady Henriet Stewart, daughter of Esme duke of Lennox, by whom he
had four sons and four daughters.

1. George, his heir.

2. Sir John Gordon, created viscount Melgum and lord Aboyne, by king Charles
I. anno 1627, and married lady Sophia Hay, daughter of Francis ninth earl of
Errol, but died, and was burnt in the house of Frendraught, without issue.

3. Lord Francis Gordon, who died in Germany, anno 1620.

4. Lord Adam, who was lord of Auchindoun.

1st daughter, lady Anne, married to James earl of Murray.

2. Lady Elizabeth, married to Alexander earl of Linlithgow.

3. Lady Mary, married to William marquis of Douglas.

4. Lady Jean, married to Claud Hamilton, lord Strabane, of the kingdom of
Ireland.

He died anno 1636, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIX. GEORGE, second marquis of Huntly, who was a great loyalist, and
inviolably attached to the interest of the royal family.

While a young man, he was a captain of the Scotch gens d'armes to Lewis the
XIII. of France; but upon the breaking out of the civil war, he returned to his
native country, joined the loyalists, and was appointed lieutenant in the
north; Rescinded acts of parlt.
and for his steady adherence to the king, was forfeited by parliament, anno
1645.

He was excepted from pardon, 4th March 1647, and his houses of Boig of Gight
and Strathbogie taken possession of, Ibidem.
by order of parliament, 8th June 1648.

He was at last executed for his loyalty at Edinburgh, on 30th March 1649,
having married lady Anne Campbell, daughter of Archibald, seventh earl of
Argyle, by whom he had five sons and five daughters.

1. George, lord Gordon, who joined the king upon the breaking out of the civil
war, and never deserted his interest, till he lost his life in his service, at
the battle of Alford, anno 1645, without issue.

2. Lewis, afterward marquis of Huntly.

3. Lord Charles, afterward earl of Aboyne.

4. Lord James, also a great loyalist, who, after the murder of the king,
retired to France, where he died, without issue.

5. Lord Henry Gordon.

1st daughter, lady Anne, married to James earl of Perth.

2. Lady Henriet, married, 1st, to George lord Seton; 2dly, to John earl of
Traquair.

3. Lady Jean, married to Thomas earl of Haddington.

4. Lady Mary.

5. Lady Catharine, died unmarried.

XX. LEWIS, or LUDOVICK, third marquis of Huntly, succeeded his father in 1649.

He married Isabel, daughter of sir James Grant of that ilk, by whom he had a
son,

George, his heir, -- and three daughters.

1. Lady Anne, married to the count de Crolly.

2. Lady Mary, married, 1st, to Adam Urquhart of Meldrum; 2dly, to James earl
of Perth, chancellor of Scotland.

3. Lady Jean, married to Charles earl of Dunfermline.

The marquis did not long survive his father, but died anno 1653, and was
succeeded by his son,

XXI. GEORGE, fourth marquis of Huntly, Records of parliament. and Chart. in
pub. archiv.
who was parliamentarily restored to his whole estate, had the act of
forfeiture rescinded, anno 1661; and got charters, under the great seal, totius
marchionatus de Huntly, etc.

He was much esteemed by, Ibid. haered. mase. e corpore suo.
and in great favor with king Charles II. who created him duke of Gordon, by
patent to the heirs-male of his body, dated 1st November 1684.

Upon the accession of king James VII. to the crown, he was made one of the
lords of the treasury, one of his majesty's most honorable privy council,
governor of the castle of Edinburgh, and one of the knights of the most ancient
order of the thistle.

At the revolution he held out the castle of Edinburgh for his master king
James; but at last, seeing no hopes of relief, he surrendered it to the troops
of king William, and retired to his seat in the country, where he continued to
his death.

He married lady Elizabeth Howard, daughter of Henry duke of Norfolk, by lady
Anne Somerset his wife, daughter of Edward marquis of Worcester: by her he had
issue a son,

Alexander, -- and a daughter,

Lady Jean, married to James earl of Perth.

He died anno 1716, and was succeeded by his son,

XXII. ALEXANDER, second duke of Gordon. He married lady Henrietta Mordaunt,
daughter of Charles earl of Peterborough and Monmouth, by whom he had ^our
sons, and seven daughters.

1. Cosmo-George.

2. Lord Charles.

3. Lord Lewis, who died anno 1754.

4. Lord Adam, a colonel in the army, and member of parliament for the county
of Aberdeen.

1st daughter, lady Henriet.

2. Lady Mary.

3. Lady Anne, married to William earl of Aberdeen.

4. Lady Betty, married to Mr. Skelly, a clergyman of the church of England.

5. Lady Jean.

6. Lady Catharine, married to the honorable Francis Charteris of Amisfield;
Esquire;.

7. Lady Charlotte.

He died anno 1728, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XXIII. COSMO-GEORGE, third duke of Gordon, who was elected one of the sixteen
peers to the tenth British parliament, in the year 1747.

He married lady Catharine Gordon, daughter of William earl of Aberdeen, by
whom he had three sons, and three daughters.

1. Alexander, now duke of Gordon.

2. Lord William.

3. Lord George.

1st daughter, lady Susan.

2. Lady Anne.

3. Lady Catharine.

He died in August 1752, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XXIV. ALEXANDER, fourth duke of Gordon.

ARMS.
Quarterly, first, azure, three boars heads arazed or, for Gordon; second or,
three lions heads erazed gules, for Badenoch; third or, three crescents within
a double tressure gules, for Seton; fourth azure, three cinquefoils argent for
Fraser.

CREST; in a marquis's coronet or, a stag's head guardant proper.

SUPPORTERS; two gray hounds argent, each gorged with a collar gules, and three
buckles or.

MOTTO; Bydand.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Strathbogie in the county of Aberdeen, and Gordon-castle in Banff-shire.

RUTHVEN Earl of GOWRIE.
THE surname of Ruthven is local, and was first assumed by the proprietors of
the lands and barony of Ruthven in Perthshire, which they were in possession
of, long before sirnames came to be much used in this country.

I. THORE, the immediate ancestor of this noble family, flourished in the
reigns of king David I. and king Malcolm IV. who succeeded David, anno 1153. He
was father of

II. SWANUS, who appears to have been a man of considerable rank and
distinction, in the reign of king William the Lion, and had the superiority of
lands in other counties, besides those of Ruthven in Perth-shire.

He made a donation to the monastery of Scoon, of part of his lands of
Tubermore, in the last named county, Chartulary of Scoon, penes MacFarlane, p.
185.
pro salute animae comitis Henrici, etc. and is therein designed Swanus filius
Thori, to which John bishop of Dunkeld was a witness, who was in that see from
1177 till he died anno 1203.

He made another donation, de quodam tofio in Tubermore, Regist. of Inc^^colm,
penes eundem, p. 18.
to the monastery of Inchcolm before the year 1200.

King William confirms, to the monastery of Newbottle, a donation made by
William de Lindsay, of part of his lands of Crawford in Lanark-shire, quam ipse
Willielmus tenet de Swano filio Thori, Chartulary of Newbottle, penes eund. p.
18.
etc. to which David, the king's brother, Robert de Quincy, etc. are witnesses,
ante 1214, in which year king William died.

He left issue two sons.

1. Alanus, his heir.

2. Walter, who is witness in a donation of Gilbert earl of Strathearn to the
monastery of Scoon, Chartulary of Scoon, p. 199.
wherein he is designed Walterus filius Swani, etc. tempore Alexandri regis
secundi.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. ALANUS or ALAN, who confirmed his father's donations to the religious,
Chartul. of Scoon and Inchcolm.
and is therein designed Alanus filius Swani, in the beginning of the reign of
king Alexander II. who succeeded to the crown, anno 1214.

He left issue two sons.

1. Sir Walter, his heir.

2. Henry, Chartulary of Scoon, p. 199.
who is witness in the said donation of Gilbert earl of Strathearn, and is
designed Henricus filius Alani, etc.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. Sir WALTER de RUTHVEN, who is the first of this family that assumed the
surname.

In a controversy with Galfride, bishop of Dunblain, about the patronage of a
church in Perth-shire, Malcolmus comes de Fife, Walterus Senescallus,
justiciar. Scotiae, Walterus de Ruthven, Register of Inchcolm, p. 32.
Laurentius de Abernethy, Malcolmus de Levenax, etc. are witnesses, anno 1239.

He confirmed his predecessors donations to the religious, Chartul. of Scoon
and Inchcolm.
in these words: Walterus filius Alani, etc. totam terram illam quam Swanus
filius Thori avus meus dedit in Tubermore, etc. to which Gilbert earl of
Strathearn, Robert, his son, etc. are witnesses, inter 1235 et 1240.

He married Cecily, daughter of Gilbert earl of Strathearn, then one of the
most considerable families in Scotland, with whom he got a large accession to
his estate. This marriage appears from an original charter, Origin. charters,
penes MacFarlane, v. II. p. 196.
in which are these words: Walterus filius Alani uxorem duxit Ceciliam filiam
Gilberti comitis de Strathearn, etc.

By her he had issue a son and successor,

V. Sir WILLIAM de RUTHVEN, the first we find designed lord of that ilk.

He confirms his predecessors donations to the religious in these words:
Chartulary of Scoon.
Willielmus de Ruthven dominus ejusd. etc. confirmasse, etc. cartam domini
Walteri, filii Alani, bonae memoriae patris mei, etc. Deo et canonicis de
Scoon, etc. anno 1260.

In two donations of William earl of Mar, Chartulary of St. Andrews, p. 376,
and 377.
to the priory of St. Andrews, Willielmus de Ruthven, miles, is a witness, anno
1267.

He left issue two sons.

1. Sir Walter, his heir.

2. Sir Gilbert, who, in a charter of Roger de Quincy, Ibid. p. 406.
earl of Winton, is designed Gilbertus de Ruthven, miles, filius Willielmi,
etc. anno 1262.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. Sir WALTER RUTHVEN, dominus ejusd. who confirmed his predecessors
donations to the religious, Chartulary of Scoon, p. 184
and is then designed silius et haeres Willielmi, etc.

He married Cecily, daughter and co-heiress of sir William Maule, Charta penes
comitem de Panmure.
with whom he got part of the lands and barony of Foulis, which he afterward
resigned, anno 1262.

By her he had issue a son,

VII. Sir WILLIAM RUTHVEN, dominus ejusd. Prynne's collect. vol. III. p. 662.
who succeeded him, and was one of the Scotch barons that swore sealty to king
Edward I. of England, when he had overrun Scotland, anno 1296.

He married Marjory, daughter of -- Ramsay of Auchterhouse, M. S. hist. of the
family of Gowrie.
by whom he had three sons.

1. Sir Walter, his heir.

2. James.

3. Robert.

These two last were killed at the battle of Duplin, Ibidem.
anno 1332.

He died anno 1320, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. Sir WALTER de RUTHVEN, dominus ejusd. who accompanied king David Bruce
into Scotland, Ibidem.
and lost his life at the battle of Durham, where his royal master was taken
prisoner, anno 1346.

By Margaret Carron his wise he left a son,

IX. Sir WILLIAM, who succeeded him, and confirms the donations of his
predecessors in these words: Willielmus de Ruthven dominus ejusd. etc.
confirmasse, etc. donationem illam quam Swanus filius Thori praedecessor meus
fecit, Register of Inchcolm, p. 15.
et Walterus filius Alani filii Swani confirmavit, etc. monasterio insulae Sti
Columbi, etc. de quodam tofto apud Tubermore, etc. testibus, Mauritio de
Ruthven, consanguineo meo, etc. anno 1362.

He got a safe conduct from king Edward III. to go up to England, Rymer, tom.
VI. p. 408.
anno 1363, and is then designed Willielmus de Ruthven, miles.

There is a charter of confirmation, under the great seal, upon an assedation,
Chart. in archiv. Robert II.
per quondam Willielmum de Ruthven, etc. factam Johanni Penny, etc. dated anno
1376.

By Margaret his wife, a daughter of sir John Logie, he left issue two sons.

1. Sir William, his heir.

2. David de Ruthven, MacFarlane's collections, v. I. p. 172.
who got from his brother the lands of Morehall, by a charter dated 20th
October 1400.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. Sir WILLIAM RUTHVEN, dominus ejusd. a man of good parts, and a great
patriot.

He was one of the Scotch nobles appointed by the estates of the nation,
Rymer's ^ad. tom. X. pages 308, and 327.
to treat with the English about king James's liberty, anno 1423, and was
afterward one of the hostages for his ransom, anno 1424.

We have not discovered whom he married, but he left issue a son,

Sir William, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Christian Ruthven, married to George Douglas of Leswalt, in Galloway, by a
charter from king James III. Chart. in pub. archiv.
dated anno 1477.

He died in the reign of king James II. and was succeeded by his son,

XI. Sir WILLIAM, Records of parliament.
who was created a lord of parliament by king James III. 29th January 1487.

He was appointed heretable sheriss of Perth, and got charters, under the great
seal, Willielmo domino Ruthven, Chart. in pub. archiv.
officii vicecomitatus de Perth; and of a vast number of lands and baronies,
viz. the lands of Cousland, the half of Strathbrand, Glencuthil; Cowgask,
Culteranie, Drumdrany, Craignegaw, and many others in different counties, too
numerous to be here inserted.

This lord married, 1st, Isabel, daughter of -- Livingston of Saltcoats, and
relict of Walter Lindsay of Beaufort, by whom he had a son,

William, master of Ruthven, -- and a daughter,

Margaret, Ibidem.
married, 1st, to Alexander earl of Buchan; 2dly, to John Erskine of Dun, in
Forfar-shire, and was mother of the superintendant.

He married, 2dly, Christian, daughter of sir John Forbes of Pitsligo, by whom
he had another son,

William Ruthven of Bandean, of whom the earl of Forth, the Ruthvens of
Dunglas, Redcastle, etc. are descended, -- and a daughter,

Elizabeth, married, 1st, to William, fifth earl of Errol; 2dly, to Ninian lord
Ross.

He lived to a great age, and died in 1528.

XII. WILLIAM, master of Ruthven, eldest son and apparent heir of William,
first lord Ruthven, Ibidem.
married Jean Hepburn, daughter of the lord of Rickerton, by whom he had a son,

William, afterward lord Ruthven.

The master accompanied king James IV. to the fatal field of Flowdon, where he
lost his life with his royal master, anno 1513.

XIII. WILLIAM, second lord Ruthven, only son of the master, Chart. in pub.
archiv. inter 1530 and 1542.
succeeded his grandfather, anno 1528, and got charters, under the great seal,
of many lands and baronies.

He was a man of parts and learning, and was made lord privy seal, anno 1547,
which office he held till his death. Ibidem.


He married Janet Halyburton, daughter and one of the co-heiresses of Patrick
lord Halyburton of Dirleton; Ibid. and Nisbet.
and, on account of that marriage, he quartered the arms of Halyburton with his
own. He got with her a great accession to his estate, and by her had issue two
sons, and seven daughters.

1. Patrick, his heir.

2. Alexander Ruthven of Freeland, ancestor of lord Ruthven of Freeland. Vide
title lord Ruthven.

1st daughter, Lilias, married to David lord Drummond.

2. Catharine, married to sir Colin Campbell of Glenurchie.

3. Cecilia, married to sir David Wemyss of Wemyss.

4. Barbara, married to Patrick lord Gray.

5. Janet, married to John lord Crichton of Strathurd.

6. Margaret, married to James Johnston of Elphingston, in Haddington-shire.

7. Christian, married to William Lundin of that ilk, in Fise-shire.

He died anno 1553, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIV. PATRICK, third lord Ruthven, heretable sheriff of Perth, who was a man of
a daring spirit; and a great promoter of the reformation.

He got charters, under the great seal, of many lands and baronies, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
Patricio domino Ruthven; etc. inter 1554 et 1562.

He married, 1st, Janet Douglas, natural daughter of Archibald earl of Angus,
by whom he had two sons; and two daughters.

1. William, afterward earl of Gowrie.

2. Alexander Ruthven, Esquire;.

1st daughter; Jean, married, Lives of the offic. of state.
1st, to Henry lord Methven; 2dly, to Andrew earl of Rothes.

2. Isabel, married to sir James Colvile of Easter-Wemyss.

He married, Chart. in pub. archiv. ad annum 1557.
2dly, lady Janet Stewart, daughter of John earl of Athole, widow of Henry lord
Methven, by whom he had a son,

James Ruthven, who was precentor of Dunkeld, anno 1582.

This lord had the misfortune to be accessory to the murder of David Rizio,
anno 1566, which is the greatest stain upon his character; and dying in the end
of that year, or beginning of 1567, Ibidem.
was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. WILLIAM, fourth lord Ruthven, a man of great parts and undannted courage.

He was appointed lord high treasurer of Scotland, anno 1571, and was created
earl of Gowrie 23d August 1581.

This earl, who was truly a great man, had so many and various scenes of life,
that it is inconsistent with the brevity of this work to narrate them here, but
shall refer our readers to the lives of the officers of state, page 383, etc.
where will be found a full account of his life and actions. We shall only add,
that in the minority of king James VI. BishopSpotiswood.
he was charged with several treasonable practices, for which he was condemned
and executed, on 28th May 1584, and his estate and honors forfeited to the
crown.

We shall sum up his character in the words of a learned author: "He was a
nobleman, who in his life was much honored, and employed in the chief offices
at court; Ibidem.
a man wise, but too curious, and said to have consulted with wizards, etc. He
made this common regret, which many great men have done in such misfortunes,
that if he had served God as faithfully as he had done the king, he had not
come to that untimely end. His death, to the beholders, was very peaceable and
quiet, etc. etc."

He married Dorothea, daughter of Henry lord Methven, Lives of the offic. of
state.
by whom he had issue five sons, and seven daughters.

1. James.

2. John, who succeeded his brother.

3. Alexander, who was^ concerned with his brother in the attempt upon the king
at Perth, as will be mentioned hereafter.

4. William, who was but a child at his brother's death, but, upon the
extirpation of the family, went abroad, and became famous for his knowledge in
the art of chemistry.

5. Patrick, who became a doctor of physic, and was eminent in his profession.
His daughter was married to Anthony Vandyke, the famous painter.

1st daughter, lady Margaret, married to John earl of Montrose, and was mother
of the great marquis.

2. Lady Mary, married, 1st, to John fifth earl of Athole; 2dly, to John lord
Innermeath, afterward earl of Athole.

3. Lady Sophia, married to Ludovick duke of Lennox and Richmond.

4. Lady Jean, married to James eighth lord Ogilvie, and was mother of the
first earl of Airly.

5. Lady Beatrix, married to sir John Home of Coldingknows.

6. Lady Isabel, married to sir Robert Gordon of Lochinvar, and was mother of
John viscount Kenmure.

7. Barbara, married to sir John Wemyss of Pittencrief.

XVI. JAMES, eldest son of William, first earl of Gowrie, by the king's great
lenity and goodness, was restored to his father's estate and honors, and was
the second earl.

He was a youth of great hopes, and of a sweet disposition; but died unmarried,
anno 1588, whereby the estate and honors devolved upon his brother,

XVI. JOHN, third earl of Gowrie, who, with his brother Alexander, made that
audacious attempt upon the king's sacred person at Perth, on the memorable
fifth of August 1600, when both the brothers were slain in the enterprise.

Though there are particular histories of Gowrie's conspiracy wrote by several
historians, yet we have only hereto subjoined the account given by a learned
author. No transaction in the Scotch history can be so little accounted for, as
that of Gowrie's conspiracy. A reason for an attempt so horrid, is scarcely so
much as hinted; and the methods used, even supposing such had been the
intention, were so preposterous, that it cannot reconcile, either with the
character of the two young gentlemen, or with the other circumstances of the
story itself. Nature and education had joined in adorning them, especially the
elder, with the most noble accomplishments: More learned than is usual among
persons of their rank; more religious than is common at their age of life;
generous, brave, popular: their countrymen, far from thinking them capable of
any atrocious crime, conceived the most sanguine hopes of their early virtues.

This remarkable incident happened on the fifth August 1600. Historians tell
us, that as the king was going out in the morning to the chase from his palace
of Falkland, he was accosted by the younger of the two Ruthvens, Alexander,
who, with an air of secrecy and importance, acquainted him, that the evening
before, a stranger had been seized near his brother's house at Perth, and
secured; and, on searching him, a vast quantity of foreign gold was found upon
him. The king immediately suspecting this unknown person to be a trafficking
priest, supplied with foreign coin, in order to excite new commotions in the
kingdom, ordered him to be sent to Falkland; but this Mr. Ruthven strenuously
opposed, and, with many arguments, urged the king to proceed to Perth, and
examine into the matter himself. The king, whose curiosity was awakened by the
strangeness of the affair, promised to go when the chase was over, during the
whole of which Ruthven continued his importunity in so strong at manner, that,
even after it was over, he would not allow the king to wait a fresh horse, but
insisted on his setting out on the same he had hunted with the whole day. Mr.
Ruthven, too, was very desirous that the king should set out without
attendants; but this he refused, and, with a train of about twenty persons, set
out for Perth.

The earl of Gowrie apprised by his brother of the king's approach, met him at
a little distance from the town, and conducted him to his house: mean time no
preparations for entertaining his majesty appeared; the earl seemed embarassed,
nor did he apologize for the seanty fare with which he entertained his royal
guest. The king's repast being over, his attendants were conducted by the earl
to dine in another apartment. At that time Mr. Ruthven took the opportunity of
whispering the king, that now he might have an opportunity of seeing the
unknown person. The king desired sir Thomas Erskine to go with him; but Mr.
Ruthven would not consent: he then conducted the king by a narrow staircase,
through several apartments, all of which he locked behind him, till at last he
came to a small room, where, instead of a fettered criminal, as the king
expected, he found a man standing compleately armed, with a sword and dagger at
his side. Ruthven, upon his entrance, snatched the dagger from the man's side,
and addressing the king, spoke to him of his father's execution; that he was
now his prisoner, and at his mercy; but added, that if he would be quiet, and
make no noise, his life should be in safety. He then delivered back the man the
dagger, told him to take care of the king, and at same time binding the king
with an oath not to make any noise or disturbance during his absence, he
returned to acquaint his brother with what he had done.

Mean while the king's attendants, impatient at his not appearing, inquired at
Gowrie what had become of him: at that instant one of Gowrie's domestics
entered the room, and acquainted them, that the king had just mounted his
horse, and rode off for Falkland; on which all of them immediately left the
house, and called for their horses. At this time Mr. Ruthven had returned to
the king, and told him, that now he behoved to die, and at same time offered to
bind his hands. Unarmed as the king was, he would not submit to such an
indignity, but closing with Mr. Ruthven, a fierce struggle ensued; during which
the man in armor stood by trembling, dismayed, and motionless, without offering
the least assistance to his master, or violence to the king.

In the scuffle the king had pulled Mr. Ruthven near a window, part of which
was open, and, putting out his head, called out, with a wild affrighted voice,
Treason! Murder! His attendants knew the voice, and observing a hand at the
window, collaring the king, they immediately rushed up stairs to his
assistance. The greater number took the principal staircase, but found all the
doors fast, which while they were attempting to force open, sir John Ramsay
entered by a back stair, and seeing Mr. Ruthven struggling with the king, drew
his dagger, plunged it twice into his body, then pulled him from the king, and
threw him down stairs, where he was met by sir Thomas Erskine, and sir Hugh
Herries, who, with their daggers, dispatched him; Mr. Ruthven calling out with
his last breath, alas! alas! I am not to blame. During this scuffle the man in
armor, who had been concealed in the apartment, made his escape unknown.

There were now in the apartment with the king, Ramsay, Erskine, and Herries,
and one Wilson a footman, who entered the room along with them. Before they had
time to congratulate the king on his narrow escape, the earl came up the same
back-stair, and rushed in with a sword in each hand, attended by seven
servants, completely armed, threatening them all with immediate death.
Notwithstanding the inequality of the numbers, the three gentlemen immediately
attacked the earl, and sir John Ramsay having run him through the heart, his
followers immediately fled.

The king's attendants, who were endeavoring to force a passage from the other
staircase, were now let in, and, with transports of joy, congratulated the
king on his deliverance; and he falling on his knees, with his attendants
around him, offered thanks to God for his wonderful preservation.

The danger however was not quite over: the inhabitants of Perth hearing of the
death of the earl, their beloved provost and patron, surrounded the house, and
vowed vengeance against the king; but the magistrates being admitted into the
king's presence, and acquainted with the fact, they, by their influence, by
degrees appeased the multitudes, who soon after dispersed. The king then
returned to Falkland, having left the care of the dead bodies of the earl and
his brother to the magistrates.

Such is the story handed down to us by many writers; but all of them are at a
loss to account for the motives of a conduct so contrary to the known character
of these two brothers, whose gentle and peaceable dispositions made them
idolized by all who knew them.

Three of Gowrie's servants were afterward hanged at Perth, for being
concerned in the attempt; but from them no light could be drawn into this
intricate affair; and the man who was concealed in the study, and who, upon
promise of pardon, had revealed himself, and proved to be the earl's steward,
was as much a stranger to his master's design as the rest; and though placed in
the study, by the earl's immediate command, he did not even know for what end
that station was assigned him; the truth of which seems strongly to appear from
his behavior to the king while alone in the apartment with him; and when,
instead of appearing to have a design upon his life or liberty, he stood
motionless, trembling and affrighted; in short, altogether unfit for so horrid
an office.




All the honors and estates of the earldom of Gowrie were forfeited and
annexed to the crown, and the fifth of August in time coming ordered to be
regularly observed as a day of thanksgiving, in remembrance of his majesty's
happy deliverance.

ARMS.
Three coats; quarterly, 1st and 4th, argent, three bars gules; 2d or, three
bars gules; 3d or, on a bend azure, three lozenges of the first; all within a
border or, flowered and counterflowered gules.

SUPPORTERS; two goats proper.

CREST; a goat's head caboss'd, issuing out of a crown or.

MOTTO; Facta probant.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Ruthven-Castle, (now called Hunting-tower,) in Perth-shire, etc.

GRAY Lord GRAY.
BOTH Scotch and English antiquaries agree, that the noble and ancient surname
of Gray is originally from France; and that Fulbert, great chamberlain to
Robert duke of Normandy, got from that prince the castle and honor of Croy,
alias Gray, in Picardy, from which he assumed his surname.

This Fulbert had a son,

John lord Gray, Peerage of England, vol. II. p. 1.
who succeeded him, -- and a daughter,

Arlette, who was mother of William the Conqueror.

Certain it is there were several of that surname came from France to Britain
with that great prince, anno 1066, and had considerable commands in his army;
and as he divided the lands of England amongst his brave officers, Ibidem.
we find that the Grays got a large share, made a great figure, and became very
numerous soon after William was master of the country. They were progenitors of
several noble families that have flourished with great luster in that kingdom
ever since, Salmon's abridgment, p. 124.
viz. the dukes of Suffolk, and Kent, the marquis of Dorset, the earls of
Tankerville, and Stamford, the barons Gray of Codnor, Ruthin, Wilton, Roleston,
Wark, and Chillingham, etc. from which last is descended the lord Gray in
Scotland.

In the northern counties there are still many ancient families of that name,
which enjoy considerable estates, as appears from the acts of parliament,
nominating the justices of the peace, commissioners of supply, etc. in those
parts.

And it is observable, that the Grays in Scotland carry the same armorial
bearings with those in the north of England, which may be seen in their
churches, tomb-stones, and other monuments of antiquity: and as Northumberland
formerly belonged to Scotland, it is the general opinion, that lord Gray of
Chillingham of that county, (whose predecessor came over with William the
Conqueror,) gave the lands of Browfield or Broxmouth, in the county of Roxburgh
adjoining to it, to a younger son of his family, of whom all the Grays in
Scotland are said to be descended.

But both Scotch and English historians, who assert, that the Grays came first
into Scotland in the reign of king James I. Cambden, Boethius, Buchanan, etc.
are in a mistake; for we have undoubted proof, that they were settled and
making a figure in this country near two hundred years before that era; or,
above five hundred years ago.

And though we cannot six the precise time of their coming, yet we shall deduce
the descent of this noble family, by authentic documents, in a direct line from

I. Sir HUGH de GRAY, a man of considerable rank and figure in the reign of
king Alexander II. (who succeeded to the crown, anno 1214;) was then proprietor
of the lands of Browfield or Broxmouth in Roxburghshire, Nisbet, vol. I. p. 173.
and is particularly documented by a charter of Walter de Lundin to his kinsman
Philip de Feodary, ancestor of the Meldrums of that ilk, of the lands of
Balcormack in Fife, in which sir Hugh de Gray, Alexander earl of Buchan, Charta
penes dominum de Lundin, and Book of original writs, penes MacFarlane. vol. II.
p. 1.
William lord of Brechin, sir Philip de Melville, and several others were
witnesses; and his being therein designed dominus Hugo de Gray, and inserted
before some other honorable persons, is a sufficient proof, that he was a man
of the first rank; and it is not to be imagined he was the first of this family
that was settled in Scotland. This charter is without date; but, by the
witnesses, must have been before 1248.

He left issue three sons.

1. Sir Hugh de Gray.

2. Henry de Gray, Prynne's collections, vol. III. p. 658.
who swore fealty to king Edward I. of England, anno 1296.

3. John de Gray, who was senescallus to the earl of March, and is witness to
many donations to the monastery of Coldstream; Chart. of Coldinghame penes
MacFarlane, p. 15, 35, etc.
particularly to one of Patrick earl of March, together with Philip de
Halyburton, Adam de Gordon, William de Home, etc. tempore Alexandri III.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. Sir HUGH de GRAY, dominus de Broxmouth, who flourished in the reign of
king Alexander III. and survived him many years.

He was one of the Scotch barons that swore fealty to king Edward I. Prynne,
vol. III. p. 654.
of England, anno 1296, and is then designed Hugo de Gray, miles.

He died about 1300, and left issue a son and successor,

III. Sir ANDREW de GRAY, third baron of Broxmouth, who was a great patriot, a
firm and steady friend of king Robert Bruce, Abercrombi^, vol. I. p. 585
by whom he was highly esteemed. He was joined with sir James Douglas, and sir
Alexander Fraser, in the command of a detachment against the lord Lorn, where
he performed the part of a brave and gallant officer, anno 1308. He afterward
obtained from king Robert, for his good and faithful services, a grant of
several lands, domino Andreae Gray militi, omnes terras et tenementa cum
pertinent. Chart. penes dom. de Gray.
quae fuerunt Edmundi de Hastings militis, infra baroniam de Longforgund cum
pertinent. terras de Craigie cum molendinis, terras de Pitcarrach, terras de
Carriston et Milntown, etc. jacen. in vicecomitatu de Forfar. The charter of
confirmation is dated at Arbroath, 12th February 1315, before these witnesses,
Bernard abbot of Arbroath chancellor, Gilbert de Haya constable of Scotland,
Alexander Fraser, William Oliphant, David Barclay, and James Lindsay, knights,
etc.

He got also a charter of confirmation from Alexander de Fraser, Ibidem, and
Haddington's collections in the advocate's library, Edr.
domino Andreae de Gray militi, of part of the lands of Broxmouth, which he
held of Thomas Randulph earl of Murray, in tenemento de Bronmouth, etc. to
which Walter high steward of Scotland, John de Soulis, Adam de Gordon, John de
Lauder, knights, etc. are witnesses. The charter is without date; but, by the
witnesses, must have been granted circiter annum 1321.

He is witness in a charter of sir Robert Lauder of the lands of Quarrelwood in
Moravia, Book of charters, penes MacFarlane, vol. I. p. 6.
to Thomas de Borthwick, together with John de Matulant, lord of Thirlestane,
Thomas de Hope-Pringle, William de Colville, etc. in the beginning of the reign
of king David II.

He married Ada Gifford, Martin's genealogical collections, vol. I. p. 18
daughter of Thomas lord Yester, by whom he had two sons.

1. Sir David.

2. Thomas de Gray, who accompanied king David Bruce to the battle of Durham,
Rymer, tom. V. p. 874.
with whom he was taken prisoner, anno 1346, and was not relieved till 1356.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. Sir DAVID de GRAY, fourth baron of Broxmouth, etc.

In a decree of the burgesses of Dundee, he is designed nobilis vir David de
Gray, Chartulary of Arbroath, penes MacFarlane, p. 8.
miles, etc. to which sir Robert de Chisholm, Walter de Maull, ancestor of
Panmure, Adam de Guthry, etc. are witnesses, in the year 1348.

He died 'twixt the years 1354 and 1357, leaving issue a son,

V. Sir JOHN de GRAY, fifth baron of Broxmouth, who succeeded him, and made a
great figure in the reign of king David Bruce, with whom he was in high favor.

He was one of the noble Scotch heirs proposed to be sureties for king David's
ransom, Rymer, tom. V. p. 791.
anno 1354, though he was not released till three years thereafter.

He got from William de Troup a charter, terrarum de Craigie infra
vicecomitatum de Kincardine de le Mernes. etc. Johanni de Gray domino de
Broxmouth, pro suo fideli subsidio et consilio sibi penes nobilem virum Thoman
de Moravia impenso, etc. Charta penes dom. Gray.
The charter is without date; but as Patrick bishop of Brechin, (afterward
chancellor,) is a witness, it must have been inter 1354 et 1357.

And soon thereafter he got the same confirmed to him by a charter of
confirmation from king David Bruce, Johanni de Gray domino de Broxmouth, Ibidem.
terrarum de Craigie, etc. dated 8th September 1357, to which William bishop of
St. Andrews, William bishop of Dunblain, Robert high steward of Scotland, the
king's nephew, Patrick earl of March, and Thomas earl of Angus, were witnesses,
apud Perth, etc.

After king David was released from his captivity, he appointed sir John his
clerkregister, and made him a donation, Chart. in archiv. reg. David.
domino Johanni Gray clerico rotulorum nostrorum, centum solidos sterlingorum
de escheatis itineris camerariae nostrae, et totidem solidos in exitibus
justiciariae, nostrae, etc. dated anno 1363.

He got also a charter from the same prince, Ibidem.
Johanni de Gray, dilecto et fideli clerico nostro rotulorum, etc. omnes firmas
et exitus burgi de Peebles, etc. dated anno 1369.

And being in no less favor with king Robert II. he was continued in the same
office, by that prince, and got a charter under the great seal, dilecto et
fideli nostro, Chart. in archiv. Robert II.
Johanni de Gray militi, clerico nostro rotulorum ac registri, quandam partem
terrae in villa de Leith, cum pertinen. dated anno 1376.

He married -- daughter of -- by whom he had issue, two sons.

1. John, who was one of the noble Scotch heirs, Rymer, tom. VI. p. 35.
that were sent into England for king David's ransom, anno 1357, and is then
designed, John, son and heir of John de Gray, etc. but he died before his
father without issue.

2. Sir Patrick.

Sir John died, inter anno^ 1376 et 1378, and was succeeded by his second son,

VI. Sir PATRICK GRAY, sixth baron of Broxmouth, who was in great savor both
with king Robert II. and III.

In his father's lifetime, he acquired from Christian, daughter and heiress of
Roger de Kyd, a part of the barony of Longforgund in Perthshire, to which she
had right from her father, Chart. in pub. archiv. et chart. penes dom. Gray.
and upon which he got a charter under the great seal, to him, and Margaret his
spouse, and the heirs of their bodies, which failing, to the said Patrick his
heirs whatsomever, dated 11th February 1374.

He acquired also some other lands in the barony of Longforgund, from Marian
Oliphant, descending to her in right of her father, which is documented by an
indenture betwixt Marian Oliphant, Martin's Genealogical collections, v. I. p.
432, et charta penes dom. de Gray.
in her viduity, on the one part, and Patrick de Gray dominus de Broxmouth on
the other, dated 13th January 1378.

He got another charter from king Robert II. dilecto consanguineo nostro,
Patricio Gray, domino de Broxmouth, of an annuity or pension of twenty-six
pound, thirteen shillings and four pence sterling, Chart. in archiv. Robert II.
et charta penes dom. de Gray.
to him and his heirs, in feodo et haereditate in perpetuum, to be paid per
manus camerarii regis, qui pro tempore fuerit, etc. dated 23d February, 1381.

He got a charter from king Robert III. of the whole barony of Longforgund,
Ibidem.
dilecto consanguineo nostro Patricio de Gray, militi, dated 11th February 1393.

He got also a charter from Thomas Strachan, dominus de Glenkindy: nobili viro
et potenti domino, Records of parliament, in the lawiers library, Ed^n. et
chart penes dom. Gray.
Patricio Gray de Broxmouth militi, domino suo superiori de Snadown, terrarum
de Snadown, etc. in baronia de Gray infra vicecomitatum de Mernes, for which
sir Patrick had paid to said Thomas a considerable sum to relieve his estate of
Glenkindy, etc. dated 16th March 1406.

There was a mutual bond of man-rent entered into betwixt Alexander earl of
Crawfurd, Charta penes dom. Gray.
and his cousin sir Patrick Gray, lord of Broxmouth, whereby they oblige
themselves to assist and stand by one another against all mortals, the king's
majesty only excepted, dated 20th December 1413.

He married Margaret, Chart. in pub. archivis, et charta penes dom. Gray.
(but of what family we know not,) by whom he had issue four sons, and three
daughters.

1. Sir Andrew de Gray.

2. Alexander.

3. Patrick.

4. George.

These sons are all mentioned in a charter, Charta penedom. Gray.
dated anno 1424.

1st daughter Margaret married to sir William Hay of Errol, Ibidem, and Chart.
penes comitem de Errol.
constable of Scotland.

2. Marian married to -- Lindsay of --.

3. Elizabeth, married to Andrew Moncur of that ilk.

Sir Patrick died before the year 1418, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. Sir ANDREW GRAY, seventh baron of Broxmouth, who was betrothed to a
daughter of sir Roger de Mortimer, when very young; and as the tenor of the
contract is somewhat singular, we shall narrate the most material part of it at
large, viz. Robertus dei gratia, Charta penes dom. Gray.
etc. confirmasse, etc. dilecto et fideli nostro iam in annis minoribus
Andreae, filio et haeredi apparenti Patricii de Gray, et Joannettae filiae et
haeredi Rogeri de mortuo mari, militis, inter ipsum et Margaretam de Menteith
sponsain suam procreatae, terras baroniae de Foulis, terras de Blacklaw cum
pertinen. etc. jacen. infra vicecomitatum de Perth, quae fuerunt dicti Rogeri,
et. quas idem Rogerus non vi, etc. resignavit, etc. tenend. dictis Andreae et
Joannettae, etc. vel ipso Andrea ante annos nubiles decedente, Alexandro Gray
secundo filio praedicti Patricii, et eaedem Joannettae. Ipso vero secundo ante
tempus conjugale abeunte, Patricio Gray tertio silio praedicti Patricii, et
eaedem Joannettae, etc. Quibus omnibus deficientibus, praedicto Rogero et
haeredibus suis, etc. testibus Willielmo, episcopo Sti Andreae, Johanne
primogenito nostro de Carrick, Roberto de Fife et de Menteith filio nostro,
Willielmo de Douglas consanguineo nostro, comitibus, Jacobo de Lindesay nepote
nostro, Alexandro de Lindesay, militibus, etc. apud Dundee, 20mo Junii 1378.

He married, first, this Janet Mortimer, by whom he got the lands and barony of
Foulis, etc. M. S. hist of the family penes dom. Gray.
which afterward became the chief title of the family, and by her he had issue
one son,

Sir Andrew, afterward lord Gray, -- and seven daughters.

1. Janet, married to sir Alexander Ogilvie of Auchterhouse.

2. Jean, married to Robert, son and apparent heir of William lord Keith,
ancestor of the earl Marishal.

3. Elizabeth, married, 1st, to sir Thomas Maule of Panmure; and 2dly, to sir
Andrew Murray of Tullibardin.

4. -- married to John Ross of Kinfauns.

5. -- married to -- Herron of Lethinty and Glasclune.

6. -- married to -- MacClellan of Bomby, ancestor of lord Kirkcudbright.

7. --, married, 1st, to William Auchterlony of Kelly; and 2dly, to David
Annand of Melgum.

Sir Andrew married, 2dly, Annabella, daughter of Alexander first lord Forbes,
by whom he had no issue.

He was one of the Scotch nobles, that met the king at Durham, Rymer tom. X. p.
309
to concert measures for his liberation, for which he obtained a sase conduct
from the king of England, 20th December 1423.

He was succeeded by his only son,

VIII. Sir ANDREW GRAY, dominus de Foulis, who was one of the hostages for king
James I's. ransom, his father being then alive, which appears by these words in
Rymer, Andreas Gray, Ibid. p. ^^^ and 335.
filius unicus et haeres Andreae Gray, dominus de Foulis, cum consensu patris,
accedit in regnum Angliae, ad remanendum ibidem obses, etc. 20th March, 1424.

He, with several of the hostages were relieved, and obtained liberty to return
to Scotland, Ibid. p. 382.
9th November 1427.

He made a great figure in the reigns of king James I. and II. Creations of the
nobility, in the lawiers library, Edin.
was summoned as a lord baron to the parliament held at Edinburgh, on 9th
October 1437, and was first lord Gray.

There is a protest taken in parliament, by James master of Forbes, in relation
to his being heir of line to the earl of Angus, Book of original writ^, penes
MacFarlane, vol. I. p. 170.
etc. to which Andrew lord Gray of Foulis, Henry lord Dalkeith, William lord
Somerville, Patrick lord Glammis, etc. are witnesses, anno 1445.

He married, first, Elizabeth, daughter of sir John Wemyss of Rires. By the
original contract or indenture, betwixt sir Andrew Gray lord of Foulis, and sir
John Wemyss lord of Rires, Charta penes dom. Gray.
Andrew, son and heir to the said sir Andrew, becomes bound to marry Elizabeth,
daughter of the said sir John, etc. dated at Foulis, the last day of August,
1418.

By her he had a son,

Andrew, master of Gray, -- and three daughters.

1. Elizabeth married to John lord Glammis.

2. Margaret, married to Robert lord Lyle.

3. Christian, married to James Crichton of Strathurd, Chart. in pub. archiv.
son and heir of George earl of Caithness, per contract, dated 14th February
1463.

He married, 2dly, Elizabeth, daughter of sir Walter Buchanan knight, by whom
he had four sons, which is instructed by a charter, per Andream Gray, dominum
de Foulis, of certain lands in the barony of Longforgund, to and in favors of
his son Andrew, Charta penes dom. Gray.
procreate betwixt him, and Elizabeth Buchanan his spouse, and the heirs-male
of his body; which failing, to his son Patrick, procreate betwixt him and the
said Elizabeth, and their heirs, etc. which failing, to his son William, etc.
and which failing, to his son John, etc. which all failing, to his own nearest
heirs whatsomever, etc. to which charter, Andrew Gray his eldest son and heir,
and Thomas and William Grays, his nepotes, are witnesses, dated at Foulis, the
7th day of May, 1439.

He had another son, David, which appears by an instrument of protest taken by
David, son of Andrew lord Gray of Foulis, procreate betwixt him, and Elizabeth
Buchanan his spouse, against a deed made by his father, jacens in lecto
aegritudinis, Ibidem.
in quo diem clausit supremum, etc. the instrument is dated 16th January 1449.

Andrew, eldest son of the second marriage, was the first of the Grays of
Balegarno, which lands were acquired from George lord Halyburton, and is
instructed by a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Andreae Gray de Balegarno, dated 15th August 1475.

Andrew first lord Gray, died before the year 1449, and was succeeded by his
only son of the first marriage,

IX. ANDREW, second lord Gray, who got a charter from king James II. dilecto
consanguineo suo, Charta penes dom. Gray.
Andreae domino de Gray, terrarum de Littletown, etc. to which Alexander earl
of Huntly, William lord Crichton, chancellor of Scotland, and David Murray of
Tullibardin, are witnesses, dated 7th October, 1449. Also a sasine of the same
lands, honorabili et potenti domino, Andreae domino Gray de Foulis, dated the
27th of said month of October; to which Andrew, brother to Andrew lord Gray, is
a witness.

In the same year, Andrew lord Gray of Foulis, together with William bishop of
St. Andrews, Book of original writs, vol. I. p. 21.
William earl of Douglas, and William lord Somerville, are witnesses, to the
foundation-charter of a provostry, to the collegiate church of Crichton.

He was a man of great parts, was highly esteemed by king James II. and was
employed in most of the public transactions of his time.

In the month of August 1449, he with John bishop of Brechin, Andrew abbot of
Melrose, Alexander lord Montgomery, etc. were appointed ambassadors
extraordinary to the court of England. Rymer's foed. tom. XI. p. 235, 243, 244,
254, etc.
A special commission from the king was sent them, dated 3d November, and they
concluded a two years tr^ce, settled the marches on the borders, and Andrew
lord Gray was one of the guarantees on the part of Scotland, 15th November 1449.

He was also one of the commissioners that concluded another truce with the
English, anno 1451, Ibid. p. 294, 300, 327, 397, etc.
to continue for three years, which was afterward prorogued for three years
longer; in all which treaties, Andrew lord Gray was both a negociator and
guarantee.

During these truces, the lord Gray accompanied William earl of Douglas, James
lord Hamilton, etc. in a pilgrimage to Canterbury, ( peregrinationis causa) for
which they got a safe conduct from the king of England, Ibid. p. 306.
dated 22d January 1452.

The same year he was appointed magister hospitii, by king James II. and
obtained from that prince, his royal license to build a castle upon any part of
the lands and baronies of Longsorgund or Foulis, Charta penes dom. Gray.
aut quibuscunque aliis suis terris infra regnum Scotiae jacentibus, ubi dicto
Andreae melius placueri^, etc. dated 26th August 1452; upon which he built the
beautiful castle of Huntly, (now Castle-lyon) in the Carse of Gowrie, which was
long one of the chief seats of the family.

In the year 1453, Chartulary of Newbottle, penes MacFarlane, page 321.
this lord Gray, together with George earl of Caithness, admiral of Scotland,
William lord Somerville, Alexander lord Montgomery, and Patrick lord Glammis,
are witnesses in a royal charter to William de Ledale, etc.

He was afterward appointed one of the wardens, Rymer, tom. XI. p. 434.
or custodes marchiarum de Scotia, versus Angliam, Chart. penes dom. Gray, et
in pub. arch.
25th July 1459; and got charters and sasines of a great many lands, too
numerous to be here inserted, etc.

He married Elizabeth Gray, (but of what family we know not) which appears from
a writ of reversion to John Stewart of Forthwhit, of the lands of Killibrock,
and Dysert, in the earldom of Athole, and sheriffdom of Perth, from a noble and
mighty lord, Andrew lord Gray of Foulis, his heirs, etc. with consent and
assent of Elizabeth Gray his spouse, Patrick Gray of Kynneff, his son and
apparent heir, Chart. penes dom. Gray.
and Andrew Gray, son of the said Patrick, knights, dated 20th August 1462.

By her he had issue two sons.

1. Patrick, master of Gray.

2. Andrew, who got a charter, under the great seal, of the lands of Cluny,
upon the resignation of his brother Patrick master of Gray, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
Andreae Gray scutifero regis, etc. dated 13th April 1466. This Andrew is said
to have had several sons; one whereof was Alexander Gray, who was bred a
merchant in Aberdeen, and made a considerable estate. He got a charter under
the great seal, upon the resignation of William Gordon of Schives, Alexandro
Gray burgen. burgi de Aberdeen, terrarum de Newton et Schives, in vicecomitatu
de Aberdeen, etc. dated 27th November 1512; and of him the Grays of Schives,
Ibidem.
Pittendrum, etc. are descended.

Andrew, second lord Gray died in the end of the year 1469, his lady surviving
him; which appears by an instrument for infefting domina Elizabetha, domina de
Gray, in the lands of Tullibothy, for her teirce, in which her husband, Chart.
penes dom. Gray.
Andrew lord Gray, died possessed and seized, dated 15th May 1470.

X. PATRICK, master of Gray, commonly called sir Patrick of Kynneff, first son
and apparent heir of Andrew second lord Gray, was one of the gentlemen of the
bed chamber to king James II. when a young man.

He acquired the lands and barony of Kynneff from Alexander de Ogilvie; which
appears by his sasine, Patricio de Gray, militi, silio et haeredi apparenti
Andreae domini de Gray, Sasine ibid.
etc. terrarum de Kynneff, dated 1st April 1458. Also by an assignation made by
Andrew lord Gray of Foulis, with consent and assent of his dearest sons and
appearand heirs, sir Patrick Gray of Kynneff, and of his son and appearand heir
sir Andrew Gray, knights, to James Blair, son of umquhil William Blair of
Ardblair, of the third part of the lands of the Westfield of Dundee, Ibidem.
dated 27th April 1461.

He married, 1st, Margaret, daughter of Malcolm lord Fleming, by whom he had no
issue.

He married, 2dly, Annabella, daughter of Alexander lord Forbes, which is
instructed by a charter from his father, terrarum de duobus Woodtowns, dated
6th July 1445, confirmed by a charter under the great seal, Patricio, filio et
haeredi apparenti Andreae domini Gray, et Annabellae Forbes, filiae quondam
Alexandri domini Forbes, Chart. in pub. archiv.
suae sponsae, etc. terrarum de Woodtowns, dated 10th January 1464.

By her he had issue one son,

Sir Andrew, -- and three daughters.

1, Elizabeth, M. S. history of the family, and chart. penes dom. Gray
married to David Rollock of Ballachie and Manmore.

2. --, married to Andrew Moncur of that ilk.

3. --, married to -- Culace of Balnamoon.

He died before his father, in June 1464, and was succeeded by his son,

XI. ANDREW, third lord Gray, who was served heir to his father Patrick, master
of Gray, Retour penes dom. Gray.
on 5th November 1464, and to his grandfather Andrew, second lord Gray, on 20th
January 1470, which is instructed by a precept for infefting Andrew, now lord
Gray, son and heir of sir Patrick Gray of Kynneff, Ibidem.
son and apparent heir of Andrew lord Gray his grandfather.

He was a man of fine parts, and in great favor with king James the IV. who
appointed him one of the lords of his privy council.

He was also constituted lord high sheriff of the county of Forfar, upon the
resignation of David duke of Montrose, and earl of Crawfurd; on which he got a
charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub archiv.
officii vicecomitatus de Forfar, Andreae domino Gray, etc. dated 14th December
1488.

He was infeft in the lands, lordships and baronies of Foulis, Longforgund,
Huntly, cum turre et fortalitio earundum, Lundy, B^lgillo, terr. super rupe de
Bruchtee, cum castro, fortalitio, et piscaria earundem, terr. de Littletoun,
Gotharstoun, Ibidem.
and many others, all documented by charters under the great seal, which
sufficiently shows what a vast estate the family of Gray was now possessed of.

He was made justice general benorth the river Forth, Chartulary of
Dunfermline, penes M^^Farlane, ^ 4^ and ^^^
upon the forfeiture of Robert lord Lyle, and at last was made justiciarius
Scotiae, anno 1506; which high office he enjoyed till his death.

He married, 1st, Janet, only daughter of John lord Keith, M. S. hist. of the
fam. and chart. penes dom. Gray.
son of William earl Marishall, by whom he had one son,

Patrick, -- and two daughters.^

1. Elizabeth, Chart. in pub. arch. ad ann. 1511, et chart. penes dom. Gray.
married, 1st, to John lord Glammis; 2dly, to Alexander earl of Huntly; 3dly,
to George earl of Rothes.

2. --, married to Alexander Straiton of Lowrieston, in vicecomitatu de
Kincardin.

He married, 2dly, lady Elizabeth Stewart, daughter of John earl of Athole,
uterine brother of king James II. by lady Margaret Douglas, daughter of
Archibald duke of Turenne, and earl of Douglas, Stewart's hist. of the royal
fam. p. 172.
by whom he had four sons and four daughters.

1. Robert, who was killed in the service of his country at the battle of
Flowdon, anno 1513, without issue.

2. Gilbert, of Buttergask, who carried on the line of this family, of whom
afterward.

3. Andrew Gray of Muirton.

4. Sir Edward, who was bred to the church; which appears by a charter under
the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
domino Edwardo Gray capellano, terrarum de Inchyrie, etc. dated 29th November
1521.

1st daughter, Ibid. ad ann. 1517, et chart. penes dom. Gray.
Isabel, married, 1st, to sir James Scrymgeour, constable of Dundee; and, 2dly,
to James Crichton of Ruthven.

2. Janet, Chart. in pub. archiv.
married, 1st, to John Charteris of Cuthelgurdie; and, 2dly, to sir David
Wemyss of that ilk.

3. Jean, Ibid. et chart. penes dom. Gray, et test. ad ann. 1511.
married, 1st, to Alexander Blair of Balthyock; 2dly, to Hugh lord Lovat; and,
3dly, to David earl of Crawfurd.

4. Marjory, married, 1st, to -- Kinninmont of that ilk; and, 2dly, to --
Rattray of Craighall.

Andrew, third lord Gray, died in February 1514, and was succeeded by his
eldest son,

XII. PATRICK, fourth lord Gray, and second high sheriff of Forfar, who got
charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Patricio Gray, militi, filio et haeredi apparenti Andreae, domini de Gray,
terrarum de Kittlebrochans, Manskide, Dysert in Athole, etc. etc. dated anno
1511 et 1512.

He was served and retoured heir to his father, and got a sasine in favorem
Patricii domini Gray, ^a^^e penes lom. Gray.
filii et haeredis quondam Andreae, domini le Gray, terrarum de Kynneff, etc.
dated 14th March 1514.

He got also sasines (Patricio domino Gray) of the lands and baronies of
Foulis, Longforgund, Bruchty, Ibidem.
the sheriffship of Forfar, etc. etc. dated 3d April 1516, and 26th October
1523.

He married, 1st, lady Jean Gordon, daughter of Alexander earl of Huntly, widow
of Alexander master of Crawfurd, which appears by a precept of sasine to sir
Patrick Gray, knight, son and heir apparent of Andrew lord Gray, and Jean
Gordon, spouse to the said Patrick, terrarum forestae de Alicht, Ibidem.
etc. dated 5th May 1499.

By her he had issue four daughters.

1. Margaret, married to sir William Keith of Innerugie, to whom she had two
daughters, his co-heiresses. 1st. Elizabeth, married to William earl Marishall.
Ibid. et chart. in pub. arch.
2d, Mary, married to William lord Forbes.

2. Janet, Ibid. ad ann^ 1541.
married to sir Patrick Ogilvie of Inchmartin.

3. Isabel, married, 1st, to sir Adam Crichton of Ruthven; Chart. in pub.
archiv.
and, 2dly, to sir John Campbell of Lundy, lord high treasurer of Scotland.

4. --, married to -- Monorgund of that ilk.

He married, 2dly, Christian, daughter of sir David Ogilvie of Inchmartin,
which is instructed by an instrument, super contractum conjugalem inter
Patricium Gray, militem, filium et haeredem apparentem Andreae domini Gray,
Chart. penes dom. Gray.
et Christianam Ogilvie, filiam domini David Ogilvie de Inchmartin, etc. dated
anno 1504, but by her he had no children; and dying at his castle of Huntly in
April 1541, without male issue, his estate and honors devolved upon his nephew
Patrick, son of his brother Gilbert, to whom we now return.

XII. GILBERT GRAY of Buttergask, second son of the second marriage of Andrew,
third lord Gray, got a charter under the great seal, Gilberto Gray, filio
Andreae domini Gray, Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the lands of Buttergask, and Lidgertlaw, upon the resignation of Margaret
Buttergask of that ilk, dated 7th July 1504.

Also a charter of the lands of Pockmill, etc. dated 9th March 1505. Ibidem.


He married Aegidia, M. S. hist. of the family.
or Giles, daughter of sir Laurence Mercer of Aldie, by whom he had four sons.

1st, Patrick, his heir.

2. Andrew, whose son Patrick got a chater from his uncle of a third part of
the lands of Balgillo, upon which he got a charter of confirmation under the
great seal, Chart. in pub. arch.
Patricio Gray, filio quondam Andreae Gray, sratris germani Patricii domini
Gray, etc. dated 12th July 1543.

3. Robert.

4. James.

These two are both mentioned in a charter under the great seal, hereafter to
be narrated.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. PATRICK of Buttergask, who succeeded also to his uncle Patrick, 1541, as
before noticed, and was fifth lord Gray, and third lord high sheriff of the
county of Forfar.

He got a charter under the great seal, Patricio, nunc domino Gray, confirming
a charter of Patrick lord Gray, last deceased, to himself and the heirs-male of
his own body; which failing, to his brother Gilbert of Buttergask, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
and the heirs-male of his body, etc. of the lands and barony of Foulis,
Forgund, Kingslaw, etc. The charter is dated anno 1524, and the confirmation
14th September 1542.

Also a charter, Patricio domino Gray, terrarum baroniae de Forgund, cum castro
de Huntly; terrarum super rupe de Bruchty cum castro, etc. Ibidem.
terrarum de Kynneff, Balgillo, etc. una cum officio vicecomitatus de Forfar,
cum officiis constabulariorum de Forfar et Montrose, 1543.

He got another charter of a great many lands containing an entail, viz. to
Patrick lord Gray, Ibidem.
and the heirs-male of his body; which failing, to Robert Gray his
brother-german, and the heirs-male of his body; which failing, to his brother
James, and the heirs-male of his body; which all failing, to his own nearest
heirs-male whatsoever, dated 7th November 1544.

Also charters of a great many other lands, Ibidem.
all narrated in charters under the great seal.

He was a man of good parts, and much in the favor of king James V. whom he
accompanied to the battle of Solway, where he was taken prisoner, anno 1541;
but was released soon afterward for payment of a ransom of five hundred pounds
sterling.

He was a promoter of the reformation; but always a dutiful subject to queen
Mary.

He married Marian, daughter of James lord Ogilvie of Airly, by a charter under
the great seal, Ibidem.
Patricio domino Gray, et Mariotae Ogilvie ejus conjugi, terrarum villae de
Foulis, etc. dated in 1543.

By her he had issue five sons, and seven daughters.

1. Patrick, master of Gray.

2. Andrew, ancestor of the Grays of Innergowrie.

3. James, who got a charter, under the great seal, of the lands of Buttergask
etc. dated 21st June 1553. Ibidem.
He was archer to the queen's guards, alias, unus armigerorum, S. D. N.
reginae, etc. anno 1564.

4. Robert Gray of Drumelie.

5. Patrick, who, in a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
is designed, Patricius Gray, srater germanus Patricii domini Gray, etc. dated
13th May 1585, confirmed 18th May 1589.

1st daughter, Margaret, married to Patrick master of Ruthven; without issue.

2. Mary, married to William master of Ruthven.

3. --, married to Mr. James Ogilvie of Balfour.

4. Agnes, married, 1st, to sir Robert Logan of Restalrig; 2dly, to Alexander
lord Home; and, 3dly, to sir Thomas Lion of Auldbar, lord high treasurer of
Scotland.

5. Lilias, Ibid. et penes dom. Gray.
married, 1st, to David Tyrie of Drumkilbo; 2dly, to John master of Oliphant,
and had issue.

6. Elizabeth, married to Laurence Bruce of Cultmalindie.

7. Anne, married to Patrick Douglas of Kilspindie.

He died anno 1582, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIV. PATRICK, sixth lord Gray, and fourth lord high sheriff of Forfar, who, in
his father's lifetime, got charters, under the great seal, of the lands of
Kilmullamock, Forrestersut, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Monsbains, etc. etc. Patricio, magistro de Gray, juniori ejusdem, etc. dated
16th December 1581.

In a charter to his brother Patrick, Ibidem.
he is designed Patricius dominus Gray, anno 1585, confirmed in 1589, as
beforementioned.

He married Barbara, daughter of Patrick lord Ruthven, by whom he had five
sons, and five daughters.

1. Patrick, master of Gray.

2. James, who was gentleman of the bedchamber to king James VI. and got a
charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
Jacobo filio Patricii domini Gray, terrarum de Davidstoun, etc. dated 6th
December 1592.

3. Gilbert, who got charters, under the great seal, of the lands of Balumbie,
etc. anno 1583; Ibidem.
of a great many other lands in 1589; et terrarum de Balandirran, in 1591,
Gilberto filio Patricii domini Gray, etc. He left issue two daughters his
co-heiresses, 1st, Eupheme, married to sir Patrick Kinnaird of Inchtower,
ancestor of lord Kinnaird; 2d, Margaret, married to -- Hay of Kirkland, etc.

4. Robert Gray of Millhill.

5. Andrew, grandfather of sir James Gray, now British envoy at the court of
Naples.

1st daughter, Ibidem.
Barbara, married to sir John Cranston of Moriston.

2. Mary, married to David Seton of Parbroath, comptroller of Scotland.

3. Helen, married to sir Hugh Maxwell of Tealing.

4. Isabel, married, 1st, to David Strachan an of Carmelie; Ibid. et penes dom.
Gray.
and, 2dly, to sir Alexander Falconer of Halkerton.

5. Elizabeth, married to William Gordon of Abergeldie.

He died anno 1609, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. PATRICK, seventh lord Gray, and fifth lord high sheriff of Forfar, who,
being a man of extraordinary parts, was a great favorite of king James VI.
who, in his father's lifetime, appointed him gentleman of the bedchamber,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
master of the wardrobe, one of the lords of his privy council, and commendator
of the monastery of Dunfermline, anno 1584.

When queen Mary was under sentence of death, he was sent ambassador
extraordinary to queen Elizabeth of England, to interpose in her behalf; and
though his embassy was not attended with success, yet he acquitted himself with
honor and reputation.

He got charters, Ibidem.
under the great seal, of the lands of Leiftie, etc. Patricio magistro de Gray,
dated anno 1605.

This great man married, Lives of the offic. of state, p. 33.
1st, Elizabeth, daughter of John lord Glammis, chancellor of Scotland, by whom
he had no issue.

He married, 2dly, Stewart's hist of the royal family, p. 104.
lady Mary Stewart, eldest daughter of Robert earl of Orkney, by whom he had
two sons, and six daughters.

1. Andrew, master of Gray.

2. William Gray, who got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Willielmo filio Patricii domini Gray, etc. of the lands of Bandirran, dated
anno 1605.

1st daughter, Jean, married to John earl of Wemyss.

2. Agnes, married to William earl of Menteith and Strathern.

3. Mary, married to James lord Lindores.

4. Elizabeth, Ibid. et penes dom. Gray.
married to John Lesly of Newton.

5. Helen, married to David Bruce of Earlshall.

6. Isabel, married to Robert Carnegy of Dunichen.

He survived his father only three years, died anno 1612, and was succeeded by
his eldest son,

XVI ANDREW, eighth lord Gray, and sixth lord high sheriff of Forfar.

He got a charter under the great seal, terrarum baroniae de Forgund, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
etc. Andreae magisiro de Gray, filio et haeredi apparenti Patricii domini
Gray, etc. dated 20th June 1611.

Also a charter, Andreae domino Gray et dominae Annae Ogilvie ejus conjugi,
Ibidem.
terrarum de Foulis, etc. dated 22d July 1613.

He got charters of a great many other lands, Andreae domino Gray, Ibidem.
anno 1617, needless to be here inserted.

He was in great favor with king Charles I. to whom he resigned the office of
the sheriffship, which had been in his family near two hundred years; and he
got the king's bond for fifty thousand merks for it; but the civil war breaking
out soon thereafter, the money was never paid.

He was a steady friend to the royal family during all the time of the civil
war, on which account he suffered many hardships.

He was banished the kingdom by the parliament, never to return under pain of
death, Minutes of Parliament.
for being with Montrose, 30th October 1645, but his banishment was prorogued
till 15th June 1646.

He was excepted out of Oliver Cromwell's act of grace to the Scots, Cromwell's
actofindemn.
and was fined in fifteen hundred pounds sterling, anno 1654.

He was lieutenant to the Gens de Arms in France, under James duke of York
their captain; but was prevailed on by king Charles II. and him, then in exile,
to resign it in favors of marishal Schomberg; which office had long been
enjoyed by Scotchmen, but could never afterward be recovered.

He married, 1st, dame Margaret Ogilvie, countess of Buchan, daughter of Walter
lord Deskford, and sister of James first earl of Finlater, by whom he had a son,

Patrick, master of Gray, who was killed at the siege of -- in France,
unmarried; -- and a daughter,

Anne, mistress of Gray, of whom more hereafter.

He married, 2dly, dame Catharine Caddel or Calder, by whom he had also one
daughter,

Frances, married to captain MacKenzie, son to the bishop of Murray.

Lord Gray's only son being dead, and he having no hopes of any male-issue,
made a resignation and settlement of his estate and honors in savours of his
daughter and heiress,

ANNE, mi^tress of Gray, who, with consent of her father, and the approbation
of the crown, was married to William Gray younger of Pittendrum, who had the
estate and honors conferred upon him by charters under the great seal, and
ratified in parliament, as will be shown hereafter: and as he was eldest son
and heir of sir William Gray of Pittendrum, who made a considerable figure in
his time, and of whom the present lord Gray is lineally descended, I hope we
shall be pardoned for briefly inserting here some part of that gentleman's
descent and character.

Sir William Gray of Pittendium, (descended of Alexander Gray of Schives,
grandson of Andrew, second lord Gray, as before noticed,) was bred a merchant
in Edinburgh, by which employment he acquired vast riches to himself with a
fair character, and did great service to his country in the mercantile way.

He got charters, under the great seal, of many lands, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Willielmo Gray de Pittendrum mercatori burgen. burgi de Edinburg, anno 1634,
etc.

He was a man of great sagacity, singular worth and merit, and highly esteemed
by king Charles I. who created him a knight baronet.

He was a great loyalist, and suffered many hardships on that account.

He was fined in an hundred thousand merks by the parliament at St. Andrews,
for corresponding with Montrose, Minutes of parliament.
etc. and, at the desire of general Lesly, was carried prisoner to the castle
of Edinburgh, till he should pay the sum; but, upon application of his friends
to the committee of estates, it was modified to thirty-five thousand merks,
which was instantly paid by his son the master of Gray, upon which he was
liberate on the 15th April 1646.

There was afterward extorted from him, by way of loan, the sum of ten
thousand pounds sterling, which was never re-paid.

He died anno 1648, having married dame Giles Smith, sister to sir John Smith
of Grotel, provost of Edinburgh, by whom he had five sons, and ten daughters.

1. William, who married Anne mistress of Gray.

2. Robert, whose son, John Gray of Criechie, married Marjory, mistress and
heiress of Gray, and was ancestor of the present lord Gray.

3. David, who was killed at Tangier with the earl of Teviot.

4. Alexander, who died unmarried.

5. Andrew, who was bred to the church.

1st daughter, Agnes, married to Archibald earl of Roseberry, etc. etc. etc.

We now return to the family.

Andrew, eighth lord Gray, died in an advanced age, anno 1663.

XVII. ANNE, mi^tress of Gray, his daughter and heiress, married to William
Gray, younger of Pittendrum, as before observed, etc.

This William, upon the resignation of his father-in-law, got a patent under
the great seal, (in which the great loyalty and services to the crown, by the
lords Gray his predecessors, are fully narrated,) "to and in favors of William
Gray, eldest lawful son and apparent heir of sir William Gray of Pittendrum,
and the heirs-male gotten or to be gotten betwixt him and the said Anne
mistress of Gray, his spouse; which failing, to sir William Gray elder of
Pittendrum, and his nearest and lawful heirs-male whatsoever, bearing the
surname and arms of Gray, etc. and the said William Gray junior, bearing the
style and title of master of Gray during the said Andrew lord Gray his
lifetime, as if he had been his son and heir, and after his death the title of
lord Gray, with all the dignities, privileges, and precedence due to the lords
Gray his predecessors, etc. etc."

The diploma is dated 8th January 1639, Ibid. et chart in pub. archiv.
which was afterward ratified in parliament, 17th November 1641.

Lord Gray made also a separate entail of his estate, upon which there passed a
charter under the great seal, in favors of William master of Gray, Ibidem.
and the heirs-male procreate or to be procreate betwixt him and Anne mistress
of Gray, (therein designed daughter and heiress of Andrew lord Gray,) his
spouse; which failing, to the nearest and lawful heirsmale of sir William Gray
of Pittendrum, elder, his father, etc. totas et integras terras, baronias,
officia, molendina, sylvas, piscationes baroniae de Forgund, etc. etc. etc.
dated 5th March 1639.

The master was likeways a great loyalist, and strongly attached to the
interest of the royal family. He had the command of a regiment in the king's
army at the battle of Worcester, mostly raised upon his own charges, and there
he narrowly escaped being made prisoner.

By the said Anne, mistress of Gray, he left issue three sons.

1. Patrick, his heir.

2. William, who died unmarried.

3. Mr. Charles Gray, advocate, who died also without issue.

The master died in September 1660, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVIII. PATRICK, who succeeded also to his grandfather anno 1663, and was
ninth lord Gray.

He married Barbara, daughter of Andrew lord Balvaird, sister of David viscount
Stormont, by whom he had only one daughter, who survived him, viz.

Marjory, mistress of Gray, who, with the consent and approbation of her father
and friends, married John Gray of Criechie, her father's cousin-german, being a
son of Robert, second son of sir William Gray of Pittendrum beforementioned,
and consequently was next heir-male in the last patent of honor to Patrick 9th
lord Gray, and his brother Mr. Charles, who both joined in a resignation of the
estate and honors into the king's hands, in December 1669, upon which a new
patent passed the great seal, to and in favors of the said John Gray of
Creichie, with all the dignities, privileges, titles of honor, and precedence,
belonging to his predecessors lords Gray, during all the days of his life, and
after his decease, Chart. in pub. archiv.
to his eldest son John, procreate betwixt him, and the said Marjory, his
spouse, and the heirs-male of his body, which failing, to his second son, by
the said Marjory, and the heirs-male, etc. which failing, to the eldest
heir-female of the said marriage, without division, etc. etc. etc. dated at St.
James's, the 7th day of February, 1706.

Patrick ninth lord Gray, died anno 1711, and was succeeded in his estate and
honors, by his son-in-law,

XIX. JOHN, tenth lord Gray, married to the said Marjory, mistress of Gray, as
before-noticed, who obtained from king James VII. a gift under the privy seal,
of fifteen hundred pound sterling; the preamble whereof was, "James, etc.
Forasmuchas John Gray of Creichie, Original gift, penes dominum Gray.
married to the only child of lord Gray, did great and signal services to our
brother king Charles II. etc. and considering the great loyalty and sufferings
of sir William Gray, grandfather to the said John Gray, and great grandfather
to his lady, from whom vast sums were extorted, in the years 1645 and 1646, by
fining and otherwise, by an pretended committee of state, for the said sir
William, his dutifully assisting the said marquis of Montrose, etc. etc. to
confer and bestow, etc. the sum of fifteen hundred pound sterling, etc. toward
the payment and satisfaction, etc. dated at Windsor, 21st September, 1686."

By the said Marjory, he had issue three sons

1. John, master of Gray.

2. William.

3. Alexander. -- and three daughters.

1. Barbara.

2. Catharine.

3. Elizabeth.

He died, anno 1724, and was succeeded by

XX. JOHN, eleventh lord Gray, who married Helen, daughter of Alexander lord
Blantyre, by whom he had two sons

1. John, now lord Gray.

2. Charles. -- and one daughter,

Anne, married to William Gray of Balegarno, Esquire;

He died anno 1738, and was succeeded by

XXI. JOHN, twelfth lord Gray, who, anno 1741, married miss Blair, heiress of
Kinfauns, by whom he has issue three sons,

1. Andrew, master of Gray.

2. Charles.

3. William-John. -- and seven daughters.

1. Jean.

2. Helen.

3. Margaret.

4. Barbara.

5. Elizabeth.

6. Anne.

7. Mary.

ARMS.
Gules, a lion rampant, within a border, ingrailed, argent.

CREST; on a wreath, an anchor in pale, or.

SUPPORTERS; two lions guardant, gules.

MOTTO; Anchor fast anchor.

CHIEF SEATS.
At the castle of Gray, and Foulis in the carse of Gowrie.

RAMSAY Viscount HADDINGTON.
SIR John Ramsay, designed of Wylieeleugh was second son of John Ramsay of
Dalhousie, and brother german of George, first lord Ramsay.

He was a man of great honor, undaunted courage and intrepidity, and had the
good fortune to be very instrumental in the rescue of king James VI. having
with his own hand killed the earl of Gowrie, when he and his brother made that
andacious attempt upon his majesty's sacred person at Perth, on 5th August 1600.

He accompanied the king into England, anno 1603, became a great favorite, and
was raised to the dignity of the peerage, Crawfurd'^ Peerage.
by the title of viscount Haddington, 11th June, 1606.

He got likewise from the king, to him and his heirs-male, the privilege of
carrying the sword of state before the royal family to church on the 5th of
August, Martin's collections, and Nisbet, vol. II. p. 73.
being the day appointed for a thanksgiving, in commemoration of his majesty's
happy delivery on that day, in the year 1600 before mentioned.

He was afterward created a peer of England, Extinct peerage of England, vol.
I. p. 397.
by the title of earl of Holderness, 20th January, 1620.

He married lady Elizabeth Ratcliff, daughter of Robert earl of Suffex, by whom
he had two sons and one daughter, who all died in infancy.

And he dying without any surviving issue, anno 1625, all his titles of honor
(being to the heirs of his body) became extinct.

ARMS.
Argent, an eagle displayed, sable, beaked and membered, gules; on his breast,
a crescent of the last, for his brotherly difference, with an additament of
arms, viz. azure, a dexter hand holding a sword, in pale argent, hilted and
pomelled or, piercing a man's heart gules, the point supporting an imperial
crown proper, which he impaled on the right; with his paternal coat, on the
left side of the shield.

MOTTO; Haec dextra vindex principis et patriae.

HAMILTON Earl of HADDINGTON.
As the antiquity and grandeur of the great and illustrious name of Hamilton,
is to be found under the title of duke of Hamilton, we shall proceed to deduce
the descent of this noble family from their immediate ancestor, being sprung
from the honorable house of Innerwick, one of the most ancient cadets of that
great family.

John, second son of sir Walter de Hambleton, by Mary, daughter of Adam lord
Gordon, flourished in the reign of king David Bruce, and was progenitor of the
Hamiltons of Ballincrief, Innerwick, etc. of whom Alexander Hamilton, Esquire; now
of Innerwick, is the undoubted heir-male.

Of this John was also lineally descended,

I. Sir THOMAS HAMILTON, ancestor of this noble family, Scots compend. p. 243.
who flourished in the reign of king James V. Nisbet, vol I. p. 393.
He is sometimes designed sir Thomas Hamilton of Byres, also Thomas Hamilton of
Drumcairn.

He was father of

II. Sir THOMAS HAMILTON of Priestfield, who got a charter under the great
seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
terrarum de Baldyn et Drumcairn, to him in vitali redditu, et magistro Thomae
Hamilton de Drumcairn ejus filio, advocato S. D. N. R. in ^^odo, dated 30th
May, 1597.

And another charter of the lands of Priestfield, Ibidem.
etc. dated the same year.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of James Heriot of Trabrown, by whom he had a
son and successor,

III. Sir THOMAS HAMILTON of Priestfield, who being a man of eminent parts,
great learning and knowledge of the laws, was in high favor with king James
VI. who in his father's lifetime, made him king's advocate, and one of the
senators of the college of justice, anno 1592.

He was appointed one of the Octavians, anno 1595, and secretary of state, anno
1612.

He was afterward made lord president of the session, and lord register; in
all which high offices he acquitted himself with honor, fidelity and
reputation.

He acquired a great many lands, upon all which he got charters under the great
seal, viz. the lands and baronies of Binning, Monkland, Ibidem.
Byres, etc. and as all the public offices he enjoyed, are particularly
mentioned in these charters, so he was at different times designed by all these
titles.

He got likewise a charter officii praefecti, seu magistri, Ibidem.
metallorum, etc. 25th March 1607.

Also two charters, domino Thomae Hamilton de Monkland, Ibidem.
militi, etc. minera, mineralia auri et argenti, et cujuscunque generis, inter
bondas terrarum de Ballincrief, Bathgate, Drumcross, Tartreven, Torphichen,
etc. dated anno 1607.

He was now possessed of a vast estate, and his majesty's favor to him still
increasing, he was pleased to raise him to the dignity of the peerage, by the
titles of lord Binning and Byres, anno 1613, Ibidem.
and afterward created him earl of Melro^s, by letters patent, dated 20th
March 1619, which he soon thereafter changed for Haddington, and got that title
confirmed to him by king Charles I. on 18th October 1627; and in that year he
was made lord privy seal, which office he enjoyed till his death.

He afterward got several charters under the great seal, Ibidem.
Thomae comiti de Haddington, terrarum dominii de Tyninghame, etc. 7th February
1628, terrarum de Lufnois in 1633, terrarum et baroniae de Coldstream,
Cold^nknows, etc. 1634.

He married, 1st, Margaret, daughter of James Borthwick of Newbyres, by whom he
had two daughters.

1. Lady Christian, married, 1st, to Robert lord Lindsay; and, 2dly, to Robert
lord Boyd.

2. Lady Isabel, married to James earl of Airly.

He married, 2dly, Margaret, daughter of James Foulis of Collington, by whom he
had three sons and two daughters.

1. Thomas, lord Binning.

2. Sir James Hamilton of Priestfield.

3. Sir John, who got from his father the lands of Trabrown, by a charter under
the great seal, Ibidem.
Johanni Hamilton, militi, filio legitimo tertio genito Thomae comitis de
Melross, terrarum de Trabrown, etc. dated anno 1621.

1st daughter, lady Margaret, married, 1st, to David lord Carnegie, 2dly, to
James earl of Hartsiel.

2. Lady Jean, married to John earl of Cassilis.

He married, 3dly, Juliana, daughter of sir Thomas Ker of Fernyhirst, widow of
sir Patrick Home of Polwarth, by whom he had a son,

Robert Hamilton, Esquire; who was killed at the blowing up of the house of
Dunglass.

The earl dying anno 1637, was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. THOMAS, second earl of Haddington, who, at the breaking out of the civil
war, joined the covenanters; and when the Scotch army marched into England, he
was left governor of the castle of Dunglass, where there was a considerable
magazine of powder, which, by some accident, was blown up; by which the earl,
and nine or ten other persons of distinction, lost their lives, besides many
more that were wounded, anno 1640.

He left issue, by lady Catharine Erskine, his first wife, Ibidem.
a daughter of John earl of Mar, two sons.

1. Thomas, lord Binning.

2. John, afterward earl of Haddington.

And by his second wife, lady Jean Gordon, daughter of George marquis of
Huntly, he left issue one daughter, Ibidem.


Lady Margaret, married to John earl of Kintore.

V. THOMAS, third earl of Haddington, succeeded his father, and married lady
Hemietta, Ibidem.
daughter of the duke de Chattillon in France, but dying without issue, was
suceeded by his brother,

V. JOHN, fourth earl of Haddington, who got a charter under the great seal,
Ibidem.
Johanni comiti de Haddington, ( ult. haer.) of some lands and tenements about
Aberdeen, dated 13th January 1663.

He married lady Christian Lindsay, daughter of John earl of Crawfurd, by whom
he had issue a son,

Charles, lordBinning, -- and three daughters. Crawfurd's peerage, and Scotch
comp.


1. Lady Margaret, married to John Hope of Hopeton, Esquire;.

2. Lady Helen, married to sir William Austruther of that ilk, one of the
senators of the college of justice.

3. Lady Susan, married to Adam Cockburn of Ormiston, lord justice clerk in the
reign of king William, afterward lord treasurer depute, and lord justice clerk
in the reign of queen Anne, and was at last appointed lord justice clerk for
life by king George I.

All the daughters had issue.

He dying in 1669, was succeeded by his son,

VI. CHARLES, fifth earl of Haddington, who married Margaret, countess of
Rothes, eldest daughter of John duke of Rothes, Ibidem.
by whom he had three sons.

1. John, who succeeded to the earldom of Rothes, in right of his mother.

2. Thomas, who succeeded to the earldom of Haddington.

3. Charles, who died young.

VII. THOMAS, sixth earl of Haddington, in the parliament 1706, was a great
promoter of the union betwixt Scotland and England, and afterward was one of
the sixteen peers for Scotland, in three British parliaments.

In 1716, he was made knight of the most noble order of the thistle, and one of
the lords of police.

He married Helen, Ibidem, and Salmon's abridgement.
daughter of John Hope of Hopeton, sister of Charles first earl of Hopeton, by
whom he had two sons and two daughters.

1. Charles, lord Binning.

2. John Hamilton, Esquire; advocate, who married Margaret, daughter of sir John
Home of Blackadder, and has issue four daughters, all married.

1st daughter, lady Margaret.

2. Lady Christian, married to sir James Dalrymple of Hailes, baronet, and has
issue.

The earl died anno 1735.

VIII. CHARLES, lord Binning, eldest son and apparent heir of Thomas sixth earl
of Haddington, married Rachel, daughter of George Baillie of Jerviswood, by
whom he had issue three sons and two daughters.

1. Thomas, now earl of Haddington.

2. George, who has taken the name of Baillie, as representing his grandfather
George Baillie of Jerviswood.

3. Charles-James Hamilton, Esquire; a captain in the regiment of dragoon guards.

1st daughter, Grizel, married to Philip earl of Stanhope.

2. Rachel.

Lord Binning dying at Naples in 1732, before his father, was succeeded by his
eldest son,

IX. THOMAS, who succeeded also to his grandfather, anno 1735, and is seventh
earl of Haddington.

He married Mary, daughter of Rowland Holt of Redgravehall, in the county of
Suffolk, Esquire; nephew of the lord chief justice Holt, by whom he has two sons.

1. Charles, lord Binning.

2. Mr. Thomas.

ARMS.
Quarterly; 1st and 4th, gules, on a cheveron, between three cinquefoils
argent, two muchetors and a buckle azure, all within a border or, charged with
eight thistles vert, for Hamilton of Innerwick; 2d and 3d argent, a fess wavy
between three roses gules, barbed and seeded proper, as a coat of augmentation,
for the title of Melross.

CREST; on a wreath, two dexter hands joined in each other, issuing out of
clouds proper, and holding between them a branch of laurel.

SUPPORTERS; two talbots argent, each gorged with a plain collar gules.

MOTTO; Praesto et persto.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Tyningham in East Lothian, etc. etc.

HALYBURTON Lord HALYBURTON.
THIS is a local surname, taken from the lands of Halyburton, in the shire of
Berwick, where there are two places almost contiguous to one another, viz.
Meikle and Little Halyburtons, which were at first called only Burtons or
Burghtons; but a church or chapel being afterward built at one of them, it was
from thence called Holy or Halyburton, and that name in process of time became
common to both.

The first of this ancient family we have found upon record, is,

I. TRUCTE or TRUITTE, a person of some rank and distinction, Chartulary of
Kelso.
cotemporary with king David 1. who died anno 1153.

He was father of,

II. DAVID, who gave the church of his village of Halyburton to the abbacy of
Kelso, about the year 1176, Ibid. p. 239.
and is then designed son of Tructe, etc.

He is a frequent witness in the writs of the monastery of Kelso, Ibid. and Sir
James Dalrymple's collections.
in the reign of king William, who died anno 1214.

He had a son,

III. WALTER, designed son of David, son of Tructe, etc. He confirms his
father's donation to the monks of Kelso, of his church or chapel of Halyburton,
Chartulary of Kelso, p. 239.
then declared to be depending on the mother church of Green-law, which
belonged to the said monastery.

He is the first of this family who assumed his surname from his lands, under
the designation of Walterus de Halyburton, and is witness to a charter, whereby
Eustachius de Vescy, dominus de Sprouston, who married Margaret, a natural
daughter of king William the Lion, gave twenty shillings yearly out of his mill
of Sprouston, in Roxburgh-shire, to the abbacy of Kelso, Ibid. p. 182.
about the year 1207.

He had issue three sons.

1. Sir William, his heir.

2. Adam de Halyburton, who is witness to a charter of Matilda countess of
Angus, confirming several donations made by her ancestors to the abbacy of
Arbroath, Chartulary of Arbroath, p. 179.
about the year 1242.

3. Sir Henry Halyburton, knight, who confirms several donations granted out of
the tenement of Molla, now Mow, in Roxburghshire, Chartulary of Kelso, p. 149.
to the abbacy of Kelso, by his charter dated anno 1270.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. Sir WILLIAM HALYBURTON, knight, who married Christian, daughter, and at
length sole heiress of Richard Fachnes of Fachnes, now Fawnes, Ibid. p. 107.
in the shire of Berwick.

He left issue a son and successor,

V. PHILIP de HALYBURTON, who confirmed the donations made by his grandfather
Richard de Fawnys, and his uncle Adam Fawnys, to the abbay of Kelso, of certain
lands in Meloestane, now Mellerstane, in the shire of Berwick. In this charter
he is designed son and heir of sir William Halyburton, Ibid. p. 107.
by Christian his wife, etc.

He also confirms the grants made by his great grandfather, David the son of
Tructe, and his grandfather Walter, the son of David, to the monastery of
Kelso, Ibid. p. 240, 241, etc.
of his chapel of Halyburton, dated in 1261.

This Philip died before the year 1296; for Alicia his widow obtained from king
Edward I. of England, a precept directed to the sheriffs of Edinburgh and
Berwick, to repone her to the possession of her jointure-lands in these two
counties, Rymer, tom. II. p. 727.
anno 1296.

By the said Alicia he had issue one son,

VI. Sir HENRY HALYBURTON, who we find swearing allegiance to king Edward I.
Prynne, vol. III. p. 656.
for his lands in Berwick-shire, anno 1296.

He afterward became one of the sureties to king Edward II. for the liberation
of William Lamberton bishop of St. Andrews, then a prisoner in Windsor castle,
Rymer, tom. III. p. 82.
23d May 1308.

We find him always designed sir Henry Halyburton, particularly in the original
writs of Melross, Penes comitem de Morton.
in the reign of king Robert Bruce.

He was succeeded by his son,

VII. Sir ADAM HALYBURTON, who was one of the sureties in a contract of
marriage, whereby John, son and heir of sir Malcolm of Innerpeffer, should
marry Margaret, daughter of William Sinclair, Autogr. penes MacFarlane.
etc. dated anno 1321.

He left issue three sons.

1. Sir Walter, his successor.

2. Sir John, first of the family of Dirleton, of whom more hereafter.

3. Alexander. Fordun, vol. II.
-- These sons were all taken prisoners at the battle of Durham, anno 1346.

VIII. Sir WALTER HALYBURTON, after he was taken prisoner as aforesaid, was
first confined in the tower of London, and from thence carried to the castle of
Windsor, and had ten merks sterling allowed him by the king of England, Rymer,
tom. V. p. 534. and 554.
to bear his charges on the journey, anno 1347.

In the year 1357, he obtained his liberty with his royal master, and the year
thereafter got a safe conduct to go up to England, Ibid. tom. VI. p. 67. and 82.
to negotiate some affairs of state, etc.

He was high sheriff of Berwick, Chartulary of Coldinghame.
anno 1364, and died about the year 1385, leaving issue a son and successor,

IX. Sir JOHN HALYBURTON of that ilk, who is witness in a charter of Margaret
countess of Angus, Remarks on Ragman's roll, p. 21.
wherein he is designed sir John Halyburton dominus ejusd. anno 1389.

He was taken prisoner at the second battle of Nisbet, anno 1402: he was
afterward ransomed, Fordun, vol. II.
and returned to Scotland; but dying without issue, was succeeded by sir Walter
of Dirleton, his cousin and heir-male, being grandson of his uncle sir John, to
whom we now return.

VIII. Sir JOHN HALYBURTON, second son of sir Adam, was a brave warrior, and
often fought valiantly against the English, in defense of the liberties of his
country.

He at last lost his life at the first battle of Nisbet, anno 1355. A good
author has these words: Cecidit ex part Scotorum vir fortissimus et
bellicosus, Johannes Halyburton, Anglicis semper infe^^us, Ibid. p. 350.
etc.

He married -- Vaus, daughter and co-heiress of William de Vallibus, or Vaus,
lord of Dirleton, with whom he got a considerable estate, and, in consequence
of this marriage, Nisbet, etc.
he quartered the arms of the Vauses of Dirleton with his own. He had a son,

IX. Sir JOHN HALYBURTON of Dirleton, who succeeded him. He is witness in a
charter of Richard Edgar to Robert Edgar of Wedderly, dated anno 1378,
confirmed anno 1384, Ibidem, vol. I. p. 102.
wherein he is designed dominus Johannes de Halyburton, dom. de Dirleton,
miles, etc.

He married Margaret Cameron, whose sister Jean married sir Nichol Erskine of
Kinnoul, knight. They were daughters and coheiresses of sir John Cameron of
Ballegarno, knight, whose great estates in Perth-shire and East-Lothian were
divided 'twixt them; Writs of the family of Winton.
and sir John, on account of this marriage, quartered also the arms of Cameron
with his own.

By the said Margaret Cameron, he had issue two sons, and one daughter.

1. Sir Walter, his heir, afterward lord Halyburton.

2. George Halyburton of Gogar, who obtained these lands from his elder
brother, which were confirmed to him by a charter from Robert duke of Albany,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
dated in 1409.

His daughter, Jean, married to Henry Sinclair, first earl of Orkney.

He died about the year 1392, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. Sir WALTER HALYBURTON of Dirleton, who succeeded also to his cousin sir
John of that ilk, as before observed.

He was one of the hostages for king James I.'s ransom, Rymer, tom. X. p. 308.
and 345.
anno 1424; but obtained liberty to return to Scotland, anno 1425.

He was appointed one of the ambassadors extraordinary to the court of England,
Ibid. p. 446. and 491.
and one of the wardens of the marches, in 1430.

He was constituted lord high treasurer of Scotland in the minority of king
James II. from whom he got a charter, Chart. in pub. archiv.
dilecto consanguineo et the saurario suo, etc. anno 1439.

He was created a peer in the year 1440 or 1441, Records of parliament.
and as such sat in parliament.

He married lady Isabel Stewart, daughter of Robert duke of Albany, and got a
charter under the great seal from the said Robert, Chart. in pub. archiv.
then governor of Scotland, wherein he is designed his beloved son, to which
Alexander, George, Fergus, and John Halyburtons are witnesses, anno 1407.

By the said lady Isabel he had issue four sons, and one daughter.

1. John, his successor.

2. Walter, who married Catharine, daughter and co-heiress of Alexander de
Chisholm, and got with her the lands and barony of Pitcur in Angus, of whom
more hereafter.

3. Robert. 4. William. -- These two are mentioned in the extract of the
service of sir Norman Lesly, Penes com. de Rothes.
as heir to his cousin sir David, in May 1439.

His daughter, Christian, was married to George Lesly, first earl of Rothes,
and had issue.

XI. JOHN, second lord Halyburton, who appointed Alexander Home of that ilk
sheriff depute of the shire of Berwick for life, which is confirmed to him by a
charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
dated 4th January 1447.

He married Janet, daughter of William master of Seton, first lord Seton, by
whom he had two sons.

1. Patrick, his successor.

2. George, who succeeded his brother.

XII. PATRICK, third lord Halyburton, married Margaret, daughter of sir Patrick
Hepburn lord of Hailes, and upon the resignation of his father John lord
Halyburton, got a charter under the great seal, to him and Margaret Hepburn his
spouse, of the lands of Dirleton, Ibidem.
etc. etc. anno 1451.

But dying without issue, was succeeded by his brother,

XII. GEORGE, fourth lord Halyburton, who having impignorated to the king part
of his lands of Bolton in East-Lothian for 1000 merks, he redeemed the same,
upon which he got a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
in 1459.

This George is particularly mentioned in a charter, Writs of the family of
Congalton.
dated 7th July 1464, and is then designed son of Janet Seton lady Dirleton.

He had issue three sons.

1. Archibald, master of Halyburton.

2. Patrick, afterward lord Halyburton.

3. Andrew Halyburton.

XIII. ARCHIBALD, master of Halyburton, eldest son and apparent heir of George
fourth lord, got from his father the lordship of Halyburton confirmed to him by
a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Archibaldo, filio et haeredi apparenti Georgii domini Halyburton, in 1474.

He is afterward mentioned in another charter, together with Patrick and
Andrew Halyburtons, Ibidem.
his two brothers, and Helen Schaw his spouse, anno 1490.

He died before his father, and by the said Helen, a daughter of -- Schaw of
Sa^chie, he left issue a son,

XIV. JAMES, who succeeded his grandfather, and was fifth lord Halyburton, but
dying without issue, his estate and honors devolved upon his uncle,

XIII. PATRICK, before mentioned, who was second son of the fourth lord, and
was sixth and last lord Halyburton.

He married, 1st, Margaret, daughter of James Douglas of Pompherston and
Audeston, by whom he had three daughters.

1. Janet, married to William lord Ruthven, whose grandson, William earl of
Gowrie, added that of Halyburton to his other titles, Ibidem, ad annum 1481.
as being descended of the eldest daughter.

2. Mariota, married to George lord Home.

3. Margaret, married to George Kerr of Faudenside, in the county of Roxburgh.

He married, 2dly, Christian Wavane, lady Segy, daughter of Thomas Wavane of
Stevenson, Ibid. ad ann. 1505.
in East-Lothian, by whom he had no children.

He dying without sons, anno 1506, in him ended the male-line of John second
lord Halyburton; the representation therefore devolved upon the male-heir of
Walter his immediate younger brother, before mentioned, to whom we now return.

XI. WALTER HALYBURTON, second son of Walter the first lord, married Catharine,
heiress of Pitcur, as before observed, and got a charter, Charta penes Jacobum
Halyburton de Pitcur.
under the great seal, of these lands, etc. anno 1432. Of this Walter, colonel
James Halyburton, now of Pitcur, is descended in a direct male line, whose
succession will be deduced in the II. vol. of this work; but he has not
hitherto claimed the peerage.

FALCONER Lord HALKERTOUN.
THOUGH this family is of very great antiquity, and has flourished long with
luster in the north of Scotland, yet we cannot pretend to give so full an
account of it as could be wished, one of their chief seats having been
accidentally burnt down, wherein most of their ancient writs were destroyed,
anno 1679.

The following descent therefore is chiefly documented from the writs of other
families, and our public registers.

The first of them we have upon record is,

I. WALTERUS, who appears to have been a man of rank and figure, and flourished
in the reigns of king David I. and Malcolm IV. which last succeeded to the
crown of Scotland, anno 1153.

His surname, according to sir George MacKenzie, was Loncorp; and in Crawfurd's
peerage of Scotland, Genealogical collect. in the lawyers lib. Edin.
he is called Walterus de Lenorp; but none of these are right.

He was possessed of an estate in the shire of Kincardin, viz. the lands of
Lunkyir, (now Longair) from which he derived his surname, as will be shown
hereafter.

He was father of,

II. RANULPHUS, or RANULFUS, designed ^lius Walteri de Lunkyir, who obtained
the office of king's falconer from king William the Lion, from whom he got a
charter of the lands of Luthra, Balbegno, and several others, lying in the
shires of Kincardin and Mearns, Ibidem.
near the castle of Kincardin, where king William often resided, in which he is
designed Ranulfus filius Walteri de Lonkyir, falconarius noster, etc.

From which office he assumed the surname of Falconer, Nisbet, vol. I. p. 353.
and the armorial bearing of the family, both ancient and modern, alludes to
that office.

The lands of Luthra, which seems to be so called from its situation on the
water of Luther, and Rath or Ra, which signifies a town or farm, is said to
have had its name changed long ago to Halkertoun or Hawkertoun, from the office
of its proprietor, which has continued to be the chief title of the family
ever since.

He left issue a son and successor,

III. WALTERUS, promiscuously designed Le Falconer, et de Lunkyer, etc.

He is witness to the charter of vendition of the lands of Drumsleid,
Chartulary of Arbroath, penes MacFarlane, p. 48.
in vicecom. de Kincardin, circa 1250, in which he is designed Walterus de
Lunkyir, etc.

He left issue two sons.

1. Robert le Falconer.

2. Petrus Falconer, who is mentioned in two donations to the abbacy of Kelso,
Chartulary of Kelso, penes eund. p. 132 and 151.
with Galsrede de Lempetlaw, chamberlain of Scotland, circa 1260.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. ROBERT le FALCONER, who is the first we find designed by the title of
Halkertoun.

He, together with William, Thane of Mothes, and Dovenald, Chart. penes dominum
de Culravock:
Thane of Calder, etc. were called to estimate the valuation of the barony of
Culravock and Geddes, anno 1295.

He was then possessed of a considerable estate, which appears from his being
obliged to swear fealty to king Edward I. Prynne, vol. III. p. 651, 661, etc.
of England, for lands lying in different counties, in 1296.

He died about 1320, and left issue a son and successor,

V. -- FALCONER of Halkertoun, whose christian name we have not found upon
record; but he seems to have been in favor with king David Bruce, which
appears by the care and kindness he showed to his infant son and heir,

VI. DAVID FALCONER of Halkertoun, who succeeded him, and to whom king David
stood godfather, Chart. in archiv. reg. David.
and showed a paternal concern for him, by settling a pension of eight pounds
sterling per annum upon him, (a considerable sum in those days,) by his
charter, dilecto filiolo suo quam de sacro font levavit, etc. dated anno 1365.

He was succeeded by his son,

VII. ANDREW FALCONER of Halkertoun, who, Chartulary of Murray, penes
MacFarlane, p. 187.
in his father's life time, was designed by the title of Lethenbar, and was one
of the north-country barons that attended Alexander Stewart earl of Buchan,
lord of Badenoch, fourth son of king Robert II. when he was the king's
lieutenant on the north-side of Forth, 11th October 1380.

He was father of

VIII. ALEXANDER FALCONER of Halertoun, who succeeded him, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
and, in his father's life time, was designed by the title of Lethins, a barony
which has been long in the possession of this family.

He married --, daughter of --, by whom he had issue two sons.

1. David.

2. Robert Falconer, Ibidem.
who obtained a charter from king James III. of the lands of Newham, etc.
Ibidem.
dated anno 1473, whose grandson Robert got a charter from king James IV. of
the lands of Balendro, dated 1504.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. DAVID FALCONER of Halkertoun, who slourished in the reigns of James II.
and III.

At an inquisition held in presence of Patrick de Berkclay, then sheriff of
Kineardin, this David Falconer of Halkertoun, together with dominus Andreas
Ogilvie de Inc^martin, Ibidem.
Alexander Strachan of Thorntoun, Robert Arbuthnot of that ilk, David
Scry^geour of Balmakyn, and several others, were upon the inquest, when it was
found and declared, that the second teinds of Mearus belonged to the bishops of
(...) ab antiquissimis temporibus, etc. 1st April 1448.

He was succeeded by his son,

X. ALEXANDER FALCONER of Halkertoun, Nisbet's append. p. 90.
who married Janet, daughter of sir Robert Arbuthnot of that ilk, by whom he
had a son and successor,

XI. Sir GEORGE FALCONER of Halkertoun, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who got a charter from king James IV. of the lands of Lethins, etc. dated anno
1506.

He died anno 1511, leaving issue, by Elizabeth his wise, daughter of --
Erskine of Dun, only one son,

XII. DAVID FALCONER of Halkertoun, who succeeded him, Ibidem.
and got a charter from king James V. of the lands of Easter-Kilravock, etc.
dated anno 1526.

Also a charter of the lands of Easter-town of Middletoun, Ibidem.
etc. dated anno 1539.

He married Marian Dunbar, by whom he had two sons.

1. Sir Alexander.

2. Donald Falconer, who got from his father part of the lands of Middletoun,
Ibidem.
upon which he got a charter from king James V. dated anno 1541.

He died anno 1540, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. Sir ALEXANDER FALCONER of Halkertoun, Ibidem.
who got a charter from king James V. of the lands of Hill of Halkertoun, third
part of the lands of Bent, etc. dated anno 1541.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of sir Archibald Douglas of Glenbervie,
ancestor of the marquises and duke of Douglas, by lady Agnes Keith his wife,
daughter of William earl Marishall, by whom he had four sons, and one daughter.

1. Sir Alexander.

2. Archibald, ancestor of the Falconers of Phesdo, of whom John Falconer now
of Phesdo, late member of parliament for the county of Kincardin, is the
representative.

3. Samuel Falconer of Kincorth, in vicecom. de Elgin.

4. William, who was father of doctor Colin Falconer, first bishop of Argyle,
thereafter of Murray.

His daughter, Ibidem, and Chartulary of Murray, p. 440, etc.
Catharine, married to Hugh Rose of Kilravock, which appears by a charter in
1567, and another in 1573.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIV. Sir ALEXANDER FALCONER of Halkertonn, who married Isabel, daughter of
Patrick lord Gray, by whom he had three sons.

1. Sir Alexander Falconer.

2. Patrick of Newton, of whom James Falconer of Monkton, Esquire; married to Jane
sister of the present lord Halkertoun, is now the representative.

3. James, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who got a charter from king James VI. of the lands of Middlehaugh, etc. in the
barony of Spynzie, and shire of Elgin, etc.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. Sir ALEXANDER FALCONER of Halkertoun, who was possessed of a vast estate,
Ibidem.
which appears by a great number of charters, in the public registers, for
different lands and baronies granted domino Alexandro Falconer de Halkertoun,
militi, etc.

He married Agnes, daughter of sir David Carnegie of Coluthie, ancestor of the
earl of Southesk, by Eupheme his wise, daughter of sir David Wemyss of that
ilk, ancestor of the earl of Wemyss, by whom he had four sons.

1. Sir Alexander, his heir.

2. Sir David Falconer of Glenfarquhar, ancestor of the present lord
Halkertoun, of whom afterward.

3. Sir John Falconer of Balmakellie, who was master of the mint in the reign
of king Charles II.

4. James, Ibidem.
who got a charter from king Charles I. of the lands of Coatfield in the shire
of Elgin.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVI. Sir ALEXANDER FALCONER, (afterward lord Halkerton,) Account of the lords
of session, in the Lawyer's library, Edin.
a man of eminent parts, singular integrity honor and loyalty, was deservedly
in great savor with, and highly esteemed by king Charles I. who constituted
him one of the senators of the college of justice, anno 1639.

He adhered firmly to the interest of the royal family, during all the time of
the civil war, Chart. in cancellaria. Haeredibus masculis quibuscunque in
perpet^um.
both at the parliament, and in the field, for which the king was pleased to
raise him to the dignity of the peerage, by the title of lord Falconer of
Halkertoun; the patent being to his heirs-male whatsoever, and dated 20th
December 1647.

He got a charter under the great seal, Alexandro domino Halkertoun, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
of the lands of Diracrost, etc. anno 1648.

After the murder of the king, he still persisted in his loyalty and attachment
to the royal cause, was turned out of his office of lord of session, and
suffered many other hardships, which he bore with great sirmness and constancy.

Immediately after the restoration, king Charles II. in reward of his great
merit, sufferings, and faithful services, reponed him to his office in the
college of justice, in which he continued to act with probity and reputation,
till he died anno 1671.

He married Anne, daughter of John lord Lindsay, ancestor of the earl of
Crawfurd, by whom he had a son,

Alexander, his successor, -- and a daughter,

Agnes, married to George lord Banff.

XVII. ALEXANDER, second lord Halkertoun, married lady Margaret Ogilvie,
daughter of James earl of Airly, by whom he had a son,

David, his heir.

And dying in 1684, was succeeded by

XVIII. DAVID, third lord Halkertoun, who was retoured heir to his father in
1685; but died without issue, Retour in chancery.
which ended the male line of Alexander first lord Halkertoun, whereby his
estate and honors devolved upon David Falconer of Newton, his next heir-male,
lineally descended of sir David Falconer of Glenfarquhar, to whom we now return.

XVI. Sir DAVID FALCONER of Glenfarquhar, second son of sir Alexander of
Halkertoun, by Agnes, daughter of sir David Carnegie of Coluthie, and
brother-german to Alexander first lord Halkertoun, married Margaret Hepburn,
daughter of -- Hepburn of Bearford, by whom he had two sons.

1. Sir Alexander.

2. Sir David of Newton, who carried on the line of this family, of whom
afterward.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVII. Sir ALEXANDER FALCONER second of Glenfarquhar, who was created a knight
and baronet, and married --, daughter of --, by whom he had a son,

XVIII. Sir ALEXANDER FALCONER, third of Glenfarquhar, who died without issue,
which ended the male-line of the first son of sir David of Glenfarquhar, we
therefore return to his brother,

XVII. Sir DAVID FALCONER of Newton, second son of sir David of Glenfarquhar,
who was second son of sir Alexander, brothergerman of the first lord
Halkertoun, Account of the lords of Session, in the lawiers library. Edin.
being a man of great parts and learning, was promoted to be one of the
senators of the college of justice, anno 1676, and president of the session,
anno 1682, in which office he acquitted himself with honor and reputation.

He married, 1st, -- Nairn.

He married, 2dly, Mary, daughter of George Norvill of Boghall, by whom he had
three sons, and three daughters.

1. David of Newton, who, upon the death of David third lord Halkertoun,
succeeded to his estate and honors, (being next heir-male,) as before-noticed.

2. Alexander Falconer, second son of sir David of Newton, married Mary
countess of Errol; but died without issue.

3. George Falconer, Esquire; married Miss Marjorybanks, sister of general
Marjorybanks, by whom he had three sons, and two daughters.

1st daughter, Margaret, died unmarried.

2. Mary, married to Fullerton of Dudwick.

3. Catharine, married to Home of Ninewells.

XVIII. DAVID, fourth lord Halkertoun, first son of sir David of Newton, was a
man of great honor, probity, and integrity.

He married lady Catharine Keith, daughter of William earl of Kintore, by whom
he had five sons, and four daughters.

1. Alexander, now lord Halkertoun.

2. William, married a daughter of Burge, master of Idikingo.

3. David, married a daughter of -- Lampelugh, Esquire; of Cumberland.

4. John, married Miss Nairn in Jamaica.

5. George, captain of a ship of war in the royal navy.

1st daughter, Catharine, died unmarried.

2. Jean, married to James Falconer of Monktoun, Esquire;.

3. Mary.

4. Marjory, married to George Norvill of Boghall, Esquire;.

He died anno 175^, and was succeeded by

XIX. ALEXANDER, fifth lord Halkertoun, who married Miss Francis Mackworth,
daughter of Herbert Mackworth, Esquire; of Glamorgan-shire in Wales.

ARMS.
Azure, a salcon displayed argent, crowned with a ducal crown or, for Falcone;
charged on the breast with a man's heart gules, between three stars of the
second, for Douglas.

CREST; on a wreath, an angel in a praying posture, within an orle of laurel.

SUPPORTERS; two falcons proper.

MOTTO; Vive ut vivas.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Halkertoun and Glensarquhar, in the county of Kincardin.

HAMILTON Duke of HAMILTON.
THIS ancient and illustrious family, which has made so great a figure in the
annals of Scotland, derive their origin from the earls of Leicester in England,
who were descended from the earls of Mellant, a great and noble family in
Normandy, viz.

I. ROGER de BELLAMONT, grandson of Turolf of Pontaudomare, by Wevia, sister
of Gunora, wife of Richard, first of that name, duke of Normandy, grandfather
of king William I.

This Roger married Adelina, Dugdale's baronage of England, vol. I. p. 83.
daughter of Waleran count of Mellant, and heir to Hugh count of Mellant, her
brother, by whom he had issue a son,

Robert, who, in right of his mother, succeeded to the earldom of Mellant.

II. ROBERT earl of Mellant, was a man of great parts, Henry of Huntington, de
gesti^, Willielmi ducis Norman.
equally qualified for the cabinet and the field; and being a near relation of
William the Conqueror, came over to England with that great prince, and had the
command of the right wing of his army at the memorable battle of Hastings,
where he remarkably distinguished himself, according to the historian, who
speaks of him in these words, Will. Pictaviensis de gestis, Willielmi ducis
Normann.
proelium illo die experiens egit, quod oeternandum esset laud, cum legione
quam in dextro cornu duxit, irruens ac sternens magna cum audacia, etc. etc.

The Conqueror nobly rewarded him according to his merit, Dugdale, vol. I. p.
84.
and bestowed upon him ninty-one lordships and manors in the counties of
Warwick, Leicester, Wilts, Northampton, and Gloucester.

And having been likeways a firm and faithful friend to king Henry I. Ibidem.
was by that prince created earl of Leicester, anno 1103.

And, being now settled in England, he assumed for his armorial bearing the
arms of the earls of Mellant, Nisfet, vol. I. p. 390. Peerage of England, vol.
I. p. 160, edit. printed anno 1714.
viz. gules, a cinquesoil ermine. He communicated the same to the town of
Leicester, which continues to bear it to this day, and the Hamiltons in
Scotland, to denote their descent from that noble family, have the same
bearing, only with the variation of three cinquefoils for one.

He married Elizabetha, or Isabella, a daughter of Hugh, Bugdale, vol. I. p. 83.
surnamed Magnus, a younger son of king Henry I. of France, by whom he had
issue two sons.

1. (...), earl of Leicester.

2. Walleran, Ibidem. and (...) collect. p. 173.
to whom he gave the earldom of Mellant, and all his lands in Normandy.

He lived to a great age, died anno 1118, and was succeeded in the earldom of
Leicester, and all his lands in England, by his eldest son,

III. ROBERT, second earl of Leicester, who, Dugdale's baronage (...) England.
upon all occasions, adhered firmly to the interest of king Henry II. with whom
he was in great favor, and was attending him when he died at Lions in France,
anno 1135.

He married Amicia, daughter of Ralph de Guader, earl of Norfolk, by whom he
had a son,

Robert, -- and two daughters.

1. Amicia, married to Simon earl of Huntington.

2. Hawise, Ibid. p. 8.
married to William earl of Gloucester.

He died anno 1167, and was succeeded by his son,

IV. ROBERT, third earl of Leicester, surnamed Le Blanch Mains, Ibid. p. 8.
or White Hands, who married Petronella, daughter and heiress of Hugh de
Grandmesnil, lord of Hinkley, and great steward of England, whereby he
succeeded to the great stewardship, and the whole estate of Hinkley, etc.

By her he had issue three sons, and two daughters.

1. Robert, earl of Leicester.

2. Roger, who came to Scotland in the reign of king William the Lion, Ibidem,
and Lives of the offic. of state, p. 10.
to whom he was nearly related by his mother Ada, daughter of the earl of
Warren and Surrey. Keith's catalogue of bishops, p. 9.
He was kindly received, and became in great favor with that prince,
Dalrymple'3 collect. p. 33^.
who appointed him chancellor of Scotland; and being bred to the church, was
made archbishop of St. Andrews, where he died, and was interred in the church
of St. Rule, anno 1202.

3. William, Poerage of England, vol. I. p. 160, 161* etc.
first of the family of Hamilton, of whom more hereafter.

1st daughter, Amicia, married to Simon de Monfort.

2. Margaret, married to Saer de Quincy, Dugdale, vol. I. p. 88.
created earl of Winchester, anno 1207. He was son of Robert de Quincy, who
came to Scotland in the reign of king William the Lion, Chartulary of St.
Andrews* penes Mac^ Farlane, p. 53.
and married Orabilis, daughter and heiress of Willielmus filius Nesii, with
whom he got a great many lands, whereby he came to have large possessions both
in Scotland and England. Orabilis, after his death, was married to -- earl of
Mar. Saer and his lady settled in Scotland, and he was there designed comes de
Winton, Chartulary of Dunfermline, penes eund. p. 517, 518, etc.
about the year 1214, of which there are many documents. They had issue a son,
Chron. of Melross, penes eund. ad annum 1234.
Roger de Quincy, comes de Winton, lord high constable of Scotland, who married
Ellan, eldest daughter and co-heiress of Alan lord of Galloway, etc. Sacr earl
of Winton died anno 1219. Dugdale, vol. I. p. 258.


The earl of Leicester died in his return from the holy war, anno 1190, and was
succeeded by his eldest son,

V. ROBERT, fourth earl of Liecester, who married Lauretta, Ibidem.
daughter of William lord Braose; but his male-line is long since extinct,
whereby the representation of that noble family fell to the descendents of his
brother William, to whom we now return.

I. WILLIAM, third son of Robert third earl of Leicester, Peerage of Ireland,
vol. III. p. 136.
was born at the manor of Hambleton in Buckingham-shire. He assumed his surname
from the place of his birth, Nisbet, vol. I. p. 390.
and was the first of the family of Hamilton, Scots compend, p. 54.
as before observed.

He came to Scotland about the year 1215, to visit his sister the countess of
Winton and Winchester, was well received by king Alexander II. who conferred
many favors on him.

He married Mary, daughter and heiress of Gilbert earl of Strathearn, a lady of
the first rank and quality in the kingdom, by whom he had a son,

Sir Gilbert, M. S. hist. of the fam. and chart. penes comitem de Abercorn.
who succeeded him, and of whom all the Hamiltons in Scotland are descended.

II. Sir GILBERT HAMBLETON, Ibidem.
second of that name, Prynne's collections.
slourished in the reign of king Alexander III. Remarks on Ragm. roll, etc.
with whom he was in great favor.

In a charter of confirmation of the church of Cragyn to the monastery of
Paisley, Chartulary of Paisley, penes MacFarlane, p. 71.
Gilbertus de Hambleton, Walterus senescallus Scotiae, comes de Meneteth, etc.
are witnesses, anno 1272.

He married Isabella, Peerage of Ireland, Nisbet, Scots compend. and pe^rage of
England, vol. I. p. 161.
daughter of sir James Randolph of Strathdon, sister of Thomas earl of Murray,
governor of Scotland, by whom he had two sons.

1. Sir Walter.

2. Sir John of Rossaven, ancestor of the Hamiltons of Fingalton and Preston,
Ibidem.
from whom branched the Hamiltons of Mount-Hamilton in Ireland.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. Sir WALTER de HAMBLETON, who is witness to the confirmation-grant,
^ha^tulary of (...).
by James great steward of Scotland, of the privilege of a herring-fishing to
the monastery of Paisley, anno 1294.

He appears to have had large possessions, for we find him with many others,
Prynne's collect. vol. III.
swearing fealty to king Edward I. anno 1292, for lands lying in the county of
Clydsdale; and anno 1294, for lands lying in other counties, and is always
designed Walter Fitz-Gilbert de Hambleton.

And though he was forced to submit to the superior force of king Edward, yet no
sooner did king Robert Bruce begin to assert his title to the crown, than he
joined him, Remarks on Ragman's roll, p. 3, Scotscompen. Crawfurd, and peerage
of England.
had several military commands under him, and acquitted himself so much to the
satisfaction of that great prince, that he bestowed upon him several lands and
baronies, (then in the crown,) for his good and faithful services, etc. viz.
the barony of Cadzow, now Hamilton, the chief seat of the family: also the
lands and baronies of Kinniel, Larbor, Auldcathie, and several others in the
shire of Linlithgow, Kirkender, Kirkowen, etc. in the shire of Wigton.

He married Mary, daughter of Adam lord Gordon, Chart. in archiv. Robert I. and
Hav's vindication of Elizabeth More, p. 121.
which is confirmed by a charter from king Robert Bruce, dilecto et fideli suo
Waltero filio Gilberti, et haeredibus sais, inter issum et Mariam de Gordon,
sponsam saam legitime procreatis, etc. totum tenementum de M^chan, cum
pertinen, quod (...) quondam Johannis Cumyn, militis, etc. dated 3d March, anno
1315.

He got another charter from the same prince, to Walter the son of Gilbert, and
his wife Mary, and their heirs, of the lands and barony of Kinniel, etc. dated
28th July, anno 1324.

By the aforesaid Mary, he had issue two sons,

1. Sir David, his heir.

2. John, ancestor of the Hamiltons of Innerwick, of whom Alexander Hamilton,
Several charters in the public regist. English and Scotch peerages, etc.
Esquire; now of Innerwick, postmaster general of Scotland, is the lineal
heir-male, and of this family the earls of Haddington, the Hamiltons of
Priestfield, Red-house, etc. are descended.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. Sir DAVID HAMBLETON, a man of great worth and merit, Rymer's foedtom. V.
p. 534, wherein he is designed David Fitz. Walter, Fitz Gilbert, etc.
a firm and steady friend of king David Bruce, whom he served with great
fidelity, and accompanied to the battle of Durham, where he was taken prisoner
with his royal master, anno 1346, but was released soon thereafter, for payment
of a considerable ransom.

He mortified to the sea of Glasgow, pro salutae animae suae, etc. Chartulary
of Glasgow.
an annuity of ten merks sterling, out of his barony of Kinniel, anno 1361, and
is then designed, dominus David, filius Walteri filii Cilberti, etc.

He got a charter from king David Bruce, Davidi filio Walteri militis, Charta
in archivis regis David.
confirming a charter, granted by king Robert I. Waltero filio Gilberti,
militi, terrarum baroniae de Cadzow, cum pertinen. jacen. in vicecomitatu de
Lanerk, etc. dated at Lindores, 27th December, 1368.

And other two charters from the same prince, to David, son of Walter, and
grandson of sir Gilbert, of several other lands, dated in December, 1369.

He was one of the magnates Scotiae, at a meeting of the estates at Scoon, when
John earl of Carrick, Hay's vindication of Elizabeth More.
was unanimously acknowledged to be eldest lawful son of king Robert II. and
undoubted heir to the crown, his seal being appended to the deed or instrument,
dated 27th March 1371.

He married lady Margaret Leslie, daughter to Walter earl of Ross, by Euphemia,
countess of Ross, daughter and heiress of earl William, son of earl Hugh, and
grandson of earl William, by Matilda, sister of king Robert Bruce, by whom he
had two sons,

1. Sir David.

2. Walter, ancestor of the Hamiltons of Cambuskenneth, in vicecomitatu de Air,
etc.

He died anno 1374, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. Sir DAVID HAMILTON of Cadzow, who got a charter from king Robert II. Chart.
in pub. archiv
quadraginta market. sterlingorum annui redditus, terrarum baroniae de Cadzow,
etc. wherein he is designed dominus David Hamilton, filius et haeres David
filii Walteri, militis, etc. dated anno 1375.

Also another charter of sixteen merks sterling, Charta penes ducem del
Hamilton.
out of the seu-duties of Cadzow, which the king gave to sir David, in lieu of
some lands in the barony of Bathgate, which he, and Janet his wife, yielded to
sir James Douglas of Dalkeith, to preserve peace and amity betwixt the two
families, dated 24th October, 1378.

He was a man of great parts, and highly esteemed by king Robert II. who
conserred upon him the honor of knighthood.

He married Janet or Johanna Keith, Ibid. et chart. in pub. archiv.
daughter and heiress of sir William Keith of Galilon, invicecomitatu de Air,
with whom he got a great accession to his estate, and by her he had issue five
sons and one daughter.

1. Sir John Hamilton.

2. Sir William, Ibidem.
ancestor of the Hamiltons of Bathgate, in vicecomitatu de Linlithgow, which
appears by a charter under the great seal, upon his mother's resignation,
Willielmo Hamilton, militi, dilecto filio suo, terrarum de Bathgate, etc. dated
4th March, anno 1407.

3. Andrew, ancestor of the Hamiltons of Bruntwood and Udston, of whom the
Hamiltons of Burncleugh, Rosehaugh, Pancaitland, Bangour, Ibidem.
and Wishaw are descended. He is also documented by a charter under the great
seal, upon his mother's resignation, dilecto filio suo, Andreae Hamilton,
terrarum de Thulock, Bruntwood, Lang side, Kirkton, and many others, in baronia
de Kyle, dated 11th Dec. 1406.

4. George, Ibidem.
ancestor of the Hamiltons of Boreland, in vicecomitatu de Air.

5. David, who married the daughter and co-heiress of -- Galbraith of that ilk,
in vicecomitatu de Stirling, Ibidem.
by whom he got a fair estate, and was ancestor of the Hamiltons of Bardowie.

His daughter Elizabeth, was married to sir Alexander Frazer of Cowie and
Doors, ancestor of lord Salton.

He died before 1395, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. Sir JOHN HAMILTON of Cadzow, who was superior of the lands of Balderston
etc. in Linlithgow-shire, Charta pereducem d^e Hamilton.
for sir John Hamilton, lord of Cadzow, grants charter and sasine of these
lands to Adam Forrester of Corstorphin, upon his own resignation, for payment
of a silver penny, etc. on 21st March, 1395.

He married Janet, Chart. penes comitem de Morton.
daughter of sir James Douglas of Dalkeith, ancestor to the earl of Morton, by
whom he had three sons.

1. Sir James, afterward lord Hamilton.

2. David, ancestor of the Hamiltons of Dalserfe, Chart. in pub. archiv. ad
annum 1426.
Blackburn, Allershaw, Ladyland, Green, etc.

3. Thomas, ancestor of the Hamiltons of Raploch, of whom are descended the
Hamiltons of Torrence, Crawfurd's peerage, peerage of Ireland, and Chart. in
pub. archiv.
Darnagaber, Stanhouse, Wood-hall, Aikenhead, Dechmont, Barns, Hill, and
several others in Scotland, also the Hamiltons earls of Clanbrazil, the lord
viscount Limerick, etc. in Ireland.

This sir John Hamilton of Cadzow, together with John Hamilton of Fingalton,
Rymer tom. VIII. p. 57
had been taken prisoners at sea by the English, but obtained an order from
king Richard to be set at liberty, 28th October, 1398.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. Sir JAMES HAMILTON, lord of Cadzow, who was a man of good parts, and made
a great figure in the reigns of king James I. and II.

He, with his brother David, obtained letters of safe conduct, Ibid. tom. IV.
p. 49.
from king Henry IV. to travel through England, etc. anno 1413.

When the king was to be relieved from his captivity, he was one of the
hostages sent to England for his ransom, anno 1423, was appointed one of the
king's privy council, Ibid. tom. X. p. 125. 308, etc.
and had the honor of knighthood conferred upon him, anno 1424.

He was created a lord of parliament, and got all his lands in Lanarkshire
erected into one lordship, Charta penes ducem de Hamilton.
anno 1445, which was ever after called the lordship of Hamilton.

He was joined in commission with John bishop of Glasgow, and others, to
negotiate a peace with the English, Rymer's foed. tom. XI. pages 235, 306, etc.
which they happily concluded, anno 1449.

This lord was engaged in that memorable league or association with the earls
of Douglas, Crawfurd, Ross, Murray, Ormond, etc. wherein they solemnly swore to
stand by, Hawthornden Glasg. edit. p. 78.
and spend their lives, fortunes, and goods, in defense of one another, etc.
and he obtained a safe conduct from king Henry to go along with that earl into
England, Rymer, tom. XI. p. 285.
anno 1451.

After William earl of Douglas was killed in the castle of Stirling, his
brother earl James raised a formidable rebellion against the king, and was
joined by all the lords of the association.

Lord Hamilton continued for some time in the Douglas's army, which was then
far superior in numbers to the king's; but the earl not appearing forward at
that time to fight against his countrymen, Hawthornden p. 91 and 92, and
Abercrom. ^ol. II. pages 360 and 361.
lord Hamilton (no doubt out of a principle of loyalty) deserted the rebels,
carried off with him a great number of his friends and followers, went over to
the king, who received him graciously, and freely pardoned him.

Lord Hamilton soon became in so great favor with the king, that he was joined
with the earl of Angus in the command of the royal army, Hawthornden p. 94.
when the earl of Douglas was totally routed, anno 1455.

He then got a charter from king James II. to his beloved cousin James lord
Hamilton, and his heirs, of the lands and baronies of Cadzow, Machan, Charta
penes dacem de Hamilton.
Kenniel, Hamilton, and many others, erected into one free lordship, to be
called the lordship of Hamilton, etc. 3rd July 1455.

He got likeways, from the same prince, for his good and faithful services, the
baronies of Drumsargard, Ibidem.
and Carmonock, the patronages of the churches thereto belonging, also the
heretable sheriffship of the county of Lanark, then in the crown, by the
forfeiture of the earls of Douglas, anno 1455.

He married, 1st, Janet, daughter of sir Alexander Livingston of Calendar,
ancestor of the earls of Linlithgow, by whom he got some lands in the barony of
Machan, Ibidem.
by a charter from Alexander Livingston, lord of Calendar, to James de
Hamilton, lord of Cadzow, and Janet Livingston, daughter of the said Alexander,
their heirs, etc. in libero maritagio, etc. dated 20th October 1422.

By her he had issue four sons.

1. James, lord Hamilton.

2. Andrew, ancestor of the Hamiltons of Silvertonhill, Crawfurd's Peerage, etc.
Broomhill, etc. of whom lord Belhaven is descended.

3. Gavin, provest of the collegiate church of Bothwell, ancestor of the
Hamiltons of Orbiston, from whom the families of Dalziel, Haigs, Ibidem.
Kilbrachmont, Monkland, Bothwelhaugh, Parkhead and Bar, are descended.

4. John, who married, and settled at Whistleberry, in Lanarkshire, Ibidem.
where his posterity are still subsisting.

He married, 2dly, lady Eupheme Grahame, daughter of Patrick earl of
Strathearn, sister of Malise, Ibidem.
earl of Menteith, great grandchild of king Robert II. both by father and
mother, and widow of Archibald earl of Douglas and duke of Turenne, by whom he
had a son,

Sir John Hamilton of Shawfield, -- and two daughters.

1. Mary, married to William Keith, earl Marishal of Scotland.

2. Elizabeth, Ibidem.
married to David fourth earl of Crawfurd, created duke of Montrose for life by
king James III. whose only son John was killed in the service of his country at
the battle of Flowdon, anno 1513.

He founded, and amply endowed the collegiate church at Hamilton, anno 1451,
and dying in 1460, was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. JAMES, second lord Hamilton, who was a man of remarkable courage and
conduct, which he manifested upon many occasions, Ibidem.
and was in so great favor with king James II. that he was called to his privy
council when but a young man, anno 1440; and being no less a good statesman
than a brave soldier, he was often employed in negotiations of importance,
particularly anno 1461, 1471, and 1472; in which last year he was appointed one
of the ambassadors extraordinary to the court of England, Rymer, tom. XI. p.
476, 716, 740, etc.
and met lord Howard, and the English commissioners, on the borders, and
acquitted himself greatly to the king's satisfaction.

He was now possessed of a vast estate, which appears by his charters in the
public records, Chart. in pub. archiv.
inter 1460 et 1470.

And being one of the greatest men in the kingdom, and highly esteemed by the
king, he was pleased (in consideration of his eminent qualities, and great and
faithful services) to bestow upon him in marriage his eldest sister lady Mary,
Stewart's hist. of the royal family, p. 69.
then widow of Thomas Boyd, earl of Arran, who died at Antwerp, anno 1471. To
which princess he was married with consent of parliament, anno 1474.

He got charters under the great seal, from king James III. to James lord
Hamilton, and his dearest sister Mary Stewart, to them and their heirs-male,
Chart. penes ducem de Hamilton.
etc. of the lands of Kinncil, Drumsargarth, Curmannock, with many others, and
the patronages, etc. in the lordship of Hamilton, 11th August 1475.

By her he had one son,

James, afterward earl of Arran, -- and one daughter,

Elizabeth, married to Matthew earl of Lennox, and, by him, was great
grandmother of Henry lord Darnly and duke of Albany, who married Mary queen of
Scotland, Stewart's hist. p. 154 and 155.
and by her was father of king James VI.

He got another charter from the king, Jacobo domino Hamilton et Mariae
senescal. sorori suae carissinae, of several other lands and baronies, Chart.
in pub. archiv.
also of the heretable sheriffship of Lanarkshire, etc. anno 1476.

Also other two charters to him et Mariae dominae Hamilton, terrarum baroniae
de Teiling, baroniae et castri de Kilmarnock, Ibidem.
quae fuerunt Roberti domini Boyd, etc. dated anno 1478.

He died in November 1479, and was succeeded by his only son,

IX. JAMES, third lord Hamilton, and first earl of Arran, who, being endowed
with all the princely qualities suitable to his high birth, was particularly
distinguished, and taken notice of by king James IV. and was appointed one of
his privy council before he was twenty-one years of age.

He was insest in the heretable sheriffship of Lanark, and all the rights and
privileges thereto belonging, 1st August 1489.

He got a charter of the lands and barony of Kinneil, Ibidem.
dated 28th April 1490.

Also a charter of the lands of Padoeruke, etc. Ibidem.
dated 30th May 1498.

Anno 1502, he was sent to England to negotiate a marriage betwixt his royal
master and princess Margaret, Rymer, tom. XIII. p. 45.
eldest daughter of king Henry VII. of England, which he happily concluded,
anno 1503.

He solemnized and celebrated the nuptials with such splendor and
magnificence, that the king, in recompense of his good services, and the great
expense he had been at, bestowed upon him the island of Arran, and created him
earl thereof, Scots compend. p. 57, and Chart. in pub. arch.
by patent, dated the 10th August 1503. In which the great services done to the
crown by the family of Hamilton, their near connection by blood with the royal
family, etc. are fully narrated.

He also obtained a commission of justiciary within the said island, with all
the castles, fortalices, Chart. in pub. arch. et peneducem de Hamilton.
mills, fishings, patronages of chapels, etc. Jacobo comiti de Arran, domino
Hamilton, etc. dated 11th August 1503.

Anno 1504, he got the command of the forces that were sent to the assistance
of king Christiern II. of Denmark; which service he performed with conduct and
fidelity.

Sometime thereafter he got the command of four thousand auxiliaries that were
sent to France to the assistance of Lewis the XII. where he gained immortal
honor.

After the death of king James IV. in the fatal field of Flowdon, anno 1513,
the earl of Arran was become so very popular, that he stood fair to have been
elected regent and governor to the young king, but he generously yielded his
pretensions to his cousingerman John duke of Albany, who indeed had the better
title, being in the same degree of propinquity to the royal family in the male
line that the earl was in the female. (...)
He was then appointed captain and governor of the castle of Edinburgh.

Anno 1517, when the duke of Albany went to France, to renew the ancient
league, which had subsisted so many centuries betwixt the two crowns, he
nominated six guardians, who were to take care of the state, and govern by
turns during his absence, viz. the earls of Arran, Angus, Huntly, Argyle, and
the archbishops of St. Andrews and Glasgow. He also joined to them his trusty
friend sir Anthony Darcy, Ibid. p. 222 and 225.
le sieur de la Beauti, on whom he chiefly depended for intelligence, and the
earl of Arran was, by themselves, unanimously chosen their primus, and warden
of the marches.

He married, 1st, Beatrix, daughter of John lord Drummond, by Elizabeth, Chart.
in pub. arch. and history of the Stuarts, page 119.
daughter of David duke of Montrose, by whom he had one daughter,

Lady Margaret Hamilton, married to Andrew Stewart lord Ochiltree, and had
issue.

He married, 2dly, Janet, sister of Alexander first earl of Home; but her
former husband, sir Thomas Hay, Process, and sentence of divorce,, (...) ducem
de Hamilton.
who was thought to have been dead, being found to be alive, he was divorced
from her by a court of delegates, and empowered to marry another, anno 1513:

Whereupon he married, 3dly, Janet, daughter of sir David Beaton of Creich, in
vicecomitatu de Fife, comptroller of Scotland, in the reign of king James IV.
Charta penes ducem de Hamilton.
widow of sir Robert Livingston of Easter Wemyfs, by whom he had two sons and
two daughters.

1. James, earl of Arran.

2. Sir John Hamilton of Clydsdale.

1st daughter, lady Helen, married to Archibald fourth earl of Argyle.

2. Lady Jane, married to Alexander fifth earl of Glencairn.

He died anno 1530, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. JAMES, second earl of Arran, who got charters from king James V. Jacobo
comiti Arraniae, Chart. in pub. archiv.
domino Hamilton, etc. terrarum baroniae de Machanshire, Drumsargard,
Stanhouse, et Kirkinane, terrarum baroniae de Hamilton, and many other lands,
too numerous to be here inserted.

He was a man of consummate prudence, honor and integrity, and was in great
favor with king James V. Hawthornden's hist. p. 268.
whom he accompanied to France, when he espoused Magdalene, eldest daughter of
king Francis I. anno 1536.

Anno 1539, he had the honor to stand godfather to James duke of Rothsay,
eldest son of the king, Ibid. p. 274.
by his second wife Mary of Lorrain, daughter of Rene, and sister of Francis
duke of Guise, widow of Lewis duke of Longueville, etc.

After the death of king James V. anno 1542, he was chosen guardian to the
young queen, and governor of Scotland, and was, by an act of the three estates,
declared next heir to the crown, failing issue of queen Mary: to which act the
seals of the noblemen, Penes ducem de Hamilton.
prelates, barons, and members of the burrows in parliament assembled, are
appended, 13th of March 1543.

About this time there was a match proposed betwixt Mary queen of Scotland and
prince Edward of England, which the earl of Arran agreed to, Rymer, tom. XV. p.
4.
believing it might put an end to the wars and perpetual sends that had so long
subsisted betwixt the two nations; but the earls of Huntly, Argyle, Montrose,
Bothwell, Menteith, lord Fleming, and many other worthy Scotsmen opposed it
strenuously, being convinced that it would prove derogatory to the dignity and
independency of Scotland, so that it could never be got accomplished, though
king Henry VIII. had it very much at heart.

There was then a treaty on foot with the English, the articles whereof were
agreed to by a Scotch parliament; king Henry not only refused to ratify it, but
caused seize several Scotch ships, laden with Scotch and French commodities,
upon the faith of the treaty, which they thought was concluded. This notorious
violation of the articles, the governor resented highly; and in December 1543,
called a parliament, who declared the treaty void and null, and the governor
immediately raised what forces he could to oppose the English, who had invaded
our country with an army of seven or eight thousand men, under the command of
lord Evers. The Scots encountered them near Ancrum, in Teviotdale, with an army
not half their number, and totally defeated them.

Some time thereafter the earl of Hertford invaded Scotland with another army,
and the governor being now joined by 3500 French auxiliaries, marched to oppose
them; but upon the approach of the Scots, the English retreated.

The governor, in his turn, invaded England, defeated the English wherever he
met them, and returned crowned with laurels, and his soldiers laden with great
booty. He had then the ensigns of the most noble order of St. Michael sent him
from France by king Francis I. anno 1546.

King Henry VIII. dying in January thereafter, the duke of Somerset, protector
of England, and tutor to king Edward VI. invaded Scotland with a powerful army,
supported by a strong fleet. The governor of Scotland encountered them at
Pinky-cleugh, where the Scots behaved with the utmost courage and resolution,
but being overpowered by numbers, were at last totally defeated, and about 8000
of them killed in the field, on 10th September 1547.

The governor, not at all dismayed with this loss, appointed a meeting of the
nobility at Stirling, and, in a most pathetic speech, he first condoled with
them for their loss at Pinky, then he put them in mind of the great spirit and
magnanimity with which their ancestors had defended themselves, and maintained
their independency against their implacable enemies, etc. This had such an
effect upon them, that they unanimously resolved rather to hazard all than
submit to the English.

They then applied to their old allies the French; and, at the same time,
proposed a match betwixt their young queen and the dolphin, son of king Francis
I. who was then pleased to create the governor duke of Chattelherault, Extract
from the register of the parliament of Paris.
with a revenue of 30,000 livres per annum, to enable him to support that
dignity, to him and his heirs for ever.

The duke of Chattelherault, the governor, after several conventions with the
English commissioners in 1551 and 1552, Rymer, tom XV. p. 263, 319, 326, etc.
at last concluded a treaty with them, and settled the marches on the borders,
in December 1552.

The duke Cattelherault continued governor of Scotland till the year 1555, and
then resigned, in full parliament, to the queen's mother, when his whole
conduct was approven of; and he was again declared next heir to the crown,
failing heirs of the queen's body, after he had delivered up the regalia and
ensigns of government.

When queen Mary returned from France, anno 1561, the duke of Chattelherault,
who was a great friend to the reformation, was appointed one of the privy
council; and, in 1566, was sent to France to take care of her majesty's
interest there, where he continued till the queen was forced to make a
resignation of the government in favors of her son: upon which he was called
home to be head of the loyalists. He used all his interest to get the earl of
Murray degraded, and did every thing in his power for her majesty's service;
but at last, when he found that all attempts to get the queen restored to the
government were in vain, he entered into an agreement with the regent, for
himself, the earl of Cassilis, lord Herris, and others of the queen's friends,
the articles whereof are at large in Crawford's peerage of Scotland, page 197,
etc. Upon the faith of which, the duke came to Edinburgh, trusting to the
regent's engagements, but was no sooner in his power, than he was confined in
the castle of Edinburgh, where he was kept prisoner till the regent was put to
death by James Hamilton of Bothwelhaugh, on 23d January 1570.

The earl of Lennox being then made regent, the duke, with his two sons, and
many more of his name and family, were outlawed and forfeited: however, the
duke continued firm and steady in the queen's interest to the very last; and,
for his untainted loyalty, shared greatly in her majesty's misfortunes; but
being now old and infirm, he retired to France, where he remained till the heat
of the civil war was over, and died soon after his return home, anno 1575.

By lady Margaret Douglas, his wife, eldest daughter of James earl of Morton,
he left issue sour sons and sour daughters.

1. James, his successor.

2. Lord John, afterward marquis of Hamilton, who carried on the line of this
family, of whom hereafter.

3. Lord Claud, ancestor of the earl of Abercorn. Vide title Abercorn, page Is It
of this work.

4. Lord David, who died without issue.

1st daughter, lady Barbara, married to James lord Fleming, lord high
chamberlain of Scotland, whose only daughter Jane, married, 1st, to John lord
Thirlestane; 2dly, to Gilbert earl of Cassilis.

2. Lady Anne, married to George fifth earl of Huntly, lord high chancellor of
Scotland, ancestor of the duke of Gordon.

3. Lady Margaret, married to Alexander lord Gordon.

4. Lady Jane, married to Hugh earl of Eglington.

XI. JAMES, third earl of Arran, and eleventh duke of Chattelherault, was a
youth of great hopes and expectations, and seemed to inherit all the virtues of
his worthy ancestors. He went to France anno 1555, was much taken notice of by
king Henry II. who made him captain of his Scotch life-guards; but some time
thereafter he came to Scotland, Crawford.
turned melancholy, retired from the world, died without issue, anno 1609, and
was succeeded by his nephew James, son of his brother lord John, to whom we now
return.

XI. Lord JOHN, afterward marquis of Hamilton, second son of James second earl
of Arran, Chart. in pub. arch. and several charters penes ducem de Hamilton.
and duke of Chattelherault, born anno 1532, was appointed commendator of
Arbroath, by king James V. anno 1541, by which title he was designed for many
years thereafter.

He was most zealous in support of the queen's cause, in opposition to those
who assumed the government in the name of king James her son; was deeply
engaged in the civil wars that ensued thereupon, and never deserted the
interest of queen Mary, in her deepest distress.

When she was carried prisoner to the castle of Lochleven, the commendator
entered into that memorable association, with several others of the nobility,
obliging themselves to stand by one another in defense of the queen, and to
endeavor to procure her liberty at the hazard of their lives and fortunes,
etc. for which, and his other acts of loyalty, he, with his brother lord Claud,
was, by the ruling faction at the time, outlawed and sorfeited, as before
hinted, anno 1570.

He then made his escape to France, where he continued in banishment for
several years; and the queen was so sensible of his unshaken fidelity, that
when that cruel sentence of death was passed upon her in England, she pulled a
ring off her finger, and ordered one of her servants to deliver it to her
cousin lord John Hamilton, as a token of the just sense she had of his constant
fidelity and sufferings for her interest; which ring is still preserved in the
family.

When he heard that the king had begun to take the management of affairs upon
himself, he returned to Scotland, anno 1585; and being joined by his brother
lord Claud, with several others of the nobility, they advanced, with what
forces they could raise, to Stirling, where the king then was, and represented
to him, that as their enemies had contrived their ruin, and had deprived them
of all other means of imploring his protection, they were reduced to the hard
neceslity of coming in that manner. They were then admitted into the king's
presence, and received their pardons; and the king addressing himself to lord
John, said, "My lord, I never did see you before, and must confess that you
have been wronged. You was a faithful servant to my mother, and hardly used
when I understood not the state of things as I now do." Lord John was soon
thereafter made governor of Dunbarton castle, and admitted of the privy council.

When the king went to Norway to bring home his queen, Rymer, tom. XVI. p. 27
and 28, ad annum 1588.
he deputed lord John to preserve the peace of the borders, and appointed him
one of the regency, till his return.

The king's favor for him still increasing, he was pleased, Sir George
MacKenzie's heraldry.
in regard of his great sufferings, and long and faithful services, to dignify
him with the title of marquis of Hamilton, anno 1599.

The king afterward visited him osten at his palace of Hamilton, and he
continued to enjoy a large share of his majesty's esteem and favor as long as
he lived.

He married Margaret Lion, daughter of John lord Glammis, Charta penes ducem de
Hamilton.
ancestor of the earl of Strathmore, widow of Gilbert earl of Cassilis, by whom
he had one son,

James, -- and one daughter,

Lady Margaret, married to John lord Maxwell, ancestor of the earl of Nithsdale.

He died anno 1604, and was succeeded by his only son,

XII. JAMES, second marquis of Hamilton, born anno 1589, who succeeded also to
his uncle James, earl of Arran, and duke of Chattelherault, anno 1609, as
before observed.

He was appointed one of the gentlemen of the king's bedchamber, and one of
the lords of his privy council, before he arrived at the age of twenty-one.

The king also, in consideration of his father's fidelity and sufferings for
queen Mary, erected into a temporal lordship the abbaylands, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
with the patronages and tithes of the monastery of Arbroath, in favors of the
marquis, by his royal charter dated anno 1608, which was a great accession to
his estate.

He was afterward made steward of the king's household, and, as another great
instance of his majesty's favor, he was created a peer of England, by the
titles of lord Innerdale, and earl of Cambridge, anno 1619, the honors being
limited to the heirs-male of his body.

He was appointed lord high commissioner to the parliament 1621, when the five
articles of the assembly of Perth were ratified; and having managed matters in
these ticklish times with great prudence and dexterity, he dissolved the
parliament 27th August thereafter, and was installed at Windsor one of the
knights of the most noble order of the garter, 7th July 1623.

He married lady Anne Cunninghame daughter of James earl of Glencairn, by whom
he had three sons, and three daughters.

1. James, afterward duke of Hamilton.

2. William, also duke of Hamilton.

3. Lord John, who died unmarried.

1st daughter, lady Anne, married to Hugh earl of Eglington, and had issue.

2. Lady Margaret, married to John earl of Crawfurd, and had issue.

3. Lady Mary, married to James earl of Queensberry, without issue.

He died anno 1625, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. JAMES, third marquis of Hamilton, and second earl of Cambridge, born in
1606. He was, Burnet's memoirs of the family of Hamilton.
by king Charles I. appointed a member of his privy council in both kingdoms;
and was also made one of the gentlemen of his bedchamber, and master of horse,
anno 1628.

Anno 1630, he had the honor to represent the king of Bohemia, and stood
godfather to king Charles II.

The same year, by the king's direction, he entered into treaty with Gustavus
Adolphus, of Sweden, to raise 6000 men for the service of that prince, to be
employed against the Imperialists, for the recovery of the Palatinate, Ibidem.
with which force he sailed from Yarmouth the following year, having just
before his departure been elected and installed knight of the most noble order
of the garter.

In 1638, he was sent by the king into Scotland, to endeavor to appease the
commotions beginning there, and was made his majesty's high commissioner to the
general assembly of the kirk; but they were then become so very untractable,
that, according to his instructions, he was obliged to dissolve them. The next
year he had the command of the fleet that was sent to try to bring the
covenanters to reason, the king having advanced as far as Berwick, with about
six thousand land forces; and by the marquis's mediation, a treaty was set on
foot, and a pacification ensued.

But as the behavior and conduct of this great man, during the whole course of
the civil war, is recorded by many able historians, we shall say little more of
it here; but for his good and faithful services to the crown, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
he was created duke of Hamilton, marquis of Clydsdale, etc. by patent, in
which all the titles of the family are narrated, "to him and the heirs-male of
his body; which failing, to the heirs-male of his brother, the earl of Lanark,
his body; which failing, to the eldest heir-female of his own body without
division, and the heirs-male of her body, they bearing the name and arms of
Hamilton; Chart. in pub. archiv.
which failing, to the heirs whatsoever of the said James's body, etc. etc.
etc." dated 12th April, anno 1643.

We shall here add also the speech he made to the Scotch parliament, against
delivering up the king to the English, which was in these words:

"Will Scotland now quit her possession and interest in her sovereign, and do
it to those whose emnity to him and us does visibly appear? Crawfurd's peerage,
and Scots compend. p. 61.
Is this the consequence of all your protestations of duty and affection to his
majesty? Is this the keeping of your covenant, wherein you have sworn to defend
the king's majesty, person, and authority? Is this a suitable return for the
king's goodness, both in consenting to all your desires in 1641, and in his
late trusting his person with you What censures will the world pass upon this
action? What a stain will it be to the whole reformed religion? and what danger
may we not apprehend, both to the king's person, and to Scotland, from the
party that now prevails in England?"

However, all he could do or say did not prevail; the king was delivered up to
the English, the fatal consequence of which we need not repeat.

The duke, who did every thing in his power to wipe off that everlasting stain
upon the Scotch nation, at the parliament 1648, prevailed so far, that it was
agreed to raise an army in defense, and for the relief of the king, etc. of
which the duke of Hamilton got the command. He marched directly into England,
was attacked by the parliament's forces, near Preston, where his army was
totally deseated, and himself taken prisoner.

After several months confinement, he was brought to a trial before that
infamous high court of justice, where he received sentence of death, and was
accordingly beheaded in Palace-yard, Westminster, on 9th March 1649, a few
weeks after one of the best of kings had suffered the same sat.

He died with undaunted courage, and remarkable tranquillity and composure of
mind, declared his steady and firm attachment to the protestant religion, and
prayed for the restoration of the royal family, the moment besore he laid his
head upon the block.

He married lady Mary Fielding, daughter of William earl of Denbigh, by Susanna
his wife, sister to George Villiers, the great duke of Buckinghame, and by her
had three sons, and three daughters.

1. Charles.

2. James.

3. William.

All the above sons died young.

1st daughter, lady Mary, died young.

2. Lady Anne, who became duchess of Hamilton, of whom more afterward.

3. Lady Susanna, married to John earl of Cassilis.

The duke was succceded in his estate and honors by his brother,

XIII. WILLIAM, second duke of Hamilton, and third earl of Cambridge, born 14th
December 1616, who was a man of great accomplishments, honor, and integrity,
Chart. in archiv. Careli^
and was soon distinguished by king Charles I. by whom he was highly esteemed,
and raised to the honor of the peerage, when he was a young man, by the titles
of earl of Lanark, lord Machanshire and Polmont, by letters patent dated 31st
March 1639.

Upon the death of the earl of Stirling, Ibid. et chart. penes ducem de
Hamilton.
he was appointed secretary of state for Scotland, anno 1640, and was made
knight of the most noble order of the garter.

We shall not trouble our readers with an account of his noble conduct during
the civil war, it being fully set forth in the histories of these times; we
shall only add, that after the murder of the king, he raised a troop of horse
at his own charge for the service of king Charles II. in order to his
restoration, with which he marched to the fatal battle of Worcester, fought
valiantly upon their head, on 3d September 1651, and received a wound in his
leg, of which he died in eight days thereafter, and was buried in the cathedral
of Worcester.

We shall conclude this great man's character, with the earl of Clarendon's
words, who will not be suspected of partiality in his favors.

"He was a man not inferior in partsor understanding to the wisest men in the
nation, of great honor, courage, and sincerity in his nature, and, (which was
a rare virtue in the men of that time,) was still the same man he pretended to
be; and, in truth, was, in all respects, a very accomplished person, of an
excellent judgment, and ready expression; and though he had been been driven
into some unwarrantable actions, he made it evident, that he had not been led
by any inclination of his own, and heartily run into all opportunies of
redeeming it; and in the very article of his death, he expressed a great
cheerfulness, that he had the honor to lose his life in the king's service,
and thereby to wipe out the memory of his former transgressions, which he
always professed were odious to himself."

He married lady Elizabeth Maxwell, daughter and co-heiress of James earl of
Dirleton, by whom he had a son,

James, who died an infant, -- and four daughters.

1. Lady Anne, married to Robert earl of Southesk, and had issue.

2. Lady Elizabeth, married, 1st, to James lord Kilmaurs, eldest son of William
earl of Glencairn; and, 2dly, to sir David Cunninghame of Robertland.

3. Lady Mary, married, 1st, to Alexander earl of Calendar; 2dly, to sir James
Livingston of Westquarter; and, 3dly, to James earl of Finlater.

4. Lady Margaret, married to William Blair of that ilk, an ancient baron in
the shire of Air, and had issue.

Upon the death of duke William, without surviving male-issue, the estates and
titles descending by several patents to the heirs general, he was succeeded by
his niece lady Anne, to whom we now return.

XIV. Lady ANNE HAMILTON, eldest daughter of James first duke of Hamilton, the
undoubted heir of line of the family, and now duchess of Hamilton, married
William Douglas earl of Selkirk, eldest son of William marquis of Douglas, by
his second wife lady Mary Gordon, daughter of George marquis of Huntly; in
consequence of which marriage, upon a petition from the duchess, he was
created duke of Hamilton for life, with all the titles, dignities, and
precedence belonging to the family, which appears by the diploma, Diploma in
archivis Caroli II.
Willielmi ducis de Hamilton, marchionis Clydsdale, comitis Arraniae, Lanarc^ae
et Selkirk, domini Acon, Machanshire, et Daer, etc. dated 12th October 1660.

He was soon thereafter made one of the privy council, and knight of the most
noble order of the garter.

Upon king James VII.'s accession to the crown, he was made a lord of the
treasury, an extraordinary lord of session, and a privy councillor for both
kingdoms, in which office he continued all king James's reign.

When the prince of Orange came over to England, he was chosen, by diverse
Scotch nobility and gentry then in London, to be their president, when they
addressed that prince to take upon him the administration of all affairs, civil
and military, and was also chosen president of the convention of estates, who
declared the crown vacant, and settled it on that prince.

After he was crowned king, the duke was appointed president of the council,
one of the extraordinary lords of session, and lord high admiral of Scotland.

By said lady Anne duchess of Hamilton he left issue seven sons, and three
daughters.

1. James, earl of Arran.

2. Lord William, who died in France without issue.

3. Charles, earl of Selkirk.

4. John, earl of Ruglen.

5. George, earl of Orkney.

6. Lord Basil, who married Mary, daughter and sole heiress of sir David Dunhar
of Baldoon, Bart. and was grandfather of Dunbar, now earl of Selkirk.

7. Lord Archibald, who was appointed governor of Jamaica by queen Anne, was a
flag-officer in the navy, and governor of Greenwich hospital. He married lady
Jane Hamilton, daughter of James earl of Abercorn, and had issue two sons.

The duke's 1st daughter, lady Catharine, married to John duke of Athole.

2. Lady Susanna, married, 1st, to John earl of Dundonald; and, 2dly, to
Charles marquis of Tweeddale.

3. Lady Margaret, married to James earl of Panmure.

And dying anno 1694, was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. JAMES, fourth duke of Hamilton, in his father's lifetime designed earl of
Arran, was born 11th April 1658, had a noble and liberal education suitable to
his high birth and quality.

Upon his return from his travels, he was particularly distinguished by king
Charles II. Hist. of England, vol. III.
and was made one of the gentlemen of his bedchamber, anno 1679, and was sent
ambassador extraordinary to the court of France, 1683.

When king James VII. succeeded to the crown, he was made master of the
wardrobe, knight of the thistle, and colonel of the royal regiment of horse.

He was steady in the interest of that unfortunate prince, and never left him
till he embarked for France, 23d December 1688, and was always suspected of
retaining a warm affection to him, even when the revolution had altered the
system of government, and directed the subjects allegiance to a new king; which
plainly appears from the speech he made in the beginning of 1689, when the
prince of Orange asked the opinion of the Scotch nobility and gentry then at
London, in relation to the affairs in Scotland. Upon this occasion the earl of
Arran delivered his opinion as follows:

"I have all the honor and deference for the prince of Orange imaginable. I
think him a brave prince, Miscellaneous collections of the year 1689.
Crawfurd's peerage, p. 215.
and that we owe him great obligations, in contributing so much to our delivery
from popery: but while I pay those praises, I cannot violate my duty to my
master. I must distinguish between his popery and his person; I dislike the
one, but have sworn and do owe allegiance to the other, which makes it
impossible for me to assign away that which I cannot forbear believing is the
king my master's right; for his present absence from us in France can no more
affect my duty, than his longer absence from us has done before; and the prince
desiring our advice, mine is, that we should move his majesty to return, and
call a free parliament, for the securing our religion and property, which, in
my humble opinion, will at last be found the best way to heal all our
breaches."

After king William was established in the throne, the earl of Arran was twice
sent prisoner to the tower, on suspicion of corresponding with king James; but
was never prosecuted; however, he lived a retired life the greatest part of
king William's reign.

His father, being created duke only for life, Charta penes ducem deHamilton,
et Chart. in pub. archiv.
as before noticed, the hereditary honors of the family still remained in the
duchess, and did not descend to the earl of Arran their son upon his father's
death; wherefore the duchess made a surrender of her titles into the king's
hands, upon which a patent past, creating him duke of Hamilton, etc. with the
precedence of his grand-father's patent in 1643, as if he had succeeded thereto
by his father's death. This patent is dated at Loo, 10th August School.

He opposed the union of the two crowns, and, at the invasion 1708, was, by
order of council, taken into the custody of a messenger, upon suspicion of his
being privy to that expedition; but he was soon admitted to bail, the duke of
Newcastle, earl of Wharton, and lord Halifax being his sureties; and that same
year he was elected one of the sixteen peers for Scotland to the British
parliament.

In 1710, he was created a peer of Great Britain, by the titles of duke of
Brandon, and baron Dutton in England, by patent; the preamble whereof, (which
is very honorable for the family,) is to be found in the Scots compendium,
page 65; but in December the same year his English peerage was disputed in the
British parliament, and was found to be inconsistent with the articles of
union, and was therefore at that time set aside.

In 1712, he was constituted master of the ordnance, and knight of the most
noble order of the garter as well as the thistle, the queen having declared she
would wear both orders herself; and immediately thereafter, upon the conclusion
of the treaty of Utrecht, he was appointed her majesty's ambassador
extraordinary to the court of France; but a little before he was to have set
out for that kingdom, he fought a duel with lord Mohun, wherein they were both
killed, on 15th November 1712.

Had not the duke been a man of uncommon bravery, he might well have refused
the challenge, being a privy councillor, and her majesty's ambassador
extraordinary; but that he thought was inconsistent with his honor: and some
suspected he was killed unfairly by general MacCartney, lord Mohun's second,
who, after king George's accession to the crown, stood his trial, and was
acquitted.

His grace's mother, Anne, the duchess dowager, survived him four years, and
died anno 1716, aged eighty.

He married, 1st, lady Anne Spencer, daughter of Robert earl of Sunderland, by
whom he had two daughters, that died young.

He married, 2dly, Elizabeth, daughter and sole heiress of Digby, lord Gerard
of Bromly, by Elizabeth his wife, daughter to Charles earl of Macclesfield, by
whom he had issue three sons, and four daughters.

1. James, marquis of Clydsdale, afterward duke of Hamilton.

2. Lord William, who married Anne, daughter and heiress of Francis Hawes, Esquire;
but died without issue.

3. Lord Anne, so named, in regard that the queen was his god-mother. He
married Miss Pownel, an heiress, by whom he had issue.

The duke's 1st daughter, lady Elizabeth.

2. Lady Catharine.

These two both died young.

3. Lady Charlotte, married to Charles Edwin, Esquire;

4. Lady Susan, married to Anthony Tracykeck, of great Tew in Oxfordshire.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVI. JAMES, fifth duke of Hamilton, who was elected a knight of the most noble
order of the thistle, and installed at the abbay of Holyroodhouse, anno 1726.

In May 1727, he was appointed gentleman of the bedchamber to king George I.
and so continued by George II.

He married, 1st, lady Anne Cochran, daughter of John earl of Dundonald, by
whom he had a son,

James, duke of Hamilton.

He married, 2dly, Elizabeth, daughter and co-heiress of Thomas Strangeways, of
Dorsetshire, Esquire; by whom he had no issue.

He married, 3dly, Elizabeth, daughter and heiress of Edward Spencer, Esquire; of
the county of Suffolk, by whom he had two sons and one daughter.

1. Lord Archibald.

2. Lord Spencer.

Lady Anne.

He died in 1742, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVII. JAMES, sixth duke of Hamilton, who married Elizabeth, daughter of John
Gunning, Esquire; by Bridget his wife, daughter of John viscount Mayo, of the
kingdom of Ireland, who, after the duke's death, married to John marquis of
Lorn, son and apparent heir of John, the present duke of Argyle.

By her the duke had two sons and one daughter.

1. James-George, now duke of Hamilton.

2. Lord Douglas Hamilton.

Lady Elizabeth.

He died anno 1758, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVIII. JAMES-GEORGE, seventh duke of Hamilton, Brandon, etc. born 18th
February, 1755, who, upon the death of Archibald duke of Douglas, without
issue, succeeded to the titles of marquis of Douglas, earl of Angus, etc. as
heir-male.

ARMS.
Four grand quarters: first quarterly, 1st and 4th, three cinque-foils pierced
ermine, for Hamilton, being part of the arms of To. de Bellamont: 2d and 3d,
argent, a ship with its sails furled up, gules, for the earldom of Arran. The
second grand quarter is argent, a man's heart crowned with an imperial crown
proper, and on a chief azure, three mullets argent, for the name of Douglas.
Third grand quarter as the second. Fourth as the first.

CREST; in a ducal coronet or, an oak fructed and penetrated transversly in the
main stem, by a frame-saw proper, the frame or.

SUPPORTERS; two antelopes argent, their horns, ducal collars, chains, and
hoofs or.

MOTTO; Through.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Hamilton upon Clyde, in the county of Lanerk, a fine seat, with a noble
park, etc.

HARRIES Lord HARRIES.
THIS noble and ancient family, is said to be descended from a younger son of
the house of Vendosine in France, who settled in Scotland, in the reign of king
David I.

The armorial bearing of the family, from whence he sprung, being a porcupine
or urcheon, in French, Herisson or Herizon, from that he assumed the surname of
Heris or Heriz, and that family has ever since continued to have the urcheons
for their arms, in commemoration of their descent from that great and
illustrious house.

The first of them we find in this country, was

I. WILLIAM de HERIZ, who is witness in a donation of Henry prince of Scotland,
MacFarlane's collections, and Chartulary of Newbottle.
to the monastery of Wedderhall in England, in or before the year 1152, in
which year prince Henry died.

He had issue three sons.

1. Nigellus or Neil.

2. William de Heriz, who is witness in a donation to the monastery of Kelso,
Chartulary of Kelso, p. 224.
about the the year 1190.

3. Thomas de Herris, Ibid. p. 228.
who is witness in another donation to the same monastery, betwixt the years
1190 and 1195.

II. NIGELLUS de HERIZ, the eldest son, Preface to his historical collect. p.
82.
is particularly mentioned by sir James Dalrymple, as predecessor of this noble
family.

He is a witness also in that donation with his brother Thomas, Chartulary of
Kelso, p. 132, 151, 228, etc.
and in several others to the monastery of Kelso, in the end of the reign of
king William the lion, who died anno 1214.

He was father of

III. HENRICUS de HERIZ, who was appointed keeper of the royal forests by king
Alexander II.

In a donation of that prince to the monastery of Newbottle, Henricus de Heriz
forestarius regis is a witness, in or before the year 1249, in which year king
Alexander died.

He left issue two sons.

1. William.

2. Gilbert de Heriz, who is witness in a donation to the monastery of
Newbottle, anno 1266. Chartulary of Newbottle, p. 300.


He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. WILLIAM de HERIZ, who was proprietor of an estate in Nithsdale, and is to
be sound amongst the Scotch barons swearing fealty to king Edward I. Prynne,
vol. III. p. 661.
of England, for his lands lying in Dumfries-shire, anno 1296.

He was succeeded by his son,

V. ROBERT de HERRIS, MacFarlane's collections, and Chart. penes Lockhart of Lee
who, in an original charter of king Robert Bruce, is designed dominus de
Nithsdale, anno 1323.

He left issue a son and successor,

VI. Sir JOHN HERRIES, designed dominus de Terregles, who made a great figure
in the reign of king David II. by whom he was highly esteemed.

He was witness to several charters of that prince, Chartulary of Dunfermline,
p. 424, and 425.
and donations to the monastery of Dunfermline, betwixt the years 1360 and 1363.

He was joined in commission with William bishop of St. Andrews and others,
Rymer tom. VI. p. 315 and 614.
to negociate with the court of England, about some important affairs of state,
in the year 1361, and again in 1369.

He got a charter under the great seal, from king David Bruce, Charta in
archivis regis David.
of the whole lands and estate of Terregles in Dumfries-shire, erecting them
into a free barony, with several ample privileges, anno 1365.

He got another charter from the same prince, Ibidem.
of the lands of Kirkgunzeon, in the said county, anno 1368.

Also two charters more of the lands of Aithry, Ibidem.
and the twenty merk land of Skeok, etc. anno 1369.

He left issue a son,

VII. Sir JOHN HERRIES of Terregles, who succeeded him, and was witness to a
charter of king Robert III. MacFarlane's collections, v. I. p. 93.
confirming a donation of David Fleming, lord of Biggar, to the monastery of
Holyroodhouse, anno 1393.

He got a safe conduct to go up to England, Rymer, tom. VIII. p. 417.
to negociate some affairs with that court, anno 1405.

He was succeeded by his son,

VIII. Sir HERBERT HARRIES of Terreagles, Ibid. tom. X. p. 308.
who was appointed one of the hostages for king James I's. ransom, anno 1443.

He was one of the lords that sat on the trial of Murdoch duke of Albany,
Fordun, vol. II. p. 483 and 485.
and was one of the Scotch nobles sent to France to negociate a marriage
betwixt king James's daughter and the dauphin, anno 1425.

In a charter of king James I. Chart. in pub archiv.
he is designed dominus Herbertus de Harries, dominus de Terreagles, miles,
anno 1425.

He had issue, two sons and one daughter.

1. Robert his heir.

2. William de Harries, who was rector of Kirkpatrick, Rymer, tom XI. p. 326.
anno 1453.

His daughter -- married to sir Herbert Maxwell of Carlaverock.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. ROBERT HARRIES of Terreagles, who accompanied William earl of Douglas up
to England, Ibid. p. 285.
for which he got a safe conduct from king Henry, anno 1451.

He got charters, under the great seal, of the lands of Kirkpatrick, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
Iron-gray, and several others in Dumfries-shire, inter 1465, et 1469.

He had two sons.

1. David, his heir.

2. George, who got a charter of the lands of Tarachty, Ibidem.
anno 1477.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. DAVID, who, in a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
from king James III. is designed David Harrries of Terreagles, pater, etc.
anno 1477.

He left issue a son,

XI. Sir HERBERT HERRIES of Terreagles, who succeeded him, Crawfurd's peerage.
and was raised to the dignity of the peerage, by the title of lord Herries of
Terreagles, anno 1493.

He got charters under the great seal, Herberto domino Herries, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
of several lands and baronies, anno 1493 et 1494.

He married Marian, daughter of the lord Torthorald, by whom he had a son and
successor,

XII. ROBERT, second lord Herries of Terreagles, who married lady Janet
Douglas, Charta in archiv. fam. de Douglas.
daughter of Archibald, fifth earl of Angus, by whom he had a son,

Andrew, his heir.

He accompanied king James IV. to the fatal field of Flowdon, where he lost his
life with his royal master, anno 1513, and was succeeded by his son,

XIII. ANDREW, third lord, who got charters under the great seal, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
Andreae domino Herries, of the lands and barony of Terreagles, etc. inter
1528, et 1532.

He died soon after, leaving issue two sons.

1. William his heir.

2. Robert, who got a charter, under the great seal, Ibidem.
of the lands of Mabie, etc. and was ancestor of the Herries's of Mabie.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIV. WILLIAM, fourth lord Harries of Terreagles, who got charters, under the
great seal, Ibidem.
of many lands and baronies, Willielmo domino Herries, etc. inter 1536 et 1542.

He married Catharine, daughter of John Kennedy of Blairquhan, by whom he had
three daughters.

1. Agnes, married to sir John Maxwell, second son of Robert lord Maxwell,
ancestor of the earls of Nithsdale.

2. Catharine, married to Alexander Stewart of Gairlies, ancestor of the earl
of Galloway.

3. Janet, married to William Cockburn of Skirling, Esquire;.

Lord Harries dying without issue male, anno 1543, the line of the family was
carried on by his eldest daughter,

XV. AGNES, married to sir John Maxwell, as above, who got with her the barony
of Terreagles, etc.

At the solemnity of king James VI. his baptism, Balfour's collections in the
lawiers library, Edin.
he got the honors and titles of lord Harries confirmed to him, with the
former precedence, anno 1566, and was the fifth lord Harries.

He got charters, under the great seal, of several lands, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Johanni domino Herries, etc. inter 1570 et 1580.

He was a man of great honor, undannted courage, a firm and steady friend of
queen Mary, and never deserted her interest to the very last. With what
fidelity and magnanimity he defended her cause at London, and indeed on every
other occasion, is acknowledged by all historians who have wrote on that
subject.

By the said Agnes, he left issue a son and successor,

XVI. JOHN, sixth lord Harries, who got charters, Ibidem.
under the great seal, of many lands, Johanni domino Herries, etc. inter 1608
et 1612.

He was succeeded by his son,

XVII. JOHN, seventh lord Harries, who succeeding also to the earldom and
honors of Maxwell, earl of Nithsdale, as heir male, the titles of Harries were
sunk into that noble family, who were afterward designed earls of Nithsdale,
lords Harries, etc. and always quartered the arms of Harries with those of
Maxwell, etc.

Vide Title earl of Nithsdale.

ARMS.
Argent, three urcheons sable.

SUPPORTERS; two savages proper, holding clubs in their hands.

CREST; a buck's head or, attired with ten tynes argent.

MOTTO; Dominus dedit.

CHIEF SEATS
Were at Terreagles, within two miles of Dumfries, Kirkgunzeon in the same
county, etc.

BOTHWELL Lord HOLYROODHOUSE.
THE first of this surname we have found upon record is John de Bothwell, who
appears to have been a man of rank and distinction; for he got a charter from
king David Bruce, Chart. in archiv. reg. David.
Dilecto consanguineo suo, december librarum sterlingorum, et quatuor celdras
frumenti, de thanagio de Down, infra vicecomitatum de Banff, pro toto tempore
vitae suae, etc. dated anno 1366.

He also got another charter of the lands of Gargwell, Ibidem.
in the same county, anno 1370, but we can trace him no further.

The immediate ancestor of this family was,

1. RICHARD de BOTHWELL, Nishet's append. p. 243.
who was provost of Edinburgh in the reign of king James III. and married
Elizabeth, daughter of William Somerville of Plain, in the county of Stirling,
by whom he had two sons and one daughter.

1. Sir Francis, his heir.

2. Sir Richard Bothwell, a man of great parts, Ibid. et chart. in pub. archiv.
and bred to the church. He was appointed one of the senators of the college of
justice by king James V. at the first instititution of that court, and got
charters, under the great seal, of the lands of Bogend, and others, inter 1532
et 1534, and died anno 1547.

His daughter, Ibidem.
Margaret, married to sir Duncan Forest of Garden, comptroller to king James
IV. anno 1503.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. Sir FRANCIS BOTHWELL, who being bred to the law, and a man of great
learning, was also appointed one of the senators of the college of justice,
Acts of parlt.
anno 1532.

He got charters under the great seal, duas vastas terras in burgo de Edinburg,
and some other lands, Chart. in pub. archiv.
inter 1527 et 1532.

He was also provost of Edinburgh, anno 1535, and married Janet, daughter and
coheiress of Patrick Richardson of Meldrumhaugh, Haddington's collect. and
Nisbet's append. p. 243.
by whom he had two sons and one daughter.

1. Richard de Bothwell, whose male line is extinct.

2. Mr. Adam Bothwell, who carried on the line of this family.

His daughter, Janet, married to sir Archibald Napier of Merchiston.

III. Mr. ADAM BOTHWELL, son of sir Francis, was bred to the church, and was
constituted bishop of Orkney, and obtained letters patent from queen Mary,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
confirming the deed of the chapter, 8th October 1562.

He came early into the reformation, and made an exchange of the benefice of
the bishopric of Orkney, with Robert Stewart, commendator of Holyroodhouse,
Ibidem.
natural son of king James V. for the abbay of Holyroodhouse, which was
ratified and confirmed to the bishop, by a charter under the great seal, anno
1569. He was also appointed one of the senators of the college of justice.

He got another charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
Adamo Bothwell feudifirmarum augmentationibus, per canonicos monasterii de
Holyroodhouse, vel eorum praedecessores solvi solitis, et annuis redditibus,
etc. etc. 1581.

He married Margaret, daughter of John Murray of Touchaddam, an ancient family
in the county of Stirling, by whom he had issue two sons and one daughter.

1. John, his heir.

2. William, ancestor of the Bothwells of Glencorse, of whom more afterward.

His daughter, Margaret, married to William Sandielands of St. Ninians,
ancestor of lord Abercrombie.

He died anno 1593, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. JOHN, designed of Allhammer, who, in his father's lifetime, got a charter
under the great seal, Ibidem.
magistro Johanni Bothwell filio Adami, episc. Orcaden. provisio ad abbaciam de
Holyroodhouse, cum jurisdictione regalitatis, etc. anno 1581.

He got another charter, Ibidem.
provisio ad abbaciam de Holyroodhouse, cumt erris, dominiis, ecclesiis,
decimis, molendinis, etc. ad dict. abbaciam, spectant. etc. anno 1582.

He got also another charter, Ibidem.
dicto magistro Johanni, beneficium et abbaciam de Holyroodhouse, cum omnibus
commoditatibus, etc. etc. ad dict. beneficium speclantibus, etc. anno 1592.

He was in great favor with king James VI. who, upon his father's death,
appointed him one of the judges of the court of session, anno 1593.

He, in that year, accompanied his majesty up to England, and was nominated one
of his privy council.

He was afterward raised to the dignity of the peerage, by the title of lord
Holyroodhouse, and got all the lands, that formerly belonged to that abbay and
convent, erected into a temporal lordship, Diploma narrated in Crawford's
peerage, p. 185.
dominium de Holyroodhouse nuncupandum, omni tempore futuro, by patent, dated
20th December 1607, to the heirs-male of his body; which failing, to the
heirs-male of Adam bishop of Orkney, his father, etc.

He married Mary, Charta penecomitem de Hyndo rd.
daughter of sir John Carmichael of that ilk, by whom he had a son,

V. JOHN, second lord Holyroodhouse, who died unmarried, anno 1635; and though
the honors were not claimed for near one hundred years thereafter, yet,
according to the tenor of the above mentioned patent, they certainly ought to
have devolved upon the heir-male of the second son of the bishop, to whom we
now return.

IV. WILLIAM BOTHWELL, second son of Adam bishop of Orkney, and brother german
of John first lord Holyroodhouse, got from his father, Nisbet's append. p. 345.
as commendator of Holyroodhouse, several lands within the regality of
Broughton, and is then designed filius legitimus of the bishop, anno 1582.

He married Helen, daughter of John Cunninghame of Drumquhassel, Ibidem.
by whom he had a son,

V. ADAM BOTHWELL of Philpside, who succeeded him, and married Janet, daughter
of sir William Heart of Preston, Ibidem.
justice-clerk in the reign of king James VI. by whom he had a son and
successor,

VI. ALEXANDER BOTHWELL, designed of Glencorse, Ibidem.
who married Mary, daughter of sir James Stewart, son of Robert earl of Orkney,
by whom he had a son and heir,

VII. ALEXANDER BOTHWELL of Glencorse, who married Janet, Ibidem.
daughter of John Trotter of Mortonhall, by whom he had a son,

VIII. HENRY BOTHWELL of Glencorse, who succeeded him; and, in the year 1734,
claimed the peerage, after it had lain dormant ninety-nine years, served
himself heir before the sheriffs of Edinburgh, to John the last lord
Holyroodhouse, craved to be entered into the rolls of parliament, and continued
to carry the title and achievement of lord Holyroodhouse, though it does not
appear the parliament determined any thing therein.

He married Mary, daughter of lord Neil Campbell, second son of Archibald
marquis of Argyle, by whom he had five sons and four daughters.

1. Alexander, his heir, designed master of Holyroodhouse.

2. Neil, who was factor for the Southsea-company, but died without issue.

3. Archibald, who was master of the mint for Scotland, but died also without
issue.

4. Henry, who resides in France.

5. Robert, who went to Jamaica.

1st daughter, Vere, married to Mr. Francis Wachope of Kekmuir, advocate.

2. Eleanora.

3. Mary, married to doctor Menzies.

4. Anne.

IX. ALEXANDER, master of Holyroodhouse, married to lady Margaret, daughter of
Charles earl of Home, but died without issue.

ARMS.
Azure, on a cheveron, between three trefoils slipped or, a crescent gules.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter a spaniel dog collared gules, on the sinister, a
goshawk proper, jessed, be^ked, and belled, or.

CREST; a naked boy, pulling down the top of a green pine tree.

MOTTO; Obdura adversus urgentia.

HOME Earl of HOME.
THOUGH the surname of this noble family is certainly local, yet there are few
in Scotland can boast of so high and princely an origin as that of Home, being
a branch of the great and illustrious house of Dunbar, earls of March, who were
undoubtedly sprung from the Saxon kings of England, and the princes and earls
of Northumberland.

Vide Title Dunbar earl of March.

We shall therefore deduce their descent from their immediate ancestor,

VI. COSPATRICK, third earl of Dunbar, and sixth generation of that illustrious
family, by Derder his wife, left issue two sons,

1. Waldeve, fourth earl of Dunbar, his successor.

2. Patrick, the first of this family.

I. PATRICK, second son of Cospatrick, third earl of Dunbar, flourished in the
reigns of king William the Lion, and king Alexander II.

He got from his father the lands of Greenlaw, Lambden, and many others, in the
shire of Berwick.

This appears from a donation he made to the monastery of Kel^o, viz. Ecclesiam
de Greenlaw, capellas de Lambden et Haliburton, cum unadimidia carr^cata
terrae, Chartul. of Kel^o, penes MacFarlane, p. 58.
quam eadem ecclesia de Greenlaw (...) (...) etc. in which he is designed
Pat(...) filius comitis Cospatricii, et sra^er comitis Wald^^^, etc.

In a confirmation by king Alexander II. of a donation to the monastery of
Paisley, Patricius filius comitis Cospatricii, Chartulary of Paisley, penes
eund. p. 70.
together with Matthaeus cancellarius, Walterus Olyfard, justiciar. Loudoniae,
Rogerus de Mowbray, Thomas de Haya, etc. are witnesses, anno 1228.

He died inter 1228 et 1230, and was succeeded by his son,

II. Sir WILLIAM, who made a donation to the monastery of Coldstream, pro
salute animae suae, Chartulary of Coldstream, penes eund. p. 77.
etc. terrar^^^ de Rhondes et Breadpo^s, in the shire of Berwick, wherein he is
designed (...) ^ilius Patrtcii, etc. to which Thomas de Gordon, Bernard de
Frafer, Edward de vallilus, etc. are witnesses, anno 1230.

He is also particularly mentioned in several other charters, Ibidem.
in the same chartulary, and always under the same designation.

He married 1st, M. comitissa, (but of what family we know not.) This appears
from a donation made by Willielmus filius Patricii, Chartulary of Kelso, penes
eund. p. 61.
pro salute animae suae, et M. comitissae, (...) suae, etc. to^tam illam in
Greenlaw, etc. with several other parcels of land in the shire of Berwick. By
her he had no issue.

He married, 2dly, his cousin, Ada, daughter of Patrick, fifth earl of Dunbar,
who had been formerly married to -- Courtenay. By her he got the lands and
barony of Home, which had been given to her by her father upon her marriage.
This is clearly instructed by a charter upon a donation made by the said Ada in
these words: Ada de Courtenay, filia Patricii comitis de Dunbar; Chartulary of
Kelso, p. 100.
sciatis me dedisse, etc. pro salute animae meae, patris et matris meae, et
maritorum meorum, etc. monasterio de Kelso, etc. quandam partem terrae de
libero maritagio meo, in territorio, deHome, etc. ante 1240.

From the lands and castle of Home this William took his surname, the family of
March having assumed the surname of Dunbar a few years before. He also carried
the armorial bearings of the earls of Dunbar, Nisbet, vol. I.
which his posterity, the family of Home, have continued to do ever since, with
little variation; all which is fully documented afterward.

Here we have taken the liberty to differ from former authors, who have deduced
the descent of the family of Home from Willielmus, filius comitis Patricii,
which is certainly a mistake; for that William married Christiana, daughter and
heiress of Walter de Corbet of Mackerston, by whom he had two sons, Nicholaus
and Patricius de Corbet; and neither he nor his posterity ever took the name of
Home; all which is well vouched, and more fully set forth under the title of
Dunbar earl of March, and sufficiently prove, that Willielmus, filius comitis
Patricii, could not be progenitor of the family of Home.

Sir William died before 1266, and was succeeded by his son,

III. Sir WILLIAM HOME, Chartulary of Kelso, Coldstream, etc.
who, in many authentic writs, is designed dominus de eodem, filius domini
Willielmi, militis, etc.

In a donation made by Patrick earl of Dunbar, of several lands to the
monastery of Coldstream, Chartul. of Coldstream, p. 84.
Willielmus dominus de Home, Patrick son of earl Patrick, dominus Johannes de
Gray, Philippus de Haliburton, Adam de Gordon, etc. are witnesses, anno 1260.

In a controversy betwixt the abbot and convent of Kelso, and this William,
(therein designed dominus de Home,) about some lands in the barony of Home,
Chartulary of Kelso, p. 102, 103, etc.
are these remarkable words: quam quidem terram dicti abbas et conventus habent
ex dono nobilis dominae Adae, siliae nobilis viri Patricii quondam comitis de
Dunbar, et quondam dominae dictae villae de Home, etc. etc. dated anno 1268.

He made a donation to the abbot and convent of Kelso, pro salute animae suae,
etc. wherein he is designed Willielmus dominus de Home, Ibid. p. 253.
filius et haeres nobilis viri domini Willielmi militis, quondam domini dictae
villae de Home, etc. dated anno 1269.

He married, Is It, Ada, which appears by a charter, Willielmo domino Home, filio
et haeredi Willielmi, Ibid. p. 255.
etc. et Adae ejus sponsae, dated anno 1268. What family this Ada was of we
know not; but by her he had a son,

Galfridus de Home.

He married, 2dly, Maryota, and died soon thereafter. Chartulary of Coldstream.
p. 98.
She surviving him, was afterward married to Patrick de Edgar, which appears
by a charter, domino Patricio de Edgar et Maryotae dominae de Home ejus
sponsae, etc. ante 1284.

He was succeeded by his son,

IV. GALFRIDUS dominus de Home, who was one of the great Scotch barons that
swore fealty to king Edward I. of England, Prynne's collect. vol. III. p. 657.
for his lands lying in the shire of Berwick, etc. anno 1296.

He made a donation to the abbot and convent of Kelso, (besides the kirk of
Home,) of a pension of twelve shillings and sixpence sterling per annum,
Chartulary of Kelso.
out of his lands of Home, anno 1300; and is also mentioned in the same
chartulary, anno 1312.

He left issue a son,

V. ROGERUS de HOME, Dalrymple's collect. p. 415
dominus de eodem, who succeeded him, and is witness to a charter of William de
Gordun seignour de Stitchell, ancestor of the family of Kenmure, dated anno
1331.

He left issue a son and successor,

VI. Sir JOHN de HOME, dominus de eodem, a man of remarkable courage and
intrepidity, Nisbet, vol. I. p. 415.
and a strenuous defender of the borders. He made several incursions into
England, and always fought upon the head of his own men in a white jacket or
doublet, Mill's genealog. collect. penes MacFarlane, page 471.
and was a great terror to the English, who gave him the nickname of Willie
with the white doublet.

He was succeeded by his son,

VII. Sir THOMAS HOME, dominus de codem, who married Nicholas Pepdie, daughter
and heiress of -- Pepdie of Dunglass, Nisbet, vol. I. p. 276.
an ancient family in the shire of Berwick, by whom he got a considerable
accession to his estate; particularly the lands and lordship of Dunglass; in
consequence of which marriage he added the arms of Pepdie to his own, which
have been marshalled with the arms of Home ever since, viz. azure, three
pepingoes vert.

By the said Nicholas he left issue three sons, and two daughters.

1. Sir Alexander Home.

2. David, who obtained the lands of Wedderburn from the earl of Douglas,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
and was progenitor of the Homes of Wedderburn.

3. Patrick Home of Rathburn, Chartulary of Coldinghame p. 159.
whose heirs are frequently mentioned in the writs of the family; particularly
anno 1452, as will be shown hereafter.

1st daughter, MacKenzie's M. S. in the lawiers library Edinburgh.
--, married to Thomas Ker of Kershaugh, ancestor of the marquis of Lothian.

2. --, married to sir John Oliphant of Aberdalgie.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. Sir ALEXANDER HOME, designed of that ilk, and of Dunglass, a warlike
man, and a true patriot, who always fought gallantly against the enemies of his
country.

He was taken prisoner at the battle of Homildon, Fordun, vol. II. p. 435.
on 5th May 1402, and was confined in England for some time thereafter.

Upon his return home, Chart. penes comitem de Home.
he founded the colegiate church of Dunglass, anno 1403, and largely endowed it.

He afterward accompanied the earl of Douglas to France, Home's hist. of
Douglas, Black book of Scoon, etc.
and there lost his life, with that brave earl, at the battle of Vernouil, anno
1424.

By Jean his wife, daughter of sir William Hay of Locharret, ancestor of the
marquis of Tweeddale, he left issue three sons.

1. Sir Alexander.

2. Thomas, ancestor of the Homes of Tynninghame, Nisbet, vol. I. p. 280.
of whom the Homes of Ninewells, etc. are descended.

3. George, Charta penes comitem de Home.
who got a grant of the bailiary of the priory of Coldinghame, anno 1422, and
was progenitor of the Homes of Spott.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. Sir ALEXANDER HOME, Chartulary of Coldinghame penes MacFarlane, p. 150.
who got a charter from king James II. officii balivatus dominii terrarum
baroniae de Coldinghame, Alexandro Home de eodem, militi, anno 1442.

He got also a charter from the same prince, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Alexandro Home de eodem militi, filio domini Alexandri militis, etc. terrarum
de Hogiston, cum pertinent. jacen. in vicecomitatu Edinburgi, dated 24th July
1444.

He, together with Alexander his son and heir, Chartulary of Coldinghame p. 145.
entered into an agreement with the monks of Coldinghame, about the marches of
Old-Cambus, etc. anno 1444.

He was one of the guarantees of a treaty with the English, Rymer, tom. XI. p.
254.
and one of the wardens of the marches, anno 1449.

He got from king James II. a charter of the lands of Castletown, Langshaws,
Gallobraes, Whitelaws, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Roberton, Crenock, Blare de Kirkwood, and Makbiehill, in vicecom. de Air, etc.
dated 20th July 1450.

He got also charters of a great many other lands, Ibidem.
which were all annexed to the barony of Home.

He made a donation to the collegiate church of Dunglass, of four husband-lands
in Chirnside, pro salute animae suae, Ibidem.
et Alexandri patris sui, etc. testibus Alexandro Home filio suo primogenito,
Thoma Home et Georgio Home fratribus suis, etc. dated 5th August 1450.

He is particularly mentioned in a passport from the king of England to the
earl of Douglas, Rymer, tom. XI. p. 277.
anno 1450.

He married Mariota, Chart. penes ducem de Roxburgh, ad ann. 1443.
daughter of sir Robert Lauder of Bass, by whom he had five sons.

1. Sir Alexander.

2. George.

3. John.

4. Patrick.

5. Nicholaus.

All these sons are mentioned in the following entail.

He died before 1456, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. Sir ALEXANDER HOME, Chart. in pub. archiv.
first designed of that ilk, and Dunglass, afterward lord Home. He was served
heir to his father, anno 1456.

In his father's lifetime, Ibidem.
he got a charter under the great seal, Alexandro Home filio primogenito
Alexandri Home de eodem, militis, of the lands of Dunglass, Home, Fusterpath,
Killoch, and many others, lying in the earldom of March, and shire of Berwick,
erecting them all into one free barony, to be called the barony of Home, dated
22d August 1450.

All which lands were entailed, Ibidem.
"to and in favors of Alexander Home, son and apparent heir to sir Alexander
Home of that ilk, knight, and his heirs-male; which failing, to George, then to
John, then to Patrick, then to Nicholaus, his brothers-german; which failing,
to Thomas, then to George Home, brothers of the said sir Alexander; which
failing, to David Home of Wedderburn, knight; which failing, to the sons and
heirs-male of the deceast Patrick Home of Rathburn, before noticed, etc." This
entail proceeds upon the resignation dicti Alexandri Home de eodem, militis,
ultimo Februarii, anno 1452.

There are also a great many other lands contained in the above entail, and
annexed to the barony of Home, Ibidem.
all to be found in our public records, but too numerous to be inserted here,
which sufficiently show what vast possessions in lands the family of Home had
at that time.

This sir Alexander was appointed one of the ambassadors extraordinary to treat
with the English, Rymer, tom. XI. p. 434.
anno 1459.

He got the hereditary office of the bailiary (...), to him and his heirs, from
the (...) and chapter of that convent, (...)
2d August 1465.

In the parliament held by king James III. Creations of the nobility in the
advocate's library, Edinburgh.
anno 1465, we find Alexander dominus de Home sitting as a lord baron.

He was actually created a lord of parliament by the title of lord Home,
Records of parliament,
2d August 1473.

He was afterward employed in several negotiations with the English, Rymer,
tom. XII. p. 41, 246, and 267.
betwixt the years 1476 and 1485.

He married, 1st, Mariota, daughter and sole heiress of -- Landals of that ilk,
Chart. in pub. arch.
in vicecom. de Berwick, by whom he had issue three sons, and one daughter.

1. Alexander, master of Home.

2. George, ancestor of the Homes of Ayton.

3. Patrick, progenitor of the Homes of Fastcastle.

His daughter, Discharge of her portion, penes com. de Home. ad ann, 1460.
Helen, married to Adam, son and heir of sir Patrick Hepburn lord of Hailes.

He married, 2dly, Elizabeth, daughter of Alexander lord Montgomery, by whom he
had two sons.

1. Thomas of Langshaw, etc. in vicecom. de Air.

2. Nicholaus de Home.

These are documented by a charter, Alexandro Home de eodem, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
militi, etElizabethae Montgomery, sponsae suae, durante vita eorum, deinde
Thomae Home eorum filio, deinde Nicholao Home sratri germano dicti Thomae, etc.
de terris de Hattonbill, etc. dated 14th July 1467. This charter proceeds upon
the resignation of George Ker of Samuelton, and Elizabeth Carmichael his
spouse, whose daughter and heiress was married to the second lord Home, great
chamberlain of Scotland, as will be shown hereafter.

Alexander, first lord Home, died betwixt 1489 and 1492.

XI. ALEXANDER master of Home, eldest son and apparent heir of Alexander first
lord Home, is frequently designed Alexander Home of that ilk in the public
records, after his father was created lord Home.

He got the office of the stewarty of Dunbar, Rymer, tom. XII. p. 340.
and was appointed one of the ambassadors extraordinary to the court of
England, anno 1488, and died the end of that year, his father being still alive.

By Elizabeth Hephurn his wife, daughter of Adam second lord Hailes, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
and sister of Patrick first earl of Bothwell, he left issue, two sons, and
four daughters.

1. Alexander, lord Home, who succeeded his grandfather.

2. John Home, first of Whiterigs, then of Ersilton, ancestor of the Homes of
Coldingknows, and the present earl of Home, of whom afterward.

1st daughter, Elizabeth, married to James earl of Arran.

2. Helen, married to Alexander lord Erskine.

3. --, married to Patrick third earl of Bothwell.

4. Margaret, married to John earl of Crawfurd.

XII. ALEXANDER, second lord Home, eldest son of the master, was served heir to
his grandfather, anno 1492.

He was a man of great parts, singular worth and merit, and highly esteemed at
court, even when a young man.

He was appointed one of the privy council to king James IV. Chart. in archiv.
Jacobi IV. and lives of the officers of state, p, 323.
and was constituted lord high chamberlain of Scotland for life, by a
commission, dated 7th October 1488, his grandfather being then alive.

He was also made warden of the east marches, by a gift under the great seal,
Ibidem, and in pub. arch.
dated 26th August 1489; and at the same time was appointed captain of the
castle of Stirling, governor to the young king, and had the tuition of his
brother the earl of Mar committed to him for nine years.

He got a charter from king James IV. containing an entail, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
Alexandro Home magno camerario Scotiae, nepoti et haeredi apparenti Alexandri
domini Home, et haeredibus suis masculis; post ejus decessum, Alexandro Home
suo filio et haeredi apparenti; deinde, 2do, Georgio; 3tio, Johanni, etc. etc.
quibus deficientibus, haeredibus masculis dicti Alexandri ipsorum patris;
quibus deficientibus, Johanni Home de Ersilton sratri germano dicti Alexandri
senioris; then to the heirs-male whatsomever, of the lands of Chirnside, etc.
etc. gaudend. et possidend. per haeredes qui legitime successerint ratione
praesatae talliae ad finalem completionem totius mundi, dated 4th January 1489.

This worthy patriot continued in favor till the day of his death, and
acquitted himself in every station of life with fidelity, honor, and
reputation.

He went a pilgrimage in 1493, Rymer, tom. XII. p. 518.
for which he got a safe conduct to pass through England from king Henry VII.
etc. etc.

He was employed in several negotiations to the court of England afterward,
Ibid. tom. XIII. p. 45. 64, and 92.
inter 1495 et 1504.

Here we beg leave to roctify a mistake of former authors, who have affirmed,
that this great man suffered death anno 1516; whereas we have many
incontestible documents in our our public records, which prove him dead long
before that time: that his son was also magnus camerarius Scotiae, etc. all
which is sufficiently proven hereafter.

He married Nicholas, daughter and heiress of George Ker of Samuelton, Ibidem.
by whom he had seven sons, who are all mentioned in the following entail.

1. Alexander, lord Home.

2. George, also lord Home.

3. John Home, who died without issue.

4. Patrick, died also without issue.

5. William, who was execute with his brother, without issue.

6. Andrew, who died without issue.

7. David, prior of Coldinghame.

Alexander second lord Home, great chamberlain of Scotland, died before 26th
January 1506, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. ALEXANDER, third lord Home, who got a charter from king James IV.
Alexandro domino Home, Ibidem.
(not then chamberlain,) who entails his lands of East-Gordon, together with
the patronage of the chapel of St. Mary of Huntlywood, upon the resignation of
Alexander earl of Huntly, dated 26th January 1506, first to himself and his
heirs-male, then to his brother George, thirdly, to John, fourthly, to Patrick,
fifthly, to William, sixthly, to Andrew, and, seventhly, to his brother David,
and their heirs-male; which failing, to Mungo Home of Ersilton; then to John,
Mungo's brother; then to sir John Home of Ayton; then to his own heirs-male
whatsoever, etc. dated 28th January 1506; Retour penes comitem de Home.
and he was retoured heir to his father on 21st October that same year.

This lord Home, being a man of parts, was also in great favor with king James
IV. who, in consideration of his father's great merit and faithful services,
appointed him lord high chamberlain of Scotland in the end of 1507. Ibidem.
This is confirmed by a charter under the great seal, Alexandro domino Home,
magno camerario Scotiae, etc. dated anno 1508.

He also got charters of the lordship of Dunglass, Ibidem.
the barony of Greenlaw, and many other lands, betwixt 1508 and 1516; all which
are fully narrated in the records.

He continued in great favor, and had the chief management of all public
affairs during king James IV.'s life, and some time after his death. He went
one of the ambassadors from the estates of Scotland to the court of France,
Rymer, tom. XIII. p. 509.
to endeavor to get the Scots included in their treaty with England, anno
1515; but after John duke of Albany was made governor to the young king, the
earl not meeting with that regard he thought his services merited, was then
suspected to have entered into a concert with the queen and the earl of Angus,
to seize upon the young king's person, and send him to his uncle king Henry;
and afterward, having been concerned in some plot against the regent and the
government, he, and his brother William, were apprehended, and sent prisoners
to the castle of Edinburgh. They were afterward indicted of high treason,
Lives of the offic. of state, page 324.
tried, condemned, and executed; lord Home on the 11th, and his brother on the
12th October 1516. His estate and honors were forfeited to the crown, where
they remained till his brother George was reponed to both, about five years
thereafter.

He married Agnes Stewart, which appears by a charter under the great seal,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
Alexandro domino Home, et Agnetae Stewart ejus sponsae, terrarum dominii de
Dunglass, etc.

By her he had only one daughter,

Janet, married to sir John Hamilton, natural brother to James duke of
Chattleherault, Ibid. ad ann. 1531.
who, with her, obtained the barony of Samuelton, which she possessed in right
of her grandmother dame Nicholas Ker, lady Home.

And, having no male-issue, the succession devolved upon

XIII. GEORGE, brother-german and heir-male of Alexander, Home and Drummond's
Histories.
third lord Home, who was reponed to his brother's estate and honors, anno
1521, and was fourth lord Home.

He obtained a renunciation from Janet Home, Charta penes comitem de Home.
his brother's only daughter, of all she could claim by virtue of any
succession to her father and grandfather, anno 1531.

He was a brave warior, a man of singula courage and conduct, Home's and
Drummond's histories.
performed many gallant actions against the enemies of his country, and
remarkably distinguished himself at the battle of Haldingrig against the
English, anno 1541.

He married Marian, daughter and co-heiress of Patrick lord Haliburton, by whom
he had two sons, and one daughter.

1. Alexander, lord Home.

2. Andrew Home, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who died without issue.

His daughter, Margaret, Ibid. ad ann. 1580.
married to sir Alexander Erskine of Gogar, ancestor of the earl of Kelly.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIV. ALEXANDER, fifth lord Home, who was a man of great worth and merit,
Ibidem.
and was appointed warden of the marches, anno 1565.

He was at first engaged in the king's party; but, after the battle of
Langside, he joined the queen, and never after deserted her interest. Sir James
Melvil says, "he was a true Scotsman, that he was unwinnable to England,
Melvil's memoirs.
or to do any thing prejudicial to his country, etc."

In the history of the campaigns 1548 and 1549, written by a French gentleman,
who was an eye witness, there are mentioned many remarkable seats of arms
performed by this noble earl.

He sums up his character thus: "He was a Scotsman of quality, M. Beague's
history.
that upon all occasions had given the most signal proofs of his loyalty, and
evinced himself inferior to none in the world, either in courage or conduct,
etc."

He married, 1st, Margaret, daughter of sir Walter Ker of Cessford, ancestor of
the duke of Roxburgh, by whom he had one daughter,

Margaret, married to George fifth earl Marshal.

He married, 2dly, Agnes, daughter of Patrick lord Gray, widow of sir Robert
Logan of Restalrig, by whom he had a son,

Alexander, afterward earl of Home, -- and a daughter,

Isabel, married to sir James Home of Eccles.

And dying in 1576, was succeeded by his son,

XV. ALEXANDER, sixth lord Home, who being a man of parts, was in great favor,
and highly esteemed by king James VI. whom he accompanied to England; was
appointed one of his privy council; Rymer, tom. XVI. p. 552.
and, for his good and faithful services, was there naturalized, anno 1603.

He was very instrumental in suppressing the rebellion of Francis earl of
Bothwell; for which signal service he had a grant of the dissolved priory of
Coldinghame, to him and his heirs; Scots compend, p. 218, Balfour's annals, etc.
and was further dignified with the title of earl of Home, lord Dunglass, etc.
haeredilus masculis quibuscunque, 4th March 1604.

He married, 1st, Margaret, sister of William earl of Morton, by whom he had no
issue.

He married, 2dly, Mary, daughter of Edward Dudley, Ibidem.
viscount Lyle in England, by whom he had a son,

James, -- and two daughters.

1. Lady Margaret, married to James earl of Murray.

2. Lady Anne, Chart. in pub. archiv.
married to John duke of Lauderdale.

He died in 1619, and was succeeded by his only son,

XVI. JAMES, second earl of Home, who married, 1st, Catharine, daughter of
Henry viscount Falkland, lord lieutenant of Ireland; 2dly, lady Grace, daughter
of Francis earl of Westmorland, but dying without issue, anno 1634, Crawfurd's
peerage and Scots compend.
in him ended the male line of the first son of Alexander master of Home,
eldest son and apparent heir of Alexander first lord Home, whereby the estate
and honors, by virtue of the patent and entail to heirs male, devolved upon
sir James Home of Coldingknows, lineally descended of John Home of Whiterigs,
before mentioned, to whom we now return.

XII. JOHN HOME of Whiterigs, second son of Alexander master of Home, eldest
son and apparent heir of Alexander first lord Home, got a charter from king
James IV. Chart. in pub. archiv.
terrarum et villae de Ersilton, anno 1489; and he and his posterity were
afterward promiscuously designed by the titles of Ersilton and Coldingknows.

He was appointed one of the ambassadors extraordinary to the court of England,
Rymer, tom. XII. p. 465.
anno 1491.

He left issue two sons.

1. Mungo.

2. John, who got a charter of the lands of Swaynlaws, in vicecomitatu de
Berwick, Chart. in pub. archiv.
wherein he is designed filius quondam Johannis Home de Ersilton, dated anno
1493. These lands afterward returned to the family, and were disponed by John
Home of Coldingknows, Ibidem.
to James Ker of Spynie, by a charter under the great seal, dated anno 1598.

John Home of Ersilton, or Coldingknows, was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. KENTIGERNUS or MUNGO HOME of Coldingknows, who got a charter from king
James IV. Ibidem.
terrarum et villae de Ersilton, etc. dated 4th March 1505.

He married Elizabeth Stewart, daughter of James earl of Buchan, by whom he had
two sons and one daughter.

1. Sir John.

2. Alexander, who got a charter from king James V. Ibidem.
terrarum de Mudwells, etc. wherein he is designed frater Johannis Home de
Coldingknows, etc. dated anno 1534.

His daughter, Helen, was married to Alexander Hamilton of Innerwick.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIV. Sir JOHN HOME of Coldingknows, who married Margaret, daughter of sir
Andrew Ker of Cessford, which is instructed by a charter from king James V.
terrarum de Swaynlaws, Margaretae Ker, dominae de Coldingknows, etc. Ibidem.
dated 2d November 1524. By her he had three sons.

1. Sir James.

2. Alexander, who got a charter from queen Mary, terrarum de Gartsherre,
wherein he is designed filius Johannis Home de Coldingknows. Ibidem.


3. William, who acquired from Andrew Currie, vicar of the kirk of Bassendean,
terras ecclesiasticas, mansionem et glebam vicariae de Bassendean; upon which
he got a charter under the great seal, wherein he is designed lawful son of sir
John, and brother-german of sir James Home of Coldingknows, Ibidem.
etc. dated 11th February 1573, of whom the present Home of Bassendean is
lineally descended.

Sir John was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. Sir JAMES HOME of Coldingknows, who, Spotiswood's church hist. p. 363.
being a man of good parts, was in great favor with king James VI.

He was one of the Scotch commissioners sent to treat with the English, Rymer
tom. XV. p. 803.
anno 1578.

He died before February 1590, having married Catharine Home, by whom he had a
son,

XVI. JOHN HOME of Coldingknows, who succeeded him, and got a charter from king
James VI. of the lands and town of Ersilton, erecting it in liberum burgum,
etc. wherein he is designed filius primogenitus quondam domini Jacobi Home de
Coldingknows, Chart. in pub. archiv.
, militis, dated 1st February 1590, and confirmed 31st August 1592.

In which charter a reasonable third part of these lands is reserved to dame
Catharine Home, spouse to the above sir James, as her tierce, etc.

He married, 1st, Mary Sinclair, daughter of John lord Berrendale, eldest son
of George earl of Caithness, by lady Jean Hepburn, daughter of Patrick earl of
Bothwell, as appears by a charter granted to John Home of Coldingknows, and the
said Mary Sinclair his spouse, terrarum domimcalium de Whiterigs, etc. Ibidem.
reserving the liserent to Margaret Ker, grandmother to this John, dated anno
1601, who, by this time, must have been of a very great age.

He married, 2dly, lady Beatrix Ruthven, Crawfurd's peerage, p. 166.
fifth daughter to William earl of Gowrie, by whom he had a son and successor,

XVII. Sir JAMES HOME of Coldingknows, who married lady Anne Home, eldest
daughter and co-heiress of George earl of Dunbar, Ibidem.
by whom he had a son,

XVIII. Sir JAMES HOME of Coldingknows, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who was served heir to his mother, 8th July 1635.

He succeeded also to the earldom of Home, as heir-male to James the second
earl, (before observed) and obtained from king Charles I. a ratification of all
the honors, privileges, and precedence, formerly enjoyed by Alexander or
James, earls of Home, his predecessors, by his diploma to him et haeredibus
masculis --, Ibidem.
dated 22d May 1636, and was third earl of Home.

He got a charter from king Charles I. Jacobo comiti de Home, Ibidem.
domino Dunglass, terrarum baroniae de Dunse, etc. etc. dated ultimo Julii 1637.

Also a charter Jacobo comiti de Home, domino Dunglass, Ibidem
etc. terrarum baroniae de Home, etc. etc. dated 24th July 1638.

He appears to have been a great loyalist. He opposed the covenant, Rescinded
acts of parlt.
and was colonel of the Berwick-shire foot to duke Hamilton's engagement, anno
1648.

He married lady Jane Douglas, daughter of William earl Morton, by whom he had
three sons.

1. Alexander.

2. James.

3. Charles.

All successively earls of Home.

He died anno 1666, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIX. ALEXANDER, fourth earl of Home, who married lady Anne Sackville, daughter
of Richard earl of Dorset in England, Peerage of England.
but died without issue, anno 1674, and was succeeded by his brother,

XIX. JAMES, fifth earl of Home, who married lady Anne Ramsay, Crawfurd's
peerage.
daughter of George earl of Dalhousie, and, dying also without issue, anno
1688, was succeeded by his brother,

XIX. CHARLES, sixth earl of Home, who was a man of good parts, great honor,
and a true patriot. He opposed the union with all his interest; and as he made
a great figure in that transaction, we shall give you his character from a
cotemporary author, who writes a full account of that affair: "He was master of
a sound judgment, and clear conception, esteemed by people of all parties, on
account of his eminently unbyassable honesty and integrity, Carnwath's memoirs,
p. 214 and 215.
both in private and public matters: He gave evident proofs that no temptation
could seduce him in the least from prosecuting and adhering, with the utmost
vigor, to what he owned to be his principle and opinion; and was so zealous
for the interest of his country, that would he have deserted her, he might more
than once have made his own terms with the court; and was so faithful to the
royal family, that he suffered much upon that account, and was more relied upon
than any other, etc. etc."

He married Anne, daughter of sir William Purvis of that ilk, baronet, by whom
he had three sons and three daughters.

1. Alexander.

2. James Home of Ayton.

3. George.

1st daughter, lady Jane, married to Patrick lord Polwarth.

2. Lady Marjory.

3. Lady Margaret, married to Alexander Bothwell, designed master of
Holyroodhouse.

And dying on 20th August 1706, was succeeded by his eldest son,

XX. ALEXANDER, seventh earl of Home, who was elected one of the sixteen peers
for Scotland, to the British parliament 1710, and was made general of the mint,
anno 1711.

He married lady Anne Ker, daughter of William marquis of Lothian, by whom he
had six sons and two daughters.

1. William, his heir.

2. Alexander, now earl of Home.

3. Charles.

4. James.

5. Alexander.

6. George.

The last four sons died in infancy.

His 1st daughter, lady Anne, died also in infancy.

2. Lady Jane Home.

The earl died anno 1720, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XXI. WILLIAM, eighth earl of Home, who was lieutenant general of his majesty's
forces, colonel of a regiment of foot, and governor of Gibraltar.

He was elected one of the sixteen Scotch peers to the ninth British
parliament, anno 1741, and was re-elected to every parliament since.

He married --, but dying without issue, anno 1761, was succeeded by his
brother,

XXI. ALEXANDER, ninth earl of Home, who married, 1st, Primrose, daughter of
Charles ninth lord Elphingston, by whom he had a son,

William, lord Dunglass, -- and a daughter,

Lady Elizabeth.

He married, 2dly, Marion, daughter of his uncle James Home of Aiton, Esquire;.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st and 4th, vert, a lion rampant argent, armed and langued gules,
for Home; 2d and 3d, argent, three pegingoes vert, beaked and membered gules,
for Pepdies of Dunglass; and over all, by way of surtout, a scutcheon or,
charged with an orle azure, for the name of Landel.

CREST; on a cap of dignity a lion's head erased gules.

SUPPORTERS; two lions as those in the arms.

MOTTO; True to the end.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Home-castle, and Hirsel, in the county of Berwick.

HOPE Earl of HOPETON.
THE surname of Hope is of great antiquity in Scotland.

John de Hope flourished in the reign of king Alexander III. and was afterward
forced to swear fealty to king Edward I. of England, Prynne's collections, vol.
III. p. 659.
when he overrun Scotland, anno 1296.

Another John de Hope is mentioned in Rymer's soedera Angliae, and got a
protection from king Henry IV. of England, Rymer, tom. VIII. p. 399.
anno 1405.

Thomas de Hope got a charter from king James III. of some lands lying near
Leith, Chart. in pub. archiv.
in January 1488.

There are many others of the surname of Hope to be sound in the public
records, but as we cannot connect them with this noble family, we proceed to
deduce their descent by good authority from,

1. JOHN de HOPE, who is said to have come from France in the retinue of
princess Magdalene, Nishet's append. p. 97
queen to king James V.

He settled in Scotland, having married Betty Cummin, (but of what family we
know not) by whom he had a son, Ibidem.


II. EDWARD HOPE, who was one of the most considerable inhabitants of the city
of Edinburgh, in the reign of queen Mary, and being a great promoter of the
reformation, Calderwood's church hist. M. S.
was chosen one of the commissioners for that metropolis to the general
assembly, anno 1560.

He was father of,

III. HENRY HOPE, who, having applied himself to the business of commerce, did
great service to his country, and acquired a considerable estate to himself in
the mercantile way.

He went often to Holland, where he carried on a very advantageous trade,
Crawfurd's peerage, Scots compend. and Nisbet's append.
and then married Jacque de Tott, a French lady, whom he brought with him to
Scotland, and by her had a son,

IV. Sir THOMAS HOPE, designed of Craigiehall, a man of great parts and
learning, who, being bred to the law, became so eminent in that profession,
that even when a young man, he was pitched upon to plead the cause of the
presbyterian ministers, Calderwood's church hist.
who were indicted for denying the king's authority in matters ecclesiastical,
anno 1606.

He acquitted himself so much to the satisfaction of the clergy, that he was
ever after advised in all their councils, Bishop of Dunkeld's memoirs.
and was the oracle of their party.

He got charters, under the great seal, magistro Thomae Hope advocato, Chart.
in pub. archiv.
et Johanni Hope, ejus filio, terrarum dominicalium de Edmonstoun, baroniae de
Prestongrange, etc. etc. inter 1608 et 1615.

Also charters of the lands of Kinninmonth, Ladeddys easter and wester, the
lands of Arnydie, the lands of Kinkell, with the office of bailliary of the
provostry of Kirkhaugh, the church lands of Ceres, with the whole lands and
baronies of Craigiehall, Grantham, and many others, Ibidem.
too numerous to be here inserted, inter 1616 et 1624.

In the end of the reign of king James VI. he was appointed joint king's
advocate with sir William Oliphant, who dying soon thereafter, he was made sole
advocate by king Charles I. anno 1627, Minutes of parliament.
and created knight and baronet by the same Prince.

He got a new charter of confirmation from king Charles I. domino Thomae Hope,
of all the above named lands and baronies; also charters of many others,
together with all mines, minerals, Chart. in pub. archiv.
coals, etc. upon his whole estates, inter 1627 et 1642.

Upon the breaking out of the civil war, he attached himself entirely to the
parliament's side, and was by them appointed a privy councillor, and advocate
for life, Rescinded acts of parlt.
anno 1641, also planter of kirks, etc.

But it seems the king did not suspect him of disloyalty, for he appointed him
high commissioner to the general assembly, Bp. Guthrie's memoirs.
anno 1643, then an office of high trust and estimation; and to which dignity
no commoner has attained since.

In 1635, he was made one of the commissioners of exchequer. Reseinded acts of
parlt.
He died in the end of the year 1646, and left considerable estates to all his
sons, three of whom being lords of the session, while their father sir Thomas
was king's advocate, it was thought indecent that he should plead uncovered
before them; which was the origin of the privilege the king's advocates have
ever since enjoyed, of pleading with their hats on if they please.

Sir Thomas was a man of very great abilities, and his works extant are still
highly esteemed, and sufficiently show his extensive knowledge of our laws.

By Elizabeth, his wife, daughter of John Bennet of Wallingford, Esquire; he lest
issue four sons and two daughters.

1. Sir John Hope of Craigiehall, who succeeded him, and carried on the line of
that family, which is now represented by sir John Bruce Hope of Kinross,
baronet, and of which Thomas Hope of Rankillor, Esquire etc. are descended.

2. Sir Thomas Hope of Kerse, baronet, ancestor of the Hopes of Kerse, etc.

3. Sir Alexander Hope of Grantham, who was cup bearer to king Charles I.

4. Sir James Hope of Hopeton, ancestor of this noble family; to whom, and his
issue, we shall consine these memoirs, and give an account of the descendents
of the other brothers in the second volume of this work.

1st daughter, Mary, married to sir Charles Erskine of Alva.

2. Anne, married to David lord Cardross, ancestor of the earl of Buchan.

V. Sir JAMES HOPE of Hopeton, fourth son of sir Thomas Hope of Craigiehall,
was a man of good parts, and being bred to the law, was likeways a great
proficient in that study. He was also a good alchymist, and the first who
brought the art of mining to any degree of perfection in Scotland.

He was made governor of the mint, Haddington's collections.
anno 1641, by king Charles I.

He was afterward, by the parliament, appointed one of the general
commissaries of the committee for public accounts, one of the revisers of the
laws, one of the senators of the college of justice, with power to hold courts
in the mint-house, Rescinded acts of parlt.
and one of the last committee of estates, anno 1649.

He was also, by Oliver Cromwell, Ibid. and Oliver's printed acts.
constituted one of the commissioners for the sale of the forfeited estates in
Scotland, anno 1654.

He married, 1st, Anne, daughter of John Foulis of Leadhills, Esquire; in
Lanarkshire, by whom he had many children, but none survived him except

John, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Rachael, married to David Bethune of Balsour, Esquire; an ancient family in the
county of Fife.

He married, 2dly, lady Mary Keith, eldest daughter of William, seventh earl
Marishall, by whom he had another son,

Sir William Hope of Balcomie, baronet, deputy governor of the castle of
Edinburgh.

He died 1661, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. JOHN HOPE of Hopeton, a man of great learning, worth and merit, and highly
esteemed by king Charles II. and his brother the duke of York, afterward king
James VII.

He got charters under the great seal, Johanni Home de Hopeton, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
terrarum barroniae de Hopeton, cum mineralibus, etc. etc. inter 1661 et 1680.

He married lady Margaret Hamilton, daughter of John earl of Haddington, by
whom he had a son,

Charles, afterward earl of Hopeton, -- and a daughter,

Heleanor, married to Thomas earl of Haddington.

He was much at the court of king Charles II. and attended the duke of York in
his voyage to Scotland, but had the misfortune to be cast away, with several of
the Scotch nobility, his royal highness narrowly escaping in the boat, anno
1682.

He was succeeded by his son,

VII. CHARLES HOPE of Hopeton, who, as soon as he became of age, was elected
member of parliament for Linhthgowshire, he being heretable sheriff of that
county; and was, by queen Anne, appointed one of the privy council to her
majesty, Diploma in cancellaria, haered. masc. excorpore suo, quibus
deficientibus, haeredibus semellis.
and raised to the dignity of the peerage, by the titles of earl of Hopeton,
viscount Aithrie, and lord Hope, 15th April 1703, by patent, to the heirs-male
of his body; which failing, to the herisfemale, etc.

He was appointed lord lieutenant of the county of Linlithgow, anno 1715; and
anno 1723, his majesty's commissioner to the general assembly.

He was elected one of the sixteen Scotch peers for Scotland to the British
parliament anno 1722; was re-elected to every parliament thereafter as long as
he lived, and was made a knight of the most noble and ancient order of the
thistle, anno 1738.

He married lady Henriet Johnston, daughter of William marquis of Annandale, by
whom he left two sons and six daughters.

1. John, now earl of Hopeton.

2. Charles, who was elected knight of the shire of Linlithgow, anno 1743, and
has been re-elected for that county to every parliament since. He was
appointed commissary, or muster-master-general of Scotland anno 1744, and is
now governor of Blackness castle. He married, 1st, the daughter and heiress of
sir William Weir of Blackwood, baronet, by whom he has issue two sons and one
daughter. He married, 2dly, lady Anne Vane, daughter of Henry earl of
Darlington, by whom he has issue two sons.

The earl's 1st daughter, lady Sophia, was second wife to James earl of
Finlater and Seafield.

2. Lady Henriet, married to Francis lord Napier.

3. Lady Margaret, married to John Dundas of Duddingston, Esquire;.

4. Lady Christian, married to Thomas Graham of Balgowan, Esquire;.

5. Lady Helen, married to James Watson of Saughton, Esquire;.

6. Lady Charlotte, married to Thomas lord Erskine, son and heir of John earl
of Mar.

He died anno 1741, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. JOHN, second earl of Hopeton.

He was appointed his majesty's high commissioner to the general assembly of
the church of Scotland, anno 1754.

He married lady Anne Ogilvie, daughter of James earl of Finlater, by his first
wife lady Elizabeth Hay, daughter of Thomas earl, of Kinnoul, his issue by whom
was four sons and three daughters.

1. Charles, lord Hope.

2. Mr. James.

3. Mr. John, who died young.

4. Mr. Henry.

1st daughter, lady Betty, married to Henry marquis of Drumlanrig, son and heir
apparent of Charles duke of Queensberry, but died without issue.

2. Lady Henriet.

3. Lady Sophia.

ARMS.
Azure, on a cheveron, betwixt three besants or, charged with a bay leaf proper.

CREST; a broken globe, surmounted of a rainbow, all proper.

SUPPORTERS; two women, their hair hanging down, with loose garments, holding
anchors in their hands.

MOTTO; At spes non sracta.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Hopeton house, a fine seat in West Lothian, Ormiston-hall in East Lothian,
etc. etc. etc.

CARMICHAEL Earl of HYNDFORD.
THIS ancient surname is local, and was assumed by the proprietors of the lands
and barony of Carmichael, in the shire of Lanark, which has been long in the
possession, and still is one of the chief seats of this noble family.

The first of them we find upon record is,

I. WILLIAM de CARMYCHEL, who lived in the reign of king David Bruce, and is
mentioned in a charter of the lands of Ponfeigh, Charta penes comitem de
Hyndford.
about the middle of the 14th century, 1350.

He was father of,

II. JOHN de CARMYCHEL, who flourished in the reigns of king Robert II. and
III. and who got a charter of the lands of Carmichael, Ibid. et in archiv fam.
de Douglas.
anno 1370, from William earl of Douglas and Mar, then superior thereof.

He was the first baron of Carmichael, and left issue a son,

III. WILLIAM, who succeeded him, and was second baron of Carmichael.

In a charter of a donation to the priory of St. Andrews, Chartulary of St
Andrews, penes com. de Panmure.
he is designed Willielmus Carmichael dominus ejusd. anno 1410.

He was succeeded by his son,

IV. Sir JOHN, third baron of Carmichael, a man of undaunted courage and
resolution. He accompanied Archibald earl of Douglas, and John earl of Buchan,
to France, anno 1419, who went with 7000 auxiliaries to the assistance of king
Charles VI. against the English, and remarkably distinguished himself at the
battle of Beauge, where he so suriously attacked the duke of Clarence, that he
broke his spear in the encounter. The duke there lost his life, and the Scots
obtained an important victory over the English. Fordun, vol. II. p. 461.
Sir John, in memory of the above bold action, got added to his paternal arms,
a dexter hand and arm, armed, holding a broken spear, which is now the crest of
the family.

In an indenture or submission entered into by sir Herbert Maxwell, lord of
Carlaverock, and sir John Sinclair, lord of Herdmanston, James Douglas, lord
Balvenie, and this sir John de Carmichael, Mill's genealog. collect. penes
MacFarlane.
were arbiters upon the part of sir Herbert, anno 1427.

He married lady Mary Douglas, a daughter of George earl of Angus, by whom he
had three sons.

1. William, his heir.

2. Robert, ancestor of the Carmichaels of Balmedie, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Meadowflat, etc, whose descent is instructed by charters under the great seal
in our public records.

3. John de Carmichael, who was provost of St. Andrews, Chartulary of St.
Andrews.
and was one upon a perambulation of some lands and marches in that
neighborhood, anno 1434.

Sir John died anno 1436, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. WILLIAM, fourth baron of Carmichaael, who was one of the inquest upon the
service of sir David Hay lord of Yester, Charta penes marchion. de Tweeddale.
anno 1437.

He left issue two sons.

1. Sir John, his heir.

2. George, a man of great parts and learning: he was bred to the church, and a
doctor of divinity. Rymer, tom. XII. p. 251.
In 1458, he was appointed one of the Scotch commissioners to treat with the
English about a peace; Keith's bishops, p. 150.
and in 1482, he was promoted to the episcopal see of Glasgow, and died anno
1484.

VI. Sir JOHN, fifth baron of Carmichael, a man of great abilities, honor and
probity, and in high favor with king James III. Chart. in pub. arch. et chart.
penes com. de Hyndford.
from whom (for his good and faithful services) he obtained a grant of
Nethertown of Carmichael, etc. upon which he got a charter under the great
seal, anno 1485.

He had issue two sons and one daughter.

1. William, his heir.

2. Thomas Carmichael, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who was vicar of Stirling, inter 1492 et 1500.

His daughter, Margaret, is mentioned in two charters under the great seal,
Ibidem.
between the years 1488 and 1502.

He died anno 1506, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. WILLIAM, sixth baron of Carmichel, who obtained from king James IV. a
charter under the great seal, of several lands, anno 1507; Ibid. et chart.
penes commit. de Hyndford.
also charters of the lands of Cruikston, etc. in the years 1508 and 1510.

He had issue three sons.

1. Bartholomew, who died without issue.

2. William, his heir.

3. Walter, designed of Hyndford and Park, of whom the present earl of Hyndford
is lineally descended, as will be shown hereafter.

He died anno 1530, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. WILLIAM, seventh baron, who got a charter from king James V. Chart. in
pub. archiv.
Willielmo Carmichael, domino de eodem, of the twenty pound land of Carmichael,
Overtown, and Nethertown thereof; also of the lands of Lochlyack, superiority
of the lands of Crossrig, Bowhouse, etc. with the right of patronage of the
church of Carmichael, etc. dated at Perth 8th September 1532.

He left issue a son,

IX. JOHN, eighth baron of Carmichael, who succeeded him, Chart. penes comitem
de Hyndford.
and got a charter from king James V. of the lands and barony of Carmichael,
dated 15th August 1540.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of Hugh lord Somerville, by whom he had two
sons and one daughter.

1. Sir John, his heir.

2. Archibald Carmichael of Edram. Mill's collect. penes MacFarlane.


His daughter, Mary, married to John, son of sir Robert Hamilton of Preston.

He died 1570, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. Sir JOHN CARMICHAEL, dominus de eodem, a man of eminent parts, great
loyalty, and a faithful subject to queen Mary, who constituted him warden of
the middle marches when a young man; Rymer, and M. S. hist. of the family.
in which office he did great service to his country, in suppressing the
insurrections on the borders; and being likeways in savor with king James VI.
was appointed one of the ambassadors to the court of Denmark, to negotiate the
match between the king and princess Anne, Johnston's history Brit.
a daughter of that crown, anno 1588, which was soon thereafter happily
accomplished; and the same year he was appointed captain of his majesty's
guards.

In 1590, he was sent ambassador to England to negociate affairs of the highest
importance with queen Elizabeth; Ibidem and Rymer.
and in 1598, he was again constituted warden of the middle marches, and in
every station of life he acquitted himself with honor, fidelity, and
reputation; but was at last murdered in the execution of his office on the
borders, anno 1600.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir David Douglas of Pittendreich, sister of
David earl of Angus, Chart. in pub. archiv.
and James earl of Morton, regent of Scotland, by whom he had three sons and
four daughters.

1. John, who, in several charters of king James VI. is designed John
Carmichael junior de eodem, etc. Ibidem.
but he died before his father, without issue.

2. Sir Hugh de Carmichael, who became his father's heir.

3. William Carmichael, Ibidem.
who obtained from his father some lands in Kylesmuir.

1st daughter, Elizabeth, married to John Home, younger of Keltonhill, Esquire;.

2. Mary, Contract penes comitem de Hyndford,.
married to John lord Holyroodhouse, who got with her 12000 merks in portion.

3. Abigail, married to Hugh Weir of Clowburn, Esquire;.

4. Anne, married to doctor Whiteford bishop of Brechin.

He was succeeded by his son,

XI. Sir HUGH CARMICHAEL of that ilk, a man of great worth and merit, and in
high favor with king James VI. who constituted him one of the privy council,
Ibidem.
and master of the horse, in his father's lifetime, anno 1593.

The same year he was sent ambassador to the court of Denmark, Signed
instructions penes comitem de Hyndford, and M. S. hist. of the family.
and acquitted himself of his charge with great honor, and much to the king's
satisfaction.

He married Abigail, daughter of William Baillie of Lamington, by whom he had a
son and successor,

Sir John, -- and a daughter,

Jean, married to James Lockhart of Cleghorn, of whom there is issue.

XII. Sir JOHN CARMICHAEL of that ilk, got charters from king James VI. of a
great number of lands, viz. the lands of East-Fenton, Fenton-Tower, Vilever,
Sydsers, Long-Herdmanston, Curry, and the barony of Wistoun, which had been
long the property of the family, besides the original estate of Carmichael,
Carmacoupe, Chart. in pub. archiv.
etc. etc. and is always designed Johannes de Carmichael de eodem.

He married Elizabeth, daughter to sir Patrick Home of Polworth; but dying
without issue, his estate came to his cousin sir James Carmichael of Hyndford,
lineally descended of Walter of Hyndford and Park, beforementioned, to whom we
now return.

VIII. WALTER CARMICHAEL, was third son of William sixth baron of Carmichael,
and brother-german to William the seventh baron. Charta penes comitem de
Hyndford.
He is designed of Hyndford and Park in several writs of the family, and was
succeeded by his son,

IX. GAVIN CARMICHAEL, who got a feu-grant of the lands of Hyndford in the year
1547, Ibidem.
and is designed son and heir of Walter of Hyndford and Park.

He left two sons,

1. James, his heir.

2. Charles, who obtained right to the lands of Boat-houses, etc. etc. but died
without issue.

X. JAMES, eldest son and heir to Gavin, above mentioned, married Marian,
daughter of sir Hugh Campbell of Loudoun, by whom he left issue three sons.

1. Walter, his heir.

2. Thomas, who got a charter from king James VI. Chart. in pub. archiv.
of an annuity out of the lands of Little-Newton, etc.

3. John, designed of Howgate. He had a son, John, who, betaking himself to a
military life, went abroad into the Russian service, where, by his gallant
behavior, he was advanced to the rank of colonel, by John Basilowitz, the then
czar, and distinguished himself at the siege of Plescow, where he commanded
5000 men, Olvarius's hist.
and afterward was made governor of Plescow.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. WALTER CARMICHAEL of Hyndford, who, in the writs of the lands of Hyndford,
is designed grandson of Gavin, and great grandson of Walter of Park, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
anno 1567.

This Walter, by his singular prudence and economy, greatly improved his
estate, and obtained charters from king James VI. of the lands of Ponfeigh, and
others, wherein he is designed Walterus Carmichael de Hyndford, etc. Ibidem.
anno 1595.

He married Grizel, Writs of the family of Hyndford.
daughter of sir John Carmichael of Meadowslat, captain of Crawford, by whom he
had a son,

Sir James, his heir, -- and six daughters.

1. Marian, married, 1st, to James Stewart of Allantoun, Esquire; and, 2dly, to
Robert Denholm of Westshield, Esquire; and had issue.

2. Grizel, married to Stephen Lockhart of Wicketshaw.

3. Rachel, married to Archibald Hamilton of Halleraig.

4. Margaret, married to William Telser of Haireleugh.

5. Elspyth, married to sir John Chiefly of Kerswell.

6. Catharine, married to Mr. William Weir of Ponichill.

He died anno 1616, and was succeeded by his only son,

XII. Sir JAMES CARMICHAEL of Hyndford, afterward lord Carmichael, who
succeeded also to his cousin sir John Carmichael of that ilk, as before
observed.

He was a man of great accomplishments, both of mind and body, Crawfurd's
peerage, and memoirs of the family.
of a most amiable disposition, great humanity, charity and goodness, of which
he gave many remarkable instances.

When young he excelled all his cotemporaries at the manly exercises, such as
fencing, jumping, etc. He became a great favorite of king James VI. who,
first, made him one of his cup-bearers, then his chief carver, and afterward
chamberlain of the principality of Scotland, which office he enjoyed long, and
discharged his duty with great prudence and integrity. Ibidem,


He got charters, under the great seal, of the lands of Westraw, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
Pettincan, etc. in which he is designed architriclinus (archchamberlain)
principis, anno 1623.

And being also in great favor with king Charles I. Ibid. et chart. penes
commit. de Hyndford.
was by that prince continued in the same offices, and created a knight and
baronet 16th July, anno 1627.

He was also made sheriff-principal of the shire of Lanark, Ibidem.
by a commission under the great seal, dated 5th September 1632.

In 1634, he was made master of ceremonies by the king, and lord justice-clerk,
which last office he resigned, Ibidem, and rescinded acts of parlt.
anno 1636, and was made deputy treasurer by a commission dated 14th October
that year.

He was appointed one of the senators of the college of justice, 6th March
1639, Ibidem.
and afterward lord justice-clerk.

He got charters under the great seal, of the lands and barony of
Easter-Carmichael, the lands of Nemphlar, Holmhead, etc. in all which he is
designed dominus Jacobus Carmichael de eodem, miles baronettus; Chart. in pub.
archiv.
and the last of these charters is dated 21st October 1641.

In August that year, he was by parliament made a privy councillor for life,
one of the commissioners for plantation of kirks and valuation of teinds; but
having been concerned in duke Hamilton's engagement, was deprived of all these
offices by parliament; Rescinded acts of parlt.
yet was one of the last committee of estates, anno 1649.

He was a faithful and loyal subject to king Charles I. never deserting his
interest, but procured and advanced him several considerable sums of money
during the civil wars, when he was in the greatest distress; for all which
faithful services his majesty was pleased to raise him to the dignity of the
peerage, by the title of lord Carmichael, Diploma penes commit. de Hyndford.
to him and his heirs-male whatever, 27th December. 1647, which was again ratified
by king Charles II. by another patent, with the same precedence contained in
the former, dated at Perth, 3d January 1651. Ibidem.


He was also made one of the lords of his privy council, and lord
justice-clerk; but that last office he was deprived of by Oliver Cromwell, who,
for his steady adherence to his sovereign, Cromwell's act of indem.
imposed a fine upon him of two thousand pounds sterling, anno 1654.

After the fatal battle of Worcester, he lived a private and retired life till
the restoration; to the accomplishing whereof he contributed his utmost
endeavors.

He married Agnes, sister-german of John Wilkie of Fowlden, Memoirs of the
family.
Esquire; by whom he had three sons and four daughters.

1. William, master of Carmichael.

2. Sir David Carmichael of Mauldsly, deputy-treasurer to king Charles II. who
died without issue.

3. Sir James Carmichael of Bonnytown, also a great loyalist, who was a colonel
in the service of king Charles II. at the battle of Dunbar, anno 1650. He left
issue a son, sir John, who succeeded him, and by lady Henriet, daughter of
James earl of Annandale, he had a son, sir James Carmichael of Bonnytown. He
married the daughter and heiress of William Baillie of Lamington, by whom he
had one son, sir William, who died without issue, anno 1738. He had also a
daughter, Henriet, who succeeded to both estates, and was married to Robert
Dundas of Arniston, Esquire; now lord president of the session, whose eldest
daughter, Elizabeth, is heiress of these estates, and is married to captain
Ross-Lockhart of Balnagowan, Esquire;.

The lord Carmichael's eldest daughter, Mary, married, 1st, to sir William
Lockhart of Carstairs; 2dly, to sir William Weir of Stonebyres.

2. Agnes, married to sir John Wilkie of Fowlden, whose only daughter and sole
heiress was married to William lord Ross.

3. Anne, married to sir David Carmichael of Balmedie, whose only daughter
Agnes, was married to John Dundas of Duddingston, Esquire;.

4. Martha, married to John Kennedy of Kirkmichael, in the shire of Air.

He died in the 94th year of his age, anno 1672.

XIII. WILLIAM, master of Carmichael, eldest son and apparent heir of James
lord Carmichael, was a man of great courage and integrity; but did not inherit
his father's attachment to the royal family. He was one of the committee of
parliament, Rescinded acts of parl^.
anno 1644, and one of the committee of estates in 1645.

He had the command of a regiment in the parliament's service, at the battle of
Philiphaugh, against the marquis of Montrose, Ibidem.
anno 1646.

He married lady Grizel, daughter of William marquis of Douglas, by his first
wife, a sister of the earl of Abercorn, by whom he had a son,

John, afterward earl of Hyndford, -- and two daughters.

1. Mary, married to sir Archibald Stewart of Castlemilk.

2. Rachel, married to James Vere of Stonebyres, Esquire,.

He died anno 1658, and was succeeded by his son,

XIV. JOHN, who succeeded also to his grandfather, James lord Carmichael, anno
1672.

He came early into the revolution, and was in great favor with king William,
who, immediately upon his accession to the throne, appointed him one of his
privy council, Writs of the family of Hyndford.
and one of the commissioners for executing the office of lord privy seal, anno
1689.

In 1690, he was appointed his majesty's commissioner to the general assembly
of the church of Scotland, which high office he enjoyed for six years
afterward, viz. 1694 and 1699 inclusive.

In 1693, he was made colonel of a regiment of dragoons, and one of the
principal secretaries of state, in 1696.

In School and 1699, he showed himself a great patriot, and true lover of his
country, in the important affair of Darien, Ibidem.
and acquitted himself in all the high offices he enjoyed with fidelity and
reputation. At last his majesty, in regard of his great merit and faithful
services, was pleased further to dignify him with the titles of earl of
Hyndford, viscount of Inglisberry and Nemphlar, lord Carmichael of Carmichael,
etc. by patent to him, Charta penes comitem de Hyndford, et in pub. archiv.
et haeredibus masculis et talliae, illi in terris et statu suo succedentibus,
secundum ipsius jura et infeosamenta earund. etc. dated 25th June 1701.

Upon her majesty queen Anne's accession to the crown, he was nominated one of
her privy council, anno 1702, and was appointed one of the commissioners for
the treaty of union with England, anno 1706.

He married Beatrix Drummond, daughter of David lord Maderty, by lady Beatrix
Graham, his wife, daughter of John earl of Montrose, by whom he had six sons,
and three daughters.

1. James, his heir.

2. Mr. William Carnichael of Skirling, advocate, who married Helen, only
daughter of Thomas Craig of Riccarton, Esquire; by whom he had two sons, and two
daughters, 1. John, who married Janet Grant, daughter of lord Prestongrange; 2.
James, who married Janet, daughter of sir John Clerk of Pennycuik, Bart. 1st
daughter, Elizabeth. 2. Helen, married to John Gibson of Durie, Esquire; and has
issue.

3. Mr. Daniel Carmichael of Mauldsly, who married --, daughter of sir George
Lockhart of Carnwath, president of the court of session, and by her had four
sons and two daughters. 1. Daniel his heir, who married and has issue five
sons, (1. Daniel, 2. John, 3. William, 4. Thomas, 5. Andrew, and a daughter,
Grizel.) Mr. Daniel's other three sons, George, John, and William, died without
issue; and his two daughters names are Barbara and Grizel.

The earl's 4th son, Mr. David Carmichael advocate, died without issue.

5. John.

6. Charles.

These two perished at sea on the coast of Holland, as they were going abroad
to travel.

1st daughter, lady Beatrix, married to John Cockburn, Esquire; son and apparent
heir of Adam Cockburn of Ormiston, one of the senators of the college of
justice, and lord justice clerk, by whom she had no issue.

2. Lady Mary, married to John Montgomery, Esquire; then son and apparent heir of
Mr. Francis Montgomery of Gissen.

3. Lady Anne, married to sir John Maxwell of Nether Pollock, baronet, to whom
she had a son and two daughters.

He died anno 1710, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. JAMES, second earl of Hyndford, who was made colonel of a regiment of
dragoons, on his father's resignation, anno 1706, and was raised to the degree
of a brigadier-general, anno 1710.

He married lady Elizabeth Maitland, daughter of John earl of Lauderdale, by
whom he had five sons and six daughters.

1. John, now earl of Hyndford.

2. William, lord bishop of Mead, and one of the privy council of the kingdom
of Ireland.

3. Mr. James, who was long member of parliament for the burghs of Lanark,
Linlithgow, etc. and died at London unmarried, anno 1754.

4. Mr. Archibald, who was a captain of foot in Minorca, but died also without
issue.

5. Mr. Charles, who was in the East India company's service, and died at
Bombay, without issue, anno 1732.

1st daughter, lady Margaret, married to sir John Anstruther of that ilk,
baronet, and was mother of the present sir John.

2. Lady Mary, married to Charles O'Hara, Esquire; in the county of Sligo in
Ireland.

3. Lady Anne, married to -- Dasscina, Esquire; and has issue one son.

4. Lady Elizabeth.

5. Lady Rachel.

6. Lady Grace.

These three died young.

The earl died 16th August 1737, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVI. JOHN, third earl of Hyndford, who, in the year 1732, was made colonel of
a company in the third regiment of guards.

In the year 1739, he was appointed his majesty's high commissioner to the
general assembly of the church of Scotland, and had again the honor to enjoy
the same office, anno 1740.

He got a commission under the great seal, appointing him sheriff principal of
the shire of Lanark, dated 9th April 1739.

And another from his majesty, of the same date, constituting him lord
lieutenant of the said county; also a commission as one of the lords of police
in Scotland.

In 1741, upon the king of Prussia's invasion of Silesia, he was sent envoy
extraordinary and plenipotentiary to the court of Berlin, and the year
thereafter accomodated the differences which occasioned that war.

Upon the conclusion of the treaty of Breslaw, he had the order of St. Andrew
conferred upon him; and as a testimony of the satisfaction of the contending
powers, he received a royal grant from the king of Prussia, dated at Berlin
30th September 1742, Diploma penes commit. de Hyndford.
for adding the eagle of Silesia to his paternal coat of arms, with this motto,
Ex been merito, which is likeways ratified by a diploma from her Hungarian and
Bohemian majesty, dated at Vienna 29th November 1742, both conceived in terms
much to his lordship's honor.

In 1744, he went ambassador to the court of Russia, where he continued till
the year 1750, and by his memorable negotiation for thirty thousand Russians,
contributed in a great measure to accelerate the peace, which was concluded at
Aix-la-Chapelle.

After his return to England, he was appointed a privy councillor, and one of
the lords of his majesty's bed chamber, and was again sent upon a commission of
great importance to the court of Vienna, anno 1752.

He was elected one of the sixteen Scotch peers to the ninth, tenth, and
eleventh British parliaments, etc. etc. etc.

He married, 1st, Elizabeth, eldest daughter of sir Cloudesly Shovel, widow of
lord Romney, who died without issue.

He married, 2dly, Jean Vigor, daughter of Benjamin Vigor of Fulham, Esquire;.

ARMS.
Argent, a fess wreathy azure and gules.

CREST; on a wreath, an armed arm erect, holding a broken spear.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter side, a chevalier in complete armor, plumed on the
head with three feathers argent, holding in his right hand a battoon royal; on
the sinister a horse argent, furnished gules.

MOTTO; Toujours pressed.

N. B. The Silesia arms granted as above mentioned, according to the rules of
heraldry.

CHIEF SEATS,
At Carmichael-house and Westraw, in the county of Lanark.

KER Lord JEDBURGH.
SIR THOMAS KER of Fernyhirst, the eleventh generation of the illustrious house
of Lothian, married, 1st, Janet, daughter of sir William Kirkcaldy of Grange,
governor of the castle of Edinburgh, by whom he had a son,

Sir Andrew Ker, afterward lord Jedburgh.

He married, 2dly, Janet, daughter of sir William Scot of Kirkurd, son and heir
of sir Walter Scot of Buckcleugh, by whom he had three sons.

1. Sir James Ker of Crailling, who succeeded his brother as lord Jedburgh.

2. Thomas Ker of Oxnam.

3. Robert Ker, earl of Somerset, viscount Rochester, etc.

Sir Thomas was succeeded by his eldest son,

I. Sir ANDREW KER, who was created lord Jedburgh by king James VI. 2d February
1622, by patent to the heirs-male of his body; whom failing, to his heirs-male
whatsoever.

He dying without issue, anno 1628, his estate and honors devolved upon his
brother,

I. Sir JAMES KER of Crailling, who was second lord Jedburgh.

He left issue a son and successor,

II. ROBERT, third lord Jedburgh, who got a confirmation of the former patent
from king Charles II. in these words: facimus et constituimus praenominatum
Robertum Ker, dominum de Jedburgh, etc. et haeredes masculos ex ejus corpore;
quibus deficien. Williehno magistro de Newbottle et haeredibus masculis ex ejus
corpore; quibus deficien. dict. magistri de Newbottle haeredibus masculis
quibuscunque, titulum, bonorem, etc. domini de Jedburgh, etc. cum praecedentia
et ordine Andreae domini Jedburgh^ etc. etc. dated 11th July 1670.

He dying without issue, the estate and honors, according to the last
mentioned patent, devolved upon the said master of Newbottle: and as these
titles are now in the marquis of Lothian's family, we must refer our readers to
title Ker marquis of Lothian, where the succession is deduced from the first of
that most noble house, to the present generation; we shall only add what is
said on this peerage by our lords of session, in their report to the house of
peers, anno 1739.

"William master of Newbottle succeeded to the honors of Jedburgh, and on that
title voted in parliament, anno 1702, where his father, the marquis of Lothian,
also sat and voted as marquis of Lothian; and, upon his father's decease, he
succeeded to the honors of Lothian. Therefore, if a judgment were to be formed
on what thus appears, it would be natural to conclude, that the honors of
Jedburgh and Lothian are conjoined in the same person: but as it appears, that
the present marquis of Lothian, in his father's lifetime, voted anno 1712, at
the election of a peer to sit in parliament, in the room of earl Marishal, then
deceased, under the character of lord Jedburgh, it is not impossible, that the
family of Lothian may be possessed of some settlement in this peerage of
Jedburgh, different from what has hitherto been found in the records, etc."

ARMS.
Gules, on a cheveron argent, three moles of the first.

SUPPORTERS; two angels.

CREST; a buck's head caboss'd, proper.

MOTTO; Forward in the name of God.

CAMPBELL Earl of IRVINE.
ARCHIBALD, seventh earl of Argyle, married to his second wife Anne, daughter
of sir William Cornwallis of Broom, ancestor of lord Cornwallis, by Lucy his
wife, daughter and co-heiress of John Nevil, lord Latimer, by whom he had a son,

James Campbell, a man of great valor and courage, and highly esteemed by king
James VI. who created him lord Kintyre, in 1622. Being possessed of an active
military genius, he went to push his fortune in the wars abroad, served under
king Lewis XIII. of France, and had the command of a regiment against the
Spaniards, where he acquired such reputation, for his knowledge in the military
art, Diploma in pub. archiv. haered. masculis de corpore suo.
that king Charles I. upon his return home, created him earl of Irvine, lord
Lundy, etc. 28th March 1642, by patent to the heirs-male of his body.

He dying without male issue, before the restoration of king Charles II. the
honors became extinct.

INGRAM Viscount IRVINE.
THE first of this family was

I. ARTHUR INGRAM, Esquire; a wealthy citizen of London, who having acquired great
riches, purchased several considerable estates and manors in Yorkshire, and
other counties, particularly the manor of Temple-Newsom, which became the chief
title of his family, the lands of Halfield, some lands in Leeds, etc. etc. etc.

He was appointed high sheriff of the county of York, Dr. Burton's collections.
anno 1619, one of the justices of the peace for the several Ridings, and often
representative in parliament for the same county.

He was succeeded by his son,

II. ARTHUR INGRAM of Temple-Newsom, who was high sheriff of Yorkshire, anno
1630, deputy lieutenant, and justice of the peace for the West Riding of the
same county, and in the commission of oyer and terminer in the reign of king
Charles I. Ibidem.


He married, 1st, a daughter of -- Brown of London, by whom he had three sons.

1. Sir Thomas, his heir.

2. Sir Arthur, who succeeded his brother.

3. John Ingram, Esquire; who married twice, but died without issue.

He married, 2dly, -- Ferrers, daughter of a London citizen, by whom he has no
issue.

He married, 3dly, Mary, daughter of sir Edward Grevill, knight, by whom he had
a son,

Lionel Ingram, who died young.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. Sir THOMAS INGRAM of Temple-Newsom, who was chancellor of the duchy of
Lancaster, and one of the privy council to king Charles II.

He married Frances, Peerage of England, vol. IV. p. 351.
daughter of Thomas lord viscount Falconberg, but dying without issue, was
succeeded by his brother,

III. Sir ARTHUR INGRAM of TempleNewsom, who married, 1st, Eleanor, daughter of
sir Henry Slingsby, Dr. Burton's collections.
by whom he had three sons and two daughters.

1. Henry, afterward viscount Irvin^.

2. Thomas Ingram, Esquire; who married Mary, daughter of Watkinson Payler, of
Thorvly, Esquire;.

3. Arthur Ingram of Barrowly, Esquire;.

1st daughter, Peerage of England, vol. II. p. 244.
Elizabeth, married to Robert Rich, son and heir of Robert earl of Holland.

3. Anne, married to -- Stapleton of Wighill, Esquire;.

He married, 2dly, Catharine, daughter of Thomas lord viscount Emely, by whom
he had a daughter.

Catharine.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. HENRY, who having been a great loyalist during the troublesome reign of
king Charles I. was raised to the dignity of the peerage of Scotland by king
Charles II. by patent, Henrico Ingram de Temple-Newsom, vicecomit^ de Irvine,
Diploma in pub. archiv.
domino Ingram, et haeredibus masculis, de corpore suo, etc. dated 23d May 1661.

He married lady Essex Montague, daughter of Edward earl of Manchester, Peerage
of England, vol. I. p. 670
by whom he had two sons and one daughter.

1. Arthur, his heir.

2. Edward Ingram, Esquire; who married Elizabeth Sherard, daughter of Bennet lord
Lettrim in Ireland, Peerage of Ireland, vol. IV. p. 144.
and sister of Bennet earl of Harborough in England.

His daughter, Essex, died without issue.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. ARTHUR, second viscount Irvine, who married Isabel, eldest daughter of John
Matchel of Hills and Horsham in Sussex, Burton's collections.
Esquire; by whom he had seven sons.

1. Richard, his heir.

2. Edward, who was lord lieutenant of the East Riding of Yorkshire, but died
before his elder brother, without issue.

3. Arthur.

4. Henry.

5. Charles.

Successively viscounts of Irvine, of whom afterward.

6. George, who being bred to the church, was canon of Windsor, and chaplain to
the house of commons.

7. William, who became an eminent merchant in Holland.

He died anno 1702, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. RICHARD, third viscount Irvine, who was governor of Hull, colonel of the
bodyguards, anno 1715, and was appointed governor of Barbados, Ibidem.
anno 1720, but died a few weeks before he should have set out for that island,
anno 1721.

He married lady Anne Howard, second daughter of Charles earl of Carlyle,
Peerage of England, vol. II. p. 410.
but having no issue, his estate and honors devolved upon his brother,

VI. ARTHUR, fourth lord viscount Irvine, who was member of parliament for
Horsham, at the time of his brother's death, anno 1721.

He was appointed custos rotulorum, and lord lieutenant of the East Riding of
Yorkshire, Burton's collections.
anno 1728; but dying without issue, anno 1736, was succeeded by his brother,

VI. HENRY, fifth lord viscount Irvine, who was elected member for Horsham,
anno 1722: was made commissary for the stores at Gibraltar, anno 1727, and
re-elected at the general elections that same year; also to the next parliament
1734; and after his brother's death, was appointed lord lieutenant of the
East Riding of Yorkshire, Ibidem.
anno 1736, but dying soon thereafter, without issue, was succeeded by his next
brother,

VI. CHARLES, sixth lord viscount Irvine, who was colonel of the foot-guards,
and adjutant-general of the forces. He was elected member for Horsham, anno
1737, and continued in the parliament till his death, anno 1748, leaving issue
a son and successor,

VII. CHARLES, seventh lord viscount Irvine, who, upon his father's death, was
elected member for Horsham, anno 1748, and has continued in parliament for the
same place ever since.

He married miss Shepherd, a lady of a vast fortune; for which an act of
parliament was lately obtained, and by her he has issue.

CAMPBELL Earl of ISLAY.
ARCHIBALD, tenth earl, and first duke of Argyle, married Elizabeth, daughter
of sir Lionel Talmash of Hylingham, by his wife Elizabeth duchess of
Lauderdale, by whom he had issue two sons and one daughter, lady Anne, married
to James earl of Bute.

His eldest son, John, succeeded his father, and was second duke of Argyle.

His second son, Archibald, was created earl of Islay by queen Anne, anno 1706,
etc.

He succeeded his brother John, second duke of Argyle, and was the third duke.

Vide Title duke of Argyle.

MACDONALD Lord of the ISLES.
THE ancestors of this great and illustrious family had large possessions in
lands, and were designed thanes of Argyle before they were lords of the Isles.

It appears also, that while the islands called Aebudae held of the kings of
Norway, Abercromb. etc.
their lords or governors were, by the Norvegians and others, called kings of
the Isles, etc.

I. SOMERLED, thane of Argyle, (the immediate ancestor of this noble family)
flourished in the reign of king David I. who succeeded to the crown of
Scotland, anno 1124, and died in 1153.

It is acknowledged by all our historians, that this Somerled was a man of
great power and interest. He married the daughter and heiress of Olaus, one of
the kings of the Aebudae, whereupon he and his posterity, for several
generations, assumed to themselves the title of kings of the Isles.

Somerled being no less ambitious than great, raised an army, and invaded the
territories of Malcom IV. who succeeded David, was joined by Donald, son of
Malcolm MacBeth, who had been at the head of a formidable rebellion in the
preceding reign; but king Malcolm sent the brave Gilchrist, earl of Angus,
against them, Abercrombie, vol. I. p. 248.
who defeated them, took Donald prisoner, and obliged Somerled to fly to
Ireland, anno 1157.

Somerled afterward returned, raised a new army, made a descent at a bay in
the river Clyde, and penetrated into the country as far as Renfrew, where he
was met and attacked by the king's army, Chronicle of Melrose.
under the command of Walter high steward of Scotland, was entirely routed, and
himself stain, anno 1164.

He had issue four sons.

1. Dulgal, who was killed with his father at Renfrew, and, it is said, was
progenitor of the MacDougals.

2. Reginald, who succeeded his father in the lordship of the Isles.

3. Angus.

4. Olaus, who, in the chronicle of Man, are both designed filii Somerledi.

II. REGINALD, son of Somerled, was also designed king of the Isles; but it
does not appear from our histories, that he gave any disturbance to king
William, who succeeded Malcolm, anno 1165, yet he never acknowledged him to be
his superior, Rymer.
but entered into a league with the king of England against his country, as an
independent prince.

He was very liberal in his donations to the religious.

He founded and endowed the abbacy of Sandale in Kintyre, Chartulary of Paisley.
and is then designed Reginaldus filius Somerl^di, insularum rex, etc.

He made several other donations to the monastery of Paisley, Ibidem, and
chartulary of Lennox, p. 182.
under the same designation, with the addition of dominus de Ergyle et Inchgall.

He got a safe conduct from king John, Reginaldo regi insularum, veniendi in
Angliam, et ab Anglia redeundi, Rymer, tom. I. p. 140.
etc. anno 1206.

He afterward became a liegeman, and subject of the king of England, Ibid. p.
159.
pro toto tempore vitae suae, anno 1212.

By Fonia, his wife, he left issue two sons.

1. Dovenald.

2. Roderick, to whom he gave the lands of Kintyre, and in a donation to the
abbacy of Sandale, he is designed Rodericus de Kintyre, filius Reginaldi,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
etc. which is confirmed by a charter under the great seal, anno 1507. He had a
son Alan, who was one of the Scotch nobles that bound themselves to stand by,
and receive for their queen and sovereign, Margaret, daughter to the king of
Norway, failing male issue of king Alexander, etc. anno 1284, Rymer, tom. II.
p. 266.
and is then designed Alanus filius Rotherici, etc.

Reginald was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. DOVENALD, or Donald of the Isles, who was certainly progenitor of the
whole clan of MacDonald; and though we do not find him designed king, yet he is
often called lord of the Isles, Ergyle, Inchgall, etc. and it does not appear
that he ever acknowledged the king of Scotland for his superior.

He made a donation of eight cows, etc. to the monastery of Paisley, Chartul.
of Lennox, page 185.
and is then designed Donaldus filius Reginaldi, ^ilii Somerledi de insulis,
etc. tempore Alexandri II. who succeeded king William, anno 1214.

He left issue two sons.

1. Angus, his heir.

2. Alexander, of whom the MacAlasters of Loup in Argyleshire, and the
Alexanders of Menstrie, in Stirlingshire, are descended.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. ANGUS, who makes a donation to the monastery of Paisley, of an annuity
dimidiae marcae, Chartul. of Paisley, and chartulary of Lennox, page 186.
unius denarii, etc. in which he is designed lord of Inchgall, son of Donald,
son of Reginald, son of Somerled of the Isles, etc. to which his brother
Alexander is a witness.

King Alexander II. confirms a donation, Angusii filii Dovenaldi, ecclesiae
sancti Quaerani in Kintyre, monasterio Paslet. pro salute animae Alexandri
regis Scotiae domini sui, Ibid. p. 187.
Alexandri ^ilii ejus, etc.

By his calling king Alexander his dominus, he plainly acknowledges himself a
subject of the king of Scotland, and he is the first of his family that did so.

After the death of prince David, son to king Alexander III. he was one of the
magnates Scotiae that agreed to acknowledge and receive his grandchild Margaret
of Norway for their lawful queen and sovereign, Rymer, tom. II. p. 266.
and to that deed his seal is appended, anno 1284.

However, we afterward find Angusius de insulis Scotiae, filius Dovenaldi, et
Alexander de insulis filius dicti Angusii, separately obliging themselves --
been et fideliter se habendo erga dominum, Ibid. p. 541.
regem Angliae, etc. anno 1292.

Angus died soon thereafter, and left issue three sons.

1. Alexander, his heir.

2. Donald, designed Donaldus de Isle, filius Angusii, M. S. hist. of the
family.
in Rymer's foedera Angliae, and is said to have been ancestor of the
Robertsons of Strowan.

3. John, Abercrombie, and Crawf.
said to be father of Reginald MacEan of Arndamurchan, etc.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. ALEXANDER, lord of the Isles, who, in a confirmation of the church of
Kilkerran in Kintyre, to the monastery of Paisley, is designed filius et haeres
domini Angusii filii Dovenald^ domini de Isle, Chartulary of Paisley, and
chartulary of Lennox, page ^90.
etc. to which Patrick, abbot of Crossragwell, Robert Bruce earl of Carrick,
and Robert his son and heir, are witnesses.

This Alexander was a true Scotsman, and a worthy patriot. He it was who, in
the 1306, gave protection and sanctuary, within his island of Raughrine, to the
immortal king Robert Bruce, when all others, who were willing, could not,
Abercrombie, and Barber's life of king R. Bruce.
and they who were able would not so much as own his title, far less screen his
person from his victorious foes.

He died soon after this generous action, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. ANGUS, lord of the Isles, commonly called Angus More, or the great Angus;
and indeed he was a man of great worth and honor, a firm and steady friend of
king Robert Bruce.

At the battle of Bannockburn, anno 1314, he charged, upon the head of 2000 of
his own men, Ibidem.
with remarkable bravery and conduct, and had no small share of the honor
gained by the Scots on that memorable day.

He was so much a true and faithful subject to king Robert, that he never once
asserted his own independency, as king or lord of the Isles, as long as he
lived.

He married a daughter of the family of O-Caine, M. S. of the family.
the chiestain of a great tribe in the kingdom of Ireland, by whom he had a son
and s^ccessor,

VII. JOHN, lord of the Isles, a man of great spirit, but he did not inherit
the loyalty and virtues of his father and grandfather. He turned an enemy to
his young sovereign king David Bruce, and joined Edward Baliol, which appears
from a ratification by the king of England, Rymer, tom. IV. p. 711.
of an indenture entered into betwixt Edward Baliol king of Scotland, and John
lord of the Isles, etc. anno 1335.

That same year he got a charter from king Edward, as he is then called, of the
lands of Kintyre, Knapdale, the islands of Mull, Sky, Lewis, and a great many
others, for which he obliged himself, by all means possible, to molest and
annoy the enemies of Edward, etc.

He afterward got a safe conduct to go up to England, Ibid. p. 831.
anno 1337; and it seems he then set up for an independent prince; Ibid. tom. V.
for as such king Edward of England entered into a league, offensive and
defensive, with John lord of the Isles, anno 1353.

Sometime thereafter he was again reconciled to his lawful sovereign, Ibid.
tom. VI.
offered himself one of the hostages for king David's ransom, anno 1357, and
appears to have continued a dutiful subject all his life afterward.

He married lady Margaret Stewart, Stewart's hist of the royal family, p. 57.
second daughter of king Robert II. and is then designed lord of Isla and Isles.

By her he had three sons, and two daughters.

1. Donald, his heir.

2. John de Isle, ancestor of the MacDonalds of Dunveg and Glens, of whom the
earls of Antrim in Ireland, M. S. hist. of the family.
the MacDonalds of Largy and Sana, etc. in Scotland are descended.

3. Alexander of Isle, Ibid. and Chartul. of Murray, p. 222. Haddington's
collect. etc.
who is designed filius ^tio genitus domini de insulis, anno 1402, and was
ancestor of the MacDonalds of Keppoch.

1st daughter, Hist. of the family of Sutherland.
Elizabeth, married to Nicholas earl of Sutherland.

2. Margaret, Chart. in pub. archiv. ad annum 1390.
married to Lauchlan MacLean of Dowart.

He got a charter under the great seal from king Robert II. in these words:
Robertus, etc. sciatis nos dedisse et confirmasse dilecto filio nostro Johanni
del Isle, Charta in rotul. Robt. II.
omnes et singulas terras de Modworth, Arras, etc. (here a vast number of lands
are narrated,) tenend. et habend. eidem Johanni, haeredibus suis, etc. de nobis
et haeredibus nostris in f^odo et haereditate, etc. etc. data apud Sconam
tempore parliamenti, 9no Martii 1372.

Also a charter, upon his own resignation, from the same prince, dilecto ^ilio
meo Johanni del Isle, Ibidem.
insulam de Colowsay cum pertinent. tenend. et habend. eidem Johanni et
dilectae filiae nostrae Margaretae sponsae suae, et haeredibus inter ipsos
legitime pro^reat. seu procreand. quibus deficientibus, heredibus legitimis
dicti Johannis quibusaunque, etc. dated at Stirling, 6th June 1376.

He got likeways a third charter of the lands of Lochaber, Ibidem.
and a fourth of the lands of Kintyre and Knapdale, both of the same tenor and
date with the charter last-mentioned.

This John had other two sons.

1. Godfridus, who, in a treaty with the king of England, Rymer, tom. VII.
is designed filius Johannis del Isle, etc. anno 1388; but we know nothing of
his posterity.

2. Reginald, who got from his father a considerable estate, confirmed to him
by a charter under the great seal in these words: Robertus, Chart. in archiv.
Rob. II.
etc. sciatis nos approbasse, confirmasse donationem illam et concessionem quas
dilectus filius noster, Johannes de Isle, fecit Reginaldo de Isle, filio suo, de
terra de Mudiert, etc. (here all the lands are narrated,) tenend. et habend.
praefatas terras eidem Reginaldo et haeredibus suis masculis de corpore suo
legitime procreand. de praefato Johanne de Isle, et haeredibus suis, etc. data
apud Arnelle, 1mo die Januarii 1373.

This Reginald was progenitor of the MacDonalds of Moydart, Clanronald, etc. of
whom Glengary, Moror, etc. are descended; but whether he was a son of a former
marriage, or older or younger than John's successor, we shall not pretend to
determine.

But as the different branches of the clan MacDonald do not agree about this
part of their history, we shall only make an obvious remark or two upon the
preceding charters, and leave the determination of the points in dispute to
the judgment of our readers.

John of the Isles got his first charter, under the great seal, of all the
lands therein mentioned, "to himself and his heirs-general, holding of the
king," before narrated, 1372.

About ten months thereafter, he gave a considerable estate to his son
Reginald, and the heirs-male of his body, confirmed and approved by the king,
not holding of the crown, but of John himself, and his heirs, whereby John's
lawful successor became Reginald's superior; and in the charter Reginald is
neither designed filius legitimus, nor dilectus filius, (the common style in
old charters,) but simply filius meus: therefore, by any thing that appears
upon record, John's lawful heir was a different person from Reginald.

John died in the end of 1387, or beginning of 1388, and was insallibly
succeeded in all the estates he died possessed of, and in the superiority of
the other lands he had given off to his children, by his son,

VIII. DONALD lord of the isles, who, it seems, set out upon an independent
sooting; for Richard king of England entered into a treaty with him as a
sovereign prince, Rymer, tom. VII.
anno 1388, and his father John is then said to be nuper defunitus.

This Donald was a man of an aspiring genius, and had vast possessions: Chart.
in pub. archiv.
he gave off parts of his lands to his friends and neighbors, viz. the
MacLeans, MacIntoshes, MacKenzies, MacKinnons, etc. all holding of himself for
military service, which greatly increased his power; but, upon the forfeiture
of this family, these clans got their lands holding of the crown.

In the year 1400, Donald, lord of the isles, and John de Isle his brother, got
a safe conduct from king Henry IV. Rymer tom. VIII. p. 146.
to come to England with one hundred horse in their retinue, to treat of a
peace with the English, for themselves and their friends.

The king of England afterward gave power to his commissioners to treat of a
final peace with them in their own country, Ibid. p. 418.
anno 1405.

In a truce concluded betwixt the king of England and France, Ibid. tom. IX.
Donald, lord of the Isles and John Stanely of Man, are included as independent
princes, anno 1414.

They are again both included in a treaty with France as allies of England,
Ibid. tom. XII. p. 400.
anno 1416; whereby it appears, that this lord was more in the English interest
than the Scotch.

He married dame Margaret Lesly, only daughter of Walter Lesly, by lady
Eupheme, eldest daughter and co-heiress of William, the last male of the
ancient earls of Ross, and upon whose heirs the estate and honors of Ross were
settled by act of parliament. By her he had a son,

Alexander, his heir.

As the battle of Harlaw happened in consequence of this marriage, we shall
briefly account for it as follows:

Walter Lesly, who married Eupheme, countess of Ross, (besides his daughter,
married to the lord of the isles,) had a son Alexander, who became earl of
Ross, as heir to his mother: He married Isabel, daughter of Robert duke of
Albany, governor of Scotland, by whom he had an only daughter, Eupheme,
countess of Ross, his sole heiress: she became a nun, and died without issue,
whereby the successi on to the earldom of Ross, in right of blood, ought to
have devolved upon the said dame Margaret Lesly, lady of the Isles, her
undoubted heir of line.

But the duke of Albany having obtained from his grandchild, Eupheme the nun,
a resignation of her honors in favors of his second son the earl of Buchan,
Resign. penes comitem de Rothes.
and failing heirsmale of his body, to fall to the crown, the earl of Buchan
thereupon added that of Ross to his other titles.

Donald lord of the Isles claimed that earldom in right of his wife; the duke
of Albany determined his son should have it, in virtue of the nun's resignation.

Donald being denied what he thought he had a just title to, resolved to assert
his right by force of arms, and raised an army of about ten thousand men,
chiefly of his own friends and followers, the clans beforementioned.

The duke was not behind-hand with him in raising forces, Fordun, vol. II. p.
414.
but soon got together an army much about the same number, commanded by the
brave Alexander Stewart, earl of Mar.

They met near a village called Harlaw, within ten miles of Aberdeen, where a
most bloody battle ensued, fought with incredible obstinacy on both sides,
Ibidem.
in which many brave men lost their lives; but neither had reason to brag much
of the victory. The lord of the isles, rather wearied than conquered, retreated
the next day, and the earl of Mar was not in a condition to pursue him. This
happened anno 1411.

It seems Donald afterward made up matters with the governor; for the earl of
Buchan possessed the earldom of Ross without further disturbance, till he was
slain at the battle of Vernoil in France, anno 1424; then that earldom came to
the crown, in virtue of the resignation by Eupheme the nun, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
beforementioned. This is fully instructed by many charters under the great
seal, to be seen in our public records, though it does not appear that the said
dame Margaret, lady of the Isles, ever gave up her title; Fordun, vol. II.
for she always designed herself countess of Ross, even after the crown was in
possession of that earldom.

Donald died in France, anno 1427, and was succeeded by his son,

IX. ALEXANDER afterward earl of Ross, of whom Buchanan says, he was unus post
regem long potenti^simus, etc.

In his mother's lifetime he designed himself dominus insularum et magister
comitatus Rossiae; for it seems he still intended to assert his title to that
earldom. He raised an army of above ten thousand men, burnt the town of
Inverness, and laid waste a great part of the country. The king, being highly
incensed at this insolence, raised an army to oppose him, Ibid. p. 489.
and came up with him in Lochaber. The clan Chatton, and the Camerons, seeing
the standard of their lawful sovereign, deserted the lord of the Isles, whose
forces, being immediately attacked by the king's troops, were soon routed and
put to slight, in the year 1429.

Sometime thereafter, Alexander, repenting of his disloyal practices, threw
himself at the king's feet, Ibid. p. 490.
and implored mercy; who, notwithstanding his open rebellion, was graciously
pleased to pardon him.

At last king James, out of his great goodness and love of justice, yielded the
earldom of Ross to him, being sensible he had a good title to it in right of
his mother, who was really heir of line of the family, as before observed, by
which accession to his estate he became one of the greatest and most powerful
subjects in the kingdom.

This Alexander, earl of Ross, grants a charter to John Ross of Kilravock in
liferent, and his son Hugh his apparent heir in fee, Chart. in pub archiv.
of the lands of Kilravock, Easter-Geddes, etc. upon Kilravock's resignation to
the earl, as his lawful superior, 22d June 1440, confirmed by a charter under
the great seal.

In the minority of king James II. he was, by the estates of the kingdom,
Ibidem.
appointed justiciar of Scotland, benorth the river Forth; and it is
acknowledged he kept all that country in peace and good order as long as he
lived.

He granted several charters and other deeds as earl of Ross, and lord of the
Isles, Ibidem.
all confirmed by charters under the great seal, which is a sufficient proof,
that the crown acquieseed in his possession of that earldom.

He married Elizabeth, Charta penes ducem de Gordon.
daughter of sir Alexander Seton, lord of Gordon, and sister of Alexander,
first earl of Huntly, by whom he had three sons, and two daughters.

1. John, his heir.

2. Hugh, progenitor of the MacDonalds of Slate, as will be shown hereafter.

3. Celestine, ancestor of lord MacDonald. Vide title lord MacDonald.

1st daughter, Hist. of the family of Sutherland.
Margaret, married to John earl of Sutherland, and was mother of Elizabeth,
heiress of that noble family.

2. Florence, Chart. in pub. archiv.
married to Duncan MacIntosh, captain of the clan Chatton.

This earl died in the end of 1448, or beginning of 1449, and was succeeded by
his eldest son,

X. JOHN, earl of Ross, and lord of the Isles, who was certainly one of the
greatest and most powerful men in the kingdom, and behaved like a dutiful and
loyal subject, excepting his engagement with the earl of Douglas, as long as
king James II. lived, with whom he appeared to be in great favor.

There was a truce concluded with the English in November 1449, Rymer, tom. XI.
p. 254, etc.
in which John earl of Ross was one of the guarantees; and to another in 1451.

And though he was engaged in the earl of Douglas's rebellion, yet it is
certain he made his peace with the king very soon thereafter; for in the year
1457, he is one of the guarantees of a treaty with the English, Ibid. p. 397,
and 434.
and one of the wardens of the marches; and again in 1459.

But after the death of king James II. he begun to revive the old pretensions
of his family to independency; and, shaking off his allegiance to his lawful
sovereign, he entered into a treaty with the king of England in the following
terms, viz.

"That John de Isle, earl of Ross, and lord of the Isles, Donald Balagh, and
John of Isle, son and heir apparent of the said Donald, and all their subjects,
The MacDonalds of Moydart or Clanronald.
men, people, and inhabitants of the earldom of Ross and Isles, etc. become
liegemen and subjects to king Edward IV. his heirs, etc. to do homage, etc. and
that they shall remain for ever subjects to the kings of England, and assist
them against all their enemies, etc. King Edward, on the other part, agrees,
and gives the earl of Ross, during life, a yearly pension of one hundred merks
sterling in time of peace, and two hundred pounds sterling in time of war; and
twenty pounds sterling to Donald Balagh in time of peace, and forty pounds
sterling in time of war: and further, in case of a treaty for a final peace
betwixt the two kingdoms, that England shall not agree with Scotland without
getting the earl of Ross, Rymer, tom. XI. p. 486.
etc. comprehended in it, etc."

This treaty was concluded 8th February 1462, but was kept secret for several
years, Ibidem.
and was never discovered till there was actually a final peace concluded
between Scotland and England; by an article whereof it was provided, that both
the respective kings should renounce all former engagements made against each
other; the English were thereby obliged to produce their treaty with the earl
of Ross, by which this treasonable intrigue came to light, anno 1474.

In the interim the earl of Ross got charters under the great seal from king
James III. Chart. in pub. archiv.
of many lands and baronies, inter 1468 et 1474.

At last John earl of Ross was summoned before the parliament 1475, was
indicted for high treason, found guilty, and, by sentence of the three estates,
Records of parliament.
was outlawed and forfeited, and the earldom of Ross unalienably annexed to the
crown by act of parliament.

Soon thereafter the earl submitted to the king, who, out of his great
elemency, restored him to all the honors, lands, and islands he possessed, as
lord of the Isles, with the approbation of parliament, Chart. in pub. archiv.
"to him and the heirs-male of his body, lawfully to be procreated; which
failing, Angusio de Isle filio naturali dicti Johannis, et haeredibus masculis
de corpore ipsius Angus^i legitime procreandis; quibus deficien. Johanni de
Isle, filio etiam naturali dicti Johannis domini insularum, et haeredibus
masculis de corpore suo legitime procreandis; quibus deficientibus, veris,
legitimis, et propinquioribus haeredibus dicti Johannis domini insularum
quibus^unque, Ibidem, an^ black acts (...) parlt.
etc." This is dated 15th July 1576. Five days thereafter he was solemnly
invested as a lord of parliament, and entered on the rolls accordingly on 20th
July 1476.

He afterward got charters, under the great seal, of several lands and
baronies, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Johanni Isle, dom. insularum, etc. inter 1476 et 1480.

But notwithstanding the many acts of benevolence and favor conferred upon him
by king James III. we find him again relapsed into his former misdemeanors, and
contracting alliances with the enemies of his country.

He reassumed the titles of earl of Ross, etc. which appears by a
correspondence betwixt him and king Richard of England, Rymer, tom. XII. p. 140.
who sent his commissioners ad tractandum cum dilectis consanguineis suis,
Johanne domino insularum, comite Rossensi, et Donaldo Gorm super
confoederationibus, etc. 2do Junii 1480.

His treasonable practices being fully made known to the court, he was again
outlawed and forfeited, his estate, honors, and lordship of the Isles, annexed
to the crown.

This second forfeiture is instructed by many charters, Chart. in pub. archiv.
under the great seal, inter 1490 et 1498.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of James lord Livingston, great chamberlain of
Scotland; but dying without lawful issue, anno 1498, the representation of this
great and noble family devolved upon the descendents of his brother Hugh, of
whom sir James MacDonald of that ilk is lineally descended: but before we
proceed to deduce his descent, we must here observe, that this last John's two
natural sons,

Angus, and

John,

Who, by the investiture of the lordship of the Isles by parliament, in July
1476, were both provided to the fee of the estate and honors, failing lawful
heirs-male of John's body, as before observed, yet they were both cut out by
their father's last forfeiture.

Angus, the eldest son, married lady Margaret Campbell, daughter of Colin earl
of Argyle; but dyed before his father without lawful issue. He left a natural
son, Donald, who usurped the title of lord of the Isles, and, with the lord of
MacLean, Records of parliament.
and others his abettors, were forfeited by parliament, 1503.

We now return to

X. HUGH, second son of Alexander earl of Ross, and lord of the Isles, who got
a charter from his brother John, of the lands of Slate, Sherbog, Bambecula,
etc. etc. and is therein designed brother german of John earl of Ross, and lord
of the Isles; the charter is dated 28th June 1449, before these witnesses,
Donaldo de Insulis domino de Dunveg et Glenns, Celestino de Insulis de
Lochlash, fratre nostro Lauchlano MacGillian de Lochbowie, Lauchlano juniore
MacGillian, magistro de Dowart, Willielmo MacLaod de Glenelg, Roderico MacLeod
de Leoghis, Alexandro Johannis de Ardnamurchan, Chart. in pub. archiv.
etc. etc. This charter is narrated and confirmed by another under the great
seal, anno 1495.

He married, M. S. hist. of the family, and Crawfurd's peerage.
1st, Fynvola, daughter of John MacKean of Ardnamurchan, by whom he had a son,

John, his heir.

He married, 2dly, Mary Gun, daughter of the chieftain of the clan Gun, Ibidem.
by whom he had another son,

Donald, who carried on the line of this family, of whom afterward.

He died anno 1498, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. JOHN, who, according to the custom of that country, Ibidem.
was called John Hughson; but he dying without issue, anno 1502, his estate
devolved upon his brother,

XI. DONALD, third baron of Slate, also called Hughson. He married a cousin of
his own, Ibidem.
-- MacDonald, of the kingdom of Ireland, by whom he had a son,

Donald, his heir, and dying anno 1506, was succeeded by,

XII. DONALD, fourth baron of Slate, who died anno 1534, having married
Margaret, a daughter of -- MacDonald of Moydart, Ibidem.
by whom he had a son and successor,

XIII. DONALD, fifth baron of Slate, a man of great spirit, and possessed of a
vast estate, who, anno 1535, claimed the lordship of the Isles, as lawful
heir-male to John earl of Ross, in virtue of the act of parliament in July
1456, before mentioned; but the second forfeiture of that lord stood in the
way: however, since he was denied what he thought was his right, he raised a
considerable body of men, and laid siege to the fort of Elendounan, Ibidem.
where the king had placed a strong garrison; before which place Donald was
shot dead with an arrow, anno 1537, leaving issue, by Margaret his wife,
daughter of Roderick MacLeod of Lewis, a son,

XIV. DONALD, sixth baron, commonly called Donald Gorme MacDonald of Slate, who
succeeded him.

He was a man of great honor and integrity, a faithful and loyal subject to
queen Mary, during all the time of the civil war

He married Mary, daughter of Hector MacLean of Dowart, Ibidem.
by whom he had three sons.

1. Donald, his heir.

2. Archibald, who carried on the line of this family, of whom afterward.

3. Alexander MacDonald.

He died anno 1585, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. DONALD, seventh baron of Slate, a man of good parts, and a most polite
behavior. He was in great favor with king James

VI. to whom he was very assisting in civilizing the northern parts of this
country.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir Kenneth MacKenzie of Kintail, Ibidem.
ancestor of the earl of Seaforth; but dying without issue, anno 1616, his
estate devolved upon his nephew, Donald, son of his brother Archibald, to whom
we now return.

XV. ARCHIBALD MACDONALD, second son of Donald sixth baron of Slate, Ibidem.
married Margaret, daughter of Angus MacDonald of Dunveg and Glenns, by whom he
had a son,

XVI. Sir DONALD, who succeeded his uncle Donald, anno 1616, was the eighth
baron of Slate, and in bishop Guthry's memoirs, is called sir Donald Gorme.

He got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the twenty-pound land of Slate, the forty-pound land of North-Uist, the
thirty-merk land of Skerdhoug, the twelve-merk land of Bambecula, etc. etc.
domino Donaldo MacDonald de Slate, militi, inter 1616 et 1618.

He was a man of great abilities, honor and loyalty, and highly esteemed by
king Charles I. Diploma ibidem, et penes dom. Jacob. MacDonald de eodem.
who raised him to the degree of a knight and baronet of Nova Scotia, with the
precedence of all the other baronets in Scotland, by a patent under the great
seal, dated 14th July 1625.

He was a steady friend of king Charles I. and never deserted his interest as
long as he lived.

He married Janet, daughter of Kenneth lord Kintail, and sister of Colin, first
earl of Seaforth, by whom he had four sons and four daughters.

1. Sir James, his heir.

2. Donald MacDonald of Castletoun, a great loyalist, and steady friend of the
royal family.

3. Archibald-Aeneas.

4. Alexander.

1st daughter, Margaret, married to Aeneas lord MacDonald, without issue.

2. Catharine, married to Kenneth MacKenzie of Gairloch, and had issue.

3. Janet, married to Donald MacDonald of Moydart, captain of Clanronald, and
had issue.

4. Mary, married to sir Ewan Cameron of Lochiel, and had issue.

He died anno 1643, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVII. Sir JAMES MACDONALD, ninth baron of Slate, and second baronet.

He was also a great loyalist, suffered many hardships on that account, and was
excepted from pardon by the parliament, Guthry's memoirs.
but after the murder of the king, he lived a retired life till the restoration.

He married, 1st, Margaret, daughter of sir Roderick MacKenzie of Tarbat,
ancestor of the earl of Cromarty, by whom he had two sons and two daughters.

1. Sir Donald, his heir.

2. Hugh of Glenmore, ancestor of the MacDonalds of Serlie, Sortle, etc.

1st daughter, Catharine, married to sir Norman MacLeod of Berneray, and had
issue.

2. Florence, married to John MacLeod of that ilk and Herries, and had issue.

He married, 2dly, Mary, daughter of Roderick MacLeod of that ilk, by whom he
had a son,

John MacDonald of Backney.

He died in December 1678, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVIII. Sir DONALD MACDONALD, tenth baron of Slate, and third baronet, who
married lady Mary Douglas, only child of Robert earl of Morton, by whom he had
three sons and two daughters.

1. Sir Donald, his heir.

2. Sir James, who carried on the line of this family, of whom afterward.

3. Alexander, tutor of MacDonald, who married and had issue.

1st daughter, Isabel, married to sir Alexander Bannerman of Elsick, baronet,
and had issue.

2. Barbara, married to Colonel MacDonald of Keppoch.

He died in February 1695, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIX. Sir DONALD MACDONALD, eleventh baron of Slate, and fourth baronet, a man
of great probity, worth and merit, and a true lover of his country.

He married Mary, (a cousin of his own) daughter of Donald MacDonald of
Castletoun, by whom he had a son,

Sir Donald, his heir, -- and four daughters.

1. Mary, who died unmarried.

2. Margaret, married to captain John MacQueen.

3. Isabel, married to doctor Alexander Monro, professor of anatomy, etc. in
Edinburgh.

4. Janet, married to Norman MacLeod of that ilk.

He died anno 1718, and was succeeded by his son,

XX. Sir DONALD MACDONALD of that ilk, who died unmarried, anno 1720, and was
succeeded by his uncle,

XIX. Sir JAMES MACDONALD of that ilk, second son of sir Donald MacDonald,
tenth baron of Slate, who married, 1st, Janet, daughter of Alexander MacLeod of
Grifernesh, by whom he had several children.

1. Sir Alexander, his heir.

2. John MacDonald, Esquire; who died unmarried.

1st daughter, Margaret, married to Robert Douglas, Esquire; son of sir Robert
Douglas of Glenbervie, baronet, and had issue.

2. Isabel, who died unmarried.

3. Janet, married to sir Alexander MacKenzie of Coul, baronet, and has issue.

He married, 2dly, Margaret, daughter of John MacDonald of Castletoun, by whom
he had a son,

John, who died young.

Sir James died anno 1723, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XX. Sir ALEXANDER MACDONALD of that ilk, who married, 1st, Anne, daughter of
David Erskine of Dun, one of the senators of the college of justice, and
dowager of James earl of Airly, by whom he had a son,

Donald, who died young.

He married, 2dly, lady Margaret Montgomery, daughter of Alexander earl of
Eglington, by whom he had three sons and one daughter.

1. Sir James, his heir.

2. Alexander.

3. Archibald.

His daughter, Susan, died young.

He died anno 1746, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XXI. Sir JAMES MACDONALD of MacDonald.

ARMS.
The armorial bearing of MacDonald, lord of the Isles.

Or, a double eagle displayed gules, surmounted of a lymphad sable, and in the
dexter chief point, a right hand couped gules.

SUPPORTERS; two boars, with arrows sticking in their bodies, all proper.

CREST; a raven sable, standing on a rock azure.

Sir James's MOTTO is, Nec tempore, nec fato.

CHIEF SEATS
At Armidale, Mugyestot, Dunturn. etc. in Sky.

ERSKINE Earl of KELLY.
JOHN lord Erskine, the twelfth generation of the illustrious house of Mar,
married lady Margaret Campbell, daughter of Archibald second earl of Argyle, by
whom he had five sons.

1. Robert, who died without issue.

2. Thomas, who died also without issue.

3. John, his father's successor, and afterward earl of Mar.

4. Sir Alexander, the first of this family.

5. Arthur, etc. Vide title earl of Mar.

1. Sir ALEXANDER ERSKINE of Gogar, son of John lord Erskine, was a man of good
parts, great honor and integrity. After the death of his brother John earl of
Mar the regent, he had the keeping the young king and the castle of Stirling
conferred upon him, anno 1572; which great trust he discharged with fidelity
and reputation.

In 1578, he was constituted governor of the castle of Edinburgh, Melvil's
memoirs etc.
and one of his majesty's most honorable privy council; and in 1580, he was
appointed vice-chamberlain of Scotland.

He married Margaret, daughter of George fourth lord Home, by whom he had three
sons and three daughters.

1. Sir Alexander, a youth of great hopes, who was killed at the surprise of
the castle of Stirling, anno 1578, without issue.

2. Sir Thomas, afterward earl of Kelly.

3. Sir George Erskine of Innertiel, one of the senators of the college of
justice, who got charters, Chart. in pub. archiv.
under the great seal, of several lands in the county of Fyfe.

1st daughter, Chart. in pub. arch. ad ann. 1602.
Margaret, married to James Crichton of Ruthven, Esquire; and had issue.

2. Jean, married to John Lesly of Balquhain, mother by him to Walter first
count Lesly in Germany.

3. Mary, married to sir Dougal Campbell of Auchinbreek, and had issue.

He was succeeded by his son,

II. Sir THOMAS ERSKINE, who having from his infancy been educated with king
James VI. was much about his person, and always in great favor with that
prince, who bestowed upon him many marks of his regard and esteem.

He appointed him a gentleman of his bedchamber, anno 1585.

He got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
domino Thomae Erskine de Gogar, of several lands, inter 1595 et 1599.

He had the good fortune to be one of the happy instruments in the rescue of
his majesty's person from the treasonable attempt of John earl of Gowrie, and
his brother Alexander Ruthven, All Scotch historians.
at Perth, on 5th August 1600, having with his own hand killed the latter as he
came down stairs; for which signal service, he had the lordship and estate of
Ditleton conferred upon him, Chart. in pub. archiv.
anno 1603; upon which he got a charter under the great seal; and that same
year accompanied king James into England, where he was made captain of the
English guard, in the room of sir Walter Raleigh.

He was afterward, in recompense of his constant loyalty, Ibidem:
and many faithful services, created viscount Fenton, anno 1606, and was
further dignified with the title of earl of Kelly, on 12th March 1619, by a
charter under the great seal, Ibid. haered. masc. cognom. de Erskine gerentibus.
Thomae, comiti et vicecomiti de Kelly, domino Dirleton, etc. to his
heirs-male, bearing the name of Erskine, etc. He was also elected a knight of
the most noble order of the garter.

He afterward got charters under the great seal, Ibidem.
Thomae comiti de Kelly, domino Dirleton, of several lands, inter 1621 et 1625.

He married Anne, daughter of Gilbert Ogilvie of Powrie, by whom he had two
sons and one daughter.

1. Thomas, his heir.

2. Alexander, who succeeded his brother.

His daughter, lady Anne, married to sir Robert Mowbray of Barnbougle.

He died anno 1639, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. THOMAS, second earl of Kelly, a great loyalist, who joined in a petition
against the covenanters, anno 1642, but to the great joy of that set of men,
Bp. Guthry's memoirs.
he died anno 1643, and having no issue, his estate and honors devolved upon
his brother,

III. ALEXANDER, third earl of Kelly, a man of great worth and honor, also a
steady friend of the royal family; on which account he suffered great hardships.

He was colonel of foot for the counties of Fife and Kinross, Rescinded acts of
parlt.
for duke Hamilton's engagement, anno 1648, and was afterward particularly
excepted out of Oliver Cromwell's act of indemnity, Bp. Guthry's memoirs, and
printed act.
anno 1654.

He married lady Anne Seton, daughter of Alexander earl of Dunsermline, by whom
he had two sons and three daughters.

1. Alexander, his heir.

2. Sir Charles Erskine of Cambo, baronet, lord Lion king at arms, father of
sir Alexander, also lord Lion, father of the present sir William.

1st daughter, lady Mary, married to Gavin earl of Carnwath.

2. Lady Sophia, married to Alexander lord Salton.

3. Lady Margaret, married to William lord Forbes.

He died anno 1677, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. ALEXANDER, fourth earl of Kelly, who married, 1st, Mary, daughter of
colonel Kilpatrick, governor of the Bush in Holland, by whom he had only one
daughter,

Lady Anne, married to sir Alexander Erskine of Cambo, baronet, lord Lion king
at arms, before mentioned, and had a numerous issue.

He married, 2dly, Mary, daughter of sir John Dalziel of Glenae, baronet, by
whom he had a son,

Alexander, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Lady Elizabeth, married to -- Fraser of Inneralachie, and had issue.

He died anno 1692, and was succeeded by his son,

V. ALEXANDER, fifth earl of Kelly, who married lady Anne Lindsay, daughter of
Colin earl of Balcarras, by whom he had a son,

Alexander, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Lady Anne.

He died anno 1710, and was succeeded by his son,

VI. ALEXANDER, sixth earl of Kelly, who married, 1st, miss Murray, daughter of
William Murray of Abercairny, Esquire; by whom he had no issue.

He married, 2dly, a daughter of doctor Archibald Pitcairn of that ilk, by whom
he had three sons and three daughters.

1. Alexander, now earl of Kelly.

2. Mr. Archibald, a captain in the army.

3. Mr. Andrew, also an officer in the army.

1st daughter, lady Betty, married to Walter MacFarlane of that ilk, Esquire;.

2. Lady Anne.

3. Lady Janet.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. ALEXANDER, seventh earl of Kelly.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st gules, an imperial crown, within a double tressure
counterflowered or; 2d argent, a pale sable.

SUPPORTERS; two griffons.

CREST; a demi-lion rampant gules.

MOTTO; Decori decus addit avito.

CHIEF SEAT
At Kelly, a beautiful seat in the county of Fise.

GORDON Viscount KENMURE.
AS the origin, grandeur, and antiquity of the great and illustrious surname of
Gordon is fully set forth under the title of duke of Gordon, we shall proceed
to deduce the descent of this noble family from their immediate ancestor, viz.

VI. Sir ADAM de GORDON, head or chief of the family of Gordon, was the sixth
generation of that illustrious house from Richard, who lived in the reigns of
king Malcolm IV. and king William the Lion, and the first who settled in the
north of Scotland. He was one of the greatest men of his time, was killed at
the battle of Halidonhill, anno 1333, and lest issue four sons.

1. Sir Alexander, who succeeded his father in all his lands in the north. Vide
title duke of Gordon.

2. William de Gordon, the first of this family.

3. John de Gordon.

4. Thomas de Gordon. Rymer, tom. III. p. 396.


VII. WILLIAM de GORDON, second son of sir Adam, got from his father most of
his lands in the south of Scotland, viz. the lands and barony of Stitchel, etc.
which appears from a charter of Thomas Randolf earl of Murray, to sir Adam de
Gordon knight, and William Gordon his son, and his heirs, of the lands and
tenement of Stitchel, Charta penes dom. Robert. Pringle de Stitchel.
with the pertinents, etc. which charter is confirmed by king Robert Bruce,
anno 1315.

Also the lands of Glenkenns in Galloway, which were acquired by sir Adam
Gordon from John de Maxwell, anno 1297, and which comprehended the lands of
Lochinvar, Chart. in the archives of the fam. of Kenmure.
Kenmure, etc. whereby he became one of the most considerable barons of that
country.

After the battle of Durham, in 1346, it seems he had been guilty of some
unwarrantable practices with his neighbors the borderers, which appears from
an ample remission from William lord Douglas, then guardian of Scotland, to
William de Gordon, and all his followers from Galloway, whereby they are
received into the faith and peace of their sovereign lord the king, and are
restored to all their heritages and conquests every where within the kingdom,
and discharges them of all transgressions they had committed after the battle
of Durham, Ibidem.
etc. The remission is dated the 9th May 1354.

He obtained also from Robert earl of Strathearn, (afterward king Robert II.)
a charter, Willielmo Gordon domino de Stitchel, of the heretable keeping of the
new forest of Glenkenns in Galloway, in as ample a manner as the said earl had
got it himself from David king of Scotland, Ibidem.
his uncle, etc. The grant is dated 8th April 1358.

He died about the year 1370, and was succeeded by his son,

VIII. ROGER de GORDON of Stitchel, who, with sir William Borthwick, were
appointed commissioners to a treaty with the English about settling the
marches, which they happily concluded. Ibidem, and Rymer, tom. VIII. p. 58.
The agreement bearing date at Clochmabanestane the 6th November 1398.

He was killed in the service of his country at the battle of Homildon,
together with his chief sir Adam, and many of his brave countrymen, anno 1402,
and was succeeded by his son, Fordun, vol. II. p. 434.


IX. Sir ALEXANDER GORDON of Stitchel, who was retoured heir to his father, and
infest in the lands of Kenmure on a precept of sasine, Chart chiv. fam. Kenmure.
obtained from Archibald earl of Douglas, then superior of Galloway, dated 24th
January 1403.

The earl of Douglas, having been long a prisoner in England, obtained liberty
to come to Scotland, and sir Alexander Gordon became one of the hostages for
his ransom, or return into England, or for his surrendering himself a true
prisoner to John of Lancaster, the king's son, or to the king himself; Rymer,
tom. VIII. p. 539.
and gets letters of safe conduct for going into England, entering himself
hostage, etc. anno 1408.

The earl afterward, in consideration of these good services, and on payment
of fiftyfive nobles in gold, gives him a ratification of the rights of all his
lands in the lordship of Galloway; Chart. in archiv. fam. de Kenmure.
also a new grant, dated 28th May 1408, of the twenty-merk land of old extent,
of Balmaclellan, lying in the lordship of Galloway, which is still in the
family.

And, by another deed dated in June 1412, he is made bailie of the barony of
Earlstoun, Ibidem.
etc.

He left issue two sons.

1. Roger de Gordon.

2. Adam of Holm, whose son Quintin de Gordon was infeft in the lands of Holm
in 1465, of whom William Gordon late of Holm, Ibidem.
now of Craig, is the lineal heir.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. ROGER de GORDON, who by a charter, as proprietor of the lands and barony of
Stitchel, confirms to St. Mary, and the monks of Jedburgh, a grant formerly
made to them, Chartulary of Kelso.
of two ox-gangs of land by William de Gordon, sometime lord of Stitchel, dated
1st June 1431.

In 1439, he made a resignation of his lands of Stitchel in favors of his son
William, Chart. in pub. archiv.
reserving to himself the liferent.

And dying about the year 1442, was succeeded by his son the said,

XI. WILLIAM de GORDON, promiscuously designed of Stitchel and Lochinvar; which
last was part of the lands in Galloway, acquired by sir Adam Gordon from John
de Maxwell in 1297, before noticed, and which continued to be the chief title
of the family till they were nobilitate, and this William was the first of them
that settled and resided in Galloway.

He got from king James II. a charter of the lands and barony of Stitchel,
Willielmo de Gordon, filio et haeredi apparenti Rogeri de Gordon, domini de
Stitchel, Ibidem.
etc. dated 7th February 1440.

He married --, by whom he had four sons and one daughter.

1. John, his heir.

2. Alexander, who, M. S. hist. of the family, et chart. in arch. fam. de
Kenmure.
in 1490, purchased the lands of Auchinreoch, etc. and was ancestor of the
Gordons of Aird, now Earlstoun, and others.

3. George, who acquired the lands of Troquhain in 1494, and of him the present
George Gordon of Troquhain is lineally descended. Ibidem.


4. Roger, who married -- MacNaught, heiress of Crago, Ibidem.
and was ancestor of the present Alexander Gordon of Crago.

His daughter, Margaret, married to sir Thomas MacLellan of Bombie, Ibidem.
ancestor of lord Kirkcudbright.

He survived the year 1450, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. Sir JOHN GORDON of Lochinvar, who got a charter from king James IV.
dilecto armigero nostro Johanni Gordon de Lochinvar, Chart. in pub. archiv.
totas et integras quadraginta solidatas terrarum de Corscranthane antiqui
extentus, etc. dated in 1492.

And another charter of the lands of Middlethird of Kirkcormack, Ibidem.
etc. dated in 1501.

He got a grant of the bailiary of Kirkanders from Patrick earl of Bothwell,
anno 1504.

Also three charters from king James IV. of a great many other lands in 1506,
1507, and 1509; Ibidem.
by all which it appears he was possessed of a vast estate.

He married, 1st, Annabella, daughter of Robert lord Boyd, by Marian, daughter
of sir Robert Maxwell of Calderwood, by whom he had a son,

Alexander de Gordon.

He married, 2dly, Elizabeth Lindsay, by whom he had three sons and two
daughters.

1. Sir Robert, of Accarsan of Glenn, who carried on the line of this family,
of whom afterward.

2. William, ancestor of the Gordons of Crauchlaw, of whom are descended the
Gordons of Pulvenan, Grange, and Balmeg, etc. in vicecomitatu de Wigton.

3. John, who obtained from his father the lands of Balmaclellan, now
Hardlands, purchased from the daughters of Quintin Gordon, a son of the family
of Holm, infeft in these lands in 1465, as before observed.

1st daughter, Elizabeth, married to sir William Douglas of Drumlanrig,
ancestor of the duke of Queensberry.

2. Janet, married, 1st, to Alexander Stewart of Gairlies, ancestor of the earl
of Galloway; and, 2dly, to sir William Keith of Inverugie.

Sir John had also a natural son, to whom he gave the lands of Crathlet, upon
which he got a charter, Ibidem.
wherein he is designed Willielmus filius domini Johannis Gordon de Lochinvar,
dated in 1506. He was afterward legitimate on 23d March 1538.

Sir John died in the end of 1512, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. Sir ALEXANDER de GORDON, who, in his father's lifetime, was designed of
Kenmure.

He was a man of fine parts, and in great favor with king James III. who made
him one of the gentlemen of his bedchamber when a young man, and gave him a
new grant of the superiority of the lands of Kenmure, Lagan, Balmaclellan, etc.
the superiority being then in the crown, by the forfeiture of the earl of
Douglas, and erected them all into one free barony, holding blench of the
crown; Ibidem.
upon which he got a charter, Alexandro Gordon de Kenmure, filio et haeredi
apparenti Johannis Gordon de Lochinvar, etc. dated anno 1487, Ibidem.
which was afterward confirmed by king James IV. anno 1489.

Some time thereafter he had the misfortune to kill John Dunbar of Mochrum,
then steward of Kirkcudbright, for which he was obliged to abscond, and his
father and friends were exeemed from the jurisdiction of the said steward, on
account of the deadly feud subsisting for the said slaughter, Ibidem.
by a privy seal, dated 4th September 1508.

He afterward got a charter from king James IV. of the lands and barony of
Stitchel, etc. Alexandro de Gordon, militi, filio et haeredi apparenti Johannis
Gordon de Lochinvar, Charta in archivis Jacobi IV.
et Elizahethae Stewart sponsae suae, etc. dated in 1512.

He married, 1st, Janet, daughter of sir William Douglas of Drumlanrig and
Elizabeth Crichton his spouse, by a dispensation from the Pope, on account of
consanguinity, but she died without issue.

He married, 2dly, Elizabeth Stewart, sister to James earl of Murray, by whom
he had one daughter.

Jean Gordon, who claimed his estate, but after a long process before the lords
of council, she was obliged to renounce all right she had to the estate of
Kenmure, etc. in favors of her uncle sir Robert, Chart. in archiv. fam. de
Kenmure.
anno 1517. To which deed the lords of council are witnesses.

She married Lauchlan Maclntosh of that ilk, who, in consideration of her being
an heiress, quartered her arms with his own, and she, with consent of her said
husband, Ibidem.
ratified her former renunciation, anno 1520.

Sir Alexander had also a natural son, named Roger, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who was legitimate, anno 1546.

He was killed with his royal leader king James IV. at the battle of Floudon,
in 1513, and was succeeded by his brother,

XIII. Sir ROBERT GORDON, formerly designed of Accarsan of Glen, now of
Lochinvar, who got a charter from king James V. Roberto de Gordon, militi, of
the lands of Kenmure, Lagan, etc. dated in 1517.

He obtained from queen Mary a grant of the clerkships of the sheriffdom of
Wigton, Charta penes fam. de Kenmure.
and stewarty of Kirkcudbright during life, with power to officiate by deputes.

He married Marian, daughter and sole heiress of John Accarsan of
Glenshyreburn, now called Rusco, Ibidem.
by whom he got all these lands, and built the house of Rusco, etc.

By her he had issue six sons, and three daughters.

1. Sir James.

2. John, Ibidem.
who, in 1518, got a charter of the lands of Barnbarrock, and Barnhausie, and
was ancestor of the Gordons of Haslefield.

3. Alexander, who acquired the lands of Gaitgill, anno 1517; Ibidem.
also the lands of Darmolane, and Markbane, in vicecom. de Wigton.

4. George.

5. Roger.

6. David, who married Isabel, daughter of John Muirhead of Culr^och, by whom
he got the lands of Carstramine, etc.

1st daughter, Catharine, married to Patrick Agnew of Salquhary, Ibidem.
ancestor of sir Andrew Agnew of Lochnaw.

2. Elizabeth, married, 1st, to Uthred MacDowal of Machermore; Ibidem.
2dly, to Alexander Livingston of Little-Airds.

3. Janet, married to James, son and heir of Alexander Ogilvie of that ilk,
Ibidem.
ancestor of the earl of Finlater.

And dying about 1520, was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIV. Sir JAMES GORDON of Lochinvar, a man of great accomplishments, and highly
esteemed by king James V. Chart. in pub. archiv.
from whom he got a charter, Jacobo Gordon de Lochinvar, militi, of the lands
of Hardlands, Minebog, and others, dated in 1539.

Also a charter, Ibidem.
duarum market. cum dimidia market. etc. jacen. in baronia de Balmage, etc.
dated in 1541.

He was made the king's chamberlain for five years of the lordship of Galloway,
Charta penes fam. de Kenmure.
by a writ dated 10th March 1528: and by another, dated the 1st April 1537, he
is made governor of the town, Ibidem.
castle, and sortalice of Douglas, and chamberlain of that lordship, then in
the crown by forseiture.

This sir James Gordon, with sir James Douglas of Drumlanrig, and thirty-seven
others, got a remission for the slaughter of Thomas MacLellan of Bombie, Ibidem.
committed in the city of Edinburgh, dated in 1529.

And being in great favor with the king, he was one of those chosen to
accompany him when he went to bring home his queen.

Sir James, upon that occasion, obtained a writ from the king, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
taking all his friends and followers under the immediate care of the
government, and freeing them from answering to courts for any misdemeanor
whatsomever, till sir James's return to Scotland; and as his friends and
followers are all named in the writ of privy seal, it sufficiently shows what a
numerous, flourishing, and considerable family that of Lochinvar then was.

He married Margaret, daughter and sole heiress of Robert Crichton of
Kirkpatrick, Charta penes fam. de Kenmure.
nephew of sir Robert Crichton of Sanquhar, ancestor of the earl of Dumsries,
by whom he got many lands in the parish of Glencairn, and by her had five sons,
and five daughters.

1. John, his heir.

2. William Gordon of Pennygame, ancestor of the present lord Kenmure, of whom
afterward.

3. Robert, who got a grant of the lands of Muirfad, 21st July 1544; Ibidem.
but dying unmarried, his estate went to his nephew John, son of his brother
William of Pennygame.

4. James, who got possession of the lands of Hardlands, Ibidem.
by a charter, dated 2d June 1540.

5. Alexander, who got a tack, from the crown, Ibidem.
of the lands of Slagnaw in Kelton, and married Janet Kennedy, relict of John
Kennedy of Largs.

1st daughter, Janet, married, 1st, to William earl of Glencairn; and, 2dly, to
Patrick Agnew, sheri^^ of Wigton.

2. Margaret, married to William, son and heir of sir James Douglas of
Drumlanrig, ancestor of the duke of Queensberry.

3. Catharine, married to sir James MacCulloch of Cardness.

4. Helen, married to sir Thomas MacLellan of Bombie, ancestor of lord
Kirkcudbright.

5. Elizabeth, married, 1st, to William Grierson of Lag; 2dly, to William Adair
of Kenhitt.

Sir James was killed at the battle of Pinkie, in 1547, and was succeeded by
his eldest son,

XV. Sir JOHN GORDON of Lochinvar, a man of great honor, loyalty, and
integrity, who suffered greatly for his firm adherence to the interest of queen
Mary.

In 1555, the queen appointed him justiciar of the stewarty of Galloway; and
her son, king James, Ibidem.
renewed his commission anno 1587.

In the year 1561, he entered into a contract with the predecessors of the duke
of Queensberry, earl of Dumfries, sir Robert Kilpatrick, sir William Grierson,
etc. whereby they were bound to stand by one another against all mortals, to
keep together in all assemblies, armies, and wars, and to submit all
differences amongst themselves to the majority, etc.

In 1567, he is one of the subscribers of the bond for confirming the king's
authority, and securing the government, as established by law.

He obtained a charter from queen Mary, of a great many lands, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
Johanni Gordon de Lochinvar, militi, etc. dated anno 1565.

Also six charters from king James VI. domino Johanni Gordon de Lochinvar,
militi, of several other lands; and particularly one, Johanni Gordon, Ibidem.
militi, filio et haeredi Margaretae Crichton, filiae et haeredis quondam
Roberti Crichton de Kirkpatrick, etc. totas et integras terras de, etc. dated
in 1580.

In 1562, he made a resignation of his whole estate in favors of his brother,
William Gordon of Pennygame, Charta penes fam. de Kenmure.
failing heirs male of his own body, he having then no maleissue; and this
William's grand-son's grandson actually succeeded to the honors of Kenmure, as
will be shown hereafter.

He married, 1st, Juliana, daughter of -- Home of Wedderburn, by whom he had
one daughter,

Margaret, married to Hugh earl of Loudoun, in 1572.

In 1563, he married, 2dly, dame Elizabeth Maxwell, M. S. hist. of the family
of Kenmure.
daughter of sir John Maxwell of Terreagles, afterward lord Herries in right
of his mother, by whom he had five sons, and four daughters.

1. Sir Robert, designed in his father's lifetime sir Robert of Glen.

2. William, appointed commendator of Glenluce in 1581, and infeft in the lands
of Glenquicken and Garrocher in 1588; but died without issue.

3. John Gordon of Buitle, who died also without issue.

4. James of Barncrosh, afterward of Buitle, whose son John succeeded to the
estate and honors of Kenmure, as hereafter.

5. Alexander Gordon of Enrig.

1st daughter, Mary, married to Alexander Kennedy of Bargeny.

2. Janet, married to John MacDowal of Garthland.

3. Elizabeth, married to Alexander Stewart of Gairlies, ancestor of the earl
of Galloway.

4. Grizel, married to James lord Carlisse of Torthorald.

He had also a natural son William, infeft in the Kirkland of Balmaclellan in
1570, Chart. in pub. archiv.
and legitimate in 1574.

Sir John dying in 1604, was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVI. Sir ROBERT GORDON, formerly of Glen, now of Lochinvar, who, in his
younger days, was one of the strongest and most active men of his time.

He was one of the three defendants at the famous tournament, Medulla histor.
Scoti^e. Johnston's hist. p. 714.
proclaimed by king James VI. to whom his daughter, princess Elizabeth,
delivered the prizes, though her own brother prince Henry, and several others
of the first rank, were challengers.

He also gave many remarkable instances of his strength and courage, in defense
of Galloway against the inhabitants of Annandale, whose cattle, having been
carried off by the English, they were in use of making reprisals on their next
neighbors.

In one of those encounters, they having killed James Gordon of Lochinkitt, his
friend and follower, he went down the country, and burnt the houses of Gratney,
Wamphrey, Lockerby, Reidhall, Langrigs, etc. and killed Richard Irvine of
Gratney, and took several others of them prisoners, for which, and some other
daring actions of that kind, king James sent out a strong party to apprehend
him; but he audaciously deforced the king's party, laid violent hands on the
officer who commanded them, and made him eat and swallow his majesty's warrant
for apprehending him.

However, being at last weary of these lawless practices, his father and
friends made intercession with the king, and obtained from him an ample
remission for all his former misbehaviour, upon which he came to court, Charta
pen^^ fam. de Kenmure.
and soon became so great a favorite of the king, that he made him one of the
gentlemen of his bedchamber.

After his accession to the crown of England, he bestowed upon him several
lands, Ibidem.
then in the crown by the annexation in 1587, by which he became possessed of a
vast estate, Chart. in pub. archiv.
as appears from many charters, domino Roberto Gordon de Lochinvar, militi, etc.

In 1621, he was created a baronet, by a charter, Ibidem.
Roberto Gordon de Lochinvar, militi, baroniae de Galloway in America, etc.

He married lady Elizabeth Ruthven, eldest daughter of John earl of Gowrie, by
whom he had two sons, and two daughters.

1. Sir John of Lochinvar, afterward viscount Kenmure.

2. Robert of Gilston, who got a grant from the crown of the barony of
Galloway, in Nova Scotia, with many ample privileges; but he died without issue.

1st daughter; Elizabeth, married to John lord Herries, afterward earl of
Nithsdale.

2. Isabel, married to Alexander Fraser, younger of Philorth, ancestor of lord
Salton.

He had also a natural son, John, who was infeft in the lands of Haslefield,
Ibidem.
anno 1624, and married Elizabeth, only daughter and heiress of Alexander
Gordon of Carstramon.

Sir Robert dying in 1628, was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVII. Sir JOHN GORDON of Lochinvar, who, in his father's lifetime, got a
charter of the ^ive pound land of Nether-Barcapel, the five merk land of
Kirkonnel, Blackmark, Ibidem.
etc. Johanni de Gordon filio legitimo natu maximo, domini Roberti Gordon de
Lochinvar, etc. dated anno 1619.

He was a great loyalist, and steady friend of king Charles I. who highly
esteemed him, and raised him to the dignity of the peerage, by the titles of
viscount Kenmure, Ibidem.
lord Lochinvar, etc. by letters patent, dated 8th May 1633, to him et
haeredibus masculis quibuscunque, etc.

And as a further testimony of his majesty's favor, he got part of his lands
erected into a royal burrow, Ibidem.
with ample jurisdiction, to be called the burgh of Galloway, now New-Galloway.

This sir John sold his barony of Stitchel, which had been so long in the
possession of his family; and, it is said, gave the price of it in a purse to
the duke of Buckingham, in hopes that he would favor his title to the earldom
of Gowrie, which he claimed in right of his mother, eldest daughter of John the
last earl: but, this is said to have happened the very night before the duke
was stabbed by Felton, and so had no effect.

He married lady Jean Campbell, daughter of Archibald seventh earl of Argyle,
by whom he had a son and successor,

XVIII. JOHN, second viscount Kenmure, to whom Archibald lord Lo^n, afterward
marquis of Argyle, and William earl of Morton, were tutors testamentar; but he
dying without issue, was succeeded in his estate and honors by his cousin and
heir-male John, son of James of Barn^ro^^, to whom we now return.

XVI. JAMES GORDON of Barnerosh and Buitle, a younger son of sir John Gordon of
Lochinvar, by Elizabeth, daughter of sir John Maxwell of Terreagles, who
married Margaret, Writs of the family of Kenmure.
daughter of sir John Vaus, and relict of John Glendoning of Drumrash, by whom
he had two sons.

1. John.

2. Robert.

XVII. JOHN the eldest son succeeded to the estate and honors of Kenmure, as
above, and was the third viscount Kenmure; but he dying without issue, was
succeeded by his brother,

XVII. ROBERT, fourth viscount Kenmure, a man of great loyalty and integrity,
who suffered many hardships on account of his firm attachment to the royal
family. His estate was forfeited by the parliament, and a reward put upon his
head by Oliver Cromwell, to any who should bring him in dead or alive.

However, he survived the restoration, went to court, and married one of the
ladies of the bedchamber, M. S. Hist. of the family of Kenmure.
anno 1661. He returned to Scotland immediately thereafter, and died at
Greenlaw that same year without issue, whereby his estate and honors devolved
upon his next heir-male, John of Pennygame, lineally descended of the
forementioned William Gordon of Pennygame, to whom we now return.

XV. WILLIAM GORDON of Pennygame, second son of sir James Gordon of Lochinvar,
Chart. penes familiam de Kenmure, et in pub. archiv.
[No. XIV. of these memoirs,] by Margaret his wife, daughter and heiress of
Robert Crichton of Kirkpatrick, was infeft in the lands of Kilreoch and
Grobdale, by a charter dated anno 1542.

He married Helen, daughter of Alexander Stewart of Gairlies, ancestor of the
earl of Galloway, by whom he had a son and successor,

XVI. JOHN GORDON of Pennygame, Ibidem.
who succeeded also to the lands of Muirfad, upon the death of his uncle
Robert, as before observed.

He was succeeded by his son,

XVII. ALEXANDER GORDON of Pennygame, who was a great loyalist, but died about
1645, having contracted a great deal of debt in the beginning of the civil
commotions. This appears by several apprisings and adjudications led against
his estate after his death, of which we shall only mention one, G^^er. regist*
book.
viz. appris^^ at the instance of -- Ferguson of Craigdarroch against the lands
of Pennygame and others, which belonged to the deceast Alexander Gordon of
Pennygame, etc.

He left issue a son and successor,

XVIII. WILLIAM GORDON of Pennygame, Writs of the fam. of Kenmure.
who married -- daughter of --, by whom he had issue two sons.

1. John, afterward viscount Kenmure.

2. Alexander, who carried on the line of this family.

He died about 1660, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIX. JOHN GORDON of Pennygame, who, upon the death of Robert fourth viscount
Kenmure, Ibidem.
succeeded to his estate and honors as before observed, anno 1661, and was the
fifth viscount, but dying without issue in 1662, was succeeded by his brother,

XIX. ALEXANDER, sixth viscount Kenmure, who, upon his brother's succession to
the honors of Kenmure, was designed by the title of Pennygame, which appears
by an inhibition, "at the instance of John Scott merchant burgess of Edinburgh,
against Alexander Gordon of Pennygame, now viscount Kenmure, heir-male to
umquhil Robert viscount Kenmure his predecessor, who was heir-male to umquhill
John viscount Kenmure his predecessor, who was heir-male to umquhil John
viscount Kenmure his predecessor, who was son and heir to umquhil John, Gener.
regist. book, ad ann. 1663.
first viscount Kenmure, his father, then designed John Gordon of Lochinvar,
etc. and sua heir-male by progress, to him upon the passive titles, etc." dated
6th July 1663.

He afterward got a charter under the great seal, Chart in cancellaria.
of the lands of Kenmure, etc. dated anno 1676.

In his younger years he was bred to the army, came early into the revolution,
and had the command of a regiment at the battle of Killycrankie, where many of
his officers, and most of his men were slain.

He married, Charta penes fam de Kenmure.
1st, the daughter and heiress of -- Gordon of Auchlauin, by whom he had one
daughter,

Agnes, married, 1st, to William Maxwell of Kelton, second son of the earl of
Nithsdale; 2dly, to John Lindsay of Wauchop.

He married, 2dly, Marian, daughter of -- MacCulloch of Ardwell, Ibidem.
by whom he had a son,

William, his heir, -- and three daughters,

1. Jean, married to William Gordon of Skirmers.

2. Marian, married to sir Alexander Gordon of Earlstoun.

3. Elizabeth, married, 1st, to Samuel Maxwell of Newlaw; 2dly, to Samuel Brown
of Mollance.

He married, 3dly, lady Grizel Stewart, daughter of James earl of Galloway,
Ibidem.
by whom he had two sons and three daughters.

1. John Gordon of Greenlaw, who married Nicholas, daughter of -- Stewart of
Castlestewart, and had issue.

2. James Gordon, Esquire; who married Grizel, eldest daughter and heiress of
William Gordon of Grange.

1st daughter, Mary, married to sir Patrick Maxwell of Springkell, Bart.

2. Grizel, married to Mr. Robert Gordon of Dundeugh.

3. Isabel, married to John MacGhie of Balmaghie.

He dying in School, was succeeded by his eldest son,

XX. WILLIAM, seventh viscount Kenmure, who married Mary, daughter of sir John
Dalziel of Glenae, and sister of Robert earl of Carnwath, by whom he had three
sons, and one daughter.

1. Robert, his heir.

2. John, who succeeded his brother.

3. James, died unmarried.

His daughter Henriet, married her mother's cousin-german, John Dalziel, Esquire;
son of captain James Dalziel, brother to sir John Dalziel of Glenae foresaid.

This viscount had the misfortune to be engaged in the rebellion 1715, was
taken prisoner at Preston, tried by his peers, condemned and executed, and his
estate and honors were forfeited to the crown.

XXI. ROBERT, his eldest son, had it not been for the forfeiture, would have
been eighth viscount Kenmure; but he dying unmarried, was succeeded by his
brother,

XXI. JOHN, who now represents that noble family, etc.

He was bred to the army, but is now retired to his seat in the country.

He married lady Frances MacKenzie, daughter of William earl of Seasorth, by
whom he has issue four sons and one daughter.

1. William.

2. John.

3. Adam.

4. Robert.

The daughter, Frances.

ARMS.
Azure, three boars heads erazed or.

CREST; on a wreath, a demi-savage, proper, wreathed about his temples and
middle with laurel.

SUPPORTERS; two savages wreathed as the crest, each holding in his outer hand
a battoon erect, proper.

MOTTO; Dread God.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Kenmure-castle, etc. in the stewarty of Kirckudbright.

BOYD Lord BOYD and Earl of KILMARNOCK.
THIS great and ancient family, is descended of a younger son of the
illustrious lord high stewards of Scotland.

ALAN, second lord high steward of Scotland, Stewart's history of the royal
family, p. 46.
was son of Walter, son of Fleance, son of Banquo, thane of Lochaber, who was
murdered by Macbeth the usurper, anno 1043.

By Margaret his wife, daughter of Fergus lord of Galloway, he left issue three
sons.

1. Walter, Ibidem.
third lord high steward of Scotland, who succeeded him, and carried on the
line of that family.

2. Adam, Ibidem and Chartulary of Coldinghame.
who is mentioned in a charter of confirmation of king David I. anno 1139.

3. Simon, who was progenitor of this noble family.

Alan the lord high steward died in 1153.

I. SIMON, Chartulary of Paisley^ penes comitem de Dundonald. Abercrombie, vol.
I. p. 447.
third son of Alan, second lord high steward of Scotland, in the
foundation-charter of the monastery of Paisley, is designed frater Walteri
filii Alani dapiferi regis Scotiae, etc. anno 1161.

He lived after the 1200, and was father of

II. ROBERT, who being of a fair complexion was called Boyt or Boyd, from the
Galic or Celtic word Boidh, which signifies fair or yellow, from which he
assumed his surname, and from him all the Boyds in Scotland are descended.

This Robert Boyd is designed nephew to Walter son of Alan, Ibid. and Nisbet,
v. ^. p. 54.
lord high steward of Scotland, in the charters to the monastery of Paisley.

The same Robert, designed dominus Robertus Boyd, Charta in archiv. villae de
Irvine. history of the shire of Rensiew, p. 55.
is witness to a contract betwixt Bryce de Eglington, and the village of
Irvine, anno 1205.

It may here be observed, that the Boyds have always carried the same armorial
bearings of the lord high stewards, Stewart's hist. of the royal family,
MacKenzie, Nisbet. etc. etc.
which denotes their descent from that illustrious house.

Robert died before the year 1240, and left issue a son and successor, Preface
to sir Jame^ Dal^ymple's collections, p. ^0, et charta penes com. de Glasgow.


III. Sir ROBERT BOYD, who in a charter of sir John Erskine, of the lands of
Halsheil is designed Robertus de Boyd, miles, 1262.

He was a man of great courage and resolution, Crawfurd's peerage. p. 242.
and remarkably distinguished himself at the battle of Largis, where king
Alexander III. obtained a glorious victory over Haco king of Norway, anno 1263,
for which good service, king Alexander rewarded him with a grant of several
lands in Cunninghame, etc.

He died about the year 1270, leaving issue a son,

IV. Sir ROBERT BOYD who succeeded him, Prynne's collections, vol. III. p. 656.
and though he was one of the Scotch barons that swore fealty to king Edward I.
when he overrun Scotland, anno 1296, and is then designed Robertus de Boyt
miles, yet he soon made it appear it was force and not inclination made him do
so; Abercrombie, vol. I. p. 526.
for he joined the great sir William Wallace, anno 1297, and did every thing
that a brave man could do, to free his country from foreign servitude.

He died about the year 1300, and was succeeded by his son,

V. Sir ROBERT BOYD, a great and worthy patriot who, according to doctor
Abercrombie, was one of the first of the Scotch nobles that joined king Robert
Bruce, Ibid. p. 571, and 637.
as soon as he began to assert his title to the crown. The same author says
afterward, he was one of the firmest and fastest friends that great monarch
had.

That king Robert had a high esteem and value for him, appears by the many
lands and baronies he conferred upon him.

He got no less than three charters under the great seal from him, Chart. in
archiv. Rob. I.
of the lands and baronies of Kilmarnock, Bondington, Hertshaw, Kilbrid,
Ardneil, Dalry, and many others, then in the crown, by the forfeiture of John
Baliol, the first dated anno 1308, and the last in 1316.

He was one of the guarantees of a treaty with the English, Rymer, tom. III. p.
1024.
anno 1323.

This great man died in the beginning of the reign of king David Bruce, and
left issue three sons.

1. Sir Thomas, his heir.

2. Sir Alan Boyd, a brave soldier, and steady friend to king David Bruce;
Fordun designs him valens armiger, Fordun, vol. II. p. 331.
etc. He was killed at the siege of Perth, anno 1339.

3. James de Boyd, MacFarlane's collections, v. I. p. 443.
who is witness in a charter, anno 1342.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. Sir THOMAS BOYD of Kilmarnock, Chart. in pub. archiv. et penes com. de
Errol.
who flourished in the reign of king David Bruce.

He married -- daughter of --, by whom he had issue three sons.

1. Sir Thomas, his heir.

2. William, Charta in archivis regis David, et in rotul. Rob. II.
ancestor of the Boyds of Badenheath, who got a charter from king David, anno
1368, and two from king Robert II. in 1375 and 1376, of different lands, in all
which he is designed son of sir Thomas Boyd of Kilmarnock, etc.

3. Robert de Boyd, Chart. in pub. archiv.
ancestor of the house of Portencross in Air-shire.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. Sir THOMAS BOYD, designed dominus de Kilmarnock, Remissio penes comitem
de Errol.
who, it seems, had been accessory to the slaughter of -- Neilson of Dalrymple,
etc. for which he got a remission from Robert duke of Albany, governor of
Scotland, anno 1409.

He married one of the daughters and coheiresses of sir John Gifford lord of
Yester, Charta penes marchionem de Tweeddale.
by whom he got a considerable accession to his estate, and by her he had
issue, a son and successor,

VIII. Sir THOMAS BOYD, lord of Kilmarnock, who being a man of parts, Rymer,
tom. X. p. 125.
made a great figure in the reign of king James I. and was one of the sureties
for him when he came to Scotland, to concert measures with his subjects about
his liberty, anno 1421.

And was appointed one of the hostages for his ransom, Ibid. p. 308, and 327.
anno 1424.

He married Janet, Crawfurd's peerage.
daughter of -- Montgomery of Ardrossan, by whom he had two sons.

1. Sir Thomas, his heir.

2. Mr. William Boyd, who betook himself to the service of the church, and was
abbot of Kilwinning. He obtained a charter from king James III. History of
Glasgow, page 233.
confirming the former grants of the crown to that abbey, and the erection of
their state into a regality, etc.

Sir Thomas died anno 1432, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. Sir THOMAS BOYD, lord of Kilmarnock, who married -- daughter of --, by
whom he had two sons and two daughters.

1. Robert, his heir, afterward lord Boyd.

2. Sir Alexander Boyd of Duncow, who was preceptor to the young king James
III. etc. etc. etc.

1st daughter, Crawfurd's peerage.
Janet, married to John Maxwell of Calderwood.

2. Margaret, Charta penes comitem de Errol.
married to Alexander lord Montgomery.

He was killed at Craignaughthill in Renfrew-shire, on the 9th of July 1439, by
sir Alexander Stewart, Buchanan.
in revenge of lord Darnly's death, whom sir Thomas had killed sometime before.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. Sir ROBERT BOYD lord of Kilmarnock, who was a man of great parts, Lives of
the offic. of state, p. 313.
and an eminent statesman. He was in high favor with king James II. who
created him a lord of parliament, by the title of lord Boyd, Rymer, tom. XI. p.
423.
anno 1459, and that same year he was one of the commissioners appointed to
treat of a peace with the English, when a truce was concluded.

After the death of king James II. the lord Boyd was appointed justiciar of
Scotland, and one of the lords of the regency, together with the archbishops of
St. Andrews and Glasgow, Lives of the offic. of state^
the bishop of Dunkeld, the earl of Orkney, the lords Graham, Kennedy and
Evandale, who was chancellor; and it is acknowledged by all our historians,
that the affairs of the nation were for several years managed with great
prudence, equity and justice.

The lord Boyd was twice sent one of the ambassadors extraordinary to the court
of England, Rymer, tom. XI. p. 517, and 541.
in the years 1464 and 1465, and conducted his negociations with great
dexterity, honor and fidelity.

After the death of archbishop Kennedy, the chief management of all public
affairs devolved upon the lord Boyd, who was a man of fine address, and great
authority and power. His brother sir Alexander was employed to teach the king
the manly and military exercises, and consequently much about his person: in
short, there was scarce any body could have access to his Majesty, without the
Boyds permission. The king was still in the palace of Linlithgow, where the
lord Kennedy one of the regents, (and no friend of the Boyds,) kept a very
watchful eye over him; the lord Boyd therefore thought it necessary for his own
interest, to have his majesty out of lord Kennedy's hands, which, by the blind
of a hunting-match, (no doubt with his majesty's approbation) he accomplished,
and got him safely conducted to Edinburgh, much against the lord Kennedy's
inclination, but where he was afterward entirely under the direction of the
Boyds.

However, lord Boyd, like a wife statesman, prevailed with the king to call a
parliament, wherein it was declared, that the lord Boyd had done the king and
country good service, Records of parliament.
in bringing his majesty from Linlithgow to Edinburgh, and he was entirely
acquitted thereof; this act of exoneration past 25th October 1466. And further,
the lord Boyd was declared governor to the young king and his brother, Ibidem.
ex consensu dominorum concilii nostri, etc. which was also ratified in
parliament.

Upon the death of lord Livingston, he was appointed great chamberlain of
Scotland, Chart. in pub. archiv.
by a charter from the king, anno 1467.

He got charters under the great seal, of a vast number of lands and baronies,
Ibidem.
Roberto domino Boyd, gubernatori regni et regis, etc. inter 1466 et 1469.

And though this lord was certainly at the head of all public affairs, Black acts
of parliament.
yet it appears he never acted in any great matters of state, without the
advice and concurrence of those joined in commission with him by parliament,
such as the king's marriage, his brother's, the duke of Albany, earl of Mar,
etc.

About this time the lord Boyd's eldest son, who was certainly one of the most
accomplished young men in the kingdom, married lady Mary Stewart, the king's
eldest sister, with the consent and approbation of his majesty. He got by her a
great accession to his estate, and was by king James III. created earl of
Arran; this indeed greatly aggrandized his family, and at the same time, was
one of the causes of its being so soon pulled down and brought to ruin.

They became greatly envied by some, and for their exorbitant power, and their
having engrossed the whole authority of the nation to themselves, were as much
hated by others. And though there are no particular misdemeanors or acts of
oppression laid to their charge, yet their enemies became innumerable.

The old lord was obliged to be much from court, in the execution of his office
of great chamberlain; his son the earl of Arran was at Denmark upon an embassy,
and his lady with him, who always accompanied him wherever he went. The enemies
of the family took that opportunity of working their ruin. They first got the
king's favor and affection alienated from them; they then prevailed with his
majesty to call a parliament in 1469, to which lord Boyd, his son the earl of
Arran, and his brother sir Alexander Boyd of Duncow, were summoned to appear,
and answer for such crimes as should be exhibited against them. The old lord
being sensible of the great authority and power of the faction that was formed
against him, and being also shocked at the king's so suddenly withdrawing his
countenance from him, Lives (...) offic. of state.
did not think fit to appear and stand his trial, but retired to England, and
died at Alnwick the year thereafter, anno 1470.

His son the earl of Arran was out of the kingdom, so could not attend; but his
brother sir Alexander, trusting to his own innocence, appeared and stood his
trial. The chief crime of which they were all accused, was their carrying off
the king from Linlithgow to Edinburgh, which was declared treason; and though
they were all acquitted for that crime, Acts of parliament.
by act of parliament anno 1466, as before observed, yet the torrent against
them was now become so violent, that the old lord and his son were found guilty
of treason, condemned in absence, and all their estates and honors were
forfeited to the crown. Sir Alexander who stood his trial, was found guilty art
and part of carrying the king from Linlithgow, condemned, and executed on the
Castle-hill, anno 1469. A remarkable instance of the instability of human
grandeur.

Robert lord Boyd married Mariota, daughter of sir Robert Maxwell of
Calderwood, by whom he had three sons and one daughter.

1. Thom^s, earl of Arran.

2. Alexander, who carried on the line of this family, of whom afterward.

3. Archibald, first of the Boyds of Bonshaw.

His daughter Elizabeth, married Archibald fifth earl of Angus, lord high
chancellor of Scotland, and had issue.

XI. THOMAS, eldest son of Robert lord Boyd, Chart. in pub. archiv.
created earl of Arran, as before observed, got charters under the great seal,
Thomae Boyd comiti Arramae et Mariae Stewart ejus conj^gi, of many lands and
baronies, in the years 1468 and 1469.

He was a man of fine parts and great honor, was often employed in
negociations of state, which he always managed with great fidelity. There is
not the least stain upon his character, transmitted to us by any historian,
except that of his being along with his father, when the king was brought from
Linlithgow to Edinburgh.

The earl, upon the ruin of his family, retired with his lady to Denmark, Lives
of the offic. of state.
and afterward went into the service of the duke of Burgundy; where, for his
brave and gallant behavior, he was highly esteemed, caressed, and well
supported by that prince, but he died soon thereafter at Antwerp, anno 1471.

His lady then returned to Scotland, was graciously received by her brother,
and anno 1474, was married to James lord Hamilton.

By the said lady Mary Stewart, he left issue a son,

James, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Lady Margaret Boyd, married, 1st, to Alexander fourth lord Forbes; 2dly, to
David earl of Cassilis, but died without issue.

XII. JAMES, only son of Thomas earl of Arran, a youth of a fine spirit, and of
great hopes, was restored to the lordship of Boyd, and put in see of the
estate, by a charter from king James III. as administrator to the prince his
son, to and in savours of dame Mary Stewart lady Hamilton, the king's ^ister,
in liferent, and James Boyd her son in fee, of the lands and barony of
Kilmarnock, Dalry, Kilbride, Nodisdale, Montford, Rivisdailmure, Raillston,
Flat, and many others, in the shire of Air, which had fallen to the prince and
steward of Scotland, through the forfeiture of Robert lord Boyd, Chart. penes
comitem de Errol, et in pub. archivi^.
etc. etc. The charter is dated 14th October 1482, and he was the second lord
Boyd, but dying without issue, anno 1484, the estate and honors again returned
to the crown, but were afterward conferred upon his cousin and heir-male
Robert, son of his uncle Alexander, to whom we now return,

XI. ALEXANDER, second son of Robert lord Boyd, great chamberlain of Scotland,
a man of great worth and honor, got much into favor with king James IV.
Ibidem, and black acts of parliament.
who constituted him bailie and chamberlain of Kilmarnock, anno 1505; and he
was then designed silius quondam Roberti domini Boyd.

He married a daughter of sir Robert Colvile of Ochiltree, by whom he had three
sons.

1. Robert, afterward lord Boyd.

2. Thomas, ancestor of the Boyds of Pitcon.

3. Adam, of whom the Boyds of Pinkhill and Trochrig, etc. are descended.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. ROBERT, who having served king James V. faithfully and honestly, both at
home and abroad, Chart. in pub. archiv. et penes com. de Errol.
was in great savor with that prince, who restored him to the honors and
estates of the lord Boyd, anno 1536.

He was afterward served and retoured heir to James lord Boyd, his father's
brother's son, in the lands and barony of Kilmarnock, Ibidem.
Dalry, Kilbride, etc. etc. 11th March 1544, and was third lord Boyd.

He married Helen, daughter of sir John Somervile of Camnethan, by whom he had
a son,

Robert, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Margaret, married to sir Neil Montgomery of Lenshaw.

He again got confirmed to him by queen Mary, all the estates, honors and
dignities that belonged to the deceast Robert lord Boyd, Ibidem.
his grandfather, with a novodamus, etc. dated anno 1549; and he dying soon
thereafter, was succeeded by his son,

XIII. ROBERT, fourth lord Boyd, a man of great honor and integrity, a firm
and steady friend of queen Mary. He never deserted her interest till it was
totally suppressed in Scotland; but he afterward came to be in great favor
with the king, Rymer, (...) V. p. 803.
and was one of the commissioners appointed to negotiate a treaty with the
court of England, anno 1578.

He married Margaret, Contract p^nes com. (...) Errol.
daughter and heiress of John Colquhoun of Glins, by whom he had three sons and
four daughters.

1. Robert, master of Boyd, Ibidem.
who, upon his father's resignation, got a charter of several lands, anno 1555,
but died before him without issue.

2. Thomas, his father's heir.

3. William, Ibidem.
who married the heiress of Badenheath, with whom he got that barony.

1st daughter, Giles, married to Hugh earl of Eglington, without issue.

2. Agnes, married to sir John Colquhoun of Luss, and had issue.

3. Christian, married to sir James Hamilton of Evandale, and had issue.

4. Elizabeth, married to John Cunninghame of Drumquhassel.

He died in the 72d year of his age, anno 1589, and was succeeded by his son,

XIV. THOMAS, fifth lord Boyd, who got charters under the great seal, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
Thomae domino Boyd, of many lands and baronies, inter 1595 et 1599.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir Matthew Campbell of Loudoun, Contr. penes
com. de (...)
by whom he had four sons and three daughters.

1. Robert, master of Boyd.

2. Sir Thomas Boyd of Bedlay.

3. Adam, who married Margaret, Contract (...)
sister of Robert Galbraith of Kilcroich.

4. John Boyd, Esquire;.

1st daughter, Ma^iana, married to James earl of Abercorn.

2. Isabel, married to John Blair of that ilk.

3. Agnes, Contract ib^d.
married to sir Gilbert Elphingston of Blythswood.

He died anno 1619.

XV. ROBERT, master of Boyd, eldest son and apparent heir of Thomas the fifth
lord, who got a charter from his father, Roberto magistro de Boyd, Charta. ibid.
of several lands, anno 1590.

He married lady Jean Ker, daughter of Mark earl of Lothian, by whom he had two
sons.

1. Robert, afterward lord Boyd.

2. James, ancestor of the present earl of Errol, of whom more hereafter.

He died before his father, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVI. ROBERT, who was served heir to his father Robert master of Boyd, Retour
penes com. deErrol.
anno 1612.

He succeeded to his grandfather anno 1619, and was sixth lord Boyd.

He got charters, under the great seal, of many lands and baronies, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
inter 1620 et 1625, and married, Is It, Margaret Montgomery, only daughter and
heiress of Robert master of Eglington, Charta penes com. deErrol.
by whom he had no issue.

He married, 2dly, lady Christian Hamilton, daughter of Thomas earl of
Haddington, by whom he had a son,

Robert, his heir, -- and four daughters.

1. Jean, married to Alexander Morrison of Prestongrange.

2. Isabel, married to John Sinclair of Stevenson.

3. Christian, married to sir William Scot of Harden.

4. Marian, married to sir James Dundass of Arniston.

He died anno 1628, and was succeeded by his son,

XVII. ROBERT, seventh lord Boyd, who got charters, under the great seal,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the lands and barony of Kilmarnock, and many others, inter 1632 et 1635.

He married lady Anne Fleming, daughter of John earl of Wigton, Contract penes
com. de Errol.
but dying without issue, anno 1640, his estate and honors devolved upon his
uncle and heir-male,

XVI. JAMES, second son of Robert the master before mentioned, Retour ibid.
was retoured heir to Robert lord Boyd, his brother's son, 8th March 1641, and
was the eighth lord Boyd.

He was a man of great worth and honor, a firm and steady friend of the royal
family, ^uthry's memoirs.
on which account he suffered many hardships.

He was excepted from pardon, Cromwell's act of indem^it^.
and sined in 1500 l. sterling by Oliver Cromwell, anno 1654.

He married Catharine, daughter of John Craik, Esquire; of the city of York, by
whom he had a son,

William, his heir -- and a daughter,

Eva, married to sir David Cunninghame of Robertland.

He died in the end of the year 1654, and was succeeded by his son,

XVII. WILLIAM, ninth lord Boyd, Retour penes com. de Errol.
who was served and retoured heir to his father in the lands and barony of
Kilmarnock, etc. etc. anno 1655.

He was also a great loyalist, and king Charles II. Crawfurd's peerage, et
chart. in pub. archiv.
in regard of the many faithful services performed to the crown, by himself,
his father, etc. was pleased to create him earl of Kilmarnock, by patent to him
and his heirsmale for ever, dated 7th August 1661.

He afterward, upon his own resignation, got a charter under the great seal,
containing a novodamus, and a new erection of all his lands in the lordship and
barony of Kilmarnock, etc. Charta penes com. de Errol,
to and in favors of William earl of Kilmarnock, his heirs, etc. dated 30th
July 1672.

He married lady Jean Cunninghame, daughter of William ninth earl of Glencairn,
by whom he had four sons and two daughters.

1. William, his heir.

2. Captain James Boyd.

3. Charles.

4. Robert.

Is It daughter, lady Mary, married to sir Alexander MacLean.

2. Lady Catharine, married to Alexander Porterfield of that ilk.

He died anno 1692, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVIII. WILLIAM, fecond earl of Kilmarnock, who married Lettice, daughter and
heiress of Thomas Boyd, Esquire; an eminent merchant in the city of Dublin, by whom
he had two sons.

1. William, his heir.

2. Mr. Thomas Boyd, advocate.

He survived his father only a few months, and dying in the end of the year
1692, was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIX. WILLIAM, Retour ibid
third earl of Kilmarnock, who was served and retoured heir to his father in
all the lands, baronies, and lordship of Kilmarnock, etc. etc. 20th July 1699.

He died anno 1717, having married Eupheme, daughter of William lord Ross, by
whom he had a son and successor,

XX. WILLIAM, sourth earl of Kilmarnock, who married lady Anne Livingston,
daughter and sole heiress of James earl of Linlithgow, by whom he had three
sons.

1. James, lord Boyd.

2. Charles Boyd, Esquire;.

3. William.

William, fourth earl of Kilmarnock, having engaged in the rebellion 1745, was
taken prisoner at the battle of Culloden, carried to London, tried for treason
by his peers, found guilty, condemned, and beheaded on Towerhill 18th August
1746; his estate, and the honors of Kilmarnock, were forfeited to the crown.

XXI. JAMES, lord Boyd, eldest son of William fourth earl of Kilmarnock, upon
the death of Mary countess of Errol, succeeded to the estate and honors
thereof, his mother being undoubted heir of line of that noble family, and he
is now earl of Errol.

Vide Title Hay earl of Errol.

ARMS of Boyd, earl of Kilmarnock.
Azure, a fess cheque argent and gules.

CREST; on a wreath, a dexter hand couped at the wrist, and erect, pointing
with the thumb and the two next fingers, the other turning down.

SUPPORTERS; two squirrels proper.

MOTTO; Confido.

CHIEF SEAT.
At Kilmarnock, in the county of Air.

LIVINGSTON Viscount of KILSYTH.
THE immediate ancestor of this noble family was

Sir JOHN LIVINGSTON of Calendar, who married to his second wife Agnes,
daughter of sir James Douglas of Dalkeith, by whom he had a son,

I. Sir WILLIAM LIVINGSTON, the first of this family, who got from his father,
for patrimony, Chart. in archiv. fam. de Kilsyth.
the lands of Wester Kilsyth, which was always afterward the chief title of
this family.

He married Elizabeth, daughter and coheiress of William de Caldcoat, with whom
he got the lands of Greden in Berwick-shire, and by her had two sons.

1. Edward, his heir.

2. Sir Henry Living ston, preceptor of Torphichen.

He died anno 1459, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. EDWARD LIVINGSTON, Retour ibid. and Crawfurd's peerage.
who was retoured heir to his father in the lands and barony of Kilsyth, anno
1460.

He married Mary, daughter of Thomas lord Erskine, by whom he had a son and
successor,

III. WILLIAM LIVINGSTON of Kilsyth, who married Margaret Graham, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
daughter of --, by whom he had a son,

William, his apparent heir.

He died anno 1540.

IV. WILLIAM, only son and apparent heir of William Livingston of Kilsyth,
married Janet, daughter of -- Bruce of Airth.

He accompanied king James IV. to the fatal field of Flowdon, Crawfurd's
Peerage.
where he lost his life, with the chief of the Scotch nobility, anno 1513.

By the said Janet Bruce, he left issue a son,

V. WILLIAM LIVINGSTON of Kilsyth, Retour in archiv. fam. de Kilsyth.
who was served heir to his father 3d January 1514.

His grandfather got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub, archiv.
Willielmo Livingston de Kilsyth, et Willielmo Livingston nepoti suo, of the
lands and barony of Kilsyth, anno 1539.

This William succeeded his grandfather, anno 1540.

He married Mary, daughter of sir Duncan Forrester of Garden, Crawfurd's
peerage.
comptroller of the household in the reign of king James IV. by whom he had
three sons, and three daughters.

1. William, his heir.

2. Alexander Livingston of Inches.

3. Robert Livingston of Baldoran.

Is It daughter, Elizabeth, married to Gabriel Cunninghame of Craigends.

2. Isabel, married to Colin Campbell of Auchinhove.

3. Margaret, married, Is It, to Ninian Bruce of Kinnaird; 2dly, to Alexander
Baillie of Jerviestoun.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. Sir WILLIAM LIVINGSTON of Kilsyth, who got charters, Chart. in pub. archiv.
under the great seal, of the lands and barony of Kilsyth, and several others,
inter 1553 et 1560.

He had the honor of knighthood conferred upon him, at the creation of Henry
duke of Albany, anno 1565.

He married lady Christian Graham, daughter of William earl of Menteith, by
whom he had a son,

Sir William, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Christian, married to John Lawson of Boghall.

He was succeeded by his son,

VII. Sir WILLIAM LIVINGSTON of Kilsyth, a man of good parts and learning, and
in great favor with king James VI. who appointed him one of the senators of
the college of justice, Balfour's an^als, and Crawfurd's peerage.
anno 1609, one of his privy council, anno 1613, and that same year was
constituted vice-chamberlain of Scotland.

He got charters under the great seal, domino Williehno Livingston de Kilsyth,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
of several lands and baronies, inter 1616 et 1622.

He married, 1st, Antonia de Board, a French lady of quality, by whom he had a
son,

Sir William Livingston of Darnchester, his apparent heir, -- and a daughter,

Cbristian, married to George lord Forrester, and had issue.

He married, 2dly, Margaret, daughter of sir John Houstoun of that ilk, by whom
he had another son,

Sir James Living ston of Barncloich, who carried on the line of this family,
as will be shown hereafter; -- also a daughter,

Margaret, married to Robert Montgomery of Haslehead, in Air-shire.

He died anno 1627.

VIII. Sir WILLIAM LIVINGSTON of Darnchester, eldest son and apparent heir of
sir William Livingston of Kilsyth, Crawfurd's peerage.
had the honor of knighthood conferred upon him at the baptism of prince
Henry, anno 1595, and died before his father, having married lady Anne Fleming,
daughter of John earl of Wigton, by whom he had a son,

IX. WILLIAM LIVINGSTON of Kilsyth, Retour in chancery.
who was served heir to his grandfather, anno 1627.

He married Margaret, daughter of George lord Ramsay, by whom he had a son,

William, his heir, -- and two daughters.

1. Margaret, married to Andrew Rutherford of Hunthill.

2. Christian, married to James viscount Oxenford.

He was succeeded by his son,

X. WILLIAM LIVINGSTON of Kilsyth, who dying in his minority, anno 1647, was
succeeded by sir James Livingston of Barncloich, his grand-uncle and heir-male,
to whom we now return.

VIII. Sir JAMES LIVINGSTON of Barncloich, second son of sir William Livingston
of Kilsyth, succeeded to his grand-nephew, anno 1647, as before observed.

He was a great loyalist, a firm and steady friend both of king Charles I. and
II. on which account he suffered many hardships.

His predecessor had been ordered, by the parliament, Minutes of parliament.
to pay in four hundred pounds sterling to the public; but he dying without
doing it, sir James was ordered to pay it, with two hundred merks of expenses,
16th November 1649.

He offered to keep out his castle of Kilsyth against Oliver Cromwell, Ibidem.
for which he got a letter of thanks from king Charles II. 7th October 1650.

He was fined by Oliver Cromwell, Gutnry's memoirs, and Cromwell's act of
indemnity.
for his adherence to the interest of the royal family, in the sum of fifteen
hundred pounds sterling, anno 1654.

However, he lived to see the happy restoration, and king Charles II. in reward
of his merit and constant loyalty, Diploma in pub. archiv.
raised him to the dignity of the peerage, by the title of viscount of Kilsyth,
lord Campsie, etc. by patent, the 17th August 1661.

He married Eupheme, daughter of sir David Cunninghame of Robertland, by whom
he had issue two sons, and one daughter.

1. James, his heir.

2. William, who succeeded his brother.

His daughter, Elizabeth, married to majorgeneral Robert Montgomery, son of
Alexander earl of Eglington, and had issue.

He died in the end of the year 1661, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. JAMES, second viscount of Kilsyth, who got a charter under the great seal,
confirming Jacobo vicecomiti de Kilsyth, Ibidem.
domino Campsie, obligationes et provisiones Jacobi quondam vicecomitis de
Kilsyth, in favorem haeredum saemellarum, etc. anno 1663.

But he dying unmarried, anno 1706, his estate and honors devolved upon his
brother,

IX. WILLIAM, third viscount of Kilsyth, elected one of the sixteen Scotch
peers, to the last two parliaments of queen Anne.

He married, Is It, Jean, daughter of William lord Cochran, son and heir of
William earl of Dundonadl, by whom he had a son,

William, who died an infant.

He married, 2dly, Barbara, daughter of -- MacDougal of Mackerston, by whom he
had a daughter,

Barbara, who also died young.

He had the misfortune to be engaged in the rebellion 1715, for which he was
attainted of high treason, and his estates and honors were forfeited to the
crown.

ARMS.
Argent, three gilliflowers slipped gules, within a double tressure, flowered
and counter-flowered with flowers de lis vert.

CREST; on a wreath, a demi-savage, wreathed about the temples and waist with
laurel.

SUPPORTERS; two lions proper.

MOTTO; Spe expecto.

BRUCE Earl of KINCARDIN.
CHARLES BRUCE, fourth earl of Elgin, and third earl of Aylesbury, dying
without male-issue, anno 1747, the titles of Aylesbury became extinct; but that
of Elgin devolved upon his cousin and heir-male Charles Bruce, earl of
Kincardin, who thereby became earl of Elgin and Kincardin; and his genealogy
being deduced under that title, we refer our readers to page 232 and 239 of
this work.

SETON Viscount KINGSTON.
GEORGE, second earl of Winton, married lady Anne Hay, daughter of Francis earl
of Errol, by whom he had two sons.

1. George, lord Seton, who carried on the line of the family of Winton.

2. Sir Alexander Seton, a man of great virtue and merit, a firm and steady
friend of the royal family, who had the honor of knighthood conferred upon him
by king Charles I. anno 1633.

He was employed in several negotiations of importance by his majesty, and
always discharged the trust reposed in him with fidelity, Memoirs of the family
of Seaton, and Chart. in pub. regist.
and to the king's satisfaction; wherefore king Charles II. in regard of his
many and faithful services, was pleased to create him viscount of Kingston, by
patent to the heirsmale of his body, dated 6th February 1650.

He married, 1st, Jean, daughter of sir George Fletcher knight, by whom he had
one daughter,

Jean, married to James lord Mordington.

He married, 2dly, Elizab^th, daughter of sir Archibald Douglas of Whitinghame,
by whom he had two sons, and one daughter.

1. Archibald, his heir.

2. James, who succeeded his brother.

His daughter, Elizabeth, married to William Hay of Drumelzier.

He married, 3dly, Elizabeth, daughter of John lord Belhaven; and 4thly, lady
Margaret Douglas, daughter of Archibald earl of Angus; but had no issue by the
two last.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

ARCHIBALD, second viscount Kingston, who dying unmarried, anno 1714, his
estate and honors devolved upon his brother,

JAMES, third viscount Kingston, who married lady Anne Lindsay, daughter of
Colin earl of Balcarras, widow of Alexander earl of Kelly; but dying without
issue, the honors became extinct.

ARMS.
Quarterly first and fourth, or, three crescents within a double tressure,
flowered and counter-flowered gules; 2d and 3d, argent, a dragon vert.

SUPPORTERS; two blackamoors, armed with darts.

CREST; a crescent slaming.

MOTTO; Habet et suam.

KINNAIRD Lord KINNAIRD.
THIS surname is local, and was assumed by the proprietors of the lands and
barony of Kinnaird in Perth-shire, as soon as sirnames began to be frequently
used in this country.

I. RADULPHUS, the immediate ancestor of this noble family, flourished in the
reign of king William the Lion (who succeeded to the crown of Scotland, anno
1165) and from the color of his hair was called Rufus.

He got a charter, from king William, of the lands and barony of Kinnaird in
Perth-shire, Radulpho Rufo per suas rectas divisas, Chart. penes dom. Kinnaird.
etc. to which Matthew bishop of Aberdeen, Andrew bishop of Caithness, William
de Bosch chancellor, Philip de Colvile, etc. are witnesses. The charter has no
date; but must have been granted in or before 1184, in which year the bishop of
Caithness died.

This Radulphus assumed his surname from his lands, and to him all the
Kinnairds of Scotch extraction owe their origin and descent.

He left issue a son,

Richard de Kinnaird, -- and a daughter,

Isabella, married to John of Invertuyl, which appears from a charter of the
lands of Dunort, Ibidem.
granted by Richard de Kinnaird to John, son of Richard of Innertuyl, of all
and haill the lands of Dunort, etc. in free marriage with his sister Isabel,
etc. etc. etc.

Radulphus lived after the year 1200, and was succeeded by his son,

II. RICARDUS de KINNAIRD, who had reserved to himself the superiority of the
lands of Dunort, though he gave the property to John of Innertuyl with his
sister, which shows, that the family were proprietors of other lands besides
the barony of Kinnaird. Ibidem.
This appears by another charter of king William, which must have been granted
in or before 1214, in which year that prince died.

He left issue a son and successor,

III. RADULPHUS de KINNAIRD, who granted a charter of confirmation to Richard
son of John of Innertuyl, Ibidem.
of all and haill the lands of Dunort, etc. which Richard his father gave to
John, son of Richard of Innertuyl, in free marriage with his sister Isabella.
The witnesses to the confirmation were Galsred bishop of Dunkeld, Alexander
abbot of Coupar, and William abbot of Scoon, which must have been in or before
1249, in which year the bishop of Dunkeld died.

He left issue two sons.

1. Richard, his heir.

2. Thomas de Kinnaird, Chartulary of Arbroath.
who is witness in a donation to the monastery of Arbroath by Hugo de
Arbuthnot, anno 1282.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. RICARDUS de KINNAIRD, who was one of the Scotch barons that swore
allegiance to king Edward I. Prynne, vol. III. p. 654.
of England, when he had overrun Scotland, anno 1296, and he is then designed
Ricardus de Kinnaird, in vicecomitatu de Perth, etc. This Richard in mentioned
in Rymer's Foedera Angliae, Rymer, tom. II. p. 10^5.
anno 1304, and did not die for some years thereafter.

He was father of

V. RADULPHUS de KINNAIRD, who is the first of the family we find designed
dominus de eodem, or of that ilk.

He was also forced to submit to the superior power of king Edward, Prynne's
collect. vol. III. p. 663.
and swear fealty to him as well as his father had done, in 1296.

He lived to a great age, died about 1350, and was succeeded by his son,

VI. RICHARD de KINNAIRD, who, in a charter of resignation of Robert de Cochran
de codem, MacFarlane's collect. vol. I. p. 402.
is designed Ricardus de Kinnaird dominus ejusdem, anno 1368.

He died before 1379, leaving issue a son,

VII. Sir RICHARD KINNAIRD of that ilk, who succeeded him, and got a charter
from king Robert II. Charta penes dom. Kinnaird.
"of all and haill the lands and barony of Kinnaird, with their pertinents,
lying in the sheriffdom of Perth, etc. dated 7th December 1379, before these
witnesses, William bishop of St. Andrews, John bishop of Dunkeld, chancellor,
John earl of Carrick, the king's firstborn son, senescallus Scotiae, his son
Walter earl of Fife, his consin William earl of Douglas and Mar, sir James
Lindsay his nephew, etc.

He got also from the same prince a charter of confirmation of the lands of
Chicken-rawath and Kinnyndmond, Charta in rotul. Rob. II.
in Aberdeen-shire, upon the resignation of Thomas de Haya, constable of
Scotland, and the king's beloved son, Ricardo de Kinnaird, etc. dated the last
day of September 1380, before the same witnesses in the preceding charter.

He left issue two sons.

1. Thomas, his heir.

2. Reginald of Inchture, who carried on the line of this family, of whom more
hereafter.

Sir Richard was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. THOMAS KINNAIRD of that ilk, who married Giles, Chart. in archiv. Jacobi
II.
daughter and heiress of Walter Murray of Cowbine, with whom he got a
considerable accession to his estate, viz. the lands and barony of Cowbine,
etc. and, in consequence of this marriage, he and his posterity continued to
quarter the arms of Murray of Cowbine with their own.

By the said Giles he left issue two sons.

1. Alan, his heir.

2. Walter, to whom he gave his mother's estate, Ibidem.
viz. the lands and barony of Cowbine, whose posterity the Kinnairds of Cowbine
subsisted in the male-line for several generations, but are now extinct.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. ALAN, whose descendents, the Kinnairds of that ilk, flourished with
luster, till the reign of king Charles I. but being now extinct, the
representation devolves upon the family of Inchture, of whom the present lord
Kinnaird is lineally descended, to whose ancestor therefore we now return.

VIII. REGINALDUS de KINNAIRD, second son of sir Richard Kinnaird of that ilk,
married Marjory, daughter and heiress of sir John Kirkcaldy, with whom he got
the lands and barony of Inchture, in the shire of Perth, upon which he got a
charter from king Robert III. " Reginaldo de Kinnaird, etc. son of the deceast
sir Richard Kinnaird, and Marjory Kirkcaldy, daughter and heiress of the
deceast sir John Kirkealdy, Charta penes dom. Kinnaird.
the said Reginald's future spouse, all and haill the lands which the said
Marjory was possessed of in the barony of Inchture, to the said Reginald and
Marjory, and longest liver of them two, and the heirs lawfully procreate
betwixt them, etc." The charter is dated 28th January 1399.

This Reginald and his successors were designed by the title of Inchture,
Nishet, vol. I. p. 142.
and, on account of this marriage, quartered the arms of Kirkcaldy with their
own.

He died in the end of the reign of king James I. leaving issue a son,

IX. WALTER KINNAIRD of Inchture, Charta in archivis Jacobi III. et penes dom.
Kinnaird.
who succeeded him, and made a resignation of his lands and barony of Inchture,
Polgavie, etc. carissimo nepoti suo, Mro. Johanni Kinnaird, etc. upon the 17th
day of October, 1486.

He had a son,

X. REGINALD de KINNAIRD his apparent heir, who died before himself, leaving
issue a son,

XI. Mr. JOHN KINNAIRD, who succeeded his grandfather in the lands and barony
of Inchture, Chart. in pub. archiv.
etc. and got a charter under the great seal confirming to him the
forementioned resignation of the barony of Inchture, etc. dated 28th October
1486.

This John Kinnaird of Inchture was one of the inquest upon the service of
Andrew lord Gray, Charta penes dom. Gray.
anno 1505.

He was succeeded by his son,

XII. GEORGE, who got a charter from king James IV. Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the lands and barony of Inchture, anno 1511.

In a charter, Ibidem, and Haddington's collections.
wherein Andrew Kinnaird of that ilk gave the castle of Kinnaird to William
lord Ruthven, George Kinnaird of Inchture, and George his son and heir, are
witnesses, anno 1514.

He left issue two sons.

1. George, his apparent heir, who died without issue.

2. Patrick, who succeeded his father.

XIII. PATRICK KINNAIRD of Inchture, Chart. in pub. archiv.
got a charter under the great seal, terrarum baroniae de Inchture, etc. anno
1542.

He married Margaret, daughter of -- Moncur of that ilk, by whom he had a son
and successor,

XIV. PATRICK KINNAIRD of Inchture, a great loyalist, Ibidem.
who got a charter under the great seal from queen Mary, anno 1565, of the
lands and barony of Inchture.

Also a charter of the lands and village of Laik, Ibidem.
etc. anno 1570.

He married Eupheme daughter of James Gray of Balegarno, Esquire; by whom he had a
son,

XV. PATRICK KINNAIRD of Inchture, Ibid. and Crawfurd's peerage.
who succeeded him, and married Eupheme, daughter and co-heiress of Gilbert
Gray of Balindoran, a son of lord Gray, by whom he had two sons and one
daughter.

1. John, who died unmarried.

2. George, who became his father's heir.

His daughter, Margaret, married to sir Andrew Hay of Keilour, and was mother
by him of John twelfth earl of Errol.

He was slain by William, son of Patrick Ogilvie of Inchmartin, anno 1590,
which appears by a remission, under the great seal, to the said William
Ogilvie, for the slaughter of Patrick Kinnaird of Inchture, Remissio in pub.
archiv.
dated anno 1594.

He was succeeded by his son,

XVI. GEORGE KINNAIRD of Inchture, who got a charter, under the great seal, of
the lands of Deans-croft, and others, in the parish of Inchture, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
anno 1603.

He married --, daughter of --, by whom he had a son and successor,

XVII. PATRICK, who got a charter under the great seal, Patricio Kinnaird de
Inchture, of the lands of Millhill, etc. anno 1615.

Also two other charters of the lands of Drimmie, Ibidem.
the half of the lands of Balegarno, etc. anno 1624.

He got likeways a charter of the lands of Polgavie, Ibidem.
etc. in 1630; also a charter of several other lands, anno 1643.

He married --, daughter of --, by whom he had a son, Ibidem.


XVIII. GEORGE KINHAIRD of Inchture, who succeeded him. He was a man of great
worth and honor, and continued a steady friend of the royal family during all
the time of the civil war.

After the restoration, king Charles II. was pleased first to confer the honor
of knighthood upon him, anno 1661; and he got a charter under the great seal,
domino Georgio Kinnaird, terrarum baroniae de Forgund et Foulis, etc. etc.
Ibidem.
1662.

He was afterward appointed one of his majesty's privy council, and raised to
the dignity of the peerage, by the title of lord Kinnaird of Inchture, by
patent haeredibus masculis e corpore suo, dated 28th December 1682.

He married Margaret, Ibidem.
daughter of James Crichton of Ruthven, Esquire; by whom he had six sons.

1. Patrick, his heir.

2. John, died without issue.

3. James, died without issue.

4. Alexander, died without issue.

5. Mr. Charles, a man of great learning and strict honor, but died without
issue.

6. George, who carried on the line of this family, of whom afterward.

He died on 29th December 1689, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIX. PATRICK, second lord Kinnaird, who married Anne, daughter of Hugh lord
Lovat, by whom he had three sons and one daughter.

1. George, master of Kinnaird, who died without issue, anno School.

2. Patrick, his father's heir.

3. Charles, who succeeded to the esate and honors, of whom afterward.

His daughter, Anne, married to Thomas Drummond of Logiealmond, Esquire;.

He dying in February 1701, was succeeded by his son,

XX. PATRICK, third lord Kinnaird, who married, 1st, lady Henriet Murray,
daughter of Charles earl of Dunmore, by whom he had no issue.

He married, 2dly, lady Elizabeth Lion, daughter of Patrick earl of Strathmore,
by whom he had a son,

XXI. PATRICK, fourth lord Kinnaird, who, dying without issue, was succeeded by
his uncle,

XX. CHARLES, third son of Patrick, second lord Kinnaird, who was the fifth
lord.

He married Magdalene Brown, daughter of Mr. William Brown, merchant in
Edinburgh, but dying without issue, anno 1758, his estate and honors devolved
upon his cousin and heir male Charles, grandson of his uncle George, to whom we
now return.

XIX. GEORGE KINNAIRD, Esquire; sixth son of George the first lord, was father of,

XX. GEORGE KINNAIRD, Esquire; who married lady Helen Gordon, daughter of Charles
earl of Aboyne, by whom he had a son,

XXI. CHARLES, sixth lord Kinnaird, who succeeded to the estate and honors, as
before observed, and married Barbara, daughter of sir James Johnston of
Westerhall, baronet, by whom he has issue two sons and three daughters.

1. George, master of Kinnaird.

2. Patrick.

1st daughter Elizabeth.

2. Helen.

3. Margaret.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st and 4th or, a fess wavey, between three stars gules, for
Kirkcaldy; 2d and 3d gules, a saltire, between four crescents or, for Kinnaird.

CREST; on a wreath, a crescent, rising from a cloud, with a star between its
horns, all within two branches of palm disposed orlewise.

SUPPORTERS; two savages, each wreathed about his head and middle with oak
leaves, and their hands, that support the shield, in chains hanging down to
their feet, their other hands holding each a garland of laurel.

MOTTO; Patitur qui vincit.

CHIEF SEAT
At Drimmie in the Carse of Gowrie, Perthshire.

HAY Earl of KINNOUL.
THIS great branch of the illustrious family of Errol, is sprung from sir
William Hay, Chart. in archiv. fam. de Leys, ad ann. 1251.
ancestor of the house of Leys, who was second son of sir David, and
brother-german of sir Gilbert Hay of Errol, who flourished in the reign of king
Alexander III.

Of this sir William was lineally descended,

I. Sir EDMUND HAY of Melginch, who made a considerable figure in the reign of
king James IV. He is mentioned in many writs of the family of Errol, had the
chief management of all their affairs in Perthshire, Diplom. Erroliana, chart.
27 et 36, penes commit. de Errol.
and was designed Edmundus de Haya de Melginch, balivus comitis de Errol, etc.
anno 1504.

He was also chosen arbitrator by John Haliburton of Gask, Writs of the family
of Pitcur.
ancestor of the family of Pitcur, anno 1506.

He was father of,

II. Sir PETER HAY of Melginch, who was also designed balivus comitis de Errol,
in the reign of king James V. from whom he got charters under the great seal,
Chart. penes dom. Gray, et in pub. arch.
Petro Hay de Melginch, terrarum de Inchonane, etc. betwixt the years 1536 and
1542.

He also got charters from queen Mary, terrarum de Mureage, terrasque
ecclesiasticas de Errol, Ibidem.
etc. etc. inter 1552 et 1560.

He married Margaret, daughter of -- Crichton of Ruthven, by whom he had three
sons and two daughters.

1. Patrick, his heir.

2. Sir James Hay of Kingask, father of James lord Bewlie, and earl of
Carlisle. Vide title lord Bewlie.

3. Edmund Hay, a man of great learning and knowledge; Lives of the offic. of
state, page 157.
was professor of the civil and canon law, and rector of the college at Doway.

Is It daughter, Catharine, married, 1st, to Robert Moncur of Balumby; Ibid. p.
158.
and, 2dly, to George Drummond of Blair.

2. Janet, married to sir Patrick Murray of Auchtertyre. Ibidem.


He was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. Sir PATRICK HAY of Melginch, a man of great honor, Ibid. p. 158.
loyalty, and integrity, who was highly esteemed by king James VI.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir Patrick Ogilvie of Inchmartin, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
paternal ancestor of the earl of Finlater, by whom he had three sons.

1. Patrick of Melginch, his successor, whose male-line is now extinct.

2. George, first earl of Kinnoul.

3. Peter of Kirkland of Melginch, who carried on the line of this family, as
will be shown hereafter.

IV. GEORGE, second son of sir Patrick Hay of Melginch, first designed sir
George of Kinfauns, was a man of extraordinary natural parts, which, by the
care of his father, were improved by a liberal education at home and abroad,
particularly in France, where he spent some years under the tuition of the
learned Edmund Hay his uncle.

On his return home, being about twenty-four years of age, he was brought into
court by his kinsman sir James Hay, afterward earl of Carlisle, with the
character of a gentleman well qualified, by his improvements and conversing
with the muses, for any service his master should honor him with. By which
introduction, and his fine accomplishments, he so far engaged the king's
favor, that he soon raised him to be one of the gentlemen of his bedchamber,
Gift in pub. archiv.
and bestowed upon him the Carthusian priory at Perth, 18th February 1598.

He was one of the retinue that attended the king from Falkland to Perth, Lives
of the offic. of state, page 158.
on the memorable 5th of August 1600, and had the honor to be instrumental in
rescuing his majesty, Gowrie's conspiracy, etc.
etc.

The king, well discerning his great abilities, made him clerk-register, anno
1616, which he held till 1622. When Alexander earl of Dunfermline, lord high
chancellor of Scotland died, to him he succeeded, and acquitted himself in that
great employment with such integrity and honor, as recommended him to the
esteem of king Charles I. who created him viscount Duplin, and lord Hay of
Kinfauns, 4th May 1627. Also, as a further mark of his favor, advanced him to
the dignity of earl of Kinnoul, by letters patent haeredibus masculis
quibuscunque, 25th May 1633.

He enjoyed the chancellor's place with universal applause till he died at
London, 16th December 1634. His body was conveyed to Scotland, and lies
interred at Kinnoul, under a sumptuous monument, with his statue in full
proportion, habited in a chancellor's robe.

By Margaret his wife, daughter of sir James Haliburton of Pitcur, Lives of the
offic. of state p. 160.
in the county of Forfar, he had issue two sons, and one daughter.

1. Sir Peter Hay, who died unmarried.

2. George, his successor.

His daughter, lady Margaret, married to Alexander Lindsay, lord Spynzie.

V. GEORGE, second earl of Kinnoul, was captain of the yeom^n of the guards to
king Charles I. and one of the privy council.

In the civil war, he showed an unshaken loyalty to his sovereign, was constant
in his service, often hazarding his person in the royal cause, Peerage of
England, vol. V. p. 295.
and, by adhering thereto, he lost the greatest part of his estate.

He died at Whitehall, 5th October 1644, leaving issue, by lady Anne Douglas,
eldest daughter of William earl of Morton, lord high treasurer of Scotland, one
son,

William, his heir, -- and two daughters.

1. Lady Mary, married to William earl Marishal.

2. Lady Catharine, married to sir James Baird of Auchmedden.

VI. WILLIAM, third earl of Kinnoul, married, 1st, lady (...) Brudenel,
daughter of Robert earl of Cardigan, by whom he had no issue; and, 2dly, lady
Elizabeth Cecil, daughter of James earl of Salisbury, by whom he had two sons.

1. George, his heir,

2. William.

And dying anno 1677, Ibidem.
was succeeded by,

VII. GEORGE, fourth earl of Kinnoul, who, dying in Hungary without issue, anno
1687, was succeeded by his brother,

VII. WILLIAM, fifth earl of Kinnoul, who dying also without issue, 10th May
1709, in him ended the male line of the body of the first earl of Kinnoul; and
the honors immediately devolved upon Thomas viscount Duplin, the next
heir-male, being lineally descended of the younger brother of the patentee, to
whom we now return.

IV. PETER HAY, third son of sir Patrick Hay of Melginch, Charta penes comitem
de Errol.
and brother of George first earl of Kinnoul, was de^^^ned of Kirklands of
Melginch, as before observed.

He married a daughter of -- Hay of Pit^our, by whom he had a son,

Mr. Francis, his heir, -- and a daughter,

--, married to sir Andrew Fletcher of Innerpesser, Genealogical collect. penes
MacFarlane.
one of the senators of the college of justice, ancestor of the Fletchers of
Salton.

V. Mr. FRANCIS HAY, his son, having acquired the lands of Balhousie near
Perth, assumed that for his chief title, Chart. in pub. archiv.
and got a charter from king Charles I. magistro Francisco Hay de Balhousie
terrarum de Mochram, etc. dated 1632.

He got likeways charters, under the great seal, of several other lands about
1640, particularly the lands of Duplin, Ibidem.
which he acquired from his cousin the earl of Kinnoul.

He was also a great loyalist, Cromwell's act of indem. and Guthries memoirs.
and suffered many hardships on account of his attachment to the royal family,
and was fined in 2000 l. sterling by Oliver Cromwell, anno 1654.

He married Margaret, MacFarlane's collections.
daughter of James Oliphant of Bachilton, by whom he had a son,

George, his heir, -- and two daughters.

1. Beatrix, Contract penes comitem de Kinnoul.
married to sir George Hay, knight, lawful son of sir Patrick Hay of Melginch,
knight.

2. Rebecca, Contract ibid.
married to Mr. George Oliphant, son of John Oliphant of Bachilton, Esquire;.

VI. GEORGE HAY of Balhousie, married Marian, daughter of sir Thomas Nicholson
of Colbrands-path, lord advocate, in 1648; and died in October 1672, leaving
issue two sons.

1. Francis Hay of Balhousie, who died without issue, anno 1675.

2. Thomas, afterward of Balhousie, who succeeded his brother.

VII. THOMAS HAY of Balhousie, having come early into the revolution, was
raised to the dignity of the peerage by king William, by patent in these words;
Creasse praefatum Th^m^m Hay de Balhousie, Chart. in pub. arch. and decisions
of the lords of sethon.
vicecomitem de Duplin -- praedic^^ Thomae et haeredibus masculis de corpore
suo legitime procreatis; quibus de ficie^. haered. ejus talliae, etc. dated
31st Dec. 1697.

Upon the death of William fifth earl of Kinnoul, without issue, anno 1709,
this Thomas succeeded to the estate and honors of Kinnoul, being next
heir-male, as before observed, and was the sixth earl.

He was elected one of the sixteen peers for Scotland to the British parliament
1713, Peerage of England, vol. V. p. ^^5.
and married Elizabeth Drummond, daughter of William viscount of Strathallan,
by whom he had three sons and two daughters.

1. Henry-George, viscount Duplin.

2. William, who died without issue.

3. Col. John Hay of Cromlix, who married Marjory, daughter of David viscount
Stormont.

1st daughter, lady Mary, married to John Erskine earl of Mar, and had issue.

2. Lady Elizabeth, married to James earl of Finlater and Seafield, and had
issue.

He died in January 1719, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. GEORGE, seventh earl of Kinnoul, who, in his father's lifetime, was
member for Foy in Cornwall, to the parliament summoned to meet at Westminster
25th November 1710; and, the year following, being made one of the tellers of
the exchequer, a writ was issued, December 8th 1711, for a new election, and he
was re-chosen.

Her majesty queen Anne, in consideration of his merit and services, was
pleased to create him a baron of Great Britain, Peerage of England, vol. V. p.
295.
by the title of lord Hay, baron Hay of Podwarden, in com. Heref. by letters
patent, bearing date the 1st of January 1712.

In the year 1729, he was appointed by his late majesty king George II. his
ambassador at the Ottoman Port, from whence he returned in the year 1737.
Ibid. p. 296.


In 1709, he married lady Abigail Harley, daughter of Robert earl of Oxford and
Mortimer, lord high treasurer of Great Britain, by whom he had four sons and
six daughters.

1. Thomas, viscount Duplin.

2. Robert, who takes the name and arms of Drummond, as heir of entail to his
great grandfather, William Drummond viscount of Strathallam. In the year 1737,
he was appointed one of his majesty's chaplains in ordinary; in 1743, a
prebendary of the collegiate church of Westminster; in 1748, bishop of St.
Asaph; in 1761, bishop of Salisbury; and in the same year archbishop of York,
Ibidem.
and one of his majesty's most honorable privy council. He married Henrietta,
daughter of Peter Auriol of London, merchant, by whom he has issue six sons
and one daughter.

3. John Hay, A. M. of Christ's church Oxon, rector of Epsworth in
Lincolnshire, by the king's gift. He died unmarried.

4. Edward, who, in the year 1752, was appointed his majesty's consul at Cadiz;
in 1754, consul-general in Portugal; in 1757, his majesty's envoy-extraordinary
to the king of Portugal; and in 1762, plenipotentiary to the said king. He
married Mary, daughter of Peter Flower of London, merchant, and has issue three
sons and three daughters.

The earl's 1st daughter, lady Margaret, died unmarried.

2. Lady Elizabeth.

3. Lady Anne.

4. Lady Abigail.

5. Lady Henrietta, married to Robert Roper, L. L. D. chancellor of the diocese
of York.

6. Lady Mary, married to Dr. John Hume, bishop of Oxford, and dean of St.
Paul's.

The earl died anno 1758, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. THOMAS, eighth earl of Kinnoul, who was member for the town of Cambridge
in the British parliaments 1741, 1747, and 1754; in the two last whereof he was
chairman of the committee of privileges and elections. In 1741, he was
appointed one of the commissioners of the revenue in Ireland, in 1746, one of
the commissioners of trade and plantations; in 1754, one of the commissioners
of the treasury; in 1755, joint paymastergeneral of his majesty's guards,
garrisons, and land forces; and in 1758, chancellor of the duchy and county
palatine of Lancaster, and one of his majesty's most honorable privy council.
In 1759, he was nominated his majesty's ambassador extraordinary and
plenipotentiary to the king of Portugal, at whose court he resided only a few
months, and returned to England in the year 1760.

In 1741, he married Constantia, daughter of John Kirle-Ernly, Esquire; of Whetham
in Wilt-shire, who died in the year 1753, leaving issue. He is at present
unmarried.

ARMS.
Quarterly; 1st and 4th azure, an unicorn rampant argent, armed, maned, and
unguled or, within a border of the last, charged with eight half thistles vert,
and as many roses gules, joined together by way of party per pale, given to the
family when created earl, as a coat of augmentation; the unicorn and border
being a part of the royal achievement, and the thistles and roses conjoined,
representing the union of the two kingdoms in the person of king James VI. The
2d and 3d argent, three scutcheons gules, for the name of Hay.

CREST; on a wreath, a country man couped at the knees, vested in gray, his
waistcoat gules, and bonnet azure, bearing on his right shoulder an ox-yoke
proper.

SUPPORTERS; two countrymen habited as the crest, the dexter holding over his
shoulder the coulter of a plough, and the sinister the paddle, both proper.

MOTTO; Renovate animos.

CHIEF SEATS,
At Duplin in Perth-shire, a fine seat in a park; Balhousie, near Perth; at
Brodsworth, in Yorkshire; and Whitehall, London.

KEITH Earl of KINTORE.
WILLIAM, sixth earl Marishal, the twentieth generation of that most noble and
ancient family, married lady Mary Erskine, daughter of John earl of Mar, by
lady Mary Stewart, daughter of Esme duke of Richmond and Lennox, by whom he had
issue three sons.

1. William.

2. George.

These two were successively earls Marishal.

3. Sir John, afterward earl of Kintore.

1. Sir JOHN de KEITH, third son of William sixth earl Marishal, a man of great
loyalty, honor, and integrity, a firm and steady friend both to king Charles
I. and II.

He had the principal hand in preserving the regalia of Scotland ( viz. the
crown, sword, and scepter) from falling into the hands of Oliver Cromwell: they
had been privately conveyed from the castle of Edinburgh to that of Dunotter
for safety.

At last when Oliver Cromwell became possessed of the whole country, except some
few castles, of which Dunotter was one, though it was also besieged; but before
it is surrender to the English, this sir John, with the assistance of some
trusty friends, got the regalia conveyed away, and deposited them under ground
in the church of king Kenneth, (commonly called Kineff,) about four miles from
Dunotter.

Sir John made his escape beyond seas, and immediately, upon his landing, wrote
to his friends in Scotland, that he was safely arrived with the regalia, etc.
which letter being industriously suffered to fall into the hands of the
English, they thereupon gave over all further hopes of finding them.

King Charles II. immediately upon his restoration, in consideration of sir
John's constant loyalty, Chart. in p^^* archiv.
was pleased to create him knight maris^^^, anno 1600, which office was made
hereditary in his family, with an annual pension sui^^ble to the office.

He afterward ^^ot a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
domino Johanni Keith, (...) mar^ scallano, terra^^^ (...) de Ca^kie^en, etc.
anno 1661.

King Charles appointed him one of the lords of his privy council, Ibidem.
and raised him to the dignity of the peerage, Nisbet's ap^end. p. 10.
by the title of earl of Kintore, lord Keith of Inverurie, and Keithhall, on
26th June 1677.

He was also appointed ^reasurer-depute, anno 1682, in which office he
continued till the treasury was put into commission in the reign of king James
VII.

He married lady Margaret Hamilton, daughter of Thomas earl of Haddington, by
whom he had a son,

William, his heir, -- and two daughters.

1. Lady Jean, married to sir William Forbes of Monimusk.

2. Lady Margaret, married to Gavin Hamilton of Raploch, Esquire;.

He was succeeded by his son,

II. WILLIAM, second earl of Kintore, and knight-marishal of Scotland, who
married Catharine Murray, daughter of David viscount Stormont, by whom he had
two sons, and two daughters.

1. John, his heir.

2. William, who succeeded his brother.

1st daughter, lady Catharine, married to David lord Halkerton, to whom she had
a numerous issue.

2. Lady Jean.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. JOHN, third earl of Kintore, who married miss Erskine, daughter of James
Erskine of Grange, Esquire; one of the senators of the college of justice, and
brother of John late earl of Mar; but hedying without issue, his estate and
honors went to his brother,

III. WILLIAM, fourth earl of Kintore, who also dying without issue, anno 1761,
the honors became extinct; but earl Marishal succeeded to his estate as heir
of entail, etc.

ARMS.
Quarterly, first and fourth gules, a s^epter and sword saltyre ways, with an
imperial crown in chief, all proper, within an orle of eight this^les or, as a
coat of augmentation for preserving of the regalia; second and third argent, a
chief pallee of six pieces gules and or, the paternal coat of Keith.

SUPPORTERS; two ^hevaliers completely armed, with pikes in their hands, all
proper.

CREST; an aged lady, from the middle upward, holding in her right hand a
garland of laurel proper.

MOTTO; Quae a^issa salva.

CHIEF SEAT.
At Kirkhall near Inverury, Aberdeen-shire.

MACLELLAN Lord KIRKCUDBRIGHT.
THE surname of MacLellan is of very great antiquity in the south of Scotland.
They had vast possessions in lands, and were very numerous and powerful.

David MacLellan is mentioned in a charter of king Alexander II. Chartulary of
Murray.
the third year of his reign, which was anno dom. 1217.

All our historians agree, that the MacLellans of Bombie were heretable
sheriffs of Galloway, Crawfurd's peerage.
flourished with great luster for many ages; and there were twelve knights of
that surname in the south of Scotland at one time, of which Bombie was the
chief.

But as there are few of them mentioned in our public records, before the
reign of king James I. we shall from that era begin to deduce their descent.

I. Sir PATRICK MACLELLAN of Bombie, lived about 350 Years ago, Charta penes
dom. Gray.
and married a daughter of sir Andrew Gray of Broxmouth, ancestor of lord Gray,
by whom he had a son and heir,

II. Sir PATRICK MACLELLAN of Bombie, who flourished in the reigns of king
James I. Crawfurd's peerage,
and II. and having been prevailed upon to take part with lord Herries his
relation against the earl of Douglas, was besieged in his own castle of
Raeberry, and being at last forced to surrender, was put to death anno 1452,
leaving issue a son,

Sir William, of whom afterward.

The clan MacLellan were so incensed at their chief's being slain, that they
all joined, took up arms, Ibidem.
and committed vast depredations upon the Douglases territories, in defiance of
all law and justice, for which king James outlawed and forseited them, and the
estate of Bombie was thereupon annexed to the crown.

About this time the county of Galloway was greatly infested with a company of
robbers or gypsies from Ireland, whereupon the king issued a proclamation,
promising a considerable reward to any who would disperse them, and bring in
their captain dead or alive; which was at last performed by the said sir
William, Ibidem. MacKenzie, Nisbet, etc.
son of the last sir Patrick of Bombie, who, with the assistance of his
friends, dispersed that lawless crew, killed their chiestain, and brought his
head upon the point of his sword to his majesty; for which gallant behavior
the king put him immediately in possession of his barony of Bombie: and to
perpetuate the memory of that brave action, he took for his crest, a Moor's
head on the point of a sword, with Think on for his motto.

III. Sir WILLIAM MACLELLAN now again of Bombie, was ever after in great favor
both with king James II. and III.

He got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Willielmo MacLellan de Bombie, of the lands of Lo-fergus, etc. etc. inter
1470, et 1474.

He left issue a son and successor,

IV. Sir THOMAS MACLELLAN of Bombie, a man of great worth and honor, and a
faithful and loyal subject, both to king James III. and IV.

He was possessed of a vast estate, Ibidem.
which appears by his charters under the great seal, Thomae MacLellan de
Bombie, militi, of many different lands and baronies, inter 1488, et 1501.

He married Agnes, daughter of sir James Dunbar of Mochrum, by whom he had
three sons.

1. Sir William, his heir.

2. Gilbert, of whom the present lord Kirkcudbright is lineally descended, as
will be shown hereafter.

3. John MacLellan of Achlane, whose male line is extinct, and his estate
returned to the family.

He died anno 1507, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. Sir WILLIAM, who got charters under the great seal, Ibidem.
Willielmo MacLellan de Bombie, of several lands and baronies, inter 1507 et
1512.

He was in great favor with king James IV. Crawfurd's peerage.
whom he accompanied to the fatal field of Flowdon, where he lost his life,
anno 1513, leaving issue, by Elizabeth Mure his wife, a son and successor,

VI. Sir THOMAS, who got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Thomae MacLellan de Bombie, of the lands of Plintoun, Blackmark, and several
others, inter 1516 et 1520.

This sir Thomas had the misfortune to be killed in the street of Edinburgh,
Crawfund's peerage.
in a family feud between him and his neighbors the barons of Drumlanrig and
Lochinvar, in July 1526, leaving issue a son,

VII. Sir THOMAS who succeeded him.

He got a charter, under the great seal, Ibidem.
of all the lands that his father sir Thomas, and his grandfather sir William
died possessed of, domino Thomae MacLellan de Bombie, etc. anno 1542.

He married Helen, Chart. in archiv. fam. de Kenmure.
daughter of sir James Gordon of Lochinvar, by whom he had a son,

VIII, Sir THOMAS who succeeded him, and got charters under the great seal,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
domino Thomae MacLellan de Bombie, of several lands and baronies, inter 1590,
et 1595.

He married Grizel Maxwell, daughter of John lord Herries, by whom he had three
sons.

1. Sir Robert, afterward lord Kirkcudbright.

2. William MacLellan of Glenshannoch, whose son Thomas succeeded to the
honors of Kirkcudbright, of whom afterward.

3. John MacLellan of Bourg, whose son John succeeded also to the lordship of
Kirkcudbright, as will be shown hereafter.

Sir Thomas died anno 1607, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. Sir Robert, who, in his father's lifetime, got a charter under the great
seal, Ibidem.
Roberto filio et haeredi apparenti domini Thomae MacLellan de Bombie, terrarum
baroniae de Bombiae, etc. anno 1595.

He was served and retoured heir to his father sir Thomas, Retour in Chancery.
anno 1608.

He got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
domino Roberto MacLellan de Bombie, militi, of several lands, anno 1610.

He afterward got charters under the great seal, Ibidem.
of many other lands and baronies, inter 1612, et 1616.

He was a man of great worth and merit, and highly esteemed by king James VI.
who conferred the honor of knighthood upon him, and made him one of the
gentlemen of his bedchamber; and being in no less favor with king Charles I.
was by that prince first created a baronet, then raised to the dignity of the
peerage, by the title of lord baron of Kirkcudbright, Diploma in pub. archiv.
25th May 1633, by patent to his heirs male general, they carrying the name and
arms of MacLellan, etc.

He married, 1st, Margaret, daughter of sir Matthew Campbell of Loudoun, by
whom he had a daughter.

Marian, married to sir Robert Maxwell of Orchardtown.

He married, 2dly, Mary Montgomery, daughter of Hugh viscount Airds, of the
kingdom of Ireland, by whom he had no children.

And dying without issue-male anno 1641, his estate and honors devolved upon
his nephew and heir-male,

X. THOMAS MACLELLAN, son of his brother William of Glenskennoch before
mentioned, who was next brother to the patentee.

He was enrolled, Records of parliament.
and sat in the parliament as a peer, from 1641, to 1647, and was second lord
Kirkcudbright.

He also got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Thomae domino Kirkcudbright, of several lands inter 1642, et 1645.

He married lady Janet Douglas, daughter of William earl of Queensberry; but
dying without issue, anno 1648, was succeeded in his estate and honors by his
cousin-german and heir-male;

X. JOHN MACLELLAN, son of his uncle John of Bourg, before mentioned, who was
youngest brother to the patentee.

This John was served and retoured heir to Thomas last lord Kirkcudbright,
Retour in chancery.
his uncle's son, anno 1648, and was third lord Kirkcudbright.

He was a great loyalist, and raised a regiment of foot, upon his own charges
for the king's service, whereby he greatly incumbered his estate, and suffered
many other hardships during the usurpation.

However, he lived to see the restoration, Records of parliament.
was entered upon the rolls of parliament as a peer, by the title of lord
Kirkcudbright, anno 1661.

He died anno 1664, and having never been able to repay the heavy debts he had
contracted during the civil war, his estate was evicted by his creditors.

By Anne, daughter of sir Robert Maxwell of Orchardtown, he left issue an
infant son,

XI. WILLIAM, fourth lord Kirkcudbright, who succeeded to nothing but an empty
title; and dying a child soon after his father, the honors devolved upon James
MacLellan, the next heir-male, being nephew to John the third lord. Accordingly,

XI. JAMES MACLELLAN designed of Achlane, Retour in chancery.
was served, retoured and cognosced heir to John lord Kirkcudbright his uncle,
anno 1729, and was the fifth lord Kirkcudbright.

But he dying also without male issue, in him ended the whole male line of
William, eldest son of sir Thomas MacLellan of Bombie, who married Agnes,
daughter of sir James Dunbar of Mochrum, as before narrated, in No. IV. of this
account.

The representation therefore devolved upon William MacLellan of Bourness,
being lineally descended from Gilbert, second son of the said sir Thomas. To
him therefore we now return.

V. GILBERT MACLELLAN was second son of sir Thomas of Bombie, by the foresaid
Agnes Dunbar. In a tack in the public register, this Gilbert is designed second
son of sir Thomas MacLellan of Bombie, In the general register.
anno 1503; and in a charter to John Dunbar of Mochrum, he is designed
brother-german to sir William MacLellan of Bombie, etc. anno 1506.

He married a daughter of lord Herries, by whom he had a son,

VI. WILLIAM MACLELLAN. There is a lease or tack of the lands of
Grange-Sannick, to the above Gilbert MacLellan and this William, then designed
his son and apparent heir, anno 1534.

After Gilbert's death, All these writs in the general regist.
William gets the tack renewed, and is then designed son and heir of Gilbert,
etc. anno 1565.

He afterward acquired the lands of GrangeSannick, alias Balmagan, upon which
he got a charter under the great seal, anno 1588, and is then designed William
MacLellan of Balmagan, etc.

By Margaret Gordon his spouse, he had a son,

VII. THOMAS MACLELLAN. In a charter by Elizabeth MacInsterre to her son,
Ibidem.
William MacLellan in Balmagan, and Thomas his son and apparent heir are
witnesses, anno 1573.

There is a charter of the said William MacLellan, then designed of Balmagan,
with consent of Margaret Gordon his spouse, Retour in chancery.
to Thomas MacLellan his son and apparent heir, of the lands of Balmagan, etc.
anno 1605; and this Thomas immediately after, is retoured heir to his said
father, in the lands of Balmagan, alias Grange-Sannick, etc.

He married -- daughter of --, by whom he had a son,

VIII. JAMES MACLELLAN. In an obligement granted by John Gordon of Gilliestoun,
In the general register.
to Thomas MacLellan of Balmagan, this James MacLellan, designed younger of
Balmagan, his son and apparent heir is a witness; and in a sasine following
upon a charter granted the said Thomas, this James designed as above, consents
thereto, anno 1622.

He married -- daughter of --, by whom he had a son,

IX. ROBERT MACLELLAN. In a tack granted by Florence MacGhie to Gilbert
Gourlay, Ibidem.
James MacLellan of Balmagan and Robert his son and heir are witnesses, anno
1637.

John lord Kirkcudbright ratifies a disposition on to Robert MacLellan of
Balmagan, Ibidem.
oye, heir and successor to Thomas MacLellan of Balmagan, his grandfather, anno
1655.

There are several other vouchers of this Robert in the public register, anno
1662, etc.

When the lands of Balmagan were apprised from him by a decree of the lords of
session, Ibidem.
anno 1666, he is then designed of Bourness, etc.

He married -- daughter of -- by whom he had a son,

X. WILLIAM MACLELLAN of Bourness. There is a contract of marriage, the parties
contracters whereof are, Robert MacLellan of Bourness and William his son and
heir, Ibidem.
on the one part, and Agnes, daughter of William MacCulloch of Nether-Ardwell
with consent of her father, on the other part. By which contract this William
and the said Agnes his spouse, are put in possession of the lands of Bourness,
etc. anno 1672.

By the said Agnes MacCulloch, he had a son and heir,

XI. WILLIAM MACLELLAN of Bourness, who was retoured and cognosced heirmale to
his father, anno 1696.

This William, upon the death of James MacLellan, fifth lord Kirkcudbright,
without male-issue, claimed these honors as next heirmale, anno 1734, has
voted as a peer at several elections for members of parliament since, and is
the sixth lord Kirkcudbright.

He married Margaret Murray, by whom he has a son,

John, master of Kirkcudbright, an officer in the army.

ARMS.
Or, two cheverons sable.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter side, a man armed at all points, holding a batton in
his hand; and on the sinister, a horse furnished.

CREST; a naked arm, supporting, on the point of a sword, a Moor's head.

MOTTO; Think on.

MAITLAND Earl of LAUDERDALE.
IT is alleged by some antiquaries, that the Maitlands came from Italy to this
country, Martin's collections, vol. II. p. 23.
in the reign of king Kenneth II. about the year 840, and some trace their
origin even higher.

Others, with more probability, assert, Introduct. to Fordu^. p. 60.
that they came originally from France.

Certain it is, some of that surname came from Normandy with William the
conqueror, anno 1066, had considerable commands in his army, and afterward
settled in England.

It Is also certain, that while king David I. resided in England, he contracted
a friendship with several persons of Norman extract of the first rank, who came
to this country with that amiable prince, and settled here, of whom some of the
most considerable families in Scotland are descended; and it is evident from
our histories and records, that the Maitlands began to make a figure in this
country, immediately after that era.

We shall therefore deduce their descent by unquestionable documents, from,

I. THOMAS de MATULANT, who flourished, and appears to have been a man of
distinguished rank, in the reign of king William the Lion, who succeeded to the
crown of Scotland, anno 1165.

In a charter of the lands of Rasau, to John Landales, Chartulary of Melrose,
penes MacFarlane, p ^.
haeres et successor Willielmi filii Johanis, filii Orme, etc. this Thomas de
Matulant is a witness, in the end of the reign of king William.

He died anno 1228, leaving issue a son,

II. WILLIAM de MATULANT, who made a great figure in the reign of king
Alexander II. appears to have been much about that prince's court, and is
witness to many of his charters, even in his father's lifetime.

In a charter of a donation to the abbacy of Kelso, by Thomas, son of Reginald
de Boscho, William de Matulant is a witness, Chartulary of Kelso, penes eund.
p. 29
with Negio de Ramsay, and William de Boscho chancellor of Scotland, who
enjoyed that office from 1211, to 1226. The charter is without date, but must
have been in or before 1226.

And to another donation to the abbacy of Kelso, Ibid. p. 373 and 374
with the same witnesses, also before the 1226.

In a donation of Richard de Bard, to the abbot and convent of Kelsan, William
de Matulant, Ibid. p. 160.
Archibald lord Douglas, William Flamang, Malcolm Loccard, Robert de Robertsun,
William, John, and Adam, sons of Reginald de Crawfurd, are witnesses, at
Lesmagu, anno 1228.

He was also witness in a charter of Herbert abbot of Kelsau, Ibid. p. 203.
who was abbot from 1231 to 1236.

And in a donation to the monks of Kelsau, Ibid. p. 315.
cum Radulfo nano, magisiro Ada de Roxburg, and many others, this William de
Matulant is a witness. This charter is without date, but by the witnesses, it
appears to have been about 1236.

Also to another donation, by David bishop of St. Andrews, Ibid. p. 345.
William de Matulant is a witness, anno 1240

This William dying about 1250, was succeeded by his son,

III. Sir RICHARD MAITLANT, who was one of the most considerable barons in the
country, being in possession of the lands and baronies of Thirlestane, Blyth,
Tullos, Hedderwick, etc. in vicecomitatu de Berwick, and was in great favor
with king Alexander III.

He made a donation to the monastery of Dryburgh, Chartulary of Dryburgh, penes
eund. p. 78.
of the lands of Koubentside, in territorio suo de Thirlestane, pro salute
animae suae, et Aviciae sponsae suae, etc.

He also gave to the same convent, Ibid. p. 79.
omnes terras suas, quas Walterus de Giling tenuit in feodo suo de Thirlestane,
et pasturagium ad quadraginta oves, sexaginta vaccas, et viginti equos, etc.

Amongst the writs of this family, there is a bond by Patrick abbot of Kelsan,
Act of parliament, ascertaining the writs of the family M. S. penes comitem de
Lauderdale, p. 8.
and convent thereof, whereby they oblige themselves not to prejudge Roger de
Quincy earl of Winchester, chancellor of Scotland, by an agreement betwixt them
and sir Richard Maitlant, and William his eldest son, anent the lands of
Hedderwick, pasturages of Thirlestane and Blyth, within their term, etc.
Patrick was abbot of Kelsau, from 1258, to 1260.

There is also an indenture betwixt sir Richard Maitlant knight, on the one
part, et Joannem anglicum ex altera part, anent the warrandice of a charter,
Ibidem.
granted by Thomas de Thirlestane, together with the said sir Richard his
confirmation of the pasturage-common of Thirlestane, Lamlech, etc.

Sir Richard, by said Avicia his wife, had a son,

IV. WILLIAM de MAITLANT, designed dominus de Thirlestane, who succeeded him.

He ratified and confirmed to the monastery of Dryburgh, Chartulary of
Dryburgh, p. 80.
omnes terras quas dominus Richardus Matulant pater suus dedit dictis monachis
in territorio suo de Thirlestane. etc.

He also confirms to the same monastery, Ibid. p. 82 and 83.
a donation of part of the lands of Bissinghame.

He was a great patriot, and joined king Robert Bruce as soon as he began to
assert his title to the crown.

And dying about 1315, was succeeded by his son,

V. Sir ROBERT MAITLANT, who, in his father's lifetime, got possession of the
lands of Thirlestane, which appears from a resignation by William, son and heir
of Edward de --, in the hands of sir Robert Maitlant, of all his lands which he
held of sir Robert, Writs of the family, p. 9.
in territorio, villa, et tenemento de Thirlestane, dated in 1293.

He was witness in a charter of John Maxwell of Pencaitland to the abbacy of
Dryburgh, Chartulary of Dryburgh.
anno 1340.

He obtained a grant of the lands of Leithington from sir John Giffard knight
of Yester, M. S. writs of the family.
which was afterward confirmed by king David II. the 17th October, in the 17th
year of his reign, anno 1346.

He was a faithful and loyal subject, both to king Robert Bruce and his son
king David.

He married a daughter of sir Robert Keith, Writs of the family of Marishal.
great marishal of Scotland, by whom he had issue three sons.

1. John, his heir.

2. William Maitlant, who is witness to a charter of Robert Lauder of
Quarrelwood, Charta penes dom. Andr. Lauder de Fountainhall.
together with his brother John, dominus de Thirlestane, in the reign of king
David II.

3. Robert Maitlant, who married --, heiress of Gight, Chart. in pub. archiv.
in vicecomitatu de Aberdeen, and was ancestor of the Maitlands of Pittrichie.

He lived to a great age, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. JOHN MAITLANT, who got a safe conduct to go up to England, Rymer, ^om. VI.
p. 428.
anno 1363, and afterward obtained a charter of the lands of Thirlestane and
Tollous, in which he is designed Johannes dominus de Thirlestane, Writs of the
family.
anno 1379.

There is also a charter of the lands of Thirlestane and Tollous granted by
William earl of Douglas to the said John Maitlant, upon his own resignation,
and to Robert his son, procreate betwixt him and Agnes Dunbar his spouse,
Ibidem.
ante annum 1384; in which year William earl of Douglas died.

In a charter of confirmation of a donation of the lands of Snowdon to the
monastery of Dryburgh, pro salute animae suae, sponsae suae, patris et matris
suae, etc. he is designed Joannes de Matulant dominus de Thirlestane,
Chartulary of Dryburgh, p. 216.
filius et haeres Roberti Matulant quondam domini ejusdem, etc.

He died about 1395, Fordun, lib. cap. 10. and writs of the family.
leaving issue by the said lady Agnes Dunbar, daughter of Patrick earl of
March, a son,

VII. Sir ROBERT MAITLANT, dominus de Thirlestane, who succeeded him, and was
entrusted, by his uncle George earl of March, with the keeping of the castle of
Dunbar, when he went to England discontented. Fordun says, " Et castrum de
Dunbar nepoti suo, filio scilicet, Fordun, lib. 15. cap. 10.
sororis suae, domino Roberto Matelant, militi, custodiendum reliquit, etc."

The earl afterward turned an enemy to his country, got assistance from
England, invaded, and did it great mischief, for which he was most justly
forfeited; but sir Robert Maitlant, having immediately surrendered the castle
of Dunbar to the earl of Douglas, Ibid. ad ann. 1440.
was not involved in his uncle the earl of March's rebellion, though some
authors have asserted that he was.

He was afterward designed by the title of Leithington, Nisbet, vol. I. p. 293.
and married --, by whom he had three sons.

1. Sir Robert, who was one of the noble Scotch heirs that were appointed
hostages for king James's ransom, Rymer, tom. X. p. 327.
anno 1424, but he died before his father without issue.

2. William, his father's heir.

3. James Maitlant, who married Aegidia, daughter of James Scrimgeour of
Dudhope, constable of Dundee, which appears from a charter of confirmation,
Jacobo Maitlant, fratri germano Willielmi Maitlant de Thirlestane, et Aegidiae
Scrimzour sponsae suae, haeredi, etc. terrarum de Auchinbreck, Dunvyn, Quithil,
Clougare, Ferdinalane, Clathkene, Auchtinach, Braunchairt, Capelrig, et de
Bagra, cum pertinent. jacent. in baronia de Tiberis, in vicecomitatu de
Dumsries; the lands to return to William, Chart. in archiv. Jacobi II.
failing heirs of James's body. The charter is dated in 1450, and the
confirmation on 10th June 1451. This James had a son, Robert, Ibid. Jacobi IV.
who got from king James IV. a charter, castrum, lacum, et montem de Tiberis,
etc. anno 1494, whose son, John Maitlant, got a charter of the same lands from
king James V. Ibid. Jacobi V.
and of him the Maitlands of Eccles and others are descended.

Sir Robert dying about 1434, was succeeded by his son,

VIII. WILLIAM MAITLAND, promiscuously designed of Leithington and Thirlestane.

There is a charter by Archibald duke of Turenne, earl of Douglas and
Longueville, lord of the regality of Lauder, etc. to William Maitland of
Thirlestane; and Margaret Wardlaw his spouse, of the lands of Blythe,
Hedderwick, Tullos, and Burncleugh, dated at Linlithgow 23d March 1432; Writs
of the family, p. 9.
his father being then alive.

He lived after 1460, and left issue, by the said Margaret Wardlaw, a son,

John, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Margaret, Chart. in pub. arch. ad ann. 1496.
married to John Edmonston of that ilk.

He was succeeded by his son,

IX. JOHN MAITLAND, designed dominus de Leithington et Thirlestane. He made a
great figure in the reigns of king James III. Ibidem, and writs of the family.
and IV. and died in the year 1514, leaving issue a son,

X. WILLIAM MAITLAND, his apparent heir, a man of great bravery, courage and
resolution, and in high favor with his majesty king James IV.

He got a bond from Thomas Cockburn of Newbigging, to keep him free at the
king's hands for the wards and relief of the lands of Gargouzie, in the barony
of Tibbers, since the death of William his great grandfather, Ibidem.
dated 19th September 1506.

Also a bond from sir William Douglas of Drumlanrig, to warrant him at the
king's hands, and the free tenants of the barony of Tibbers, from all danger of
recognition, dated 10th February 1508. Ibidem.


He accompanied his royal master king James IV. to the fatal field of Flowdon,
where he lost his life on 9th September 1513, Nisbet, and Scots comp.
his father being then alive.

By Martha his wife, daughter of George lord Seton, he left issue one son,

Sir Richard, -- and one daughter,

Janet, married to Hugh lord Somerville.

XI. Sir RICHARD MAITLAND of Leithington and Thirlestane, was served heir to
his father in October 1513, and succeeded also to his grandfather the year
thereafter.

He obtained from king James V. a charter of the lands of Thirlestane, in which
he is designed Ricardus Maitland de Leithington, Charta in archivis Jacobi V.
eques auratus, etc.

Also a charter, terrarum et villae de Blythe, terrarum de Carmure, Ibidem.
etc. dated in 1538.

He was one of the commissioners appointed to adjust the differences with the
English about the debateable lands on the borders, Rymer, tom. XV. p. 319, and
569.
anno 1552; and again in the year 1560.

He being a man of great learning and knowledge of the laws, as well as an able
statesman, was appointed one of the senators of the college of justice, anno
1561.

In 1562, he was constituted lord privy seal; Charta in archiv. Mariae reginae.
which office he resigned in 1567, and his second son John was immediately
invested with it.

In 1584, he resigned his lord of session's place in favors of sir Lewis
Ballenden, Account of the college of justice in the lawiers hor.
and having faithfully discharged his duty in all the offices he enjoyed, he
died anno 1586, having married Mary, daughter of sir Thomas Cranston of
Crosbie, by whom he had three sons and four daughters.

1. Sir William, his apparent heir.

2. Sir John Maitland, who carried on the line of this family, of whom
afterward.

3. Mr. Thomas Maitland.

1st daughter, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Helen, married to sir John Cockburn of Clerkington.

2. Isabel, Ibidem.
married to James Herriot of Trabrown.

3. Mary, Ibidem.
married to Alexander Lauder of Hatton.

4. Elizabeth, Ibidem.
married to William Douglas of Whitinghame.

XII. Sir WILLIAM MAITLAND of Leithington, first son and apparent heir of sir
Richard, was a man of great integrity, loyalty, and honor, a firm and steady
friend of queen Mary.

He obtained from her majesty a charter, Charta in archiv, Mariae reginae.
tertiae partis terrarum et baroniae de Bolton, in which he is designed
Willielmus Maitland junior de Leithington.

Also a charter dimidietat. Ibidem.
terrarum de Garvet, terrarum de Stevenson, cu^^ molendino et piscaria super
aqua de Tyne. Ibidem.


And another charter, terrarum et villae de Dawick, Ibid. ad ann. 1558.
et terrarum et villae de Bridgend, etc.

In 1558, he was constituted principal secretary of state to queen Mary; and in
1561 he was nominated one of her privy council. Ibidem.


He was many times afterward sent as her majesty's ambassador to the court of
England, where he had the management of affairs of the utmost importance; and
though his negotiations were sometimes not attended with the desired success,
yet he always acquitted himself with fidelity and good conduct.

In 1561 he was sent ambassador to England, to desire queen Elizabeth's
friendship, Keith's history, p. 181.
and to assure her majesty of queen Mary's sincere intention of cultivating a
good understanding with her dearest sister of England.

In 1562, queen Mary sent him to solicit an interview with queen Elizabeth,
Spotiswood'^ hist. p. 185.
and though he used all the arguments that could be devised by an able statesman,
it could not be brought about.

In 1563, he was sent to endeavor to get queen Mary declared heir to the crown
of England; Keith's hist. p. 235, 236. and 237.
and certainly none had a better title; but queen Elizabeth could never be
prevailed on to yield that point.

In 1564, he was sent to treat about a match for the queen of Scotland,
Cambden, p. 396.
and was at this time most graciously received by queen Elizabeth; but that
negotiation took no effect.

In 1565, he was at last sent to desire queen Elizabeth's concurrence and
approbation of queen Mary's marriage with Henry lord Darnly; Keith, Anderson,
Cambden, etc.
but the queen of England likeways opposed that, as she had done most of queen
Mary's other overtures,

When the civil war broke out in 1567, his reputation for wisdom and integrity
made him greatly courted by both parties; but what he had chiefly at heart was,
the honor and safety of the queen, and the interest and good of his country.
He strenuously opposed every measure that was taken against her majesty, both
at home and at the court of England.

He assisted sir William Kirkaldy in keeping out the castle of Edinburgh
against the young king and the regent, Chart. in archiv. Jacobi VI.
for which he was deprived of the secretary's place, anno 1570.

He still continued steady in his loyalty to the queen till his death, which
happened in 1573, Ibidem.
having married, 1st, Janet Menteith, by whom he had no issue; 2dly, Mary,
daughter of Malcolm lord Fleming, by whom he had a son,

James, -- and a daughter,

Mary, married to Robert first earl of Roxburgh.

XIII. JAMES, only son of sir William, eldest son of sir Richard Maitland of
Leithington, Chart. in pub. archiv. ad annum 1592.
married Agnes Maxwell; but dying without issue, the estate and honors
devolved upon his uncle,

XII. Sir JOHN MAITLAND, second son of the above sir Richard, a man of
excellent natural parts, which, by his father's care, were highly improved by a
liberal education.

He was a most faithful and loyal subject, and a firm and steady friend to the
interest of queen Mary.

He first had the abbacy of Kelso in commendam, Charta in archivis Mariae
reginae.
which he afterward exchanged with Francis Stewart, the queen's nephew, for
the priory of Coldinghame, anno 1566.

In 1567, he was preferred to be lord privy seal, Ibidem.
upon his father's resignation, as before observed.

But being inviolably attached to the queen's interest, and entirely
disapproving of the methods that were used to induce her majesty to resign the
government in favors of her infant son, Records of parliament, ad annum 1570.
he suffered many hardships, both in his person and fortune; his benefice was
taken from him, and given to Alexander Home of Manderston, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
and he was deprived of the office of privy seal by act of parliament, which
was immediately bestowed upon George Buchanan the historian, anno 1570.

And being sensible that the regent, who then had the management of all
affairs, was no friend of his, he retired to the castle of Edinburgh,
Spotiswood, Melvil, Home, John. ston.
where he was kindly received by sir William Ki^kaldy, the governor, with whom
he continued till the castle was taken by the regent, with the assistance of
some troops he got from queen Elizabeth, in 1573.

Sir John Maitland was then sent prisoner to Tantallon; Melvil's memoirs.
but the regent sometime thereafter consented to his enlargement, and allowed
him to be confined at the lord Somerville's house, Records of council in the
signet office.
and two miles round it; but under the penalty of ten thousand pounds sterling,
in case he should go beyond the prescribed limit.

He continued under this restraint till the earl of Morton's fall, Ibidem.
after which he was liberate by an act of council, anno 1578.

After he obtained his liberty he went to court, Memoirs of the college of
justice, in the advocate's library, Edin^.
where his many excellent qualities soon brought him into favor with the king,
who preferred him to be one of the senators of the college of justice, anno
1581.

His majesty's esteem and regard for him still increasing, Register of the
privy seal.
he first conferred the honor of knighthood upon him, then made him secretary
of state for life, anno 1584.

In 1586, he was made vice chancellor, by a most ample commission, in which are
fully narrated his great merit, Chart. in pub. archiv.
probity, and faithful services, etc. and sometime thereafter he was preferred
to be lord high-chancellor of the kingdom.

He accompanied the king to Denmark, where his marriage was solemnized; and
soon after his majesty's return to Scotland with his queen, Charta p^ne comitem
de Lauderdale.
he conferred the honor of the peerage upon the chancellor, by the title of
lord Maitland of Thirlestane, by letters patent, dated 18th May 1590, "to him
and the heirs-male of his body."

He was one of the Scotch peers that assisted at the queen's coronation that
same year. Rymer, tom. XVI. p. 60.


In 1591, the chancellor resigned his office of secretary of state, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
which the king immediately conferred upon sir Richard Cockburn of Clerkington,
the chancellor's nephew.

He died in 1595, greatly regreted by the king, and all who wished well to
their country.

He was a man of great abilities and knowledge in the management of state
affairs.

As no subject had a greater share of his royal master's favor, so none
deserved it better, he having always been a most faithful minister, and
acquitted himself in every station of life with honor, fidelity, and
reputation.

He left behind him a considerable estate, viz. Ibidem.
the lands and baronies of Blyth, Thankerton, Biggar, etc. -- The lands of
Castlehill, in dominio de Lauderdale, cum officio balivatus ejusdem, et de
Musselburgh. -- The lands of East and West-Barns, Ibidem.
Newton, Oswalden, lie-Rig et Fluris, Lochend, etc. The baronies of Stobo,
Ettlestone, nuncupat^ lie White Barony, Ibidem.
etc. -- Also ten chalders of victual yearly, out of the lands of Merkhill,
Treprene, etc. Ibidem.
Likeways the lands and barony of Leithington, etc. etc. cum turre et
fortalitio.

He married Jean, only daughter and heiress of James lord Fleming, lord high
chamberlain of Scotland in the reign of queen Mary, by lady Barbara Hamilton,
daughter of James duke of Chattleherault, by whom he had a son,

John, afterward earl of Lauderdale, -- and a daughter,

Anne, married to Robert lord Seton, son and heir apparent of Robert first earl
of Winton.

He was succeeded by his son,

XIII. JOHN, second lord Thirlestane, a man of great probity and honor, and
was likeways highly esteemed by king James VI. who, in 1616, created him a
viscount, and afterward raised him to the dignity of earl of Lauderdale, by
letters patent, "to him and the heirs-male of his body," Chart. in pub. archiv.
bearing date 24th March 1624.

He was appointed one of the senators of the college of justice, and lord
president of the council.

He married lady Isabel Seton, daughter of Alexander earl of Dunfermline, lord
high chancellor of Scotland, by Lilias, daughter of Patrick lord Drummond, by
whom he had three sons.

1. John, afterward duke of Lauderdale.

2. Robert, who married Margaret, daughter and sole heiress of John Lundin of
that ilk, by whom he had one daughter, Sophia, heiress of Lundin, married to
John earl of Melfort.

3. Charles, afterward earl of Lauderdale, who carried on the line of this
family, of whom hereafter.

And dying in 1645, ^p. Guthry's memoirs.
was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIV. JOHN, second earl of Lauderdale, a man of great abilities, and singular
accomplishments.

According to my lord Clarendon, he was deeply engaged with the covenanters in
the beginning of the civil war, and, when a young man, was one of the
commissioners appointed by the church of Scotland to meet with the assembly of
divines at Westminster, in 1643, in order to new-model the government of the
church.

In 1644, he was one of the commissioners from the estates of Scotland, to
treat with the king at Uxbridge; but that treaty taking no effect, he was again
commissioned by the parliament to treat with his majesty at Hampton Court, anno
1647, the result whereof was, the raising an army to rescue the king, etc.

When the Scots were ready to march into England, the earl was sent over to
Holland, to endeavor to prevail with the prince of Wales to repair to the
Scotch army; but it could not possibly be accomplished at that time. Before the
earl got back to Scotland, the bloody tragedy of his majesty's murder was
perpetrated, and the earl returned directly to Holland, to offer his service to
the prince of Wales, now king Charles II. and was most graciously received.

In 1650, the king came to Scotland, and the earl accompanied him; Clarendon's
history, v. III. p. 286.
but (according to the noble historian) duke Hamilton and he were obliged to
conceal themselves amongst their friends for some time after the king landed,
they being both very disagreeable to Argyle and the covenanters, who ruled all
at that time.

After the parliament at Stirling in 1651, Ibid. p. 308.
all parties were (in appearance) heartily united in the service of his
majesty; and now duke Hamilton and Lauderdale seemed to have most of the king's
confidence.

Lauderdale never after left his majesty, till the fatal battle of Worcester,
where he was taken prisoner, Ibident.
sent to the tower of London, underwent a severe confinement of nine years,
till he was released by the restoration of king Charles II. anno 1660.

After which, in recompense of his sufferings, and on account of his great
learning and knowledge in the management of affairs of state, he became the
king's first favorite, and prime minister.

He was made secretary of state, president of the council, heretable high
sheriff of the county of Edinburgh, one of the extraordinary lords of session,
first commissioner of the treasury, one of the lords of his majesty's
bedchamber, lord high commissioner to the parliament, and governor of
Edinburgh castle.

On second May 1672, he was created marquis of March, Chart. in pub. archiv.
and duke of Lauderdale, by patent to him and the heirs-male of his body.

On third June thereafter, he was installed at Windsor, a knight of the most
noble order of the garter.

On 25th June 1674, he was created a peer of England, by the titles of baron
Petersham, and earl of Guilford, by patent also to the heirs-male of his body,
and was made one of the privy council for the kingdoms of Scotland, England,
and Ireland.

As this great man has been most unjustly aspersed by some historians, we
shall take the liberty to sum up his character in the words of an author of
good reputation, North's examination of the history of the reign of king
Charles II. p. 79.
who, though an Englishman, seems to have examined the whole conduct of this
Scotsman, without prejudice, and says, "It is well known, that, by the prudent
conduct of the duke of Lauderdale, Scotland was in a posture not only of
safety, but of giving assistance to the king, if needed.

He was an inexpugnable loyalist, and kept the door of Scotland close shut,
that no harm could get in or out there while he was commissioner, which, in the
sense of the earl of Shaftsbury and his party, was the worst of offenses

In the mean time all the party foulmouths vented against him the utmost
obloquy that could possibly be imagined, as if he had been the basest of men,
and the modern time-serving historians chime in with it, though most injurious
to the character and honor of the best and wisest of statesmen that ever
England had, etc."

John duke of Lauderdale married, 1st, lady Anne, daughter and co-heiress of
Alexander earl of Home, by whom he had only one daughter,

Lady A^ne Maitland, married to John marquis of Tweeddale.

He married, 2dly, lady Elizabeth Murray, daughter and heiress of William earl
of Dysart, widow of sir Lionel Talmash of Heylingham, in the county of Suffolk,
by whom he had no succession.

And dying on the 24th of August 1682, without male-issue, his English titles,
and those of marquis and duke became extinct; but his estate, and the honors
of earl, etc. descended to his brother,

XIV. CHARLES, third earl of Lauderdale, third son of the first earl, who was
constituted treasurer-depute, anno 1670.

He was also appointed general of the mint, and one of the senators of the
college of justice.

He married Elizabeth, daughter and heiress of Richard Lauder of Hatton, and
obtained a charter from king Charles II. Carolo Maitland, filio tertio legitimo
quondam Johannis comitis de Lauderdale, Chart. in archiv. Carol^ II.
et Elizabethae Lauder filiae legitimae Mri. Ricardi Lauder de Hatton, suae
sponsae, et haeredibus masculis, etc. totas et integras terras de Nortoun,
terras de south et north Platts domos, aedificia, et pertinen. jacen. in
parochia de Ratho et vicecomitatu de Edinburg^; ac etiam totas et integras
terras et baroniam de Hatton, comprehenden. terras dominicales de Hatton, cum
castris, turribus, etc. et totas et integras terras de Over-Gogar cum turribus,
etc. etc. dated 4th December 1660.

By her he had six sons, and two daughters.

1. Richard, earl of Lauderdale.

2. John, who succeeded his brother.

3. Mr. Charles Maitland, who married Lilias, daughter of sir John Colquhoun of
Luss, and widow of sir John Stirling of Keir.

4. Mr. Alexander Maitland, who married Janet Campbell, daughter of Mr. --
Camphell, and had a numerous issue.

5. Mr. William Maitland, who married Christian, daughter and heiress of Robert
viscount Oxenford, whose son, in right of his mother, was viscount Oxenford.

6. Mr. Thomas Maitland.

1st daughter, lady Isabel, married to John lord Elphingston.

2. Lady Mary, married to Charles earl of Southesk.

And dying in 1691, was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. RICHARD, fourth earl of Lauderdale, a man of great learning, probity, and
honor; he had a fine genius for poetry; witness his elegant translation of
Virgil, which is universally acknowledged to be a masterpiece of its kind.

With these great qualifications he soon became a mighty favorite of king
Charles II. who admitted him one of his privy council when very young, and made
him lord justice-clerk, anno 1681.

And being strongly attached to the interest of the royal family, he followed
the fortune of king James VII. and went to France, where he died, having
married lady Anne Campbell, daughter of Archibald earl of Argyle, by whom he
had no issue, whereby his estate and honors devolved upon his brother,

XV. JOHN, fifth earl of Lauderdale, who came early into the revolution; and
being bred to the law, was appointed one of the senators of the college of
justice, in which office he continued till his death, which happened anno 1710.

He married lady Margaret Cunninghame, only daughter of Alexander, tenth earl
of Glencairn, which Alexander died without male-issue. By her he had three
sons, and one daughter.

1. James, lord Maitland.

2. Charles, afterward earl of Lauderdale.

3. John, who was a colonel of the guards.

His only daughter, lady Elizabeth Maitland, was married to James earl of
Hyndford.

XVI. JAMES, lord Maitland, first son and apparent heir of John fifth earl of
Lauderdale, married lady Jean, daughter of John earl of Sutherland, by whom he
had but one daughter,

Lady Jean Maitland, married to sir James Ferguson of Kilkerran, Bart. one of
the senators of the college of justice.

And dying before his father without male-issue, was succeeded by his brother,

XVI. CHARLES, who succeeded also to his father in 1710, and was sixth earl of
Lauderdale.

He was constituted president of the court of police, lord lieutenant and high
sheriff of the county of Mid-Lothian, and general of the mint.

He was also chosen one of the sixteen peers for Scotland, to the British
parliament 1741.

He married lady Elizabeth Ogilvy, daughter of James earl of Finlater and
Seafield, chancellor of Scotland, by whom he had eight sons, and three
daughters.

1. James, now earl of Lauderdale.

2. Charles Maitland, Esquire; married to -- Barclay, heiress of Towie, and has
issue.

3. George Maitland, Esquire; a dignified clergyman in the kingdom of Ireland.

4. Richard Maitland, Esquire; lieutenant colonel of a regiment of foot.

5. Alexander, a colonel of the guards, and usher to the princess dowager of
Wales. He married --, daughter of colonel Maden, and has issue.

6. Frederick, a captain of a ship of war.

7. Patrick, captain of an East India man.

8. John, a captain of foot.

1st daughter, lady Elizabeth, married to James Ogilvy of Rothemay, Esquire; and
has issue.

2. Lady Margaret, died unmarried.

3. Lady Janet, married to Thomas Dundass of Fingask, Esquire; and has issue.

He died in 1744, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVII. JAMES, seventh earl of Lauderdale, who early betook himself to a
military life, in which he continued for twenty-five years, when he resigned.

Upon his father's death he succeeded to the high sheriff-ship of the county of
Mid-Lothian, and was chosen one of the sixteen Scotch peers to the British
parliament 1747; also to the parliament 1754.

He married the daughter and co-heiress of sir Thomas Lombe of the county of
Kent. By her he has had four sons, and four daughters.

1. Valdave-Charles Lauder, lord Maitland who died young.

2. James, now lord Maitland.

3. Mr. Thomas.

4. Mr. John.

1st daughter, lady Hannah, died young.

2. Lady Elizabeth.

3. Lady Mary-Julian.

4. Lady Hannah-Charlotte.

ARMS.
Or, a lion rampant dechasse within a double tressure, flowered and
counter-flowered with flowers de lis gules.

CREST; on a wreath, a lion sejant guardant gules, crowned with a ducal crown,
holding in his dexter paw a drawn sword, pommelled and hilted or, and in the
sinister a flower de lis azure.

SUPPORTERS; two eagles proper.

MOTTO; Consilio et animis.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Lauder-Forth in the county of Berwick, and at Hatton in the county of
Edinburgh.

Old Earls of LENNOX.
THE Irish antiquaries claim the honor of the origin of this noble family,
Doctor Keatine, Peter Walsh, etc.
and assert, that their first ancestor came from Ireland.

Some Scotch authors allege, that they are descended from Alexander, second
son of Kenneth thane of Lochaber, Mr. Simson's essays. Hist. of the Stewarts,
etc.
and immediate younger brother of Bancho, predecessor of the Scotch royal
family.

But the following narration will make it plainly appear, that they came from
England.

Although upon the great victory obtained by William duke of Normandy
(afterward called the Conqueror) over Harold king of England, at Hastings, in
October 1066, all the southern provinces of England submitted quietly to the
government of the victor; yet several earls, great lords, and powerful barons,
in the northern provinces, much attached to their old race of kings, and
impatient of servitude, stood up valiantly in defense of their liberties, and
the independency of their country; and having carried on a bloody, but
unsuccessful, war against the Conqueror, whom they looked upon as an usurper,
were at last compelled to leave their country, abandon their estates, and save
their lives by flying to Scotland, where they were kindly received by king
Malcolm III. as will be shown hereafter.

The most eminent of these families was, the ancestor of the Dunbars earls of
March, who are treated of under that title, page 437 of this work.

The next was the progenitor of the old earls of Lennox, of whom we are now to
give an account.

The first of them we can fix upon, with any certainty, is

1. AYKFRITH, or EGFRITH, an English Saxon lord, who was possessed of a great
estate in Northumberland, Ordericus Vitali^.
which, with Cumberland and Westmorland, belonged to the Scots for several
generations: it is therefore probable, that he was of Scotch extract. He had
also the lordships of Dent and Sadbergh, Thore^by ducatus Loidiensi^, p. 71.
in Yorkshire, and was cotemporary with the kings Canute and Edward the
Confessor.

He made a great addition to his paternal estate, by the marriage of Ecksrida,
a rich Yorkshire heiress, Doomsday book in registro honoris de Richmond.
with whom he got vast possessions, viz. the lands and baronies of Askrig,
Holteby, Marrig, Burgh, Ilkton, Newton, Taulield, Wath, Melmorby, Normanby,
with several others, all in the same county.

He died about the year 1064, and left issue a son,

II. ARKYLL, or ARKILL, who succeeded him, Ibidem.
and, in old records, is designed Arkill chevalier, the son of Egfrith, etc.

He was possessor not only of all the above baronies in Yorkshire, but also of
the lands of Hakeford, Ibidem.
Hornebye, Layburn, Brumpton, Carthorp, etc. in the same county.

He had likeways a great estate in Northumberland, which appears from a
cotemporary author, who mentions him as one of the most powerful men in that
country, Ordericus Vitalis, ad ann. 1068. Histor. Normann. scriptores, p. 511.
according to these remarkable words: " Arkyllus Nordankymbrorum potentissimus,
cum rege concordiam fecit, eique filium suum obsidem tradidit, etc."

He married Sigrida, daughter to a powerful baron in Yorkshire, viz. Kilvert
filius Ligulfi, by Ekfrida his wife, daughter of Aldunus bishop of Durham, by
which it appears, Simon Dunelmensis, p. 80.
that the celibacy of the clergy had not then obtained in England. By her he
had a son,

Cospatrick, who marrying the daughter of Dolphin, the son of Torphin, had a
son, Cospatrick, cotemporary with Simon of Durham; a descendant of which
Cospatrick, Doomsday book, appendix, p. 61.
by an heir-female, was Adam de Steavolay, who succeeded to his Yorkshire
estate.

Arkyll being a great sticklet for the old Saxon race, bore a principal share
in all the insurrections against William the Conqueror; and being defeated by
him, anno 1067, was obliged to give his son Cospatrick an hostage for his
fidelity, who being too young to have been concerned in his father's
conspiracies, Ibidem.
got a good share of his Yorkshire estate.

Another dangerous insurrection having been raised against the Conqueror, by
the Northern counties, in the year 1068, Arkyll joined heartily in it; and
being again defeated, was forfeited, and obliged to leave England, Ordericus
Vitalis, p 513. etSimon Dunelmensis, p. 82.
according to these words of the said author, " Eodem tamen anno Arkyllus fuit
inter rebels Eboracenses; quibus profligatis, a conquestore in exilium actus
est, etc."

Arkyll fled to Scotland to king Malcolm C^nmore, who having married Margaret,
sister to Edgar Atheling, the true and lineal heir of the English crown,
received all the Saxon exiles with open arms, gave them estates in Scotland,
and other rewards suitable to their birth, merit, and the losses they had
sustained in England, on account of their loyalty

Arkyll obtained from that king a large tract of land in the shires of
Dunbarton and Stirling, which was afterward erected into the earldom of
Lennox, in favors of Alwin Mac Arkyll his grandson.

From this Arkyll his descendents, the old earls of Lennox, are denominated by
the Gaelic bards and senachies, Siol Arkyll, i. e. the posterity of Arkyll.

It is said he married a Scotch lady to his second wife, by whom he had a son
of his own name, who succeeded him in his estate in Scotland.

III. ARKYLL, Chartularies of Glasgow, Paisley, and Kelso.
second of that name, in old writs is always designed Arkyllus filius Arkyll,
etc.

It does not appear that he survived his father long; and we have little of him
on record, only that he was father of

IV. ALWYN, according to the Saxon, or Alwin according to the Celtic, who
succeeded him, and is always designed MacArkill or the son of Arkill.

We find him mentioned in our records in the beginning of the reign of king
David I. who succeeded to the crown of Scotland, anno 1124.

He is witness to a charter of confirmation, by that monarch, to the abbacy of
Dunfermline, Chartulary of Dunfermline.
together with Constantine earl of Fise, who died anno 1127.

He appears to have been much about the court of this king David, Chartulary of
Dunfermline, Kelso, and Glasgow, Da^^ymple's collect. etc.
being witness to most of that good prince's charters and donations to the
religious, which were very numerous.

He was also witness to a general confirmation to the abbacy of Dunfermline, by
king Malcolm IV. Chartulary of Dunfermline.
who succeeded king David, anno 1153.

He was possessed of a vast estate, and being also in great favor with the
said king Malcolm, was by that prince raised to the dignity of earl of Lennox,
Chartulary of Glasgow.
in the beginning of his reign.

He mortified to the church of Kilpatrick, in the earldom of Lennox, the lands
of Cocknach, Edinvernan, Baccun, Finbealuch, Drumcreve, Craigintulloch,
Chartularies of Paisley and Lennox.
Monach, Kinnern, Drumglenan, Cultbuth, and Dalmannach.

He left issue two sons.

1. Alwin, his heir to the earldom of Lennox.

2. Ethus, or Eth, who is designed son to the earl of Lennox, in a charter
granted to the monastery of Melross, by Duncan, the son of Gilbert, Autogr.
penes comitem de Morton; and chronicle of Melross.
the son of Fergus, created afterward earl of Carrick, of the lands of
Maybothle-Beg, or Little Maybole, in Airshire, in 1193; but we know nothing of
his posterity, unless Dovenald Lefitz, Michae More de Levenax, mentioned in
Prynne's collections, anno 1296, is descended of him.

Though we cannot fix upon the precise time of this earl's death, yet we are
sure it happened in the reign of king Malcolm, who died anno 1165.

The earl was succeeded in his whole estates and dignities in Scotland, by his
eldest son,

V. ALUIN, second earl of Lennox, who being very young at his father's death,
king William (who succeeded king Malcolm) as superior of the earldom of Lennox,
gave the ward thereof, during earl Alwin's minority, to his own brother, David
earl of Huntington and Garioch, which appears from an inquisition taken by the
abbot and convent of Paisley, concerning the lands of Monach-Kenneran, now
supposed to be Balchonran, Chartulary of Paisley, p. 102.
upon the river Clyde, anno 1233, when several of the witnesses declare, that
the above lands belonged to the monastery, at the time that David earl of
Huntington held and possessed the earldom of Lennox, according to these words
in the chartulary of Paisley, " Eo tempore quo David comes, frater regis
Willielmi, habuit et possedit comitatum de Levenax, etc."

This earl confirmed his father's donation of the above lands to the church of
Kirkpatrick, and added of his own free gift, Ibidem.
according to the record, the lands of Cateconar, etc.

He gave also the church of Camsie, in the earldom of Lennox, to Walter bishop
of Glasgow, and his successors in that see, ad orandum pro animabus regis
David, et comitis Henrici, et regis Malcolmi, et pro salute domini sui
Willi^lmi regis, et dominae Emergardae reginae, etc. Chartulary of Glasgow.
And in the original record he is designed Alwin earl of Lenno^, son of Alwin
earl of Lennox.

He gave likeways to Maldovinus, Charta penes dom. de Luss.
decanus de Lennox. the lands of Luss in that earldom.

He married Eva, daughter of Gilchrist earl of Menteith, by whom he had eight
sons, and one daughter, who all came to maturity.

1. Maldwin, his heir in the earldom.

2. Dugald, Chartulary of Paisley.
or Dufgalus, who was rector of the church of Kirkpatrick, and died without
issue.

3. Malcolm, who obtained for his patrimony the lands of Camsie, in the earldom
of Lennox. His only son Finlay frequently, from his father's lands, designed
Finlaus de Camsie, and Finlaus filius Malcohni, had three daughters his
co-heiresses, viz. 1. Mary, married to John Wardrobe, a gentleman of a
considerable estate in the west country. 2. Elena, married to Bernard Earth of
that ilk, in Stirling-shire, whose third share of the lands of Camsy are called
the lands of Craigbernard to this day. 3. Forveleth, married to Norinus
Monorgund of that ilk, in Perth-shire. These ladies are afterward found
nearest heirs to their grand-uncle Dougal, rector of Kirkpatrick, Chartulary of
Paisley.
by an inquisition, dated in the year 1271.

4. Gilchrist, who is a frequent witness in the chartularies of Paisley and
Lennox. He obtained from his brother earl Maldwin, for his patrimony, the lands
and barony of Arrochar, Chart. in pub. archiv. et Autogr. penes MacFarlane.
in the upper part of that earldom, which has been ever since possessed by his
posterity, of whom Walter MacFarlane, now of that ilk, is the representative,
in a direct male-line, as will be hereafter observed.

5. Amelic, who, in old writs, is called Hamelyn, or Havel. He got from his
brother earl Maldwin, the lands of Roseneath in the Lennox, the church whereof
he gave to the monastery of Paisley, in puram, liberam, et perpetuam
eleemosynam, Chartularies of Lennox and Paisley.
etc. He had two sons, Duncan and Amelic, both designed filii Amelic, etc.
whose posterity, in the male line, failed in their children, and the barony of
Roseneath went to the earl of Menteith by an heir-female; for we find Maria
comitissa de Menteith^ in possession of these lands, in the beginning of the
reign of king David Bruce.

6. Duncan, who is witness in a charter granted by his brother earl Maldwin,
Chartulary of Lennox, p. 22. and 92.
to Humfridus de Kilpatrick, whose posterity assumed the surname of Colquhoun.

7. Henry, who is witness in a charter of confirmation, granted by his brother
earl Maldwin, to Gilmore, the son of Maldwin, decanus de Lennox, above
mentioned, of the lands and barony of Luss, whose posterity ^ook on the surname
of Luss, and continued in the male-line till the reign of king Robert II. or
III. that Godfridus de Luss, having only one daughter, his sole heiress, she
married Humphry Colquhoun of that ilk, who, with her, Ibid. p. 25.
got the estate.

8. Christinus, who is a frequent witness in his brother earl Maldwin's
charters, particularly in one granted by him to Maurice, the son of Galbreath,
Ibid. p. 65.
ancestor of the ancient surname of Galbreath. Of these three last brothers
there are no descendents.

His daughter Eva got from her brother earl Maldwin, the barony of Kilsyth,
Chart. in archiv. familiae de Kilsyth.
then in the earldom of Lennox, which she conveyed to her husband Malcolm, son
of Duncan Thane of Calendar, in the shire of Stirling, and had a son Alwin,
Thane of Calendar, ancestor of those of that surname.

Earl Alwin died about the year 1224, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. MALDWIN, third earl of Lennox, who granted to Ansilan Macbeath, ancestor
of the Buchanans of that ilk, a charter of the isle of Clarinis in Lochlomond,
wherein his brother Gilchrist is a witness, Autogr. penes ducem de Montrose.
anno 1225; and this is the first time we find him mentioned as earl.

He confirmed all the donations made by his predecessors to the church of
Kilpatrick, which he afterward gave, with all its lands and privileges, to the
abbacy of Paisley; as also, the lands of Drumochar and Dunteglenan, after the
death of Ralph the king's chaplain, together with the annuity which he paid out
of them to the earl, viz. three merks of silver, one chalder of meal, another
of malt, Chartulary of Paisley.
etc. which is confirmed by king Alexander II. anno 1228.

He gave also to the said abbacy the lands of Drumdinans, Ibidem.
Kultinsuth, Reinford, etc.

When the differences betwixt king Alexander II. of Scotland, and Henry III. of
England were accommodated, Maldwin earl of Lennox was one of the guarantees on
the part of king Alexander, Rymer, tom. I. p. 377.
anno 1237.

He afterward confirmed to the sea of Glasgow the church of Camsie, and to the
monastery of Paisley all the donations made by his predecessors to that abbacy,
Ibidem, and chartulary of Glasgow.
to which Malcolm his son and apparent heir was a witness, 3d March 1238.

He made also considerable donations to the religious at Arbroath, and several
other places; Chartulary of Arbroath, etc.
which is a sufficient proof of his great piety, and the largeness of the
estate he was possessed of.

Nor was his loyalty and regard for his sovereign less remarkable; so^,
understanding that king Alexander II. had a great inclination to have into his
own possession the castle of Dunbarton, a place very strong both by nature and
art, and then the principal message of the earldom of Lennox; also a large
extent of territory called Morach, with its harbor and fishing contiguous
thereto. The earl immediately made a surrender of the whole earldom into the
king's hands, and thereupon obtained a new charter, dated in 1238, in which
neither the castle nor territory were contained, according to these remarkable
words in the charter: Chartulary of Lennox.
quae (says the king) ex consensu et bona voluntate ipsius Maldovini comitis in
manu nostra retinuimus, etc.

The castle has ever since continued a royal fort, and the town of Dunbarton
was immediately erected by the king on the territory of Morach. Chartulary of
Glasgow.


He married Elizabeth, daughter of Walter, son of Alan, hereditary lord high
steward of Scotland, ancestor of the royal family of Stewart, by Beatrix his
wife, Chartulary of Paisley, and history of the Stewarts.
daughter of Gilchrist earl of Angus. By her he had a son,

Malcolm, lord of Lennox, -- and a daughter,

Ada, married to Malcolm Drummond, ancestor of the great and ancient family of
the Drummonds earls of Perth.

The last mention we find made of this earl in any public deed, is a general
confirmation granted by him to the monks of Paisley, dated anno 1250, to which
Walter Cumin earl of Menteith, Chartulary of Paisley.
Gilchrist, Amelic, and Duncan, the earl's brothers, are witnesses.

He died soon thereafter, in the beginning of the reign of king Alexander III.

VII. MALCOLM, lord of Lennox, only son and apparent heir of earl Maldwin, is
mentioned in many writs in the chartularies of Lennox and Paisley, etc. Autogr.
penes ducem de Montrose.
and is always designed filius et haeres apparens Maldvini comitis, etc. But he
never came to be earl, as he died before his father, anno 1248, leaving issue a
son,

VIII. MALCOLM, second of that name, who succeeding his grandfather earl
Maldwin, was fourth earl of Lennox.

King Alexander III. erected a large tract of land of the earldom of Lennox
into a free forestry, with all the privileges and emoluments which any mortal
could justly claim or enjoy on account of any free forestry whatever,
Chartulary of Lennox.
in favors of this earl, dated at Kintore, 6th July 1272.

He confirmed all the donations made by his predecessors to the religious at
Paisley, Ibidem, and chartulary of Paisley.
in 1273.

He was a man of singular worth and merit, and a true lover of his country.

He was one of the Scotch nobles that bound themselves to stand by, and support
the title of, princess Margaret, daughter of the king of Norway, to the crown
of Scotland, failing heirs-male of king Alexander III.'s body, Rymer, tom. II.
p. 266.
anno 1284.

After king Alexander's death, he was one of the magnates Scotiae who agreed to
the marriage of the king of Norway's daughter (then queen Margaret) with Edward
prince of England, Ibid. p. 471.
anno 1290.

He confirmed the barony of Arrochar to his cousin Duncan, the son of his
grand-uncle Gilchrist, ancestor of the lord of MacFarlane. etc. which was
afterward confirmed by a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
from king James I. at a parliament held at Perth, anno 1430.

He died betwixt the years 1290 and 1292, leaving issue only one son,

IX. MALCOLM, third of that name, who succeeded him, and was fifth earl of
Lennox.

We find him designed Malcolmus comes de Lennox, Chartularies of Lennox and
Paisley.
filius et haeres quondam Malcolmi comitis de Lennox, anno 1292; and that same
year he was chosen one of the arbiters on the part of Robert Bruce, Rymer, tom.
II. p. 644, ad ann. 1292.
in his competition for the crown with John Baliol; yet he, with many others of
the Scotch nobility, was forced to submit to, and acknowledge the superior
power of king Edward I. of England, when he had overrun Scotland, Ibid. p. 644.
anno 1294.

He was a worthy patriot, and firmly attached to the interest of his country;
for the liberty and independency whereof he fought all his life, and was at
last slain in defense of it.

In the year 1297, Walsingham, Matthew of Westminster, Hen. Knighton.
he, in conjunction with the earls of Buchan, Menteith, Strathearn, Ross,
Athole, and Mar, at the head of a Scotch army, invaded, ravaged, and laid
waste, all the north of England.

As soon as Robert earl of Carrick (afterward the valiant and victorious king
Robert Bruce) began to assert his just right to the crown of Scotland, he was
the first of the nobility who joined him, was present with him in most of his
battles and distresses, Fordun, vol. II. p. 323 Buchanan, etc.
and, during all his life, adhered firmly to the best of sovereigns in the
worst of times.

He obtained from that great prince many charters, under the great seal, of
different lands, Chartulary of Lennox.
lordships, and baronies, and got from him the hereditary sheriff-ship of the
county of Clackmannan, anno 1310.

The king also confirmed to him the sheriff-ship and lord lieutenancy of the
earldom of Lennox, Ibidem.
which had been long enjoyed by his predecessors.

He was one of the Scotch nobles who signed that famous letter to the pope,
Fordun, vol. II. p. 275.
asserting the independency of Scotland, anno 1320.

He got also from that same prince a charter under the great seal, dilecto et
fideli suo Malcolmo comiti de Levenax, of the lands of Lecky, lying near
Buchanan, in recompense of some lands in the territory of Cardross, which the
earl had yielded to the king. This charter has no date; but appears to have
been near the end of king Robert's reign, Chart. in Rotul. Rob. I.
ante 1329.

This earl gave a full and ample confirmation of all the lands and privileges
granted by his predecessors to the abbot and convent of Paisley, Chartularies
of Paisley and Lennox.
dated in November 1330.

King Edward III. of England having besieged the town of Berwick, Archibald
lord of Douglas, then governor of Scotland, in order to raise the siege,
gathered together a numerous army, and was joined amongst others by Malcolm
earl of Lennox, with all his friends and followers. The two armies came to an
engagement, at a place called Halidonhill, near Berwick; the Scots were utterly
overthrown, and losta great number of brave men, who all died fighting
valiantly in defense of their country, amongst whom were the governor himself,
the earls of Lennox, Str^thearn, Sutherland, Carrick, etc. This battle was
fought upon the 22d day of July 1333. Henricus de Knighton, etc.


Into what family this heroic earl married, we cannot, with any degree of
certainty, affirm; but, if tradition can be credited, it was to a sister or
daughter of Donald earl of Mar, and certain it is he had issue two sons, who
survived him.

1. Donald, his heir.

2. Murdoch, who obtained in patrimony, from his brother, the lands of
Duntreath, etc. in the parish o^ Strathblane, in the earldom of Lennox, which,
Charta penes dom. Napier.
upon his death without succession, returned again to the family.

X. DONALD, sixth earl of Lennox, succeeded his father in 1333, and was one of
the earls and great men of Scotland, who granted commission to several
plenipotentiaries to treat with the English about the redemption of king David
II. Rymer, tom. VI. p. 43.
26th September 1357.

He was also one of the magnates Scotiae, who, in a parliament held at Scoon,
27th March 1371, unanimously acknowledge and declare, that John earl of Carrick
(afterward king Robert III.) was eldest lawful son of, Autogr. in pub. archiv.
and undoubted heir and successor, to king Robert II.

To this famous deed earl Donald's seal was appended, Hay's vindication of
E^zabeth More. p. 120.
though now, by the injury of time, it is lost; but the tag to which it was
affixed still remains, with his name at it.

In the year 1372, king Robert II. gave to his son Alexander, lord Badenoch,
afterward earl of Buchan, the relevium or compositum money, due to the king
out of the estate of Lennox at the entry of the next heir, to which he
succeeded upon this earl's death, Chart. in ro^ul. Rob. II.
anno 1373.

Earl Donald left issue only one daughter,

Margaret, his sole heiress, of whom afterward.

He dying without sons, in him ended the male-line of Maldwin, eldest son of
Alwin second earl of Lennox. The representation, therefore, sell to Malcolm
MacFarlane of Arrochar, the next heir-male, being grandson's grandson of
Gilchrist, fourth son of the said second earl, of whom the present Walter
MacFarlane of that ilk is the lineal representative, and is the only branch of
that illustrious and once flourishing family, now subsisting, in a direct
male-line.

XI. MARGARET, only child of earl Donald, succeeded to the estate of Lennox by
her father's destination, but not to the honors, which he could not give, and
neither she nor her husband ever assumed them.

She married Walter of Faslane, son of Alan of Faslane, the first of this
family we find upon record, who obtained the lands of Faslane from Malcolm
fifth earl of Lennox; and his son Donald the sixth and last of the old earls of
Lennox, gives a charter of confirmation to Walter of Faslane, the son of the
said Alan, of the lands of Faslane, Keppach, Culgrayn, Kirkmichael, Glenfrone,
Ballernock, Letter-duald Moyleig, etc. dated at Bellach, in festo omnium
sanctorum, anno 1351, wherein mention is made of the original donation by earl
Malcolm to Alan of Faslane, Autogr. pen^ MacFarlane.
before observed.

Though this family used no other surname but that of Faslane, Duncan Stuart in
the history of the royal family.
yet a late author derives their descent from Walter third lord high steward of
Scotland; and this seems to be in some measure confirmed by a charter of Alan
of Faslane, to which his seal was appended, having thereon a fess cheque of
three tracts, Writs of A^dincaple.
with some other mark of distinction. But be this as it will, it is certain
that Walter of Faslane, soon after his marriage with Margaret the heiress,
relinquished his own paternal coat, and assumed the armorial bearing of this
family, and his posterity took on the surname of Lennox, whereof the eldest son
was to get the estate of Lennox, which came by his mother, and his second was
to get his own paternal estate of Faslane, etc.

He was at last designed dominus de Lennox, which appears by a charter, Waltero
de Faslane, domino de Lennox, et haeredibus suis comitibus de Lennox, etc. anno
1384. Chartulary of Lennox p. 18.
And in November 1385, this Walter of Faslane in person, and Margaret the
heiress his wise, by letters patent, resigned their right to the estate of
Lennox into the king's hands for new in^estment to sir Duncan Lennox knight,
their eldest son, and his heirs, reserving the liserent of the whole to
themselves, and the longest liver, Ibid. p. 2^
during their respective lives, etc.

They had issue several sons.

1. Sir Duncan, afterward earl of Lennox.

2. Alexander.

3. Alan.

4. Walter.

These three last mentioned are all witnesses, and designed brothers of Duncan
earl of Lennox, in a charter granted by him to Murdoch, the son of Malcolm, the
son of Duncan, ancestor of the Leckies of that ilk, of the lands of
Drumfad-Easter, Ibidem.
etc.

What became of these three brothers, or whether any of them succeeded to the
estate of Faslane, we can give no further account; but Walter of Faslane, and
Margaret the heiress, were succeeded in the territory of Lennox by their eldest
son,

XII. Sir DUNCAN LENNOX, knight, grandson of Donald the sixth earl, and heir of
line of the family, who having the prospect of a great estate, and Malcolm
MacFarlane, ancestor of the lord of MacFarlane, the undoubted heir-male of the
old earls, declining to accept a dignity which he thought he had not estate
sufficient to support, king Robert II. out of a grateful remembrance of the
many and eminent services performed to the kings his predecessors by the family
of Lennox, conferred, de novo, Ibidem,
upon the said sir Duncan, and his heirs, the dignity of earl of Lennox, after
it had lain dormant for the space of eight or ten years, ever since the death
of earl Donald in 1373.

There are a great many charters still extant, relating to Duncan earl of
Lennox; but by none of them can we discover into what family he married;
Chartularies of Lennox, Pasley, etc.
only we are sure he had three daughters.

1. Isabel.

2. Margaret.

3. Elizabeth, of whom more particularly hereafter.

The earl entered into an indenture with Robert earl of Fise and Men^eith,
afterward duke of Albany, and governor of Scotland, during the minority of
king James I. whereby it was agreed, that sir Murdoch Stewart, son and heir to
the said earl of Fife, shall have to wife Isabel, eldest daughter to the said
earl of Lennox, and that the earl shall resign his haill earldom of Lennox in
the king's hands for new in^estment thereof, to himself and the heirs-male
lawfully to be begotten of his body; which failing, to the said sir Murdoch
and Isabel, and the heirs to be procreate betwixt them; which failing, to
return to the said earl and his heirs, etc. Item, it is agreed, that the said
earl of Lennox, or his heirs-male, if he any has, Autogr. penes comitem de
Panmure, et penes ducem de Montrose.
shall pay to the said sir Murdoch, for the marriage of his daughter, two
thousand merks sterling, at reasonable times, as the terms happen, etc. This
indenture is dated at Inchmu^in, the earl of Lennox's seat, the 17th day of
February 1391-2.

The earl of Lennox, soon after the consummation of the marriage, executed a
deed of settlement of his estate, in terms of the said indenture, by resigning
his whole earldom in king Robert III.'s hands, who reconveyed it, dicto comiti
Duncano, et haeredibus suis masculis legitime procreatis seu procreandis;
quibus forte deficientibus, Mordaco senescailo consanguineo nostro carissimo,
et Isabellae filiae dicti comitis, et eorum diutius viventi, et haeredibus
inter ipsos legitime procreandis; quibus forte deficientibus, Chart. in rotul.
Rob. III. et hartul. de Lennox.
veris legitimis et propinquioribus haeredibus dicti Duncani quibuscunque, de
nobis et haeredibus nostris, etc. dated November 8th 1392.

He again renewed this entail, anno 1411, to the same series of heirs; Charta
pene^ comitem de Panmure.
whereby it is evident the heirs of line could never succeed to the earldom of
Lennox, while there were any lawful heirs-male of the earl's body subsisting.

Some time after king James I. returned from England, Duncan earl of Lennox was
arrested at the king's instance, was incarcerate in the castle of Edinburgh,
and from thence carried to the castle of Stirling, where he was accused, not of
treason, but of high crimes and misdemeanors; of which, by the verdict of an
assize, he was found guilty, and condemned to lose his head; which sentence was
executed upon him at Stirling, Fordan, vol. II. p. 483.
in May 1425, when he was about eighty years old.

That his estate was not forfeited, will afterward appear. He, with his son-in
law Murdoch duke of Albany, and his two grandsons Walter and Alexander
Stewarts, Extract ex Chron. Scotiae in bibliotheca jurid. p. 272.
who suffered at the same time, were buried in the Black-friars church at
Stirling, on the south side of the great altar, figuris et armis eorundem
d^pictis, etc.

Earl Duncan's three daughters and their posterity succeeded according to the
destination in the above entail, viz.

XIII. ISABFL, the eldest, married to Murdoch duke of Albany, who succeeded his
father duke Robert, the king's uncle, in 1420; but as there is a full account
of him, his children, and death, inserted in the title duke of Albany, page
16th and 17th of this work, we shall here only briefly mention his four sons,
viz. 1. Robert, who died before himself, unmarried. 2. Sir Walter. 3. Sir
Alexander, who both suffered with their father. 4. Sir James, who, upon his
father's, grandfather's, and brother's imprisonment, broke out into open
rebellion, burnt the town of Dunbarton, and, among others, killed sir John
Stewart of Dundonald, governor of the castle there, etc. for which he was
outlawed, and immediately obliged to fly to Ireland, where he died without
lawful issue, before the month of May, in the year 1451; but he had several
natural sons, who afterward came over to Scotland, Act of legitimation in the
public regist.
and were preferred to great honors; three whereof were legitimated by king
James III. anno 1479.

After the entail in 1392, before narrated, all the vassals of the earldom of
Lennox thought it absolutely necessary to have the charters, granted by earl
Duncan, confirmed to them by his eldest daughter and undoubted heiress Isabel;
of this we have many instances in the records, etc. particularly a charter
granted to William lord Graham, ancestor to the duke of Montrose, anno 1423, of
the lands of Errachy, Gartcarron, Strahblane, Balgrochyr, and many others,
wherein she is designed Isabella Stewart, ducissa Albaniae, comitissa de Fife,
et de Menteith, ac haeres comitatus de Lennox, etc. and confirms cum consensu
Mordaci ducis Albaniae, etc. ac regni Scotia gubernatoris, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
et filii sui et haeredis Walteri Stewart de Fife, de Lennox, de Menteith, etc.

After her father's death, and the melancholy catastrophe of her family, which
s^e long survived, and bore with great equanimity, firmness, Abercromby.
and resolution, she still continued to possess the earldom of Lennox, and to
grant charters to the vassals; in some of which she is designed countess of
Lennox, particularly in one of the lands of Balgro^hyr, Charta penes Willi^lmum
Lennox de Woodhead.
held of her in capite, anno 1444, which will be hereafter mentioned.

In the year 1450, she founded a sumptuous collegiate church at Dunbarton,
Account of religious houses, and book of assumption of benefices, M. S. in pub.
archiv.
for a provost and several prebends, dedicated to St. Patrick the apostle of
Ireland, who was born in Lennox, to which she mortified some lands in
Strathblane; as also the lands of Stue-Roger, Forkinch, Balerniebeg, and
Knockdowrie-Barber, etc. Keith's bishops, etc.
as also three churches in Lennox, viz. Fintray, Strathblane, and Bonhill.

She also mortified her lands of Balylogan, in the parish of Kilmaronock, and
earldom of Lennox, to the prior and convent of the Dominicans or Black-friars
at Glasgow, cum consensu et assensu dilecti (...) sororis nostrae germanae
Margaretae (the other sister Elizabeth being then probably dead) uxoris quondam
domini de Ru^ky, etc. pro salute animae nostrae et pro salute quondam
recolendae memoriae dilectissimi sponsi nostri domini Murdaci, Autogr. penes
MacFarlane
dudum ducis Albaniae, necnon pro anima quondam domini Duncani comitis de
Lennox, progenitoris nostri, ac pro animabus Walteri, Jacobi, et Alexandri,
quondam filiorum nostrorum, etc. In this charter, to which her own and her
sister Margaret's seal are appended, she is expressly designed duchess of
Albany and countess of Lennox, and it is dated apud manerium nostrum de
Inchmerin, 18th day of May, in the year 1451.

She died about the end of that year, or beginning of 1452; Chart. in pub.
archiv.
for the earldom of Lennox then fell into the king's hands, as the next heirs
did not for some time make up their titles.

XIII. ELIZABETH, second daughter of Duncan earl of Lennox, was married to sir
John Stewart of Darnly, whose great actions and death are inserted under the
next title. Their eldest son sir Alan Stewart of Darnly, father of John,
afterward lord Darnly and earl of Lennox, obliges himself in his son John's
contract of marriage with Margaret, daughter of Alexander lord Montgomery, to
infeft her in a forty merk land of the lands of Dreghorn and Darnly; and in
case the said Alan happen to recover the estate of Lennox, Autogr. penes ducem
de Montrose.
to infeft her in as much more as will make up her jointure to a hunder merk
land of old extent, dated 15th May 1438.

This John, on 16th December 1460, took instruments upon his requiring Andrew
lord Evandale, chancellor of Scotland, to grant him brieves forth of the
chancellary, directed to the sheriffs of Stirling and Dunbarton, for serving
him one of the heirs portioners of the deceast Duncan earl of Lennox, father of
Elizabeth of Lennox, grandmother to the said John, Ibidem.
in all the lands in which the earl died last seized and infeft, and is
afterward actually served and retoured heir to him, in the half of the lands
of the said earldom, Ibidem.
and the principal message of the same, on 23d July 1473; and of this John the
earls and dukes of Lennox are descended, as in the next title, Stewart duke of
Lennox.

XIII. MARGARET, third daughter of earl Duncan (though by some authors said to
be second) was married to Robert Menteith of Rusky, Ibidem.
who insefts her in some of his lands, 25th July 1392. By her he had a son,

Murdoch Menteith of Rusky, who married Christian, daughter of sir David Murray
of Tullibardine, ancestor of the duke of Athole, and had by her a son Patrick,
who died without succession. Murdoch had also two daughters. 1. Agnes, married
to sir John Haldane of Gleneagles, in the shire of Perth. Their elddest son,
Chart. in pub. archiv. et penes Rob Haldane de Gleneagles.
John Haldane of Rusky, was, in the year 1473, served heir in the fourth part
of the earldom of Lennox, to his great-grandmother's father, Duncan earl of
Lennox, qui obiit ultimo vestitus et sasitus, ut de feodo ad fidem et pacem
domini nostri regis, de comitatu de Levenax, etc. 2. Elizabeth, married to John
Napier of Merchiston, ancestor of lord Napier. She is served heir to her
great-grand-father at Dunbarton, 4 to die Novembris 1473, before this inquest,
viz. Alexander Cunninghame of Polmais, Duncan Napier of Kilmahew, Andrew
MacFarlane of Arrochar, Walter Nobil of Ferme, Donald Lennox, etc. etc. qui
jurati dicunt quod Duncanus comes de Levenax, proavus Elizabethae Menteith
latricis praesentium, obiit ultimo vestit. et sasit. ut de feodo ad pacem et
fidem, etc. as above, Et quod dicta Elizabetha est una legitima et pro^inquior
haeres ejusdem quondam Duncani proa^i sui, Chart. penes Franciscum dom. Napier.
de tota quarta part comitatus de Levenax, etc.

The above mentioned heirs portioners had a long contest amongst themselves,
concerning the division and succession to the earldom of Lennox, which was at
last determined in favors of the family of D^nly, anno 1477, whereby that
earldom came to the Stewarts; and, in consequnence of the above descent, the
Stewarts of Darnly, and Haldanes of Gleneagles, quarter the arms of Lennox with
their own; but the Napiers of Merchiston have ever since assumed the arms of
Lennox, in place of the old bearing of the Napiers.

By the preceding narration it appears, Nisbet. vol. I. p. 139.
that the earldom of Lennox, according to the above mentioned entail, went in a
regular course of succession to the lawful heirs of line of that ancient
family, which is fully instructed by the above indisputable documents; and if
earl Duncan had had a son lawfully born, he would have had a just and undoubted
right to both the estate and title of earl of Lennox, in which case the female
succession could never have taken place.

Yet we must here observe, that the said earl Duncan had a son Donald, who, in
an authentic charter of confirmation from the countess of Lennox, of the lands
of Balgrochyr, is designed filius legitimus quondam Duncani comitis de Lennox,
etc. These lands of Balgrochyr ly in the parish of Camsie, and earldom of
Lennox. The charter is granted by sir William Graham of Kincardine, ancestor of
the duke of Montrose, in 1423, which lands he held of the lord of
Craigbernard, and ^he of the family of Lennox: therefore Isabel, then designed
duchess of Albany, Charta penes Willielmum Lennox de Woodhead.
and countess of Lennox, as superior thereof, confirms the same to the said
Donald, anno 1444; and of him William Lennox now of Woodhead, Esquire; the Lennoxes
of Calzie, Plumptoun, Barn^hogle, etc. are descended. But it does not appear
that this Donald, or any of his posterity, ever laid claim to any part of the
earldom of Lennox.

ARMS of the old earls of Lennox.
Argent a saltier engrailed, cantoned with four roses gules.

What crest, motto, or supporters, this family used, we have not been able to
discover.

CHIEF SEATS,
Were the castle of Dunbarton, until Maldwin earl of Lennox made a present
thereof to king Alexander II. anno 1238: after that they resided at ^nchmuryn,
an island in Lochlomond; Bellach, on the water of Leven; and Catter, on the
water of Enrick; all within the earldom of Lennox and shire of Dunbarton.

STEWART Duke of LENNOX.
THE immediate ancestor of this great and illustrious family, of which not only
the royal family of Great Britain, but most of the crowned heads in Europe are
descended, was,

I. Sir JOHN STEWART knight, second son of Alexander, sixth lord high steward
of Scotland, who married Margaret, daughter and heiress of sir John de Bonkill,
by whom he got a considerable accession to his estate, and was afterward
designed sir John of Bonkill.

He was a worthy patriot, and joined the brave sir William Wallace, Stewart's
history of the royal family, and all Scotch historians.
in defense of the liberties of his country, but had the misfortune to lose his
life at the fatal battle of Falkirk, anno 1298.

By the said Margaret de Bonkill, he left a numerous issue.

1. Sir Alexander, ancestor of the Stewarts, earls of Angus, whose male line is
extinct.

2. Sir Alan, progenitor of this noble family, etc. etc.

II. Sir ALAN STEWART, second son of sir John of Bonkill, like his father, was
a true lover of his country, a firm and steady friend of king Robert Bruce,
from whom he got a charter, Chart. in rotul. Rob. I.
under the great seal, of the lands of Dregho^n, etc.

He also lost his life in the service of his country, Stewart's hist. of the
ro^al fam. p. 151.
at the battle of Halidonhill, anno 1333, leaving issue three sons.

1. Sir John, his successor whose only son Robert died without male-issue, and
was succeeded by his uncle.

2. Walter, who died also without male-issue.

3. Sir Alexander, who carried on the line of this family.

III. Sir ALEXANDER STEWART, third son of sir Alan, succeeded his nephew
Robert, son of his brother sir John, as before observed, and was promis^uously
designed of Crook^ton and of Darnly.

He accompanied king David Bruce to England, and was taken prisoner with him at
the battle of D^rham, Rymer, tom. V. p. 534.
anno 1346, but was relieved soon thereafter.

He married Janet, daughter and sole heiress of sir William Keith of Galston,
Stewart's history of the royal family.
relict of sir David Hamilton of Cadzow, by whom he had five sons, and one
daughter.

1. John, his heir.

2. William.

3. Alexander of Torbane, ancestor of the Stewarts of Halrig and Raiss.

4. Robert, of whom the Stewarts of Barscobe are descended.

5. James.

His daughter, Janet, was married to sir Thomas Somerville of Carnwath.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. Sir JOHN STEWART of Darnly, who was one of the noble Scot^h heirs proposed
to be sureties for king David's liberty, Rymer, tom. V. p. 791.
anno 1354.

He died soon thereafter, leaving issue a son,

V. JOHN, who was appointed one of the hostages for king David's ransom, though
very young, Ibid. tom. VI. p. 35.
anno 1357, and is then designed John, son and heir of sir John Stewart of
Darnly, etc.

He got a safe conduct from king Edward III. Ibib. p. 108.
to come up to England, with sixty horses in his retinue, anno 1358.

This John was truly a great man. He went with the earls of Douglas and Buchan
to France, with four thousand Scotch auxiliaries; where, for his gallant
behavior and knowledge in the military art, he gained to himself immortal
honor.

He was, by king Charles VII. made lord d'Aubigny, count d'Evereux, constable
and commander of the Scotch army in the absence of the earl of Buchan, Scotch
chron. and Stewart's history.
and a marshal of France, anno 1422.

He married lady Elizabeth, second daughter, and one of the co-heiresses, of
Duncan sixth earl of Lennox, by whom he had four sons.

1. Sir Alan, his heir.

2. Sir Alexander Stewart of Beilmouth.

3. John, lord d'Aubigny, famous in the Neapolitan wars under king Charles
VIII. and Lewis XII. of France,; and no subject in Europe made a greater figure
than he did.

4. Matthew Stewart of Castletoun.

This John of Darnly returned to France when he was a very old man, Father
Hay's collect in the lawiers library Edinburgh.
and lost his life at the siege of Orleans, anno 1429.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. Sir ALAN STEWART of Darnly, who married Catharine, Stewart's hist. of the
royal family.
daughter of sir William Seton of that ilk; but was killed by sir Thomas Boyd
of Kilmarnock, anno 1439, leaving issue two sons.

1. John, lord Darnly.

2. Alexander of Galston, ancestor of lord Pittenweem, etc.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. JOHN, lord Darnly, who served himself heir to Duncan earl of Lennox, his
great-grand-father, anno 1463; but did not enjoy the honors of Lennox till he
made up matters with the lady Gleneagles, descended of earl Duncan's youngest
daughter; then, with consent of the crown, he assumed the title of earl of
Lennox, and got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Johanni comiti de Lennox, of the lands of Darnly, ^nchinnan, Bathgate, and
others, inter 1470 et 1474.

He afterward got the honors confirmed to him by the king, anno 1483.

This earl was a loyal and faithful subject to king James III.

He was appointed one of the commissioners to treat with the English, anno
1472, Rymer, tom. XI.
and was appointed warden of the marches, anno 1481, and was again appointed
one of the ambassadors extraordinary to treat with the English about a peace,
Ibid. tom. XII. p. 241.
anno 1484.

When the civil war broke out, he joined the king against the rebels and the
prince, and was made captain of Dunbarton castle, 1488.

He married Margaret, daughter of Alexander second lord Montgomery, Stewart's
hist. of the royal family, p. 153.
ancestor of the earl of Eglington, by whom he had five sons and four daughters.

1. Matthew, his heir.

2. Robert, lord d'Aubigny.

3. William, captain of the Scotch gens d'arms in France.

4. John Stewart of Glanderstone.

5. Alan, designed filius carnalis, which is not always a natural son. He was
ancestor of the Stewarts of Cardonald.

1st daughter, lady Elizabeth, married to Archibald second earl of Argyle.

2. Lady Marian, married to Robert lord Crichton of Sanquhar, ancestor of the
earl of Dumfries.

3. Lady Janet, married to Ninian lord Ross.

4. Lady Margaret, married to sir John Colquhoun of Luss.

He died anno 1494, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. MATTHEW, second earl of Lennox of the name of Stewart. He was a man of
great parts and spirit, and, in his father's lifetime, was sent
ambassador-extraordinary to the court of England, Rymer tom. XII. p. 340.
when he was only master of Lennox, anno 1488.

He afterward got charters under the great seal, Matthaeo comiti de Lennox, of
many lands, lordships and baronies, Chart. in pub. archiv.
inter 1498 et 1510.

He married lady Elizabeth Hamilton, daughter of James earl of Arran, by
princess Mary Stewart his wife, daughter of king James II. by whom he had two
sons and three daughters.

1. William, master of Lennox, who married lady Margaret Graham, daughter of
William first earl of Montrose, but died before his father without issue.

2. John, his heir.

1st daughter, lady Margaret, married, 1st, to John lord Fleming; 2dly, to
Alexander Douglas of Mains.

2. Lady Elizabeth, married to sir Hugh Campbell of Loudoun.

3. Lady Agnes, married to William Edmonston of Duntreath.

This earl was of the privy council to king James IV. with whom he was in great
favor. He attended him to the fatal field of Flowdon, and there lost his life,
anno 1513.

He was succeeded by his son,

IX. JOHN, third earl of Lennox, who was one of the Scotch nobles that joined
in refusing to the king of England to remove the duke of Albany from the
guardianship of the young king, Rymer, tom. XIII. p. 551.
anno 1516.

He was appointed one of the lords of the regency by king James V. Stewart's
hist. of the royal family, p. 154.
anno 1524.

He was one of the Scotch nobility that ratified a treaty with the English,
Rymer, tom. XIV. p. 114.
anno 1526.

He married lady Anne Stewart, daughter of John earl of Athole, by whom he had
three sons and one daughter.

1. Matthew, his heir.

2. Robert, who was bishop of Caithness, and succeeded to the earldom of
Lennox, as will be shown hereafter.

3. John, lord d'Aubigny, who carried on the line of this family, of whom
afterward.

His daughter, lady Helen, married, 1st, to William sixth earl of Errol; 2dly,
to John earl of Sutherland.

The earl of Lennox endeavoring to rescue the king out of the earl of Angus's
hands, who, it is said, kept him little better than a prisoner, was killed in
the attempt near Linlithgow-bridge by his cousin sir James Hamilton, Stewart's
history, etc.
son of the earl of Arran, after he had been made prisoner by Pardowie, anno
1526.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. MATTHEW, fourth earl of Lennox, who betook himself to a military life, and
served in the wars of France with great reputation.

After the death of king James V. he returned to Scotland, and put several
projects on foot, which were thought inconsisent with the honor and dignity of
the nation; but being disappointed in his expectations, he retired to England,
was outlawed and forfeited.

He was kindly received by king Henry VIII. who bestowed upon him in marriage
his niece lady Margaret Douglas, All Scotch historians.
daughter of Archibald earl of Angus, by the queen of Scotland, king Henry's
sister, and gave him with her an estate in England, according to Mr. Crawfurd,
worth 1700 merks sterling per annum.

The earl entered into a contract or treaty with king Henry, Rymer, tom. XV. p.
19. 22. 29, etc.
whereby he bound himself to deliver up to the king of England his territory of
Dunbarton, the isle of Bute, the castle of Rothsay, with several other lands
and lordships in Scotland, anno 1544, but it never was performed.

He continued in England till he was recalled by queen Mary, anno 1563; and his
forfeiture was then repealed by act of parliament.

His son Henry lord Darnly came to Scotland soon after him, was married to
queen Mary, and declared king of Scotland. He was afterward most barbarously
murdered, and the earl of Lennox prosecuted those suspected to have been
concerned in it, All Scotch historians.
particularly the earl of Bothwell, who was tried by his peers, but was then
acquitted.

After the death of the regent Murray, the earl of Lennox was appointed regent
of Scotland, but was killed at Stirling, Stewart's hist. Crawford, etc.
having enjoyed that office only about thirteen months, anno 1571.

By the said lady Margaret Douglas he had issue several children, but they all
died young, except,

1. Henry, lord Darnly, who married queen Mary, as before observed, and was
father of king James VI.

2. Charles.

XI. This CHARLES succeeded his father, and was fifth earl of Lennox.

He married Elizabeth Cavendish, sister of William first earl of Devonshire,
Peerage of England, vol. I. p. 304.
by whom he had only one daughter,

Lady Arabella Stewart, married to William marquis of Hartford, but died
without issue.

The earl dying also without other children, anno 1576, the representation
devolved upon his uncle Robert, the bishop before mentioned, to whom we now
return.

X. ROBERT, second son of John third earl of Lennox, Keith's bishops, p. 128.
being born a younger brother, was bred to the church, and was bishop of
Caithness. Upon the death of his nephew Charles, he succeeded to the earldom of
Lennox, and was the sixth earl; but he then having no children, made a
resignation of the earldom of Lennox in the king's hands, in favors of his
nephew Esme Stewart, lord d' Aubigny; Ibid. Stewart's hist. etc.
on which account he was created earl of March.

He turned protestant, and married lady Elizabeth Stewart, daughter of John
earl of Athole, but dying without issue, the estate and honors of Lennox
devolved upon his nephew Esme, son of his brother John, before mentioned, to
whom we now return.

X. JOHN, lord d' Aubigny, third son of John third earl of Lennox, was captain
of the Scotch gens d'arms in France, Lives of the office. of state, p. 331.
and governor of Avignon in the reign of king Francis I.

He was father of,

XI. ESME, lord d'Aubigny, upon whom the earldom of Lennox devolved, as before
observed. He had his education in France, came over to Scotland anno 1579, and
was most kindly received by his majesty, who immediately gave him a grant of
the lordship of Arbroath; then in the crown by the forfeiture of lord John
Hamilton. He created, Writs of the privy seal, ad annum 1580.
or rather confirmed the earldom of Lennox to him, and the heirs-male of his
body allenarly; which failing, to return to the crown. He then appointed him
governor of the castle of Dunbarton, Lives of the office. of state,
Spotiswood's history, etc.
captain of the guards, first gentleman of the bedchamber; great chamberlain
of Scotland, and duke of Lennox, anno 1581.

This sudden rise to power and honors, procured him envy, though he was a man
of a mild and sweet disposition, and a lover of peace; but it being alleged
that he was too much attached to the Roman catholic religion, he was strangely
persecuted by the reformers. The king, who was convinced he was not so,
continued his firm friend, and was like to be brought to trouble upon his
account; he therefore, much against his majesty's inclination, retired to
France, and died soon thereafter, Lives of the offic. of state.
in May 1583. A staunch protestant according to Mr. Crawford.

He married Catharine de Balsack, daughter of William seigneur d'Antrague, by
whom he had two sons and two daughters. Ibidem.


1. Ludovick, duke of Lennox.

2. Esme, lord d'Aubigny, who succeeded his brother.

1st daughter, lady Henriet, married to George first marquis of Huntly.

2. Lady Mary, married to John earl of Mar, to whom she had a numerous issue.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. LUDOVICK, second duke of Lennox, whom the king immediately brought from
France, took great care of his education, and confirmed to him all the estates
and honors which belonged to his father.

He also bestowed upon him the lordship of Methven and Balquhidder, and
appointed him heretable admiral, Ibidem.
and lord high chamberlain of Scotland.

He assisted at the queen's coronation, Rymer, tom. XVI. p. 60.
1590.

He got charters under the great seal of a vast number of lands, lordships, and
baronies inter 1590 et 1600, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Ludovico duci Lennociae, etc.

He was sent ambassador to France to renew the old friendship betwixt the two
crowns, anno 1601.

And when the king went up to England, anno 1603, he was made earl of
Newcastle, duke of Richmond, master of the household, first gentleman of the
bedchamber, and knight of the most noble order of the garter.

He was appointed his majesty's commissioner to the parliament of Scotland,
Lives of the offic. of state, Stewart's history, etc.
anno 1607.

He married, 1st, lady Sophia Ruthven, daughter of William earl of Gowrie;
2dly, Margaret, daughter of sir Matthew Campbell of Loudoun; and, 3dly,
Frances, daughter of Thomas viscount Bendon, countess of Hartford, but dying
without issue, in February 1624, his estate and honors devolved upon his
brother,

XII. ESME, lord d'Aubigny, then third duke of Lennox, lord high admiral, and
great chamberlain of Scotland. He had been created earl of March in England, on
17th June 1620, Dugdale's baronage of England, vol. II.
by patent to his heirs whatever; which honors were enjoyed by his female
descendents.

He married Catharine, daughter and heiress of Gervaise lord Clifton of
Broomswold, by whom he got a great estate in England, and by her had issue
seven sons and three daughters. Lives of the offic. of state.


1. James, duke of Lennox.

2. Lord Henry.

3. Lord Francis.

These last two both died young.

4. George, lord d'Aubigny, whose son succeeded to the honors of Lennox, of
whom afterward.

5. Lord Ludovick, who went into holy orders, and was a canon of the cathedral
church of Notredame at Paris.

6. Lord Bernard, commander of the king's troop of guards in the time of the
civil war, and was killed at the battle of Chester, anno 1645.

7. Lord John, who was general of the horse in the king's service, and was
slain at the battle of Arlesford, anno 1644.

1st daughter, lady Elizabeth, married to Thomas Howard earl of Arundel.

2. Lady Anne, married to Archibald earl of Angus, eldest son and heir of
William first marquis of Douglas.

3. Lady Frances, married to Jerome Westone earl of Portland.

The duke died anno 1625, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. JAMES, fourth duke of Lennox, who, while he was abroad for his
education, was made a grandee of Spain: when he returned home, being scarce 21
years of age, he was made a privy councillor, and had all the heretable offices
belonging to his family confirmed to him, was made warden of the cinqueports,
master of the household, Ib. and Stewart's hist.
and knight of the garter.

He got charters under the great seal, Jacobo duci Lennociae, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
of many lordships and baronies, inter 1630 et 1640.

He was a firm and steady friend of the royal family. A noble author says, Lord
Clarendon.
"He was very worthy of all the favor the king had showed him; for, throughout
the whole course of the civil war, he was immovable in his loyalty, and lent
the king at one time 20,000 l. sterling, etc.'

He married lady Mary Villiers, daughter of George duke of Buckingham, by whom
he had a son,

Esine, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Lady Mary, married to Richard Butler earl of Arran, of the kingdom of Ireland,
son of James first duke of Ormond.

He had the honor to pay his last duty to his royal master king Charles I. by
putting him into his grave at Windsor. He never had health or spirits
afterward, but died anno 1655, and was succeeded by his son,

XIV. ESME, fifth duke of Lennox, who dying without issue, anno 1660, his
estate and honors devolved upon his cousin-german, Lives of the offic. of
state.
and heir-male Charles, son of his uncle George, before mentioned, to whom we
now return.

XIII. GEORGE, lord d'Aubigny, fourth son of Esme third duke of Lennox, a great
loyalist, who lost his life in the king's service, at the battle of Keynton, in
October 1642. LordClarendon says, Ibid. and Clarendon.
"He was a man of great hopes, of a gentle and winning disposition, and of very
clear courage, etc."

He married lady Catharine Howard, Peerage of England, v. II.
daughter of Theophilus earl of Suffolk, by whom he had a son,

Charles, afterward duke of Lennox, -- and a daughter,

Catharine, married to Henry lord Obrian, son and heir of the earl of Thomond,
in the kingdom of Ireland, Ib. and Peerage of Ireland.
by whom he had a daughter, married to Edward earl of Clarendon.

He was succeeded by his son,

XIV. CHARLES, who, when very young, was created lord Stewart of Newbury, and
earl of Litchfield, Dugdale's baronage.
by king Charles I. anno 1645; and succeeding to the honors of Lennox, anno
1660, as before observed, was the sixth duke, and was made a knight of the
garter anno 1661.

He got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
of many lands and lordships, inter 1664 et 1670.

He was sent ambassador extraordinary to the court of Denmark, and was seized
with a high fever at Elsineur, where he died anno 1672, leaving no issue by
Frances his wife, daughter of Walter Stewart, Esqque son of Walter lord
Blantyre, whereby the honors, heretable offices, etc. of the family, devolved
upon king Charles II. as next heir-male; but his majesty gave the liferent of
his whole estate to his widow, the said Frances, then duchess dowager of
Lennox, etc. etc.

The hereditary offices of high admiral, and great chamberlain, he reserved to
himself; but afterward created his natural son Charles, duke of Lennox, etc.

LENNOX, Duke of LENNOX and RICHMOND.
I. CHARLES, only son of king Charles II. of England, by the lady Louisa Rence
de Penencoet, duchess of Portsmouth, was born 29th July 1672, christened
Charles Lennox, and, by his royal father, was created baron of Setrington in
the county of York, Peerage of England, vol. I. p. 205.
earl of March, and duke of Richmond in Yorkshire, by letters patent dated at
Westminster 9th August 1675.

He likeways bestowed upon him the fee of the estate of Lennox in Scotland,
and, by letters patent, dated 9th September that same year, he created him duke
of Lennox, earl of Darnly, and lord Torbolton, to him and the heirs-male of his
body. Ibid. p. 205.


He married Anne, eldest daughter of Francis lord Brudenel, son and heir of
Robert earl of Cardigan, and relict of Henry lord Bellasyse of Worlaby, by whom
he had a son,

Charles, his heir, -- and two daughters.

1st, lady Louisa, married to James earl of Berkley.

2. Lady Anne, married to William-Anne earl of Albemarle.

He died anno 1723, and was succeeded by his son,

II. CHARLES, second duke of Richmond and Lennox, who made a great figure in
the reigns of king George I. Ibidem.
and II. and rose to the highest rank in the army.

He married lady Sarah, eldest daughter and coheir of William earl of Cadogan,
by whom he had four sons and eight daughters. Ibidem.


1. --.

2. Charles.

They both died in infancy.

3. Charles, his heir.

4. Lord George-Henry Lennox, who got a commission in the guards, anno 1754,
and married lady Louisa Ker, eldest daughter of William earl of Ancrum.

1st daughter, lady Georgina-Carolina, married to Henry Fox, Esquire; who was
secretary at war, and one of the privy council to king George II.

2. Lady Louisa-Margaret, who died young.

3. Lady Anne, died an infant.

4. Lady Emilia, married to James earl of Kildare in Ireland, and viscount
Leinster of Great Britain.

5. Lady Margaret, died young.

6. Lady Louisa-Augusta.

7. Lady Sarah.

8. Lady Cecilia.

He died anno 1750, and was succeeded by his son,

III. CHARLES, third duke of Richmond and Lennox, a major general in the
British service, and colonel of a regiment of foot. He married lady Mary Bruce,
sister to the earl of Aylesbury, etc.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st and 4th, the arms of France and England; quarterly, the 2d
Scotland, and the 3d Ireland, within a border, compone, argent and gules; the
first charged with verdoy of roses of the 2d, and seeded proper; over all, in
an escutcheon, the arms of Aubigny, viz. gules, three oval buckles or.

CREST; on a chapeau gules, turned up ermine, a lion passant guardant or,
crowned with a ducal coronet gules, and gorged with a collar, gobone,
countercharged as the border in the coat.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter side, an unicorn argent, armed, crested and hoofed,
argent; on the sinister, an antelope armed, crested, and hoofed as the dexter;
each supporter gorged with a collar compone, gules and ermine.

MOTTO; En la rose je fleurie.

CHIEF SEAT.
At Good-wood in Sussex.

LESLY Earl of LEVEN.
AS the rise and descent of the ancient and illustrious name of Lesly is to be
found under the title of earl of Rothes, we proceed directly to the immediate
ancestor of this branch of that noble family, being descended of the house of
Balquhain, which, for antiquity, yields to few of the name of Lesly in Scotland.

WILLIAM LESLY, who flourished in the reigns of king James II. Chart. in pub.
archiv.
and III. got charters under the great seal of the lands and barony of
Balquhain, etc. and left issue several sons.

1. Alexander, who succeeded him, and carried on the line of the family of
Balquhain.

2. William, of whom was lineally descended,

I. ALEXANDER LESLY of Kininvic, who left issue two sons.

1. Alexander, who succeeded him in the lands of Kininvic.

2. George.

II. This GEORGE LESLY of Drummuir, History of the fam. of Lesly, M. S. penes
Mr. David Rae advocate; and Mr. Martin's collections.
progenitor of this noble family, married Mary, daughter of -- Stewart of
Kilcowie, by whom he had a son,

III. Captain GEORGE LESLY, a brave soldier, who had the command of the
garrison in the castle of Blair, in the reign of king James VI.

He married Anne, Ib. and Crawfurd's peerage.
daughter of -- Stewart of Ballechin, by whom he had a son,

IV. Sir ALEXANDER LESLY, who having a strong military genius, went abroad to
push his fortune in the foreign wars, where he had the opportunity of
signalizing his courage and conduct so often, Ibid. and Nisbet, vol. I. p. 97.
that he justly acquired the reputation of a man of great knowledge in the
military art.

He first served a volunteer in lord Vere's regiment in Holland, where he soon
rose to the degree of a captain.

He then went to Sweden, and entered into the service of Gustavus Adolphus, and
performed such heroic actions under that great monarch, that he raised him to
the rank of a lieutenant general, then to that of velt marshal of his armies.

In 1628, when the town of Stralsund was besieged by a victorious army, under
the command of Count Walsten, and reduced almost to the last extremity, the
king of Sweden sent general Lesly to take upon him the command of the garrison,
where he behaved with such singular resolution and conduct, that he obliged the
Count to raise the siege. The burghers were so sensible of the great service he
had done them, that they made him considerable presents, and struck several
medals in honor of him upon that occasion, some whereof are still preserved in
the family.

In 1630, he drove the Imperialists entirely out of Rugen, and continued in the
Swedish service with great glory and renown, till the troubles broke out in his
own country, that he returned home.

He immediately laid out some of his money upon lands in the north country,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
and got charters under the great seal, domino Alexandro Lesly, militi, et
Gustavo Lesly filio suo, of the lands of Auchintoul, etc. inter 1635 et 1637.

In 1638, he was invited by the covenanters to take upon him the command of
their army, Guthry's memoirs.
which he accepted of, and was made governor of the castle of Edinburgh in
March 1639.

In anno 1640, he invaded England upon the head of the Scotch army, and
defeated a party of the king's troops, under the command of lord Conway at
Newburn, and took possession of Newcastle.

His behavior and conduct is approved by parliament, and he got an order for
100,000 merks, Minutes of parliament, and rescinded acts.
to be paid out of the first and readiest of the public money, for his good and
faithful services, etc.

Immediately thereafter, there was a treaty set on soot with the king at
Rippon, general Leslie being one of the parliament's commissioners, at the
conclusion of which the king was so well pleased with the general's behavior,
that he first created him lord Balgony, Charta penes comitem de Leven.
then raised him to the dignity of earl of Leven, by patent to his heirs
whatsomever, anno 1641.

He got a charter under the great seal, Alexandro Leslie domino de Balgony,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
militi, anno 1641; and afterward got charters, Alexandro comiti de Leven, of
several lands and baronies, inter 1641 et 1643.

In 1642, he was sent over to Ireland with some forces, to suppress an
insurrection in that country; and returning in 1643, had again the command of
the Scotch army that was sent to the assistance of the parliament's forces
against the king; and the victory obtained over his majesty's forces at
Marstonmuir, anno 1644, was chiefly ascribed to the conduct of the earl of
Leven.

He was appointed one of the committee of estates by the Scotch parliament,
Rescinded acts of parlt.
anno 1645, one of the supernumeraries of the committee, anno 1646, and got a
new commission to be lord general, anno 1647.

He was one of the planters of kirks, and had a considerable pension settled on
him, besides 1529l. per month for the payment of his troops, Ibidem.
including trumpeters, kettle drums, etc. anno 1649.

Notwithstanding what is above observed, his after-behaviour would induce one
to believe, that his real principles were rather loyal than otherways; and
that, had he imagined the parliament would have driven matters to such
extremities, he would not have been so hearty in their interest; yet a reverend
author says, Guthry's memoirs.
that he was one of the peers that sat in the parliament in January 1649, and
did nothing to hinder the king's murder.

However, none appeared more forward than the earl of Leven afterward for
raising an army, and restoring king Charles II.

He served as a volunteer against Oliver Cromwell at the battle of Dunbar, and
heartily joined and concurred with the loyalists in every measure for
re-establishing our old constitution in church and state; but when he, with
others of the loyal party, had a meeting in Angus, to concert matters for their
future conduct, general Monk, who then besieged Dundee, having got intelligence
of their meeting, sent a strong party in the night, surprised and took them all
prisoners at Alyth in Angus, and sent the old general, with several others,
prisoners to London, where they were confined in the tower.

And though he had been long a faithful servant to the parliament, yet he did
not meet with the least favor from Oliver Cromwell on that account; but
suffered sequestration, and many other hardships, till at last, by the
mediation of the queen of Sweden, he obtained his liberty, and was so sensible
of the service her majesty had done him, that he went over to Sweden in person,
to make his acknowledgments, where he was received, and entertained with great
respect, according to his quality and former services.

He at last returned to his own country, Crawfurd's peerage, and Chart. in pub.
archiv.
retired to his seat of Balgony in Fise, where he died of a very great-age,
anno 1662.

He married Agnes, daughter of -- Renton of Billy, by whom he had two sons, and
five daughters.

1. Gustavus, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who died before his father, without issue.

2. James, lord Balgony.

1st, Lady Anne, married, 1st, to Hugh master of Lovat, and heir of Hugh lord
Lovat; 2dly, to sir Ralph de la Vall, and had issue.

2. Lady Margaret, married to James Crichton viscount Frendraught.

3. Lady Mary, married to William lord Cranston.

4. Lady Barbara, married to sir John Ruthven of Dunglass.

5. Lady Christian, married to Walter Dundass junior of that ilk.

V. JAMES lord Balgony, son and apparent heir of Alexander first earl of Leven,
Crawfurd's peerage.
a youth of an extraordinary genius, who followed his father's example, betook
himself to a military life, and soon rose to the degree of a colonel.

In 1642, he went over to Ireland with his father, and died soon after his
return, in the flower of his age, much regreted, leaving issue by his wife,
lady Margaret Leslie, daughter of John earl of Rothes, a son,

Alexander, afterward earl of Leven, -- and a daughter,

Catharine, married to George first earl of Melvil, whose son David succeeded
to the earldom of Leven, as will be shown hereafter.

VI. ALEXANDER, only son of James lord Balgony, Retour in chancery.
succeeded his grandfather, anno 1662, and was second earl of Leven.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir William Howard, Peerage of England.
sister of Charles earl of Carlisle, by whom he had two daughters.

1. Lady Margaret.

2. Lady Catharine.

He dying without male-issue, anno 1663, was succeeded in his estate and
honors by his eldest daughter,

VII. Lady MARGARET LESLY, countess of Leven, Crawfurd's peerage,
who married Mr. Francis Montgomery, second son of Hugh earl of Eglington; but
dying without issue anno 1674, was succeeded by her sister,

VII. Lady CATHARINE LESLY, also countess of Leven, who dying unmarried, the
estate and honors devolved upon her cousin-german David, son of her aunt
Catharine, to whom we now return.

VI. CATHARINE, only daughter of James lord Balgony, and sister of Alexander
second earl of Leven, was married to George first earl of Melvil, as before
observed, by whom he had three sons, and one daughter.

1. Alexander, lord Raith, who died without issue.

2. David, afterward earl of Leven.

3. James Melcil of Balgarvie, Esquire; who married, and had issue.

His daughter, lady Margaret, married to Robert lord Burleigh.

VII. DAVID, son of George earl of Melvil, by Catharine, daughter of James lord
Balgony, Ibidem, and Chart. in pub. archiv.
succeeded his father in the earldom of Melvil, and thereby became head or
chief of one of the most ancient families in the kingdom. ( Vide title earl of
Melvil.) And succeeding also, in right of his mother, to the earldom of Leven,
assumed to himself the surname of Lesly with that last title, as being the
elder peerage, and was third earl of Leven.

He likeways, having a military genius, went into the service of the duke of
Brandenburgh, anno 1685, where he was first made a captain of horse, then a
colonel of a regiment of foot, which he brought over to England with the prince
of Orange, anno 1688.

After king William was settled on the throne, Charta penes comitem de Leven
he was made one of the lords of his privy council, and governor of the castle
of Edinburgh anno 1689, which office he enjoyed all king William's reign.

After queen Anne's accession to the crown, he was appointed major general of
her majesty's forces in Scotland, anno 1703. He was again made governor of the
castle of Edinburgh, anno 1704, and soon thereafter general of the ordnance.

In 1706, he was constituted lieutenant general, and commander in chief of all
the forces in Scotland; in all which high offices he acquitted himself with
fidelity and honor.

He was one of the commissioners for the treaty of union, and was chosen one of
the sixteen Scotch peers to the first British parliament.

He married lady Anne Wemyss, daughter of Margaret countess of Wemyss, and
James lord Burntiss and, by whom he had two sons, and one daughter.

1. George, lord Balgony.

2. Alexander, afterward earl of Leven.

His daughter, lady Mary, married to William earl of Aberdeen.

He died in May 1728.

VIII. GEORGE, lord Balgony, eldest son and apparent heir of David third earl
of Leven, died before his father, and by lady Margaret Carnegie, his wife,
daughter of David earl of Northesk, left issue a son.

IX. DAVID, who succeeded his grandfather anno 1728, and was fourth earl of
Leven, but he dying unmarried, anno 1729, was succeeded in his estate and
honors by his uncle,

VIII. ALEXANDER, second son of David the third earl, before mentioned, who was
the fifth earl of Leven.

Being born a younger brother, he applied himself to the study of the law, and
was appointed one of the senators of the college of justice.

He was elected one of the sixteen Scotch peers to the British parliaments
called to meet in 1747 and 1754.

He had the honor to represent his majesty, as high commissioner to the
general assembly of the church of Scotland, for thirteen years successively,
viz. 1741 and 1753 inclusive.

He married, 1st, Mary, daughter of colonel John Erskine of Carnock, by whom he
had a son,

David, now earl of Leven.

He married, 2dly, Elizabeth, daughter of David Monypenny of Pitmilly, Esquire; by
whom he had another son,

Colonel Alexander Lesly; -- and three daughters.

1. Lady Anne, married to George earl of Northesk.

2. Lady Elizabeth.

3. Lady Mary, married to doctor James Walker of Innerdivot, Esquire;.

The earl died in the end of the year 1754, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. DAVID, sixth earl of Leven, whose genius leading him to a military life,
he went very young into the army, and soon rose to the rank of a captain; but
upon his father's death he resigned.

He married Willielmina, daughter of William Nisbet of Dirleton, Esquire; by whom
he has issue three sons, and three daughters.

1. Alexander, lord Balgony.

2. William.

3. David.

1st daughter, lady Jean.

2. Lady. Mary-Elizabeth.

3. Lady Charlotte.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st and 4th, azure, a thistle proper, ensigned with an imperial
crown of the last, as a coat of augmentation. 2d and 3d, argent, on a bend
azure, three buckles or for Lesly.

CREST; on a wreath, a chevalier in complete armor, holding in his right hand
a dagger erect, proper, the pommel and hilt or.

SUPPORTERS; two chevaliers, as the crest, each holding in his exterior hand
the banner of Scotland.

MOTTO; Pro rege et patria.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Melvil and Balgony, two fine seats, both in Fife-shire.

LESLY Lord LINDORES.
ANDREW LESLY, fifth earl of Rothes, married thrice; 1st, Jean, daughter of sir
John Hamilton of Evandale, by whom he had three sons.

1. James, who carried on the line of the family of Rothes.

2. Sir Patrick Lesly of Pitcairly, first lord Lindores.

3. Andrew, who died without issue.

He married, 2dly, Jean, daughter of Patrick third lord Ruthven, by whom he had
no male-issue.

He married, 3dly, Janet, daughter of David Durie of that ilk, by whom he had
also three sons.

1. George, who died unmarried.

2. Sir John Lesly of Newton, of whom the present lord Lindores is lineally
descended, as will be shown hereafter.

3. Robert, who died without issue.

The earl had also several daughters, for which Vide title Lesly earl of Rothes.

I. Sir PATRICK LESLY of Pitcairly, Account of the lords of session in the
lawiers library, Edinr.
second son of Andrew fifth earl of Rothes, being a man of parts, was much in
favor with king James VI. who made him one of the gentlemen of his
bedchamber, then appointed him one of the senators of the college of justice.
He afterward made him commendator of Lindores, Charta penes dom. Lindores.
gave him all the lands of that abbay, erected into a temporal lordship, and
created him a lord of parliament, Keith's bishops, p. 252.
by the title of lord Lindores, to him and his heirsmale whatever, 25th
December 1600.

He married lady Jean Stewart, Stewart's history of the royal family. p. 104.
daughter of Robert earl of Orkney, by whom he had sive sons, and five
daughters.

1. Patrick, who got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Patricio silio Patricii, commendatotorr^ de Lindores, etc. anno 1601; but he
died before his father without issue.

2. James, master of Lindores.

3. Robert, Minutes of parliament.
who got a nineteen years tack of the rents of the bishopric of Orkney, anno
1641. He married and had issue; but his male-line is extinct.

4. Ludovick, a brave officer, who was a colonel in the German wars; but died
without issue.

5. David, afterward lord Newark. Vide title Lesly lord Newark.

1st daughter, Margaret, married to John lord Maderty.

2. Elizabeth, married to sir William Sinclair of May.

3. Jean, married, 1st, to George Lesly of that ilk; 2dly, to John Forbes of
Lesly.

4. Janet, married to sir John Cunninghame of Broomhill.

5. Mary, married to sir David Barclay of Culearny.

He was succeeded by his son,

II. JAMES, second lord Lindores, Guthry's me moirs.
who was one of the Scotch commissioners sent to treat with the king at Rippon.

He was a great loyalist, and suffered many hardships on that account.

He was appointed one of the gentlemen of the bedchamber to king Charles II.
after the restoration.

He married, 1st, Mary, daughter of Patrick seventh lord Gray, by whom he had a
son,

John, master of Lindores.

He married, 2dly, -- Clepburn of the county of York, an English lady, by whom
he had a daughter,

Jane, married, 1st, to John Stewart of Innernytie; 2dly, to John Bruce of
Blairhall, and heired both their estates.

He was succeeded by his son,

III. JOHN, third lord Lindores, who married lady Marian Ogilvie, daughter of
James second earl of Airly, by whom he had a son.

David, his successor.

He died anno 1706.

IV. DAVID, fourth lord Lindores, married Margaret, daughter of Archibald
Stewart of Dunearn, Esquire; but he dying without maleissue, anno 17 --, the
honors devolved upon Alexander, now lord Lindores, the next heirmale, being
lineally descended of sir John Lesly of Newton, beforementioned, to whom we
now return.

I. Sir JOHN LESLY of Newton, son of Andrew fifth earl of Rothes, and younger
brother of Patrick first lord Lindores, got from his father the lands and
barony of Newton, by a charter, viz. "Andrew earl of Rothes, with consent of
Janet Durie his spouse, Chart. in pub. archiv.
gives and dispones the lands of Easter, Wester, and Middle-Newton, to their
son George, and the heirs-male of his body; which failing, to their son John,
and the heirs-male of his body, etc. etc." they bearing the name and arms of
Lesly; and this charter is dated at Balmbriech, anno 1596.

George dying without issue, these lands devolved upon John, Ibidem.
which he got confirmed to him by a charter under the great seal, wherein he is
designed Johannes Lesly, nunc de Newton, etc. The confirmation is dated anno
1620.

This sir John was a man of great parts, and highly esteemed by king James VI.
Account of the lords of session in the lawiers library, Edinr.
who appointed him one of the senators of the college of justice; and he was
always afterward designed lord Newton.

He was a great loyalist, and yet was much regarded by the parliament, who
appointed him a lord of session for life, anno 1641, Rescinded acts of parlt.
and one of the commissioners of exchequer in 1645; but he accepted of a
commission from lord Eglington to be lieutenant colonel of the king's horse
guards; Minutes of parliament, and rescinded acts.
and having been concerned in duke Hamilton's engagement, was deprived of his
lord of session's place, etc. by the parliament, anno 1649.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of Patrick seventh lord Gray, by whom he had
three sons.

1. Sir John Lesly of Newtou, whose only son, John, died without succession.

2. Andrew, who carried on the line of this family.

3. James, ancestor of the Leslies of Lumquhat.

II. ANDREW LESLY, second son of sir John Lesly, designed lord Newton, acquired
the lands of Quarter, in the parish of Burntisland, in the county of Fise, and
married Margaret, daughter to Andrew Balfour of Grange, by whom he had a son,

David.

And dying anno 1669, was succeeded by

III. DAVID LESLY of Quarter, who married --, daughter of -- Spittle of
Leuchat, and had a son,

Alexander, now lord Lindores; -- and two daughters.

1. --, married to -- Spittle younger of Leuchat.

2. Jean, unmarried.

He was succeeded by his son,

IV. ALEXANDER, who, upon the death of David, fourth lord Lindores, succeeded
to the honors, being next heir-male, as before observed, and is fifth lord
Lindores. Hebetook himself to a military life, is now a majorgeneral in the
British service, and colonel of a regiment of invalids.

He married Jean, daughter to Colin Campbell, late a commissioner of the
customs, and brother to sir James Campbell of Aberuchil, by whom he has a son,

Francis, master of Lindores, an officer in the army.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st and 4th, argent, on a bend azure, three buckles or, for Lesly:
2d, and 3d, or, a lion rampant gules, debrused with a ribband sable, for
Abernethy; and, on a surtout, a scutcheon gules, charged with a castle argent,
masoned sable, sor the title of Lindores.

CREST; on a wreath, a demi-angel winged or, holding in his dexter hand a
grissin's head erazed, proper.

SUPPORTERS; two grissins argent, winged or.

MOTTO; Stat promissa fides.

CHIEF SEAT.
At Lindores abbey, in Fife, near the river Tay.

LIVINGSTON Earl of LINLITHGOW.
IT is the opinion of some antiquaries, that the first of this noble family was
a Hungarian gentleman, who came to Scotland with Margaret, queen to king
Malcolm Canmore, about the year 1078. Certain it is they begun to make a figure
in this country soon after that era.

Their immediate ancestor,

I. LIVINGUS, flourished in the reigns of king Alexander I. and king David, who
succeeded Alexander, anno 1124.

He was possessed of a considerable estate in West-Lothian, and called it
Livingstoun, after his own name, which afterward became the chief title and
surname of the family.

He was father of

II. THURSTANUS, Foundation charter of that abbey, in father Hay's collections
in the lawiers library, Edinr.
who was witness to the foundation charter of the abbey of Holyroodhouse, anno
1128.

He made a donation to that abbacy, ecclesiam de Livingstoun cum dimidia
carucata terrae, Dalrymple's collect. p. 421.
et una tosta, etc. etc. pro salute animae suae, etc. and is then designed
Thurstanus filius Livingi.

He left issue two sons.

1. Alexander.

2. William.

In a donation to the priory of St. Andrews, Chartulary of St. Andrews, p. 247.
Thurstanus filius Livingi et Willielmus filius ejus, are witnesses, temp.
regis Willielmi.

Thurstan was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. ALEXANDER, who, in a charter of king William, Dalrymple's collections.
is designed Alexander filius Thurstani filii Livingi, etc. The charter has no
date; but must have been in or before 1214, in which year king William died.

He having succeeded to the lands and barony of Livingston, assumed that for
his surname, and was progenitor of all the Livingstons in Scotland.

He died in the end of the reign of king Alexander II. leaving issue a son and
successor,

IV. Sir WILLIAM LIVINGSTON, Original writs of the abbey of holy rood house,
penes Mac-Farlane.
who acquired the lands of Gorgyn near Edinburgh, and is then designed
Willielmus de Livingston, miles, anno 1263.

He is witness in a Charter of Malcolm earl of Lennox, Chartulary of Lennox,
penes eund. p. 54.
together with sir William de Keith, Gilbert Drummond, etc. anno 1270.

He had issue three sons.

1. Sir William, his heir.

2. Sir Archibald, progenitor of the Livingstons of Calendar and Linlithgow, as
will be shown hereafter.

3. Adam de Livingston, Prynne, vol. III. p. 654.
who swore sealty to king Edward I. of England, anno 1296.

He died before the year 1300, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. WILLIAM LIVINGSTON of that ilk, Chartulary of Lennox, page 85.
who is witness in a charter of Donald earl of Lennox, together with Malcolm
Fleming earl of Wigton, etc. and is then designed sir William Livingston
knight, in the year 1300.

This sir William was a steady friend of king Robert Bruce, and died soon after
that great monarch, leaving issue two sons.

1. Sir William, his heir.

2. Robert de Livingston, Rymer, tom. V. p. 625.
who, being a man of parts, was one of the Scotch commissioners appointed to
treat with the English about king David's liberty, anno 1348.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. Sir WILLIAM LIVINGSTON of that ilk, a man of stannch honor, great
abilities, and a true patriot. Rymer, tom. V. p. 200.
He was one of the hostages for John earl of Murray, anno 1340.

He was afterward employed in all the negociations and public transactions
with the English, Ibid. p. 711, 736, etc.
during king David's captivity, from 1346 to 1357, in which last year he was
named one of the hostages for his ransom, and is then designed Willielmus de
Livingston miles, etc.

He died about the year 1370, and was succeeded by his son,

VII. Sir PATRICK LIVINGSTON of that ilk, Ibid. tom. VI. p. 35.
who, in his father's lifetime, was one of the noble Scotch heirs, appointed
sureties for king David's ransom, and is then designed Patricius filius et
haeres domini Willielmi, etc. anno 1357.

He died before 1400, leaving issue a son,

VIII. Sir ROBERT LIVINGSTON of that ilk, Ibid. tom. X. p. 327.
who succeeded him, and was one of the hostages for king James I's ransom, anno
1424.

This family made a considerable figure in Scotland, and continued in the male
line till the reign of king James IV. that sir Bartholomew Livingston of that
ilk, grandson of this sir Robert, died without sons, and left issue only three
daughters his co-heiresses.

Agnes, the eldest, married -- Learmont, whose son James made a donation to the
prioress and convent of Senys near Edinburgh, Keith's bishshops, p. 280.
unum annuum redditum december mercarum usualis monetae regni Scotiae, annuatim
levand. et percipiend. de tota et integra mea tertia part terrarum et baronioe
de Livingston, cum pertinen. jacen. infra vicecom. de Linlithgow, etc. dated at
Edinburgh, 15th November, and confirmed by king James V. the last day of
December, 1533.

The male line of the ancient house of Livingston of that ilk thus ending, we
now return to the ancestor of this noble family, viz.

V. Sir ARCHIBALD LIVINGSTON, second son of sir William Livingston of that ilk,
the fourth generation of this genealogical account before mentioned.

This sir Archibald, with many others of his countrymen, Prynne's collections,
vol. III. p. 662.
was forced to swear fealty to king Edward I. of England, when he had overrun
Scotland, anno 1296.

He died soon thereafter, leaving issue a son,

VI. Sir WILLIAM LIVINGSTON, Penes Captain William Livingston.
who in an old manuscript account of this family, is designed of Easter-wemyss.

He flourished in the reign of king Robert Bruce, and married a daughter of sir
John Erskine of that ilk, ancestor of the family of Mar, by whom he had a son
and heir,

VII. Sir WILLIAM LIVINGSTON, a man of great courage, and resolution, and
highly esteemed by king David Bruce, whom he accompanied in his unfortunate
expedition into England, and for his gallant behavior, had the honor of
knighthood conferred upon him under the banner.

He was taken prisoner with his royal master, at the battle of Durham,
Crawfurd's peerage.
anno 1346, but was released soon thereafter.

He was appointed one of the commissioners to treat with the English, about the
king's liberty, Rymer, tom. V. p. 632.
anno 1348, and is then designed Willielmus Livingston bannerettus, etc.

He married Christian, daughter and heiress of Patrick Calendar of that ilk,
Chart. in the archives of the fam. of Kilsyth.
whose estate had been forfeited to the crown by king Robert Bruce, for his
adherence to the Baliol's interest; but king David restored it to sir William
Livingston, and the said Christian his wife heiress thereof, and Calendar
afterward became the chief title of his family.

This sir William is a witness in a confirmation charter of king David Bruce to
the monastery of Kelso, Chartulary of Kelso, p. 441.
together with Malcolm earl of Wigton, William earl of Sutherland, Robert de
Erskine, knight, etc. anno 1354.

He got a charter under the great seal, to him, and Christian Calendar his
wife, daughter and heiress of Patrick Calendar of that ilk, King David's book
of charters
of the lands and barony of Kilnsyth, etc. in Dunbartonshire, dated at the
castle of Kindriminy, 3d October, the 33d year of his reign, anno dom. 1362.

By the said Christian, he lest issue a son

VIII. Sir WILLIAM LIVINGSTON of Calendar, Crawfurd's peerage.
who died in the end of the reign of king Robert II. and lest isse a son,

IX. Sir JOHN LIVINGSTON of Calendar, who succeeded him.

This sir John was one of the arbiters in a submission betwixt the abbot and
convent of Cambuskenneth, Chartulary of Cambuskenneth, penes MacFarlane.
and Robert de Dumbarny, etc. 17th February, 1389.

In a donation of David Fleming lord of Biggar, Ibidem.
to the monastery of Cambuskenneth, the witnesses are, Robert duke of Albany,
earl of Fyfe and Menteith, Murdoch his son and heir, Thomas de Erskine lord of
Always, sir John Livingston of Calendar, Alexander Livingston, etc. anno 1399.

He married, 1st, --, daughter of -- Menteith of Carse, by whom he had three
sons.

1. Sir Alexander, his heir.

2. Robert, Crawfurd's peerage.
ancestor of the Livingstons of Westquarter and Kinnaird, of which last the
earls of Newburgh, etc. are descended.

3. John, ancestor of the Livingstons of Bonton, etc.

He married, 2dly, Agnes, daughter of sir James Douglas of Dalkeith, by whom he
had a son,

Sir William Livingston, first of the house of Kilsyth. ( Vide title Kilsyth.)

He was killed in the service of his country, Fordun, vol. II. p. 434.
at the battle of Homildon, anno 1402, and succeeded by his eldest son,

X. Sir ALEXANDER LIVINGSTON of Calendar, Ibid. p. 484.
who was one of the magnates Scotiae, that sat on the trial of Murdoch Duke of
Albany, anno 1424.

He was a man of good parts, and much esteemed for capacity and integrity.

After the murder of king James I. Indenture penes comitem de Errol.
he was by parliament appointed governor to the young king, which occasioned
great animosities betwixt the queen mother, chancellor ^^hton and him; but at
last all differences were made up betwixt her majesty and him, by a solemn
indenture yet extant, and narrated at large in Crawsurd's peerage, dated 4th
September, 1439.

However, this harmony did not long subsist amongst them; for the queen, the
chancellor, and sir Alexander, continued wrangling, till the king begun to take
the management into his own hands, anno 1444.

Sir Alexander's enemies then prevailed with his majesty to call a parliament,
to which sir Alexander was summoned to appear.

He was accused of having alienated the crown lands etc. Black acts of
parliament.
and was found guilty, his estate confiscated, and himself sent prisoner to
Dunbarton castle, which treatment, it was thought, he by no means deserved.

Whether the king was sensible he was not guilty of what was laid to his
charge, or whether he continued to have a friendship for the man that had the
care of him in his younger years, we shall not pretend to determine; but
certain it is, the king soon thereafter not only gave him his liberty, but
restored to him his whole estate, and he continued ever after in great favor
with his majesty, who constituted him justice-general of Scotland, anno 1449,
Rymer, tom. XI. p. 235.
in which year he was also nominated one of the ambassadors to the court of
England, and is then designed Alexander de Livingston, dominus de Calendar,
justiciarius Scotiae.

He died soon thereafter, having married --, daughter of -- Dundass of that
ilk, by whom he had two sons and two daughters.

1. James, his heir.

2. Alexander, ancestor of the Livingstons of Dunipace.

1st daughter, Janet, married to James first lord Hamilton.

2. Elizabeth, married to James Dundass of that ilk.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. Sir JAMES LIVINGSTON of Calendar, a man of great worth and merit, Lives of
the offic. of state.
who was appointed captain of the castle of Stirling, and had the tuition of
the young king conferred upon him by his father, which great trust he
discharged with fidelity and honor.

He was one of the commissioners appointed to treat with the English, Rymer,
tom. XI. p. 319, and 327.
anno 1452, and is then designed sir James Livingston of Calendar. He got a
safe conduct to go up to England, anno 1453, and is then designed James lord
Livingston; so that he was certainly raised to the dignity of the peerage, in
the end of 1452, Lives of the offic. of state.
or beginning of 1453, in which last year he was appointed one of the privy
council to his majesty, master of his household, and lord great chamberlain of
Scotland, which high office he enjoyed as long as he lived, with universal
applause.

He got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Jacobo domino Livingston, of several lands and baronies, inter 1454 et 1465.

He sat as a peer in the parliaments called to meet 1462, Records of parliament.
etc.

He married Marian, but of what family we know not, Ibidem.
though she is designed widow of James lord Livingston, anno 1478. By her he had
issue two sons and two daughters.

1. James, his heir.

2. Alexander, who carried on the line of of this family, as will be shown
hereafter.

1st daughter, Elizabeth, married to John earl of Ross, and lord of the isles.

2. Eupheme, married to sir Malcolm Fleming, son and heir of Robert lord
Fleming.

He died anno 1467, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. JAMES, second lord, who got charters under the great seal, Jacolo domino
Livingston, of the lands of Baldoran, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Slamannan, Muir, and many others, inter 1470 et 1492.

He married, 1st, a daughter of sir John Erskine of Kinnoul; 2dly, a daughter
of sir Robert Crichton; but dying without issue, his estate and honors
devolved upon his nephew sir John, son of his brother Alexander before
mentioned.

XIII. Sir JOHN LIVINGTON, Ibidem.
son of Alexander, second son of James first lord Livingston, succeeded his
uncle James the second lord, as before observed, and was third lord Livingston.

He married, 1st, Elizabeth, daughter of Robert lord Fleming, by whom he had a
son,

William, his heir.

He married, Ibidem.
2dly, a daughter of sir John Houstoun of that ilk, by whom he had another son,

Alexander, ancestor of the Livingstons of Glentyran, whose male-line is now
extinct.

He died about the year 1510, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIV. WILLIAM, fourth lord, who got charters under the great seal, Ibidem.
Willielmo domino Livingston, of the lands and barony of Calendar, castle
thereof, etc. anno 1511.

He marrried Agnes Hepburn, Ibidem.
daughter of Adam lord Hailes, sister of Patrick first earl of Bothwel, by whom
he had a son,

Alexander, -- and two daughters.

1st Margaret, married to John, fourth lord Hay of Yester, ancestor of the
marquis of Tweeddale.

2. Isabel, married to Nichol Ramsay, ancestor of the earl of Dalhousie.

He was succeeded by his son,

XV. ALEXANDER, fifth lord Livingston, who, in his father's lifetime, Ibidem.
got charters under the great seal, (to Alexander, son and apparent heir of
James lord Livingston,) of the lands and barony of Calendar, castle thereof,
etc. etc. inter 1511 et 1516.

He afterward got charters from queen Mary, Ibidem.
of many lands and baronies, ( Alexandro domino de Livingston, inter 1542 et
1548.

This lord was a man of great integrity and honor. He was entrusted with the
care of queen Mary's education in her young and tender years, Ibidem.
and discharged his duty with great fidelity.

He married, 1st, Janet Stewart, by whom he had no issue.

He married, 2dly, Chart. penes com. de Morton.
lady Agnes Douglas, daughter of John second earl of Morton, by whom he had
three sons and four daughters.

1. John master of Livingston, a youth of great intrepidity and merit, who
married a daughter of Malcolm lord Fleming, but was killed at the battle of
Pinkie, without issue, his father being then alive.

2. William, his father's heir.

3. Thomas, ancestor of the Livingstons of Haining.

1st daughter, Elizabeth, married to John Buchanan of that ilk.

2. Janet, married to sir Alexander Bruce of Airth.

3. Magdalene, married, 1st, to Arthur Erskine of Grange, brother to John earl
of Mar; 2dly, to John Scrimgeour of Glastre, ancestor of lord Dundee.

4. Mary, married to John Semple of Beltree, son of lord Semple.

He died anno 1550, and was succeeded by his son,

XVI. WILLIAM, sixth lord Livingston, who got charters, Chart. in pub. archiv.
under the great seal, of several lands and baronies, inter 1550 et 1558.

He was a man of remarkable integrity and loyalty, a firm and steady friend of
queen Mary. He behaved gallantly at the battle of Langside, though her
majesty's troops were totally defeated; but lord Livingston never deserted her
interest to the very last, and had always a large share of her majesty's
confidence and esteem.

He married Agnes, daughter of Malcolm lord Fleming, Ibidem.
ancestor of the earl of Wigton, by whom he had five sons and two daughters.

1. Alexander, afterward earl of Lithgow.

2. John.

3. Henry,

These two both died young.

4. Sir George Livingston of Ogleface, great grandfather, in a direct
male-line, of Alexander Livingston late of Bedlormie, who left a numerous
issue, viz. Alexander Livingston now of Bedlormie, Captain William Livingston,
Robert Livingston, Esquire; who has several son, etc. This Alexander Livingston of
Bedlormie appears to be the male representative of the noble families of
Calendar, etc.

5. Sir William Livingston of Cultre, whose male line is now extinct.

1st daughter, Jean, married to Alexander fourth lord Elphingston.

2. Margaret, married, 1st, to sir Lewis Ballantyne of Broughton, lord justice
clerk in the reign of king James VI. 2dly, to Patrick Stewart earl of Orkney.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVII. ALEXANDER, seventh lord, who got charters under the great seal,
Alexandro domino Livingston, of the lands and barony of Calendar, Ibidem.
Airth, Slamannan-muir, etc. etc. inter 1598 et 1600.

He was, like many of his worthy ancestors, a man of singular probity, honor
and integrity, and in great favor with king James VI. Charta penes comitem de
Errol.
who created him earl of Lithgow, lord Livingston of Calendar, etc. by patent
dated 15th November 1600.

He got charters under the great seal, Alexandro comiti de Lithgow, et
haeredibus masculis e corpore suo, quibus deficient, haeredibus masculis
quibuscunque, Chart. in pub. archiv.
cognomen de Livingston gerentibus, etc. of the lands and village of
Livingston, the Temple-lands of Nether-Carlowrie, the lands of Airth,
Abbotshaugh, Bearcross, Saltcoats, Redhaugh, lands about Falkirk, etc. etc.
inter 1602 et 1606.

He married lady Eleanor Hay, daughter of Andrew, eighth earl of Errol, a lady
of singular virtue and accomplishments. The king being perfectly well
acquainted with the fidelity and merit of this noble pair, committed the
education of his daughter princess Elizabeth, afterward queen of Bohemia,
entirely to their care and management; and they discharged their duty so much
to his majesty's satisfaction, that when they delivered her safe at Windsor,
they obtained a full acquittance for their care and conduct from the king and
council, Charta penes comitem de Errol.
(which we have seen) and it contains many great and noble clauses, much to
both their honors, and that of the ancestors of the family of Lithgow, dated
at Windsor, anno 1603.

By the said lady Eleanor Hay, he left issue two sons and one daughter.

1. Alexander, his heir.

2. Sir James Livingston, afterward earl of Calendar.

His daughter, lady Margaret, was married to John earl of Wigton.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVIII. ALEXANDER, second earl, who got charters under the great seal,
Alexandro comiti de Lithgow, of the hereditary office of justiciar and bailie
of the whole lands and barony of Ogleface, the village and lands of Bedlormie,
Wester-craigs, Chart. in pub. archiv.
etc. the lands and barony of Herbertslure, with many others, inter 1608 et
1616.

He got also charters of several other lands, Ibidem.
inter 1624 et 1630.

He married, 1st, lady Elizabeth Gordon, daughter of George marquis of Huntly,
by whom he had a son,

George, his heir.

He married, 2dly, lady Mary Douglas, eldest daughter of William tenth earl of
Angus, by whom he had another son,

Alexander, second earl of Calendar. ( Vide page 115 of this work,) -- and two
daughters.

1. Lady Margaret, married, 1st, to sir Thomas Nicholson of Carnock; 2dly, to
sir George Stirling of Keir; 3dly, to sir John Stirling of Keir.

2. Lady Eleanor, who died unmarried.

The earl was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIX. GEORGE, third earl of Lithgow, a great loyalist, who suffered many
hardships on account of his attachment to the royal family.

Upon the restoration of king Charles II. he was appointed one of the lords of
his majesty's privy council, and captain of the royal regiment of foot guards.

In 1681, he resigned that commission, and was constituted justice-general of
Scotland; in which office he continued till the year 1689.

He married lady Elizabeth Maule, daughter of Patrick first earl of Panmure,
widow of John earl of Kinghorn, by whom he had two sons and one daughter.

1. George, his heir.

2. Alexander, third earl of Calendar, of whom more hereafter.

His daughter, lady Henriet, married to Robert viscount Oxenford.

He died on the 1st day of February 1690, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XX. GEORGE, fourth earl of Lithgow, who came early into the revolution, and
was sworn one of the lords of the privy council to king William and queen Mary,
anno 1692; and being in great favor with his majesty, was appointed one of the
commissioners of the treasury.

He married Henriet Sinclair, daughter of Alexander lord Duffus, but dying
without issue, anno 1695, his estate and honors devolved upon his nephew James
earl of Calendar, son of his brother Alexander, before mentioned, to whom we
now return.

XX. ALEXANDER, third earl of Calendar, second son of George third earl of
Lithgow, married lady Anne Graham, daughter of James marquis of Montrose, by
whom he had a son,

James, his heir, -- and two daughters.

1. Lady Henriet, who died unmarried.

2. Lady Mary, married to James Graham of Airth, Esquire; an eminent lawier, and
judge-admiral of Scotland, to whom she had several children.

He died anno 1694, and was succeeded by his son,

XXI. JAMES, fourth earl of Calendar, who succeeded to the estate and honors
of Lithgow, upon the death of George the fourth earl, as before observed, was
the fifth earl of Lithgow, heretable governor of the castle of Blackness, and
hereditary sheriff of the county of Stirling.

He was elected one of the sixteen Scotch peers to the British parliament, anno
1713, but having had the misfortune to be engaged in the rebellion 1715, he was
attainted of treason, and his estate and honors were forfeited to the crown.

He married lady Margaret Hay, daughter of John twelfth earl of Errol, whose
grandson succeeded to the estate and honors of that noble family, as will be
shown hereafter.

By her he had issue a son,

James, lord Livingston, who died young, -- and a daughter,

XXII. Lady ANNE LIVINGSTON, who became his sole heiress, and married William
fourth earl of Kilmarnock, to whom she had three sons.

XXIII. 1. JAMES, who succeeded to the estate and honors of Errol, in right of
his grandmother lady Margaret Hay, before mentioned, and is now the fourteenth
earl of Errol. Vide pages 255 and 378 of this work, where the other children
are mentioned.

ARMS of the earl of Lithgow, etc.
Quarterly, 1st and 4th, argent, three cinque-foils gules, within a double
tressure, with flowers de lis vert, for the name of Livingston: 2d and 3d,
sable, a bend between six billets or, for Calendar; and over all, by way of
surtout, in an escutcheon azure, an oak growing out of the base or, within a
border argent, charged with eight gilliflowers gules, as a coat of
augmentation, for the title of earl of Lithgow.

CREST; on a wreath, a demi-savage, wreathed about the temples and waist with
laurel proper, holding in his right hand a baton erect, and in the left a
serpent, which is twisted about his a^m.

SUPPORTERS; two savages proper, wreathed as the crest, each holding on his
exterior shoulder a baton or.

MOTTO; Si je puis.

CHIEF SEATS
Were at Calendar-castle in Stirlingshire, and at the Bridgehouse in
Lithgowshire.

Nota, The family were heretable keepers of the palace of Lithgow.

STEWART Lord LORN and INNERMEATH.
THE immediate ancestor of this branch of the illustrious family of Stewart was

I. Sir JAMES STEWART, fourth son of sir John Stewart of Bonkill, second son of
Alexander sixth lord high steward of Scotland, great grandfather of king Robert
II.

This sir James flourished in the reign of king Robert Bruce, and got a charter
from that great prince, Chart. in rotul. Roberti I.
of the whole lands of Preston and Warwickhill in Cunningham, in which he is
designed filius quondam Johannis senescalli, militis, etc.

He was killed at the battle of Halidonhill, Stewart's history of the royal
family. p. 168.
anno 1333, leaving issue three sons.

1. Sir John, who got a charter of the lands of Kelly in Angus; Chart. in pub.
archiv.
but died without male-issue.

2. Sir Alan of Ugiltree, who made over the ba^ony of Long-newton to sir Henry
Douglas of Lugton; Ibidem.
but we can give no account of his posterity.

II. 3. Sir ROBERT STEWART of Shanbothy, who carried on the line of this
family, and was afterward designed of Innermeath.

He got a charter under the great seal, Roberto senescallo de Innermeath,
Chart. in archiv. Roberti II.
militi, of the lands and ba^ony of Durisdeer in Dumfriesshire, anno 1375.

Also a charter viginti marcas sterlingorum de magna custuma burgi de
Innerkeithing, Roberto senescallo de Innermeath, Ibidem.
et haeredibus suis, etc. anno 1388.

He left issue two sons, and one daughter.

1. John, Stewart' history of the royal family.
his heir.

2. Robert, ancestor of the Stewarts of Rosythe.

His daughter, Catharine, married to John Bethune of Balfour, in the county of
Fise.

He died anno 1386, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. JOHN STEWART of Innermeath, who married the daughter and co-heiress of
John de Ergadia, Ibid. p. 169.
lord of Lorn, with whom he got a great accession to his estate, and that of
Lorn afterward became one of the chief titles of his family.

In the year 1404, John lord Lorn and Innermeath, was appointed one of the
Scotch commissioners to treat with the English; Rymer, tom. VIII. p. 369. 389.
411. and 701.
also in 1405; and again in 1406 and 1411.

By the said lady he had issue five sons, and two daughters.

1. Robert, Stewart's history, etc.
his heir.

2. Archibald.

3. Sir James, commonly called the Black knight of Lorn, of whom the earls of
Athole, Buchan, and Traquair, are descended.

4. Alexander, ancestor of the Stewarts of Grantully.

5. William.

1st daughter, Christian, married to James Dundas of that ilk.

2. Isabel, married to sir William Oliphant of Aberdalgie, ancestor of lord
Oliphant.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. ROBERT, second lord Lorn and Innermeath, who was one of the Scotch
commissioners appointed to treat with the English about king James's liberty,
Rymer, tom. X. p. 125. 308. and 416.
anno 1421; and was afterward one of the hostages for his ransom, anno 1424;
and was not released before the year 1429.

He married Margaret, Stewart's history, p. 169.
daughter of Robert duke of Albany, governor of Scotland, by whom he had five
sons, and two daughters.

1. John, his heir.

2. Walter, who succeeded his brother, of whom afterward.

3. Alan.

4. David.

5. Robert.

All these sons are mentioned in an entail hereafter narrated.

1st daughter, --, married to John lord Lindsay of Byres.

2. --, married to Robert lord Erskine.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. JOHN, third lord Lorn and Innermeath, who made an entail of his whole
estate, confirmed by a charter under the great seal from king James II. "to him
and the heirs-male of his own body; Chart. in pub. archiv.
which sailing, to his brothers, Walter, Alan, David, and Robert, and the
heirs-male of their bodies successively; which sailing, to Archibald their
uncle, etc. which sailing, to sir James, etc. etc. etc. dated anno 1452.

He also got a charter of the lands and barony of Innermeath the same year.
Ibidem.


He had issue three daughters.

1. Isabel, married to Colin first earl of Argyle.

2. Margaret, married to sir Colin Campbell of Glenurchie.

3. Marian, married to Arthur Campbell of Ottar.

He had a natural son, Dougal, ancestor of the Stewarts of Appin.

John third lord Lorn dying without lawful male-issue, his estate and honors
devolved upon his brother,

V. WALTER, fourth lord, Stewart's history, and Chart. in pub. archiv.
who exchanged his lands of Lorn with the earl of Argyle for the lands of
Baldoning, Innerdoning, etc. in Perth-shire, and was afterward designed only
by the title of Innermeath.

He got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Waltero domino Innermeath, of many lands and baronies, inter 1476 et 1480.

He left issue a son and successor, Ibidem.


VI. THOMAS, who got charters under the great seal, Thomae domino Innermeath,
of several lands, inter 1507 et 1510.

By Janet Keith his wife, Ibidem, and Stewart's hist.
he had issue a son, Richard, his heir; -- and a daughter, Marian, married to
Patrick Ogilvie of Inchmartin, ancestor of the earl of Finlater.

He was killed, with his royal master king James IV. in the fatal field of
Flowdon, anno 1513, and succeeded by his son,

VII. RICHARD, Stewart's history, p. 170.
lord Innermeath, who married Margaret, daughter of John lord Lindsay of Byres,
ancestor of the earl of Crawfurd, by whom he had a son,

VIII. JOHN, lord Innermeath, Ibidem.
who succeeded him, and got charters, under the great seal, of many lands and
baronies, inter 1538 et 1548.

He married Elizabeth Bethune, daughter to the lord of Creich, in the county
of Fife, by whom he had two sons. Ibidem.


1. James, his heir.

2. William.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX, JAMES, lord Innermeath, who, in his father's lifetime, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
got charters under the great seal, Jacobo magistro de Innermeath, etc. of
several lands, inter 1542 et 1548.

He married Helen Ogilvie, by whom he had a son,

John, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Helen, married to Mr. Ruthven of Bandean.

He was succeeded by his son,

X. JOHN, lord Innermeath, who married, 1st, Margaret, daughter of sir David
Lindsay of Edzel, by whom he had a son,

James, afterward earl of Athole, -- and a daughter,

Margaret, married to sir Robert Crichton of Clunie.

He married, 2dly, lady Mary Ruthven, daughter of William earl of Gowrie, widow
of John fifth earl of Athole, by whom he had no issue.

John fifth earl of Athol dying without sons, the king conferred the titles
upon this John lord Innermeath, Ibidem.
"to him and the heirs-male of his body; which failing, to return to the crown,
anno 1596.

He was accordingly succeeded in these honors by his son,

XI. JAMES earl of Athole, lord Innermeath, Balveny, etc. who married lady Mary
Stewart, second daughter of John fifth earl of Athole; but he dying without
issue, in 1625, the titles and honors of Athole were confirmed by the king to
John, third earl of Tullibardin, only son and heir of William the second earl,
by lady Dorothea Stewart, eldest daughter of the said John fifth earl of
Athole; which John was undoubted heir of line of that most noble family, Vide
pages 50 and 55 of this work, where that succession is fully narrated.

KER Marquis of LOTHIAN.
THAT the noble and illustrious name of Ker is of very great antiquity in
Scotland, appears from many authentic documents.

Some deduce them from a noble family of that surname in France, one whereof
came over to England with William the Conqueror, had a considerable command in
his army, and afterward settled in England; in confirmation of which they
allege, that baron Ker, and several other families of that surname, now
subsisting in France, trace their origin even higher than that era.

Others are of opinion, that Ker is a local surname, and was first assumed by
the possessors of the lands and baronies of Ker and Kershall, in Lancashire,
where several families of that name have made a considerable figure for many
ages past: But it must be observed, that the Kers in England and France have
the very same armorial bearings; so whether they came from France to England,
or from England to France, we shall not pretend to determine.

Sir George MacKenzie, that learned and judicious antiquary, is of opinion,
that the Kers first settled in the south parts of Scotland about the year 1330;
but it is most certain they were a numerous and flourishing family in this
country long before that time; for we find many of that surname swearing fealty
to king Edward I. of England, betwixt the years 1291 and 1297, for lands lying
in different parts of the kingdom.

Henricus Ker swore fealty in 1296. Prynne's collect vol. III. p. 657.


Nicol Ker ditto, Prynne, ibid. page 660.

Andrew del Ker --, ibid. page 661.

Willielmus Ker, who swore fealty for lands in Air-shire, anno 1291, Remarks on
Ragman's roll, p. 29.
and is said to be ancestor of the Kers of Kersland.

Thomas Ker, Ibid. p. 14.
miles, etc.

Sir George MacKenzie mentions two brothers of that surname, who settled in the
south parts of Scotland, viz. Ralph and Robert Kers; but whether they came from
England or France, or were sons of any of the abovenamed Kers, he does not
determine; but thinks that Ralph, ancestor of the Kers of Fernyhirst, was the
eldest brother, because that family carried the same arms with the Kers in
England and France, without any difference either of tincture or charge. We
shall therefore follow that great author, and deduce their descent according to
his account.

I. RALPH KER, who settled in Teviotdale about the year 1330, got possession of
the lands lying betwixt the water of Jed and the lands of Straseburgh, of which
the earls of Douglas were superiors.

He afterward called the lands by the name of Kers-haugh, MacKenzie's collect.
in the lawiers library, Edin.
which continued for some time the chief title of this family.

He died about 1350, leaving issue a son,

II. THOMAS KER of Kers-haugh, Ibid. and M. S. hist. of the family of
Somerville, penes dominum Somerville.
who succeeded him. He purchased the lands of Crailling from the Homes, and
married Margaret, daughter of sir Thomas Somerville of Carnwath, Ibidem.
by whom he had two sons.

1. Andrew of Kers-haugh.

2. John Ker, who acquired some lands near Aberdeen, upon which he got a
charter from king David Bruce, Charta in archiv. regis David.
anno regni 36 to, anno domini 1365.

III. ANDREW KER of Kers-haugh succeeded his father, MacKenzie's collect. M. S.
and was cup bearer to king Robert III.

He married Margaret, daughter of -- Edmonstone of that ilk, by whom he had a
son,

IV. THOMAS KER of Kers-haugh, who succeeded him, and married Elizabeth, Ibidem.
daughter of sir Thomas Home of that ilk, by whom he had three sons.

1. Andrew, of Kers-haugh.

2. Thomas Ker, who is mentioned in a protection from the king of England to
the earl of Douglas, Rymer, tom. II. p. 284.
with Hugh earl of Ormond, James lord Hamilton, etc. anno 1452.

3. James Ker, mentioned in the same protection in 1452.

And dying about 1430, was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. ANDREW KER of Kers-haugh, who, with many other gentlemen of rank, Ibidem.
accompanied the earl of Douglas to Rome in 1450, and is particularly mentioned
in a passport from the king of England, together with sir James Hamilton, sir
Alexander Home, sir Nicholas Campbell, and many others.

He married Jean, MacKenzie's collect. M. S.
daughter of -- Crichton of that ilk, by whom he had a son and successor,

VI. RALPH KER of Kers-haugh, Ibidem.
who married Mary, daughter of sir -- Tours of Innerleith, by whom he had two
sons.

1. Andrew of Kers-haugh.

2. Robert Ker of Yair.

He died about 1460, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. ANDREW KER of Kers-haugh, Ibidem.
who married Mary, daughter of Herbert first lord Herries, by whom he had two
sons.

1. Thomas.

2. John, ancestor of the Kers of Greenhead. Ibidem


He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. THOMAS, who having built a new house in the middle of the forest about
ann. 1490, gave it the name of Fernyhirst, Ibidem.
and was the first who was designed by that title, which continued afterward
to be the chief seat and title of the family, till they were nobilitate.

He got a new charter of the lands and barony of Fernyhirst from Archibald earl
of Angus the superior ( ante 1500) of which his son sir Andrew got a
confirmation, Writs of the privy seal.
bearing date 14th December 1511.

He married Catharine, daughter of sir Robert Colvil, lord of Ochiltree, by
whom he had three sons.

1. Sir Andrew Ker of Fernyhirst.

2. Ralph, ancestor of the Kers of Cavers.

3. William Ker, who purchased the lands of Langley and Gilastons, anno 1537.
Chart. in pub. archiv.


He died anno 1499, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. Sir ANDREW KER, Writs of the privy seal.
who was in possession of the lands and barony of Fernyhirst, anno 1500, which
he got confirmed to him in 1511, as before noticed.

He also acquired the whole barony of Oxenham at different times, Ibidem.
by two charters under the great seal, in 1509 and 1523.

He purchased also a third part of the lands and lordship of Dirleton, Ibidem.
anno 1526.

He was a man of extraordinary parts, and made a great figure in the reigns of
king James IV. and V.

He was warden of the east, west, and middle marches, Rymer, tom. XIV. p. 278.
and was one of the commissioners appointed to treat of a peace with the
English, which they happily concluded, anno 1528; and the same year he got a
new charter of the whole lands and barony of Fernyhirst, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Corris-haugh, etc. from king James V. the superiority whereof was then in the
crown, by the forfeiture of the earl of Angus.

In 1542, Writs of the privy seal.
he obtained the bailiary of Jedburgh forest.

He married Janet, daughter of sir Patrick Home of Polwarth, ancestor of the
earl of Marchmont, by whom he had three sons, and one daughter.

1. Thomas, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who died before his father without issue.

2. Sir John Ker of Fernyhirst.

3. Robert Ker, designed of Ancrum, to whom he gave the third part of the lands
of Dirleton, Ibidem.
anno 1538, who carried on the line of this family, as will be shown hereafter.

His daughter, Ibidem.
Janet, obtained from her father the lands of Betheroul, in the year 1519.

Sir Andrew dying in 1545, was succeeded by his son,

X. Sir JOHN KER of Fernyhirst, Ibidem.
who, in his father's lifetime, acquired part of the lands of Langtoun, anno
1524.

He was knighted by the duke of Chattleherault, for his good services against
the English, in restraining their incursions on the borders, anno 1548.

He married Catharine, Writs of the privy seal.
daughter of sir Andrew Ker of Cessford, by whom he had three sons.

1. Sir Thomas, his heir.

2. Andrew Ker of Nether-Gogar, Ibidem.
whose male-line is extinct.

3. William Ker, who was a great loyalist, and adhered firmly to the interest
of queen Mary, Ibidem.
for which, and for his good and faithful services, her majesty was pleased to
settle on him, for life, a pension of five hundred merks per annum in 1561. He
died without issue.

Sir John died anno 1562, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. Sir THOMAS KER of Fernyhirst, who was a man of eminent parts, great
probity, and honor. He was a steady friend to queen Mary, and never deserted
her interest in her greatest distress.

In 1570, he and Buckcleugh entered the borders of England with fire and sword,
Buchanan's history.
in hopes of doing service to their queen, by raising dissension and
disturbances; but had not the desired success.

In 1571, Drumsoy's lives of the four regents.
he was one of those who attacked the convention or parliament at Stirling, and
in the conflict the earl of Lennox, then regent, lost his life, for which sir
Thomas was exiled and forfeited.

King James VI. no sooner took the government upon himself, Writs of the privy
seal.
than he gave sir Thomas liberty to return home, anno 1579; and being perfectly
sensible that his loyalty and attachment to his mother's interest had been his
greatest crimes, Ibidem.
his majesty restored him to the possession of his whole estate, in 1581.

He also got the bailiary of Jedburgh forest confirmed to him in 1582. Ibidem.


And in 1583, Chart. in pub. archiv.
he obtained from the king a full and ample remission under his great seal.

He married, 1st, Janet, daughter of sir William Kirkcaldy of Grange, governor
of the castle of Edinburgh, by whom he had a son,

Sir Andrew Ker, afterward lord Jedburgh, -- and two daughters.

1. Juliana, married to sir Patrick Home of Polwarth.

2. Margaret, Writs of the privy seal.
married to sir Robert Melvil of Murdo-Cairny.

He married, 2dly, Janet, daughter of sir William Scot of Kirkurd, eldest son
and heir apparent of sir Walter Scot of Buckcleugh, Ibidem.
by whom he had three sons, and one daughter.

1. Sir James Ker of Crailling, afterward lord Jedburgh, Ibidem.
of whom more hereafter.

2. Thomas Ker, who got from his father the lands of Oxenham.

3. Robert Ker, Chart. in pub. archiv.
afterward earl of Somerset, viscount Rochester, etc.

His daughter, Anne, was married to John lord Balmerino.

He died in 1586, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. Sir ANDREW KER, Ibidem.
who, before his father's death, got possession of East and West Nisbets, of
which he got a charter under the great seal, anno 1584.

He obtained also a charter of the bailiary of the lands and baronies belonging
to the monastery of Jedburgh; Ibidem.
dated 15th March 1587. The charter bears; that umquhile Andrew Ker of
Fernyhirst, umquhile John Ker of Fernyhirst, and umquhile Thomas Ker of
Fernyhirst, knights, great grandfather, grandfather, and father of our
well-beloved Andrew, now of Fernyhirst, were constituted lawful bailies of
these lands from the year 1542, etc.

He being a man of great parts and learning, Writs of the privy seal.
was in high favor with king James VI. who made him one of the gentlemen of
his bedchamber, Chart. in pub. archiv. haered. masculis quibuscunqu^.
anno 1591, and raised him to the dignity of the peerage, by the title of lord
Jedburgh, the patent bearing date 2d February 1622.

He died in 1631, having married Anne, daughter of Andrew master of Ochiltree,
by whom he had one son,

Sir Andrew Ker, Writs of the privy seal.
who, in 1613, was made keeper of the castle of Dumfries.

In 1618, Chart. in pub. archiv.
he was made captain of his majesty's guards, and one of his privy council.

In 1628, he was made one of the extraordinary lords of session.

He married lady Margaret Ker, daughter of Mark earl of Lothian, by whom he had
no issue, and died in the end of the year 1628, his father being then alive,
who dying also without any surviving issue, anno 1631, was succeeded by his
brother,

XII. Sir JAMES KER of Crailling, second son of Thomas of Fernyhirst, before
mentioned, who was second lord Jedburgh.

He married Mary Rutherford, Ibidem.
heiress of Hundilie, by whom he had a son,

XIII. ROBERT, third lord Jedburgh, who succeeded him, and being a man of
parts, loyalty, and integrity, was in great favor with king Charles II. from
whom he got the peerage of Jedburgh confirmed to him in these words: Chart. in
pub. regist. and report of the lords of session.
Dicto Roberto, et haeredibus masculis ex ejus corpore; quibus deficientibus,
Willielmo magistro de Newbottle, et haeredibus masculis ex ejus corpore; quibus
deficientibus, dicti magistri de Newbottle haeredibus masculis quibuscunque,
titulum, honorem, etc. cum praecedentia et ordine Andreae domini de Jedburgh,
secundum literas patentes, de data 2do Februarii 1622.

He married Christian, daughter of sir Alexander Hamilton of Innerwick, widow
of sir Patrick Home of Polwarth; but dying without issue, in him ended the
male-line of the first and second sons of sir Andrew Ker of Fernyhirst, No. IX
of this account, whereby the representation devolved upon the descendant of the
third son, etc.

Before we return to sir Andrew's third son, it must be observed, that Robert,
third lord Jedburgh, finding that he had no issue, made an entail of his estate
and honors, with consent of the crown, in consequence of the abovementioned
patent, in favors of William lord Newbottle, Mac Kenzie's collect. in the
lawiers library, et chart. in pub. archiv.
son of Robert, then earl, afterward marquis of Lothian, his nearest
heir-male; and after him to the eldest son of the house of Lothian for the
time, as a distinct peerage for ever; by which entail and confirmation it is
provided, that albeit the eldest son of that family bear the title of lord
Jedburgh, and thereby have the privilege of a peer, yet it shall not prejudge
him as to the precedence due to the eldest son of the family of Lothian. This
deed is dated 11th of July 1670.

Accordingly, when William lord Newbottle succeeded to Robert third lord
Jedburgh, in virtue of the above entail, he took his place in parliament as
lord Jedburgh; and the eldest sons of the family of Lothian have since that
time exerted the same privilege of sitting and voting in parliament, as well as
their fathers, which appears from the parliament rolls anno 1693, 1695, 1696,
School, 1702, and the election 1712.

As then the estate and honors of Jedburgh, upon the death of Robert the third
lord, devolved upon William lord Newbottle, his next heir-male, and he being
lineally descended of the said Robert of Ancrum, to him we now rerurn.

X. ROBERT KER of Ancrum, third son of sir Andrew Ker of Fernyhirst (No. IX.
Chart. in pub. arch. ad ann. 1538.
of this account) having got from his father the third part of the lands of
Dirleton, as beforementioned, obtained also the lands of Woodhead, etc. in
Over-Ancrum, Ibidem.
in feu-farm from the monastery of Jedburgh, 7th July 1542.

He got also the lands of Newton in the barony of Bedrule, anno 1586; and died
in 1587, Ibidem.
having married Margaret, daughter of -- Home of Wedderburn, by whom he had a
son,

XI. WILLIAM KER of Ancrum, who succeeded him; and as about this time the
disputes about the chiefship betwixt the families of Fernyhirst and Cessford
run very high, this William was unhappily killed by Robert Ker younger of
Cessford, Ibidem.
anno 1590, leaving issue by Margaret, daughter of Alexander Dundas of Fingask,
two sons.

1. Sir Robert of Ancrum, his heir.

2. William Ker, Esquire; a man of singular courage and intrepidity, who did his
country such signal service on the borders, that king James VI. Writs of the
privy seal.
was pleased to settle a pension on him of one thousand pounds per annum for
life. He obtained also from king Charles I. a grant of the lands of Overtoun,
being the escheat of Robert Ker younger of Cessford; upon which he got a
charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
anno 1625. He was groom of the bedchamber both to king James VI. and king
Charles I. and left issue a daughter, --, married to the lord Wharton in
England.

XII. Sir ROBERT KER of Ancrum succeeded his father, and being a man of great
worth, probity, and honor, was highly esteemed by his majesty king Charles I.
Ibidem.
who appointed him one of the gentlemen of his bedchamber, anno 1625, which
office he enjoyed above twenty years.

He afterward raised him to the dignity of the peerage, Ibid. Haered. masc.
inter eum et dominam Annam Stanley; quibus deficient. haered masc. suis
quibuscunq. in perpetuum, etc.
by the titles of earl of Ancrum, lord Ker of Nisbet, Long-Newton, and
Dolphington; the patent bearing date 24th June 1633.

He married, 1st, Elizabeth, daughter of -- Murray of Blackbarony, by whom he
had a son,

William, afterward earl of Lothian.

He married, 2dly, lady Anne Stanley, only daughter of William earl of Derby.

His eldest son being then earl of Lothian, he got the honors of Ancrum,
Ibidem.
with the king's approbation, provided to the heirs-male of this marriage;
which failing, to his own heirs-male for ever, etc.

By lady Anne Stanely he had issue only one son,

Charles, second earl of Ancrum, who dying without male-issue, the title of
Ancrum returned to the family.

XIII. WILLIAM, eldest son of Robert first earl of Ancrum, married lady Anne
Ker, eldest daughter and heiress of Robert Ker earl of Lothian, descended of a
younger son of the family of Cessford, the genealogy whereof, from its origin,
being fully set forth under the title of Roxburgh, we shall therefore deduce
the descent of this earl of Lothian from his immediate ancestor, in which we
shall keep close to the records, though we differ from Mr. Crawford in several
particulars.

I. Sir ANDREW KER of Cessford, married Agnes, daughter of William third lord
Crichton of Sanquhar, Chart. in pub. archiv.
by whom he had three sons, and one daughter.

1. Walter, his successor, ancestor of the family of Roxburgh.

2. Mark, father of the first earl of Lothian.

3. Andrew Ker, Ibidem.
Esquire;.

These brothers are attested by many charters under the great seal.

His daughter Margaret Ker, Ibidem.
married --.

II. MARK, second son of sir Andrew Ker of Cessford, got the vicarage of
Lintoun in Tweeddale for life, Writs of the privy seal.
26th March 1564, and soon after was made abbot of Newbottle, which benefice he
had in commendam after the reformation.

April 20th 1569, Privileges of the college of justice in the lawiers library
he was made one of the extraordinary lords of session.

He married lady Helen Lesly, Writs of the great seal.
daughter of George earl of Rothes, by whom he had four sons and one daughter.

1. Mark, Writs of the privy seal.
afterward earl of Lothian.

2. Andrew Ker of Fenton.

3. George Ker, Ibidem.
Esquire;.

4. William Ker, Esquire;.

His daughter Catharine, Ibidem.
was married to William Maxwell lord Herries.

He died in 1584, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. MARK KER, a youth of bright parts, and a fine genius. Ibidem.
He was made master of requests 20th March 1577, and had that office confirmed
to him in 1581. Ibidem.


Upon his father's death, he was confirmed commendator of Newbottle, Writs of
the great seal.
24th August 1584, in which he had been formerly provided by queen Mary in
1567. Ibidem.


November 12th 1584, he was made one of the extraordinary lords of session.

In 1587, he got the lands of Newbottle erected into a barony, Ibidem.
and, by a charter of confirmation, got it erected into a temporal lordship,
Ibidem.
October 15th 1591.

He was one of the commissioners for holding the parliament in 1597, and was
created earl of Lothian by patent, Ibidem.
bearing date 10th July 1606, and died in 1609, having married Margaret,
daughter of John lord Herries, by whom he had four sons and seven daughters.

1. Robert, earl of Lothian.

2. Sir William Ker of Blackhope.

3. Sir Mark Ker.

4. James Ker, Esquire;.

These brothers are documented by several charters. Ibid. and privy seal


1st daughter, lady Jean, married, 1st, to Robert master of Boyd; 2dly, to
David earl of Crawfurd.

2. Lady Janet, married to William earl of Glencairn.

3. Lady Margaret, married, 1st, to John lord Yester; and, 2dly, to Andrew
master of Jedburgh.

4. Lady Isabel, married to William first earl of Queensberry.

5. Lady Lilias, married to John lord Borthwick.

6. Lady Mary, married to sir James Richardson of Smeaton.

7. Lady Elizabeth, married to sir Alexander Hamilton of Innerwick.

IV. ROBERT, second earl of Lothian, succeeded his father; and in April 8th
1606, was made master of requests, Writs of the privy seal.
being then only master of Newbottle.

He married lady Annabella Campbell, daughter of Archibald earl of Argyle, by
whom he had only two daughters.

1. Lady Anne.

2. Lady Joanna. Writs of the great seal.


And having no male-issue, he made over his estate and titles, with the king's
approbation, in favors of his eldest daughter lady Anne.

He dying in 1624, she succeeded to him accordingly; Scots compendium.
and having married William, eldest son of Robert first earl of Ancrum, as
before noticed, to him we now return.

XIII. This WILLIAM obtained from king Charles I. a grant of the lands and
lordship of Newbottle, by a charter under the great seal 30th July 1631, Chart.
in pub. archiv.
and was created earl of Lothian and lord Newbottle; 31st October that same
year, the patent being fully narrated in a charter of the lands of Newbottle,
anno 1634; by which the peerages of Lothian, Ancrum and Jedburgh, Ibidem.
were now all in this family.

Earl William was a man of great honor and integrity; and though he was on the
parliament's side during the greatest part of king Charles I. his troubles, yet
he had the utmost abhorrence of the barbarous treatment the king met with from
the parliament of England.

In 1648, he, with some others, were sent commissioners from the estates of
Scotland, to treat with the English in behalf of the king; and though Oliver
Cromwell had, by that time, expelled most of the members of both houses of
parliament, and was then perfectly master of the rump, yet he remonstrated in
the name of the whole kingdom of Scotland, against the using any violence or
indignity upon the sacred person of the king: He added, that the whole nation
had the very thoughts thereof in the utmost abhorrence and detestation, and
took a solemn protest against their proceedings; but all his honest endeavors
proved fruitless; upon which the earl transmitted to the estates of Scotland an
account of what he had done, and his conduct was highly approved of.

After the murder of the king, the earl continued steady in his loyalty to his
son king Charles II. and contributed all that was in his power toward his
restoration, and was one of the commissioners appointed to treat with his
majesty at Breda, anno 1650.

He had issue, by the said lady Anne, three sons and seven daughters.

1. Robert, earl of Lothian.

2. Sir William Ker, who was made director of the chancery soon after the
restoration, anno 1661.

3. Charles, ancestor of the Kers of Abbotrule.

1st daughter, lady Anne, married to Alexander master of Salton.

2. Lady Elizabeth, married to John lord Borthwick.

3. Lady Mary, married to James Brodie of that ilk.

4. Lady Margaret, married to sir James Richardson of Smeaton.

5. Lady Vere, married to lord Neil Campbell, son to the marquis of Argyle.

6. Lady Henrietta, married to sir Francis Scot of Thirlestane.

7. Lady Lilias Ker.

XIV. ROBERT, fourth earl of Lothian, succeeded his father, and came early into
the revolution, was one of the privy council to king William, and was
constituted justice-general, and lord high-commissioner to the general assembly
of the church of Scotland anno 1692.

And being in great favor with his majesty, he was pleased to raise him to the
honor of marquis of Lothian, Ibidem.
by letters patent haeredibus masculis, dated 23d June 1701.

He married lady Jean Campbell, daughter of Archibald marquis of Argyle, by
whom he had four sons and one daughter.

1. William, marquis of Lothian.

2. Lord Charles Ker of Cramond, director of the chancery, who married a
daughter of sir David Murray of Stanhope, by whom he had a numerous issue. His
eldest son Robert Ker, Esquire; is now director of the chancery.

3. Lord John Ker, betook himself to a military life, had a regiment, and
served in the army with honor and reputation till his death.

4. Lord Mark Ker, a brave soldier. He was general in the army, a colonel of
dragoons, and governor of the castle of Edinburgh, etc.

His daughter, lady Mary, married James marquis of Douglas, and was mother of
Archibald late duke of Douglas, and of lady Jane.

Robert, first marquis, dying in 1703, was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. WILLIAM, second marquis of Lothian, who, by her majesty queen Anne, was
appointed one of the commissioners to treat of an union with England.

In 1705, he was made knight of the most noble order of the thistle, and was
elected one of the sixteen Scotch peers to the first and second British
parliaments, and also to the parliament 1714.

He was colonel of the third regiment of guards, and major general of the
forces in Scotland, and acquitted himself in every station of life, with
honor, fidelity, and reputation.

He married lady Jean Campbell, daughter of Archibald earl of Argyle, by whom
he had a son,

William, now marquis of Lothian, -- and four daughters.

1. Lady Jean, married to William lord Cranston.

2. Lady Anne, married to Alexander earl of Home.

3. Lady Elizabeth, married to William lord Ross.

4. Lady Mary, married to Alexander Hamilton of Innerwick, Esquire;
postmaster-general of Scotland.

He died anno 1721, and was succeeded by his only son,

XVI. WILLIAM, third marquis of Lothian, who was elected one of the sixteen
peers for Scotland to the eighth, ninth, and tenth British parliaments. He was
made knight of the thistle in 1734, and was also appointed his majesty's high
commissioner to the general assembly of the church of Scotland; which office he
enjoyed for seven years, viz. from 1732 to 1738 inclusive.

He was several years lord clerk register of Scotland, but resigned that office
anno 1760, which was then conferred upon the present earl of Morton.

He married, 1st, Margaret, daughter of sir Thomas Nicholson, Bart, who bore
him two sons.

1. William, earl of Anerum, whose genius leading him to a military life, he
went early into the army, and is now a major general, colonel of a regiment of
dragoons, lord of the bedchamber to the duke of Cumberland, and member of
parliament for Richmond, in Yorkshire. He married lady Carolina Darcey, only
daughter of Robert earl of Holderness, by whom he has issue a son, William
Ker, lord Newbottle, who, anno 1762, married miss Fortescue, niece to the lord
Mornington in Ireland: -- and two daughters, 1. lady Louisa, married tolord
George Lennox, second son of the duke of Richmond. 2. lady Willielmina-Emelia.

The marquis's second son, lord Robert, a youth of great hopes and spirit, was
a captain in the army, and was killed at the battle of Cullodden, on 16th April
1746, regreted by all who knew him.

He married, 2dly, his cousin Jane, daughter of lord Charles Ker of Cramond,
etc.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st and 4th, azure, the sun in its splendour or, as a coat of
augmentation for Lothian; 2d and 3d, gules, on a cheveron argent, three mullets
of the field, for the name of Ker.

CREST; on a wreath, the sun as in the coat.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter, an angel apparrelled azure, its hair and wings or;
on the sinister an unicorn argent, horned, maned, and unguled or.

MOTTO; Sero sed serio.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Newbottle in the shire of Edinburgh, Fernyhirst and Mounteviot-lodge, in
the shire of Roxburgh.

CAMPBELL Earl of LOUDOUN.
THE rise and descent of the great and illustrious name of Campbell, is to be
found under the title of duke of Argyle, p. 34. of this work; but as the chief
title of this noble family is derived from that of Londoun of that ilk, we
shall briesly deduce their descent from the first of that ancient house we have
upon record, viz.

I. LAMBINUS, was proprietor of the lands and barony of Loudoun, Preface to
Dalrymple's collect. p. 6^.
etc. in the shire of Air, and flourished in the reign of king David I. who
succeeded to the crown of Scotland anno 1124, and died anno 1153.

He was father of

II. JAMES de LOUDOUN, dominus de eodem, or of that ilk, who got a charter of
the lands and barony of Loudoun, Ibid. et chart. penes com. de Loudoun.
and others, from Richard de Morville, constable of Scotland, Jacobo filio
Lambini; etc. also a charter from William de Morville, Jacobo de Loudoun
terrarum baroniae de Loudoun, etc. both in the reign of king William the Lion,
who succeeded to the crown anno 1165; a certain proof that he had assumed his
surname from his lands, which was very much the custom in those early times;
and his armorial bearing was argent, Nisbet, vol. I. p. 373.
three inescutcheons sable.

This James de Loudoun died without male-issue; but had a daughter,

III. MARGARET de LOUDOUN, his sole heiress, who succeeded him in his whole
estate.

She married sir Reginald de Crawfurd, Dalrymple's collections, et Chart. penes
com. de Loudoun.
heretable lord high sheriff of the county of Air, one of the principal
branches of the noble family of Crawfurd.

He retained the surname of Crawfurd; but quartered the arms of Loudoun with
his own, and was afterward designed sir Reginald of Loudoun, which has
continued to be the chief title of his posterity ever since.

This sir Reginald was witness to a donation of David de Lindsay to the
monastery of Newbottle, Chartulary of Newbottle, p. 19.
confirmed by king Alexander II. anno 1220.

By the said Margaret de Loudoun he left issue a son and successor,

IV. HUGH CRAWFURD of Loudoun, highsheriff of Air, Chartulary of Paisley,
Dalrymple, etc.
who, in a charter of Walter, son of Alan lord high steward of Scotland, of a
donation to the monastery of Paisley of the lands of Dalmulin, is designed Hugo
filius Reginaldi, etc. anno 1226.

He died in the end of the reign of king Alexander II. leaving issue a son,

V. HUGH CRAWFURD of Loudoun, high sheriff of Air, Rymer, tom. I. p. 599.
who succeeded him; and upon the particular recommendation of king Alexander
III. got a safe conduct from king Henry III. to go up to England, etc. anno
1255.

He left issue a son,

Sir Reginald, Dalrymple, Abercrombie, vol. l. p. 523, says this Margaret was
daughter of sir Reginald. etc.
his heir, -- and a daughter,

Margaret, married to sir Malcolm Wallace, knight, and was mother of the
immortal sir William Wallace.

He was succeeded by his son,

VI. Sir REGINALD CRAWFURD of Loudoun, high sheriff of Air, Chartulary of
Paisley.
who is witness in a charter of James lord high steward of Scotland, of a
donation to the monastery of Paisley, anno 1288.

He was one of the arbitrators on the part of king Robert Bruce, Rymer, tom,
II. p. 553.
in the competition for the crown betwixt him and John Baliol, anno 1292.

He was afterward, with many of his countrymen, Prynne, vol. III. p. 662.
compelled to swear sealty to king Edward I. of England, anno 1296.

He was basely murdered in the English garrison at Air, anno 1297, Crawfurd's
peerage.
leaving issue, by Cecilia his wife, a son,

VII. Sir REGINALD CRAWFURD of Loudoun, high sheriff of Air, who succeeded him,
and was often designed sir Reginald the younger.

He was a strenuous defender of the liberties of Scotland, Ibidem.
against all foreign oppressors, and lost his life in the service of his
country, anno 1303, leaving issue only one child,

VIII. SUSANNA, his sole heiress, who succeeded him in his whole estate and
dignities.

She married sir Duncan Campbell, who got a charter from king Robert Bruce,
Duncano Campbell, Charta in archivis Rob. I.
militi, et Susannae suae sponsae, ommes terras de Loudoun, de Stevenston, etc.
etc. haereditarie, all erected into one freebarony, to them and the heirs
procreate, or to be procreate, betwixt them; which failing, to return to the
nearest heirs whatsomever of the said Susanna. The charter is dated anno 1318;
whereupon (though he retained the surname of Campbell) he was afterward
designed sir Duncan of Loudoun, which has continued to be the chief title of
the family ever since.

By this marriage he got also the heretable sheriffship of Air; Nisbet, vol. I.
and his family continued long to have the arms both of Loudoun and Crawfurd in
their armorial bearing.

IX. This sir DUNCAN was son of sir Donald Campbell, Haddington's collections.
who got a charter from king Robert Bruce, of the lands Rubri Castri, or
Red-Castle; sir Donald was second son of sir Colin More, the seventh
generation, and immediate ancestor of the illustrious family of Argyle; so that
sir Duncan was the ninth generation of that ancient house, in a direct
male-line, Vide page 35th of this work.

He was a great loyalist, a firm and steady friend of king Robert Bruce.

By the said Susanna he left issue a son,

X. Sir ANDREW CAMPBELL of Loudoun, heretable high sheriff of Air, a man of
singular merit, and in great favor with king David Bruce, Rymer, tom. V. p.
534, 586, 874, etc.
whom he accompanied in his unfortunate expedition into England, and was taken
prisoner with him at the battle of Durham, anno 1346. He remained under
confinement in England, till his royal master was set at liberty, anno 1357.

He afterward, Chart. in pub. arch. et penes comitem de Loudoun.
in reward of his constant loyalty, got a grant from king David of several
lands in the county of Kincardine, anno 1361.

He then resigned his lands of Red-castle in favors of sir Robert Stewart,
Crawfurd's peerage.
knight.

He died in the reign of king Robert II. and was succeeded by his son,

XI. Sir HUGH CAMPBELL of Loudoun, Rymer, tom. X.
high sheriff of Air, who was one of the great barons of Scotland that was
appointed to meet king James I. at Durham, anno 1423, and had issue a son,

XII. Sir GEORGE CAMPBELL of Loudoun, high sheriff of Air, who succeeded him.

He was appointed one of the hostages for king James I.'s ransom, Ibid. p. 327.
anno 1424, and is then designed son and heir of sir Hugh, etc.

He accompanied princess Margaret, Fordun, v. II. p. 485, calls him John by
mistake.
daughter of king James I. to France, when she was married to Lewis XI. anno
1436.

He married -- Stewart, Crawfurd's peerage,
a daughrer of the family of Darnly, by whom he had a son,

XIII. Sir GEORGE, who succeeded him, and had the honor of knighthood
conferred upon him, by king James II.

He made a resignation of the heretable sheriffship of Air-shire into the
king's hands, Chart. in pub. archiv. et penes com. de Loudoun.
upon which he got a new grant, and a charter under the great seal, to him and
his heirs-male for ever, dated 16th May 1450.

He died in the beginning of the reign of king James III. and was succeeded by
his son,

XIV. Sir GEORGE, who got a charter under the great seal from king James III.
Georgio Campbell de Loudoun, Chart. in pub. archiv.
militi, filio et haeredi Georgii Campbell de Loudoun, vicecomitis de Air, of
some lands he exchanged with Alexander de Livingston, anno 1465.

He got also a new charter of the sheriffship of Air, Ibidem.
to him and his heirs-male, in the year 1487.

He married a daughter of Gilbert lord Kennedy, Crawfurd's peerage.
ancestor of the earl of Cassilis, by whom he had two sons, and two daughters.

1. Sir Hugh, his heir.

2. George, ancestor of the Campbells of Killoch.

1st daughter, Elizabeth, married to Robert lord Erskine, ancestor of the earls
of Mar.

2. Margaret, married to sir Alan Lockhart of Lee.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. Sir HUGH, high sheriff of Air, who got charters under the great seal,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
Hugoni Campbell de Loudoun, militi, of many lands and baronies, inter 1501 et
1507.

This sir Hugh sat in the Scotch parliament when queen Mary's jointure was
settled, Rymer, tom. XIII. p. 96.
anno 1504.

He married Isabel, daughter of sir Thomas Wallace of Craigie, Crawfurd's
peerage.
by whom he had a son,

Sir Hugh, his heir, -- and five daughters.

1. Annabella, married, 1st, to sir Thomas Boswell of Auchinleck; 2dly, to sir
John Cunningham of Caprington.

2. Helen, married to Laurence Crawfurd of Kilbirny, ancestor of the viscount
Garnock and earl of Crawfurd.

3. Isabel, married to Mungo Muir of Rowallan.

4. Janet, married to -- Campbell of Cesnock.

5. Margaret, married to Thomas Kennedy of Bargeny.

He died anno 1508, and was succeeded by his son,

XVI. Sir HUGH, who was a faithful and loyal subject, both to king James III.
and IV.

He got charters, under the greal seal, Hugoni Campbell de Loudoun, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
militi, vicecomiti de Air, of many lands and baronies, inter 1526 et 1532.

He married lady Elizabeth Stewart, daughter of Matthew earl of Lennox, Ibid.
ad ann 1533, and Stewart's hist p. 154.
by lady Elizabeth his wife, daughter of James earl of Arran, and lady Mary
Stewart, daughter of king James II. by whom he had a son,

Sir Matthew, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Marian, married to James Carmichael of Hyndford.

He was succeeded by his son,

XVII. Sir MATTHEW CAMPBELL of Loudoun, high sheriff of Air, Chart. in pub
archiv.
who got charters, under the great seal, of many lands, inter 1552 et 1562.

Though he was a great promoter of the reformation, yet he was a faithful and
steady friend of queen Mary, sought for her at the battle of Langside,
Crawfurd's memoirs.
where her troops got a total defeat, and he was taken prisoner, anno 1568.

He married Isabel, daughter of sir John Drummond of Innerpefsry, by whom he
had two sons, and seven daughters.

1. Sir Hugh, afterward lord Loudoun.

2. Matthew, who, being a man of a military genius, inclined to push his
sortune in foreign countries, and signalized himself in the German wars. He
settled in Livonia, and assumed the surname of Loudoun from the hereditary
title of the noble family from whence he sprung; and of him marishal count
Loudoun, now one of the chief commanders of the Imperial army in Germany, is
lineally descended.

1st daughter, Margaret, was married, 1st, to Robert Montgomery of Giffin,
designed master of Eglington; 2dly, to Ludovick duke of Lennox.

2. Marian, married to Thomas lord Boyd, ancestor of the earls of Kilmarnock,
the present earl of Errol, etc.

3. Jean, married to sir John Wallace of Craigie.

4. Agnes, married to sir William Cunninghame of Caprington.

5. Isabel, married to William Crawfurd of Lochnorris.

6. Anne, married to Robert lord Kirkcudbright.

7. Annabella, married, 1st, to Daniel Ker of Kersland; 2dly, to David Dunbar
of Enterkin.

He died about the year 1572, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVIII. Sir HUGH CAMPBELL of Loudoun, high sheriff of Air, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
who was possessed of a vast estate, which appears by his charters under the
great seal, inter 1580 et 1600.

He was a man of sine parts, and in great favor with king James VI. who
appointed him one of the lords of his privy council, Records of parliament.
created him a baronet and lord of parliament, by the title of lord Loudoun,
the last day of June 1601.

He afterward got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Hugoni domino Loudoun, of many lands, inter 1612 et 1616.

He married, 1st, Margaret, daughter of sir John Gordon of Lochinvar,
Crawfurd's peerage.
ancestor of viscount Kenmure, by whom he had a son,

George, master of Loudoun, -- and three daughters.

1. Juliana, married to sir Colin Campbell of Glenurchy, ancestor of the earl
of B^eadalbane.

2. Isabel, married to sir John Maxwell of Pollock,

3. Margaret, married to John Kennedy of Blairquhan, Esquire;.

He married, 2dly, lady Isabel Ruthven, daughter of William earl of Gowrie,
widow of sir Robert Gordon of Lochinvar, by whom he had two daughters.

1. --, married to sir William Cunninghame of Cunninghamhead.

2. --, married to David Crawfurd of Kerse, Esquire;.

He married, 3dly, Margaret, daughter of sir David Home of Wedderburn, by whom
he had no issue.

He died anno 1622, and was succeeded by his grand daughter Margaret, as will
be shown hereafter.

XIX. GEORGE, master of Loudoun, only son and apparent heir of Hugh lord
Loudoun, married lady Jean Fleming, Ibidem.
daughter of John earl of Wigton, by whom he had two daughters.

1. Margaret, afterward baroness of Loudoun.

2. Anne, married to sir Hugh Campbell of Cesnock.

He died before his father, anno 1612, and was succeeded by his eldest daughter,

XX. MARGARET, who, upon the death of her grandfather, succeeded to the honors
of Loudoun, anno 1622, as before observed.

Margaret, baroness of Loudoun, married John Campbell, Lives of the offic. of
state. p. 195.
Esquire; eldest son and heir of sir James Campbell of Lawers, son of sir John
Campbell of Lawers, son of Archibald Campbell of Lawers, son of James Campbell
of Lawers, son of sir John Campbell of Lawers, who was son of Sir Colin
Campbell first baron of Glenurchy, by his last wife Margaret, daughter of sir
Luke Stirling of Keir, etc. etc.

This John was a man of great abilities, Ibid. et chart. in pub. archiv.
and much esteemed by king Charles I. who created him earl of Loudoun, lord
Machlane, etc. 8th May 1633, by patent to his heirsmale for ever.

He g^t charters under the great seal, Ibidem.
terrarum de Kylesmure, and many others, Johanni comiti de Loudoun, etc. inter
1633 et 1635.

As the earl was a man of staunch presbyterian principles, he was deeply
engaged with the covenanters during all the troublesome reign of king Charles
I. yet he osten labored most sincerely to bring about a pacification, and
accomodate matters betwixt the king and them.

At last, when a peace was concluded, and ratified in parliament in 1641, the
king was so sensible of the good intentions and friendly offices of the earl of
Loudoun, that he constituted him lord high chancellor of Scotland that same
year.

As the brevity of this work will not allow us to give a particular account of
all the transactions of this great man in these unhappy times, we must refer
our readers to the lives of the officers of state, page 195. etc. where his
life is published at large; we shall only here observe, Rescinded acts of parlt.
that the parliament confirmed the chancellor's office to him, made him a privy
councillor, and one of the committee of estates, all for life, anno 1641.

And though he was president of the council in 1648 and 1649, yet none appeared
more forward to bring about a restoration than the chancellor, and assisted at
the coronation of king Charles II. Cromwell's act of indemnity,
anno 1651; for which, and his other loyal practices, he was deprived of his
chancellor's office; both he and his son, the lord Machlane, were forfeited,
and their estates sequestrate by Oliver Cromwell, anno 1654.

He suffered many other hardships during the usurpation, yet lived to see the
restoration, Haddington's collect.
and immediately after obtained from king Charles II. a ratification of his
gift of tithes, etc. 17th August 1660.

He sat in the Scotch parliament 1661, and died in March 1663.

By the said Margaret, baroness, afterward countess of Loudoun, he left issue
two sons, and two daughters.

1. James, his heir.

2. Mr. George Campbell, died unmarried.

1st daughter, lady Jean, married to George second earl of Panmure.

2. Lady Anne, married to John third lord Balmerino.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XXI. JAMES, second earl of Loudoun, who married lady Margaret Montgomery,
daughter of Hugh seventh earl of Eglington, by whom he had three sons, and four
daughters.

1. Hugh, his heir.

2. Colonel John Campbell of Shankstoun.

3. James, colonel of the regiment of Scotch grays, groom of the bedchamber to
king George II. governor of the castle of Edinburgh, major general of his
majesty's forces, etc. was, upon his military conduct and courage at the battle
of Dettingen, anno 1743, made a knight of the most noble order of the bath, but
was unfortunately killed at the battle of Fontenoy, anno 1745, leaving issue a
son, by lady Jean Boil his wife, daughter of David earl of Glasgow, etc.

1st daughter, lady Margaret, married to Colin earl of Balcarras.

2. Lady Jean, married to sir James Campbell of Aberuchil, Bart.

3. Lady Christian, married to George Ross of Galston, Esquire;.

4. Lady Eleanor, married, 1st, to James viscount Primrose; 2dly, to John earl
of Stair.

He died anno 1683, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XXII. HUGH, third earl of Loudoun, who came early into the revolution, and
being in great favor with king William, was appointed one of the lords of his
privy council, anno 1693, sheriff of Air, bailie of Kyle, and one of the
extraordinary lords of session, anno 1699.

He was by queen Anne constituted one of the lords of the privy council, anno
1703, one of the lords of the treasury, and knight of the most noble order of
the thistle, anno 1704, one of the principal secretaries of state, anno 1705,
and one of the commissioners for the treaty of union betwixt the two crowns,
anno 1707.

After the conclusion thereof in 1708, the secretary's office was laid aside,
and he was made keeper of the great seal, which office he enjoyed till 1713.

He was one of the privy council both to king George I. and II. and was lord
lieutenant of Air-shire, anno 1715.

He was chosen one of the sixteen Scotch peers to the first seven British
parliaments, and was high commissioner to the general assembly of the church of
Scotland for the years 1722, 1725, 1728, and 1731.

He had a pension of two thousand pounds per annum settled upon him for life,
by king George II. anno 1727.

He married lady Margaret Dalrymple, daughter of John earl of Stair, by whom he
had a son,

John, now earl of Londoun, -- and two daughters.

1. Lady Betty Campbell.

2. Lady Margaret, married to John Campbell of Shawfield, Esquire; without issue.

He died anno 1732, and was succeeded by his only son,

XXIII. JOHN, fourth earl of Loudoun, who betaking himself to a military life,
rose to the highest rank in the army.

He was appointed governor of Virginia, colonel of the 30th regiment of foot,
lientenant-general and governor of Stirling castle, and one of the sixteen
Scotch peers to the four last British parliaments; also to the present, which
was called to meet in 1761.

During the rebellion in 1745, he was very active in his majesty's service; and
in 1756 he was appointed general of all his majesty's forces in North America;
and after settling the plan of operations; and the measures that have been
since prosecuted with success, he resigned, anno 1758, returned home, and is
now commander in chief of all the British forces in Portugal.

ARMS.
Gironny of eight, gules and ermine, being the field of Crawsurd of Loudoun,
who bore gules, a fess ermine.

CREST; on a wreath, an eagle displayed, with two heads gules, in a frame
proper, looking toward the sun with the dexter head.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter side, a chevaher in armor, plumed on the head w^^h
three feathers gules, and holding a spear in his right hand; on the sinister, a
lady nobly dressed, plumed on the head with three feathers argent, and holding
in her left hand a letter of challenge.

MOTTO; I bide my time.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Loudoun-castle in Airshire, and Privygarden, London.

FRASER Lord LOVAT.
THOSE of the surname of Fraser yield to none in Scotland for antiquity, and
all our historians agree, that they are of French extraction.

In the M. S. history of the family, it is said that one Julius de Berry, a
French gentleman of rank, who lived near Bourbon, made a great entertainment at
his house for the king of France as he passed that way; that amongst other
delicacies, there were fine strawberries, fully ripened before the ordinary
time, wherewith the king was so well pleased, that he assigned him strawberry
leaves for his arms, which in the French language are called Frases or
Frasiers; from which he assumed Fraser for his surname; and certain it is, the
Frasers continue to carry strawberry leaves, or frases, for their armorial
bearing to this day.

The time of their first settling in this country is uncertain. M^Kenzie's
ess^y^, Mr. M^tin's collections, etc.
Some authors say, that a nobleman of France, called Pierre Frasier came to
Scotland in the reign of king Achaius, about the year 790; that of him was
descended

Sir Simon Fraser, who, in the reign of king Malcolm Canmore, married Margaret,
eldest daughter of Walter first lord high steward of Scotland, Aberc^ombie,
Simson's hist. of the Stewarts, etc.
grandson of Bancho thane of Lochaber, paternal ancestor of the royal family of
Stewart.

The Frasers were undoubtedly settled, and had considerable possessions in
lands in the South of Scotland, soon after the death of king Malcolm Canmore,
which is sufficiently instructed by their donations to the religious.

Gilbert de Fraser is witness to the foundation charter of the monastery of
Coldstream, Chartul. of Coldstream.
by Cospatrick earl of Dunbar and March, in the reign of king Alexander I. who
succeeded to the crown of Scotland, anno 1107, and died anno 1124.

Simon Fraser made several considerable donations to the religious at Kelso,
Chartulary of Kelso, Newbottle, etc.
etc. in the reign of king David I. who succeeded Alexander anno 1124. These
were afterward confirmed by king Malcolm IV. who succeeded David anno 1153.

In the reign of king William, who succeeded Malcolm anno 1165, the Frasers
became very numerous.

Bernardus Fraser is mentioned in a donation to the monastery of Newbottle,
Ibidem.
anno 1178, and was progenitor of this noble family.

Sir Simon Fraser is witness in a donation to the monastery of Coldinghame,
Chartulary of Coldingham.
anno 1184.

Thomas Fraser, MacFarlane's collections.
with some others of that name, are mentioned in an original charter, anno 1200.

Adam Fraser filius Udardi, and Laurentius Fraser filius Adae, etc. are
witnesses, and made donations to the monastery of Newbottle, Chartulary of
Newbottle.
etc. confirmed by king William in or before 1214, in which year that prince
died.

In the reign of king Alexander II. who succeeded William anno 1214, we find
Gilbert Fraser, Ibidem, and Kelso
vicecomes de Traquair, Bernardus Fraser de Drem, Thomas Fraser, etc. inter
1226 et 1236.

But as we cannot connect these Frasers with one another, we proceed to deduce
the descent of this noble family from their immediate ancestor,

I. BERNARDUS FRASER, who flourished in the reign of king William the Lion,
Chartulary of Newbottle.
is mentioned in a donation to the monastery of Newbottle, anno 1178, as before
observed.

He is witness in several charters of Patrick earl of Dunbar, Chartulary of
Newbottle.
and made a considerable donation to the monastery of Newbottle, for the safety
of the souls of his predecessors, etc. anno 1204.

He died before the year 1220, leaving issue a son,

II. BERNARD FRASER, who succeeded him, and made a great figure in the reign of
king Alexander II.

He was possessed of a vast estate, and had several noble seats in the county
of Tweeddale, viz. Ibidem, and Cambuskenneth.
the castle of Needpath, Drumelzier, Oliver-castle, etc. which last place was
one of his chief titles.

He was high sheriff of Peebles, also of Stirling; which office continued long
with his posterity.

He had issue two sons.

1. Sir Simon, his heir.

2. William Fraser, who was bishop of St. Andrews, and lord high chancellor of
Scotland, etc. Lives of the offic. of state.
As the life of this great man is to be found in the lives of the officers of
state, to that we refer our readers.

Bernard died about the year 1250, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. Sir SIMON FRASER of Oliver-castle, Chartulary of Kelso, and Newbottle.
etc. who was also vicecomes of Peebles and Stirling, anno 1266.

He was one of the magnates Scotiae, that entered into a solemn engagement to
stand by and receive Margaret of Norway for their lawful queen and sovereign,
in case of king Alexander III. Rymer, tom. II. p. 266.
his death, without male-issue, anno 1283.

He was also one of the Scotch nobles that agreed to the marriage of queen
Margaret with prince Edward of England, Ibid. p. 471.
anno 1289.

He is often in public records designed sir Simon pater, to distinguish him
from sir Simon his son, particularly when he was one of the auditors of the
debate in the competition for the crown betwixt Bruce and Baliol, on 5th June
1291; Ibid. p. 553, and 567.
and on the 12th of the same month, we find him, with many others of his
countrymen, swearing fealty to king Edward I. of England.

He died soon thereafter, leaving issue two sons.

1. Sir Simon, his heir.

2. Sir Alexander, who carried on the line of this family, as will be shown
hereafter.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. Sir SIMON FRASER of Oliver-castle, etc. who is acknowledged by all Scotch
historians to have been one of the greatest heroes of his time, and performed
many great and glorious actions, in defense of the liberties of his country.

He was lieutenant general of the Scotch forces when sir John Cummin of
Badenach was guardian of the kingdom; and it is well known how these two, with
scarce 10,000 Scots, defeated three English armies in one day, each of them of
equal, if not superior, numbers to themselves, Abercrombie, vol. I. p. 552.
near Roslin, anno 1303, and Dr. Abercrombie attributes the glory gained by the
Scots on that day chiefly to the remarkable courage and conduct of sir Simon.

As it is inconsistent with the brevity of this work, to enumerate all the
glorious actions of this great man, we shall only add, that he was at last
taken prisoner, and sent to London, where king Edward most cruelly put him to
death, he leaving issue only two daughters, the one married to the ancestor of
the marquis of Tweeddale, MacKenzie, Nisbet, etc.
and the other to the predecessor of the family of Wigton. In consequence of
which marriages, these two families have continued to quarter the arms of
Fraser with their own.

Sir Simon dying without male-issue, the representation devolved upon his
brother sir Alexander before mentioned, to whom we now return.

IV. Sir ALEXANDER FRASER, second son of sir Simon of Oliver-castle, etc. was
also a great patriot, and a man of singular valor and intrepidity. Abercrombie
vol. ^. p. 571.
He joined king Robert Bruce as soon as he began to assert his title to the
crown, and never deserted him in his greatest distress.

He was taken prisoner at the battle of Methven, in endeavoring to rescue his
royal master, anno 1306, and did not obtain his liberty till sir James Douglas,
Ibid and Ba^ber's life (...) king Robert^
after defeating several bodies of the English, retook sir Thomas Randolph the
king's nephew, sir Alexander Fraser, and others, anno 1308.

King Robert being perfectly sensible of the great merit of this sir Alexander,
daily heaped new favors upon him, he being married to his sister lady Mary
Bruce.

He afterward made him lord high chamberlain of Scotland; Ibid. and ^^ve of
the officer of state.
which high office he enjoyed as long as the king lived.

Sir Alexander, by the king's bounty, and the lucrative offices he enjoyed,
became possessed of a vast estate in the North, consisting of many lands and
baronies, Ibid. p. 274.
too numerous to be here inserted, but are mentioned in the lives of the
officers of state.

As he had been a faithful and steady friend of king Robert Bruce, Ibidem.
he was no less so to his son king David, and at last lost his life in his
service at the battle of Duplin, anno 1332.

By the said lady Mary Bruce, daughter of Robert earl of Carrick, he left issue
five sons.

1. Sir John, Ibid. p. 276.
his heir, who left issue only one daughter, Margaret, married to sir William
Keith, great marishal of Scotland, etc.

His other four sons were Simon, William, James, and Andrew. Which was the
eldest we shall not pretend to determine; but

Simon carried on the line of this noble family.

William was ancestor of the Frasers, lords Salton.

James and Andrew were both killed at the battle of Halidon-hill, Fordun, vol.
II. p. 311.
anno 1333.

V. Sir SIMON FRASER, son of sir Alexander, great chamberlain of Scotland,
seemed to inherit the virtues of his worthy ancestors, and embraced every
opportunity of fighting in defense of the liberties of his country, even when a
young man.

He became possessed of the barony of Lovat, whether from the king's bounty, or
from his father, we shall not determine, but the king assigned him the three
crowns for part of his armorial bearing, Nisbet's append. p. 115.
as being so nearly related to his family, which, by some, has been mistaken
for the arms of the Bissets.

This sir Simon was also killed in the service of his country, at the battle of
Halidonhill, anno 1333, according to a celebrated author, who says, " Andreas,
Simon, et Jacobus Fraser, fratres, Fordun, v. II. p. 311.
et alii nobiles quamplures occisi, etc. etc."

He left issue an infant son,

VI. HUGH FRASER of Lovat, who succeeded him.

This Hugh, in a deed of homage to the bishop of Murray, Chartulary of Murray,
penes MacFarlane, vol. I. p. 283.
for some of his lands which he held of that see, is designed Hugo Fraser,
dominus de Lovat, anno 1367.

There is a resignation Hugonis Fraser, domini de Lovat, totius terrae suae de
Fairlyhope, nobili et potenti domino, Chart. penes comitem de Morton.
Jacobo Douglas domino de Lynton, jacen. in vicecomitatu de Peebles, etc. anno
1377: which lands were part of the property of his ancestors in that county.

He entered into an agreement with Alexander bishop of Murray, who, for the sum
of 20 l. sterling, H^ddington's collections, p. ^09.
frees Hugh dominus de Lovat of all bygone rests of teinds, etc. anno 1384.

He married Isabel, daughter of sir David Wemyss of that ilk, by whom he had
four sons.

1. Hugh, his heir.

2. Alexander Fraser, who got from his father a considerable estate, but he
dying without issue, anno 1430, his lands returned to the family, as will be
shown hereafter.

3. John, first of the Frasers of Knock in Air-shire.

4. --, ancestor of the Frasers of Foyers, and their cadets.

He died before the year 1480, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. HUGH FRASER of Lovat, who grants a charter to his beloved cousin Peter de
Stirling, Ibidem.
and John his son, of the lands of Kinnell, Braikie, etc. in Forfarshire, anno
1420.

He was retoured heir to his brother Alexander, in the lands of Stratherick,
Glenelg, Ibid. p. 270.
Muckrack, with several others, lying in the barony of Aberturff, on the 20th
September 1430.

He married Janet, Chart. in pub. arch. ad ann. 1426.
sister and co-heiress of William Fenton of that ilk, by whom he got a great
accession to his estate in lands in Inverness-shire.

He got four charters under the great seal, Hugoni Fraser de Lovat, Ibidem.
of many lands and baronies, inter 1426 et 1430.

He was a man of great parts, and highly esteemed by king James I. who created
him a lord of parliament, by the title of lord Fraser of Lovat, Ibidem.
and constituted him high sheriff of the county of Inverness, anno 1431.

By the said Janet Fenton, he left issue a son and successor,

VIII. HUGH, second lord Lovat, who granted a charter to John Stirling,
Haddington's collections.
confirming the lands of Kinnell and Braikie to him, of which he was superior,
and he is then designed Hugo dominus Fraser de Lovat, etc. anno 1476.

He married lady Janet Dunbar, daughter of Thomas earl of Murray, by whom he
had two sons and one daughter.

1. Thomas, his heir.

2. Alexander, of whom are descended the Frasers of Faratine, and their
branches.

His daughter Agnes, married to sir Kenneth MacKenzie of Kintail.

He obtained a decree before the lords auditors, against Doualle
MacGillicallim, who was thereby obliged to content, pay, and deliver to Hugh
lord Fraser of Lovat, 400 cows, or 12 l. Scots per piece, 36 horses, or 26 l. 3
d. per piece, Records of parliament.
and 900 sheep, or 2 l. per piece, etc. which were spulzied and taken ^rae the
said lord Hugh, by the said Doualle, as was sufficiently proven before the
said lords, 16th December 1494.

He died soon thereafter, of a very great age, and was succeeded by his son,

IX. THOMAS, third lord Lovat, who was a man of great courage and spirit, and
much in favor with king James IV. who appointed him his justiciar in the North.

He was possessed of a vast estate, Chart. in pub. archiv.
and got five charters under the great seal, Thomae domino Lovat, of many lands
and baronies, inter 1500 et 1508.

He got another charter of the lands and castle of Beaufort, Haddington's
collections, p. 442.
dated 15th October 1509.

He married, 1st, Janet, daughter of Alexander Gordon of Midmar, by whom he had
two sons.

1. Thomas, master of Lovat, a youth of great hopes and resolution, who
accompanied king James IV. to the fatal field of Flowdon, where he lost his
life, anno 1513, without issue.

2. Hugh, his father's heir.

He married, 2dly, Jean, daughter of Andrew third lord Gray, by whom he had a
son,

James, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who got a charter, under the great seal, of the lands of Kinkell, etc. anno
1542, -- also a daughter,

Janet, married to John Crichton of Ruthven, Esquire;.

He died anno 1530, and was succeeded by his son,

X. HUGH, Ibidem.
fourth lord Lovat, who got ten charters under the great seal of many lands and
baronies, inter 1530 et 1540.

He married, 1st, Anne, daughter of John Grant of Freuchie, lord of Grant, by
whom he had a son,

Hugh, master of Lovat, who was killed at Lochlochy, without issue, anno 1544.

He married, 2dly, Janet, daughter of Walter Ross of Balnagowan, by whom he had
two sons and one daughter.

1. Alexander, his heir.

2. William, of Strowie, of whom many Frasers in Inverness-shire are descended.

His daughter, Agnes, married, Is It, to William MacLeod of Dunvegan, 2dly, to
Alexander Bayne of Tulloch.

This lord was the king's justiciar in the North, and fell into a fatal quarrel
with the MacRonalds; History of the families of Sutherland, Gordon and Lovat.
upon which a considerable number of both clans met near Lochlochy in
Inverness-shire, where they sought with such incredible obstinacy, that scarce
ten of both sides came off alive, and lord Lovat, with his eldest son, were
killed on the spot, on 2d June 1544.

He was succeeded by his son,

XI. ALEXANDER, Chart. in pub. archiv.
fifth lord Lovat, who got charters, under the great seal, of several lands,
inter 1550 et 1556.

He married Jean, daughter of sir John Campbell of Calder, by whom he had four
sons and one daughter.

1. Hugh, his heir.

2. Thomas, ancestor of the Frazers of Strichen.

3. James, of Ardachie.

4. --

His daughter Anne, was married to John Frazer of Dalcross.

He died anno 1558, and was succeeded by

XII. Ibidem.
HUGH, sixth lord Lovat, who was served heir to his father in 1560, and got
charters under the great seal, of many lands, inter 1566, et 1570.

At the time of the reformation, upon the dissolution of the church lands, he
acquired the lands and tithes of the priory of Bewlie, which greatly increased
the wealth and dependency of his family.

He married Lady Elizabeth Stewart, daughter of John fourth earl of Athole, by
whom he had a son,

Simon, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Elizabeth, married to Alexander Dunbar of Westfield, sheriff of Murray.

He died anno 1576, and was succeeded by his son,

XIII. SIMON, Ibidem.
seventh lord Lovat, who got charters under the great seal, of several lands
and baronies, inter 1590 et 1600.

He got afterward five charters of a vast number of other lands, Ibidem.
inter 1608 et 1620.

He married, first, Margaret, daughter of sir Colin MacKenzie of Kintail,
ancestor of the earl of Seaforth, by whom he had a son,

Hugh, his heir.

He married, 2dly, Jean Stewart, daughter of James lord Down, by whom he had
two sons and one daughter.

1. Sir Simon, ancestor of the Frasers of Inneralachy.

2. Sir James Fraser of Brae, etc.

His daughter Margaret, married first to sir Robert Arbuthnot of that ilk;
2dly, to sir John Haldane of Gleneagles.

He died anno 1633, and was succeeded by

XIV. HUGH, Chart. in archiv. fam. de Wemyss.
eighth lord Lovat, who married Isabel, daughter of sir John Wemyss of that
ilk, by whom he had two sons and three daughters.

1. Hugh, master of Lovat.

2. Thomas Fraser of Beaufort, who carried on the male line of this family, as
will be shown hereafter.

Is It daughter, Anne, married to John earl of Sutherland.

2. Mary, married to David Ross of Balnagowan.

3. Catharine, married to Robert viscount Arbuthnot.

He died in February 1646.

XV. HUGH, master of Lovat, eldest son and apparent heir of Hugh eighth lord
Lovat, married lady Anne Lesly, daughter of Alexander first earl of Leven, and
died in May 1643, leaving issue by the said lady Anne, a son,

XVI. HUGH, who succeeded his grandfather, anno 1646, and was the ninth lord
Lovat.

He married Anne, daughter of sir George MacKenzie of Tarbat, by whom he had a
son,

Hugh, his heir. -- and three daughters.

1. Anne, married to Patrick lord Kinnaird.

2. Isabel, married to Alexander MacDonald of Glengary.

3. Margaret, married to colonel Andrew Monro.

He died in April 1672, and was succeeded by his son,

XVII. HUGH, tenth lord Lovat, who married lady Amelia Murray, daughter of John
Marquis of Athole, by whom he had four daughters.

1. Amelia, married to Alexander MacKenzie of Prestonhall.

2. Anne, married first to Norman MacLeod of that ilk; 2dly, to Peter
Fotheringhame of Pourie.

3. Catharine, married to sir William Murry of Auchtertyre.

4. Margaret.

This lord dying without male issue, there was a long contest for the estate
and honors, betwixt Simon Fraser of Beaufort the heirmale, and Amelia, eldest
daughter of this lord Hugh, the heir of line, who had assumed to herself the
title of baroness of Lovat; but that affair being at last compromised, and
determined in favors of the said Simon, son of Thomas of Beaufort before
mentioned, to him we now return.

XV. THOMAS FRASER of Beaufort, second son of Hugh eighth lord Lovat, married
--, daughter of -- MacLeod of Her^ies, by whom he had issue.

XVI. SIMON FRASER of Beaufort, undoubted heir-male and representative of this
noble family, who having recovered the estate and honors as before observed,
was the eleventh lord Lovat.

He was a man of good parts, and master of most languages, particularly Latin,
French, and Galic, all which he spoke with great propriety.

He married, 1st, Janet, daughter of Ludovick Grant of that ilk, by whom he had
two sons and two daughters.

1. Simon, master of Lovat.

2. Alexander Fraser, Esquire;.

1st daughter, Janet, married to Mr. MacPherson of Clunie, chief of that clan,
who stands attainted for his accession to the rebellion in 1745.

2. Si^illa, who died unmarried, a few years after her father's death.

He married, 2dly, Primrose, daughter of John Campbel of Mammore, Esquire; father
of the present duke of Argyle, by whom he had a son,

Archibald Fraser, Esquire; merchant in London.

This lord having been engaged in the rebellion 1745, was taken prisoner in
1746, carried up to London, and confined in the tower.

In March thereafter, he was tried before the house of lords, found guilty of
treason, sentenced to be executed, and his estate and honors were forfeited to
the crown.

He was accordingly beheaded upon Towerhill the 9th day of April 1747, in the
80th year of his age. His behavior at his trial and execution was brave and
undaunted.

The printed account makes particular mention of his friend Mr. Fraser. Printed
account of the trial published by authority.
"The trial, (says the author of this account,) lasted ten days, during which
he was nobly defended upon the credit and expense of his relation and family
doer Mr. William Fraser of Foord, writer to the signet, who attended him to
London, prepared his defense, and was appointed one of his sollicitors; and at
his request attended him to the seaffold, and there received my lord's public
declaration of his gratitude, by delivering him his gold-headed cane, repeating
these words: I deliver you this cane in token of my sense of your faithful
services, and of my committing to you all the power I have upon earth, etc."

XVII. SIMON the master, his eldest son, had it not been for his father's
forfeiture, and his own, would have been twelfth lord Lovat from father to son
in a direct male line.

He was also engaged in the rebellion 1745, and attainted, but obtained his
majesty's pardon, went into the army, and has now the command of a Highland
regiment doing duty in North America. He and his regiment distinguished
themselves at the siege of Louisbourg, the taking of Quebec, and the two
battles fought near that place, where the regiment greatly suffered. He was
elected member of parliament for the county of Inverness in his absence, and
upon his return from North America, was promoted to the rank of
brigadier-general, and sent to Portugal with lord Loudoun and others, to defend
that kingdom against the invasion of the Spaniards.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st and 4th, azure, three cinque foils argent, one and two: 2d and
3d, three an tique crowns gules.

CREST; on a wreath a stag's head erased or, armed argent.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter side a stag sejant, proper; on the sinister, a
savage wreathed about his head and middle with laurel, holding over his
shoulder a batton, all proper.

MOTTO; Je suis pressed.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Lovat and Beaufort in the county of Inverness, and Bewly in the county of
Ross.

LYLE Lord LYLE.
THE surname of Lyle was first assumed by the proprietors of some of the
Western isles, where they settled as early as the reign of king Malcolm
Canmore, and were first designed Le'Isle, which appellation in process of time
came to be pronounced Lyle, and from hence their surname.

They had also possessions of lands on the continent, and Duchal castle in
Renfrew-shire appears to have been their principal seat, and chief title of the
family.

Their immediate ancestor was,

1. WILLIAM de LYLE, who is one of the witnesses to the foundation charter of
the monastery of Paisley, by Walter, Chartulary of Paisley, penes comitem de
Dundonald.
second of that name, son of Alan, lord high steward of Scotland, anno 1164.

He was one of the Scotch barons that were taken prisoners with king William
the Lion at Alnwick, Rymer, tom. I.
anno 1174.

He died before the year 1200, leaving issue a son and successor,

II. WILLIAM de LYLE, the first we have found so named, and it is certain the
descendants of this family were frequently designed de Iusula afterward.

In a charter of a donation by Walter, third of that name, son of Alan lord
high steward of Scotland, Chartulary of Paisley.
William bishop of St. Andrews, Walter bishop of Glasgow, William de Lyle, etc.
are witnesses, in or before the year 1232, in which year the bishop of Glasgow
died.

He had issue two sons.

1. Radulphus.

2. Sir Alan, who is witness in many donations to the monastery of Paisley, and
is designed dominus Alanus de Insula, miles, etc. in the reign of king
Alexander II.

William was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. RADULPHUS de LYLE, who, in a donation to the monastery of Paisley, where
Walter earl of Menteith, Ibidem.
sir John Montgomery, sir John Erskine, etc. are witnesses, is designed
Radulphus de Insula, dominus de Duchal, in the beginning of the reign of king
Alexander III. who succeeded his father, anno 1249.

He is also witness to the vendition of the lands of Aldiston to the abbot of
Paisley, Ibidem.
and is then designed dominus de Duchal in the same reign.

He left issue a son,

IV. Sir WALTER LYLE, who succeeded him, Rymer tom. II.
and was one of the magnates Scotiae chosen on the part of Robert Bruce, in the
competition for the crown betwixt him and John Baliol, anno 1292.

He was a steady friend of king Robert Bruce, and always adhered to his
interest.

He was succeeded by his son,

V. Sir ALAN LYLE, who did not inherit his father's loyalty, Fordun, vol. II.
p. 311.
but, in the beginning of the reign of king David Bruce, joined Edward Baliol,
who constituted him sheriff of Bute and Cowal, anno 1334.

He was afterward attacked by a party of the loyalists, Ibid. p. ^16.
and, tho'he made a stout defense, was killed in the action, anno 1335, leaving
issue a son and successor,

VI. Sir JOHN LYLE, dominus de Duchal. He was a man of great honor and
integrity, Rymer, tom. VI. p. 534.
and a particular favorite of king David Bruce, who appointed him one of his
ambassadors to treat with the English, anno 1366.

He afterward, for his good and faithful services, obtained from that prince a
grant of Balquhain in Stirling-shire, "to him, and Margaret Vaus his spouse,
and the heirs procreate or to be procreate betwixt them, which failing, to
return to the crown, etc." the charter is dated 3d February 1368.

In a charter of confirmation by Alan Erskine of Barrochan, to sir Robert
Erskine, of the lands of Dunnerbook and Auchintorly, Crawfurd's peerage.
he is designed Johannes de Lyle, dominus de Duchal, miles, etc. in the end of
the reign of king David, who died anno 1371.

By the said Margaret Vaus, he left issue a son,

VII. Sir JOHN LYLE, who in several charters of king Robert II. Chart. in pub.
archiv.
is designed Johannes filius et haeres Johannis de Lyle, domini de Duchal,
miles, etc.

He married one of the daughters and coheiresses of the family of Mar, by whom
he had three sons.

1. Sir Robert, his heir.

2. Alexander.

3. William.

Both mentioned in the chartulary of Paisley.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. Sir ROBERT LYLE, who obtained a safe conduct to go up to king James I.
Rymer, tom. X.
then prisoner in England, anno 1422.

He was afterward one of the hostages for his ransom, Ibid. p. 327.
anno 1424.

Upon the death of Alexander Stewart earl of Mar, Fordun's continuation.
anno 1436, an author who lived near that time, says, " Rex illi successit,
quia bastardus suit; Crawfurd's peerage.
quamvis jure haereditario domini de Erskine et de Lyle successisse debuissent,
etc.

Sir Robert claimed a part of that estate in right of his mother; MacKenzie,
Nisbet, vol. II. part III. p. 54.
but what share thereof he got, cannot now be ascertained, but he added the
coat of Mar to his own armorial bearing.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of sir John Stewart of Castlemilk, Stewart's
history, p. 198.
by whom he had a son and heir,

IX. Sir ROBERT, afterward lord Lyle.

He married, first, Margaret, daughter of Andrew first lord Gray, Charta penes
dom. Gray.
who grants a charter to his son Patrick master of Gray, of several lands, in
which Robertus de Lyle, dominus de Duchal, filius dicti Andreae, is a witness,
anno 1445.

By her he had a daughter,

Margaret, married to Alexander, Chart. in pub. archiv. ad annum 1465.
son and heir of Alan Lyle of Cragbrae.

He married, 2dly, Margaret Wallace, by whom he had a son,

Robert, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Elizabeth, Stewart's history, p. 110.
married to John Stewart of Blackhall.

This sir Robert being a man of parts, was in great favor with king James II.
Nisbet, vol. I. p. 219
who raised him to the dignity of the peerage, by the title of lord Lyle, anno
1446.

There is a precept granted by Robert lord Lyle to William Semple, Chartulary
of Paisley.
son and heir of the lord of Elieston, to which Alexander de Lyle and William,
his father's brothers, are witnesses, anno 1452.

He is witness in many of lord Gray's writs, inter 1452 et 1462.

He got a charter under the great seal, ( Roberto domino Lyle) capitalis
messuagii manerii de Lyle, etc. etc. containing an entail, first to himself,
and the heirs-male of his body, procreate betwixt him and Margaret Wallace his
spouse; Chart. in pub. archiv.
then to his daughters, their husbands, and their heirs-male, they carrying the
name and arms of Lyle; then to George Lyle of Staniepath, and the heirs-male of
his body, etc. etc. etc. dated 13th April 1466.

He died about the year 1470, and was succeeded by his son,

X. ROBERT, second lord Lyle, a man of great abilities, worth and honor, a
firm and steady friend of king James III. and one of the lords of his privy
council.

He got charters under the great seal, (Roberto domino Lyle) of the lands of
Little and Meikle-Dowald, Ibidem.
Duchalhill, the lands of Bordland, Ketness, and many others, inter 1472 et
1490.

He was one of the ambassadors extraordinary to the court of England, Rymer,
tom. XI. p. 750.
in March 1472, and concluded a truce with that nation, to last till July 1473.

This lord was most unjustly suspected of keeping a correspondence with James
earl of Douglas, and others the king's enemies in England. He was accused, and
tried in parliament by an aslize of the following noble persons, viz. the earls
of Athole and Morton, the lords Glammis, Erskine, Oliphant, Cathcart, Gray,
Borthwick, Stobhall, Drumlanrig, and Maxwell, sir William Borthwick, Alexander
master of Crawfurd, Silvester Rattray dominus de eodem, sir Robert Abercrombie,
and sir David Moubray.

He was honorably acquitted, and declared innocent by the assize, Records of
parliament.
and was assoilzied in pleno parliamento, the king being present, anno 1481.

He was immediately afterward in as great favor with the king as ever, Rymer,
tom. XII. ^. 230, 241, 267, and 340.
and being a man of great knowledge in the management of state affairs, he was
four times employed to treat with the English, in the years 1484 and 1485, and
conducted himself in all his negotiations with great prudence and dexterity.

He was again sent to England in 1488, to treat of a final peace. In his
absence the king was murdered near Bannockburn or Stirling, in June that same
year.

Lord Lyle was immediately named one of the lords of the privy council to king
James IV. Records of parliament.
by act of parliament, and was also constituted justice-general besouth the
river Forth. Haddington's collections.


Notwithstanding all these preferments, he joined the master of Lennox, and
others, who took up arms to revenge the king's death; but they were defeated by
the lord Drummond, and the lord Lyle was forseited.

Upon the general act of indemnity, anno 1491, Ibidem, and Black acts of
parliament.
he was rehabilitate and restored to the justiciary; which office he executed
with great fidelity for several years thereafter.

He married, 1st, a daughter of John, son and heir apparent of George lord
Seton, by whom he had no issue.

He married, 2dly, lady Elizabeth Douglas, daughter of Archibald fifth earl of
Angus, Crawfurd's peerage, and Chart. in pub. archiv.
by whom he had four sons, and three daughters.

1. Robert, his heir.

2. George Lyle of Langlybank.

3. Nichol.

4. John.

1st daughter, Margaret, married to James Stewart of Blackhall.

2. Mariot, married to Peter Houstoun of that ilk.

3. Agnes, married to John Maxwell of Stainly.

He married, 3dly, Margaret Houstoun, by whom he had no issue.

He made an entail of his estate, first, to Robert his eldest son, and the
heirs-male of his body; which failing, to George, then to Nichol, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
then to John, his second, third and fourth sons; then to John Stewart of
Ardgowan; then to Peter Houstoun's heirs-male by his daughter Mariot, etc. they
carrying the name and arms of Lyle, etc. This is confirmed by a charter under
the great seal, dated 6th May 1495.

He got another charter, under the great seal, of the lands of Salsarshill,
etc. anno 1499; and, Ibidem.
dying soon thereafter, was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. ROBERT, third lord Lyle, who got a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
Roberto silio et hae^^di apparenti Roberti domini Lyle, et Mariot^ Lindsay,
ejus spousae terrarum de Shiels de Kil^ride, etc. anno 1497.

By the said Mariot Lindsay, a daughter of the family of Dunrod, he had issue a
son,

John, his heir, -- and two daughters.

1. Helen, married to Alan, master of Cathcart, son and apparent heir of John
second lord Cathcart, without issue.

2. Catharine, married to Archibald MacLauchlane of that ilk.

He died anno 1511, and was succeeded by his son,

XII. JOHN, fourth lord Lyle, who, being under age at his father's death, the
king assigned the ward of his marriage to James Beaton bishop of Glasgow, whose
niece he afterward married.

He was a man of great honor and integrity. Upon the death of king James V.
he, with several others of the Scotch nobility, Crawfurd's peerage.
entered into a solemn association, to maintain and defend the infant queen
Mary, against all-assaults of Englishmen or Scotch-men in the interest of
England, etc.

He married Grizel, Chart. in pub. archiv.
daughter of David Beaton of Creich, by whom he had a son,

James, master of Lyle, -- and a daughter,

Jean, married to sir Neil Montgomery of Lainshaw, son and heir of sir Neil
Montgomery of Lainshaw, who was second son of Hugh first earl of Eglington.
Vide, page 229 of this work.

This lord made an entail of his estate, Ibidem.
failing heirs-male of his son's body, to his daughter Jean, sir Neil
Montgomery her husband, and their heirs whatever.

James master of Lyle got a charter under the great seal, Jacobo filio Johannis
domini Lyle, Ibidem.
of the lands and barony of Lyle, etc. anno 1541; but he dying without issue,
the representation of this noble family devolved upon the descendants of sir
Neil Montgomery of Lainshaw, who married Jean only daughter of the fourth lord
Lyle, and sister of James the master, as before observed.

The chief cadet of this family, subsisting at that time, was, Robert Lyle of
Staniepath, who carried the same arms with the lord Lyle, with a mollet for
difference.

This Robert of Staniepath got a charter, under the great seal, of the lands of
Staniepath, Hoperigshiels, Ibidem.
Chirnside, Bassendean, etc. anno 1541; but it does not appear that he ever
claimed the peerage. Of him was lineally descended major William Lyle of
Staniepath, a great patriot, who was cup bearer to king Charles I. had several
daughters, but died without male-issue, anno 1661.

ARMS.
Gules, a sret or.

MACDONALD Lord MACDONALD.
THE immediate ancestor of this branch of the MacDonalds was,

Alexander earl of Ross, and lord of the Isles, the ninth generation of that
illustrious house, in a direct male line, who left issue three sons, and two
daughters. I. John, his successor in the earldom of Ross, etc. 2. Hugh,
ancestor of the MacDonalds of Slate, etc. 3. Celestine, the first of this
family. -- For his daughters, Vide page 361 of this work.

I. CELESTINE, third son of Alexander earl of Ross and lord of the Isles, got
from his brother several lands in Inverness-shire, to him and Finvola his
spouse, and their heirs, etc. which were confirmed to him by a charter under
the great seal, Celestino fratri Johannis comitis de Ross, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
domini insularum, etc. de terris de Lochalsh, Lochbryne, Lochcarron, etc.
dated 10th January 1463; and he was afterward promiscuously designed de
Lochalsh, et de insulis.

By the said Finvola, a daughter of Lauchlan MacLean of Dowart, M. S. hist. of
the family of MacDonald.
he had issue a son,

Sir Donald, -- and three daughters.

1. Margaret, who carried on the line of this family, of whom afterward;

2. --.

3. --.

He was succeeded by his son,

II. Sir DONALD MACDONALD, Chart in pub. archiv.
designed de Insulis et Lochalsh.

He died anno 1503, without issue, and his estate was divided amongst his three
sisters.

II. MARGARET, Retour, ibid.
the eldest, was served heiress to her brother, anno 1515.

She married Alexander MacDonald of Glengary, Chart. in pub. archiv.
by whom she had a son,

III. AENEAS or ANGUS MACDONALD of Glengary, who succeeded his father and
mother, and became possessed of a vast estate.

He was father of

IV. DONALD MACDONALD of Glengary, Chart. in pub. archiv. ad annum 1525.
who is designed Donald MacAngus-Mac-Alaster, when he is served heir Margaretae
de Insulis a^iae suae.

He married Margaret, daughter of Alexander MacDonald, captain of Clanronald,
by whom he had two sons.

1. Alexander, his heir.

2. Donald of Scot-house, who carried on the line of this family, of whom more
hereafter.

He lived to a great age, died about the year 1630, and was succeeded by his
eldest son,

V. ALEXANDER MACDONALD of Glengary, Crawfurd's peerage.
who died soon after his father, having married Jean, daughter of Alan Cameron
of Lochiel, by whom he had a son,

VI. AENEAS MACDONALD of Glengary, who succeeded him.

He was a great loyalist, a firm and steady friend of king Charles I. Minutes
of parliament.
and never deserted the interest of the royal family during all the time of the
civil war, for which he was forfeited by Oliver Cromwell, anno 1651.

Immediately after the restoration, king Charles II. in reward of his constant
loyalty and faithful services, Chart. in pub. archiv.
raised him to the dignity of the peerage, by the title of lord MacDonald of
Aras, to him and the heirs-male of his body for ever, by patent dated 20th
September 1660.

He afterward got charters under the great seal, Aeneae domino MacDonald de
Aras, Ibidem:
of several lands and baronies, inter 1661 et 1664.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir Donald MacDonald, Bart. eighth baron of
Slate; but dying without issue, anno 1680, the peerage became extinct; but his
estate devolved upon his cousin and heir-male,

Alexander MacDonald, lineally descended of Donald MacDonald of Scot-house,
before mentioned, to whom we now return.

V. DONALD MACDONALD of Scot-house, second son of Donald MacAngus-MacAlaster of
Glengary, was father of

VI. RONALD MACDONALD, who had issue four sons.

1. Alexander, his heir.

2. Aeneas MacDonald, designed of Scot-house.

3. John MacDonald.

4. Archibald MacDonald of Barrisdale.

VII. ALEXANDER MACDONALD, eldest son of Ronald, and grandson of Donald of
Scot-house, upon the death of Aeneas lord MacDonald without male-issue,
succeeded to the estate of Glengary, being heir-male, as before observed.

He married lady Mary MacKenzie, daughter of Kenneth earl of Seaforth, by whom
he had three sons.

1. John, his heir.

2. Randulph Mac Donald of Kylles.

3. Alexander MacDonald.

He died anno 1724, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. JOHN MACDONALD of Glengary, who married, 1st, Miss MacKenzie, by whom he
had two sons.

1. Alexander, his heir.

2. Colonel Angus MacDonald, who married a niece of -- Robertson of Strowan,
and left issue a son, Duncan, now of Glengary, and a daughter, Angusia.

John married, 2dly, a daughter of John Gordon of Glenbucket, by whom he had
two sons.

1. James MacDonald of Glenmiddle.

2. Captain Charles.

He had also several daughters; and dying anno 1754, was succeeded by his
eldest son,

IX. ALEXANDER MACDONALD of Glengary, a youth of great spirit and honor, who
was served heir to Aeneas lord MacDonald; his propinquity and descent, as above
deduced, being proven before an inquest, anno 1758; but he dying unmarried,
anno 1761, was succeeded by his nephew, Duncan, son of his brother colonel
Angus, before mentioned, to whom we now return.

X. DUNCAN MACDONALD of Glengary, etc.

DRUMMOND Lord MADERTY.
As the origin and descent of the great and ancient name of Drummond, is to be
found under the title of earl of Perth, to that we refer our readers, and
proceed to the immediate ancestor of this noble family,

David lord Drummond, the sixteenth generation of that illustrious house in a
direct male-line, married Lilias, daughter of William second lord Ruthven,
ancestor of the earls of Gowrie, by whom he had two sons. 1. Patrick lord
Drummond, his successor. 2. James, afterward lord Maderty.

1. JAMES, second son of David lord Drummond, obtained from his father the
lands and tithes of the abbacy of Inchassry, which he had acquired from
Alexander Gordon bishop of Galloway, who then had that abbacy in commendam.

Upon the death of the bishop in 1576, this James became commendator of
Inchassry.

He having been educated with king James VI. List of the gentlemen of the
bedchamber, ann. 1585 penes dom. Cathcart.
and being a man of good parts and learning, was a great favorite of that
prince, who appointed him one of the gentlemen of his bedchamber, anno 1585.

He attended his majesty from Falkland to Perth, Account of the Gowrie's
conspiracy, from the records of parliament.
on the memorable 5th of August 1600; and having been witness to the audacious
attempt of the earl of Gowrie and his brother, upon his majesty's sacred
person, gave one of the most distinct and clear accounts, in his deposition
relative to that intricate affair, of any that was emitted.

The king was afterward pleased to erect the abbacy of Inchassry into a
temporal lordship, Chart. in pub. arch Keth's bishope, etc.
in favors of the commendator, and created him a lord of parliament, by the
style and title of lord Maderty, anno 1607, to him and the heirs-male of his
body.

He thereupon got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Jacobo domino Maderty, viginti quinque mercatas terrarum de Easter-Craigton,
etc. etc. inter 1610 et 1612.

Also other charters, to him and his second son James, of the lands and barony
of Uchtermachan, Ibidem.
comprehending the lands of EasterFordoun, etc. inter 1615 et 1618.

He married Jean, daughter of sir James Chisholm of Cromlix, by whom he got the
lands and barony of Innerpessry, being her mother's portion, and by her had
issue two sons, and four daughters.

1. John, his heir.

2. Sir James Drummond of Machany, whose great grandson succeeded to the
honors of Strathallan and Maderty.

1st daughter, Lilias, married to Laurence lord Oliphant.

2. Jean, married to AndrewWood of Largo, in the shire of Fise.

3. Margaret, married to James Muirhead of Braidsholm, in Lanark-shire.

4. Catharine, married to Andrew first lord Rollo.

He died about the year 1620, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. JOHN, second lord, who got charters under the great seal, Johanni domino
Maderty, terrarum de New-Raw, cum decimis garbalibus octo market. Ibidem.
terrarum de Balmachrone, terrarum de Easter et Wester-Craigies, etc. etc.
inter 1627 et 1630.

He was a great loyalist, Guthry's memoirs.
and was imprisoned by the parliament, for being with the marquis of Montrose.

Yet he afterward obliged himself not to oppose the parliament's proceedings,
in the prosecution of the cause of the covenant, Minutes of parliament.
and became cautioner for Graham of Inchbraco's good behavior, under the
penalty of. fifty thousand pounds, anno 1649.

He married Margaret Lesly, daughter of Patrick lord Lindores, second son of
Andrew fifth earl of Rothes, by whom he had five sons, and three daughters.

1. David, his heir.

2. James.

3. John.

The last two were both captains in the wars abroad, and died without issue.

4. Ludovick, a brave officer and great loyalist who, after his escape from the
battle of Worcester, went into the service of the king of Sweden, and was
killed at the storming of Copenhagen, also without issue.

5. General William Drummond of Cromlix, afterward viscount of Strathallan.

1st daughter, Anne, married to Patrick Rattray of Craighall, in Perth-shire.

2. Jean, married to Patrick Graham of Inchbraco, a brave gallant man, and
steady friend of the royal family.

3. Margaret, married to sir Robert Crichton, nephew to the earl of Dumfries,
who afterward changed his name to Murray, upon an entail by the lord of
Cockpool.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. DAVID, third lord Maderty, who, in his father's lifetime, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
got charters under the great seal, Davidi magistro de Maderty, terrarum
baroniae de Innerpeffry, inter 1635 et 1637.

He married lady Beatrix Graham, daughter of John earl of Montrose, and sister
of the great marquis, by whom he had two sons, and three daughters.

1. James.

2. William.

These two sons died young.

1st daughter, Margaret, married to her cousin John, son to Patrick Graham of
Inchbraco. He was post-master-general of Scotland.

2. Beatrix, married to John earl of Hyndford.

3. Mary, married to John Haldane of Gleneagles. They all had children.

This lord dying without surviving male issue, his estate and honors of
Maderty devolved upon his nephew and heir-male, William viscount of
Strathallan, son and heir of his brother general William Drummond, before
mentioned. Vide title viscount of Strathallan.

DUNBAR Earl of MARCH.
This great and illustrious family is undoubtedly sprung from the (...) kings
of England, and the princes or earls of Northumberland, which is sufficiently
attested by many eminent historians, and other authentic documents: we shall
therefore deduce their descent by unquestionable authority from

I. CRINAN, a man of the first rank and quality, Hovedon's last of England,
Francfort edit. page 424.
and head of one of the greatest and most opulent families in the north of
England, who flourished about the end of the tenth century, and was father of

II. MALDREDUS, who married Algatha, daughter and heiress of Uthred prince of
Northumberland, Chron. of the kings of England, and Salmon's chronology, p. 6.
and grandchild of Ethelred king of England, who succeeded to the crown, anno
979, and died anno 1016.

A good historian, who lived about this era, has these words: Hovedon, p. 424.
Hane Algathan later (Uthredus) dedit in conjugium Maldredo filio Crinani, quam
habuit ex Elgiva filia Ethelredi regis Angliae, etc. etc.

By her he had a son and successor,

III. COSPATRICIUS or GOSPATRICIUS, who was earl of Northumberland in right of
his mother.

When William the Conqueror had overrun the greatest part of England, he
allowed Cospatrick to possess his earldom of Northumberland for some time,
Ibidem.
upon his paying him a considerable sum of money; but, being afterward jealous
of his greatness and power, alleged he had been carrying on some private
correspondence with his enemies, the malcontents of England; he therefore
deprived him of his titles and estates, and expelled him the kingdom, anno
1071. All our historians agree in this-, Also Simon Dunelmensis; chartulary of
Coldstream, penes MacFarlane, p. 69, etc.


Cospatrick sled to Scotland, and was kindly received by king Malcolm Cammore,
who, being a generous prince, bestowed upon him the lands and manor of Dunbar,
in East-Lothian, and several baronies in Berwick-shire.

His future conduct and behavior showed, that king Malcolm's favors were not
misplaced; for he served him faithfully, and contributed greatly to establish
peace and order in the kingdom.

And as the manor of Dunbar then became his chief seat, it was afterward
assumed for the surname of the family.

He left issue three sons, and one daughter.

1. Dolphinus. Chartulary of Coldstream.


2. Waldevus. -- We know nothing of the progeny of these two.

3. Cospatricius, who carried on the line of this family.

His daughter, History of the royal family, Th. Miles, etc. p. 710.
Ethelreda, married king Duncan, son of king Malcom Canmore.

IV. COSPATRICIUS succeeded his father, and made a great figure in Scotland. He
was a brave warrior, often fought valiantly with the Scots against the English,
and was appointed warden of the marches.

He is witness to many of our kings charters, particularly to the foundation
charter of the abbacy of Scoon by king Alexander I. wherein Cospatricius frater
Dolphini, Chartulary of Scoon, penes vicecom. de Stormont.
Mallus comes, Duffagan comes, Williel^^^ frater reginae, Edwardus
constabularius, Cospatricius filius Waltheof, and many others, are witnesses,
anno 1115. Here it may be observed, that he is generally designed Cospatricius
frater Dolphini, to distinguish him from other cotemporary Cospatricks.

In the inquisition made by king David I. (when prince of Cumberland) de
possessionibus ecclesiae Glasguensis, Chartulary of Coldstream, p. 69, and
Dalrymple's collections, p. 340.
the witnesses were Cospatricius frater Dolphini, Waldevus frater ejus,
Cospatricius fi^ius Uthred, Cospatricius filius Alden, U^htred filius Scot,
Gervasius Riddel, Robertus Corbet, Walterus de Lindsay, Willi^^^us Venator, and
many others, ^irca annum 1120.

He is likeways witness to the foundation charter of the abbacy of
Holyroodhouse by king David I. Hay's collections.
and is also therein designed Cospatricius frater Dolphini, anno 1128.

He appears to have been created earl soon after this era; Origin. writs of
Coldinghame penes MacFarlane, p. 67.
for he made a donation to the priory of Coldinghame of the lands of Edram and
Nisbet, in the shire of Berwick, in which he is designed Cospatricius comes,
frater Dolphini, etc. anno 1130.

This donation of the lands of Edram and Nisbet is afterward confirmed by king
David I. to the monks of Coldinghame, on the 17th of the calends of September
1139, on which day earl Cospatrick died. Ibid. p. 9.
This is documented from these remarkable words in the confirmation, viz. ea
die qua fuit vivus et mortuus, etc.

He left issue a son,

Cospatrick, -- and a daughter,

Margaret, married to Philip de Montgomery, ancestor of the earl of Eglington.

He was succeeded by his son,

V. COSPATRICIUS, second earl, who, like his father, was a strenuous defender
of the borders of Scotland.

He was a great benefactor to the religious, and is witness to many of their
charters and donations, Chartulary of Newbottle, penes eund.
particularly one by king David I. to the abbacy of Newbottle, and is therein
designed Cospatricius comes filius Cospatricii, without any local appellation,
anno 1140.

He made a donation to the monastery of Kelso of the patronages of the churches
of Home, Chartulary of Kelso, penes eundem.
Lambden, Greenlaw, etc.

Also a donation to the church of St. Nicholas of Home, Ibidem.
of a carucate of land, to which his three sons, Cospatrick, Edward, and Edgar,
gave their consent, and are witnesses.

By the above donations, and several others too numerous to be here inserted,
it sufficiently appears, that this family had vast possessions in the shire of
Berwick as early as the reign of king David I. particularly the lands and
barony of Home, which afterward became the property, surname, and title of one
of the greatest and most noble branches of this illustrious house, as has been
shown under the title earl of Home, page 341 of this work.

He died in 1147, Chron. of Melross, penes MacFarlane.
leaving issue three sons.

1. Cospatrick, his successor.

2. Edward, of whose succession we can give no account.

3. Edgar, Chartulary of Kelso.
who appears to have been ancestor of those of the surname of Edgar.

He is likeways said to have had a fourth son, Uthred, supposed to have been
ancestor of the family of Dundas. Vide title Dundas in the II. Vol.

VI. COSPATRICK, third earl, was styled Cospatricius comes, Ibidem.
filius com. Cospatricii, etc.

He founded the Cistertian nunnery of Coldstream, situated on the banks of the
river Tweed, in the shire of Berwick, and gave to that convent the half of the
church of Layvel, with half a carucate of land, consisting of the half of the
lands of Layvel, and another half in Birghame, etc. He confirms also the church
of Hirsel to them, with a carucate of land, which had been given by Derder his
countess, Chartulary of Coldstream, p. 70, 71.
etc. to which donations Derder co^it^ssa, and Waldevus filius com.
Cospatricii, are witnesses.

He also founded another runnery of the same order at Eccles, Chartulary of
Melross.
in Berwick-shire, which he largely endowed.

By the said Derder, his countess (of what family we know not) he left issue
two sons.

1. Waldevus.

2. Patrick, father of William, ancestor of the family of Home, Chartulary of
Kelso, Coldstream, etc.
of whom afterward.

And dying anno 1166, was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. WALDEVE, fourth earl, who is the first we find designed comes de Dunbar,
which he also took for his surname.

Earl Waldeve is particularly mentioned in a convention with king Henry of
England, Rymer, tom. 1. p. 39.
about the liberation of king William the Lion, anno 1174.

He confirmed the donations of his predecessors to the religious, Chartulary of
Coldstream, p. 72.
particularly the churches of Layvel and White-Chester, by his charter, wherein
he is designed Waldevus, comes de Dunbar, etc. and to which his brother Patrick
is a witness.

He died anno 1182, Chronicle of Melrose.
leaving issue by Alina comitissa de Dunbar, two sons, and one daughter.

1. Patrick, his successor.

2. Constanti^e, who is mentioned with his brother, Origin. writs of
Coldinghame, p. 117.
in a donation to the monastery of Coldinghame.

His daughter, Crawfurd's peerage.
Alicia, married Philip de Seton, ancestor of the earls of Winton.

Alina comitissa de Dunbar is mentioned in many authentic writs; Chronicle of
Melrose.
and, surviving her husband five years, died anno 1187.

VIII. PATRICK, Rymer.
fifth earl, was the first of this family that was designed comes Marchiae.

He was a brave soldier, was engaged in many encounters against the English, in
the reign of king William the Lion, and always behaved with remarkable conduct
and resolution.

He confirmed all the donations of his predecessors to the religious, by his
charter in these words: " Patricius comes, etc. sciatis me confirmass,
Chartulary of Coldstream, p. 73.
etc. sicut cartae predecessorum, comitis Cospatricii, et comitis Walde^i
patris mei, confirmant et testantur, testibus Willielmo filio meo, Bernardo
Fraser, etc.

He founded a monastery of red friars at Dunbar, Chartulary of Kenso, etc.
anno 1218, and Ada his countess founded a nunnery for the Cistertian nuns of
St. Bothans in Berwick-shire, etc.

He married Ada, Chartulary of Pa^sl^y, penes MacFarlane, p. 14, ad ann. 1174.
, daughter of king William the Lion, by whom he had three sons, and one
daughter.

1. Galfridus, who was contracted to Jean, eldest daughter of John King of
England, which is attested by Rymer's Foedera in these words: Rymer. tom. I. p.
193.
" conventio inter Johannem regem Angliae, et P. comitem Marchiae, per quam
praedictus rex tenetur tradere Johannam filiam suam Galfrido, filio dicti
comitis in uxorem, etc. anno 1214," but he dled before his father; without
succession.

2. Patrick, who carried on the line of this family.

3. William, Chartulary of Kelso, p. 205.
who, in a charter of donation to the monastery of Kelso, is designed
Willielmus filius comitis Patricii, etc. anno 1241.

His daughter Ada, got from her father the lands and barony of Home, Ibid. p.
100.
and was married, 1st, to -- Courtney, to whom she had no issue; she was
married, 2dly, to her cousin sir William, son of Patrick, second son of
Cospatrick, third earl of Dunbar, before mentioned, who got with her the lands
and castle of Home, from which he assumed his surname, and was progenitor of
the family of Home. Vide, Title earl of Home.

Here we beg leave to observe, that the above William, third son of Patrick
fifth earl of Dunbar, is said, by former authors, to have been ancestor of the
family of Home, which certainly is a mistake; for Willielmus filius comitis
Patricii married Christiana Corbet, daughter and sole heiress of Walter de
Corbet of Mackerston, with whom he got a considerable estate, and by her had
two sons.

1. Nicholaus de Corbet, who got the lands of Mackerston.

2. Patricius de Corbet, who got the lands of Foggo, Chartulary of Melrose,
Kelso, Coldstream etc.
etc. and both they and their posterity kept the surname of Corbet, and were
the only sons that this William ever had. -- All which is attested by many
documents, and sufficiently prove that Willielmus filius comitis Patricii could
not be progenitor of the family of Home.

This William, Chronicle of Melrose.
son of earl Patrick, died anno 1253, and Christiana de Corbet, his spouse,
died anno 1241.

Earl Patrick died anno 1232, Fordun, v. II. p. 59, cui successit Patricius
filius ejus, et nepos regis.
and was succeeded by his son,

IX. PATRICK, second of that name, and sixth earl, promiscuously designed of
Dunbar and March.

He was a man of fine parts, and in great savor with king Alexander II. who
often employed him in negotiations of importance, and he always acquitted
himself with fidelity and honor.

He, with Walter lord high steward of Scotland, subdued that great and
formidale rebel Thomas Dow-MacAllan, and obliged him to submit to the king's
mercy, anno 1235.

He also reduced, and brought to a submission Somerlede thane of Argyle,
another archrebel,; and when the differences betwixt king Alexander II. of
Scotland, and king Henry III. Rymer, tom. I. p. 377.
of England, were accommodated, Patrick earl of March, the earls of Fife,
Menteith, Strathern, Levenax, Angus, Mar, Athole and Ross, Walter son of Alan,
and Bernard Fraser, were guarantees for the king of Scotland, anno 1237.

He was also one of the guarantees in another treaty betwixt the kings of
Scotland and England, Ibid. p. 428.
anno 1244.

He afterward went to the holy war with Lewis IX. of France, accompanied by
Walter lord high steward of Scotland, Chronicle of Melrose.
and David Lindsay of Glenesk, but died at the siege of Damieta in Egypt, anno
1249.

He left issue by Christian his wife, second daughter of said Walter lord high
steward of Scotland, Stewart's history, p. 49.
only one son,

X. PATRICK, seventh earl, who succeeded him, and was a man of great worth and
merit, and a true patriot.

When Walter Cummin earl of Menteith fortified the castle of Edinburgh, Fordun,
vol. II. p. 90.
and refused to surrender it to the king, Patrick earl of March reduced it, and
obliged Walter to implore the king's mercy, anno 1252.

King Alexander likeways employed him in a particular embassy to his
father-in-law the king of England, Rymer, tom. VI. p. 558, and 566.
anno 1255.

He married Cecilia, daughter of John de Were, Simson.
and died anno 1262, leaving issue a son and successor,

XI. PATRICK, eighth earl, who was highly esteemed by king Alexander III. to
whom he did many signal services.

He commanded the left wing of the royal army at the memorable battle of
Largis, where the lord high steward commanded the right, and the king the main
body or center, and obtained a glorious victory over Haco king of Norway, who
had invaded Scotland with a great army, anno 1263.

The year thereafter, the earl of March, with the lord high steward, reduced
the Isle of Man, with all the Ae^udae or Western Isles; and in 1266, Magnus
king of Norway, yielded all pretensions to those islands, for 4000 merks, and
an annuity of 100 merks, which brought about the marriage betwixt Eric, son of
Magnus, with princess Margaret, daughter of king Alexander III.

Anno 1284, this earl was one of the magnates Scotiae that entered into a
solemn engagement, acknowledging princess Margaret, daughter to Eric king of
Norway, to be true and undoubted heir to the crown of Scotland, Rymer tom. II.
p. 266, and 284.
and to receive her as queen, upon the death of king Alexander III. her
grandfather.

He was also one of the Scotch nobles that wrote to the king of England about
the marriage of Margaret queen of Scotland with his eldest son prince Edward,
Ibid. p. 471.
anno 1290.

After the death of the queen, he became one of the competitors for the crown,
as being grandson of Ada, Ibid. p. 553.
daughter of king William the Lion, but it seems he afterward gave up his
pretensions; for in the competition betwixt Bruce and Baliol, we find this earl
of March was one of the arbiters chosen on the part of Bruce, anno 1292.

He died 1294, having married Christian Bruce, Stewart's history, p. 34.
daughter of Robert lord of Annandale, competitor for the crown of Scotland, by
whom he had a son and successor,

XII. PATRICK, ninth earl, who, like many of his brave countrymen, Prynne's
collect. vol. III.
was forced to submit to the superior power of king Edward of England, and
swore fealty to him, anno 1296.

In 1304, the parliament of England chose him one of the representatives for
Scotland, but the Scotch affairs beginning then to have a more favorable
aspect, he refused to serve in such a parliament, though he had lands lying
both in Scotland and England.

Soon after Robert Bruce was king of Scotland, we find him in the enemy's
interest, his strong castle of Dunbar in the hands of the English, Rymer. tom.
III. p* 14.
and himself appointed by king Edward one of the keepers of the peace upon the
English borders, viz. Lancashire, Cumberland, Westmorland, etc. anno 1307; yet
he was afterward reconciled, and in great friendship with king Robert, and was
one of the magnates Scotiae that attended him to his convention at Air, when
the succession to the crown was settled, to which he affixed his seal, anno
1315.

He married Marian, daughter of Duncan, tenth earl of Fife, by whom he had two
sons.

1. Patrick, tenth earl of March.

2. George, of whom it is said the Dunbars of Cumnock, Moch^um, etc. are
descended.

He died in the end of 1315, or beginning of 1316, and was succeeded by his
eldest son,

XIII. PATRICK, sixth of that name, and tenth earl, who was a man of great
honor, loyalty, and integrity, and always a firm friend to the royal family.

He was one of the Scotch nobles that signed that famous letter to the Pope,
Fordun, vol. II. p. 275.
asserting the independency of Scotland, anno 1320.

Upon the death of Thomas Randolph, regent of Scotland, he was chosen guardian
of the kingdom, Rymer, tom. III. p. 5^^.
besouth the river Forth, anno 1332, and entered into a solemn agreement with
the king of England, super liberatione castri et ^illae de Berwick, etc. anno
1333.

He was one of the commissioners appointed to treat of a peace with the king of
England, Ibid. tom. V. p. 224.
anno 1342.

And was one of the chief commanders at the ^nfortunate battle of Durham, where
king David, by being too forward, was taken prisoner; but the earl of March,
after the battle was lost, made a glorious retreat, and by his good conduct,
saved a great part of the army.

This earl was afterward employed in many embassies and negociations with the
English, to procure the king's liberty, Rymer.
which at last was effectuated, anno 1357.

He married Agnes, daughter of Thomas Randolph, Crawfurd's p. ^^ge, p. 308.
earl of Murray, sister, and at length sole heiress of John earl of Murray,
whereby he was afterward designed earl of Murray, which appears by a charter
of king David II. Chart. in pub. archiv. a^ annum 1359.
By her he had two sons and three daughters.

1. George, earl of March.

2. Patrick Dunbar, Autogroph. penes fam. de Wemyss.
who is witness in a charter of his brother's, anno 1396.

1st daughter, lady Margaret, married to William earl of Douglas.

2. Lady Agnes, married to James Douglas, lord of Dalkeith.

3. Lady Elizabeth, married to sir John M^itland of Leithington.

And dying anno 1360, was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIV. GEORGE, eleventh earl of March, designed also earl of Murray, and lord of
Annandale in right of his mother, was certainly one of the most powerful men of
his time, and continued a dutiful and loyal subject during all the reign of
king Robert II.

He was warden of the marches, and was very successful in repressing the
insolences of the English borderers.

In 1380, he was one of the commissioners appointed to treat of a peace with
England, Rymer.
which ended only in a truce.

In 1384, he joined the earl of Douglas, and they burnt the town of Roxburgh,
took the castle of Lochmaben, defeated the English, who had invaded the South
borders, and took a rich convoy that followed their army.

After all these services, he revolted to the English; for which our historians
give the following reason^:

The earl's daughter, lady Elizabeth Dunbar, was contracted to David prince of
Scotland, the king's eldest son, and it is said the earl had actually paid a
considerable sum to the king, in part of his daughter's portion.

The earl of Douglas being then the greatest man in the kingdom, proposed to
the king to marry the prince to his daughter lady Marjory Douglas, which
accordingly was accomplished, notwithstanding the former contract.

The earl of March being a man of a great spirit, highly resented this affront,
turned an enemy to his country, and determined to do it all the mischief in his
power.

He committed the care of his castle of Dunbar to his nephew sir Robert
Maitland of Leithington, renounced his allegiance to his lawful sovereign,
Ibidem.
withdrew to England with a considerable retinue of his friends and followers,
was well received by king Henry, who gave him possession of several lands, and
settled an annuity of 500 merks sterling upon him, became a liege man to the
king of England, and did him many signal services against his native country.

He entered into a strict friendship with sir Henry Piercy, and other English
borderers, the constant enemies of the Scotch nation, and with them invaded
Scotland with a considerable force, made great havoc, and destroy-all with
fire and sword wherever he came; for which he was most justly outlawed and
forfeited: and being one of the best generals of his time, the English gained
several advantages over the Scots under his conduct, particularly at Homildon,
in 1402, and at the battle of Shrewsbury in 1403, where the victory was chiefly
ascribed to the earl of March's military skill.

After all, he became weary of distressing his native country, and made
application to Robert duke of Albany, governor of Scotland, for a pardon, who
gave him a favorable answer; upon which he came to Scotland, and was restored
to all his estates and honors by the governor, anno 1409, and lived peaceably
in his own country all the remainder of his days.

He married Christian, daughter of sir William Seton of that ilk, ancestor of
the earls of Winton, by whom he had six sons and one daughter.

1. George, his heir.

2. John, earl of Murray.

3. Sir Gavin Dunbar, Fordun, vol. II. p. 447.
a brave soldier.

4. Colin Dunbar.

5. Sir Patrick Dunbar of Beill, who was murdered with king J^mes I. Ibidem.
anno 1437. -- This sir Patrick left a son, Hugh, who sold his lands of Beill,
Chart. in pub. archiv. ad annum 1390.
etc. in East Lothian, and the mill of Mersington, in Berwickshire, to Robert
Lauder of Edrington, 12th September 1489. -- All these four brothers are
mentioned in a charter in our public records. Ibid. ad ann. 1425, and charter
in MacFarlane's book of orinal writes, p. 374.


6. David Dunbar of Cockburn, whose only daughter and heiress, Mariota, married
Alexander earl of Crawfurd.

His daughter, lady Janet, married, 1st, to John lord Seton; and, 2dly, to sir
Adam Johnston of that ilk.

The earl died in 1416, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. GEORGE, twelfth earl of March, who was one of the commissioners appointed
to treat with the English about the redemption of king James I. Rymer.
anno 1423, which was happily accomplished the year thereafter, and the earl
had the honor of knighthood conferred upon him at the solemnity of the king's
coronation.

Though it does not appear that this earl was ever guilty of any bad practices
against the state, yet the ravages and devastations, committed by his father
against his country, during his rebellion, made many good subjects enemies to
his family. They endeavored to prepossess the king against him, and to
convince him that it was not in the power of a governor to restore to his
estate, and fully to pardon so great and formidable a rebel as his father was,
who had been justly outlawed and forfeited by the Iaws of the land.

The earl was apprehended, and committed prisoner to the castle of Edinburgh;
but the king would suffer nothing to be done against him contrary to law: he
therefore called a parliament to meet at Perth, in order for his trial, on 10th
January 1434.

The earl pled, that his father had been fully pardoned by the duke of Albany,
then governor of Scotland, and that he had never been guilty of any crime
against the state.

The advocates for the king replied, that the power of restoring rebels and
exiles was lodged in the king alone, and never in the person of a governor.

At last, after long debate, the parliament passed sentence against him, in
these words: " Quod ratione forisfacturae domini Georgii de Dunbar, Records of
parliament.
quondam comitis Marchiae, et domini de Dunbar, omne jus tam proprietatis quam
possessionis omnium et singularum terrarum comitatus Marchiae, et dominii de
Dunbar, aliarumque terrarum quae de domino nostro rege tenuit in capite, cum
omnibus et singulis fuis pertinentiis, suisse, spectasse, et pertinuisse, ac
esse, spectare, et pertinere debere, tam in possessorio quam in petitorio, ad
dominum nostrum regem, etc."

The earldom of March was thus annexed to the crown, where it remained till
king James III. conferred it upon his unnatural brother Alexander duke of
Albany, anno 1478.

Yet such was the king's goodness and bounty to this earl, that he bestowed
upon him a pension out of the earldom of Buchan, (then in the crown) which
supported him according to his quality during his life.

We have not been able to discover to whom this earl was married, but it is
certain he left issue a son,

XVI. PATRICK DUNBAR, who, in many authentic documents, is designed filius et
haeres Georgii, quondam comitis de March, particularly when he got a pension
from the king of 400 merks per annum, the very year after his father's
sentence, anno 1435, Fordun, vo^ II. p. 500*
which was no inconsiderable sum in those days, and sufficiently shows the
king's lenity and good will toward the family.

It appears also, that the parliament only forfeited his lands that held of the
king; for we find that this Patrick, and his heirs, possessed the lands and
barony of Kilconquhar in Fife, which was the undoubted property of the earls of
March; but they held these lands of the bishop of St. Andrews, who granted a
new charter, Book of original charter belonging to MacFarlane.
Patricio Dunbar, filio et haeredi quondam Georgii comitis de March, terrarum
baroniae de Kilconquhar, etc. circa annum 1457; and his posterity continued in
possession of these lands for several generations afterward, till the last of
them died without male-issue, in the reign of queen Mary; and we have not been
able to discover any male-descendants of this family, after their forfeiture in
the year 1434.

ARMS.
A lion rampant.

STEWART Earl of MARCH.
AFTER the forfeiture of the earl of March in 1434, that earldom remained in
the crown, till king James III. bestowed it upon his brother Alexander duke of
Albany, anno 1478; but he being also forfeited for rebellion, that title was
again annexed to the crown, where it continued till king James VI. conferred it
upon,

Robert Stewart, second son of John earl of Lennox, by lady Anne Stewart his
wife, daughter of John earl of Athole.

This Robert was bred to the church, and, when a young man, was made provost of
the collegiate church of Dunbarton, Keith's bishops, p. 128.
and elected bishop of the sea of Caithness, anno 1542; but he having taken
part with his brother the earl of Lennox, against the earl of Arran, the
governor of the kingdom, he incurred the same forfeiture with his brother, was
obliged to abscond, Ibidem.
then went abroad, where he continued for the space of twenty-two years.

Upon his return home, he became protestant, but enjoyed the revenue and title
of bishop of Caithness as long as he lived, though he never was in priest's
orders.

After the death of the regent Murray, and the accession of his brother the
earl of Lennox to that supreme office, Ibidem.
he got a gift of the revenue of the priory of St. Andrews, which he also
retained all his life.

In the year 1576, the honors of earl of Lennox devolved upon him by the death
of his nephew Charles; but as he had no lawful issue of his own body, he
resigned that earldom in favors of his grand nephew Esme Stewart, lord
d'Aubigny; and in lieu thereof, he had the title of March conferred upon him,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
and got a charter under the great seal, Roberto Stewart totius comitatus
Marchiae, et dominii de Dunbar, etc. anno 1579.

He married lady Elizabeth Stewart, daughter of John fourth earl of Athole, and
lived privately at St. Andrews for many years; but dying without lawful issue
in the 70th year of his age, anno 1586, the title of March again returned to
the crown, where it lay dormant for one hundred and eleven years.

DOUGLAS Earl of MARCH.
THE next who enjoyed this ancient title was,

1. Lord WILLIAM DOUGLAS, second son of William duke of Queensberry, by Isabel,
daughter of William marquis of Douglas.

He being in great favor with king William, was created a peer of Scotland, by
the titles of earl of March, lord Douglas of Niedpath, Line, and Mannerhead; by
patent, haeredibus masculis de ejus corpore; Chart. in cancellaria.
quibus deficientibus, aliis haeredibus masculis et taliae content. in ejus
infeo^amentis te^ rrarum dominii de Niedpath, etc. dated 20th April 1697.

He married lady Jean Hay, daughter of John marquis of Tweeddale, by whom he
had three sons and three daughters.

1. William, his heir.

2. John Douglas of Broughton, Esquire; who was member of parliament for the county
of Tweeddale, but died without issue.

3. James Douglas of Stow, Esquire; who died also without issue.

1st daughter, lady Isabel.

2. Lady Mary.

3. Lady Jean.

He died anno 1705, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. WILLIAM, second earl of March, who married lady Anne Hamilton, eldest
daughter of John earl of Selkirk and Ruglen, by whom he had a son,

III. WILLIAM, third earl of March, who succeeded also to the honors of
Ruglen, in right of his mother, who was eldest daughter of the last earl, as
before observed.

This William, now earl of March and Ruglen, is one of the lords of the
bedchamber to king George III. and one of the sixteen Scotch peers to the
present British parliament.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st and 4th, the whole arms of the duke of Queensberry; 2d and 3d,
gules, a lion rampant argent, within a border of the last, charged with eight
cinquesoils of the first.

CREE^; on a wreath, a man's heart gules, ensigned with an imperial crown
proper, between two wings erect or.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter side a pegasus argent, the same as Queensberry; on
the sinister a lion, as in the arms.

MOTTO; Forward.

CHIEF SEAT.
At the castle of Niedpath, in the county of Tweeddale.

HUME Earl of MARCHMONT.
AS the origin and descent of the noble and ancient name of Hume is to be found
under the title of earl of Home, page 341 of this work, we proceed to the
immediate ancestor of this great branch of that illustrious house,

Sir Thomas Hume, dominus de eodem, the seventh generation of that ancient
family, in a direct male-line, flourished in the reigns of king Robert II. and
III. and married Nicolas Pepdie, heiress of Dunglass, by whom he had two sons,
1. sir George, his successor, ancestor of the earl of Home, 2. sir David, of
whom this noble family is lineally descended.

I. Sir DAVID HUME, second son of the said sir Thomas, got from his father the
lands of Thurston in East-Lothian, Chart. in archivis fam. de Wedderburn,
Godscroft's history, and Nisbet, vol. I p. 278.
and being a youth of a noble and undaunted spirit, was greatly esteemed by
Archibald earl of Douglas, who appointed him his scutifer, or armor-bearer, et
pro servitiis suis multipliciter impensis et impendendis, etc. made him a grant
of the lands and barony of Wedderburn, For his services done, and to be done.
which became the chief title of his family, whereupon he got a charter from
the said earl, anno 1413, which was afterward confirmed by a charter under the
great seal, terrarum baroniae de Wedderburn, Chart. in pub. archiv.
lying in the earldom of March, and shire of Berwick, to the said David, and
his heirs whatsomever, dated 19th of April 1430.

He married Alicia (but of what family we know not) by whom he had two sons.

1. David.

2. Alexander Hume, Esquire;.

II. DAVID, first son and apparent heir of sir David Hume of Wedderburn, Ibidem.
married Elizabeth Carmichael, and died before his father, leaving issue two
sons.

1. George.

2. Sir Patrick, ancestor of this noble family, of whom afterward.

III. GEORGE HUME of Wedderburn, first son of David, succeeded sir David his
grandfather, and got a charter of confirmation from king James II. of the lands
of Wedderburn, upon the resignation of the said sir David, to himself and
Alicia his wife in liserent; and, after their decease, Georgio Hume filio
quondam Davidis Hume, filii dicti Davidis resignantis, et haeredibus suis
masculis; Ibidem.
quibus desicientibus, Patricio Hume fratri germano dicti Georgii, et
haeredibus suis masculis; quibus deficientibus, Alexandro Hume fratri germano
dicti quondam Davidis Hume, etc. etc. The confirmation is dated at Stirling,
16th May 1450.

This George married Marian, eldest daughter and co-heiress of John Sinclair of
Herdmanston, Ibidem.
with whom he got a considerable accession to his estate, and by her had issue
a son,

David, who carried on the line of the family of Wedderburn, etc. etc. Vide
that title, in vol. II.

We now return to his brother,

III. Sir PATRICK HUME, second son of David, and grandson of sir David, first
baron of Wedderburn, married Margaret Sinclair, daughter and co-heiress of John
Sinclair of Herdmanston, with whom he got the lands and barony of Polwarth,
which afterward became one of the chief titles of this family.

We must here observe, that the lands and barony of Polwarth belonged to an
ancient and honorable family of that surname, designed Polwarths of that ilk,
who flourished with luster in the shire of Berwick, for several centuries, till
sir Patrick de Polwarth, knight, in the reign of king Robert II. died without
male issue, leaving only one daughter, Elizabeth Polwarth, his sole heiress,
who was married to sir John Sinclair of Herdmanston, one of the most ancient
families of that surname in Scotland. He got with her the lands and barony of
Polwarth, Ibidem.
Kimmergham, etc. which descended to his great grandson, John Sinclair of
Herdmanston, who dying also without maleissue, his estate of Herdmanston went
to his brother and heir-male, sir William Sinclair; but his lands of Kimmergham
and Polwarth went to his daughters, Marian and Margaret, both married to the
two brothers, George and sir Patrick Humes, as above observed; and, in
consequence of this marriage, sir Patrick and his heirs, have continued to
quarter the arms of Sinclair of Herdmanston and Polwarth of that ilk, with
their own, etc.

This sir Patrick was a man of great valor and fortitude, and a strenuous
desender of the borders, against the encroachments of the English.

By the said Margaret Sinclair, he left issue a son and successor,

IV. Sir PATRICK HUME, second baron of Polwarth, a man of great worth and
honor, a loyal and steady friend of king James III.

He being a man of great power and interest, had considerable offers from the
duke of Albany, (then in rebellion) to join his party; but nothing could tempt
him to go in with any measure contrary to the interest of his king and country.

He got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Patricio Hume de Polwarth, viginti una librat. terrarum de West-mains de
Lettim, etc. dated 2d February 1488.

He was possessed of a vast estate, and afterward got no less than seven
charters, under the great seal, Ibidem.
of different lands and baronies, Patricio Hume de Polwarth, militi, inter 1488
et 1501.

As he intended to go a pilgrimage, he obtained a safe conduct from king Henry
VII. Rymer, tom. XII. p. 548.
to pass through England, anno 1493.

He was in great favor with king James IV. Chart. in pub. archiv.
who constituted him comptroller of Scotland, anno 1499.

He married, 1st, Margaret, daughter of sir John Edmonston of that ilk, Ibidem.
by whom he had a son,

Alexander, his heir.

He married, 2dly, Helen, daughter of -- Schaw of Sauchie, widow of George
fifth lord Haliburton of Dirleton, which appears by (...) charter under the
great seal, Patricio Hume de Polwarth militi, Ibidem.
et Helenae Schaw dominae de Dirleton, suae sponsae, etc. etc. dated anno 1497.
By her he had a son,

George, ancestor of the Humes of Argathy, in Stirlingshire, -- ^lso four
daughters.

1. Alison, married to sir James Schaw of Sauchie.

2. Janet, married to sir Andrew Ker of Fernyhirst, ancestor of the marquis of
Lothian.

3. Marian, married to sir William Baillie of Lamington.

4. Margaret, who became a nun, and was lady abbess of North-Berwick. Ibidem.


This sir Patrick is thought to have married, 3dly, a natural daughter of king
James III. by a charter from king James IV. dilecto fratri suo Patricio Hume de
Polwarth, Haddi^gton's collections, p. 280.
of the lands of Strabraune, Auchintravie and Glenshean, in Perthshire, dated
1st May 1499.

He died anno 1504, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. ALEXANDER, third baron of Polwarth, who married, 1st, Margaret, daughter of
Robert second lord Crichton of Sanquhar, ancestor of the earl of Dumsries, and
got a charter under the great seal, Alexandro Hume de Polwarth, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
et Margaretae Crichton ejus spons^, terrarum de Brigamsheills, etc. dated 26th
July 1511. By her he had issue two sons.

1. Patrick, his heir.

2. Alexander, who got a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
Alexandro Hume, filio quondam Alexandri de Polwarth, of two mills in
North-Berwick, etc. dated anno 1546. Of him the Humes of Heugh and Rhodes are
descended.

He married, 2dly, Margaret, daughter of sir Robert Lauder of Bass, by whom he
had three daughters.

1. Margaret, married to Patrick Hepburn of Craig.

2. Catharine, married to Robert Pringle of that ilk.

3. Isabel, who betook herself to a religious life, and become lady abbess of
North-Berwick.

He died anno 1532, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. PATRICK, fourth baron of Polwarth, who got a charter under the great seal,
Ibidem.
Patricio Hume filio et haeredi Alexandri Hume de Polwarth, terrarum haroniae
de Polwarth, etc. dated anno 1536.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of sir Patrick Hepburn of Waughton, by whom he
had three sons and two daughters.

1. Patrick, his heir.

2. Sir Alexander, who became possessed of a considerable estate, and got a
charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
Alexandro filio Patricii Hume de Polwarth, officii balivatus monasterii de
North-Berwick, dated 18th March 1569. He got other two charters under the great
seal of different lands, Ibidem.
anno 1565 and 1569; but we can give no account of his posterity.

3. Mr. Adam, was the first protestant rector of the church of Polwarth, and a
man of great virtue and probity.

1st daughter Margaret, married to John Baillie of John's-kirk.

2. Anne, married to -- French of Thornydyke.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. PATRICK, fifth baron of Polwarth, who was a great promoter of the
reformation of religion, The original bond, penes ducem de Hamilton.
and was one of the Scotch barons who entered into a mutual league or bond of
association, to protect and defend the sincere preachers of the gospel, etc.
anno 1560.

Upon the breaking out of the civil war, he was upon the side of the young king
against the queen, Crawford's memoirs.
and got a dangerous wound in a conflict betwixt the two parties, at Cairny, on
2d June 1571.

He married Agnes, daughter of Alexander Hume of Manderston, Crawfurd's peerage.
by whom he had six sons and three daughters.

1. Sir Patrick, his heir.

2. Alexander, rector of Logie.

3. Gavin, ancestor of the Humes of Cleugh.

4. Sir John of Northberwick, who made a great figure in his time, was provost
of Edinburgh, anno 1591, Rymer, tom. XVI. p. 110.
and was sent ambassador to the court of England, anno 1593. He was ancestor of
the Humes of Castle-home, in the county of Fermannagh in Ireland, a family
which flourishes with luster in that kingdom to this day.

5. David Hume of Rowiestoun.

6. George Hume of Belyhose.

1st daughter, Jean, married to David Hume of Law.

2. Agnes, married to -- Edmonston of Woolmet.

3. Margaret, married to sir Thomas Cranston of Crosbie.

He lived to a great age, died anno 1592, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. Sir PATRICK, sixth baron of Polwarth, who, in his father's lifetime, got
three charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Patricio Hume apparenti de Polwarth, of many lands and baronies, dated in
1587, 1590, and 1591.

He got afterward another charter, Patricio Hume de Polwarth, Ibidem.
terrarum baroniae de Redbraes, etc. dated 18th March 1593.

He was in great favor with king James VI. who appointed him master of his
household, one of the gentlemen of his bedchamber, and one of the wardens of
the marches toward England; which last office was suppressed upon the union of
the two crowns, anno 1603.

He married Juliana, daughter of sir Thomas Ker of Fernyhirst, Crawfurd's
peerage.
sister of Andrew lord Jedburgh, and Robert earl of Somerset, by whom he had
three sons and three daughters.

1. Sir Patrick, his heir.

2. Thomas Hume of Coldstream.

3. Mr. George Hume of Kimmergham.

1st daughter, Elizabeth, married to sir James Carmichael of that ilk.

2. Jean, married to Christopher Cockburn of Chausly.

3. Sophia, married to Joseph Johnston of Hilton.

He died in June 1609, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. Sir PATRICK, 7th baron of Polwarth, who got a charter under the great
seal, Patricio Hume de Polwarth, Chart. in pub. archiv.
terrarum baroniae de Polwarth, cum molendino, etc. 31st July 1623.

This sir Patrick was also in great favor both with king James VI. and his son
king Charles I. He had a pension of 1000 l. sterling per annum settled on him
by the former, anno 1621, Crawfurd's peerage.
and was created a baronet by the latter, anno 1625.

He married Christian, daughter of sir Alexander Hamilton of Innerwick, by whom
he had two sons and two daughters.

1. Sir Patrick, afterward earl of Marchmont.

2. Alexander Hume, Esquire; a youth of great spirit, who betook himself to a
military life, and soon ^ose to the rank of a colonel, but died in the flower
of his age, without issue.

1st daughter Juliana, married to Richard Newton of that ilk in the county of
Berwick.

2. Anne, married to Alexander son of John Hume of Manderston.

He died in April 1648, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. Sir PATRICK HUME, eighth baron of Polwarth, who was scarce seven years old
at his father's death.

He had an education suitable to his birth, and was chosen knight for the shire
of Berwick, to the parliament 1665, where he soon discovered an extraordinary
genius, and great abilities. He strenuously opposed the court in every measure,
Lives of the offic. of state,
when he thought there was the least encroachment upon the liberties of his
country; and as the whole behavior and conduct of this great man, is fully
narrated in the lives of the officers of state, page 240, etc. we shall only
here briefly mention the most remarkable occurrences of his life.

In 1674, he went to London with the duke of Hamilton and earl of Tweeddale, to
apply for redress of some grievances during the duke of Lauderdale's
administration.

In 1675, some disturbances happening in the country, with regard to the
militia, etc. he protested and took instruments against it, in such bold and
daring terms, that the council, for his insolence, Ibidem.
(as they called it) first declared him incapable of all public trust, then
sent him prisoner to the tolbooth of Edinburgh, then to Dunbarton castle, and
from thence to the castle of Stirling, where he suffered a long and tedious
confinement, but was a^ last set at liberty by the interest of his relation the
countess of Northumberland; but he, believing he had several enemies at court,
retired first to England, then to Geneva, and at last to Holland, where he was
greatly caressed by the prince of Orange.

In 1685, he came over to Scotland with the earl of Argyle; and upon the
suppression of that rebellion, he narrowly escaped being made prisoner; he
again retired to Holland, where he remained, till he came over with the prince
of Orange in 1688.

He was chosen a member of the convention which sat down at Edinburgh in March
1789, was very instrumental in getting the crown settled upon their royal
highnesses, Chart. in cancellaria, heredibus masculis de corpore suo et eorum
haered. quibuscunque.
was immediately named one of the new privy council by king William and queen
Mary, and was raised to the dignity of the peerage, by the title of lord
Polwarth of Polwarth, the 26th December 1690; and by the patent; the king adds
to his armorial bearing, in a surtout, an orange proper, ensigned with an
imperial crown, Lives of the offic. of state, p. 243.
etc. as a lasting mark of his Majesty's esteem and regard for the family of
Polwarth.

He was constituted sheriff-principal of Berwick-shire, anno 1692, one of the
extraordinary lords of session, anno 1693, lord high chancellor of Scotland,
anno 1696, and was further dignified with the title of earl of Marchmont, Ibid*
et chart. penes com. de Marchmont.
viscount Blassonberry, lord Polwarth of Polwarth, Redbraes and Greenlaw, 23d
April 1697.

Soon thereafter he was named one of the commissioners of the treasury and
admiralty, and was appointed his majesty's high commissioner to the parliament,
Ibidem.
which met at Edinburgh, 19th July School.

Upon the accession of queen Anne to the crown, he was named one of the privy
council, and was appointed her majesty's high commissioner to the general
assembly of the kirk of Scotland, Ibidem.
anno 1702, and discharged his duty in all the high offices he enjoyed, with
great sufficiency, candor, and fidelity.

As his commissions of lord chancellor and sheriff of Berwick tell upon the
death of king William, her majesty queen Anne immediately conferred the first
upon the earl of Seafield, and the other upon the earl of Home. The earl of
Marchmont continued to act with the same public spirit as formerly, and in the
first parliament of queen Ange, anno 1703, he moved to bring in a bill, for
settling the succession on princess Sophia, duchess dowager of Hanover, the
next protestant heir; but this motion was dropped at that time.

He was a great promoter of the union, the chief motive whereof was the
protestant succession, than which he had nothing more at heart.

Upon the accession of king George I. to the throne, he was immediately
restored to the high sheriff-ship of Berwick, and made one of the lords of
police. He died, in the 84th year of his age, anno 1724.

By Grizel his wife, a daughter of sir Thomas Ker of Cavers, he had issue three
sons and four daughters.

1. Patrick, lord Polwarth, who, as lord high treasurer of Scotland, sat in the
parliament anno School. He married, Is It, Elizabeth, daughter of sir James Home of
Home-castle, in the kingdom of Ireland; 2dly, lady Jean, daughter of Charles
earl of Home, but died without issue, anno 1710.

2. Alexander, who succeeded his father.

3. Sir Andrew Hume of Kimmergham, who being bred to the law, became one of the
senators of the college of justice. He married Elizabeth, daughter of John
Douglas, Esquire; and had issue.

1st daughter, lady Grizel, married to George Baillie of Jerviswood, Esquire; one
of the commissioners of the treasury, and had issue.

2. Lady Anne, married to sir John Hall of Dunglass, baronet, without issue.

3. Lady Juliana, married to Charles Billingham, Esquire; and had issue.

4. Lady Jean, married to James lord Torphichen, and had issue.

XI. ALEXANDER, second earl of Marchmont, was a man of good parts, great
learning, and knowledge in the laws. He was chosen into the parliament of
Scotland, often before the union. In 1704, he was made one of the senators of
the college of justice in Scotland, and soon after one of the privy council and
exchequer. His place in the session he resigned in favors of his brother sir
Andrew, upon his being appointed, in March 1715, envoy extraordinary to the
courts of Denmark and Prussia. In December 1716, he was made clerk register for
Scotland.

In January 1721, he was appointed first ambassador in the congress to be held
at Cambray, and in March following, made his public entry into that city, with
a splendour and magnificence becoming the British nation.

In 1725, he, by a commission from the king, was invested with the most noble
order of the thistle.

In 1726, he was sworn one of the privy council to his majesty.

In 1733, he was removed from all his offices.

He married Margaret, daughter and heiress of sir George Campbell of Cesnock,
on which account this family has added the name of Campbel to that of Hume. By
her he had four sons and four daughters.

1. George, who died in 1724.

2. Patrick, who died that same year.

3. Hugh, now earl of Marchmont.

4. Alexander, who was elected representative of the shire of Berwick, for the
parliament that met in 1734-5, and was so continued to his death. In 1756, he
was appointed lord clerk register of Scotland for life, He married Mrs.
Elizabeth Perris of London, and died in 1760, without issue.

1st daughter, lady Anne, married to sir William Purves baronet, and has issue.

2. Lady Grizel, died unmarried.

3. Lady Jean, married to James Nimmo, Esquire;

4. Lady Margaret, died unmarried.

He died anno 1740, and was succeeded by his son,

XII. HUGH, third earl of Marchmont. When lord Polwarth, he was elected the
representative of the town of Berwick, in the house of commons, to the
parliament 1734-5.

In 1747, he was appointed first lord of the police in Scotland, and in 1750,
was chosen one of the sixteen peers for Scotland, in the room of the earl of
Crawfurd deceast.

He married, 1st, Anne Western of the city of London, by whom he had a son, who
died young, and three daughters.

1. Lady Anne, married to sir John Paterson of Eccles, baronet.

2. Lady Margaret.

3. Lady Diana, married to Walter Scott of Harden, Esquire;

He married 2dly, Elizabeth Crompton of the city of London, by whom he has a
son,

Alexander, lord Polwarth.

ARMS.
Quarterly, first grand quarter counter-quartered, 1st and 4th vert, a lion
rampant argent; 2d and 3d, argent, three swallows of the first; 2d argent,
three piles issuing from the chief ingrailed, gules; 3d, argent a cross
ingrailed, sable; the 4th grand quarter as the first, and over all, as a
surtout, an escutcheon argent, charged with an orange ensigned with an imperial
crown, all proper, as a coat of augmentation given by king William III.

CREST; on a wreath, a man's heart, out of which issues a dexter arm erect,
grasping a scimeter, all proper.

SUPPORTERS; ^wo lions reguardant, argent, armed and langued gules.

MOTTO; Fides probata coronat.

CHIEF SEATS.
In the town of Berwick upon Tweed; at Redbraes in the county of Berwick; and
in Green-street Grosvenor-square, London.

KEITH Earl MARISHAL.
HISTORY and remotest antiquity are agreed, that the family of Keith is one of
the most ancient and illustrious the Scotch nation ever has produced: a family,
fruitful in a race of great men, who, not indebted to the nobility of their
origin, have always reflected greater glory on their progenitors, on the
hereditary titles and offices they enjoyed, than they ever deduced from them.

Our best antiquaries derive their origin from a certain great man called
Robert, who performed glorious exploits against the Danes, when they invaded
Scotland with a numerous army in the reign of king Malcolm II. Cambden,
Abercrombie, vol. 1. p. 207. Stewart's hist. of the royal family, and many
other authors.
though some trace their origin much higher; however, this hero remarkaby
distinguished himself at the battle of Barry or Camustone in Angus, where, with
his own hand, he killed the famous Camus, general and champion of the Danish
army, whereby the Scots gained a complete victory, anno 1010.

King Malcolm, in recompense of his great and signal services, bestowed upon
him several lands, particularly the barony of Keith in East-Lothian, from which
his posterity assumed their surname. He also appointed him hereditary great
marishal of Scotland, which high office has continued in his family, and has
never been enjoyed by any other since that time.

Of this great warrior was lineally descended, Herveus, or Hervieus de Keth, of
whom we have many authentic documents in the archives of the kingdom, which
sufficiently prove that he was great marishal of Scotland, and proprietor of
the lands and barony of Keth; and as he was undoubted progenitor of this
illustrious family, from him we deduce their descent by unquestionable vouchers.

I. HERVEUS de KETH, great marishal of Scotland, flourished in the reign of
king David I. who succeeded to the crown anno 1124, and died anno 1153.

This Herveus had a dispute with the abbot and convent of Kelso, Chartulary of
Kelso, penes MacFarlane, p. 72.
who claimed the church of Keth, in the village of this Herveus, designed
Herveus de Keth marescallus regis Scotiae, at a convention held on that cause,
to which J. bishop of Glasgow, and R. abbot of Jedworth, are witnesses, inter
annos 1164 et 1174, in which last year the bishop died.

That there had been many meetings and conventions about this contest,
sufficiently appears from the writs in the chartulary of Kelso.

At last the pope interposed his authority, and Joceline bishop of Glasgow, and
Osbert prior of Paisley, were delegated by him as judges of the plea, Ibid. p.
73.
which had long sublisted between the monks of Kelchou, and Herveus great
marishal, about the church of Keth, in the village of the said Herveus, etc.
Their sentence in favors of the monastery was confirmed by Richard bishop of
St. Andrews, who died anno 1178; Ibid. p. 74.
and Joceline having been constituted bishop of Glasgow, anno 1174, Ibidem.
the controversy must have been determined between these two periods.

It may here be observed, that of old there were two Keiths; that which
belonged to this family was promiscuously called Keith-Hervey, Ibid. p. 67, and
Chart. in pub. archiv.
and Keith-Marishal; the other, which sometime belonged to the Frasers, was
called Keith-Symons, or Keith-Hundely (now Humby;) but the great marishals soon
became proprietors of both, as will be shown hereafter.

Herveus de Keth lived to a great age, died betwixt the years 1190 and 1195,
and was father of

II. MALCOLMUS de KETH, who, in a donation to the monastery of Arbroath,
Chartulary of Arbroath, penes MacFarlane, p. 105.
is designed son of Herveus de Keth, great marishal of Scotland, anno 1178.

And in a donation to the monastery of Kelso, Chartulary of Kelso, p 127, 128,
and 132.
concerning the teinds of the miln of of Molla, Malcolm, son of Herveus de
Keth, great marishal of Scotland, is a witness anno 1185.

He is also mentioned in another donation to the same monastery, Ibid. p. 228.
together with Robert de Ednem, Thomas de Heriz, etc. before the year 1190.

This Malcolm appears to have died before his father, for we never find him
designed great marishal. He left issue two sons.

1. Philip de Keth.

2. David de Keth, who enjoyed a share of the marishal's office with his
brother, Chartulary of Arbroath and Cambuskenneth, and Dalrymple's collections.
as in several donations to the monasteries of Arbroath and Cambu^kenneth, we
find Philip and David de Keth, designed brothers and great marishals of our
lord the king, between the years 1195 and 1199. This David had a son Richard,
Origin. writs penes MacFarlane, vol. II. p. 91, 92, etc. ad ann. 1^21, 1229,
and 1236.
who is said to have been progenitor of those who assumed Marishal for their
surname, of whom there were several families in Scotland afterward; but some
historians have most erroncously taken them for great marishals of Scotland,
though it is most certain that that office was never enjoyed by any family but
the Keiths, as before observed.

III. PHILIP de KETH, great marishal of Scotland, eldest son of Malcolm,
succeeded his grandfather, Chartulary o Arbroath, p 153.
and in a donation to the monastery of Arbroath, is designed Philip de Keth,
great marishal of our sovereign lord the king, about the year 1195.

Also in a charter of king William, of a donation to the monastery of
Dunsermline, Chartulary of Dunsermline, p. 194.
Philippus de Keth, great marishal of Scotland, is particularly mentioned,
before the year 1210. Original book of writs, chartulary of Cambuskenneth, etc.


He is likewise designed great marishal of Scotland, in several other authentic
writs before the year 1214.

He married Eda, daughter and heiress of Hugo de Lorens, Chartulary of Kelso,
penes eundem.
by Eda his wife, daughter and heiress of Simon Fraser of Keth-Hundely, with
whom he got the lands of the other Keth, whereby he became proprietor of both,
and by her lest issue a son and successor,

IV. HERVEUS de KETH, Chartulary of Coldingham, penes eund, p. 29.
who, in a donation to the monastery of Coldinghame, is designed great marishal
of Scotland, son of Philip great marishal, etc. anno 1222.

He is designed in the same manner, Origin. writs, p. 59, v. II.
in a donation to the monastery of Arbroath, in the year 1226.

This Hervens, (now proprietor of Keth-Humbie) confirmed all the donations of
the church of Keth, Chartulary of Kelso, p. 67.
together with the commonty and easements of all the lands of Keth, etc. made
by Simon Fraser to the monastery of Kelso, about the year 1236.

All which donations, with the lands, forest, etc. Ibid. p. 71.
lying in the tenement of the said Herveus de Keth, are confirmed by a charter
from king Alexander II. anno 1238.

He died in the end of the reign of the king Alexander II. and left issue a son,

V. Sir JOHN, who succeeded him, and is designed great marishal of Scotland,
when he confirms all the donations of his predecessors, and particularly those
ceded to the monastery of Kelso, by the determination of the late controversy,
and as they are contained in the charter of Herveus great marishal of Scotland,
his father, in king Alexander II's charter, anno 1238 before mentioned, etc. He
likewise added to that donation some other lands in his ground of Keth, all
contained in one charter, which is without date, Ibid. p. 69.
but by the witnesses appears to have been about the year 1250.

He also confirms a donation to the monastery of Soltray, Chartulary of Soltray.
of the lands of Johnston in East-Lothian, of which he was superior, in the
beginning of the reign of king Alexander III.

He married a daughter of the earl of Buchan, by whom he had two sons.

1. Sir William, his heir.

2. Sir Adam de Keth, Chartulary of Soltray.
who being bred to the church, was rector of the church of KethMarishal, anno
1292.

He died before the year 1270, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. Sir WILLIAM KETH, great marishal of Scotland, Chartulary of Levenax, penes
MacFarlane, p. 54.
in a charter of confirmation by Malcolm earl of Lennox, of a donation to the
monastery of Paisley, sir William de Keth, sir William Livingston, knights,
Gilbert Drummond and Patrick Lindesay are witnesses 1270.

The Keiths by this time were become very numerous in Scotland, and we find
many of that surname mentioned in authentic documents, whom we can connect with
no particular family. viz.

Sir Robert Keth, Chartulary of Drybrugh.
anno 1240.

Robertus de Keth, in the reign of king Alexander III.

Bernard de Keth, Chartulary of Newbottle.
anno 1274.

Philip de Keth, with Mary his wife, anno 1296, as in Rymer's foedera angliae.

Alisandre de Keth, in the same year, as in Prynne.

Sir Edward Keith of Synton.

Sir Walter Keth.

And many others needless to be here inserted.

Sir William married Barbara, M. S. hist. of the family.
daughter of Adam lord Seton, ancestor of the earl of Winton, by whom he had
three sons, and one daughter.

1. Sir Robert.

2. Sir Richard de Keth, ancestor of the family of Galston.

3. Philip de Keth, Chartulary of Soltray.
who being bred to the church, was rector of Bygar.

His daughter, --, was married to William lord Douglas, Home's hist. of Douglas.
called the Hardy, ancestor to the duke of Douglas.

He died before the year 1296, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. Sir ROBERT KETH, great marishal of Scotland, who confirms to the
monastery of Soltray the tenement of Johnston, etc. by a charter, in which sir
Richard de Keth, Knt. sir Philip de Keth, Chartulary of Soltray.
rector of the church of Bygar, his brothers, sir Adam de Keth, rector of
Keth-Marishal, his uncle, and John de Keth, his son and heir, are witnesses,
about the year 1296.

He was a man of great parts, a worthy patriot, and had a large share of the
troubles wherewith his country was oppressed for many years, and embraced every
opportunity of exerting his courage with the loyalists, in the reign of king
Robert Bruce.

When king Edward I, of England thought he had completed the conquest of
Scotland, and pretending to show them a little favor, he allowed them to choose
ten of their own countrymen to represent them in parliament to be held at
London, Abercrombie vol. I. p. 520
of which number sir Robert Keth the marishal was one, anno 1304.

He was soon thereafter appointed one of the guardians of Scotland by king
Edward, Rymer, tom. II. p. 970.
in the year 1305.

And though he was for some time on the Baliol's side, Abercrombie, vol. I. p.
637.
when the country was overrun by the English, yet no sooner did king Robert
begin to assert his title to the crown, than he joined him, was faithful and
steady in his interest ever after, and was one of his chief favorites and
fastest friends.

He was very instrumental in gaining the battle of Innerury, Chart. in pub.
arch. et penes comitem de Marishal.
which was amongst the first of king Robert's conquests, for which he got a
grant of several lands, and particularly a royal seat called Hall-forest, etc.

He was appointed justiciar of Scotland benorth the river Forth, Chartulary of
(...) and sir Rob. Si^bald s history of F^fe.
and is designed the noble marishal of Scotland, and justiciar beyond the river
Forth, in the year 1309.

He had a considerable command at the battle of Bannockburn, Nisbet's append.
p. 4.
and contributed not a little to the king's obtaining that glorious victory,
anno 1314.

He was one of the magnates Scotiae (or Scoch nobles or grandee^) who signed
that famous letter to the pope, Fordun, vol. II. p. 275.
asserting the independency of Scotland, anno 1320.

And being no less an able statesman than a brave soldier, Rymer, tom. III. p.
809.
was that same year sent ambassador extraordinary to the court of France, to
negotiate some affairs of the utmost importance, and he acquitted himself
entirely to the king's satisfaction.

He was afterward one of the commissioners appointed to treat with the
English; Ibid. p. 102^.
a truce was concluded, and he was one of the guarantees, anno 1323.

In a donation of king Robert to the monastery of Coldinghame, Robert de Keth,
Chartulary of Coldinghame p. 375.
great marishal of Scotland, is a witness, anno 1328.

And in another charter of king Robert, confirming all the donations of his
predecessors to the monastery of Kelso, Chartulary of Keho, p. 452.
Gilbert de Haya, lord high constable, and Robert de Keth, great marishal of
Scotland, are witnesses, in the 23d year of king Robert's reign, anno 1329.

He married Barbara Douglas (but of what family we know not) by whom he had
issue two sons. Nisbet's append. p. ^


1. John, his apparent heir.

2. Sir William Keth, a brave and valiant knight, who performed many gallant
actions against the enemies of his country. He was governor of Berwick, Rymer,
tom. IV. p. 566, 594, etc.
which he desended to the last extremity, and is often designed custos Bervici
by the English, anno 1333, 1334, etc. He was appointed by the estates of
Scotland ambassador extraordinary to the court of England, Ibid. p 639, and 677.
and obtained a safe conduct for himself and sixty horsemen in his retinue,
anno 1335, and was at last killed at the siege of Stirling, anno 1336.

Sir Robert was killed in his old age, with most of his kindred and clan,
Boethius, Buchanan, Abercrombie.
fighting gallantly for his king and country at the battle of Duplin, anno
1332, cum plerisque ex familia, nobilibus, etc. says Boethius.

VIII. JOHN de KETH, designed son and heir of sir Robert Keth, great marishal
of Scotland, in the confirmation of the lands of Johnston to the monastery of
Soltray, Haddington's collections.
before noticed, died in the year 1324, which appears by an entail made by his
father of his whole estate in favors of his grandson sir Robert, and the
heirs-male of his body, in the year 1325.

IX. Sir ROBERT de KETH, great marishal of Scotland, son of John, succeeded his
grandfather in the year 1332, and inherited all his virtues.

He was no less a steady friend to king David than his grandfather had been to
king Robert, Book of original writs belonging to MacFarlane chartularies of
Soitray and A^erdeen, Haddington's collect. etc.
and performed many brave actions against the English. He was designed great
marishal of Scotland, and high sheriff of Aberdeen in many authentic writs
still extant, between the years 1335 and 1342.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir Gilbert Hay of Errol, Charta penes
comitem de Errol.
lord high constable of Scotland, and ancestor of the earl of Errol, by whom he
had a son,

Sir Edward, -- and two daughters.

1. -- married sir Robert Maitland of Thirlestane and Leithington, ancestor of
the earl of Lauderdale.

2. --, married --, Irvine of Drum.

The marishal accompanied king David in his expedition to England, Fordun, vol.
II. p. 343.
and lost his life in the service of his country at the battle of Durh^un,
where his royal master was taken prisoner, in the year 1346.

He was succeeded by his son,

X. Sir EDWARD KETH, great marishal of Scotland, Chartulary of Aberdeen, pene,
MacFarlane, p. 158.
who was designed sir Edward de Keth, knight, in an inquisition, where his
father is designed Robert de Keth, great marishal of Scotland, etc. in the year
1341.

He married, 1st, Christian, eldest daughter of sir John Menteith, by lady
Helen his spouse, Writs of the fam. of M^art
daughter of Gratney earl of Mar. By her he had issue only one daughter,

Janet, married to Thomas lord Erskine, ancestor of the earls of Mar, of the
surname of Erskine.

He married, Nisbet's append. p. 4.
2dly, Isabel de Keth, said to be a daughter of the family of Galstoun, by whom
he had two sons, and one daughter. Chart. in pub. archiv. and chartulary of
Arbroath, (where he is designed son of sirEdward, and brother of William great
marishal of Scotland, in the year 1354) and Aberdeen, p. 272, in the year 1378.


1. Sir William, his heir.

2. John, who married Mariota de Cheyne, only daughter of Reynald de Cheyne of
Innerugie, widow of John Douglas of Strabrock, by whom he got he got the lands
and baronies of Innerugie, Strabrock, etc. and was ancestor of the Keiths of
Innerugie, etc. of whom sir Robert Keith of Ludquhairn, colonel of a regiment
of foot in his Danish majesty's service, is now the male representative.

His daughter, Catharine, married Alexander Barclay, Charta penes dom. de Urie,
ad ann. 1351.
ancestor of the family of Urie.

He died before the year 1350, and was succeended by his eldest son,

XI. Sir WILLIAM, Chartulary of Arbroath, v. II. p. 87.
who is designed great marishal of Scotland, son of sirEdward de Keth, etc. in
the year 1354.

He was a man of great parts, and was often employed in negotiations of
importance, in the reign of king David II. and always acquitted himself with
fidelity and honor.

William, great marishal of Scotland, Rymer, tom. VI. p. 43.
was nominated one of the commissioners by the estates of the kingdom, to treat
with the English about king David's liberation in the year 1357, which was
happily accomplished that same year.

After the king's return, he was again sent to England upon king David de Bruce
his affairs in the year 1358, Ibid. p. 8^.
and got a safe conduct from the king of England, for himself and sixty
horsemen in his retinue.

He was a third time appointed one of the commissioners to the court of
England, Ibid. p. 633.
when a truce was concluded to last for fourteen years after 1369; and the
marishal was one of the guarantees of the treaty.

In a parliament called by king Robert II. John of Carrick, Chartulary of
Aberdeen, p. 443.
lord chancellor, Walter de Bygar, lord chamberlain, James de Lindsay, nephew
to the king, William de Keth, great marishal of Scotland, and several others,
are particularly mentioned in a parliament held at Scoon, 3d April 1374.

This sir William, with Robert de Keth his son, Ibid. p. 219. 226, 263, and 272.
are mentioned in several authentic writs in the chartulary of Aberdeen, in the
years 1378, 1382, and 1393, etc.

He married Margaret, only daughter and sole heiress of sir John Fraser, by
whom he got a vast estate in the county of Kincardin: by her he had issue three
sons, and four daughters.

1. John de Keth.

2. Robert, afterward great marishal of Scotland.

3. Alexander Keth of Crabstane, Balmedie, etc. who, in the chartulary of
Aberdeen, is designed son of sir William the great marishal, Chartulary of
A^erdeen, p. 288.
and brother of the duke of Albany, in the year 1403, and had the command of
the horse at the battle of Harlaw, against Donald of the Isles, in the year
1411.

1st daughter, Stewart's history, p. 114.
Muriella, married to Robert duke of Albany, governor of Scotland, etc.

2. Janet, married to Philip Arbuthnot of that ilk.

3. Christian, married to sir William Lindsay of Byres.

4. Elizabeth, married to sir Adam Gordon of Huntly.

John de Keth, first son and heir apparent of sir William, great marishal of
Scotland, married a daughter of king Robert II. and shared the office of great
marishal with his father.

He got a charter from king Robert, "to his beloved son John, great marishal of
Scotland, son of William great marishal, and Margaret Fraser, Charta in
archivis regis Roberti II.
etc. all and sundry the lands and possessions, etc. which belonged to the
said great marishal and Margaret, etc. reserving to the said William, during
all the days of his life, the office of great marishal, etc. etc. etc." dated
at Perth, 7th January 1374.

He died in the year 1375, leaving issue a son,

Robert de Keth, who died also before his grandfather, leaving no male-issue,
and but one daughter, Jean, married to Alexander first earl of Huntly, who died
likeways without issue, which ended the whole descent of John^ eldest son of
William, great marishal of Scotland.

The marishal lived to a great age, and dying betwixt the year 1406 and 1408,
was succeeded by his son,

XII. Sir ROBERT KEITH, great marishal of Scotland, Chart. in pub. archiv.
second son of sir William, who, upon his father's resignation, got a charter
under the great seal, "to Robert Keith, son of William great marishal, of the
lands of the forest of Cowie, etc." in the year 1376.

And another charter of the barony of Strathachyne, Ibidem.
and several other lands, upon the resignation of his father the marishal, and
Margaret Fraser his mother, dated same year.

He got also, upon his father's resignation, the lands and barony of Troup,
Ibidem.
and sheriffship of Kincardin, upon which he got a charter from Robert duke of
Albany, governor of Scotland, dated in 1406.

He then got a charter from Robert duke of Albany, "to our beloved brother
Robert Keith, Ibidem.
lord of Troup, son and heir of William the great marishal, etc." who now
resigns all his lands and offices to him and the heirs-male of his body, etc.
etc. etc. The resignation is dated 20th September 1406, and the charter of
confirmation dated 12th March thereafter.

This Robert is designed sir Robert Keith, knight, Ibidem.
great marishal of Scotland, in a charter under the great seal hereafter
narrated, dated in the year 1408.

He made a great figure in the reign of king James I. Rymer, tom. X. p. 125.
and was one of the commissioners appointed by the estates of the kingdom, to
treat about his majesty's liberation (who was then a prisoner in England) in
the year 1421; and when it was accomplished, Ibid. p. 3^7.
the great marishal was one of the hostages for payment of the ransom, in 1423.

The estates of the hostages were then valued, Ibid. p. 327.
and the marishal's was estimated at eight hundred merks sterling per annum, a
very considerable estate in those days.

He married lady Elizabeth Lindsay, daughter of David earl of Crawfurd, by whom
he had three sons, and two daughters.

1. Sir William, his heir.

2. John de Keith, who got from his father the lands and barony of Troup, by a
charter of confirmation under the great seal, "to John Keith, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
son of Robert the great marishal, and the heir-male of his body; which
failing, to the heirs-male of Alexander his son, etc. reserving the superiority
to his own heirs, the great marishals, etc." The resignation is dated in the
year 1408, and the confirmation in 1413.

3. Alexander de Keith, of whose succession we can give no account.

1st daughter, --, married to Hugh Arbuthnot of that ilk.

2. Elizabeth, married to Alexander Irvine of Drum.

He died before the year 1442, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. Sir WILLIAM, afterward lord Keith, and earl marishal, who made an
entail of his whole estate, in which he is designed great marishal of Scotland,
"to, and in favors of Robert his eldest son, Ibidem.
and the heirs-male of his body; which failing, to William his second son, and
the heirs-male of his body; then to John his third son, and Alexander his
fourth son, and the heirs-male of their bodies, etc." which is confirmed by a
charter under the great seal, in the year 1442. Ibidem.


He was a man of singular worth, integrity and honor, and highly esteemed by
his majesty king James II. who raised him to the dignity of the peerage, first
by the title of lord Keith, about the year 1450, then by that of earl marishal,
about the year 1455.

In the parliament called by the king, Records of parlt. in the lawiers library
Edinburgh.
on 6th July 1451, we find him designed lord Keith, and great marishal of
Scotland.

He was appointed one of the guarantees of a treaty of peace with the English,
Rymer, tom. XI p. 403.
in the year 1457, and sat in the parliament called to meet 4th July 1458,
Records of parliament.
and was then designed earl marishal.

He married Mary, daughter of James first lord Hamilton, by lady Eupheme
Graham, daughter of Patrick earl of Strathearn, Charta penes ducem de Hamilton.
sister of Malise earl of Menteith, great grandchild of king Robert II. both
by father and mother, and widow of Archib^ld earl of Douglas and duke of
Turenne, by whom he had issue four sons, and two daughters.

1. Robert, designed master of Keith, who was sherif^-depure of Kincardin,
Writs of the fam. of Skeen.
in conjunction with Alexander Ogilvie of Innerquharity, in the year 1444. He
married a daughter of lord Seton, by whom he had one daughter, Jean, married,
1st, to lord Gray; 2dly, to Alexander lord Gordon. He died without male-issue,
anno 1446.

2. William, his father's heir.

3. John.

4. Alexander. -- These two last are mentioned in their fathers entail
above-recited but we cannot give any further account o^ them.

1st daughter, lady Janet, married, 1st, to John Lesly, Chart. penes comitem^
de Rothes.
grandson and apparent heir to George earl of Rothes; and, 2dly, to Thomas
Stewart lord Innermeath.

2. Lady ^gidia, married to James second lord Forbes, and had issue.

He died before the year 1476, and was succeeded by his second son,

XIV. WILLIAM, second earl marishal, who got a charter, Chart. in pub. archiv.
under the great seal, of the l^^ds of Garvalt, etc. in the year 1476.

And got charters of several other lands and baronies, Ibidem.
betwixt the years 1480 and 1508.

He sat in the parliament called by king James III. 1st July 1476, and in all
the succeeding parliaments of that prince's ^^^bulent reign; Records of
parliament.
and being a man o^ found judgment, and steady loyalty, he endeavored, by all
means imaginable, to allay the heats which then subsisted among the nobility,
and at last brought the king to his untimely end.

He married Mariota, daughter of -- lord Erskine, by whom he had two sons.

1. William.

2. Robert de Keith, who, in a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
is designed brother-german to William earl marishal, in the year 1511.

He is said to have had another son,

John, of whom Robert Keith, Esquire; envoy extraordinary at the court of Russia,
is lineally descended.

He died before 1510, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. WILLIAM, third earl marishal, who made a mortification to the Blackfriars
of Aberdeen, Writs of the college of Aberdeen.
for the safety of the souls of himself and Elizabeth Gordon his spouse, of
William de Keith earl marishal, his father, and M^riot Erskine his mother, etc.
in the year 1510.

He assisted at the parliament called by king James IV. Records of parliament.
to meet at Edinburgh that year.

He was likeways a faithful and loyal subject both to king James IV. Chart. in
pub archiv.
and V. and got charters, under the great seal, of several lands and baronies.

He gave a charter to sir William Ogilvie of Strathearn, Ibidem.
confirmed by a charter under the great seal, to which William Keith of Troup,
Gilbert Keith of Pittendrum, his second and third sons, and Robert Keith his
brother-german, are witnesses, 6th March 1511.

He married, Contract penes ducem de Gordon, ad ann. 1482.
in his father's lifetime, lady Elizabeth Gordon, daughter of Alexander earl of
Huntly, by whom he had four sons, and five daughters.

1. Robert, lord Keith.

2. William de Keith, to whom his father gave the lands and ba^ony of Troup,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
upon which he got a charter under the great seal in the year 1493. He was
killed with his brother, at the battle of Flowdon, without issue.

3. Gilbert de Keith, who got from his father the lands of Pittendrum; Ibidem.
but afterward resigned them, Precept of (...) of the lands of Pittendrum,
Pitblae, etc. dilec^o filio nostro, Alexandro Keith, quas Gilbertus filius
noster in manus nostras in resignavit, etc.
and got the lands of Troup upon the death of his brother.

4. Alexander de Keith, who obtained from his father the lands of Pi^tendrum,
which his brother had resigned. Of this Alexander are deseeded Alexander Keith,
in the East India company's service, and Robert, his brother, an officer in the
guards, who are grandson^ of Alexander Keith, late sheriff-depute of the
Mearns: Nisbet's append. p. 6.
also Alexander Keith of Ravelston, Esquire; in the county of Edinburgh.

1st daughter, Charta penes (...) de Montrose, ad ann. 1516.
lady Janet, married to William earl of Montrose.

2. Lady Elizabeth, Chart. in pub. archiv ad annum 1526.
married to William lord Sinclair.

3. Lady Jean, married to John lord Glammis, ancestor of the earl of
Strathmore. Ibidem.


4. Lady Agnes, Ibid. et chart. penes famil. de Douglas.
married to sir Archibald Douglas of Glenbervie, ancestor of the duke of
Douglas, etc.

5. Lady Beatrix, Lives of the offic. of state.
married to Alexander Fraser of Philorth, ancestor of lord Salton.

When John duke of Albany, governor of Scotland, went to France, to renew the
league with king Francis I. 1520, William earl marishal had the custody of the
young king James V. in the castle of Edinburgh, in the earl of Mar's absence,
in which trust he behaved so well, that the king ever after highly esteemed
him, Chart. in pub. archiv.
and granted him many charters, with great privileges and jurisdictions.

He died about the year 1530. Privy seal.


XVI. ROBERT, lord Keith, first son and apparent heir of William third earl
marishal, a man of great spirit and magnanimity, married lady Elizabeth
Douglas, Charta penes comitem de Morton.
daughter of John earl of Morton, by whom he had two sons and two daughters.

1. William, his grandfather's heir.

2. Robert de Keith, commendator of Deer, ancestor of lord Dingwall. Vide title
Dingwall.

1st daughter, Elizabeth, Chart. in pub. archiv.
married to George earl of Huntly.

2. Christian, Writs of the family of Arbuthnot.
married to sir Robert Arbuthnot of that ilk.

He accompanied king James IV. to the fatal field of Flowdon, where he lost his
life with his royal master in the 1513.

XVII. WILLIAM, fourth earl marishal, eldest son of Robert lord Keith,
succeeded his grandfather.

He got a charter under the great seal, containing a novo damus, confirming,
erecting, etc. his lands in the northern counties; also the lands and manours
of Kincardine, with the office of constable of the same, Chart. in pub. archiv.
etc. dated in the year 1531.

He got also charters of diverse other lands. Ibidem.


He was a man of good parts, great integrity, and in high favor with queen
Mary, who nominated him one of the twelve peers, by whom the affairs of the
nation were to be managed.

He carried with him all his friends and followers, who were fit to bear arms,
to the bloody battle of Pinkie, where many of them were slain, in the year 1547.

He was a great promoter of the reformation, but opposed all irregular
proceedings in that affair.

He married Margaret Keith, daughter and coheiress of sir William Keith of
Innerugie, Privy seal.
by whom he got an opulent fortune; upon which he got charters, Ibid. et chart.
in pub. archiv. and Had lington's collections, page 92 and 93, etc.
to him and her, of lands lying in the counties of Caithness, Inverness, Elgin,
Banff, Lithgow, Kincardine, etc. in the years 1538 and 1540.

By her he had issue two sons and seven daughters.

1. William, lord Keith.

2. Robert, commendator of Deer, afterward lord Altree. Vide title Altree.

1st daughter, lady Anne, married, 1st, to James earl of Murray, regent of
Scotland, natural brother to queen Mary, to whom she had two daughters. Chart.
under the great seal.
She married, 2dly, Colin earl of Argyle, and was mother of earl Archibald.

2. Lady Elizabeth, Ibidem.
married to sir Alexander Irvine of Drum.

3. Lady Alison, Haddington's collections.
married to Alexander lord Abernethy of Salton.

4. Lady Mary, Chart. in archivis (...) VI.
married to sir John Campbell of Calder.

5. Lady Beatrix, Haddington's collections.
married to John Allardice of that ilk.

6. Lady Janet, married to James Crichton of Frendraught. Ibidem.


7. Lady Margaret, Ibidem.
married to sir John Kennedy of Blairquhan. -- They all had issue.

While queen Mary was prisoner in England, he meddled in no public affairs, but
retired to his castle of Dunotter, from whence he never stirred abroad, and was
therefore nicknamed, by the common people, William in the Tower. And as he
lived there at a very small expense, and died in a good old age, in the year
1581, he left behind him an immense estate to his grandson and heir, George,
afterward earl marishal, son of,

XVIII. WILLIAM, lord Keith, commonly called master of Marishal, first son and
apparent heir of the above William. He got charters under the great seal, in
his father's lifetime, Chart. in pub. archiv.
to William master of Marishal, of a great many lands.

He was at the battle of Pinkie with his father, where he was taken prisoner,
and confined till he paid a ransom of 2000 l. sterling, upon which he was
liberate, Records of parliament, and Keith's history.
sat in the parliament 1560, and was appointed one of the privy council by
queen Mary.

He married lady Elizabeth Hay, daughter of George earl of Errol, Privy seal.
by whom he had four sons and three daughters.

1. George, who succeeded his grandfather.

2. William, a youth of great hopes, who accompanied his brother when he went
to his travels, but was unhappily killed in a scuffle at Geneva, when but a
very young man.

3. Robert, who got from his father the lands of Benholm, which he afterward
sold to John Gordon, from whom they were bought back by George earl marishal,
this Robert's eldest brother. Ibidem.


4. John de Keith, of whose posterity we can give no account.

1st daughter, Mary, married to sir Robert Arbuthnot of that ilk.

2. Barbara, married to Alexander Forbes of Pitsligo.

3. Margaret, married to sir William Keith of Ludquhairn.

He was one of the privy council to queen Mary in 1561 and 1569, Ibidem.
as before noticed, and died before his father in 1580.

XIX. GEORGE, fifth earl marishal, eldest son of William the master, succeeded
his grandfather anno 1581, and got charters under the great seal of a vast
number of lands, Chart. in pub. archiv.
to George earl marishall, etc.

He was a man of fine natural parts, which, by the care of his grandfather,
were greatly improved by a liberal education. He studied several years with the
best masters at the universities abroad; and, in the course of his travels, he
visited most of the courts of Europe, in the space of about seven years.

When he returned to his native country, he soon gained the esteem of every
body, and was acknowledged to be one of the finest gentlemen of the age.

He became greatly in favor with king James VI. who appointed him one of his
privy council.

In the year 1589, he was sent ambassador extraordinary to the court of
Denmark, to espouse princess Anne, a daughter of that crown, in name of king
James VI. and being possessed of one of the greatest estates in this country,
he appeared with all the luster and magnificence with which the wealth of
Scotland could adorn him, and that mostly upon his own charges. He had in his
retinue Andrew Keith lord Dingwall, sir James Scrimgeour of Dudhope, Mr. John
Skeen king's advocate, Mr. George Young arch-dean of St. Andrews, and several
other persons of distinction, and acquirred himself so much to the satisfaction
of the king and ministry, that they granted him a full, ample, and honorable
acquittance and discharge, Nisbet's append. p. 8th. where part of his discharge
is narrated.
by an act of the privy council, in which are inserted several ancedots, very
much to his honor, and wherein his great abilities and fidelity are fully set
forth.

In the year 1593, this earl made a noble foundation of a college at Aberdeen,
called the marishal college, and endowed it with sufficient funds for the
support and maintenance of a principal and four professors of philosophy, of
which this family are perpetual patrons; and the seal of the college bears the
arms of earl marishal quartered with those of the town of Aberdeen.

After king James went up to England, his esteem and favor for the earl never
abated. He conferred upon him the greatest honors that a subject is capable
of, and appointed him his high commissioner, or viceroy, to represent his
royal person in the parliament of Scotland in the year 1609. Records of
parliament.
He served his majesty in every station of life, with fidelity, honor, and
reputation.

He married, 1st, Margaret, daughter of Alexander fourth lord Home, Privy seal.
by whom he had a son,

William, lord Keith, -- and two daughters.

1. Lady Anne, married to William earl of Morton, to whom she had a numerous
issue. Vide title Morton.

2. Lady Margaret, married to sir Robert Arbuthnot of that ilk.

He married, 2dly, Margaret, daughter of James lord Ogilvy, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
ancestor of the earl of Airly, by whom he had two sons.

1. James, who got from his father the lands of Benholm, Ibidem.
in the year 1619, and married a daughter of sir Alexander Lindsay of Edzel, by
whom he had three daughters, 1. Elizabeth, married to sir Archibald Primrose of
Dalmeny, clerk-register in the reign of king Charles II. ancestor of the earl
of Roseberry. 2. Margaret, Contract penes Methven, ad ann. 1652.
who died unmarried. 3. Agnes, married to Patrick Smith of Braco, grandfather
of David Smith of Methven, Esquire; but this James died without male issue.

2. John de Keith, who was also provided to the lands of Benholm, by his
father's destination, failing heirs of his brother's body; Privy seal.
but these lands were sold by James in the reign of king Charles I. and whether
John had any succession or not we can give no account.

This noble lord died at his castle of Dunotter, April 2d 1623, and was
succeeded by his eldest son,

XX. WILLIAM, sixth earl marishal, who got charters under the great seal of
many lands and baronies, Ibidem.
to William earl marishal, etc.

He was a man of great learning and integrity, which made him highly esteemed
by king Charles I. who called him to his privy council, where he soon
discovered himself to be well affected to the crown and government in church
and state.

He married lady Margaret Erskine, daughter of John earl of Mar, by lady Mary
Stewart, daughter of Esme duke of Richmond and Lennox, Chart. in pub. archiv.
by whom he had three sons and two daughters.

1. William, lord Keith.

2. George, who succeeded his brother.

3. John, afterward earl of Kintore. Vide title Kintore.

1st daughter, lady Mary, married to John lord Kilpont, Crawfurd's peerage.
son and heir of William earl of Airth and Menteith.

2. Lady Jeaen, Ibidem.
married to Alexander lord Pitsligo.

He died in the flower of his age, universally lamented, 28th October 1635, and
was succeeded by his eldest son,

XXI. WILLIAM, seventh earl marishal, who was a great loyalist, and adhered
firmly to the interest of the royal family, during all the time of the civil
war.

He raised a troop of horse upon his own charge, marched with them into
England, in hopes of procuring the king's liberation in the year 1648, and
fought gallantly upon their head at Preston, where the king's army was
defeated, and the earl narrowly escaped being made prisoner: however, he got
safe back to Dunotter castle, Ibid. Nisbet's appendix, and M. S. hist. of the
family.
where he had the honor to entertain king Charles II. the duke of Buckingham,
etc. etc. in the year 1650. He never left his majesty while he staid in
Scotland, and gladly would have accompanied him into England, had he not been
expressly ordered by the king to remain with the earls of Crawfurd and
Glencairn, to govern the nation; but while he was busily employed in raising
forces for the royal cause, he was surprised, with several of his friends, at
Elliot in Angus, by a strong party of English horse, and sent prisoner to
London by sea; where, after a ten year's confinement in the tower, which he
bore with great sirmness and constancy, he was released at the happy
restoration of king Charles II. who, in recompense of his great merit and
sufferings, nominated him one of his privy council in the year 1660, Chart. in
pub. arch.
and soon thereafter made him lord privy seal, which office he enjoyed till his
death.

He married lady Elizabeth Seton, daughter of George earl of Winton, Ibidem.
by whom he had four daughters.

1. Lady Mary, Paper in the Earl of Hopeton's custody.
married to sir James Hope, ancestor of the earl of Hopeton.

2. Lady Elizabeth, Writs of the family of Arbuthnot.
married to Robert viscount of Arbuthnot.

3. Lady Jean, married to George lord Banff.

4. Lady Isabel, Writs of the sam. of Winton.
married to sir Edward Turner, a man of a vast estate in England.

The earl dying without male issue in the year 1661, his estate and honors
devolved upon his brother,

XXI. GEORGE, eighth earl marishal, a man of undaunted courage and intrepidity,
who, in his younger days, served in the wars in France, and soon rose to the
degree of a colonel; but when the unhappy civil war broke out, he returned to
his native country, and immediately joined the loyalists, M. S. hist. of the
family.
and suffered many hardships during ^he usurpation.

He died in an advanced age in the year 1694, leaving issue, by lady Mary Hay,
daughter of George earl of Kinnoul, one only son and successor,

XXII. WILLIAM, ninth earl marishal, a man of an active spirit, solid judgment,
great hospitality, and a true lover of his country, and so strongly attached to
the interest of the Stewart family, that he never came into the measures of the
court, during all the reign of king William, Ibidem.
and a great part of queen Anne's.

He opposed with all his interest the union of the two kingdoms in every
article, as being inconsistent with the liberty, and derogatory to the honor
of his country in general, and that of his hereditary office of great marishal
in particular, Protestatlarge in Crawfurd's peerage, page 323, and Nisbet's
append. p. 10.
wherefore he entered a solemn protest against it, which is still upon record,
and will be a lasting monument of the sincere regard he had for the ancient
privileges of his country.

He was elected one of the sixteen Scotch peers to serve in the parliament of
Great Britain, in the year 1710.

He married lady Mary Drummond, daughter of James earl of Perth, lord high
chancellor of Scotland, by lady Jean Douglas, daughter of William marquis of
Douglas, by whom he had issue two sons and two daughters.

1. George, his heir.

2. James Keith, who betaking himself to a military life, served in the wars
abroad, rose to the highest degree in the army, and was inferior to no general
of his time for military capacity. After the battle of Dumblain, where he was
engaged with his brother earl marishal, he went abroad to seek preferment at
the Spanish court; but not finding a quick promotion there, he entered into the
service of Peter the Great, emperor of Russia, who soon promoted him to the
rank of a general officer. He afterward went into the service of Frederick
III. king of Prussia, who raised him to the rank of a field marshal; but after
many signal services, when the right wing of the Prussian army was surprised by
the Austrians under marshal Daun, at Hochkirchen, he making a glorious defense,
was unfortunately killed, 14th October 1758, and was buried in the churchyard
of Hochkirchen; but the king of Prussia, who could not sufficiently regret the
loss of so great a commander, had his corpse taken up and sent to Berlin, where
he was interred a second time, with great military honors.

The earl's Is It daughter, lady Mary, was married to John earl of Wigton, whose
only child, lady Clementina Fleming, married to Charles, tenth lord
Elphingston, to whom she has a numerous issue.

2. Lady Anne, married to Alexander lord Gairlies, now earl of G^lloway, to
whom she had two sons, who died young, and a daughter, lady Mary, married to
Kenneth lord Fortrose, to whom she had a numerous issue.

The earl died in the year 1712, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XXIII. GEORGE, tenth earl Marishal, who having been engaged in the rebellion
1715, was attainted of treason, and his estate and honors forfeited to the
crown. He went beyond seas, and at different times resided at the courts of
France, Spain, Rome, and Prussia.

In 1750, he was appointed ambassador extraordinary by his Prussian majesty to
the court of France, and was afterward invested with the order of the Black
Eagle.

In 1759, he went by Turin to the court of Spain, being, as was generally
believed, sent there from the king of Prussia, who appointed him governor of
Neufchatell.

In the same year 1759, there was a pardon obtained for him from king George
II. upon which he came over to England, has since succeeded to the estate of
Kintore, and went again to his government of Neufchatell.

ARMS.
Argent, on a chief gules, three pallets or.

CREST; on a wreath, a stag's head erased proper, and attired with ten tynes or.

SUPPORTERS; two stags proper attired, as the crest.

MOTTO; Veritas vincit.

Note, The two battoons in saltire semee of thistles, and ensigned on the top
with imperial crowns behind the shield, were born as badges to the office of
lord marishal of Scotland.

CHIEF SEATS,
Were at Dunotyr-castle, in the shire of Kincardine, and Fetteresso, in the
same county; also at Inverngy and Newburgh, in the county of Aberdeen.

MAR Earl of MAR.
THE highest dignity or jurisdiction enjoyed by subjects in Scotland, before
the tenth century, was that of Thane, such as the Thanes of Mar, Angus, Fife,
etc. which dignity was afterward succeeded by that of earl: but as most of the
accounts of the origin and descent of our great families before the reign of
king Malcolm III. are only traditional, and sometimes sabulous, we shall begin
the memoirs of this illustrious family from the reign of that king, since which
era the uninter(...)ed possession of it, down to the present time, is clearly
documented by our histories and records.

All our historians agree, that king Malcolm III. called Canmore, held a
con^entus procerum, or parliament, at Forsar, in the beginning of his reign, by
some authors said to be in 1057, and by others in 1061, at which general
meeting Malcolm created some of the chiefs of his nobility earls, by the titles
they formerly enjoyed (...) Thanes; amongst whom was Martacns, Thane,
afterward earl of Mar, who probably assumed his surname from his possessions,
as was the custom of those early times; from him therefore we proceed to deduce
the descent of this most noble family.

I. MARTACUS, Thane of Mar, was created earl by king Malcolm Canmore, in 1057
or 1061, as above.

In a charter of a donation by the said Malcolm to the Culdees of Lochleven, Mr
Martin's genealogical collect. vol. I. p. 297.
of the manor of Kilgad, Earnoch, Martacus comes de Mar is a witness, anno
1065.

He died before the year 1100, and left issue a son,

II. GRATNACH, Chartulary of Scoon, penes vicecom. de Stormont.
second earl of Mar, who is witness to the foundation charter of the monastery
of Scoon, by king Alexander I. anno 1114.

He was father of,

III. MORGUNDUS, or MORGAN, third earl of Mar, who is witness in a donation to
the monastery of Dunsermline, by king David I. who succeeded king Alexander,
Chartulary of Dunfermime.
anno 1124.

He is witness also in a donation to the same monastery by king Malcolm IV.
(...) and (...)ton's collections.
who succeeded king David, anno 1153.

He left issue two sons.

1. Gilocher, or Gilchrist, his heir.

2. Congal de Mar, designed by the title of Tullibardin, whose only child
Muriel, married to the earl of Strathearn, to whom she had a daughter Ada, who
brought to her husband, M. S. hist. of the family of Athole.
sir William Murray, the lands of Tulhbardin.

Morgund was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. GILCHRIST, or GILOCHER, fourth earl of Mar, Haddington's collections.
who is witness in a charter of king Malcolm IV. anno 1163.

He died in the beginning of the reign of king William, who succeeded Malcolm,
anno 1165, and left issue a son and successor,

V. MORGUND, fifth earl of Mar, whose service, as heir to his father, is
narrated at large in Selden's titles of honor, viz. Wiltrelmus rex Scntorum,
universis episcopis, comitibus, etc. dictum Morgundum, filium et haredem
legitimum Gilocheri comitis de Mar, etc. per quod concessi et reddidi eidem
Morgundo totum comitatum de Mar, Seld. p. 846, and 847.
etc. anno 1171. Though this service is very singular and curious, yet it is so
long, that it cannot well be inserted here: we must therefore refer our readers
to our author; but must here observe, that by this document it appears, that
both this earl and his father were possessed of the earldom of Murray.

Earl Morgund made a donation of the patronage of the church of Milnoch, with a
carucate of land in Gochelston, to the priory of St. (...), Chartulary of St.
Andrews.
pro salute animae suae, et Agnetae (...) (...) suae, etc. etc.

This earl did not long survive his father; but by the said Agnes he left issue
five sons.

1. Gil^^t.

2. (...).

3. Du^can. -- These three were successively earth of (...), as will be shown
hereafter.

4. (...), who, in a confirmation charter of (...) father's donation to the
priory of St. Andrews, Ibidem.
is designed silius Morgundi comini de (...).

5. James. In the foundation charter by Matthew bishop of Aberdeen, to the
hospital of St. Peter in that town, Gilbertus co(...) de Mar, Malcolmus et
Jacobus sratres (...) fili Margundi, Chartulary of Aberdeen, p. 572.
etc. are witnesses. Mat(...) was bishop of Aberdeen from 1164 to 1199.

This earl was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. GILBERT, Haddington's collections.
sixth earl of Mar, who is mentioned in a charter of king William, anno 1178.

Also in a general confirmation of the same prince, of all the donations made
by his predecessors to the religious at Aberdeen, Chartulary of Aberdeen.
Gilbertus comes de Mar, is a witness, anno 1180.

He dying without issue was succeeded by his brother,

VI. GILCHRIST, seventh earl of Mar, who is witness in many charters of king
William to the religious, as per the chartulary of Aberdeen and Murray.

He made a donation to the episcopal see of Murray, of the patronage of the
church of Abercherdor; but there happening a dispute betwixt Brice bishop of
Murray and him about that patronage, they both, at the earnest desire of king
William, Chartularies of Murray and Dunfermhne.
made over their right thereto to the monastery of Dunfermline.

Earl Gilchrist was witness also to the foundation charter of the abbacy of
Inchaffry, Chartulary of Inchafsry.
by Gilbert earl of Strathearn, anno 1200.

In the reign of king William, Chartulary of St. Andrews, and Kerth's bishops.
this earl built a priory for the canons regular of St. Andrews at Monimusk,
before the year 1214, in which year king William died.

He dying also without issue, was succeeded by his brother,

VI. DUNCAN, eighth earl. In the beginning of the reign of king Alexander II.
who succeeded king William, Duncanus comes de Mar made a donation, Chartulary
of Aberdeen, p. 506, and chartulary of St. Andrews.
Deo et Stae. Mariae de Monimus et Kildeis, ibidem deo servientibus, ecclesium
de Lochil, etc. for the safety of the souls of king William, Morgund earl of
Mar, his father, and Margaret countess of Mar, his mother, their ancestors
and successors, and for the prosperity of king Alexander II. etc.

He also made an agreement with John prior of St. Andrews, concerning some
donations made to that priory by Morgund earl of Mar, Ibidem.
his father, anno 1226.

He married Orabella, daughter of William, son of Nesius lord of Latherisk, and
died before the year 1234, leaving issue a son,

VII. WILLIAM, ninth earl of Mar, who made a very great figure in the reigns
of king Alexander II. and III. and was concerned in most of the public
transactions of those times.

In a charter of king Alexander II. confirming a donation to the monastery of
Kelso, Willilielmus comes de Mar is a witness, Chartulary of Kelso.
in the year 1234.

He is witness in a charter of confirmation from the same prince, Chartulary of
Cambuskenneth.
to the abbacy of Cambuskenneth.

When the differences betwixt king Alexander of Scotland, and king Henry of
England, were accommodated, William earl of Mar was one of the sureties upon
the part of the king of Scotland, Rymer, tom. I. p. 252.
anno 1237.

He was also one of the guarantees of another treaty with the English, Ibid. p.
428.
anno 1244.

He was one of the Scotch nobles who engaged, quod Scoti et Walenses non
facient pacem cum rege Angliae, sine mutuo consensu et assensu, Ibid. p. 653.
and 670.
etc. anno 1255.

He obtained from king Alexander III. a charter of the lands of Tilliecultry,
in Clackmannan-shire, Chart in archiv. fam. de Mar.
dated at Forfar, the fourteenth year of his reign, or in 1263.

He was a faithful and loyal subject, and in great favor with king Alexander
III. who constituted him great chamberlain of Scotland, Lives of the offic. of
state, fir James Balfour, and Mar Farlane's collect. etc.
anno 1264. There are many original charters, still extant, wherein he is
designed camerarius Scotiae, etc. inter 1264 et 1267.

He confirmed, by two different charters, all the donations, quas Morgundus
comes de Mar, avus suus, fecit priori et conventui Sti. Andreae, Chartulary of
St. Andrews, p. 676, and 677.
etc. testilus Willielmo de Ruthven, milite, Do-enaldo et Duncano filiis dicti
comitis, etc. anno 1267.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of William Cumyn, earl of Buchan, by whom he
had two sons. Fordun, vol. II. p. 109.


1. Donald, his heir.

2. Duncan, mentioned in his father's charter of confirmation above narated, in
1267; but we can give no further account of him.

The earl died in the year 1268, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. DONALD, tenth earl of Mar, who is witness in a charter of king
Alexander III. erecting several lands in Dunbirton-shire into a free forestry
for the earl of Lennox, Chartulary of Lennox, 16.
anno 1272.

Donaldus comes de Mar, is one of the Scotch nobles who consents to the
marriage of king Alexander III.'s daughter, princess Margaret, with Eric king
of Norway, anno 1281. Rymer. tom. II. p. 1083.


He was also one of the magnates Scotiae that agreed to receive king
Alexander's grandchild, Margaret of Norway, as the true and lawful heir to the
crown of Scotland, in case of king Alexander's death without male-issue, Ibid.
p. 266.
anno 1284.

He afterward agreed to the marriage of princes Margaret of Norway, then queen
of Scotland, Ibid. p. 471.
with prince Edward of England, in 1290.

He was one of the arbiters chosen on the part of Robert Bruce, lord of
Annandale, Ibid. p. 553, and 558.
in his competition for the crown with John Baliol, anno 1292.

He died anno 1294, leaving issue a son,

Gratney, his heir, -- and two daughters.

1. Lady Isabel, married to king Robert Bruce, and was mother, by him, of
princess Marjory, who carried on the line of the royal family of Scotland.

2. Lady Mary, married to Kenneth fourth earl of Sutherland.

He was also said to have had another daughter, lady Margaret, married to Henry
lord Sinclair, and was mother of William first earl of Orkney.

IX. GRATNEY, eleventh earl of Mar, succeeded his father Donald. He was also a
a great patriot, a true lover of his country, and steady in the Brucian
interest.

He married lady Christian Brace, Stewart's hist. of the roval tam. p. 35.
daughter of Robert earl of Carrick, and sister of the immortal king Robert.
With her the earl got the lordship of Garrioch, Chart in rotul. Rob. I.
which appears by a charter from king Robert Bruce, hereafter narrated.

This lordship was the property of prince David, brother of king Malcolm IV.
and king William the Lion, Stewart's history of the roval family, p. 21.
who was designed David earl o^ Huntington and Garrioch. He married Mathilda,
daughter of Hugh, and sister of Ranulph count Paletine of Chester, in whose
right he was also earl of Chester. He had issue four sons and four daughters.
His sons were, Henry, David, Robert, and John. The first three died young
without issue. John, the fourth, designed earl of Humington and Chester,
married Helen, daughter of Lewellin prince of Wale; but dying also without
issue, Ibidem.
earl David's great estate devolved upon his daughters. Margaret, the eldest,
married to Alan lord of Gallowry. Isabel, the second, married Robert Bruce,
lord of And (...); and as the lordship to Ga^rioch fell to her there she
conveyed it to him; and (...) grandson, Writs of the (...) of Mar, and chart
in pub. archiv.
king Robert, afterward disponed that lordship to Christian his dearest
sister, and Graney earl of Mar his beloved brother, as above observed. Earl
David's third daughter was Matilda, who died without issue. Fourth Ada, married
Henry, grandfather of John Hastings, competitor for the crown, etc. etc. We
now return to Graney earl of Mar, who by the said lady Christian Bruce had
issue a son,

Donald, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Lady Elyne, in right of whom this euldom defended to the lords of Erskine, as
will be shown hereafter.

He is also said to have had another daughter married to the lord Lyle, Vide
page 433d of this work.

Earl Gratney died before the year 1300, and was succeeded by his son,

X. DONALD, twelfth earl of Mar, often designed Donald Bayne.

He was a man of great honor and merit, a firm and steady friend of king
Robert Bruce, whom he joined as soon as he begun publicly to assert his title
to the crown; but had the misfortune to be taken prisoner fighting gallantly in
defense of the liberties of his country, Rymer, tom. II. p. 1014.
at the battle of Methven, anno 1306.

He was immediately sent prisoner to London, where he was closely confined for
the space of eight years; but was at last exchanged for an English nobleman,
who had been taken prisoner at the battle of Bannockburn, and obtained a safe
conduct from king Edward of England to return to Scotland, Ibid. tom. III. p.
488.
anno 1314.

He got several charters from king Robert Bruce, Donaldo comiti de Mar, viz.
charter of all his thanage of Colvith in Angus, etc. Also charter of the lands
of Saline in File, Mount-Blairy in Banff-shire, etc. with charters of several
other lands and baronies, too numerous to be here inferrted, Chart in archi.
tam. de Mar.
in the years 1324, 1328, and 1329, in all which he is designed the king's
nephew.

Upon the death of Thomas Randolph, earl of Murray, regent of Scotland, in the
minority of king David II. Hist. of the royal family.
Donald earl of Mar was elected to succeed him in that high office.

He married Isabel, daughter of sir Alexander Stewart of Bonkill, sister of
John Stewart earl of Angus, by whom he had a son,

Thomas, his heir, -- and one daughter,

Lady Margaret, married to William first earl of Douglas, of whom more
afterward.

This great man lost his life in the service of his country, at the battle of
Duplin, anno 1332, and was succeeded by his son,

XI. THOMAS, thirteenth earl of Mar, also a man of great abilities, a faithful
and loyal subject of king David Bruce, in all the various vicissitudes of
fortune in that long reign, during which there was scarce any public
transaction wherein the earl of Mar was not concerned.

He was appointed one of the ambassadors extraordinary by the estates of the
kingdom, to treat with the English about king David's liberty, Rymer, tom. V.
p. 711.
anno 1351.

He was one of the hostages for his ransom, Ibid. tom. VI. P. 212, and 323.
anno 1357, and was constituted great chamberlain of Scotland, anno 1358.

He was again named one of the ambassadors to treat with the court of England,
Ibidem.
anno 1362.

He was afterward one of the guarantees of a treaty with that nation, Rymer,
tom. VI. p. 395, 633, 760, and tom. VII. p. 30.
anno 1369, and again got a safe conduct to go up to England to negotiate, anno
1373, and returned the year thereafter.

This earl obtained a charter of confirmation from king David II. to him and
his heirs whatsomever, of the whole lands and lordship of Garrioch, Chart. in
archivis fam. de Mar.
to be holden by him and his heirs, etc. as freely as David earl of Huntington
held the same.

There are amongst the archives of the family of Mar, many charters to their
friends, and vassals, which do great honor to, and is a good proof of the
grandeur of, this noble family; but they are too numerous to be here inserted.

This earl married, 1st, Mary, daughter and heiress of Alan earl of Menteith,
from whom, according to a good author, Fordun, vol. II. p. 150.
he was divorced upon false and unjust grounds.

He married, 2dly, lady Margaret Stewart, daughter, and at last sole heiress,
of Thomas earl of Angus, who, after his death, married to her second husband
William earl of Douglas, and by him was mother of George Douglas earl of Angus.

Earl Thomas dying without issue, anno 1377, in him ended the whole male line
of Gratney, eleventh earl of Mar, and his estate and honors devolved upon his
only sister,

XI. MARGARET, countess of Mar, married, as before observed, to William first
earl of Douglas, who, according to the courtesy of Scotland at that time,
became earl of Mar, lord of Garrioch, etc. in her right, and was fourteenth
earl.

There are innumerable charters and other vouchers in the archives of the
families of Douglas and Mar, as well as in Rymer's Foedera Angliae,
instructing the above, with which we shall not trouble our readers.

By William earl of Douglas and Mar, she had issue a son,

James, who succeeded his father and mother in the earldoms of Douglas and
Mar, lordship of Garioch, etc. -- and a daughter,

Lady Isabel, countess of Mar, of whom more hereafter.

Margaret, countess of Douglas and Mar, having been divorced from her first
husband, married, 2dly, sir John Swinton, but to him she had to issue.

XII. JAMES, second earl of Douglas, and fifteenth earl of Mar, married lady
Isabel Stewart, History of the royal family.
daughter of king Robert II. by whom he had one son, who died in infancy; and
he being killed at the battle of Otterburn, anno 1388, without any surviving
lawful issue, the earldom of Douglas went to his brother Archibald, son of his
father's second marriage, and the earldom of Mar, lordship of Garrioch, etc.
devolved upon his sister,

XII. Lady ISABEL DOUGLAS, countess of Mar, etc. before mentioned. She
married, 1st, sir Malcolm Drummond of that ilk, or Cargill, who, upon the death
of her brother, in her sight became earl of Mar, of which there are many
vouchers both in the public register, and amongst the writs of the family of
Mar; also i would title Drummond earl of Perth. But sir Malcolm died without
issue, and she married, 2dly, sir Alexander Stewart, earl of Buchan, fourth
lawful son of king Robert II. and made a resignation of the estate and honors
of Mar, lordship of Gairioch, etc. in the king's hand^, for new infeftment to
them, and the heirs-male of the marriage; which failing, to the heirs
whatsomever of the said sir Alexander, dated 12th August 1404, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
whereby he became sixteenth earl of Mar.

It has been alleged by some authors, that sir Alexander besieged the countess
in her castle of Kild^immie, which he took, and then ravished her: and there is
a remarkable instrument o^ a protest, still extant, and hereafter narrated; but
whether it will infer force in this case, is submitted to the judgment of our
(...) The instrument of protest, taken by the said sir Alexander before the
ga^es of the castle of Kildri^mie, 19th September 1404, In archiv. (...) de
Ma^r.
sets ^orth, that he did present and deliver to the said countess, the castle
of Kildrimmie, with the haill papers, evidents, silver pl^te, and all other
plenishing within the said castle, and thereupon delivered the haill key^ of
the said castle into the hands of the (...) lady, freely, and with a good
heart, for her to dispose of them as ^he pleased: whereupon, ^he holding the
said keys in her hands, of mature advice chused the said sir Alexander for her
husband, and in free marriage gave to him the (...) castle, with it is (...),
the (...) of Mar, the lordship of Gar^ioch, the (...) of Strathaven and
Cre^ch-mount, Down, ^uck, and Cabrach, an (...) of two hundred merks out of the
pari^h of (...), the forest of Jedburgh, and the lands and pertinents of the
same, and all other ^ands belonging, or which might belong^, to her, either by
her father or her mother, within the kingdom of Scotland, to be holden by her
said husband and herself, and the heirs procreate betwixt them; which failing,
to the said lady, and her lawful heirs. Upon all which the said sir Alexander
took instruments, etc.

There is likeways a charter by the said countess Isabel, and her husband, of
the earldom of Mar, Ibidem.
etc. as above, with all right and title either of them had by her father or
mother, to all lands and goods whatsomever, within the kingdom of Scotland,
that might be unjustly detained from them, to them and their common heirs;
which failing, their haill estates to return to their lawful heir, ex utraque
part, etc. sealed and dated before Alexander bishop of Ross, and the haill
tenants in the fields, without the gates of the castle of Kildrimmie, Ibidem.
she not being forced thereto, 9th December 1404.

There is also an instrument of sa^^^e of the same date following thereon, and
a confirmation by king Robert III. dated the 21st of January 1404-5, by which
it appears, Ibidem.
that the destination in the above resignation of the 12th of August 1404,
whether voluntary or by force, was now altered and set aside.

This earl was truly a man of great parts and magnanimity, equally skilled in
the arts of peace and war.

He was appointed ambassador extraordinary to treat of a peace with the court
of England, Rymer, tom, VIII. p. 450, and 461.
and got a safe conduct from that crown ( Alexandro comiti de (...) et
Garrioch) to go up to London with seventy horses in his retinue, anno 1406.

He got another safe conduct to go up to England and negotiate with that court,
Ibid. p. 500
1407.

He had the chief command of the royal army against Donald earl of Ross, lord
of the Isles, at the memorable and bloody battle of Harlaw, Fordun, vol. II.
and p. 361st of this work.
anno 1411, where he behaved with the valor and conduct of a brave and
experienced general.

In the year 1416 he was again appointed ambassador extraordinary to the court
of England, Rymer, tom. IX p. 418. and tom. X. p. 491.
and soon thereafter he was constituted lord warden of the marches.

Lady Isabel Douglas, countess of Mar, died anno 1419, without issue, and in
her ended the whole line of Donald, only son of Gratney, eleventh earl of Mar;
the representation therefore of this most noble and ancient family undoubtedly
devolved upon Robert lord Erskme, lineally descended of lady Helen, only
daughter of the said eleventh earl, as before observed.

Alexander earl of Mar, in right of his wise, in manner abovementioned, being
a man of an enterprizing genius, became weary of a peaceable life at home; he
therefore raised a large company of gentlemen, his followers, carried them to
Flanders, and, with them, entered into the service of John duke of Burgundy,
where he and his followers performed such feats of chivalry at the siege of
Liege, Abercromby.
etc. as acquired great reputation both to himself and his countrymen.

He then married Jean duchess or countess of Brabant, and, in her right,
claimed that sovereignty; but the Brabanters refusing to submit to the
government of a foreigner, and the countess dying within little more than a
year after their marriage, he returned home greatly incensed against the
Brabanters.

He therefore immediately fitted out a fleet, and failed to the coast of
Flanders, where he attacked a large fleet of the Brabanters returning from
Dantzick, Hathornden, etc.
richly ladened, all which he took, pillaged and destroyed, and returned to
Scotland with vast wealth and booty.

Though this sir Alexander had no right to the earldom of Mar, but by his
charters from Isabel countess thereof, as is above narrated, whereby the whole
was limited to the heirs to be procreated betwixt them; which failing, to
return to her heirs, etc. yet soon after his return to Scotland, he made a
resignation of the earldom of Mar, lordship of Garrioch, etc. into the king's
hands for new infeftment to himself, etc. upon which the king granted a new
charter to the said sir Alexander, and Thomas Stewart his natural son, and
their heirs-male; which failing, to the king and his heirs whatever, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
dated 28th May 1426.

Thomas, the natural son, died before his father, without issue, and sir
Alexander himself died in 1435, also without lawful children; whereupon ensued
a long contest about the earldom of Mar, betwixt the king, as having right by
the resignation and charter above narrated, and Robert lord Erskine, who, as
this earldom appears to have descended to heirs general, had an undoubted right
and title thereto; for the whole descendents of Gratney, eleventh earl of Mar,
were now failed, except those of his daughter,

I. Lady ELYNE, beforementioned, who married sir John Menteith, lord of Arran,
by whom she had issue only one daughter,

II. CHRISTIAN MENTEITH, married to sir Edward Keith, to whom she had an only
child,

III. JANET KEITH, who married Thomas seventh lord Erskine, to whom she had
issue

Robert, lord Erskine, who was undoubted representative and heir to one of the
most ancient earldoms in the kingdom, and was accordingly served heir before
the sheriff of Aberdeen, Several retours in the archives of the family of Mar.
23d April 1436, to Elizabeth countess of Mar, the last descendent of the body
of Donald twelfth earl of Mar, only son of Gratney eleventh earl, who was the
common great great grandfather, or atavus, of Isabel last countess of Mar,
and of Robert lord Erskine, as above deduced.

We shall only here observe, before we proceed to the history of the family of
Erskine, that though the earls of Mar, as far back as we have any records,
were amongst the greatest and most illustrious families in the kingdom, yet we
find few or none of their descendents who assumed Mar for their surname.

Nicol de Mar is witness in a charter of king Malcolm IV. to the town of
Inverness, Haddington's collections.
ante 1165, in which year king Malcolm died.

Thomas earl of Mar grants a charter to John de Mar, of some lands in
Aberdeen-shire, in the reign of David II. Ibid. p. 574.
who succeeded to the crown of Scotland, anno 1329.

Johannes de Mar, miles, Rymer tom. VI. p. 67.
was taken prisoner at the battle of Durham, anno 1346, etc. etc.

But we cannot connect any of these with this family.

ERSKINE Earl of MAR.
ALL our antiquaries agree, that this noble family is of very great antiquity;
but the history of its origin, like that of most other ancient families, is
chiefly founded on tradition.

Some authors deduce their descent from a noble Florentine, who is said to have
come to Scotland in the reign of king Kenneth II.

It is said by others, that in the reign of king Malcolm II. a Scotsman of high
distinction having killed, with his own hand, Enrique, one of the Danish
generals, at the battle of Murthill, cut off his head, and, with the bloody
dagger in his hand, showed it to the king, and, in the Gaelic, said,
Eris-skyne, alluding to the head and dagger, and, in the same language, also
said, I intend to perform greater actions than what I have done, etc. whereupon
king Malcolm imposed upon him the surname of Erskyne, and assigned him for his
armorial bearing, a hand holding a dagger, with je pense plus for a motto,
which has continued to be the crest and motto of this noble family ever since.

But we shall insist no further on these traditional accounts, and shall here
only observe, that it is most certain that this family had vast possessions in
the shires of Renfrew and Air, in very early times, particularly the lands,
barony, and castle of Erskine, a beautiful seat upon the banks of the river
Clyde. Whether the Erskines gave their name to their lands, or took it from
them, we shall not pretend to determine; but certain it is there is no account,
either from records or tradition, of any persons being possessed of the lands
of Erskine before them.

The first of the family we can mention, from any good authority, is,

I. HENRICUS, or HENRY de ERSKINE. He was proprietor and lord of the barony of
Erskine in Renfrew-shire, and flourished in the reign of king Alexander II.

In a donation of Amelick, brother of Maldwin earl of Lennox, of the patronage
of the church of Roseneath, Chartulary of Paisley, penes com. de Dundonald.
and tithes thereto belonging, to the monastery of Paisley, Henricus dominus de
Erskine is a witness, in the year 1226.

He was succeeded by his son,

II. Sir JOHN, second lord of Erskine, by whom there is a charter of some lands
in Renfrew-shire, Prynne's collections.
Roberto dicto Boyd, etc. in the end of the reign of king Alexander II.

In a charter of king Alexander III. dominus Johannes de Erskine, miles,
together with Radulphus de Insulis, Chartulary of Paisley
dominus de Duchal, etc. are witnesses, anno 1252.

He is witness also in another charter of a donation to the monastery of
Paisley by Walter earl of Menteith, Ibidem.
of the church of Cormonell, etc. anno 1262.

He left issue two sons.

1. John, his heir.

2. William de Erskine, who obtained from his father some lands in the shire of
Air, Book of original writs, penes Mac-Farlane.
confirmed to him by James, lord high steward of Scotland, the superior; but we
can give no account of his posterity.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. Sir JOHN, third lord of Erskine, who, with many of his brave countrymen,
was obliged to submit to the superior sorce of king Edward I. Rymer, tom. III.
p. 657.
of England, when he had overrun Scotland, anno 1296.

He lived after the year 1300, and left issue a son and successor,

IV. Sir JOHN, fourth lord of Erskine, who, in his father's lifetime, obtained
a grant of some lands, in tenemento de Largis, and shire of Air, confirmed to
him by James lord high steward of Scotland, Johanni de Erskine, filio Johannis
de Erskine, filii et haeredis Johannis de Erskine, militis, etc. to which
Robert bishop of Glasgow, sir Reginald de Crawfurd, Book of original writs,
penes Mac-Farlane, vol. I.
sir John Erskine his father, and several others, are witnesses. His uncle
William is also mentioned in that charter, which has no date, but must have
been before 1310, in which year the lord high steward died.

He had issue a son,

Sir William, his heir, -- and three daughters.

1. Mary, who married, 1st, sir Thomas Bruce, brother to king Robert; but he
being taken prisoner by the English, M. S. hist. of the family of Mar.
and put to death at London, she married, 2dly, sir Ingram Morvile.

2. Alice, History of the royal family, p. 54.
married to Walter lord high steward of Scotland, to whom she had one daughter,
Jean, married to Hugh earl of Ross.

3. Agnes, married to sir William Livingston of that ilk.

He died soon after his father, and was succeeded by his son,

V. Sir WILLIAM, fifth lord of Erskine, who, according to all our historians,
was a man of singular merit and bravery, Abercromby, etc.
and always a firm adherent to king Robert Bruce.

He joined, with his forces, the earl of Murray, and sir James Douglas, when
they invaded England in 1322, defeated all that opposed them, and was knighted
in the field under the banner, Ibid. Crawfurd, etc.
for the great services he did in that expedition.

To whom this great man was married, we have not been able to discover; but he
left issue four sons.

1. Sir Robert, his heir.

2. Sir Alan, who obtained from his father the lands of Barachan. He married
Isabel, daughter and sole heiress of sir Patrick Inchmartine of that ilk, Writs
of the family of Finlater, etc.
and was ancestor of the Erskines of Inchmartine. Vide pages 263d and 687th of
this work.

3. Andrew Erskine of Raploch.

4. Sir Archibald Erskine.

Sir William died anno 1329, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. Sir ROBERT, who was sixth lord of Erskine, a great patriot, a brave
soldier, and an able statesman, as eminently loyal and faithful to king David
Bruce, as his father had been to king Robert.

In king David's minority, he joined the lord high steward, and was very
instrumental in recovering a great part of the country for that prince, which
had been overrun by the English and the Baliol party, Lives of the offic. of
state.
while David was in France.

After his return home, the king, sensible of the great merit and faithful
services of the lord Erskine, appointed him constable, keeper and captain of
the castle of Stirling for life, with all the privileges, devoirs, duties, etc.
which any of his predecessors, keepers thereof, enjoyed; Writs of the family of
Mar.
and that office continued in this family till the attainder of earl John, in
1715.

After the unfortunate battle of Durham, Robertus dominus de Erskine, miles,
was appointed, by the estates of Scotland, Rymer, tom. V. p 618.
one of the ambassadors extraordinary to negotiate king David's liberty, anno
1348.

And though his negotiation did not then take effect, Chart. in pub. archiv and
lives of the offic. of state.
he was by his majesty appointed great chamberlain of Scotland, anno 1350.

In the years 1351, 1352, and 1354, he was again nominated one of the
ambassadors to treat of the king's liberty, Rymer, tom. V. p. 711, 736, and 791.
in the last of which years he offered himself and his son as hostages.

In the year 1355, Fordun, vol. II. p. 362.
he went ambassador from the estates of Scotland to the Pope.

He was also one of the ambassadors in 1357, Rymer, tom VI. p. 17, and 35.
when the king's liberty was accomplished, and gave his son as one of the
hostages for his ransom.

This noble lord got a charter from Thomas, thirteenth earl of Mar, "to and in
savours of his special consederate and cousin, Robert lord Erskine, and
Christian Keith his spou^e, of the lands of Balyordie, Bymdyis, Knockinlap,
Writs of the family of Mar.
Inverlammie, etc." which charter is confirmed by king David in a parliament
held at Scoon, anno regni 39 to 1358.

The king being now at liberty, and in full possession of his kingdom, renewed
the lord Erskine's commission as lord great chamberlain of Scotland; Lives of
the offic. of state, and writs of the family of Mar.
and likeways appointed him justiciar benorth the river Forth, constable and
keeper of the castles of Edinburgh and Dunbarton.

In the year 1359, he was appointed ambassador extraordinary in a very solemn
embassy to the court of France, to renew the ancient league, Rymer, tom. VI.
which had subsisted for so many centuries betwixt the two nations.

He went five times ambassador to England, between the years 1360 and 1366, in
which last year his two sons, Thomas and Alan, Ibid. p. 534.
went with him.

In 1367, he was appointed warden of the marches; Ibid. p. 570, and writs of
the family of Mar.
and in this year we find him mentioned as heretable sheriff of the county of
Stirling, which probably he had by succession.

He was one of the Scotch nobility who, in the year 1371, Fordun, vol. II. p.
369, and 382.
ratified king Robert II.'s title to the crown, and is said by our historians
to have been instrumental in his majesty's peaceable accession thereto. He
continued in no less favor with that prince than he had been with his uncle
king David, Chart. in archiv. regis David and Rob. II.
from both which kings he obtained several charters, under the great seal, of
many lands and baronies, and had several other instances of the royal favor
and bounty conferred on him.

But as the brevity of this work will not permit us to enumerate all the great
actions performed by this patriot in the service of his king and country: we
must refer our readers to our historians, and the lives of the officers of
state, for a more particular account of them; and shall only add, that during
the course of a long life, he was constantly employed in the most arduous
negotiations of state, and enjoyed the greatest offices in the kingdom, in all
which he discharged his duty with great ability, honor, and fidelity, equally
to the satisfaction of his sovereigns and fellow subjects.

He married, Writs of the family of Mar.
1st, Beatrix, daughter of sir David Lindsay; 2dly, Christian, widow of sir
Edward Keith, and left issue three sons, and two daughters.

1. Thomas, his heir.

2. Sir Nichol, first of the Erskines of Kinnoul, in Perth-shire, which family
subsisted in the male-line, till the reign of king James II. when Christian,
only daughter of sir John Erskine of Kinnoul, Chart. in pub. archiv.
married sir Robert ^righton of Sanquhar, ancestor of the earls of Dumfries.

3. Allan, Rymer.
formerly mentioned in 1366.

1st daughter, Marila, or Mariota, married to sir Maurice Drummond of Concraig,
steward of Strathearn.

2. Elizabeth, married to sir Walter Oliphant of Aberdalgie, ancestor of lord
Oliphant.

He died anno 1385, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. THOMAS, seventh lord Erskine, who was one of the noble Scotch heirs that
were given as hostages for king David's ransom, as before observed, Rymer, tom.
VI. p. 399.
and is then designed filius et haeres Roberti domini Erskine, nulitis, anno
1357.

The lord Erskine, with his brother sir Nichol, (designed by Fordun, nobiles
milites Scotigenae) took such a notable revenge of the English, who had burnt
the monastery of Inchcolm, Fordun, vol. II. p. 399.
that few or none of them escaped, anno 1383.

This Thomas was a man of great accomplishments, of singular worth and merit,
and highly esteemed both by kings Robert II. and III. By the first he was
continued in his father's government of the castle of Stirling; and by the last
he was appointed ambassador extraordinary to treat with the English, Rymer,
tom. VII. p. 788.
anno 1394.

And as in this reign we find he sat as a lord of parliament, Ibidem, et chart.
in pub. archiv.
he is always designed by the king, Thomas dominus Erskine, dilectus
consanguineus meus, etc.

He married Janet Keith, only child of the first marriage of sir Edward Keith,
by whom he had two sons, and two daughters.

1. Robert, his heir.

2. John, first of the Erskines of Dun, of whom sir Thomas Erskine of Brechin,
Chart. in archiv. Rob. III ad ann. 1393.
secretary of state in the reign of king James V. the Erskines of Pittodrie,
etc. are descended.

1st daughter, Writs of the family of Mar.
Elizabeth, married to Dun can Wemyss of Leuchars, who got with her the lands
of Pirchock and Ludcairn, etc.

2. Christian, Ibidem.
married to sir John Haldane of Gleneagles.

As Janet Keith, wife to this Thomas lord Erskine, had undoubted right to the
earldom of Mar, lordship of Garrioch, etc. in case of Isabel countess of
Marr's having no children, of which there was little probability by reason of
her age, we hope we shall be pardoned for inserting at large some of the steps
taken by this noble lord, for securing his wife and her son's right thereto, as
they are somewhat curious, and tend to give light into the manners of those
times.

There is an instrument of protestation made in parliament to the king by
Thomas lord Erskine, anent a contract made betwixt sir Malcolm Drummond and sir
John of Swinton, concerning the earldom of Mar, lordship of Garrioch, etc. of
which earldom, etc. Isabel countess of Mar, the said sir Malcolm's wife, is
undisputed heiress; and failing heirs of her body, Janet Keith, the said lord
Erskine's wife, is undisputed heiress of the same; wherefore Thomas lord
Erskine requires the king not to give any confirmation of lands or rights
whatsoever, which might sall and belong to the said succession to his said
spouse; which thing the king promised in parliament, Ibidem.
15th March 1390. Signed Henry Waddel notar.

There is also a declaration and promise by king Robert III. under the quarter
seal, that he would accept of no resignation of lands or annualrents, or any
rights whatsomever which belonged to Isabel countess of Mar, in prejudice of
Thomas lord Erskine his wife, to which she could pretend right, as heir to the
said countess of Mar; and that in case he had passed any negligently, or
should hereafter pass any, Chart. in archiv. fam. de Mar.
declares, that the same should be held to be null and of no effect. Dated at
Edinburgh, 22d November, anno regni 4 to, 1393.

Notwithstanding the above, upon the marriage of princess Mary with George lord
of Angus, the king, her father, by the indenture or marriage-contract, dated
24th May 1397, binds himself to confirm and rati^y, under his great seal, all
gifts or tailzies made, or to be made, by dame Isabel countess of Mar, to the
said George of Angus, of any lands or possessions which he has, or may have,
with^^ the kingrick of Scotland; and that he shall receive all resignations of
the said countess Isabel, and give charters and heretable possession to the
said George, and his beloved daughter, obliging himself not to receive any
resignations from the said countess Isabel, of any lands, rents, or
possessions, or to give any confirmations or grants thereupon, The original
i^denture in the archives of the family of Douglas.
but to the said George and his said daughter, retracting also if he has given
any letters to Thomas lord Erskine, etc. etc. etc.

There is a confirmation by king Robert III. of a donation made by sir James
S^^dilands, to his well beloved son, George earl of Angus, of all rights of
succession competent to him, after the decease of Isabel countess of Mar and
Garrioch, of the lands and barony of Cavers, with the office of sheriff-ship
and keeping of Roxburgh castle, with the lordship, castle, and forest of
J^dbur^h, the lordship of Walton and Easdale, in Roxburgh-shire, haill town of
S^lki^k, with the haill services of free tenants in that share, the regality,
superiority, and services or free tenants in the baronies of Buttle and (...),
in Dumsries-shire, an annualrent of two hundred merks out of the burgh of
Haddington, the haill lands and tents of Down, Buck, Cabrach, and Cloveth, in
Banff-shire, the succession to the barony of Tillicultry in Clackmannan-shire,
with the heretable succession to the haill lands to which the heirs of James
earl of Douglas might succeed. Dated May 6th, anno regni octavo.

There is also still preserved, a bond of friendship between David earl of
Crawfurd, and Thomas lord Erskine, obliging themselves to support each other
with their council, etc. And whereas Thomas would be creditor to the said earl
for twelve thousand merks, for the marriage of sir Robert, his son, with the
earl's daughter, he forgives him six thousand merks thereof; and the said earl
obliges himself, after the decease of Isabel countess of Mar, to support the
said lord Erskine, and dame Janet his wife, with all his power and interest,
and with all his friends, in case she would consent to the foresaid marriage,
in the recovery of the earldom of Mar, lordship of Garrioch, etc. to which she
had undoubted right; also in the recovery of all other lands they could pretend
right to; and if the said sir Robert married his daughter, to support him in
all things against all men, referring any differences that might happen betwixt
them to the arbitration of friends, Writs of the family of Mar.
etc. This writ is dated 20th December, 1413.

Thomas lord Erskine died about the year 1419, and was succeeded by his eldest
son,

VIII. ROBERT, eighth lord Erskine, who inherited all the virtues of his noble
ancestors, and omitted no opportunity of exerting himself in defense of the
liberties of his country.

In his father's lifetime he was, with many others of the Scotch nobility,
taken prisoner at the battle of Homildon, Fordun, vol. II. p. 435.
anno 1402, and is then designed dominus de A^loa.

He was one of the Scotch commissioners appointed to treat about king James's
liberty, in 1421; Rymer, tom. X p. 307, 446, etc.
was one of the hostages for his ransom, anno 1424; and remained confined in
England till 1434.

Robert lord Erskine, in 1435, claimed the earldom of Mar, lordship of
Garrioch, etc. to which, after the death of Isabel countess of Mar, and of
earl Alexander her husband, he had right, and was become undoubted heir, being
(as set forth in the preceding title) only son of

1. Thomas lord Erskine, by dame Janet Keith his spouse, who was only child of

2. Sir Edward Keith, by Christian Menteith his spouse, who was daughter and
heiress of

3. Sir John Menteith, lord of Arran, Strathgartnie, and Knapdale, by his
spouse lady Elyne Mar, daughter of Gratney the eleventh earl, and sister of
Donald the twelfth earl of Mar.

The first two articles were fully proven by witnesses, Writs of the fam. of
Mar.
then alive, who swore thereto.

Lady Elyne's marriage with sir John Menteith, was proved by an in^e^tment from
king David II. of the lands of Strathgartnie, to sir John Menteith, Ibidem.
and Flyne, daughter of Gratney earl of Mar, his spouse.

And as a further proof of Christian Menteith's being married to sir Edward
Keith, he produced a charter from sir John Menteith, lord of Arran, etc. in
favors of sir Edward Eeith, and Christian Menteith his dearest daughter,
Ibidem.
and their heirs, of the lands of Pirchock and Ludcairn.

He further showed, that Thomas lord Erskine, his father, and dame Janet Keith
his mother, had, with his consent, conveyed the haill said lands and barony of
Pirchock and Ludcairn, in favors of Duncan of Wemyss, son of sir John Wemyss,
and Elizabeth Erskine his spouse, Ibidem.
their daughter, in free marriage to them, their heirs, etc.

In consequence of these proofs, he was, upon the 22d April 1438, served heir
to lady Isabel Douglas, countess of Mar, etc. before the sheriff of Aberdeen,
and an inquest of the most honorable gentlemen in the county, whose seals are
thereto appended, viz. sir Alexander Forbes, sheriff-depute of Aberdeen,
Alexander of Irvine, John of Forbes, Gilbert of Hay, William of Forbes,
knights, Andrew Keith of Inverugie, John of Ogistoun, John Thane, Alexander of
Meldrum, John of Fyvie, Walter Barclay, Gilbert Menzies, John Bauss, William of
Cadow, Andrew of Buchan, Thomas of Allardice, Thomas of Twinam, William Reid,
Ibidem.
James of Skeen, James Cumin, Gilbert of Sanquhar, and John Mouat.

There is a precept for infefting Robert lord Erskine, as heir to Isabel
countess of Mar, Ibidem.
sealed and dated November 1438.

And an instrument of sasine following thereon, Ibidem.
dated 21st November the same year.

After which lord Erskine took the title of earl of Mar, lord of Garrioch,
etc. and granted many charters of lands belonging thereto.

Notwithstanding that Robert lord Erskine was acknowledged as earl of Mar, and
acted as such, yet he was never entirely in peaceable possession of that
earldom; for king James II.'s council got an act passed in his first
parliament, declaring, that whatsoever lands his majesty's father died
possessed of, or had claimed, Ibidem.
should remain with the king during his minority.

By an indenture betwixt the king's council, and Robert lord Erskine, calling
himself earl of Mar, it was agreed, for the guide and quiet of the land, that
the king shall deliver up to lord Erskine, the castle of Kildrimmie, to be kept
by him till the king's majority; which done, the said lord shall come before
the king, and three estates, and show his rights and claims as far as law will.
And further, it is accordit, that half the revenues belonging to the earldom of
Mar, shall remain with the said lord till the ending of the plea; and that
whenever the said lord shall receive the castle of Kildrimmie, he shall deliver
up not only the castle of Mar, but likeways the castle of Dumbarton, Writs of
the fam. of Mar.
dated 10th August 1440.

There is a protest taken by said lord Erskine, in the hands of Richard Cadie
notar, in the presence of the king and council, in Stirling castle, 9th August
1442, complaining upon the chancellor for refusing to retour him to the
lordship of Garrioch, and put him in possession of the castle of Kildrimmie,
protesting, that he might and should be free to intromit at his own hand with
the haill lands of Mar and Garrioch, etc.

And accordingly he immediately after besieged and took the castle of
Kildrimmie, whereupon the king seized the castle of Alloa. Ibidem.


For the recovery of which there was an indenture entered into between the king
and council on the one part, and lord Erskine on the other, by which lord
Erskine oblige^ himself to deliver up the castle of Kildrimmie betwixt and the
third July next, to any the king should appoint, to be kept by them till the
king's majority, and then to be delivered up to either of them who should be
found to have right to it, at the sight of the three estates, and to account to
the king at his majority for the one half of the earldom of Mar. And the king
and council on their part, obliged themselves, that so soon as the castle of
Kildrimmie should be delivered up to th^se appointed by the king, his majesty
should deliver up to lord Erskine his castle of Alloa, and all the furniture
and warlike stores found therein. This indenture is sealed by the king's privy
seal, and the seals of William bishop of Glasgow, and of James of Livingston,
then keepers of the king's person; and the lords of Graeme and Gray bind
themselves as cautioners for the king and council's fulfilling their part of
the indentures: and on the part of lord Erskine, his seal, and the seal of his
son and heir sir Thomas Erskine, is affixed. And sir Henry Douglas of
Lochleven, Thomas of Wemyss, and William Auchterlony of Kelly, bind themselves
as cautioners for the father and son's performing their part of the indentures,
which bears date the 20th June 1448. Ibidem.


On the 4th September 1449, sir Thoma^ Erskine appeared in parliament as
procurator for his father, and took instruments in the hands of John Anthrie
notar, that lord Erskine was ready to fulfill the terms of the above indenture,
and that his right should not be prejudised by lapse of time, Ibidem.
he being willing to submit all questions to be determined by a full and free
parliament, suspected persons, burgesses, being removed.

There are many other protests taken by Robert lord Erskine, and his son sir
Thomas, betwixt this time and the year 1456; but as they are all to the same
purpose with the last mentioned one, Ibidem.
it is unnecessary to insert more of them here.

At last, in the year 1457, the king brought a reduction against sir Thomas,
now lord Erskine (his father being then dead) of his father lord Erskine's
service, Ibidem.
abovementioned, to Isabel countess of Mar.

The heads of the reduction are, 1 st, That lord Erskine ought not to have been
served heir, In pub. archiv.
because there were no witnesses who could swear to his being come of Elyne of
Mar, who was long since dead.

2 dly, Because the said service was contrary to the act of parliament, anent
the king's keeping possession of all lands or rights his majesty's father was
in possession of, or had claimed at the time of his decease.

3 dly, Because Isabel countess of Mar was not the person who died last vested
and fa^sed in that earldom, but Alexander Stewart and Thomas his natural son,
to both whom the king was heir.

4 thly, Because the king himself was nearest heir to Isabel countess of Mar,
as being descended from Isabel of Mar, king Robert Bruce's first queen, mother
of princess Marjory; and Isabel of Mar being eldest daughter of Gratney earl
of Mar, ought to be preferred to the descendents of Elyne her second sister in
the earldom of Mar, which was an indivisable subject.

Upon these grounds an assize of error met at Aberdeen, where the king himself
was present, and they, by their verdict, dated 15th May 1457, reduced the
service of Robert lord Erskine; and sound, that the king only had right to the
earldom of Mar, lordship of Garrioch, etc.

This reduction was confirmed in parliament, Records of parliament.
5th November 1457.

But against all these proceedings, Thomas lord Erskine, entered his protest;
and he and his posterity always continued to assert their right to the earldom
of Mar, and to complain of the violence with which they said it was wrested
from them.

At last, in the reign of queen Mary, John, then lord Erskine, obtained leave
to have this question tried anew, and to have it determined by an inquest,
whether he was nearest heir to Isabel countess of Mar or not. And lord Erskine
having laid before the inquest the proofs of his propinquity, as above deduced,
and shown, that there was nothing in the four reasons of reduction, at the
instance of the king, 1457;

1 st, Because it never was before heard of, or pretended, that the proof of
propinquity to one's ancestors, by undoubted records, was not as valid as that
by witnesses, which in many cases, by lapse of time, was rendered impossible.
That if this was to be established as a rule, the king would be found to have
right to one half of the lands of Scotland, as well as to the earldom of Mar.

That as to the second reason, the act of parliament anent the king's keeping
possession during his minority; that could be no reason for reducing the
service of Robert lord Erskine to Isabel countess of Mar, but only for not
giving him possession till the king's majority.

That as to the third reason, that Isabel countess of Mar did not die last
vested and saised, but earl Alexander her husband, and Thomas his natural son;
it was of no weight, because that Alexander was only saised of that estate in
right of liferent, failing issue of the marriage, as appeared by the charter of
the said countess Isabel, and earl Alexander, dated 9th December 1404.

And which is confirmed by king Robert's charter of confirmation, 21st January
1404-5, by which it undeniably appears, that the charter of resignation by
Isabel countess of Mar, 12th August 1404, was altered both by the parties
concerned, and their sovereign lord the king; and therefore the resignation and
charter that followed thereon, 28th May 1426, in favors of the said Alexander,
and Thomas his natural son (who died before him without issue) was null and
void.

That as to the fourth reason, that Isabel of Mar, queen to Robert Bruce, was
daughter to Gratney earl of Mar, and eldest sister to Elyne, who married sir
John Menteith; that it was well known, that Isabel of Mar, queen to Robert
Bruce, was sister to Gratney earl of Mar* and not his daughter, but daughter
to (...)earl of Mar, his father, which was fully proved by Gratney earl of
Mar being always styled, in king Robert's charters, his brother, but never his
father.

The inquest accordingly met, and found by their retour, dated 5th May 1555,
that he was the nearest heir to Robert earl of Mar and (...), lord Erskine,
etc. which Robert was (...) heir to Isabel countess of Mar, and to Gratney
earl of Mar, her great grandfather.

And in 1562, he was restored to the earldom of Mar, per u^dum justitiae,
which was ratified in parliament, 4th June 1563.

He obtained a charter under the great seal, as heir to lady Isabel countess of
Mar, of the whole estate and earldom of Mar, comprehending Strathdon,
Braemarr, Cromarr, St^athd^e, and lordship of Garrioch, etc. 23d June 1565.

And there is an instrument of sasine, dated the 25th of July thereafter.

The lands abovementioned, having been all in non-entry from the year 1435, to
the 1565, being 130 years.

We have chosen to give the reader the whole of this remarkable suit at one
view, and shall now return to

Robert, first earl of Mar, of the name of Erskine, Stewart's history of the
royal family.
who married a daughter of Robert Stewart, lord of Lorn and Innermeath, by whom
he had a son,

Thomas, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Elizabeth, married to sir Henry Douglas of Lochleven.

He died anno 1453, and was succeeded by his son,

IX. THOMAS, ninth lord Erskine, and second earl of Mar of the name of Erskine.

Although this noble lord seems to have had good reason to be offended with the
court, for denying him in such an extraordinary manner, what he had a just
title to, as above set forth; yet he was a man of such honor and integrity,
that nothing could shake his loyalty and affection to his prince: and we find
him in the very year 1457, in which he was dispossessed of the earldom of Mar,
employed in many negotiations of state, Rymer, tom. XI. p. 40^.
and was then one of the guarantees of a treaty with the English.

He was also a firm and steady friend of king James III. and entered into none
of the cabals with the rest of the nobility against him, but continued steadfast
in his loyalty to him to the very last, notwithstanding the king had taken from
him the castle of Stirling, which had been enjoyed for many generations by his
ancestors.

He appears to have been possessed of a vast estate, Chart. in archiv. Jacobi
III. et archiv. fam. de Mar.
by the different charters, under the great seal, granted to him, of many great
baronies and other lands, betwixt the 1460 and 1480.

He married lady Janet Douglas, daughter of James earl of Morton, Writs of the
fam. of Morton.
by lady Jean Stewart his wife, daughter of king James I. and by her had a son,

Alexander, his heir, -- and three daughters.

1. Elizabeth, married to sir Alexander Seton of Touch.

2. Mary, married to William Livingston of Kilsyth.

3. Muricla, married to the second earl of Marishall.

He was succeeded by his son,

X. ALEXANDER, tenth lord Erskine, and third earl of Mar of the Erskine
family, who was always in great favor with king James IV. having been
entrusted with the keeping of him in his minority, Chart. in archiv. Jacobi IV.
et archiv. fam. de Mar.
and was by his majesty appointed one of his privy council, and restored to the
government of the castle of Dunbarton.

He got a charter under the great seal, upon his father's resignation,
Alexandro filio et haeredi Thomae domini Erskine, of the lands and barony of
Alloa, forestry of Clackmannan, Nisbet, and Dunglass in Roxburgh-shire,
Calin-house, Tulch-Gorme, and Middlestead, in Stirling-shire, Pittarrow, in
Forfar-shire, the barony of Kelly, in Aberdeen-shire, Balmakellie and Newton,
Ibidem, and Haddington's collections.
in Kincardine-shire, and one hundred pounds out of the customs of Aberdeen,
etc. etc. 12th August 1489.

There are many charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Alexandro domino Erskine, of baronies and other lands, betwixt 1490 and 1500.

He married, 1st, Christian, daughter of sir Robert Crichton of Sanquhar,
ancestor of the earl of Dumfries.

He married, 2dly, Helen, daughter of Alexander first lord Home, widow of Adam,
son and heir of sir Patrick Hepburn lord of Hailes, Archiv. fam. de Mar.
by whom he had three sons, and two daughters.

1. Robert, his heir.

2. Mr. Alexander Erskine.

3. Walter Erskine of Over-Donottars.

1st daughter, lady Christian, married to sir David Stewart of Rosyth.

2. Lady Agnes, married to sir William Menteith of Carse.

He was a most liberal benefactor to the religious. He founded and largely
endowed a chaplainry at Alloa, Chart. in pub. archiv.
for the safety of the souls of the late king James III. and the present king
James, and for the souls of Christian his late spouse, and Helen Home his
present, and all his ancestors, Ibidem.
his heirs and successors, etc.

He died before the year 1510, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. ROBERT, eleventh lord Erskine, and fourth earl of Mar, who, in his
father's lifetime, anno 1506, got a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
Roberto magistro de Erskine, officii vicecomitatus de Stirling, to him and his
heirs for ever.

He also appears to have been heretable sheriff of Selkirk.

There is likeways a charter, Roberto magistro de Erskine, of the barony of
Sinton, Ibidem.
anno 1507. After his father's death, he got charters, under the great seal, of
many lands and baronies, in 1510 and 1511.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of sir George Campbell of Loudoun, by whom he
had five sons, and four daughters.

1. Robert, who died before his father, unmarried.

2. John, his heir.

3. James of Little-Sauchie, ancestor of the Erskines of Balgony.

4. Alexander, parson of Monnybreck.

5. William.

1st daughter, lady Catharine, married to Alexander second lord Elphingston.

2. Lady Margaret, married, 1st, to John Haldane of Gleneagles; 2dly, to George
Home of Lawndies.

3. Lady Elizabeth, married to sir James Forbes of Torwood.

4. Lady Janet, married to John Murray of Touchaddam.

He accompanied king James IV. to the fatal field of Floudon, where he lost his
life, with his royal master, anno 1513.

He was succeeded by his son,

XII. JOHN, twelfth lord Erskine, and fifth earl of Mar, who, in the beginning
of the year 1515, was sent to France by the estates of the kingdom, Rymer, tom.
XIII. p. 509.
to endeavor to get Scotland included in their treaty with the English; and
immediately upon his return, being a man of great abilities, singular probity
and honor, was entrusted with the keeping of the young king James V. and was
appointed governor of Stirling castle, where the king and he resided; and he
acquitted himself in that great charge so much to his majesty's satisfaction,
Hathornden.
that he held him in high esteem ever after.

In the year 1517, Rymer tom. XIII. p. 60^
John lord Erskine is one of the guarantees of a treaty with the English.

There is a charter 15th May 1525, constituting John lord Erskine, and his
heirs, captain and constable of the castle of Stirling, together with the
keeping of his majesty's parks and wards of the same, with appartenances, and
all lands, sees, profits, privileges, devoirs, Writs of the fam. of Mar.
customs, duties, sicklike, and as freely, as he or any of his ancestors had
done heretofore.

In the year 1534, he was sent ambassador to the court of England, to negotiate
some matters of the highest importance, Rymer, tom. XIV. p. 540.
and concluded a treaty with that nation to the satisfaction of his royal
master.

He accompanied king James to France, Hathornden, and Stewart's history.
when he went to marry princess Magdalene de Valois, daughter of Francis I.
anno 1537.

After the death of James V. 1542, the keeping of his insant sovereign was
committed to him. Indeed the care and keeping of the king's children had been
so often given to this family, that they now claimed it as their privilege, and
actually enjoyed the same, till such time as king James VI. succeeded to the
crown of England. He discharged his duty in that high and difficult trust of
the guardianship of his young sovereign with the greatest fidelity and
prudence; All our historians.
and though this noble lord was one of those that inclined to the reformation,
then beginning in Scotland, yet he always steadily and vigorously opposed the
practices of the court of England, which he thought inconsistent with the
honor and independency of his country, and showed himself equally incapable of
being moved by English gold, or the threatenings of a party. Queen Mary
remained in his keeping till the year 1548, when the estates of the kingdom, to
avoid the practices of the court of England, and of the faction in Scotland
that had joined with them, thought proper to order him to carry the queen to
the court of France, Ibidem.
there to be educated under the eye and care of Francis I. which he accordingly
did, and delivered her safe into the hands of that monarch, and immediately
returned home.

By many charters in the public records, Chart. in pub. archiv. et in archiv.
familiae de Mar.
inter 1516 et 1540, of the different lands and baronies he was possessed of, he
appears to have had an immense estate.

He married lady Margaret Campbell, eldest daughter to Archibald second earl of
Argyle, Ibidem.
by whom he had six sons, and two daughters.

1. Robert, master of Erskine, who married lady Margaret Graeme, daughter of
William earl of Montrose. Charta penes duc^m de Montrose.
He got a charter, upon the resignation of his father, under the great seal, to
Robert master of Erskine, and Margaret Graeme his spouse, of the lands and
barony of Kelly, in Aberdeen-shire, 20th May 1536. Rymer, tom. XIV. p. 796.
He was taken prisoner at Solway-moss, and ransomed, anno 1543. He was killed
at the battle of Pinkie 1547, without lawful issue; but left a natural son by
Mrs. Jean Home, Mr. David Erskine, commendator of Dryburgh, of whom the
Erskines of Seafield are descended.

2. Thomas, master of Erskine, a youth of great hopes. He, when a young man,
was one of the secret council who got the Scots included in the treaty betwixt
England and France, Ibidem, tom. XV. p. 255.
anno 1551, and that same year he was one of the Scotch ambassadors appointed
to treat with the court of England. Ibidem.
He married Margaret, daughter of Malcolm lord Fleming, but died also without
lawful issue. He left a natural son, Adam Erskine, commendator of
Cambuskenneth, who, with his cousin, the commendator of Dryburgh, and the
famous George Buchanan, were preceptors to king James VI.

3. John, his father's heir.

4. Sir Alexander Erskine of Gogar, ancestor of the earls of Kelly, commonly
designed by our historians master of Mar.

5. Sir George Erskine of Innerteel, one of the senators of the college of
justice.

6. Sir James Erskine of Tillybody.

1st daughter, lady Elizabeth, married to Walter Seton of Touch, and had issue.

2. Lady Margaret, mother to James prior of St. Andrews, and earl of Murray, by
James V. She afterward married sir Robert Douglas of Lochleven, ancestor of
the earl of Morton.

He died anno 1552, and was succeeded by his son,

XIII. JOHN, thirteenth lord Erskine, and sixth earl of Mar, who was a man of
unblemished honor and integrity; and although he was concerned in every
transaction of importance in this country, from his father's death till his
own, yet he conducted himself so in those factious unquiet times, that he is
allowed by the historians of both sides to have been a steady friend to his
country, and a man of as unspotted a character as any person then upon the
stage.

Being born a younger brother, he was educated for the church, and was, when
very young, Keith's bishops.
by king James V. appointed commendator of Cambuskenneth, and Inchmahomo in
Perth-shire.

Immediately after his father's death, he was appointed governor of the castle
of Edinburgh, In archiv. familiae de Mar.
which, to the satisfaction of the nation, he nobly kept against all
foreigners, both French and English. Immediately upon queen Mary's return from
France, anno 1561, he was nominated one of her privy council, and got from her
several grants of church lands, at that time newly dissolved.

He then likeways, as has been beforementioned, renewed his claim to the
earldom of Mar, and obtained liberty to have that cause re-heard; and his
right being clearly and distinctly proven, he was restored, per modum
justitiae, to the earldom of Mair, lordship of Garrioch, etc. anno 1562. The
same was afterward ratified and confirmed by parliament, 4th June 1563, as
before observed. He took his seat accordingly as earl of Mar, Rolls of
parliament.
and he and his successors have always since protested, that they ought to be
called as the first earl.

There is a charter from queen Mary and king Henry, In archiv. (...) Mar.
to John earl of Mar, 18th July 1566, narrating, that the family of Erskine of
long and bygone times had the custody and keeping of the principal forts and
places of strength in the kingdom, and had always discharged their trust
faithfully and stoutly; and their majesty's being desirous to keep noble,
ancient, and untainted families in their native lands, rights, and possessions,
and to make them secure of the same; and particularly considering, that John
earl of Mar, and his predecessors, had, for a long time bygone, been keepers
of the castle of Stirling, and sheriffs of the shire thereof; therefore they
gave and granted, heretably and irredeemably, to the said earl of Mar, and his
heirs, bearing the arms and surname of Erskine, the office of sheriff of
Stirling-shire, or the prefecture or captainship, and custody of the castle of
Stirling, with the park, garden, etc. etc. Ibidem.
together with the office of bailiary and chamberlainry of the lands and
lordship of Stirling, and of the water of Forth, etc.

In the year 1566, how soon king James VI. was born, the care and keeping of
him was committed to the earl of Mar, which great trust he faithfully
discharged, and with great prudence and firmness, took all imaginable care of
his royal education, and to protect his sacred person from the violence and
snares of the two contending parties, who left no means whatsoever untried of
getting him into their hands. Melvil's memoirs, and all our historians.
For this reason he removed the king from Edinburgh to Stirling, where he was
governor, and had the sole command. Although he always behaved with the utmost
submission to the queen, and had the greatest regard for her majesty, yet the
unhappy situation of his country at that time forced him to concur with those
who set the crown on the prince's head, anno 1567. And as he appears not to
have been satisfied with the intentions of either of the parties, nor with
their method of pursuing them, he declined being engaged on either side,
further than the preservation of the king's person, and the liberties of his
country made it absolutely necessary for him to be. And although, when the
factions came to blows, he generally joined and supported the party that called
themselves the king's, yet as he plainly showed that he thought them too much
guided and influenced by the court of England, it is certain they never let him
into any of their secrets.

When the earl of Lennox, the regent, was surprised, and killed in the town of
Stirling, he, by the timely assistance he brought to the king's party,
prevented the whole heads of it from being cut off or made prisoners: and when
a new regent was to be chosen, the confidence that the nation in general had in
the earl of Marr's integrity and moderation, forced the king's party to consent
to his being made regent, notwithstanding all the practices used by queen
Elizabeth and her ambassadors to prevent it.

So soon as he was in possession of that high office, he applied himself
vigorously to allay, as far as possible, the factions which tore his country in
pieces, and to free it from the influence of English councils. In order to
these things he had accomodated matters with Kirkcaldie of Grange, Ibidem.
and others who were in possession of the castle of Edinburgh, and persuaded
them to join and cooperate with him, to bring about peace and tranquillity,
thing so much to be wished for: but just when he was on the point of bringing
these good purposes to bear, he, to the great misfortune of his country, died a
young man, in November 1572; as some say, not without the suspicion of poison.

He married Annabella Murray, daughter of lord Tullibardine, by whom he had a
son,

John, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Lady Margaret, married to Archibald earl of Angus.

He was succeeded by his son,

XIV. JOHN, fourteenth lord Erskine, and seventh earl of Mar, who was very
young at the time of his father's death, and was educated in the castle of
Stirling, along with king James VI. whom the states of the kingdom, after the
death of lord Mar, committed to the care of his widow the countess of Mar;
and though this earl had been educated with king James, yet he, in his younger
days, was so far seduced by some others of the nobility, as to forget himself,
and the unblemished loyalty of his ancestors, and to join with them in
surprising the king at Ruth^en, anno 1582, for which his whole lands were
justly seized, and he obliged to fly the country: however, he soon became
sensible of the crime he had committed, Chart. in pub. archiv. et ^amil. de
Mar.
and the king was so gracious as to pardon him, restore to him his whole
estate, and receive him again into his favor.

In the year 1595, the king entrusted the keeping of his new born son and heir,
as usual, to the earl of Mar, with a strict order to him not to deliver him up
to any person whatever, Ibidem.
without a written mandate under his own hand; and, in case of his death, not
to deliver him to any person whatsomever, neither to the queen his mother, nor
even to the parliament, if they required it, till he was eighteen years of age,
then he would command himself.

Lord Mar was naturally a man of great abilities, and being bred from his
infancy in the factious court of king James VI. he became an able statesman. He
was the person the king chose to send to England, to congratulate queen
Elizabeth upon the suppression of the attempt of the earl of Essex. Melvil, and
all our historians.
And it is acknowledged, he entered into some secret negotiations and measures
for securing the king's succession to the crown of England. He was accompanied
by the abbot of Kinloss, and matters were managed with such dexterity and
address, that most of the queen's ministers and great men of England, entered
into engagements, unknown to her majesty, and to one another, to support king
James's title to the crown of England.

When king James went to England, anno 1603, he carried lord Mar along with
him; but before he came to York, lord Mar was obliged to return to Scotland to
appease queen Anne, who had demanded her daughter princess Elizabeth, and her
son prince Charles, whom lord Mar had left under the care of his countess,
with express command, not to deliver them to any person whatever, without an
order under his hand. It is said, that the queen never forgave him this,

However, immediately thereafter he followed the king to England, and so soon
as he got to London he was appointed a privy councillor of that kingdom, and
was enstalled one of the knights of the garter at Windsor 1603.

He continued much at court, and greatly in the king's favor, for the first
eight or ten years after he went to England, who entrusted and confided much in
him with regard to the management of foreign affairs, and he was said to be at
the head of the French saction, as it was then called.

On the 3d of February 1620, he obtained a charter, upon his own resignation,
of the earldom of Mar, lordship of Strathdon, and Strathdee, of Garrioch, and
Alloa, etc. together with the heretable offices of captainship of the castle of
Stirling, and sheriff of the shire thereof, chamberlainry of the lordship of
Stirling, Menteith, Br^chin, and Navarre, bailiary and admiralty of the water
of Forth, to him and his heirs. Chart. in archiv is fam. de Mar, et in pub.
archivis.
This charter has a de novo damus erecting the whole lordships, lands, offices,
etc. contained therein, into one whole and free earldom of Mar, and declares
infeftment, taken at the tower or castle of Alloa, shall be sufficient for the
whole.

Soon after the death of Henry prince of Wales, whose education he had had the
care of, he left the court, and returned to Scotland, where he was made lord
high treasurer, in which office he continued till the 1631, that he resigned
it, and retired to the country from all public business.

It does not appear that he received from his royal master any gratuities in
England, but he was most bountiful to him in his grants of lands in Scotland;
by which, and his paternal possessions, he became possessed of one of the
greatest estates of any person in this kingdom.

He married, 1st, Anne, daughter of David lord Drummond, by whom he had a son,

John, his heir.

He married, 2dly, lady Mary Stewart, daughter of Esme, and sister of Ludovick
duke of Lennox, by whom he had seven sons and four daughters.

1. James, earl of Buchan.

2. Henry, lord Cardross, ancestor of the present earl of Buchan, ( vide p.
97th of this work.) Lord Mar, having in 1604 obtained the peerage of Cardross,
with power to assign it to any of his sons he thought proper, he accordingly
disponed it to his son Henry, who, in consequence thereof, sat as lord Cardross
in the parliament of Scotland even during his father's life.

3. Sir Alexander Erskine, one of the senators of the college of justice, who
was blown up in Dunglass house, anno 1640, without issue.

4. Sir Charles Erskine of Alva, of whom the present sir Harry Erskine, the
late Charles Erskine of Tinwald lord justice-clerk, his son lord Barjarg, etc.
are descended.

5. Sir John Erskine of Otterstown.

6. Sir Arthur Erskine of Scotscraig.

7. William Erskine, cup bearer to king Charles II. and master of the
charter house at London.

1st daughter, lady Mary, married, 1st, to William sixth earl marishal, and had
issue; 2dly, to Patrick earl of Panmure; but to him she had no issue.

2. Lady Anne, married to John earl of Rothes, and by him was mother of John
duke of Rothes.

3. Lady Margaret, married to John earl of Kinghorn, ancestor of the earl of
Strathmore, without issue.

4. Lady Katharine, married to Thomas second earl of Hadmton, and had issue.

John earl of Mar died in an advanced age in the year 1634, and was succeeded
by his son,

XV. JOHN, fifteenth lord Erskine, and eighth earl of Mar, who was a man of
learning, and a great projector, whereby he spent a considerable part of his
estate.

He was made one of the knights of the bath, at the coronation of Henry prince
of Wales, anno 1610.

He was appointed one of his majesty's privy council in Scotland, one of the
senators of the college of justice, and governor of the castle of Edinburgh,
anno 1615.

He continued a lord of session till the year 1626.

He was removed from being governor of the castle of Edinburgh anno 1638, and
general Ruthven put in his place.

In the same year, king Charles having formed the design of purchasing all the
heretable jurisdictions, prevailed with lord Mar, to enter into a minute with
him, obliging himself to sell to his majesty the heretable sheriff-ship of
Stirling-shire, and the bailiary of the water of Forth, for the sum of eight
thousand pound sterling; dated at Whitehall, 15th February 1638. And
accordingly the earl resigned these two offices, Writs of the family of Mar.
4th November 1641, and of the same date, gets a bond for the eight thousand
pound.

Upon the first breaking out of the great rebellion in king Charles the I.'s
time, he appears to have inclined to join with the covenanters, and was by them
appointed a privy councillor for life, Rescinded acts of parlt.
anno 1641; but so soon as he discovered their true intention, he openly
deserted them, joined the loyal party, and continued to act steadily with them
as long as he lived; and on that account, he had his estate sequestrated,
Guthry's memoirs.
and suffered many other hardships.

He sold many of his lands in Scotland, and purchased a large estate in
Ireland, Writs of the fam. of Mar.
which he and his family totally lost in the Irish rebellion.

He married lady Christian Hay, daughter of Francis ninth earl of Errol, by
whom he had three sons and two daughters.

1. John, his heir.

2. Sir Francis Erskine.

3. William Erskine.

The last two died without issue.

1st daughter, lady Elizabeth, married to Archibald second lord Napier, to whom
she had two sons and three daughters.

2. Lady Mary Erskine, who died unmarried.

He died anno 1654, and was succeeded by his son,

XVI. JOHN, sixteenth lord Erskine, and ninth earl of Mar, who, in his
father's lifetime, got charters under the great seal, Johanni domino Erskine,
totius comitatus de Mar, etc. etc. This is instructed by several charters in
the public register, between the years 1640 and 1642

He was a man of great honor and merit, and invariably attached to the
interest of his king and country.

He was much courted by the covenanters and their party, to accept of a command
in their army: But, upon his absolute refusal to have any connection with them,
Guthry's memoirs, p. 60. and 70.
the command designed for him in their army, together with the Stirling-shire
regiment, was given to lord Livingston.

He having joined with the marquis of Montrose, the parliament ordered his
houses of Erskine and Alloa to be plundered.

After the battle of Kilsyth, he advertised the marquis of Montrose of general
Lesly's advancing against him, and warned him of the danger he was in. Guthry's
memoirs.
But this could not prevent the fatal battle of Philiphaugh, from whence he,
(then only lord Erskine) with great difficulty, made his escape to his father's
estate in Mar, where he raised some of the friends and vassals of his family
for his majesty's service. For these, and his other loyal actions, Minutes of
parliament.
the parliament fined him in 24,000 merks, to be disposed of by general Lesly's
advice, anno 1645.

After his father's death, he had several fines imposed upon him, though his
whole estate was sequestrated, and continued so till the restoration; during
which time, he lived privately in a little cottage at the gate of his house of
Alloa. Ibidem.


After the restoration, he got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
from king Charles II. Johanni comiti de Mar, of many lands and baronies,
inter 1662 et 1664.

He married, Writs of the fam. of Buccleuch.
1st, lady Mary Scot, daughter of Walter earl of Buccleugh, by whom he had no
surviving issue.

He married, 2dly, lady Mary MacKenzie, daughter of George earl of Seaforth,
Writs of the family of Seaforth.
by whom he had two sons and three daughters,

1. Charles, his heir.

2. George, who died young.

1st daughter, lady Barbara, married to James marquis of Douglas.

2. lady Jean, married to John eleventh earl of Glencairn.

3. lady Sophia, married to Alexander lord Pit^^igo. They all had issue.

He died, anno 1664, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVII. CHARLES, seventeenth lord Erskine, and tenth earl of Mar, who, though he
died a young man, yet, he showed himself, while he lived, worthy of his
ancestors, and strongly attached to the interest of his country.

King Charles the II. appointed him one of the lords of his privy council, anno
1682.

About the same time, he raised a regiment of foot upon his own expenses for
his majesty's service, which has since been known by the name of the Scotch
Fuzileers; and he continued colonel of this regiment till he died.

The great debts his grandfather and father had been obliged to contract,
during the time of the grand rebellion, obliged him to sell a great part of his
estate; and, among other lands, the lordship of Erskine, which had never before
been out of the family, and which is now possessed by the lord Blantyre.

Although he was one of king James VII.'s privy councillors, yet he was far
from approving of the measures followed in the latter end of that reign, and
had actually left his house in order to retire and live privately abroad, when
the news of king William's landing came to Scotland.

He joined the convention of estates, and raised a large body of his vassals
and followers in support thereof; but dyed very soon thereafter.

He married lady Mary Maule, daughter of George earl of Panmure, by whom he had
eight sons, and one daughter. Two of his sons were named Charles, two of them
George, and one by the name of Francis, who all died young.

The surviving sons were,

1. John, his heir.

2. James Erskine of Grange, a man of extraordinary abilities, who, being bred
to the law, became so eminent in that profession, when very young, that he was
by her majesty queen Anne, appointed one of the senators of the college of
justice, anno 1706, and thereafter lord justice-clerk; in which offices he had
many opportunities of displaying the great talents he was possessed of.

3. Colonel Henry Erskine, a young man of a great military genius, who was
unfortunately killed at the battle of Almanza in Spain, anno 1707.

His daughter, lady Jean, married to sir Hugh Paterson of Bannockburn, and had
issue.

He died in the slower of his age, in 1689, and was succeeded by his son,

XVIII. JOHN, eighteenth lord Erskine, and eleventh earl of Mar, who was a man
of the most shining parts, and greatest capacity, of most men in the age he
lived in.

He was very young when his father died, and, upon his becoming of age, was
appointed one of the lords of the privy council in Scotland, had the command of
a regiment of foot, and was made knight of the most noble order of St. Andrew.

In the year 1705, he was made one of the principal secretaries of state for
Scotland, and, the year following, was appointed one of the commissioners for
the treaty of union betwixt the two nations. He joined and concurred heartily
with others of the Scotch nobility, who at last brought that great affair to a
conclusion, notwithstanding the great opposition it met with from several other
Scotch lords, whose spirited protests are still preserved in the records of
that parliament.

He was elected one of the sixteen peers for Scotland, to the four first
British parliaments, viz. in the years 1707, 1708, 1710, and 1713.

In the year 1708, he was appointed one of the lords of the privy council, and
was always in the greatest favor with his royal mistress queen Anne, who was
thought to confide in him more than in most men, with regard to her most secret
councils and affairs of state.

And in the year 1712, she again appointed him one of the principal secretaries
of state.

Upon the accession of king George the I. he was deprived of all his offices,
and, in the year 1715, he retired to his estate in the North of Scotland, where
he, unhappily for his country and himself, raised a rebellion, and proclaimed
the pretender at Kirkmichael in Perth-shire, on the 11th of September that
year; and being joined by several of the disaffected nobility and gentry, he
got together about 6 or 7000 men, most of them unarmed, and all undisciplined,
who rendesvouzed at Perth about the beginning of November, from whence they
marched to Sheriff-muir, near Dumblane, where, on the 13th of that month, being
met by the king's army, commanded by John duke of Argyle, inferior in numbers,
but superior in regularity and discipline, a smart engagement ensued, in which
a good deal of blood was shed on both sides. The earl of Mar behaved like a
brave officer, having his horse shot under him, and showing every token of
spirit and gallantry, but neither of the generals could claim the victory, the
duke retiring to Stirling, and the earl to Perth: however, it had all the
effect of a victory to the government, for the earl of Mar was never, after
his retreat to Perth, able again to bring the rebels forces together, but was
obliged to make his escape beyond seas, and in the year 1716, was attainted of
high treason, along with the duke of Ormond and lord Bolingbroke, and their
honors and estates were forfeited to the crown.

This unhappy lord, after his going abroad, followed the pretender to Rome, and
remained in his service till the year 1721. He then went to Paris, and
continued there till 1729; when, on the account of his bad state of health, he
was obliged to go to Aix la Chapelle, where he continued till his death, Which
happened in May 1732.

His estate was sold by the commissioners of enquiry into the forfeited
estates, and bought by the earl's brother, the said Mr. Erskine of Grange, for
the benefit of his nephew lord Erskine, to whom Mr. Erskine conveyed the same,
anno 1739.

This earl married, 1st, lady Margaret Hay, daughter of Thomas earl of Kinnoul,
by whom he had two sons,

1. John, who died an infant.

2. Thomas, now lord Erskine.

He married 2dly, lady Frances Pierpont, daughter of Evelyn duke of Kingston,
in England, by whom he had one daughter,

Lady Frances Erskine, on whom king George the I. was graciously pleased to
settle, out of her father's estate, the same fortune she was entitled to by her
mother's marriage-settlement.

His majesty was likewise pleased to give the countess of Mar, from the time
of her husband's attainder, the same jointure she was entitled to by her
marriage-settlements in case of his death.

Lady Frances Erskine, married her cousin James Erskine, son of her uncle Mr.
Erskine of Grange, and has issue two sons, John-Francis, and James-Francis
Erskines, both officers in the British service.

XIX. THOMAS lord Erskine, only son of John late earl of Mar, is in possession
of his estate in the manner abovementioned: and, had it not been for his
father's attainder, would have been the thirteenth earl of Mar of this family,
and nineteenth lord Erskine, in a direct line from father to son.

He married lady Charlotte Hope, daughter of Charles earl of Hopeton.

ARMS.
Quarterly; 1st and 4th argent, a pale sable for Erskine; 2d and 3d azure, a
bend between six cross croslets fitchee or, for the title of Mar.

CREST; on a wreath a dexter hand couped above the wrist, holding a dagger
erect, proper, the pommel and hilt or.

SUPPORTERS; two griffins argent, beaked winged, and armed or.

MOTTO; Je pense plus.

CHIEF SEATS,
Were Alloa, castle of Kildrimmie, Castle-town of Mar, at Stirling, etc.

DRUMMOND Earl of MELFORT.
THE immediate ancestor of this noble family was,

JAMES, third earl of Perth, the twentyfirst generation of that illustrious
house, in a direct male-line, who married lady Anne Gordon, daughter of George
marquis of Huntly, by whom he had two sons, and one daughter.

1. James, fourth earl of Perth, lord high chancellor of Scotland.

2. John, afterward earl of Melfort.

His daughter, lady Anne, married to John earl of Errol, lord high constable of
Scotland, and had issue.

I. JOHN, second son of James third earl of Perth, being a man of great parts,
both natural and acquired, made a considerable figure in his time, and married,
1st, Sophia, sole heiress and representative of the most ancient family of
Lundin of that ilk, in the county of Fife, whose issue by her will be mentioned
under the title of Drummond earl of Perth.

He married, 2dly, Eupheme, daughter of sir Thomas Wallace of Craigie, baronet,
lord justice-clerk. To the issue of this marriage only was the peerage granted,
and they were the only sufferers by the attainder.

Mr. Drummond was in great favor with king Charles II. who, in 1680, made him
general of the ordnance, and deputy governor of Edinburgh castle.

In 1682, when the duke of Queensberry was appointed lord high treasurer of
Scotland, Mr. Drummond was made treasurer depute.

In 1684, he was promoted to be one of the principal secretaries of state,
which high office he held till the king's death.

Upon the accession of king James VII. to the crown, being no less a favorite
of that prince, Chart. in pub. archivis.
he was continued in the same office, and was raised to the dignity of the
peerage, by the title of viscount Melfort, 20th April, 1685.

The king also made him a grant of the barony of Melfort in Argyle-shire, Acts
of parliment.
with the estate of Duchal, which were then dissolved from the crown, by act of
parliament for that purpose.

His majesty further dignified him with the titles of earl of Melfort, viscount
Forth, lord Drummond of Riccarton, Castlemain, and Gilston, by patent to the
heirs of his second marriage, dated 12th of August 1686.

When the most ancient order of the knights of the thistle was revived, he was
amongst the first who had the honor conserred upon him by king James VII. and
as he had been always steady in his loyalty to that unfortunate prince, he
followed him to France, attended him in his expedition to Ireland, and
afterward to St. Germains, where he was created a duke; Records of parliament.
but not returning to Scotland within the time limited by law, he was attainted
of high treason, and his estate and honors were forfeited to the crown: Ibidem.
but it is expressly provided, by a particular clause in the act of attainder,
M. S. account transmitted from France.
that the children of the first marriage, by the heiress of Lundin, shall
suffer no prejudice thereby.

He lived many years in France, where he was always designed duke of Melfort,
and by his second lady had six sons and five daughters.

1. John.

2. Lord Thomas, who was an officer of rank in the service of Charles VI.
emperor of Germany, but died unmarried, anno 1715.

3. Lord William, who was invested with the ecclesiastical dignity of abbe
prirol of Liege, and died in Spain, anno 1742.

4. Lord Andrew, who was a colonel of horse in the French service, and married
Magdalene Silvia de St. Hermione, daughter of Joachim de St. Hermione,
lieutenant general of the French armies, by whom he had a son, designed count
de Melfort, now a major general in the French service. He married
Jean-Elizabeth de la Port, daughter of Peter-John-Francis de la Port,
intendant of Dauphiny, by whom he has a son named Lewis-Peter-Francis-Malcolm
Drummond of Melfort.

5. Lord Bernard, who died young at Doway.

6. Lord Philip, an officer in the French service, who died of the wounds he
received in the wars of Lewis XIV.

1st daughter, lady Henriet, died unmarried, anno 1752.

2. Lady Mary, was married to count Castle Blanco, a Spanish nobleman, but died
without issue, anno 1713.

3. Lady Frances, who, after her sister's death, by a dispensation from the
Pope, married count Castle Blanco, her brother-in-law, and died anno 1726,
leaving issue a son, who married an heiress in Spain, and two daughters, the
eldest married to Mr. de Campillo, prime minister to Philip V. king of Spain;
after whose death she married, 2dly, lord Peter Stewart, second son to the duke
of Lyria, a grandee of Spain, and grandson of the marshal duke de Berwick. His
second daughter, lady Margaret, was also married to a grandee of Spain.

4. Lady Louisa, died at Paris unmarried.

5. Lady Ther^sa Margaretta, still alive at Paris, unmarried.

The duke died at St. Germains in January 1714, and was succeeded by his eldest
son of the second marriage.

II. JOHN, second duke of Melfort. He married a lady of the noble family of
Lusanne, widow of the duke of Albemarle, second natural son of king James VII.
by Mrs. Churchhill, who was general of the galleys, and enjoyed the high office
of grand prior.

By her he had issue three sons.

1. Thomas, designed marquis of Forth, now duke of Melfort.

2. Lord Lewis Drummond, major general in the French service, who was colonel
of the regiment of royal Scots; and upon the reduction of that corpse, got a
considerable pension from the court of France.

3. Lord John, now lieutenant of the grand guards of the king of Poland,
elector of Saxony, which gives him the rank of a major general.

He died anno 1752, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. THOMAS, third duke of Melfort, who enjoys a considerable estate in lower
Languedoc.

He married Mary de Berenger, by whom he has four sons, and two daughters.

1. James-Lewis, marquis of Forth.

2. Lord Charles-Edward.

3. Lord Henry-Benedict.

4. Lord Maurice.

1st daughter, lady Mary-Cecilia-Henriet^a.

2. Lady Aemilia-Felicitas.

MELVILE Earl of MELVILE.
THE surname of Melvile is of great antiquity in this country. The traditional
accounts of the family are, that a man of considerable rank of that surname
accompanied queen Margaret from Hungary to Scotland, obtained a grant of some
lands in Mid-lothian from king Malcolm Canmore, Leslie, Mac-Kenzie, Martin, etc.
where he settled, called his mansion house Castle Melvile, and was progenitor
of all the Melviles in Scotland. Introduction to Fordun's history. p. 60.
Others are of opinion, that they came originally from France.

It appears from our records, that the Melviles were numerous, and made a
figure in Scotland soon after the reign of king Malcolm Canmore.

I. GALFRIDUS de MELVILE, proprietor of the castle of Melvile in Mid-lothian,
is witness in many charters of king Malcolm IV. Chartulary of Dunfermline,
Dalrymple's collect. etc.
of donations to the monasteries of Dunfermline, Holyroodhouse, and Newbottle,
an^e 1165. In which year king Malcolm died.

He is witness also to two charters of king William to the abbacy of
Cambuskenneth, Chartulary of Cambuskenneth.
together with Duncan earl of Fife.

He himself also made a donation of the church of Melvile to the monastery of
Dunfermline, Chartulary of Dunfermline.
before Hugh bishop of St. Andrews, who died anno 1187.

This Galsride had issue four sons.

1. Sir Gregory.

2. Philip.

3. Walter.

4. Warenus.

The first three were progenitors of three considerable families.

Sir Gregory de Melvile, ancestor of the Melviles in Mid-lothian, is witness in
a charter of king Alexander II. Chartulaty of Aberdeen.
confirming a donation of Duncan earl of Mar, to the church of Aberdeen,
together with Ranulph bishop of Aberdeen, who died anno 1247.

His grandson, Chartulary of Dunferm. and Dalrymple.
sir John Melvile, dom. ejusd. is designed son of William, son of sir Gregory,
in a charter of king Alexander III. anno 1264.

He is likeways, Chartulary of Newbottle, penes MacFarlane, page 107 and 108.
in two donations to the monastery of Newbottle, designed Johannes de Melvile,
dominus baroniae de Melvile, etc. in the years 1329 and 1344.

His grandchild and sole heiress, Agnes de Melvile, in the reign of king Robert
II. was married to sir John Ross of Halkhead, ancestor of lord Ross, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
who got with her the lands and barony of Melvile, which ended the first branch
of this family.

Philip de Melvile, second son of the said Galsride, is witness in a charter of
king Alexander II. MacFarlane's collections, v, I. p. 109.
in gratiam fratrum praedicatoram de Perth, etc. anno 1241.

He was afterward sheriff of the Mearns, Nisbet's appendix, and Dalrymple.
and author of the Melviles of Glenbervie, etc.

His grandson, Prynne, and Remarks on Ragman's roll, p. 23.
James, swore fealty to king Edward I. in 1296, whose son, John Melvile, had a
charter of confirmation of the lands of Glenbervie from king David II. anno
1365. Chart. in archivis regis David.


This family subsisted in the male line till the reign of king James III. that
Giles Melvile, heiress of Glenbervie, was married to sir John Auchinleck of
that ilk, whose grandchild and heir of line was married to sir William Douglas,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
second son of Archibald earl of Angus, who got with her the lands and barony
of Glenbervie, which ended the second branch of this family.

Walter, third son of Galsride, was ancestor of this noble family, and of the
Melviles in Fife.

Warenus, Chartulary of Newbottle.
fourth son of Galsride, was witness in a charter of king William, of a
donation to the monastery of Newbottle, together with Ada comitissa, who died
anno 1178; but we can trace his genealogy no further.

We now return to,

II. WALTER de MELVILE, third son of the said Galfride. In a confirmation of
king William, Chartulary of Dunfermline.
of a donation to the monastery of Dunfermline, Gualterus de Melvile is a
witness, ante 1214, in which year king William died.

He was father of,

III. JOHN de MELVILE, who was witness to the foundation charter of the church
lands of the village of Turreff, Chartulary of Aberdeen.
by Alexander Cumyn earl of Buchan, anno 1260.

He died soon thereafter, leaving issue a son,

IV. Sir JOHN MELVILE, who succeeded him, and made a considerable figure in his
time.

He was one of the Scotch nobles that agreed to the marriage of queen Margaret
of Scotland, Rymer, tom. II. p. 471.
daughter of the king of Norway, with prince Edward of England, anno 1290.

He is afterward one of the Scotch barons that swore fealty to king Edward I.
Prynne's collect, vol. III. p. 651, and Remarks on Ragman's roll, p. 24.
of England, anno 1296, and is then designed dominus Johannes Melvile, miles,
del compte de Fife, etc.

The Melviles were by this time become so numerous, that it is not easy to
distinguish what family they belonged to, except when they are locally designed.

Sir John dying about the end of the reign of king Robert Bruce, was succeeded
by his son,

V. WALTER de MELVILE, who married Margaret, daughter of John Air, with whom he
got the lands of Cappronnewton, in the county of Peebles, which appears by a
charter of confirmation from king David Bruce, Chart. in archivis regis David.
of these lands, to Walter de Melvile, son of the deceased John de Melvile, and
Margaret Air his spouse, dated at Edinburgh, the 5th day of July 1365.

He was succeeded by his son,

VI. JOHN, who got a charter from William Scot of Balweary, Johanni Melvile de
Raith, of the lands of Pitscottie in Fife, to which Robertus senescallus,
Nisbet's append, p. 30.
Johannes de Wemyss, Willielmus de Lundin, milites, and several others, are
witnesses. The charter is without date; but, by the witnesses, appears to have
been granted in the end of the reign of Robert III. who died anno 1405.

He was succeeded by his son,

VII. Sir JOHN MELVILE of Raith, who entered into a contract with the lord of
Wemyss, Ibidem.
about a water-gang to the Schaw's mill, anno 1420.

He was father of,

VIII. Sir JOHN MELVILE of Raith, who had the honor of knighthood conferred
upon him by king James II. Crawfurd's peerage.


He married Margaret, daughter of sir William Scot of Balwearie, by whom he had
two sons.

1. William, his heir.

2. Alexander Melvile of Finally, in Roxburghshire.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. WILLIAM, Chartulary of Dunfermline.
who got a charter, Willielmo Melvile de Raith, etc. anno 1474.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir Robert Lundy of Balgony, by whom he had a
son,

William, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Margaret, married to James Bonnar of Rossie.

He attended king James IV. to the fatal field of Flowdon, Crawfurd's peerage.
where he lost his life, 1513.

He was succeeded by his son,

X. WILLIAM, who got a charter, Willielmo Melvile, filio et haeredi Willielmi
Melvile de Raith, et Margaretae, Douglas, sorori Roberti Douglas de Lochleven,
ejus sponsae, etc. anno 1544.

He dying soon thereafter, by the said Margaret Douglas, left issue a son,

XI. Sir JOHN, Chart. in pub archiv.
who got charters under the great seal, Johanni, filio et haeredi apparenti
Willielmi Melvile de Raith, tria quarteria terrarum de Murdocairny, Wester
Touch, etc. etc. inter 1540 et 1544.

He was afterward suspected, though it is said most unjustly, of having had a
correspondence with the enemies of his country in England, and being a great
promoter of the reformation, he became very obnoxious to the catholic clergy.

His son was then in England, either for his education or traveling. A letter
from him to his son was seized by the government* in consequence of which, he
was apprehended, sent prisoner to Stirling castle, accused and brought to his
trial; and the letter to his son being produced in evidence against him,
Crawfurd's peerage, p 325.
he was found guilty, condemned, and executed, anno 1549.

He married Helen, daughter of sir Alexander Napier of Merchiston, ancestor of
lord Napier, Ibidem.
by whom he had six sons and two daughters.

1. John, who carried on the line of this family, as will be shown afterward.

2. R^bert, who was created lord Melvile, of whom more hereafter.

3. Sir James Melvile, a man of fine parts, and a great statesman. He wrote
memoirs of his own times, with great judgment and learning.

4. Mr. William Melvile, Chart. in pub. archiv.
commendator of Tungland and Kilwinning.

5. Sir Andrew Melvile of Garvock, Crawfurd.
who was steward of the household to queen Mary and king James VI.

6. Capt. David Melvile of Newmill.

1st daughter, Janet, married to sir James Kirkcaldy of Grange, lord high
treasurer of Scotland, in the reign of king James V.

2. Margaret, married to sir James Johnston of Elphingston.

We now return to,

XII. ROBERT, second son of sir John Melvile of Raith, who, being a man of
great parts, and of good reputation, Crawfurd's peerage.
was appointed one of the privy council by queen Mary, anno 1562.

When king James VI. took the management of affairs into his own hands, he sent
this Robert, with the master of Grange, to the court of England, to interceed
with queen Elizabeth in behalf of his mother, etc. and it is acknowledged by
all our historians, that he acted the part of an intrepid and faithful
minister; and though his negotiation had not the desired success, Melvil's
memoirs.
yet king James always held him in high esteem. When lord Thirlestane, the
chancellor, was sent to Denmark to negotiate the king's marriage, he was named
vice chancellor in his absence. He was also made treasurer depute, Crawfurd's
peerage.
and one of the senators of the college of justice.

At last, in reward of his many faithful service, he was raised to the dignity
of the peerage, by the title of lord Melvile, 30th April 1616, by patent to the
heirs m^le of hi^ body; Sir Robert Sibbald's history of Fyfe.
which failing, to the heirs male of the body of his elder brother John, etc.

He married, 1st, Catharine, daughter of William Adamson of Graycrook; 2dly,
lady Mary Lesly, daughter of Andrew earl of Rothes; and, 3dly, lady Jean
Stewart, daughter of Robert earl of Orkney, widow of Patrick first lord
Lindores; and dying anno 1621, in the 94th year of his age, left issue one son,

XIII. ROBERT, second lord, who got charters under the great seal, Roberto
domino Mel^ile of several lands and baronies, Chart. in pub. archiv.
inter 1627 et 1630.

He married, 1st, Anne, daughter of sir Thomas Ker of Fernyh^rst; 2dly, Jean,
daughter of Gavin Hamilton of Raploch, but dying without issue, anno 1635, the
honors devolved upon his cousin John, grandson of his uncle John, to whom we
now return.

XII. JOHN, eldest son of sir John Melvile of Raith, who died anno 1549, and
immediate elder brother of Robert first lord Melvile, Ibidem.
got charters under the great (...), of several lands and baronies, inter 1578
et 1584.

He was succeeded by his son,

XIII. JOHN, who, in his father's lifetime, got charters under the great seal,
Ibidem.
Johanni Melvile juniori de Raith, terrarum de A^den, de Kingborn Easter, etc.
etc. anno 1601.

He afterward got charters of the same lands, and several others, Ibidem.
Johanni Melvile de Raith, inter 1607 et 1609.

He died soon thereafter, leaving issue a son and successor,

XIV. JOHN MELVILE of Raith, who succeeding also to his cousin Robert, Nisbet's
append.
second lord Raith, as before observed, was the third lord.

He married Anne, daughter of sir George Erskine of Inne^tiel, one of the
senators of the college of justice, Crawfurd's peerage.
by whom he had two sons and one daughter.

1. George, his heir.

2. James Melvile of Cassingray.

His daughter Anne, married to Thomas Boyd of Pankill.

He died anno 1642, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. GEORGE, fourth lord, who got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
Georgio domino Melvile, terrarum dominit et baroniae de Monymeal, with several
other lands, inter 1642 et 1646.

What part he acted during the rebellion, we can give no account; but after the
restoration of king Charles II. he became very obnoxious to the court, of which
he was so sensible, that he thought proper to retire to Holland.

He was afterward summoned to appear and answer to such crimes as should be
laid to his charge; but he did not think ^it to comply, Crawfurd's peerage.
for which he was outlawed and for^eited.

During his stay in Holland, he got acquainted with the prince of Orange; and
being a man of good parts, became in great favor with that prince, who,
immediately after his accession to the crown of England, not only restored him
to his estate and honors, but further dignified him with the titles of earl of
Melvile, viscount Kirkcaldy, lord Raith, Monymeal, and Balwearie, by patent
haeredibus masculis ex ejus corpore, Chart. in pub. archiv.
in perpetuum, dated 8th April 1690.

That same year he was appointed one of his majesty's principal secretaries of
state, and lord high commissioner to the first and second sessions of
parliament.

In 1691, he resigned the secretary's office, and was made lord privy seal.

In 1696, the duke of Queensberry was made lord privy seal, and the earl of
Melvile was made president to the council, in which office he continued as long
as the king lived.

He married Catharine, only daughter of James lord Balgony, and sister of
Alexander second earl of Leven, by whom he had three sons and one daughter.

1. Alexander, lord Raith, a youth of great parts, who was made treasurer
depute, anno 1689; which office he enjoyed as long as he lived. He married
Barbara, daughter of Walter Dundas of that ilk, but died without issue, anno
School.

2. David, afterward earl of Leven.

3. Mr. James Melvile of Balgarvie, who married, and had a numerous issue.

His daugh^er, lady Margaret, married to Robert lord Burleigh, and had issue.

The earl died in an advanced age, anno 1707, and was succeeded by his son,

XVI. DAVID, second earl of Melvile, who succeeded also to the honors of
Leven, and assumed that for his chief title, as being the elder peerage. Vide
title earl of Leven, page 405th of this work.

We shall only add, that David, now earl of Leven and Melvile, grandson of this
David, is the eighteenth generation of this most ancient family, in a direct
male line.

ARMS of the earl of Melvile.
Quarterly, 1st and 4th, a fess gules; 2d and 3d gules, three crescents, within
a border argent, charged with eight roses of the first.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter side, a ratch hound, and on the sinister an eagle
proper.

CREST; a ratch head erased sable.

MOTTO; Denique caelum.

CHIEF SEATS.
Vide Leven.

MENTETH Earl of MENTETH.
THE first who were dignified with this title, yield to few in the kingdom for
antiquity.

I. MURDOCH, earl of Menteth, is mentioned in the chartulary of Dunfermline in
the beginning of the reign of king David I. who succeeded to the crown of
Scotland anno 1124, and died in 1153.

He was succeeded by,

II. GILCHRIST, who is designed earl of Menteth in a charter of a donation to
the monastery of Scoon by king Malcolm IV. who succeeded David, Chartulary of
Scoon.
and died anno 1165.

Gilchrist earl of Menteth is witness also in several charters of king William,
Dalr^mple's collections.
who succeeded Malcolm, and died anno 1214.

He was succeeded by,

III. MAURITIUS, earl of Menteth. He flourished in the end of the reign of king
William, and the beginning of king Alexander II. who succeeded him.

In a donation by William Cummin earl of Buchan, to the monastery of
Cambuskenneth, confirmed by king Alexander II. Ibid. and Chartul. of
Cambuskenneth.
Mauritius comes de Menteth, vicecomes de Stirling, etc. is a witness, anno
1226.

This earl left only one daughter, his sole heiress, whose name we have not
found upon record, but she was countess of Menteth, and married to,

IV. Sir WILLIAM CUMMIN, son of sir Richard, and brother of John Cummin, first
lord of Badenoch, who, upon his marrying this countess, was created earl of
Menteth by king Alexander II. and appears to have been much about that prince's
court; for he is witness to most of his charters and donations to the
religious, which are very numerous.

In the foundation charter of the abbay of Balmerinoch by this king Alexander,
Chartulary of New ^ottle, p. 407.
Walter Cummin earl of Menteth is a witness, anno 1231.

He is witness to another donation of the same prince to the monastery of
Newbottle, Ibid. p. 180.
anno 1248.

Also to several other donations to the monasteries of Scoon, Inchcolm,
Chartulary of Scoon, etc.
etc. inter 1240 et 1250.

In the reign of king Alexander III. the Cummins were extremely powerful,
Rymer's foed. tom. I. p. 670.
assumed to themselves the chief management of all public affairs. This Walter
was named one of the governors of the kingdom, anno 1258; but he died soon
thereafter, Fordun, vol. II.
not without suspicion of poison.

He left no male issue, but had two daughters. The eldest, whose name we have
not been able to discover, was married to,

V. Sir WALTER STEWART, son of Walter fifth lord high steward of Scotland,
Stewart's hist. of the royal family.
who, in her right, became earl of Menteth, and assumed that title for his
surname, but retained the coat of Stewart for his armorial bearing, only he
converted the fess cheque into a bend, for difference.

He was a man of great spirit and fortitude, and behaved gallantly at the
battle of Largis, where his brother the high steward commanded the right wing
of the army, anno 1263.

This Walter earl of Menteth was one of Scotch nobles that agreed to the
marriage of king Alexander's daughter, Rymer, tom. II. p. 1083.
princess Margaret, with Eric king of Norway, anno 1281.

He was also one of those who obliged themselves to stand by, Ibid. p. 266.
defend, and receive for their queen, Margaret of Norway, only child of the
said princess Margaret, anno 1284.

He was one of the arbiters on the part of Robert Bruce, Ibid. tom. II.
in his competition for the crown with John Baliol, anno 1291.

In 1295, he, with the earls of Strathearn, Mar, Athole, Lennox, Ross, Cummins
of Badenoch, Buchan, Stewart's history, p. 207.
etc. entered England with a considerable body of men, ravaged Cumberland,
besieged Carlyle, etc.

He was taken prisoner at the battle of Dunbar, and afterward put to death by
king Edward I. Ibid. p. 208.
of England, in cold blood, in the 76th year of his age, anno 1296.

By the said countess of Menteth, he left issue two sons.

1. Alexander, his heir.

2. Sir John Menteth, a man of great spirit, etc. and though he was guilty of
that villainous action of betraying the brave sir William Wallace into the
hands of king Edward I. of England, Stewart's hist. Fordun, vol. II. p. 243.
Rymer, tom. III. p. 163, ^82, etc.
yet he afterward became a great patriot, was not only a firm friend, but a
great favorite of king Robert Bruce. He remarkably distinguished himself at
the bartle of Bannockburn in 1314, signed that famous letter to the pope anno
1320, was appointed one of the ambassadors to the court of England in 1323,
etc. etc.

The earl was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. ALEXANDER earl of Menteth, who, in the Faedera Angliae, is designed filius
et haeres comitis de Menteth, and was one of the Scotch nobles who, with his
father, entered into an association to support queen Margaret's right to the
crown, Ibidem.
anno 1284, before mentioned.

He was also, with many others of his countrymen, compelled to swear fealty to
king Edward I. of England, Ibidem.
anno 1296, and is then designed Alisaundre del count de Menteth, etc.

He died soon after his father, and by Matilda his wife, left issue three sons.

1. Alan, his heir.

2. Murdack, afterward earl of Menteth.

3. John, Crawfurd's peerage.
ancestor of the Menteths of Rusco, of whom the Menteths of Carse, etc. are
descended.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. ALAN, Rymer, tom. II. p. 1014.
earl of Menteth, a great patriot. He joined king Robert Bruce as soon as he
began to assert his title to the crown.

After performing many great actions in the service of his king and country,
Stewart's hist.
he was carried prisoner to England, where he died.

He left issue only one daughter,

Mary, of whom afterward.

And having no male children, he was succeeded by his brother,

VII. MURDACK earl of Menteth, who resigns to his niece, Ibidem.
Mariae filiae unicae quondam Alani comitis de Menteth, terras de Aberfoil,
Drongary, Buckliven, Cumlacht, etc. 1330.

He was taken prisoner at the battle of Duplin, anno 1332, Fordun, vol. II. p.
305.
and killed at the battle of Halidonhill, anno 1333.

Having no children of his own, his estate and honors devolved upon his niece
Mary, before mentioned, to whom we now return.

VIII. MARY, countess of Menteth, only child of earl Alan, married to that
renowned hero and patriot sir John Graham, who, in her right, became earl of
Menteth.

He accompanied king David II. in his unfortunate expedition into England,
Rymer, tom. V. p. 534.
was taken prisoner with him at the battle of Durham, and was afterward basely
put to death by king Edward, leaving issue only one daughter,

IX. MARGARET, countess of Menteth, his sole heiress, married to Robert duke of
Albany, who, in her right, also became earl of Menteth, etc. and was succeeded
by his son.

X. MURDOCH, duke of Albany, and earl of Menteth, upon whose forfeiture that
earldom was annexed to the crown.

Vide title Stewart duke of Albany, etc. page 16th of this work.

GRAHAM Earl of MENTEITH.
THE immediate ancestor of this great branch of the most ancient family of
Montrose, was

Sir Patrick Graham, lord of Kincardine and Dundaff, the tenth generation of
that illustrious house, in a direct male-line. By Mathilda his first lady, he
left issue a son, William lord Graham, who succeeded him, and carried on the
line of the family of Montrose.

He married, 2dly, Eupheme, daughter of sir John Stewart of Railston, second
son of Walter, eighth lord high steward of Scotland, and brother of king Robert
II. by whom he had a numerous issue: 1. sir Patrick, progenitor of this noble
family. For the other children, vide title duke of Montrose.

I. Sir PATRICK, eldest son of the se^ond marriage of sir Patrick Graham, lord
of Kincardine, was first designed by the title of Ellieston.

He married lady Eupheme Stewart, only daughter and sole heiress of David earl
of Strathearn, eldest son of the second marriage of king Robert II. by queen
Eupheme Ross, by whom he had a son,

Malise, his heir, -- and two daughters.

1. Lady Eupheme, married, 1st, to Archibald fifth earl of Douglas and duke of
Turenne; 2dly, to James first lord Hamilton.

2. Lady Elizabeth, married to Patrick Lion lord of Glammis, ancestor of the
earl of Strathmore.

This sir Patrick, Hist. of the Stewarts, and Crawfurd'^ peerage.
in right of his wife, obtained the earldom, and assumed the title of earl of
Strathearn.

He was killed by sir John Drummond, anno 1413, and succeeded by his eldest son,

II. MALISE, earl of Strathearn, who was appointed one of the hostages for king
James's ransom, Rymer, tom. X. p. 309.
anno 1423, and is then designed Malisius Graham, comes de Strathearn.

After king James obtained his liberty, and was restored to the full possession
of his kingdom, he begun to look narrowly into the rights, by which his
subjects were in possession of the crown lands, and found that the earldom of
Strathearn had been given by king Robert II. to his son prince David, Charta
penes ducem de Montrose, and M. S. hist. of the family, of Menteith, by
Crawfurd, penes Gartur.
and the heirs-male of his body: that this earl being descended of his
daughter, could have no right to that earldom; he therefore re-annexed it to
that crown, and in lieu thereof created him earl of Menteith, and gave him that
earldom, which was then in the crown by the forfeiture of duke Murdoch, the
honors being limited to the heirs-male of his body, 6th September 1428.

This earl Malise remained long a hostage in England, and was not set at
liberty till the earl of Douglas and lord Hamilton became sureties, that
Alexander, his son and heir, should surrender himself prisoner in his stead.
Rymer, tom. XI. p. 307, and 339.
This happened anno 1453; and he is then designed Malisius Graham, comes de
Menteith, etc.

He married lady Anne Vere, daughter of Henry earl of Oxford, of the kingdom of
England, by whom he had three sons.

1. Alexander.

2. Sir John Graham of Kilbride, ancestor of the Grahams of Gartmore, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
also of the Grahams of Nidderly and Esk, of whom viscount Preston, etc. are
descended.

3. Walter, ancestor of the Grahams of Balquhaple, etc.

This earl lived to a great age, and died anno 1492.

III. ALEXANDER, designed master of Menteith, eldest son and apparent heir of
Malise earl of Menteith, died before his father, leaving issue a son,

IV. ALEXANDER, Chart. penes ducem de Montrose.
who succeeded his grandfather, anno 1492, was served heir to him on 6th May
1493, and was second earl of Menteith of the Graham family.

He married Margaret, daughter of Walter Buchanan of that ilk, Ibidem.
by whom he had two sons.

1. William, his heir.

2. Walter, ancestor of the Grahams of Gartur, whose heir-male is now male
representative of this noble family, as will be shown hereafter.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. WILLIAM, third earl of Menteith, who, Ibidem.
in a charter of Walter Buchanan of that ilk, is designed his grandson, etc.
anno 1519.

He married Margaret, daughter of -- Moubray of Barnbougle, by whom he had
three sons, and one daughter.

1. John, his heir.

2. Robert, designed of Gartmore, who died without male issue.

3. Gilbert, designed of Gartartan, who died without issue.

His daughter, lady Margaret, married to Archibald second earl of Argyle.

He died anno 1537, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. JOHN, fourth earl of Menteith, who was taken prisoner at Solway-moss,
Rymer, tom. XIV. p. 796.
and was afterward ransomed for three hundred merks sterling, anno 1543.

He married Marian, daughter of George lord Seton, ancestor of the earl of
Winton, by whom he had a son,

William, his heir, -- and two daughters.

1. Lady Mary, married to John Buchanan of that ilk.

2. Lady Christian, married to sir William Livingston of Kilsyth.

He was slain in a scuffle by the tutor of Appin, in October 1547, M. S. hist.
of the family by Crawfurd.
and succeeded by his son,

VII. WILLIAM, fifth earl of Menteith, who married Margaret, Chart. in pub.
archiv. ad annum 1571.
daughter of sir James Douglas of Drumlanrig, ancestor of the duke of
Queensberry, widow of Edward lord Crichton of Sanquhar, by whom he had two sons.

1. John, his heir.

2. George Graham of Rednock, whose grandchild and heir of line, Marian
Graham, married to John Graham, Ibidem.
father of Alexander Graham of Duchry, who got these lands with her.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. JOHN, Ibid. et chart. penes ducem de Montrose.
sixth earl of Menteith, who was served heir to his father, 29th October 1587.

He married Mary, daughter of sir Colin Campbell of Glenurchy, by whom he had
two sons, and one daughter.

1. William, his heir.

2. Sir James Graham, who married lady Margaret Erskine, daughter of James and
Mary earl and countess of Buchan, but died without male-issue.

His daughter, lady Christian, married to sir John Blackadder of Tulliallan.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. WILLIAM, seventh earl of Menteith, a man of good parts, and in great
favor with king Charles I. Crawfurd's peer^ge.
who appointed him one of his privy council, justice-general of Scotland, and
president of the council.

He got charters under the great seal, Willielmo comiti de Menteith, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
domino Graham de Kinpont, etc. of many lands and baronies, inter 1627 et 1630.

He revived the old claim of the family to the earldom of Strathearn, and got
himself served and retoured heir to David earl of Strathearn, Retour in pub
regist.
and Eupheme countess of Strathearn, his daughter, his ancestors, through a
long train of descent, as above deduced; the service is dated 25th May 1630.

The king ratified his title to the earldom of Strathearn by a new patent,
Ibidem.
in July 1631, so that he was then designed earl of Strathearn and Menteith;
but his majesty being afterward made sensible that he had been imposed upon,
and that this earl had really no right to that earldom, for the reasons
beforementioned, he raised a reduction of his right, and at last he was
deprived of his titles both of Strathearn and Menteith; but his majesty was
pleased soon thereafter to create him earl of Airth, Crawfurd's peerage, and M.
S. hist of the family.
with the precedence of the title of Menteith, which his predecessor obtained
from king James I. anno 1428, as beforementioned: after this he got a new
investiture of the whole earldom of Menteith, confirmed by a charter under the
great seal, "to himself in liferent, Chart. in pub. archivis. and Crawfurd's M.
S. hist. etc.
and John lord Kinpont his son and heir, and the heirs-male procreate betwixt
him and lady Mary Keith his spouse, quibus deficientibus, haeredibus masculis
dicti Johannis; domini de Kinpont, quibuscunque, etc." dated 11th January 1644.

He married Agnes, Charta penes dom. Gray.
daughter of Patrick seventh lord Gray, by whom he had three sons, and three
daughters.

1. John, lord Kinpont.

2. Sir Charles.

3. Sir James. -- These two last died without issue.

1st daughter, lady Mary, married to sir John Campbell of Glenurchy.

2. Lady Margaret, married, 1st, to Alexander lord Gairlies; 2dly, to Ludovick
earl of Crawfurd.

3. Lady Anne, married to sir Mungo Murray of Blebo.

X. JOHN lord Kinpont, first son and apparent heir of William seventh earl of
Menteith, got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Johanni domino Graham de Kinpont, of the lands and barony of Kilbride, and
others, inter 1640 et 1643.

By the foresaid lady Mary Keith, daughter of William sixth earl marishal, he
had a son,

William, afterward earl of Menteith and Airth, -- and two daughters.

1. Mary, married to sir John Allardice of that ilk.

2. Elizabeth, who was married to sir William Graham of Gartmore, Bart.

This John lord Kinpont was a great loyalist, and adhered always to the
interest of king Charles I. Crawfurd's peerage, and M. S. hist. of the family.
but was unfortunately slain in the marquis of Montrose's camp, by a gentleman
of the name of Stewart, anno 1644, his father being then alive.

XI. WILLIAM, his only son, succeeded his grandfather, and was earl of Airth
and Menteith, but having no children, he made a conveyance of his whole estate,
Ibidem.
in favors of James, marquis, afterward duke of Montrose; and dying without
issue on 12th September 1694, the estate, according to the above destination,
went to the said marquis accordingly; but the representation of that noble
family devolved upon James Graham of Gartur, his heir-male, lineally descended
of Walter, second son of the second earl, to whom we now return.

V. WALTER GRAHAM, second son of Alexander, second earl of Menteith, and
brother of William the third earl, got a charter of the lands of Gartur, Chart.
penes magistrum Graham de Gartur.
from the abbot of Inchmaho, anno 1553; but as none of this family have
hitherto claimed the peerage, we shall only briefly mention their descent; the
vouchers whereof are all in the possession of the family of Gartur.

He married Margaret, daughter of -- Schaw of Knock-hill, by whom he had a son,

VI. GEORGE GRAHAM of Gartur, who succeeded him, and married a daughter of the
lord of Kippenross, by whom he had a son and successor,

VII. JASPER GRAHAM of Gartur, who married Agnes, daughter of -- Graham of
Gartmore, by whom he had a son and heir,

VIII. JOHN GRAHAM of Gartur, who married Isabel Drummond, a daughter of
Colquhalie, by whom he had a son,

IX. WALTER GRAHAM of Gartur, his successor, who married Marian, daughter of
sir James Graham and lady Margaret Erskiue, daughter of James earl of Buchan,
by whom he had a son,

X. JAMES GRAHAM of Gartur, who succeeded him, and married Anne, daughter of
James Graham of Orchill, by whom he had three sons and one daughter.

1. James, his heir.

2. John, who died without issue.

3. William Graham, now of Gartur, of whom afterward.

His daughter Marian, married to --.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. JAMES GRAHAM of Gartur, who, upon the death of William the last earl of
Menteith without issue, anno 1694, was undoubted heir male of that noble
family, as before mentioned. This James sold his lands of Gartur to his
youngest brother William, who now possesses them.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of Captain Philip Wilkinson of the kingdom of
Ireland, by whom he had two sons,

1. David Graham.

2. John, an officer in the army.

XII. DAVID GRAHAM, the eldest son is now a merchant in England.

And failing male issue of these two brothers, their uncle William Graham now
of Gartur, is male representative of this noble family.

He married Christian, only daughter of John Somerville of Glenhove, Esquire; a
cadet of lord Somerville's family, by whom he has three sons and one daughter.

1. Walter.

2. John.

3. James.

His daughter, Janet.

The above four children are all now alive.

STEWART Lord METHVEN.
THE immediate ancestor of this noble family was,

Andrew, second lord Evandale, who married Margaret, daughter of sir John
Kennedy of Blairquhan, by whom he had a numerous issue. 1. Andrew, afterward
lord Ochiltrie. ( Vide title Stewart lord Ochiltrie.) 2. Henry, afterward lord
Methven.

I. This HENRY, being a man of good parts, a most graceful person, and polite
behavior, was much taken notice of at the court of king James V. and was
particularly esteemed by the queen mother, whom afterward he had the honor to
marry.

She was daughter of king Henry VII. sister of king Henry VIII. of England,
widow of king James IV. and mother of king James V. of Scotland.

She had been also married to Archibald earl of Angus, to whom she had lady
Margaret Douglas, mother of Henry lord Darnly, etc.

But having proved a pre-contract betwixt that earl and another lady, she was
divorced from him, and married to this Henry, who was thereupon created lord
Methven, anno 1528.

He was one of the Scotch nobles that agreed to the marriage of queen Mary with
prince Edward of England, Rymer.
anno 1543.

He got charters under the great seal, Henrico domino Methven, of the lands of
Gallowayshiels, Chart. in pub. archiv.
M^^e-lee, Gilgirstone, Nether-Gorthy, and several others, inter 1530 et 1546.

The queen died anno 1540, and by the lord Methven had only one child, who died
in infancy.

He married, 2dly, lady Janet Stewart, daughter of John third earl of Athole,
by whom he had a son,

Henry, his heir, -- and three daughters.

1. Janet, married to Colin sixth earl of Argyle.

2. Dorothea, married to William first earl of Gowrie.

3. Margaret, married first to Andrew master of Ochiltrie; 2dly to Uchtred
MacDoual of Garthland.

He was killed at the battle of Pinkie, anno 1547, and succeeded by his son,

II. HENRY, second lord Methven, who got charters under the great seal, Chart.
in pub. archiv.
terrarum dominicalium de Methven, etc. etc. inter 1562 et 1564.

He married Jean, daughter of Patrick lord Ruthven, by whom he had a son,

Henry, his heir.

He joined the regent's party against queen Mary, was killed by a cannon shot
from the castle of Edinburgh, and was suc^eeded by his son,

III. HENRY, third lord Methven* who married a daughter of Henry Stewart, son
of James earl of A^ran, but dying without maleissue, the honors became extinct.

MIDDLETON Earl of MIDDLETON.
THE surname of Middleton is of great antiquity, and local; but as we have
never seen any of the writs of the family, except what are in the public
records, we cannot pretend exactly to deduce their succession.

Their immediate ancestor was,

I. KENNETH, who lived in the reigns of king Malcolm IV. and king William who
succeeded Malcolm, anno 1165.

He was father of

II. MALCOLM, who got a charter from king William, confirming a donation of
king Duncan's, MacKenzie's collect. in the lawiers library, Edinr.
of the lands and barony o^ Middleton, in the shire of Kincardin, to Malcolm
the son of Kenneth, etc.

This Malcolm assumed the surname of Middleton from his lands, and from him all
the Middletons in Scotland are descended.

The charter of confirmation must have been granted in or before 1214, in which
year king William died.

III. HUMFRIDUS de MIDDLETON appears to have succeeded Malcolm, MacFarlane's
collections, v. ^* p. 185.
and is witness in a charter, Waltero de Lundin, in the reign of king Alexander
II. who died in 1249.

He was succeeded by his son,

IV. HUMFRIDUS de MIDDLETON, who, in the reign of king Alexander III.
Chartulary of Arbro^th.
is witness to a donation of Robert, son of Warnebaldus de Cunninghame, of some
lands to the abbacy of Arbroath, anno 1263.

He had issue a son,

V. HUMFRIDUS de MIDDLETON, who succeeded him.

He was one of the Scotch barons who swore sealty to king Edward I. Prynne,
vol. III. p. 661.
of England, anno 1296.

He is again obliged to swear allegiance to the king of England, Rymer, tom.
II. p. 1015.
and is then designed Humfridus de Middleton, de eodem in vicecom. de
Kincardin, anno 1304.

The next of this family we find upon record, whom we may suppose to have been
great-grand-son of this Humfrey, Haddington's collections, in the lawiers
library Edin.
was, William de Middleton, designed dominus de eodem, who got a charter from
king James I. of the lands of Innerkany, anno 1430.

He was succeeded by his son,

GILBERT, who was upon an inquest concerning some lands belonging to the abbacy
of Arbroath, Ibidem.
in which he is designed Gilbertus de Middleton de eodem, in the year 1460.

He had issue a son and successor,

LAURENCE de MIDDLETON, who, in an instrument of ^asine to Andrew, Sasine,
penes dom. Gray.
third lord Gray, is designed L^urentius de Middleton, dominus de eodem, anno
1481.

He had a son,

GILBERT, who succeeded him, and is upon the service of Patrick, Ibidem.
fourth lord Gray, wherein he is designed Gilbertus de Middleton, dominus de
eodem, anno 1515.

This Gilbert was also appointed high sheriff of Forfar, Crawfurd's peerage.
anno 1516.

He was succeeded by his son,

JOHN MIDDLETON of that ilk, who excambs his lands of Middleton with David
Falconer of Halkerton, for the Nether-set of Halkerton, Haddington's
collections.
half of the lands of Bent, and mill thereof, 19th January 1538.

After this John sold his lands of Middleton, his posterity were designed by
the title of Cadham. Crawfurd's peerage.


His grandson,

JOHN MIDDLETON, of Cadham, in the end of the reign of king James VI. Ibidem.
married Helen, daughter of John Strachan of Thornton, by whom he had a son,

JOHN, afterward earl of Middleton.

This John, who made so great a figure in this country, was a man of good
parts, and bred a scholar; but upon the breaking out of the civil war, he
betook himself to arms, which seemed to suit his genius better.

He first engaged in the service of the parliament of England, where he so
remarkably distinguished himself by his courage and military capacity, that he
soon got the command of a troop of horse, and sir William Waller thereafter
made him a lieutenant general.

After the earl of Essex was cashiered, he returned to Scotland, and when the
army was raised to rescue the king (then a prisoner in the isle of Wight) he
was appointed lieutenant general of the horse, Rescinded acts of parlt.
his commission being dated 11th May 1648.

After this period he became a loyal subject, continued a steady and firm
friend of the royal family, performed many brave actions in their service, was
excepted from pardon by Oliver Cromwell, and none suffered greater hardships
during the usurpation than general Middleton; but he lived to see the
restoration, and soon received from his majesty king Charles II. the rewards of
his faithful services.

He was raised to the dignity of the peerage by the titles of earl of
Middleton, lord Clermont and Fettercairn, Chart. in pub archiv.
by patent, Johanni Middleton, et haeredibus suis, cognomen et arma de
Middleton gerentibus, omni tempore futuro, dated 1st October 1660.

On the 12th of that month, he was made governor of the castle of Edinburgh,
Records of parliament.
and was made his majesty's high commissioner to the parliament of Scotland, on
the 29th of November that same year.

He was made general of all the forces in Scotland, Ibidem.
anno 1661, and was again appointed commissioner to the parliament, in 1662.

Sometime thereafter, upon some disgust he had given the ministry, he was
divested of all his public employments; but his majesty appointed him governor
of the new English fort at Tangier in Africa, where he continued as long as he
lived.

He married, 1st, Grizel, daughter of -- Durham of Pitcarro, Crawfurd's peerage.
and sister of sir Alexander D^rham of Largo, by whom he had a son,

Charles, his heir, -- and two daughters.

1. Lady Helen, married to Patrick earl of Strathmore.

2. Lady Grizel, married to William earl of Morton.

He married, 2dly, Dugdale's baronage so England.
Martha, daughter of Henry earl of Monmouth, by whom he had no issue.

He died at his government of Tangier, anno 1673, and was succeeded by his son,

CHARLES, second earl of Middleton, who, being a man of parts, and bred at the
court of king Charles II. was in great favor with that prince.

He was appointed envoy extraordinary to the emperor of Germany, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
where he acquitted himself so much to his majesty's satisfaction, that
immediately upon his return, he was made conjunct secretary of state with the
earl of Murray, anno 1682.

He was sworn one of his majesty's privy council for England, on the 11th of
January 1684; Salmon's chronology, p. 176.
and on the 25th of August thereafter, was promoted to be one of the principal
secretaries of state for that kingdom, in the room of Sidney Godolphin, Esquire;
who was made first commissioner of the treasury, and created lord Godolphin,
etc.

He enjoyed that office till the revolution 1688, and went to France with his
unfortunate master king James VII. where he continued as long as he lived.

It having been enacted and declared treason to remain in France after the
first of August 1693, Records of parliament.
he was attainted by the Scotch parliament, and forfeited, anno 1695.

He married lady Catharine Brudenel, daughter of Robert earl of Cardigan,
Peerage of England, vol. I^. p. 388.
by whom he had two sons and two daughters.

1. John, lord Clermont.

2. Charles Middleton, Esquire;.

1st daughter, lady Elizabeth, married to Edward, commonly called lord Edward
Drummond, son of James earl of Perth, chancellor of Scotland.

2. Lady Mary, married to sir John Giffard, knight.

JOHN, lord Clermont, had it not been for his father's attainder, would have
been third earl of Middleton.

He, with his brother Charles, were taken at sea by admiral Byng, in the
descent which the French intended on Scotland, anno 1708.

They were both committed prisoners to the tower of London, but were soon
thereafter released by order of her majesty queen Anne.

They returned to France, where they both died without issue.

ARMS.
Parted per fess, or and gules, a lion rampant, within a double tressure,
flowered and counter-flowered with flowers de lis, all counter-changed.

CREST; a tower embatteled sable, and on the top of it a lion rampant.

SUPPORTERS; two eagles sable.

MOTTO; Fortis in arduis.

CHIEF SEAT,
Was at Montrose in the county of Forfar.

GRAHAM Duke of MONTROSE.
NO surname in Scotland claims a higher origin than the Graham.

The traditional account thereof, handed down to us by our historians, Dr.
Abercrombie, p. 549, v. I. etc.
is, that they are descended of the renowned Graeme, who, in the year 404, was
general of king Fergus II's. army, and was governor of Scotland in the minority
of his grandchild king Eugene II. fought with the Romans, defeated the Britons,
and in the 420, made a breach in, and forced that mighty wall which the emperor
Severus had reared up between the rivers Forth and Clyde, as the utmost limits
of the Roman empire, to keep out the Scots from molesting them in their
possessions; which wall has ever since retained, and to this day goes under the
name of Graeme's Dyke.

The foundation of this great rampart has been of late traced from the one
river to the other, and is fully instructed by several stones found therein,
which have Roman inscriptions cut out upon them, denoting the limits where, and
by whom they were set, etc. A good many of these stones are at present to be
seen in the college of Glasgow, and are well described in Mr. Gordon's
Itinerarium septentrionale.

This great man is said to have married a lady of the royal house of Denmark,
and was progenitor of all the Grahams in the kingdom of Scotland.

We shall, however, insist no further on these traditional accounts, but
directly proceed to deduce the descent of this illustrious and ancient family
by authentic documents from,

I. WILLIAM de GRAEME. He flourished in the reign of king David I. Foundation
charter* printed in the appendix to Richard Hay's vindication of Elizab. More,
p. 127.
who succeeded to the crown of Scotland in 1124, and founded the abbacy of
Holyroodhouse, in the year 1128, to which^his William de Graeme is a witness.

He appears to have been much about king David's court, being witness to many
of that good prince's donations to the religious; and, according to sir James
Dalrymple, was proprietor of several lands in Mid-Lothian, which also appears
from the chartulary of St. Andrews.

In a charter of king David to the priory of Durham, Sir James Dalrymple's
collections, p. 397.
Willielmus de Graeme is a witness, anno 1139.

The same prince made a donation, ecclesiae de Haddington, Chartulary of St.
Andrews.
ex utraque part aquae, sicut Willielmus de Graeme fecit, etc.

In a confirmation charter of prince Henry to the priory of St. Andrews, the
same William de Graeme is a witness, Ibidem.
in or before 1152, in which year prince Henry died.

He was father of,

II. JOHN de GRAEME, who flourished in the reigns of king Malcolm IV. and king
William the Lion; which last succeeded king Malcolm anno 1165, and died in 1214.

In a confirmation charter of a donation to the monastery of Newbottle, by
Robert, son of David de Lindsay, of the peat moss of Locherwood, this John de
Graeme, Henry de Bradie sheriff of Edinburgh, Chartulary of Newbottle, penes
MacFarlane, f. 8.
are witnesses. The confirmation has no date, but appears to have been about
the year 1170.

He left issue a son,

III. WILLIAM de GRAEME, who succeeded him. In a charter of Alexander de Setun
to Adam de Polisworth, of the lands of Beeth, in marriage with his sister Emma,
confirmed by king William about the year 1200, Chartulary of Dunfermline, f. 16.
this William de Graeme, David, son of earl Henry, John de Methkill, etc. are
witnesses.

He was succeeded by his son,

IV. Sir DAVID de GRAEME, the undoubted progenitor of the most noble family of
Montrose.

He obtained from king William, a grant of the lands of Charleton and
Barrowfield, near Montrose; also the lordship of Kinnebber, cum dominiis,
Charta penes ducem de Montrose.
tenendriis, et thanagiis ejusdem, in vicecomitatu de Forfar, etc. The charter
has no date, but must have been granted in, or before 1214, being the year in
which king William died.

In the beginning of the reign of king Alexander II. who succeeded king
William, he got a charter from Henry de Graeme, (wherein he is designed his
cousin or kinsman) of the lands of Clifton and Clifton-hall, Ibidem.
in MidLothian; the superiority whereof remains with the family of Montrose to
this very day.

This Henry de Graeme being a near relation of sir David, they are undoubtedly
descended of the same stock; and as Henry was progenitor of the Graemes of
Abercorn, who made a considerable figure in this country for several
generations, we shall here give a brief account of that family.

1. Petrus de Graeme, who lived in the reign of king Malcolm IV. was probably a
younger son or nephew of the first William, and left issue two sons. 1. Henry,
his heir. 2. William, who, in a donation to the monastery of Newbottle, by Ada
comitissa matter regis, Chartulary of Newbottle, p. 5.
is designed Willielmus de Graeme, filius Petri, etc. in or before 1178, in
which year Ada comitissa died.

Petrus was succeeded by his eldest son,

2. Henry de Graeme, of whom there are many documents, in the reign of king
William.

In the said donation of Ada comitissa to the monastery of Newbottle, Henricus
de Graeme filius Petri, Ibidem.
etc. is a witness, together with his brother William, before mentioned, ante
1178.

He is mentioned also in other two charters of king William, Origin. writs of
Coldingham, penes MacFarlane.
super liberate ecclesiae de Coldinghame, together with Duncan earl of Fife,
and Hugo the chancellor, who died anno 1199.

He married the daughter and heiress of -- Avenel, by whom he got the lordship
of Eskdale, etc.

He died in the beginning of the reign of king Alexander II. and lest issue a
son and heir,

3. Sir Henry de Graham, who made a great figure in the reign of king Alexander
II. Charta penes ducem de Montrose.
and granted to his cousin, sir David, the charter of Cli^ton and Clifton-hall,
in which he is designed his consanguineus, as before mentioned.

He was proprietor of the lands of Abercorn, Dalkeith, Halsington, E^kdale,
etc. as will appear by the documents hereafter narrated; and died in the
beginning of the reign of king Alexander III. leaving issue a son and successor,

4. Sir Nichol de Graham, who made a donation to the mon^stery of Me^^oss, de
tota terra sua quam habuit in villa et territorio de Halsington, and in that
charter he is designed Nicholaus de Graham, miles, ^rimogenitus domini Henrici
de Graham, etc. to which sir William de Solys, justiciar of Lothian, Thomas
Ranulph, Simon Fraser, and Andrew his brother, were witnesses. Book of original
writs, penes MacFarlane, p. 29. et charta penes ducem de Montrose.
To this charter, in which sir Nichol's lands of Dalkeith are mentioned, his
seal is appended, and is still entire, being the plain coat of Graham, viz.
three escallops, without any mark of cadency.

This sir Nichol was one of the arbiters chosen on the part of Robert Bruce,
Rymer, tom. I. p. 553.
in his competition for the crown with John Baliol, anno 1292.

He left issue a son,

5. Sir John Graham, who succeeded him, and confirmed the donations made by his
predecessors to the monks of Melross, in these words: Johannes de Graham de
Eskdale, miles, filius et haeres domini Nicholai de Graham, etc. confirmasse,
etc. totam terram de Eskdale, ab antecessoribus meis collatam, etc. etc. to
which William de Lamberton, bishop of St. Andrews, Book of charters, p. 431.
who was in that see from 1298 to 1328, was a witness.

Sir John's seal, which is thereto appended, is the same with his father's,
only round the circumference is, S. JOHANNIS DE GRAHAM.

He made a donation to the same monastery, of the patronage of the church of
Wester-Ker, and is then designed dominus de Abercorn, filius et haeres domini
Nicholai, etc. to which the said bishop Lamberton is a witness. Ibid. p. 433.


He made several other donations to the religious at Melross, all which are
confirmed by king Robert Bruce, in these words: Robertus, etc. confirmasse,
etc. monachis de Melross, etc. terram de Eskdale, etc. etc. etc. quas dicti
monachi tenuerunt de quondam domino Nicholao de Graham, et ejus antecessoribus,
etc. et ratificasse cartam domini Johannis de Graham, Books of original
charters p. 436. 440. etc.
militis, filii ei haeredis dicti domini Nicholai, etc. 25 to Decembris, anno
regni 11 mo, 1317.

This sir John had no surviving male-issue, but he had a daughter,

6. Margaret, married to William Douglas, lord of Liddisdale, of the family of
Morton, called the flower of chivalry, one of the greatest heroes of his time.
He got with her the lands and lordship of Dalkeith, which was enjoyed by, and
continued to be one of the chief titles of, the family of Morton above three
hundred years. Vide title earl of Morton, page 488th.

Though we can trace the male line of this family no further, yet there
certainly were several cadets of it, viz. the Grahams of Torbolton, Weilston,
and several others, who are designed consanguinei et cognati of the Grahams of
Abercorn, Books of original charters p. 441. 442. etc.
which is fully instructed from our public records.

We now return to the family of Montrose.

Sir David, No. IV. in this account, appears to have had issue four sons.

1. Sir David, his heir.

2. Sir Patrick Graham, Chartulary of Newbottle, penes MacFarlane, p. 180.
who is witness in a charter of king Alexander II. to the monastery of
Newbottle, anno 1248.

3. Sir Thomas Graham, designed baro et miles, in a confirmation charter of the
same king Alexander, Chartulary of Paisley, penes eund. p. 17.
to the monastery of Paisley, to which David bishop of St. Andrews is a
witness, who was in that see anno 1247.

4. William Graham, who is mentioned in two conventions betwixt the prior of
St. Andrews, Chartulary of St. Andrews, penes eund. p. 40. and 490.
and Bernard de Fraser, in the reign of king Alexander II.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. Sir DAVID GRAHAM, who got several charters, domino Davidi Graham, filio
Davidis, in the reign of king Alexander II. Chartulary of Keiso, penes eund. p*
101. 103. 105. etc.
who succeeded king William, anno 1214; particularly one from Patrick earl of
Dunbar, of two to^ts of Melekston, etc.

He had also from the same earl, Crawfurd's peerage, et charta penes ducem de
Montrose.
the lands of Dundaff and Strathcarron, which had been a king's forest, in
exchange of some lands of sir David's in Galloway.

He obtained likeways from Maldwin earl of Lennox, Ibidem.
the lands of Strathblane, Mugdock, etc.

He is witness in a charter granted by the said earl Maldwin, Chartulary of
Levenax, penes MacFarlane, p. 38.
to William, son of Arthur, son of Galbraith, etc. in which he is designed
dominus David de Graham, miles, in the year 1238.

He is witness in many charters and confirmations of donations to the religious
by king Alexander II. Chartulary of Coldstream, and Coldinghame.
inter 1230 et 1240.

He was one of the guarantees of a treaty with king Henry III. Rymer, tom. I.
p. 428.
of England, anno 1244.

He died soon thereafter, and by Agnes his wife, left issue a son and successor,

VI. Sir DAVID GRAHAM, who made a great figure in Scotland in the reign of king
Alexander III. who succeeded his father, anno 1249.

He was sheriff of Berwick, and was sometimes designed by the title of Dundaff.

This sir David, Chartulary of Dunfermline, penes MacFarlane, p. 220.
together with Clement bishop of Dunblain, are mentioned in testimonio magna^um
Scotiae, anno 1253.

In a donation of Patrick earl of March, Chartulary of Coldingham, penes eund.
p. 59.
to the monastery of Coldinghame, dominus David de Graham, vicecomes de
Berwick, is a witness, anno 1260.

He obtained from king Alexander III. Crawford's peerage, et charta penes ducem
de Montrose.
distinct charters of his whole lands, all comfirmed to him by charters under
the great seal.

He got also from Malise earl of Strathearn, Ibidem.
a grant of the lands of Kincardin in Perthshire, which afterward became one
of the chief titles of his family.

He married Annabella, daughter of Robert, and sister of Malise earl of
Strathearn, by whom he had three sons.

1. Sir Patrick, his heir.

2. Sir John Graham, who got from his father the lands of Dundaff, History of
sir W. Wallace, Abercromby, etc.
by which title he was designed. When sir William Wallace met him on
Dundaff-muir, he was called dominus ejusd. He was a great hero and patriot, the
constant companion and bosom friend of the brave sir William Wallace, governor
of Scotland, who, with him, shared the glory of all the illustrious victories
that were then obtained by the Scots over the common enemies of their country.
They are both particularly mentioned at the engagement of Blackiron-side, the
burning of the barns of Air, the taking of the castle of Crawford, the defeat
of the English at Lanark, the battle of Biggar, Buchanan, Lesly, Boeth* Pere de
Orleans, Abercromby, etc.
etc. etc. and he is agreed upon by our Scotch historians, to have been the
bravest and best of all Scotchmen, next to sir William Wallace. He at last lost
his life fighting gallantly in defense of the liberties of his country at the
fatal battle of Falkirk, in the year 1298. He was afterward interred in a
chapel ^at that place, with the following inscription on his tomb, which is
still to be seen:

Mente manuque potens, et Vallae fidus Achates, Conditur hic Gramus, bello
interfectus ab Anglis.

He having no male issue, Rymer, tom. II. p. 553.
his estate of Dundaff returned to the family.

3. Sir David, was one of the arbiters chosen on the part of John Baliol, in
his competition for the crown with Robert Bruce, anno 1292.

The Grahams, by this time, were become very numerous, among whom there were
many worthy patriots, who made a glorious struggle, in defense of the liberties
of their country, against the oppressions of king Edward I. of England, and are
particularly mentioned in Rymer's Foedera Angliae, Prynne's collections, and
several other authentic documents; and though we cannot pretend to connect them
with this noble family, yet they are undoubtedly descended from the same stock.

^ Sir David appears to have died about the year 1270, and was succeeded by his
eldest son,

VII. Sir PATRICK GRAHAM, a man of great worth, honor, and integrity.

He was witness in a charter of king Alexander III. Chartulary of Dunfermline.
of the lands of Beath, anno 1271.

He got a confirmation of several lands, Chartulary of Levenax.
from Duncan third earl of Lennox, anno 1280, and is then designed dominus
Patricius de Graham, miles, etc.

He was employed in several foreign embassies by king Alexander III. in 1281
and 1282, and was sent to negociate the marriage betwixt that prince, Fordun,
vol. II. p. 127.
and a daughter of Guido earl of Flanders, which was afterward accomplished.

He was one of those Scotch worthies who solemnly obliged themselves to receive
and defend princess Margaret for their lawful queen and sovereign, Rymer, tom.
I. p. 266.
in case of the death of king Alexander III. without male issue, anno 1284.

He was also one of the Scotch nobles who agreed to the marriage of queen
Margaret with prince Edward of England, Ibid. p. 471
anno 1290.

He was one of the arbiters chosen on the part of John Baliol, Ibid. p. 553
in his competition for the crown with Robert Bruce, together with David de
Graham, anno 1292.

He is witness in a donation of Thomas de Gourlay, Chartulary of Newbottle.
of some lands lying near Arthur's Oven to the monastery of Newbottle, together
with Willielmus de Graham, anno 1293.

He at last lost his life, fighting in defense of the liberties of his country,
Abercrombie.
at the battle of Dunbar, anno 1296, leaving issue two sons.

1. Sir David, his heir.

2. Sir John, who made a donation of the patronage of the church of Newlands,
Chartulary of Dunfermline.
to the monastery of Dunfermline, anno 1317, and is then designed nobilis vir
Johannes de Graham, miles, etc.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. Sir DAVID GRAHAM, who, with several other of the Scotch nobility,
Abercrombie.
was carried prisoner to England with king Edward I. anno 1297, but was
released soon thereafter.

He had a controversy with Archibald bishop of Murray, Chartulary of Murray, p.
179.
concerning the ^ishings on the water of ^sk, which at last he yielded to the
bishop, about the year 1298.

After king Robert Bruce began in earnest to assert his title to the crown, he
joined him, and continued his faithful and steady friend; for which he was
particularly excepted out of the act of indemnity offered to the Scots by king
Edward I. Rymer, tom. III.


He afterward, in reward of his constant loyalty, Crawfurd's peerage, and
Chart. in pub. archiv.
obtained a grant of several lands from king Robert Bruce; particularly, the
lands of Old-Montrose in Forfar-shire, which were afterward confirmed to his
posterity, by many charters under the great seal.

He was one of the magnates Scotiae, who signed that famous letter to the Pope,
Fordun, vol. II. p. 275.
asserting the independency of Scotland, anno 1320. Besides sir David, Johannes
de Graham et Patricius de Graham signed the same letter, but sir David is first
named, and his seal is thereto affixed.

He was one of the guarantees of a treaty with the English, Rymer, tom. III. p.
1025.
anno 1323.

He died soon after his royal master king Robert, and was succeeded by his son,

IX. Sir DAVID GRAHAM, designed of Montrose, who inheriting the virtues of his
worthy ancestors, Ibid. tom. V. p. 534.
was a steady friend of king David Bruce, whom he accompanied in his
unfortunate expedition into England, and was taken prisoner with him at the
battle of Durham, anno 1346.

But it seems he was released before the year 1354; Ibid. p. 791.
for then we find him one of the commissioners from the estates of Scotland,
negociating the king's liberty at the court of England.

In a charter under the great seal, from king David Bruce, Charta in archivis
regis David.
priori et canonicis de Rostenit, etc. nobilis vir David de Graham de
Old-Montrose is a witness, anno 1360.

He had issue a son,

Sir Patrick, his heir, -- and a daughter, --, married to William earl of Ross.

He was succeeded by his son,

X. Sir PATRICK GRAHAM, designed lord of Dundaff and Kincardin, who was one of
the noble Scotch heirs that were appointed hostages for king David ^ ransom,
Rymer, tom. VI. p. 35.
anno 1357, and is then designed Patrick, son and heir apparent of sir David de
Graham, etc.

He was one of the ambassadors appointed to treat with the English, Ibid. p.
315.
for which he got a safe conduct from king Edward III. anno 1361.

Upon the accession of king Robert II. Chart. in pub. archiv.
to the crown, he was one of the Scotch nobles who ratified the act in favors
of his eldest son the earl of Carrick, anno 1371.

He got charters under the great seal, Charta in archivis Rob. II.
from king Robert II. of the lands of Auchincross and others, in the shire of
Lennox, anno 1377 et 1378.

In the reign of king Robert III. he was appointed one of the ambassadors
extraordinary to the court of England, Rymer, tom. VII. p. 788.
anno 1394.

He married, Crawfurd's peerage.
1st, Matilda, (but of what family we know not) by whom he had a son,

William, lord Graham, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Matilda, married to sir John Drummond of Concraig.

He married, 2dly, Eupheme, daughter of sir John Stewart of Railston, Stewart's
hist. of the royal family, and Crawfurd's peerage.
second son of Walter, eighth lord high steward of Scotland, and brother of
king Robert II. by whom he had issue four sons.

1. Sir Patrick of Elieston, ancestor of the earls of Menteith. ( Vide page 47
4th of this work.

2. Robert.

3. David.

4. Alexander.

He died before the year 1404, and was succeeded by his only son of the first
marriage,

XI. Sir WILLIAM GRAHAM, lord of Kincardin, a man of great parts, who was
concerned in all the public transactions of his time.

In the year 1405, Willielmus de Graham, dominus de Kincardin, obtained a safe
conduct from king Henry IV. Rymer, tom. VIII. p. 389.
to come to England, and treat for the liberty of the earl of Douglas and
others, then prisoners in that kingdom.

He obtained another safe conduct from the same prince, Ibid. p. 429, 445, etc.
as ambassador extraordinary from the estates of Scotland to the court of
England, anno 1406.

He was again named ambassador extraordinary to treat with the English, Ibid.
p. 734.
anno 1412

He was three times afterward appointed one of the commissioners by the
estates of the kingdom, Ibid. tom. IX. p. 5, 244, and 418.
to negociate the liberty of king James I. and Murdoch earl of Fife, then
prisoners in England, anno 1413, 1415, and 1416.

This William lord Graham, got a charter from Robert duke of Albany,
Haddington's collections.
containing an entail of the lands of Old-Montrose, and many others.

He married, 1st, Mariotta, daughter of sir John Oliphant of Aberdalgy, Chart.
in pub. archiv.
by whom he had two sons.

1. Alexander, his apparent heir.

2. John, who, in a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
is designed second son of sir William Graham by Mariot Oliphant, anno 1421.

He married, 2dly, lady Mariot Stewart, daughter of king Robert, third widow of
George earl of Angus, and sir James Kennedy of Dunure, ancestor of the earl of
Cassilis.

He got five charters under the great seal, Willielmo domino Graham militi,
Chart. in archiv. Jacobi I.
et Mariotae Stewart sorori regis, inter 1420 et 1424, in which last year he
did, leaving issue by the said lady Mariot Stewart, five sons, all mentioned in
a charter under the great seal, anno 1421.

1. Sir Robert of Strathcarron, ancestor of the Grahams of Fintray,
Claver-house, etc.

2. Patrick, who betook himself to the service of the church, Keith's bishops,
p. 19.
was a man of great piety and learning, was first bishop of Brechin, and then
of St. Andrews. He died in the castle of Lochleven, anno 1478.

3. William, ancestor of the Grahams of Garvock and Balgowan.

4. Harry.

5. Walter of Wallacetown, ancestor of the Grahams of Knockdolian, etc.

XII. ALEXANDER GRAHAM, eldest son and apparent heir of William lord Graham of
Kincardin, Rymer, tom. VIII. p. 735.
was one of the hostages for Murdoch Stewart, then designed master of Fife,
anno 1412; and this Alexander is then designed filius et haeres domini de
Graham, etc.

He died before his father, leaving issue two sons.

1. Patrick, his heir.

2. Alexander Graham, Chart. in pub. archiv.
mentioned in a charter under the great seal, and designed brother of Patrick,
etc. anno 1423.

XIII. PATRICK lord Graham of Kincardin, eldest son of Alexander, Rymer, tom.
X. p. 372.
succeeded his grandfather, anno 1424. That same year he was appointed one of
the hostages for king James's ransom, and continued long confined in England.

At last we find Patrick lord Graham ( unus ex obsidibus) obtains a safe
conduct from king Henry VI. Ibid. p. 509.
to return to Scotland, anno 1431.

After the murder of king James I. he was appointed one of the lords of the
regency, Records of parliament.
in the minority of king James II. and was by that prince made a lord of
parliament, about the year 1445, and sat as a peer in every parliament
thereafter as long as he lived.

He was one of the ambassadors extraordinary appointed to treat with the
English, Rymer, tom. XI. p. 286, 389, and 400.
anno 1451; also in 1457, ad traclandum super indentura treugarum, etc. and
again in 1459.

He acquitted himself in all the negociations he was employed in, with great
fidelity and honor, and died anno 1465, leaving issue by Elizabeth his wife, a
son,

XIV. WILLIAM lord Graham, Ibid. tom. XI. p. 575.
who was appointed ambassador extraordinary to the court of England, anno 1466.

He married lady Anne Douglas, Chart. in archiv. fam. de Douglas.
daughter of George fourth earl of Angus, by whom he had two sons, and two
daughters.

1. William, his heir.

2. George, ancestor of the Grahams of Calendar.

1st daughter, Jean, married to John second lord Ogilvic of Airly.

2. Christian, married, 1st, to James Haldane of Gleneagles; 2dly, to sir
Thomas Maul of Panmure.

He died anno 1472, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. WILLIAM lord Graham, afterward earl of Montrose, a man of great honor
and loyalty.

He was a firm and steady friend of king James III. Crawfurd's peerage.
had the command of the army he raised in his own defense against his
rebellious subjects, and never deserted his interest.

He was in great favor with king James IV. Ibid. and letters of creation,
penes ducem de Montrose.
who created him earl of Montrose, on 3d March 1504.

He got a charter under the great seal from that prince, Willielmo comiti de
Montrose, confirming to him the lands of Old-Montrose in Forfar-shire,
Haddington's collections, p. 383.
which belonged to his predecessors, by donation from king Robert Bruce,
confirmed by king David, etc. This confirmation is dated the said 3d day of
March 1504.

He afterward got many charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Willielmo comiti de Montrose, of several lands and baronies, inter 1506 et
1511.

He married, 1st, Annabella, daughter of daughter of John lord Drummond, Chart.
penes ducem de Montrose.
by whom he had a son,

William, lord Graham.

He married, 2dly, Janet, daughter of sir Archibald Edmondston of Duntreath,
Crawfurd's peerage.
by whom he had three daughters.

1. Lady Margaret, married, 1st, to William master of Lennox; 2dly, to sir John
Somerville of Cambusnethan.

2. Lady Elizabeth, married to Walter, grandson and apparent heir of John,
first lord Drummond.

3. Lady Nicholas, married to sir William Murray of Abercairny.

He married, Ibidem.
3dly, Christian Wavane, by whom he had two sons.

1. Patrick, ancestor of the Grahams of Inchbraco, of whom the Grahams of
Gorthie, Bucklivie, etc. are descended.

2. Andrew, who betaking himself to a religious life, was appointed bishop of
Dunblain, anno 1575, and was the first protestant bishop of that see.

This earl accompanied king James IV. to the fatal field of Flowdon, where he
lost his life with his royal master, anno 1513.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVI. WILLIAM, second earl of Montrose, a man of good parts, and great
integrity.

He was one of the Scotch peers to whom John duke of Albany, Ibidem.
regent of Scotland, committed the tuition of the young king James V. when he
went to France to secure the interest of that crown in favors of his infant
sovereign, etc.

He got no less than seven charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Willielmo comiti de Montrose, of many lordships and baronies, inter 1530 et
1550.

He married lady Janet Keith, daughter of William third earl marishal, by whom
he had four sons, and five daughters.

1. Robert, lord Graham.

2. Alexander, who was pensioner of Cambuskenneth.

3. Mungo, ancestor of the Grahams of Killearn.

4. William, ancestor of the Grahams of Orchil.

1st daughter, lady Margaret, married to Robert master of Erskine.

2. Lady Elizabeth, married to George fourth earl of Caithness.

3. Lady Agnes, married to sir William Murray of Tullibardin, ancestor of the
duke of Athole.

4. Lady Janet, married to sir Andrew Murray of Balvaird.

5. Lady Catharine, married to John Graham of Knockdolain.

He died 25th May 1571.

XVII. ROBERT lord Graham, first son and apparent heir of William second earl
of Montrose, Lives of the offic. of state, p. 152.
married a daughter of Malcolm lord Fleming, and was killed at the battle of
Pinkie, anno 1547, leaving issue by his said lady a posthumous son,

XVIII. JOHN, who succeeded his grandfather, in 1701, and was third earl of
Montrose.

He got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Johanni comiti de Montrose, of the whole lands, baronies, and earldom of
Montrose, etc. etc. etc. inter 1578 et 1584.

He was a man of great abilities, and after queen Mary was prisoner in England,
he went entirely into the measures of the court.

He was chancellor of the jury upon the trial of the regent Morton, Lives of
the offic. of state, p. 153.
for the murder of king Henry, and pronounced the sentence against him, guilty,
etc.

He was highly esteemed and in great favor with his majesty king James VI. who
constituted him lord high treasurer of Scotland, Lives of the offic. of state.
by a full and ample commission, dated anno 1584.

He was afterward appointed lord high chancellor of the kingdom by another
commission, Ibidem.
dated in 1598.

After king James's accession to the crown of England, when a design was set on
foot for procuring a nearer union betwixt the two crowns, Ibidem.
the earl of Montrose was nominated his majesty's high commissioner to the
parliament, appointed to meet at Perth for that purpose, in July 1604; but at
that time it took no effect.

He was also appointed viceroy of all Scotland, supremum regni Scotiae
procuratorem pro omnibus vitae diebus, etc. the highest dignity a subject could
enjoy; for this he had another commission dated on the ides of December the
said year 1604; and as there are several clauses, in that and his former
commissions, very honorable for the family, Ibid. and append.
and narrated at large in the lives of the officers of state, to that we refer
our readers.

In virtue of this last commission, he presided as representing his majesty's
person at the parliament, which met at Perth 9th July 1606, wherein "Episcopal
government was restored to the church, Acts of parlt.
the estate of bishops reintegrate to the ancient and accustomed honors,
dignities, prerogatives, privileges, etc. etc. etc. as the same was in the
reformed kirk, most ample and free at any time before the act of annexation in
1587."

This great man discharged his duty in all the high offices he enjoyed with
fidelity and honor.

He married Lilias, daughter of David lord Drummond, by whom he had three sons,
and one daughter.

1. John, lord Graham.

2. Sir Robert Graham of Innermeath.

3. Sir William Graham of Braco.

His daughter, lady Lilias, married to John earl of Wigton.

He died in November 1608, in the 61st year of his age, and was succeeded by
his eldest son,

XIX. JOHN, fourth earl of Montrose, who got charters under the great seal,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
Johanni comiti de Montrose, of many lands, inter 1609 et 1620.

He was also a man of parts, and much esteemed by king Charles I. Crawfurd's
peerage.
who, immediately upon his accession to the crown, constituted him president of
the council.

He married lady Margaret Ruthven, daughter of William earl of Gowrie, by whom
he had a son,

James, afterward marquis of Montrose, -- and four daughters.

1. Lady Lilias, married to sir John Colquhoun of Luss, Bart. and had issue.

2. Lady Margaret, married to Archibald lord Napier.

3. Lady Dorothea, married to James first lord Rollo.

4. Lady Beatrix, married to David lord Maderty.

He died in November 1626, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XX. JAMES, fifth earl of Montrose, born in 1612, whose education was suitable
to his high birth. He was possessed of many eminent qualities, with an uncommon
military genius, which he nobly exerted in the service of his king and country.

Upon the breaking out of the civil war, he was at first engaged on the
covenanters side; but no sooner did he perceive their intentions, and the
measures they were pursuing, than he deserted their party, went over to the
king's service, was created marquis of Montrose on 16th May 1644, and continued
steady and unalterable in the interest of the royal family to the end of his
life.

The many great actions he performed, and the glorious victories he obtained
with handfuls of loyalists against the numerous forces of their enemies, viz.
at Tippermuir, Alfurd, Aberdeen, Inverlochy, Kilsyth, etc. will scarce be
believed by after-ages; and as they are all narrated in the life of that great
man, written by doctor Wishart, who was an eyewitness, to that we must refer
our readers, as it is inconsistent with the brevity of this work to be more
particular.

However, we must here, for the sake of truth, vindicate him of one aspersion
which has been most unjustly cast upon him by some authors, who have alleged,
that he actually took the solemn league and covenant, Records of parliament.
consequently was guilty of the breach of that oath: but this is absolutely
false; for in October 1643, he was summoned to appear before the parliament to
take that solemn league, betwixt and the beginning of January then next: but at
that time he was with the king, so did not appear.

Upon the 12th of January 1644, there was a decree of parliament pronounced
against him for not complying, Ibidem.
upon which he was outlawed, forfeited, and his estate ordered to be
sequestrate.

He was afterward intercommuned under the designation of James Graham,
sometime earl of montrose, for being in rebellion against God and his covenant;
and all his majesty's good subjects were discharged to reset or give him the
least supply, under the pain of treason: Ibidem.
this was enacted on 20th March 1646, in which year he was surprised by general
Lesly, and the parliament's forces, at Philiphaugh, and his army routed and
dispersed.

He was at last taken prisoner, himself brought up to Edinburgh, where he
suffered all the indignities of a common malefactor with the utmost constancy:
Doctor Wishart, etc.
a very few days thereafter he was tried, condemned, and executed, in the most
cruel manuer, on 21st May 1650: the firmness, resolution, and magnanimity, with
which he behaved at his trial and execution, were inimitable. We shall sum up
his character in the words of a noble author, Lord Clarendon.
who was far from being partial in his favor, viz. "He gave as great
testimonies of loyalty and courage as a subject could do, and performed as
wonderful actions in several battles, upon as great inequality of numbers, and
as great disadvantages in respect of arms and other preparations for war, as
have been performed in this age, etc. etc." His body was interred at the place
of execution, where it rested till the restoration of king Charles II. who gave
orders to have the scattered remains raised, and collected together, and by his
majesty's appointment were interred with great funeral pomp, in the isle of the
cathederal church of St. Giles, which belonged to his family, on 14th May 1661.

He married lady Magdalen Carnegie, daughter of David earl of Southesk, by whom
he had one son,

XXI. JAMES, second marquis of Montrose. Though he was too young to be engaged
in the wars with his worthy father, and lived a retired life during the
usurpation, yet he gave many instances of his being a man of staunch loyalty,
great probity and honor.

Immediately after the restoration of king Charles II. Crawsurd's peerage.
his father's forfeiture was repealed, he was restored to the whole estates of
the family, and appointed one of his majesty's most honorable privy council.

He married lady Isabel Douglas, daughter of William earl of Morton, widow of
Robert first earl of Roxburgh, by whom he had two sons, and three daughters.

1. James, his heir.

2. Lord Charles, a youth of great hopes and spirit, who died young.

1st daughter, lady Anne, married to Alexander earl of Calendar.

2. Lady Jean, married to sir Jonathan Urquhart of Cromarty.

3. Lady Grizel, married to William Cochran of Kilmaronock, Esquire; son of William
lord Cochran. Chart. in cancellaria.


He died anno 1669, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XXII. JAMES, third marquis of Montrose, who, being young at his father's
death, was carefully educated under the particular inspection of his majesty,
and was a man of fine accomplishments, both natural and acquired.

The king made him a captain of the guards, Chart. in pub. archiv. and charta
penes ducem de Montrose.
president of the privy council, sheriff of Dunbarton, bailie of the regality
of Lennox, Glasgow, etc.

He died in the flower of his age, greatly regreted, anno 1684; and by lady
Christian Lesly, his wife, daughter of John duke of Rothes, left issue an only
son,

XXIII. JAMES, fourth marquis, afterward duke of Montrose, who succeeded him.
He was a man of distinguished parts and good judgment, much esteemed and in
great favor with her majesty queen Anne, who, as soon as he came of age,
constituted him lord high admiral of Scotland, anno 1705, and president of the
council in 1706.

And in regard of his inviolable attachment and zeal for the protestant
succession, and his hearty concurrence in the union of the two kingdoms, her
majesty was pleased further to dignify him by the titles of duke of Montrose,
marquis of Graham and Buchanan, earl of Kincardin, viscount Dundaff, lord
Abernithvin, Mugdock, and Fintray, by patent, haeredibus masculis ex corpore
suo, Chart. in cancellaria.
quibus deficientibus, haeredibus marchionis de Montrose, per priora diplomata
praedecessoribus dicti Jacobi marchionis fact. et concess. etc. dated 24. April
1707.

He was elected one of the sixteen peers for Scotland, to the first, second,
fifth, sixth, and seventh British parliaments.

He was appointed lord privy seal, in the room of the duke of Queensberry, in
1709; but was removed from all his offices in 1713, for declining to comply
with the measures of the court.

Upon the death of her majesty queen Anne, being at his seat in the country, he
made a speedy journey to Edinburgh, and assisted at the proclamation of his
majesty king George I. and being appointed one of the regency, posted to
London, and heartily concurred with the rest for securing the public
tranquillity till his majesty's arrival, who immediately constituted him one of
the principal secretaries of state, in the room of the earl of Mar. He was soon
thereafter appointed lord keeper of the great seal for Scotland, and was also
chancellor of the university of Glasgow.

He married lady Christian Carnegie, daughter of David earl of Northesk, by
whom he had four sons, and one daughter.

1. James, marquis of Graham, who died in infancy.

2. David, marquis of Graham, whom his majesty king George I. was pleased to
advance to the dignity of a peer in England, by the style and title of earl and
baron Graham of Belford, in the county of Northumberland, 23d May 1722, with
remainder to his two brothers, William and George; and he dying unmarried, anno
1731, these titles devolved upon his brother,

3. William, now duke of Montrose.

4. Lord George, who was member of parliament for the county of Stirling, and a
captain in the royal navy, but died without issue, anno 1746.

His daughter, lady Margaret, died unmarried.

The duke dying anno 1741, was succeeded by his son,

XXIV. WILLIAM, second duke of Montrose, who married lady Lucy Manners,
daughter of John second duke of Rutland, by whom he has a son,

James, marquis of Graham, -- and a daughter,

Lady Lucy Graham.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th, or, on a chief sable three escallop shells of the
first, for the name of Graham: 2d and 3d, argent, three roses gules, barbed and
sceded proper, for the title of Montrose.

CREST; on a wreath, an eagle or, taloning a stork proper.

SUPPORTERS; two storks of the latter.

MOTTO; Ne oublie.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Glasgow, in the county of Lanark; at Kincardin in the county of Perth; at
Buchanan and Mugdock-castle, in the county of Dunbarton; and at Hanover-Square,
London.

MONYPENNY Lord MONYPENNY.
THE surname of Monypenny is of great antiquity in Scotland; but as the
traditional account of its origin appears to be somewhat sabulous, we shall not
trouble our readers with it.

In the reign of king Alexander II.

I. RICARDUS de MONYPENNY obtained from Thomas prior of St. Andrews, Sir Robert
Sibbald's history of Fyfe.
the lands and barony of Pitmullin, in the county of Fife (confirmed by king
Charles II.) which is now called Pitmillie, and is enjoyed by his posterity to
this day.

He was father of

II. JOHN de MONYPENNY, second baron of Pitmillie, Prynne's collect. vol. III.
p. 661.
who was obliged, with many others of his countrymen, to swear allegiance to
king Edward I. of England, when he had overrun Scotland, anno 1296.

He was succeeded by his son,

III. JOHN, third baron of Pitmillie, who, being a man of parts, Rymer, tom.
IV. p. 684.
was, by king David Bruce, appointed one of the ambassadors to the court of
France, anno 1336.

He left issue a son,

IV. JOHN MONYPENNY, fourth baron of Pitmillie, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who got a charter from king David II. of the third part of the lands of
Leuchars, in the county of Fife, to him and Janet Hay, his spouse, in or before
1371, in which year king David died.

By the said Janet Hay, he left issue two sons.

1. John, his heir.

2. Sir William, ancestor of lord Monypenny, of whom afterward.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. JOHN, fifth baron of Pitmillie, who was one of the inquest upon the service
of Alexander Ochterlony, Chart. in pub. archiv. and Haddington's collections.
as heir to his father William, in the lands of Kelly, and is therein designed
Johannes Monypenny dominus de Pitmillie, 24th April 1409.

He was succeeded by his son,

VI. THOMAS MONYPENNY, sixth baron of Pitmillie, who got from his father the
lands of Balbot, near Craill, in the county of Fife, which were confirmed to
him by a charter from Robert duke of Albany, Chart. in pub. archiv.
governor of Scotland, 16th December 1413; and he is therein designed son and
heir of John Monypenny of Pitmillie, etc.

Of this Thomas, major Alexander Monypenny now of Pitmillie, is the lineal heir
and representative, which can be instructed by many charters under the great
seal, and in the public archives.

We now return to,

V. Sir WILLIAM MONYPENNY, second son of the fourth baron of Pitmillie, Ibidem.
who married Margaret, daughter of sir William Arbathnot of that ilk, by whom
he had a son,

VI. Sir WILLIAM MONYPENNY, who succeeded him, and being a man of great parts
and spirit, was employed in several foreign negociations, Crawfurd's peerage.
both by king James I. and II. and having acquitted himself with great
dexterity and honor, was by the latter raised to the dignity of the peerage,
by the title of lord Monypenny, 1st May 1450.

He got a grant from the king, of the lands of Airth, and several others in
Stirling-shire, all erected into a barony, to be called the barony and lordship
of Monypenny, Chart. in pub. archiv.
to him and the heirs of his body, which failing to return to the king, anno
1450. The onerous cause in the charter is, his faithful services to the king's
father and sisters, etc.

Heafterwards got a charter from king James II. dilecto consanguineo suo,
Willielmo domino Monypenny, Ibidem.
of several lands in the lordship of Galloway and stewarty of Kirkcudbright,
which formerly belonged to James lord Hamilton, and Eupheme countess of
Douglas, his spouse, 17th July 1464.

He died soon thereafter, and was succeeded by his son,

VII. WILLIAM, second lord Monypenny, who got a charter from king James III.
confirming some lands to him, Ibidem.
in the stewarty of Kirkcudbright, upon the resignation of the lord Hamilton,
20th February, 1472.

He had issue a son and successor,

VIII. ALEXANDER, third lord Monypenny, who dying without male-issue,
Crawfurd's peerage.
anno 1495, the peerage became extinct.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st and 4th, or, a dolphin azure, finned gules, for Monypenny; 2d
and 3d, gules, three cross crosslets, fitchee, issuing out of as many
crescents, argent.

DOUGLAS Lord MORDINGTON.
WILLIAM, tenth earl of Angus, married Elizabeth, daughter of Laurence lord
Oliphant by lady Margaret Hay, daughter of George seventh earl of Errol, by
whom he had several Children. I. William, afterward marquis of Douglas. ( Vide
page 194th of this work.) 2. Sir James, the first of this family.

I. Sir JAMES DOUGLAS, second son of William tenth earl of Angus, got charters
under the great seal, Chart. in archiv. Caroli I.
domino Jacobo Douglas, of the lands of Over-Mordington, and others in the
shire of Berwick, in 1633 et 1634.

He married Anne, daughter and heiress of Laurence lord Oliphant, by Lilias
Drummond, daughter of James lord Maderty, Crawfurd's peerage.
and was by king Charles I. raised to the dignity of the peerage, by the title
of lord Mordington, with the precedence of lord Oliphant. By her he had issue
two sons.

1. James, who got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in archivis Caroli II.
Jacobo magistro de Mordington, of Nether-Mordington in Berwick-shire, anno
1661; but he died before his father without issue.

2. Wiliam, who carried on the line of the family.

His daughter Anne, married to Robert lord Semple.

He was succeeded by his son,

II. WILLIAM, second lord, who got charters under the great seal, Ibidem.
of several lands in Berwick-shire, Willie^^o domino Mordington, in the years
1663 and 1664.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of Hugh lord Semple, by lady Elizabeth Hay,
daughter of Francis ninth earl of Errol, by whom he had a son and successor,

III. JAMES, third lord Mordington, who married Jean, daughter of Alexander
first viscount Kingston, by whom he had a son,

IV. GEORGE, fourth lord Mordington, who succeeded him, and married Catharine,
daughter of doctor Robert Lauder, rector of Shenty in Hartfordshire, by whom he
had issue a son,

Charles, -- and two daughters.

1. Mary.

2. Cambelina.

He died anno 1741, and was succeeded by his son,

V. CHARLES, fifth lord Mordington, who went to sea when young, and did not
return till after his fathers death, and having no land estate, did not
immediately take up the titles.

But having engaged in the rebellion 1745, was taken prisoner, and arraigned at
Carlisle as a commoner, under the designation of Charles Douglas, Esquire; He then
pleaded his peerage, as lord Mordington, which at first was opposed by the
king's council; but he proving his descent, his trial was put off, and he was
remanded back prisoner to the castle of Carlisle, and dying some years
thereafter without issue, in him ended the male line of this family.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st and 4th, argent, a man's heart, gules, ensigned with an
imperial crown proper; on a chief azure, three stars of the first, for Douglas:
2d and 3d, gules, three crescents argent, for Oliphant.

CREST; on a cap of dignity, a salamander in flames, regardant, vert.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter side a savage, and on the sinister a stag, both
proper; the first armed with a batoon, and wreathed about his head and middle
with laurel, and the second collared and chained, with leaves of the last.

MOTTO; Forward.

DOUGLAS Earl of MORTON.
AS the origin and grandeur of the ancient and most noble name of Douglas, is
fully set forth under the title of duke of Douglas, to that we refer our
readers, and proceed to deduce the descent of this great branch of that
illustrious house from their immediate ancestor,

IV. ARCHIBALD, fourth lord Douglas, who flourished in the reign of king
Alexander II. and married Margaret, daughter and co-heiress of sir John
Crawfurd of that ilk, by whom he got large possessions in lands, etc.

He left two sons.

1. William, of whom the earls of Douglas, and Angus, marquis and duke of
Douglas, etc. are descended. ( Vide title duke of Douglas.)

2. Sir Andrew, the first of this family.

I. Sir ANDREW de DOUGLAS, second son of Archibald lord of Douglas, is witness
in a charter of the lands of Swine-Beath, Chartulary of Dunfermline, penes
MacFarlane, p. 525.
in the parish of Dunfermline, together with his brother William lord of
Douglas, anno 1248. He left issue two sons.

1. William, his heir.

2. (...) de Douglas, who swore fealty to king Edward I. Prynne, vol. III. p.
668.
of England, with his brother William, for lands in the shire of Linlithgow,
anno 1296, and was ancestor of the Douglases of Pompherston, Hawthornden, etc.

II. WILLIAM de DOUGLAS, succeeded his father, and was one of the Scotch barons
that swore allegiance to king Edward I. Ibid. p. 660, l. 22.
for his lands in West-Lothian, anno 1296, and is therein designed William
Fitz-Andrew, etc.

He left issue two sons,

1. Sir James de Loudonia.

2. Andrew de Douglas, who obtained from king Robert Bruce, a charter of the
lands of Cresswall, Chart. in archivis Rob. I.
in vicecomitatu de Lanerk, quae fuerunt quondam Henrici de Winton, etc.

This Andrew, in a charter of his nephew William lord of Liddisdale, who was
eldest son of his brother sir James, Chart. in archivis regis David.
of the lands and barony of Aberdour, is designed avunculus suus, anno 1351.

William was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. Sir JAMES DOUGLAS, whose chief residence being in Lothian, was designed
sir James de Loudonia, to distinguish him from his cousin, good sir James, who
resided in Clydsdale.

This sir James joined king Robert Bruce, as soon as he began to assert his
title to the crown, Ibidem.
and obtained from that great prince, a charter of the lands of Kincavel and
Calderclear, in vicecomitatu de Edinburgh, anno 1306, in which charter he is
designed Jacobus de Douglas de Loudonia, miles, etc.

He left issue three sons and one daughter.

1. William de Douglas, lord of Liddisdale, earl of Athole, etc.

2. Sir John Douglas, knight, ancestor of the family of Morton, Fordun, lib.
14. cap. 7.
of whom afterward.

3. Ibid. lib. 13. cap. 35.
Sir James, a brave and gallant warrior, who was killed at Burrowmuir. M. S.
hist. of the family of Somerville, penes dom. Somerville, and Nisbet's append.
p. 79.


His daughter Elizabeth, was married to sir Thomas Somerville of Carnwath.

He had also a natural son William de Douglas, who was governor of the castle
of Edinburgh, and a brave officer. He was witness in a charter to William lord
of Liddisdale, Fordun, lib. 13. cap. 47.
anno 1351. Chart. in archivis regis Davidis.


IV. WILLIAM de DOUGLAS, lord of Liddisdale, succeeded his father sir James de
Loudonia, and was one of the greatest heroes of his time. He performed many
glorious actions against the enemies of his country, on which account he was
called the flower of chivalry.

He obtained from king Robert Bruce, a charter of the lands of East-Sheils, in
the shire of Peebles, Mr. Simson's account of the chancellors of Scotland,
penes MacFarlane.
in which he is designed filius quondam Jacobi de Loudonia, etc. The charter is
dated 10th May, anno regni vigesimo quarto, 1329, to which William Turnham
chancellor of Scotland is a witness.

He got a charter of confirmation from king David II. of the lands of Lochurd,
resigned to him by Michael Marishal, Ibidem.
etc. The charter (in which he is designed William de Loudonia) is dated at
Berwick, the 21st March, anno regni secundo, to which Adam bishop of Aberdeen,
chancellor, is a witness, anno 1330.

He obtained from king David another charter of the lands of Linton-Rotherick,
resigned to him by John Logan, Ibidem.
and dated at Dunbarton, 8 vo Maii, anno regni undecimo, to which Thomas
Carnock, chancellor, is a witness, anno 1340.

He also obtained from the same prince, a grant of the lordship of Liddisdale,
and of the lands of Esk and Ewys. Willielmo de Douglas militi, etc. testibus,
Roberto senescallo Scotiae, nepote nostro carissimo, Chart. penes com. de
Morton.
Duncano comite de Fyfe, Patricio de Dunbar comite Marchiae, Mauritio de
Moravia consanguineo nostro, Malcolmo de Flemyng, et Thoma de Carnoco
cancellario nostro Scotiae, militibus, in pleno parliamento nostro tento apud
Sconam, 22do Decembris, anno regni decimo tertio, anno domini 1342.

He had the misfortune to be taken prisoner at the battle of Homildon, anno
1333, and was above two years close confined in England, Fordun, lib. cap. 27.
which was no small loss to the nation; for he no sooner obtained his liberty,
than he nobly exerted himself in the service of his country, and greatly
harassed and distressed its enemies.

King David, on account of his singular merit and great services, Nishet's
appendix, and Chart. in pub. archiv.
dignified him with the title of earl of Athole, then in the crown, anno 1341,
which title, (having no male issue) he resigned in favors of Robert lord high
steward, Nisbet's append. p. 178.
earl of Strathearn, afterward king of Scotland.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir John Graham lord of Abercorn, by whom he
got the lands, lordship, and castle of Dalkeith. By her he had no sons, and but
one daughter,

Mary, who died without issue, whereby all his estates devolved upon his nephew
sir James Douglas, in whose favors he resigned his lands of Aberdour, about
two years before his death, Charta in archivis regis Davidis.
" dilecto nepoti nostro Jacobo de Douglas, totam terram nostram de Aberdour,
cum pertinen. etc. dated at Dalkeith, 7th April 1351, to which Andrew de
Douglas his uncle, and William his natural brother are witnesses, as before
noticed.

He was killed by his cousin the earl of Douglas, anno 1353.

Fordan sums up his character thus, Fordun, lib. 14. cap. 8.
" Vir strenuus in armis, qui multa passus fuit pro liberate regni, gnarus in
guerris, fidus in promissis, flagellum Anglorum, et Scotorum murus."

He was succeeded by his nephew sir James, son of his brother sir John, to whom
we now return.

IV. Sir JOHN DOUGLAS, second son of sir James de Loudonia, Ibid. cap. (...) et
charta in biblioth. jurid. ad annum 1339.
a brave warrior. He was captain and governor of the castle of Lochleven, which
he gallantly desended against the English, in the minority of king David II.

He married Agnes Monfode, by whom he had six sons and two daughters.

1. Sir James, his heir.

2. William de Douglas, who died without issue.

3. Sir Henry Douglas of Lugton and Lochleven, progenitor of the present earl
of Morton, of whom afterward

4. Thomas de Douglas, who died without issue.

5. John de Douglas.

6. Nicholaus, Charta penes comitem de Morton.
ancestor of the Douglases of Mains in the west of Scotland.

1st daughter, Margaret.

2. Helen.

Sir John was killed at Forgywood, anno 1350, Fordun, lib. 14. cap. 7.
and succeeded by his eldest son,

V. Sir JAMES DOUGLAS, afterward designed dominus de Dalkeith, who succeeded
also to his uncle William lord of Liddisdale, and his daughter Mary, whereby he
became possessed of an immense estate, which appears from the following charters,
viz.

Charter to sir James Douglas, domino de Dalkeith, Chart. in archivis regi^
Davidis.
of the lands and barony of Aberdour, in vicecomitatu de Fife, anno 1351,
before mentioned, confirmed in 1366.

Charter from king David, of the lands of Horsebruck, Chart. in pub. archiv. ad
annum 1364.
Eccles, Easter-Hope-house, Newby, by, etc. in vicecom. de Peebles, to James
lord of Dalkeith, wherein he is designed filius quondam Johannis de Douglas,
militis, etc.

Charter from the same prince, of the whole lands and barony of Dalkeith,
Ibidem.
and castle thereof, upon his own resignation to his heirsmale, dated in 1369.

Charter, " Isabella comitissa de Fife, etc. dilecto consanguineo nostro,
Jacobo de Douglas, militi, Charta penes comitem de Morton.
domino de Dalkeith, totam medietatem terrac de Easter-Ferny, cum pertinen. in
comitatu nostro de Fyfe, quae fuerunt nobili sviri, domini Willielmi de Douglas
militis, quondam avunculi dicti domini Jacobi, etc. anno 1369.

Charter of confirmation, Euphemia Senescalla comitissa de Strathearn, Ibidem.
etc. domino Jacobo Douglas domino de Dalkeith, etc. terras de Keilor, Ibidem.
anno 1369; and another of the same tenor, anno 1371.

Charter, Johannes de Graham, filius et haeres Joannis de Graeme de
Achyncloych, etc. domino meo, Ibidem.
domino Jacobo de Douglas militi, domino de Dalkeith, crofta in villa de
Dalkeith, etc. anno 1371.

Charter by king Robert II. of the barony of Preston in Kirckcudbright of
Dumfries-shire, Simson's account of the chancellors of Scotland.
to James Douglas lord of Dalkeith, dated 7th January 1374, to which John
Carrick, chancellor of Scotland, is a witness.

Resignation, Hugonis Fraser domini del Lovat, totius terrae sua de Fairlyhope,
Chart. penes comitem de Morton.
nobili domino et potenti domino Jacobo de Douglas, domino de Lynton, in
vicecomitatu de Peebles, dated anno 1377.

Also the lands and barony of Kincavel and Calderclear, in vicecom. de
Edinburgh, the baronies of Kilbohoch and Newlands, and the whole barony of
Linton-Roderick, in vicecom. de Peebles, all contained in one charter of king
Robert II. upon his own resignation, to him, and his eldest son James, by Agnes
Dunbar, and the heirs-male of his body, which failing, to his second son
William, etc. testibus, Johanne primogenito nostro, Chart. in rotul. Rob. II.
etc. Roberto comite de Fife, etc. filio nostro, Willielmo comite de Douglas,
Jacobo de Lindesay ne pote nostro, Archibaldo de Douglas, Roberto de Erskine,
etc. militibus; at Perth, 2d January, anno regni quarto 1374.

So that he was most justly reckoned among the barons majores Scotiae, temp.
Roberti II.

When John earl of Carrick was publicly and unanimously acknowledged, by the
three estates of the kingdom conveened at Scone in 1371, for eldest lawful son
and undoubted heir of king Robert II. this sir James Douglas lord of Dalkeith,
Chart. in pub. archiv. and Hay's vindication of Elizabeth More, in the lawiers
library Edin^.
was one of the Scotch nobles whose seal was appended to that ratification. On
the outer side of the tag is, Jacobus dominus de Douglas; the escutcheon red
upon green wax, plain and void of all figures, there being neither heart nor
crown; on the chief, two mollets; for supporters, two savages; Ibid. p. 119.
for crest, a tree issuand out of the helmet. On the circumference, S. JACOBI
DE DOUGLAS.

He married, first, lady Agnes Dunbar, daughter of Patrick, and sister of
George earl of March, lord of Annandale and Man, with whom he got in tocher,

The lands and barony of Mordington, Chart. in rotul. Rob. II.
in vicecomitatu de Berwick, by a charter from king Robert III. anno regni
secundo, 1371.

Also the lands and barony of Whitinghame, by another charter, Ibidem.
both to him, and Agnes Dunbar his spouse, etc. of the same date.

He likewise got an hundred pound land in the isle of Man, Ibidem.
by a charter from king Robert II.

By her he had issue two sons and four daughters.

1. James, lord Dalkeith.

2. William de Douglas, Charta penes comitem de Morton.
to whom he gave the lands and barony of Mordington.

1st daughter, Janet, married to sir John Hamilton of Cadzow, Ibid. ad ann.
1381.
ancestor of the duke of Hamilton.

2. Margaret, married to Philip Arbuthnot of that ilk, Ibid. ad ann. 1380.
ancestor of viscount Arbuthnot.

3. Agnes, married to sir John Livingston of Calendar, Ibid. ad ann. 1381.
ancestor of the earl of Linlithgow, to whom she had sir William Livingston,
first of the family of Kilsyth.

4. --, married to -- Tweedie of Drumelzier. Ibidem.


He married, 2dly, Giles, daughter of Walter lord high steward of Scotland,
widow both of sir David Lindsay of Crawfurd, and sir Hugh Eglington of that
ilk, by whom he had a son,

James Douglas, Rymer, tom. IX. p. 7, and 8, and chart. penes com. de Morton.
designed of Roberto, who got from his father the lands of Stainy-path and
Baldwin's-gilt, in the barony of Dalkeith, upon which he got a charter from
Robert duke of Albany, Ibidem.
anno 1411.

This James lord Dalkeith, founded and endowed a chapel near his castle of
Dalkeith, (which was afterward turned into a collegiate church) " pro salute
animarum Davidis regis Scotiae, domini Johannis Douglas patris sui, Chart.
peue^ comitem d^ Morton.
et Agnetae matris suae, et domini Willielmi de Douglas avunculi sui, et bonae
memoriae Agnetae quondam uxoris ejus, Joannis de Douglas fratris sui, Mariae de
Douglas consanguineae sanguineae suae, Margaretae et Helenae sororum, etc. et
pro statu ipsius salubri et uxoris suae, etc. etc. omnes terras de Lochurde et
quadringinta solidas sterling. de terris de Kirkurde in vicecom. de Peebles;
testibus dominis Willielmo et Henrico de Douglas militibus, fratribus suis,
Nicolao deDouglas fratre ejus, Willielmo Monypenny, Jacobo Tweedie, etc. 5 to
Decembris, anno domini 1384."

He likeways founded and endowed an hospital, pro sustentatione sex pauperum,
near the chapel of Dalkeith, cum consensu domini regis et Jacobi de Douglas,
primogeniti sui, etc. viz. out of the lands of Newby, in vicecom. de Peeblis,
four pounds sterling, out of the lands of Easter-Hopekylack, six pounds
thirteen shillings and four pence sterling, and out of the lands of Morton in
the barony of Dalkeith, three pounds six shillings and eight pence sterling,
etc. testibus Jacobo de Douglas primogenito nostro, Ibidem.
Jacobo de Douglas de Aberdour filiis nostris, Johanne de Glen, Willielmo
Monypenny militibus, Nicolao de Douglas fratre nostro, Johanne de Boswel,
Willielmo de Kincardin, Alexandro Graeme, etc. June 7th 1396.

He lived to a great age, according to Fordun, who says, Fordun, vol. II. p.
460.
" dominus Jacobus de Douglas de Dalkeith, pater, miles magnanimus, etc. obiit
anno 1420"

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. JAMES, second lord Dalkeith, who obtained from his father the castle and
village of Dalkeith, Chart. in pub. archiv.
upon which he got a charter under the great seal of king Robert III. the
second year of his reign, anno 1391.

He was appointed one of the sureties for keeping a truce with the English,
anno 1390, Rymer, tom. VII. p. 683, and 788. tom. VIII. p. 25, and 369.
and was again named one of the commissioners to treat with that court, anno
1394; also in 1404; and in all his negotiations he acquitted himself with
fidelity and honor.

He married, 1st, lady Elizabeth Stewart, daughter of king Robert III. by a
charter from that prince, Chart. penes comitem de Morton.
dilecto filio nostro Jacobo Douglas, filio et baeredi Jacobi de Douglas,
domini de Dalkeith, et Elizabethae sponsae suae, filiae nostrae carissimae, etc.

There is also another charter from the same prince to James Douglas, Simson's
account of the chancellors of Scotland.
son and heir of James Douglas, lord of Dalkeith, and Elizabeth, the king's
daughter, of forty pounds Scotch per annum, to be paid out of the great customs
of Edinburgh, dated 30th May 1403, to which Gilbert bishop of Aberdeen is a
witness.

He likeways got from king James I. two charters of the lands and baronies of
Morton, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Whitinghame, etc. anno 1439.

By said lady Elizabeth he had three sons.

1. William.

2. James, afterward^ lord Dalkeith.

3. Archibald, M. S. hist of the family, penes fam. de Douglas.
ancestor of the Douglases of Netherdale, of whom Tillywhilly, and others, are
descended.

He married, 2dly, Janet, daughter of sir William Borthwick of that ilk,
ancestor of lord Borthwick, and got, upon his own resignation, from king James
II. a charter of the lands of Whitinghame, to him and Janet Borthwick his
spouse, Simson's account of the chanceliors.
and the heirs of their bodies, etc. dated 13th October 1441, to which William
lord Crichton chancellor is a witness.

By her he had a son,

Sir William de Douglas, who was the first of the Douglases of Whitinghame; he
is designed Willielmus de Douglas, miles. Of him was descended Robert Douglas,
Chart. in archivis Jacobi III.
who went into the service of Gustavus Adolphus, king of Sweden, under whom he
had the command of a regiment of horse; was crown-general and governor of Riga,
in queen Christina's time: his son was governor of East-Gothland, and married a
sister of Count Steinbeck, by whom he had three sons: 1. William count Douglas,
who was aid de camp to king Charles XII. of Sweden, and was taken prisoner with
him at the battle of Pultowa, anno 1709. 2. --, who had the command of a
regiment at that battle; was also taken prisoner, and not being ransomed,
entered into the Muscovite service, where he was raised to the degree of a
general officer. Scots compend, p. 184.
3. --, was a captain in the king of Sweden's guards.

Lord James died about 1446.

VII. WILLIAM, eldest son and apparent heir of James, Rymer, tom. VIII. p. 417.
second lord Dalkeith, obtained letters of safe conduct to go to England, 1st
September 1405, wherein he is designed filius et haeres apparens Jacobi domini
de Dalkeith, etc.

He was one of the hostages for Archibald earl of Douglas, Ibid. vol. VIII. p.
536.
anno 1408.

He was a prisoner in the tower of London with king James I. Ibid. vol. IX. p.
3.
Murdoch earl of Fife, and William Gifford armiger, anno 1413, and was redeemed
from his captivity by sir James Douglas his father, Ibid. p. 7 and 8.
James Douglas of Roberton his uncle, etc. in May 1414.

He was also one of the hostages for king James I.'s ransom, Ibid. vol. X. p.
327.
28th March 1424; and it is observable, that his father's estate was then
valued at one thousand five hundred merks sterling per annum, Duncan Campbell's
of Argyle, the same, and none of the other hostages had above twelve hundred
merks.

He died before the year 1440, without issue, whereby his brother James became
his father's successor.

VII. JAMES, third lord Dalkeith, who, in his father's lifetime, was sent by
the estates of the kingdom, Rymer, tom. VIII. p. 730.
to negotiate some affairs of importance with the king, then a prisoner in
England, anno 1412, when he is designed Jacobus de Douglas chevalier, filius
Jacobi domini de Dalkeith, etc.

After his father's death, he got two charters under the great seal from king
James II. Chart. in pub. archiv.
Jacobo domino de Dalkeith, of several lands and baronies, anno 1450.

There is another charter of the same prince, Jacobo filio et baeredi quond.
Jacobi domini de Dalkeith, Simson's account of the chancellors.
of the baronies of Dalkeith, Aberdour, Calderclear, etc. dated 8th September
1456, to which William earl of Orkney and Caithness, lord Sinclair, chancellor
of Scotland, is a witness.

He married, 1st, lady Margaret, daughter of James earl of Douglas, by whom he
had one daughter,

Beatrix, Charta penes comitem de Errol.
married to William first earl of Errol.

He married, 2dly, Elizabeth, daughter of -- Gifford of Sheriff-hall, by whom
he had two sons.

1. James, afterward earl of Morton.

2. Henry, ancestor of the Douglases of Corehead, Chart. penes comitem de
Morton, and M. S. hist. of the family.
Long-Niddry, etc. of whom several families of the name of Douglas in Tweeddale
are descended, viz. the Douglases of Harwood, Garvlefoot, etc. This Henry gets
from king James III. a charter of the lands of Borgue, anno 1473; and his son,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
Hugh de Borgue, gets a charter of the lands of Clents, anno 1478.

James, lord Dalkeith died in 1457, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. JAMES lord Dalkeith, who, being a man of great parts, was in high favor
with king James II. who was pleased to dignify him with the title of earl of
Morton, Chart. penes comitem de Morton.
anno 1458; and, by the king's order, George bishop of Brechin, chancellor of
Scotland, declared in full parliament, that his majesty, out of his good
pleasure, had nominated and created the noble and potent lord James Douglas of
Dalkeith, Simson's account of the chancellors.
an earl, and he and his successors to be designed earls of Morton, etc. March
14th 1456-7.

Upon this occasion, William lord Borthwick, in name of his sister Janet lady
Dalkeith, mother-in-law to this earl, represented, that the lands of Morton
belonged to William Douglas her son, and therefore requested his majesty, in
presence of the three estates of parliament, that his dignity, by the title of
earl of Morton, might not prejudge her son with respect to these lands;
whereupon the chancellor declared, Notor. instrument, penes comitem de Morton,
dated in March 1457-8.
that lord Dalkeith's title of earl of Morton did not concern the lands of
Morton, situated in the lordship of Nithsdale, but the lands of Morton lying in
Calderclear, etc.

There is a charter under the great seal of king James II. Jacobo comiti de
Morton et Joannae sponsae suae, Chart. in pub. archiv.
sorori nostrae carissimae, of the lands of Easter and Wester-Balbartons, 15th
May 1460.

Also a charter, Jacobo comiti de Morton, Ibidem.
terrarum de Woodfield, etc. anno 1465.

He married lady Jean Stewart, daughter of king James I. who was countess
dowager of Angus, by whom he had a son,

John, earl of Morton, -- and a daughter,

Lady Janet, married, 1st, to Patrick Hepburn, first earl of Bothwel; 2dly,
Ibid. ad. ann. 1489.
to Thomas lord Erskine, ancestor of the earl of Mar.

IX. JOHN, 2d earl of Morton, succeeded, Ibiedm.
and got a charter from king James IV. to him and Janet Crichton his spouse,
terrarum dominicalium de Aberdour, dated in 1505.

He married Janet, daughter of -- Crichton of Cranston-Riddel, by whom he had
two sons, and two daughters.

1. James, his successor.

2. Richard de Douglas.

1st daughter, lady Elizabeth, married to Robert lord Keith, ancestor of earl
marishal.

2. Lady Agnes, married to Alexander lord Livingston.

X. JAMES, third earl of Morton, got a charter from king James V. terrarum
baroniae comitatus, burgi, villae, Ibidem.
et regalitatis de Dalkeith, Garmilton, Calderclear, Whitinghame, Aberdour,
etc. anno 1541.

Also a charter of confirmation of all the above lands, Ibidem.
anno 1543.

He married lady Catharine, natural daughter of king James IV. by whom he had
three daughters.

1. Lady Margaret, married to James earl of Arran, and duke of Chattelherault.

2. Lady Beatrix, married to Robert lord Maxwell, ancestor of the earl of
Nithsdale.

3. Lady Elizabeth, married to James Douglas, brother of David earl of Angus,
who afterward came to be earl of Morton, and regent of Scotland.

This earl, having no male-issue, made a resignation and entail of his estate
and honors, Charta penes comitem de Morton.
in favors of his cousin sir Robert Douglas of Lochleven, which was ratified
by a charter under the great seal of king James V. anno 1540.

However the earl a little before his death made another entail of his estate
and honors in favors of his son-in-law, Lives of the offic. of state, p. 95.
the said James Douglas, who accordingly succeeded to, the earldom of Morton,
anno 1553.

The life and transactions of this James, who was regent of Scotland, being
fully set forth in the lives of the officers of state, page 94th, et infra, to
that we refer our readers, as the brevity of this work will not permit us to
give a particular detail of them.

We shall only observe, that James the regent, having no lawful issue, made an
entail of the estate and honors of Morton in favors of his nephew, Archibald
earl of Angus, and the heirs-male of his body; which failing, to sir William
Douglas of Lochleven, son and heir of the foresaid sir Robert, anno 1567.

Upon the death and forfeiture of the regent, anno 1581, John lord Maxwell,
grandson of James third earl of Morton, by lady Beatrix his second daughter,
took upon him the title of earl of Morton, Chart. in pub. archiv.
and obtained a charter from king James VI. Johanni comiti de Morton, domino
Maxwell, terrarum comitat. regalitat. de Morton, etc. in 1581; but he
afterward laid aside that title.

The king having taken the management of public affairs upon himself, was
graciously pleased to pass a general act of indemnity, anno 1585.

The earl of Morton's forfeiture was then reversed, upon which Archibald earl
of Angus assumed also the titles of Morton, in virtue of the regent's
destination and entail beforementioned; but he likeways dying without issue in
1588, the estate and honors of Morton devolved upon sir William Douglas of
Lochleven, as having undoubted right both by the last mentioned deed of James
the regent, and the other resignation and entail of James third earl of Morton,
in favors of his father sir Robert of Lochleven, ratified under the great seal
of king James V. anno 1540, before observed.

James, third and last earl of Morton, of the house of Dalkeith, descended in a
direct line from the first son of sir John Douglas and Agnes Monsode, dying
without male issue, the estate and honors of Morton devolved upon the land of
Lochleven, lineally descended of Henry, third son of the said sir John (the
second son, William having left no succession) to whom we now return.

V. Sir HENRY DOUGLAS of Lugton and Lochleven, third son of sir John Douglas,
by Agnes Monsode, and grandion of James de Loudonia, got a charter from king
David II. dilecto et fideli nostro Henrico de Douglas, Charta in archivis regis
Davidis.
omnes terras tertiae partis de Lugton cum pertinen. infra vicecomitatum de
Edinburg, anno 1369; which charter was confirmed by two charters from king
Robert II. Ibidem.
anno 1381.

There was a safe conduct obtained from the king of England, Rymer, tom. VII.
p. 37.
pro Henrico de Douglas, de Scotia, cbevalier, cum viginti familiaribus,
equitibus, etc. dated 16th May 1374.

He got a charter from the said king Robert, dilecto consanguineo nostro
Henrico de Douglas, Chart. in pub. archiv.
militi, annuos reditus, etc. in vicecom. de Peeblis, anno regni 13tio 1383.

Also a charter of an annuity of 20 pounds sterling, Simson's account of the
chancellors.
payable out of the great customs of Haddington, dated 8th January, anno regni
14to to which John bishop of Dunkeld, chancellor, is a witness, anno 1384.

Another charter from said king, Henrico de Douglas, militi, et Marjoriae
sponsae suae, Chart. penes comitem de Morton, et chart. in pub. archiv.
nepti nostre cariffimae terrarum deLang-Newton, cum pertinen. jacen. infra
vicecom. de Roxburgh; testibus Johanne primogen. nostro, Roberto de Fife filro
nostro, Archibaldo de Douglas consanguineo nostro, comitibus, Jacobo Douglas
domino de Dalkeith, fratre nostro dilecto, et Thoma de Erskine consanguineo
nostro, milite, 11mo Martii, anno 1390.

Also two charters of said king Robert, dilecto consanguineo nostro Henrico de
Douglas militi, Ibidem.
lacum castri, et castrum nostrum lacus de Levyne, etc. anno 1390, with the
same witnesses as in the preceding charter.

He married Marjory, daughter of sir Walter Stewart of Railston, Chart. penes
comitem de Morton.
brother-german of king Robert II. and widow of sir Alexander Lindsay of
Glenesk, by whom he had two sons, and two daughters.

1. Sir William of Lochleven.

2. Sir James Douglas of Railston.

1st daughter, Margaret, married to sir John de Craigie.

2. Elizabeth, married to William Fairly of Braid, in vicecom. de Edinburg.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. Sir WILLIAM DOUGLAS of Lochleven, Ibidem. and hist. of the royal family,
p. 57.
who married lady Elizabeth Lindsay, daughter of David earl of Crawfurd, by
lady Catharine Stewart, daughter of king Robert II. by whom he had two sons,
and three daughters.

1. Sir Henry of Lochleven.

2. Sir James de Douglas, Fordun, vol. II. p. 515.
who is designed by Fordun, Jacobus frater domini Henrici Douglas de Lochleven
militis, anno 1446.

1st daughter, Elizabeth Douglas, was maid of honor to the queen; and being in
the royal apartment when the barbarous assassins of king James I. were about to
perpetrate their horrid murder, she hearing an unusual noise, ran to the door,
which finding open, she immediately shut it, Boethiu^, Buchanan, Hawthornden,
Abercrombie.
and missing the bar, thurst her feeble arm into its place, in hopes of keeping
out the murderers; but they easily forced open the door, broke her arm, and
finished their bloody tragedy, anno 1437. This heroine was afterward married
to Richard Lovel of Ballumby, Chart. in pub. archiv.
in vicecom. de Forfar, and is designed niece of the earl of Crawfurd.

2. Christian, Chart. in archiv. fam. de Wemyss, ad ann. 1432.
married to sir David Wemyss of that ilk, ancestor of the earl of Wemyss.

3. Christian, married to James Auchinleck of that ilk.

VII. Sir HENRY DOUGLAS of Lochleven succeeded, Fordun, vol. II. p. 515.
and was designed Henricus de Lochleven, miles, by Fordun, as above, anno 1446.

He got a charter from king James III. of the lands and barony of Keilor,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
anno 1464, Henrico Douglas de Lochleven et Elizabethae sponsae suae, etc.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of Robert lord Erskine, ancestor of the earl of
Mar, by whom he had three sons.

1. Sir Robert of Lochleven.

2. Mr. David Douglas.

3. Mr. Thomas Douglas.

These two last are designed fratres Roberti Douglas de Lochleven, Ibidem.
in a charter dated 12th August 1494.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. Sir ROBERT DOUGLAS of Lochleven, who, in his father's lifetime, obtained
two charters from king James III. Ibidem.
Roberto Douglas filio et haeredi apparenti Henrici Douglas de Lochleven,
militis, terrarum baroniae de Kinross, et cast^i de Lochleven, anno 1463. And
the other of the same tenor, anno 1464.

He got also a charter from king James IV. Roberto de Douglas domino de
Lochleven, Ibidem.
de sexta part terrarum de Wester-Pitlour, dated anno 1494; and another of the
lands of Dalquith, the same year; also a third charter dated in 1498.

He being a man of good parts and great spirit, was in high ^avour with king
James IV. Chart. penes comitem de Morton.
whom he accompanied to the fatal field of Flowdon, though an old man, and
there lost his life, with his royal master, anno 1513, leaving issue, by
Elizabeth his wife, daughter of sir David Boswell of Balmuto, a son,

Sir Robert of Lochleven, -- and two daughters.

1. Agnes, married to Thomas Hamilton of Raploch.

2. Margaret, married to sir David Stewart of Rosythe, which appears from a
charter, wherein she is designed Margareta filia Roberti Douglas de Lochleven;
Chart. in pub. archiv.
and in another, wherein she is designed, sponsa Davidis Stewart de Rosythe,
militis, 21st, November 1490; but to him she had no issue.

IX. Sir ROBERT DOUGLAS of Lochleven succeeded in 1513, Chart. pene comitem de
Morton.
and died before 1540, having married Margaret, daughter of David Balfour of
Burleigh, by whom he had a son,

Thomas, his apparent heir, -- and a daughter,

Margaret, married to Henry, son and heir of sir David Stewart of Rosythe,
Chart. in pub archiv.
which appears from a charter, in which she is designed Margareta Douglas
sponsa Henrici filii et haereredis Davidis Stewart de Rosythe, dated 12th
August 1516.

X. THOMAS DOUGLAS, only son and apparent heir of sir Robert of Lochleven,
Charta pene^ comitem de^ Morton.
is documented by his grandson William's service, in 1555, after-mentioned.

He died before his father, leaving issue, by Elizabeth his wife, daughter of
Archibald, son of Robert lord Boyd, one son,

Sir Robert of Lochleven, -- and three daughters.

1. Margaret, Nisbet's appendix, p. 66
married to John Anstruther of that ilk.

2. Marian, married to John Lindsay of Dowhill.

3. Elizabeth, married to Andrew Alexander, ancestor of the earl of Stirling.

XI. Sir ROBERT DOUGLAS of Lochleven, only son of Thomas, Chart. in pub archiv.
succeeded his grandfather, and obtained a charter under the great seal of king
James V. upon the resignation and entail of James third earl of Morton,
beforenoticed, terrar^um dominii, regalitatis, baroniae et burgi baroniae de
Dalkeith, anno 1540.

He also got another charter, terrarum villae, et baroniae de Kinross, Ibidem.
cum castro et lacu de Lochleven, Roberto Douglas de Lochleven, et Willielmo
Douglas ejus filio et haeredi apparenti, etc. dated anno 1540.

And a charter, Ibidem.
terrarum baroniae de Keilor, baroniae de Lugton, Lang-Newton, etc. anno
predicto.

Also a charter of the wards and reliess of the lands of Fossoquhy, Ibidem.
etc. of the same date.

He married lady Margaret Erskine, sister of John earl of Mar, Charta pene
comitem de Morton
regent of Scotland, by whom he had three sons, and three daughters.

1. William, afterward earl of Morton.

2. Robert Douglas, Hist. of the royal family p. 174.
who married lady Christian Stewart, countess and heiress of Buchan, in whose
right he became earl of Buchan.

3. Sir George Douglas, a man of great honor and integrity, and a faithful and
loyal subject to queen Mary, whom he assisted in making her escape out of the
castle of Lochleven, anno 1567. Chart. in pub. archiv.
He got a charter from king James VI. of the lands of Helenhill, Aschisheils,
etc. in which he is designed dominus Georgius Douglas de Helenbill, frater
germanus Willielmi, etc. dated anno 1591.

1st daughter, Eupheme, married to Patrick seventh lord Lindsay of Byres,
ancestor of the earl of Crawfurd.

2. Margaret, married to sir James Colville of Easter Wemyss.

3. Catharine, married to David Durie of that ilk.

This sir Robert was a man of great honor and loyalty, and a true lover of his
country. He lost his life at the battle of Pinkie, anno 1547, and was succeeded
by his eldest son,

XII. Sir WILLIAM DOUGLAS of Lochleven, Charta penes comitem de Morton.
who was served heir to his father sir Robert Douglas of Lochleven, son of
Thomas Douglas, only son of sir Robert Douglas of Lochleven, etc. anno 1555.

He was a man of good parts, and great integrity, though he did not continue long
in the interest of queen Mary, having early joined the young prince's party.

He was entrusted with the keeping of the queen in the castle of Lochleven,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
and used her majesty with great humanity, but could not be prevailed upon to
consent to, or connive at, her making her escape.

He obtained from king James VI. a charter of the lands of Pharington, anno
1576.

Also two charters, containing the lands of Kirkness, Ibidem.
Kyneskwood, Braclay, Kyneston, Balnethill, Wester-Balgeddie, Portmoke, etc.
anno 1586.

Upon the death of Archibald earl of Angus and Morton, without heirs-male, anno
1588, the estate and honors of Morton devolved upon this sir William, in
virtue of the resignation and entails before mentioned, upon which he obtained
a charter under the great teal from king James VI. Ibidem.
Willielmo comiti de Morton, domino Dalkeith, etc. containing casirum,
palatium, turrem et fortalitium de Dalkeith, etc. dated in 1591.

Another charter, Willielmo comiti de Morton, domim Dalkeith. etc. terrarum de
Calderclear, C^urie, Ibidem.
Zeithyre, Kirkfield, Cristilshaw, Kirkw^ll, Powdero, Pomwusk, Powclief,
Glendargy, Cashop, Finglen, cum decimis earundem, dated 23d January, 1606.

He married lady Agnes Lesly, daughter of George earl of Rothes, by whom he had
four sons and six daughters.

1. Robert, his apparent heir.

2. James Douglas, commendator of Melrose, who married Jean, Nisbet's appendix,
p. 66
daughter of sir James Anstruther of that ilk.

3. Sir Archibald Douglas, who got from his father the lands and barony of
Kirkness, Chart. in pub. archiv.
of whom the Douglases of Kinglassie and Strathendrie are descended.

4. Sir George Douglas of Keilor.

1st daughter, Charta penes comitem de Morton.
lady Margaret, married to sir John Wemyss of that ilk, ancestor of the earl of
Wemyss.

2. Lady Christian, married, 1st, to Laurence master of Oliphant; Ibidem.
and 2dly, to Alexander earl of Home.

3. Lady Mary, Ibidem.
married to Walter lord Deskford, ancestor of the earl of Finlater.

4. Lady Eupheme, Ibidem.
married to sir Thomas Lion of Auldbar, lord high treasurer of Scotland.

5. Lady Agnes, Ibidem.
married to Archibald seventh earl, and ancestor of the Duke of, Argyle.

6. Lady Elizabeth, Ibidem.
married to Francis ninth earl of Errol.

XIII. ROBERT, first son and apparent heir of William earl of Morton, got from
his father possession of a great many lands, upon which he obtained a charter,
before his father got the earldom, viz.

Charta, Charta in archivis Mariae reginae.
Roberto filio et haeredi apparenti Willielmi Douglas de Lochleven, omnes et
singulas terras et baroniam de Kinross, cum castro, et lacu de Lochleven,
villam, et terras de Kinross, etc. dated 26th July 1565.

Another charter, Ibidem.
terrarum et baroniae de Keillor, Lugton, Lang-Newton, etc. anno praedicto.

He married Jean, daughter of John lord Glammis, ancestor of the earl of
Strathmore, by whom he had a son,

William, who succeeded his grandfather.

This Robert perished at sea in passing to the Low Countries, anno 1583.

William earl of Morton, father of Robert, died in 1606, and was succeeded by
his grandson,

XIV. WILLIAM, second earl of Morton, of the house of Lochleven, who was a man
of excellent natural parts, which, by his grandfather's care were highly
improved by a liberal education, and traveling to foreign courts.

He got from king James VI. a charter of the lands of Tolquhair, Ibidem.
Comry, Zetsire, Kirkfield, Cristelshaw, and many others, in 1613.

Also a charter of the lands and barony of Kinross, Ibidem.
cum castro, loco, la^u, et piscariis de Lochleven, villa et burgo de Kinross,
terris baroniae de Seggy, etc. to William earl of Morton, and Robert lord
Dalkeith, his eldest son, and his heirs-male, dated in 1616.

Another charter, to William earl of Morton, Chart. in archivis Mariae reginae.
and David viscount Stormont, decimarum garbalium terrarum de Auld Lindores,
etc. anno 1621.

He obtained also from king Charles I. seven charters under the great seal, of
many other lands and baronies, Chart. in archiv. Caroli I.
too numerous to be here inserted.

Soon after his return from his travels, he was appointed one of the lords of
the bedchamber to king James VI. Lives of the offic. of state.
He had the same office conferred upon him by king Charles I. who constituted
him also lord high treasurer of Scotland, anno 1630.

He also appointed him one of the lords of his privy council in England,
Rushworth's collections.
captain of his majesty's guards, and knight of the most noble order of the
garter.

He was named chancellor by the Scotch parliament, Guthry's memoirs.
anno 1641, but was opposed by Argyle his son-in-law so strenuously, that his
nomination took no effect.

He was a great loyalist, and always adhered firmly to the interest of king
Charles I. even in his greatest distress. He advanced him considerable sums of
money, to the amount of thirty thousand pound sterling, Mill's collec. p. 271,
M S. penes MacFarlane.
having sold his fine estates of Dalkeith, etc. for that purpose, for all which
he got a mortgage on the islands of Orkney and Zetland, by a charter under the
great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Willielmo comiti de Morton, comitatus de Orkney, et dominii de Zetland, etc.
anno 1642.

He afterward got the heretable right to Orkney and Zetland confirmed to him,
Guthry's memoirs, p. 213.
anno 1646, which was ratified in parliament, anno 1647.

He married lady Agnes Keith, daughter of George fifth earl marishal, by whom
he had four sons and five daughters.

1. Robert earl of Morton.

2. Sir James Douglas of Smithfield, who carried on the line of this family, of
whom afterward.

3. John, a great loyalist, who lost his life in the king's service, at the
battle of Carbardale, anno 1650, without issue.

4. George Douglas, who, after the murder of the king, went into the service
of the states of Holland, where he arrived at great preferment, and died
without issue.

1st daughter, lady Agnes, married to George second earl of Kinnoul.

2. Lady Margaret, married to Archibald marquis of Argyle.

3. Lady Mary, married to Charles second earl of Dunsermline.

4. Lady Jean, married to James third earl of Home.

5. Lady Isabel, married 1st to Robert earl of Roxburgh; and 2dly, to James
marquis of Montrose.

This William earl of Morton died on the 7th October 1648, and was succeeded by
his eldest son,

XV. ROBERT, Chart. in pub archiv.
third earl of Morton, who was served heir to his father, on 29th November 1648.

He married Elizabeth, Chart. pene comitem de Morton.
daughter of sir Edward Villiers, sister of the lord viscount Grandison, and
niece of the great duke of Buckingham, by whom he had two sons and two
daughters.

1. William, his heir.

2. Robert, who was a lieutenant of the gens d'arms in France, under the duke
of York, master of horse to princess Henrietta duchess of Orleans, and
lieutenant of king Charles II.'s horse guards, under the earl of Newburgh, etc.
He died without issue anno 1661.

1st daughter, lady Anne, married to William earl marishal without issue.

2. Lady Margaret, married to sir James MacDonald of Slate, baronet.

Robert earl of Morton died in 16 -- and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVI. WILLIAM, Ibidem.
fourth earl of Morton, who married lady Grizel, daughter of John earl of
Middleton, by whom he had a son,

Charles, lord Dalkeith, who died before his father, unmarried.

The earl dying without issue in 1681, the honors devolved upon his uncle sir
James Douglas of Smithfield, to whom we now return.

XV. JAMES, fifth earl of Morton, second son of William the second earl, of the
house of Lochleven, was a man of great honor and integrity, and a remarkable
loyalist. He adhered firmly to the interest of king Charles I. and II. during
all the time of the civil war.

He was knighted by the earl of Lindsay under the royal standard, for his
gallant behavior at the isle of Rhee, when very young, and was gentleman of
the privy chamber to king Charles I.

He married Anne, Ibidem.
daughter and heiress of sir James Hay of Smithfield; by whom he had five sons
and one daughter.

1. Charles, lord Aberdour, who perished in his passage to Holland, unmarried.

2. James, afterward earl of Morton.

3. Robert, who succeeded his brother.

4. William, who died without issue.

5. George, afterward earl of Morton.

His daughter, lady -- died unmarried.

He died in 1686, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVI. JAMES, sixth earl of Morton, who was one of the lords of the privy
council to queen Anne, and one of the commissioners for the treaty of union
betwixt Scotland and England, which commenced in 1707.

He died unmarried in 1715, and was succeeded by his brother,

XVI. ROBERT, seventh earl of Morton, a man of good parts, great honor and
probity. He was peculiarly well versed in the knowledge of the antiquities of
our country.

He died likewise unmarried, anno 1730, and his estate and honors devolved
upon his brother,

XVI. GEORGE, eighth earl of Morton, who when a younger brother, betook himself
to a military life, and served in the army with great reputation, and was
raised to the rank of a colonel.

He was a member of parliament from the treaty of union, until he succeeded to
the earldom of Morton.

He married, 1st, -- Muirhead, daughter of -- Muirhead of Linhouse, in the
county of Mid-Lothian, by whom he had a son,

--, who died in his infancy.

He married, 2dly, Frances, daughter of William Adderly of Halstow, in the
county of Kent, Esquire; by whom he had three sons.

1. James, now earl of Morton.

2. William, who died young.

3. Robert Douglas, Esquire; a youth of great hopes, who went into the army when
very young, and was soon promoted to be a captain of foot. He was chosen member
of parliament for Orkney, anno 1730, and served as a volunteer in the imperial
army, anno 1735. He was afterward raised to the degree of a lieutenant
colonel, and was killed at the battle of Fontenoy, regreted by all who knew
him, anno 1745. He left a natural son, James Douglas.

The earl dying in January 1738, was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVII. JAMES, ninth earl of Morton of the house of Lochleven. He was made a
knight of the thistle, anno 1738.

In the year 1739, he was elected one of the sixteen peers for Scotland, and
has been re-elected to every British parliament since.

In 1742, the irredeemable right to the earldom of Orkney and lordship of
Zetland, was vested in his person by act of parliament.

In 1760, he was appointed lord register for Scotland.

He married, Is It, Agatha, daughter of James Haliburton of Pitcur, Esquire; by whom
he had five sons and two daughters.

1. Charles, who died young.

2. Sholto-Charles, lord Aberdour, his apparent heir, married to Catharine,
daughter of John Hamilton, Esquire; son of Thomas sixth earl of Haddington, and
has issue a son.

3. James.

4. George.

5. Robert.

These three last all died young.

1st daughter, lady Frances, died young.

2. Lady Mary.

He married, 2dly, Bridget, daughter of sir John Heathcote, of Normanton, in
the county of Rutland, baronet, by whom he has issue a son,

John Douglas, Esquire; -- and a daughter, Lady Bridget.

ARMS.
Quarterly, Is It and 4th, argent, a man's heart ensigned with an imperial crown,
all proper; on a chief azure, three mullets argent, being the paternal coat of
Douglas: 2d, and 3d, argent, three piles, issuing from the chief gules, the
exteriors charged with a mullet azure, for Douglas of Dalkeith and Lochleven.

CREST; on a wreath, a wild boar, striking between two stems of oak, a chain
and lock holding them together.

SUPPORTERS; two savages, wreathed about their heads and waists with oak
leaves, each holding a battoon in his hand, the great end to the ground, all
proper.

MOTTO; Lock sicker.

CHIEF SEATS,
At Aberdour in the county of Fife; Dalmahoy and Belsield in the Lothians, and
St. James's square, London.

RANDOLPH Earl of MURRAY.
THE first of this noble family we have upon record, is,

I. DUNEGAL, a man of great rank and figure, who had large possessions in the
South of Scotland, particularly in Stra-nith, or Nithsdale.

He flourished in the reign of king David I. who succeeded to the crown of
Scotland, anno 1124, and died anno 1153.

In the grant which Robert Bruce, second lord of Skeleton, obtained from king
David of the lands of Stra-hanet or Annandale, they are said to extend from the
bounds of Dunegal in Stra-nith, Dugdale's baronage of England.
to the limits of Ranulph de Meschines, then earl of Chester, and lord of
Cumberland, etc. ante annum 1141, in which year this Robert Bruce died.

Dunegal left issue four sons.

1. Radulpbus or Ranulphns.

2. Duncan.

3. Gillipatrick, who, in a donation to the monastery of Kelso, Chartulary of
Kelso.
is, with his brother Duncan, designed fratres Ranulphi, etc.

4. Dovenald or Donald, Chartulary of Glasgow.
also designed brother of Ranulph.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. RANULPHUS, who, in the end of the reign of king David I. Chartulary of
Kelso.
made a donation to the monastery of Kelso, of some lands lying near Dumfries,
and is then designed Ranulpbus filius Dunegal, etc.

In a confirmation charter of king Malcolm IV. of a grant made by king David I.
of a tenth of all the kain paid him, Hay's collections, vol. II. p. 157.
to the church of St. Mungo at Glasgow, this Ranulph and Donald his brother are
witnesses.

He is witness also in many charters of king William, who succeeded to the
crown of Scotland, anno 1165, Lives of the offic. of state, p. 164.
and died in 1214.

He lest issue a son,

III. THOMAS, who succeeded him, and is one of the magnates Scotiae, that were
present at the agreement made betwixt king Alexander the second of Scotland,
and king Henry III. of England at York, Rymer, tom. IV. p. 376.
cardinal Otho the pope's legate having been the mediator, at michaelmass, anno
1237. He is then designed Thomas filius Ranulphi, etc. and he and his whole
posterity assumed Ranulph or Randolph for their surname.

He continued in great favor with king Alexander II. Ibid. p. 566.
all his reign; also with his son Alexander III. but was laid aside upon a
change of the ministry, anno 1255.

He died anno 1262, Chronicle of Melrose.
was interred in the abbey of Melrose, and by Juliana his wife, he left issue a
son and successor,

IV. THOMAS RANULPH, Chartulary of Kelso.
designed of Strathdon, who appears to have had vast possessions, both in the
South and other parts of Scotland, and was high sheriff in the county of
Roxburgh, anno 1266.

He was a man of extraordinary parts, Lives of the offic. of state.
and in great favor with king Alexander III. who made him lord great
chamberlain of Scotland, anno 1269, which office he enjoyed till the year 1278.

A good author says, Fordun, vol. II. p. III.
he was vir magnae mansuetudinis et sapientiae; and designs him Thomas filius
Thomae, filii Ranulphi, etc.

He was one of the magnates Scotiae that agreed to the marriage of queen
Margaret of Scotland, Rymer, tom. II. p. 472.
with prince Edward of England, anno 1290.

He was also one of the Scotch nobles chosen on the part of Robert Bruce, Ibid.
p. 553.
in his competition for the crown with John Baliol, anno 1292.

He married lady Isabel Bruce, daughter of Robert earl of Carrick, Hist. of the
royal family.
sister of king Robert Bruce, by whom he had a son,

Sir Thomas Randolph, afterward earl of Murray, -- and a daughter,

Isabel, married to sir William Murray, knight, ancestor of the Murrays earls
of Anandale. ( Vide page 22d of rhis work.)

He was succeeded by his son,

V. Sir THOMAS RANDOLPH, a man of extraordinary merit, a true patriot, and
deservedly in great savor with his uncle king Robert, whom he joined as soon
as he began to assert his title to the crown.

He was apprehended and sent prisoner to England by king Edward I. Rymer, tom.
II. p. 1014.
anno 1306, but was released soon thereafter.

And having by his remarkable valor and fortitude, gained many advantages over
the enemies of his country, Haddington's collections, p. 579.
king Robert, in reward of his saithful services, made him agrant of the whole
earldom of Murray, "with most absolute regality and superiority over the king's
free tenants, etc." Thomas, Moraviae comes castrum Edinburgi cepit. anno 1313,
Fordun, vol. II. p. 245.
Also, another grant of the Isle of Man, and the valley of Annandale, etc. etc.
all before 1313, in which year he retook the castle of Edinburgh from the
English, and is then designed Thomas Ranulphus, Moraviae comes, etc.

The share he had of the glory acquired by the Scots at the memorable battle of
Bannockburn, where he commanded the left wing of the army, anno 1314, is
recorded by many historians.

In 1315, Ibid. p. 257, Thomas Moraviae comes custos regni futurus declaratur,
etc.
at the parliament held in Air, when the succession to the crown was settled,
it was specially provided, that in case, at the king's death, his successor
should be a minor, the earl of Murray should then be governor of the kingdom.

Upon the death of king Robert (his son king David being under age) the earl of
Murray, All Scotch historians.
by the unanimous consent of the whole nation, as well as by the said
destination, was chosen governor of Scotland, anno 1329, and conducted himself
to the general satisfaction of the whole kingdom.

The glorious actions performed by this great man, in defense of the liberties
of his country, are too numerous to be here inserted. Vide Abercrombie, Fordun,
vol. II. p. 271, 278, etc. etc.

He married Isabel, Crawsurd's peerage.
daughter of sir Alexander Stewart of Bonkill, by whom he had two sons, and one
daughter.

1. Thomas, his heir.

2. John, afterward earl of Murray.

His daughter, lady Agnes, married to Patrick Dunbar, tenth earl of March.

He died in the year 1331, A monacho Anglico veneno tollitur, etc. Fordun, vol.
II.
much regretted by the whole kingdom, and it was alleged he was poisoned by an
English monk.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. THOMAS, second earl of Murray, a man of remarkable integrity, Ibid. Thom.
Ranulphus comes Moraviae paternae probitatis imitator.
who inherited all the virtues of his worthy ancestors.

He did not long survive his father, but was sl^in at the battle of Duplin,
sighting gallantly against the enemies of his country, anno 1332.

And having no issue, he was succeeded in his estate and honors by his brother,

VI. JOHN, third earl of Murray, a man of singular valor and intrepidity,
Ibid. p. 320.
who embraced every opportunity in exerting his courage in defense of the
liberties of his country; but had the misfortune to be taken prisoner at the
battle of Kilblain, anno 1335, and was long detained in England.

He was first confined in the castle of Nottingham, Rymer, tom. IV. p. 660.
but was afterward sent to the tower of London, anno 1336.

There were several meetings and conventions with the English about procuring
his liberty, Ibid. tom. V. p. 200.
and the earl of March, and others of his friends, offered to be his sureties,
in 1340.

At last, Ibid. p. 224;
by the mediation of the king of France, Fordun, vol. II. p. 333.
he was exchanged for the earl of Salisbury, anno 1341, and was immediately
constituted warden of the west marches, etc.

He afterward attended king David in his unfortunate expedition into England,
Ibid. p. 343, comes Moraviae praelio caesus, etc.
and was slain at the battle of Durham, where his royal master was taken
prisoner, anno 1346.

And having no issue, the representation of this noble family devolved upon his
sister, lady Agnes, married to Patrick earl of March, as before observed.

DUNBAR Earl of MURRAY.
THE first of the name of Dunbar who enjoyed this title, was,

I. PATRICK, tenth earl of March, who married lady Agnes, only daughter, at
last sole heiress of Thomas Randolph, earl of Murray. Upon the death of her
brother John, the last earl, Rymer, tom. VI. p. 207.
without issue, this Patrick assumed to himself the title of Murray, which
appears by a safe conduct from king Edward III. of England, "to Patrick Dunbar
earl of March and Murray, one of the Scotch ambassadors, etc." anno 1360.

By the said lady Agnes, he left issue five children.

II. 1. GEORGE, who succeeded him in the earldom of March, and was the eleventh
earl.

He married Christian, daughter of sir William Seton of that ilk, ancestor of
the earls of Winton, by whom he had seven children.

1. George, who carried on the line of the family of March, and was the twelfth
earl.

2. John Dunbar, afterward earl of Murray.

For the younger children of the family of March, vide page 441, etc. of this
work.

III. JOHN, second son of George eleventh earl of March, married lady Marjory
Stewart, eldest daughter of king Robert II. who created him earl of Murray, and
he was the second earl of the name of Dunbar.

He got a charter under the great seal from the said king Robert, "to and in
savours of his beloved son John Dunbar, and Marjory his spouse, his dearest
daughter, and the heirs procreate, or to be procreate betwixt them; which
failing, to George earl of March, Chart. in rotul. Rob. II.
and his heirs whatever, of the whole earldom of Murray, etc" anno regni 2do,
anno dom. 1372.

He got another charter from the same prince, Ibidem.
Johanni comiti Moraviae, omnes et singulas terras thanagii de Kintore, etc.
anno 1376.

He got other three charters from the said king Robert, Ibidem.
in the years 1383 and 1385, of several different lands and baronies.

He was appointed one of the Scotch ambassadors to treat with the English, and
got a safe conduct, Johanni comiti de Moreff, anno 1381.

He was one of the guarantees of a treaty, Rymer, tom. VII. p. 338, and 683.
anno 1390, and died soon thereafter.

By the said lady Marjory he had issue two sons, and one daughter.

1. Thomas, his heir.

2. Alexander Dunbar of Frendraught, whose son James succeeded to the earldom
of Murray, of whom afterward.

His daughter, Writs of the fam. of Sutherland.
Mabella, was married to Robert tenth earl of Sutherland.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. THOMAS, third earl of Murray, of whom we have nothing memorable,
Crawfurd's peerage.
but that he was father of

V. THOMAS, fourth earl of Murray, Rymer, tom. X. p. 307.
who was one of the hostages for the ransom of king James I. anno 1424.

He married --, daughter of --, by whom he had one daughter,

Lady Janet Dunbar, Chart. in pub. archiv.
married to Hugh lord Fraser of Lovat.

And dying wiahout male issue, his estate and honors devolved upon his cousin
James, son of his uncle Alexander, to whom we now return.

IV. ALEXANDER DUNBAR of Frendraught, Crawfurd's peerage.
second son of John second earl of Murray, was father of

V. JAMES DUNBAR of Frendraught, Rymer, tom. X. p. 308, and 327.
who was one of the hostages for king James I.'s ransom, anno 1424.

Upon the death of Thomas fourth earl of Murray without male issue, he
succeeded to the estate and honors, and was fifth earl of Murray.

He married lady Janet Gordon, daughter of Alexander earl of Huntly, by whom he
had two daughters.

1. Lady Janet, married to James second lord Crichton, who got with her the
lands and barony of Frendraught, Lives of the office. of state.
and was afterward lord great chamberlain of Scotland; though it appears he
did not get with her the earldom of Murray, yet we find her designed Janeta
comitissa Moraviae, Chartulary of Dunfermline.
domina Frendraught et de Crichton, anno 1454.

2. Lady Mary Dunbar, married to Archibald, third son of James seventh earl of
Douglas, who, with her, obtained the earldom of Murray, and was the sixth earl.

But he having afterward engaged in his brother's rebellion, was slain in the
field of battle, and the earldom of Murray was forfeited to the crown, anno
1455, where it remained till the reign of king James IV.

STEWART Earl of MURRAY.
KING James IV. by Jean, daughter of John lord Kennedy, had a son,

JAMES, on whom he conferred the earldom of Murray, Chart. in pub. archiv.
which had been in the crown ever since the forfeiture of the earls of Douglas,
"to him and the heirs of his body," anno 1501.

He got charters under the great seal ( Jacoho comiti Moraviae) of the whole
earldom of Murray, Ibidem.
and many other lands, inter 1501 et 1503.

He married lady Margaret Campbell, daughter of Colin third earl of Argyle, by
whom he had only one daughter, lady Mary Stewart, married to John master of
Buchan.

The earl got seven charters, under the great seal, Ibidem.
of several lands and baronies, inter 1520 et 1540.

And dying without male issue, anno 1544, the earldom of Murray returned to the
crown, where it remained till queen Mary conferred it upon her natural brother,

JAMES, Ibidem.
prior of St. Andrews, natural son of king James V. by Margaret, daughter of
John lord Erskine.

He was created earl of Murray, 10th February 1562.

He was afterward advanced to the highest offices in the state, and was regent
of Scotland; but as the life and transactions of this great earl are published
by many good historians, to these we refer our readers; Buchanan, Stewart,
Crawfurd, etc.
it being inconsistent with the brevity of this work to recite them
particularly.

This earl got charters under the great seal, Jacobo comiti Moraviae, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
of many lands and baronies, inter 1562 et 1568.

He married lady Anne Keith, daughter of William fourth earl marishal, by whom
he had two daughters.

1. Lady Elizabeth, married to James lord Down.

2. Lady Margaret, married to Francis ninth earl of Errol.

The earl was killed on the street of Linlithgow, 23d January 1570; and having
no male-issue, the earldom of Murray went with his eldest daughter to James
lord Down, ancestor of the present earl of Murray, who being lineally descended
from Robert duke of Albany, from him we proceed to deduce the descent of this
noble family, by unquestionable authority.

I. ROBERT duke of Albany, governor of Scotland, was third son of king Robert
II. by Elizabeth More.

He married Margaret, grandchild and heiress of Alan earl of Menteith, by whom
he had a son,

II. MURDOCH duke of Albany, who succeeded him in his estate and honors, was
also governor of Scotland, and was very active and instrumental in getting king
James I. released from his captivity.

But being afterward suspected to have been guilty of some treasonable
practices, Fordun, vol. ^^. p. 482.
he was tried, condemned, and excuted, and his estate and honors forfeited to
the crown, in May 1425.

By lady Isabel his wife, eldest daughter and co-heiress of Duncan earl of
Lennox, he had issue four sons, and two daughters, as in pages 16th and 17th of
this work. The first three sons died without issue; we shall therefore here
only mention the fourth, who was ancestor of this family,

III. Sir JAMES STEWART, fourth lawful son of Murdoch duke of Albany, by some
writers called James the Gross, immediately upon his father's imprisonment,
came down from the Highlands with a considerable party of men, burnt the town
of Dunbarton, killed sir John Stewart of Dundonald, Stewart's hist.
governor of the castle, with many others, for which he was obliged to fly to
Ireland, where he died, anno 1451, leaving issue, by a lady of the family of
MacDonald, in that kingdom, seven sons, whom king James II. called home, and
conferred great favors and honors upon them.

1. Andrew, who was created lord Evandale, anno 1456. Ibid. and lives of the
officers of state.
He was also appointed lord chancellor of Scotland, which high office he
enjoyed for the space of nineteen years; but he dying without male-issue, anno
1488, the estate and honors devolved upon his nephew Alexander, as will be
shown hereafter.

2. Sir Murdoch, Ibid. et chart. penes com. de Buchan.
designed Murdacus senescal de Albania, miles, frater germanus magnifici et
potentis domini Andreae domini Evandale, etc. who died also without issue.

3. Arthur.

4. Robert.

5. Alexander.

These three all designed de Albany; but none of them had any male-issue.

6. Walter of Morphy, who carried on the line of this family, of whom
afterward.

7. James, commonly called Beg, ancestor of the Stewarts of Baldoran, etc.

It is proper here to observe, that though it has been said by some authors,
that these sons were born before their father and mother were married,
consequently not lawful, yet it must be owned, that the subsequent marriage of
their parents, by the law of Scotland, legitimated them to all intents and
purposes. But further, because they were born out of the kingdom, it was
thought necessary to get an act of legitimation from the crown, which they
obtained, both under the privy and great seals, "for the greater security and
more evident testimony," etc. (as the record bears) "to and in favors of
Andrew lord Evandale, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Arthur and Walter Stewarts his brothers-german, etc. etc. dated at Edinburgh,
17th April, 1479." Note, the other four brothers were then dead.

We now return to

IV. WALTER STEWART of Morphy, sixth son of sir James, Stewart's history, p.
118.
and grandson of Murdoch duke of Albany, who married Elizabeth, daughter of --
Arnot of that ilk, an ancient family in the county of Fife, by whom he had two
sons, and two daughters.

1. Alexander, afterward lord Evandale.

2. John, ancestor of the Stewarts of Kilbeg.

1st daughter, Matilda, married to sir William Edmonston of Duntreath.

2. Margaret, married to Alexander Cunninghame of Drumquhastle.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. ALEXANDER, who, upon the death of his uncle, Andrew lord Evandale, without
male issue, succeeded to his estate and honors, and was second lord Evandale.

He sat as a peer in the parliaments called to meet at Edinburgh, Records of
parliament.
anno 1505, and dying soon thereafter, was succeeded by his son,

VI. ANDREW, third lord Evandale, who exchanged with sir James Hamilton of
Finnart the barony and lordship of Evandale, in Lanark-shire, Stewart's hist.
for the barony of Ochiltrie, in Air-shire, and, with consent of the crown,
assumed Ochiltrie for his chief title.

In his father's lifetime, he married Margarer, daughter of sir John Kennedy of
Blairquhan, by whom he had three sons, and three daughters.

1. Andrew, second lord Ochiltrie, whose male-line is now extinct.

2. Henry, afterward lord Methven, whose male-line is also extinct. Vide
titles Ochiltrie and Methven in this work.

3. Sir James Stewart of Beath, of whom the present earl of Murray is lineally
descended, as will be shown hereafter.

1st daughter, Agnes, married to John Boswell of Anchinleck.

2. Anne, married to Bartholomew Crawfurd of Carse.

3. Barbara, married, 1st, to James Sinclair of Sanday; 2dly, to Roderick
MacLeod of Jews.

There is a remarkable protest taken in parliament by sir James Stewart earl of
Arran, grandson of Andrew second lord Ochiltrie, which properly should come in
under the title Ochiltrie; but that family being now extinct, as before
observed, we shall insert it here. It is in these words:

"James earl of Arran, etc. protests for himself, and in name of his father's
house of Ochiltrie, that neither the duke of Lennox's grace, nor nae other has
right to carry the crown, or be nearest to the king's majesty's person, at any
meetings of parliament, conventions of estates, etc. before the said earl's
father's house, Append. to the lives of offic. of state, p. 448.
in regard of the nearness and proximity of bluid they stand in to his
highness, since it is well known to sundry here present, who are ready to
attest the samyn, that the lord Ochiltrie, the said earl's father, is lawfully
come of the royal bluid, as lineally descending from father to son of the house
of Evandale, whaes first progenitor, not lang sinsyne, was son to duke Murdake,
begotten in lawful bed, wha was son to duke Robert, duke of Albany, wha was
uncle, (...), and governor, a lang time to umquhill king James I. his nepot.
And thereupon the said earl asked and took instruments in due and competent
form, etc."

We now return to,

VII. Sir JAMES STEWART of Beath, third son of Andrew third lord Evandale, and
first lord Ochiltrie.

He was a man of good parts, Stewart's hist. of the royal family.
and in great favor with king James V. who appointed him one of the gentlemen
of his bedchamber, lieutenant of the guards, constable of the castle of Down,
steward of Menteith, Strathgartny, etc.

He married Margaret, Ibidem.
daughter of John, fourth lord Lindsay of Byres, ancestor of the earl of
Crawfurd, by whom he had three sons, and one daughter.

1. James, his heir.

2. Archibald Stewart of Burray, who died without issue.

3. Mr. Henry Stewart of Bucklivie.

His daughter, Elizabeth, married to Mr. Robert Crichton of Cluny, lord
advocate to queen Mary, and mother by him to sir James, commonly called the
Admirable Crichton.

He was killed at Dunblain by the lord of Duntreath, and his two brothers,
anno 1547, they having been formerly stewarts of Menteith.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. Sir JAMES, who obtained a charter under the greatseal (Jacobo Stewart de
Down) of several lands, Chart. in pub. archiv.
which were all erected into one free barony, to be called the barony of Down,
anno 1565.

He was commendator of St. Colme, and was made a knight baronet when Henry lord
Darnly was created earl of Ross.

He was a steady friend of queen Mary during the civil war, Crawfurd, Stewart,
etc.
and his castle of Down was always a safe retreat for the loyalists, etc.

But another author says, he was entirely of the earl of Murray's party, joined
the lords of the congregation, Mr. Keith's history.
and was one of the members that sat in the convention or parliament, anno 1560.

However, Stewart's hist.
he was sent to France upon a negotiation of importance by queen Mary, anno
1561.

He was in great favor with king James VI. Ibid. and Crawfurd's information
for lord Lova^
who appointed him one of his privy council, and raised him to the dignity of
the peerage, by the title of lord Down, in 1581, the honors being then limited
to his heirsmale; and one of the onerous causes is, that sir James was
descended of the king's own blood, etc.

He was also appointed collector-general of all the royal revenues throughout
the kingdom of Scotland. Stewart's hist.


He married lady Margaret Campbell, daughter of Archibald fourth earl of
Argyle, by whom he had two sons and two daughters.

1. James, master of Down.

2. Henry, lord St. Colme. ( Vide title Stewart lord St. Colme.)

1st daughter, Anne, married to sir John Wemyss of that ilk.

2. Jean, married to Simon lord Fraser of Lovat.

He died anno 1590, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. JAMES, second lord Down, who appeared to be possessed of many eminent
qualities, even when a young man, and was in great favor with king James VI.
by whose special appointment he married lady Elizabeth Stewart, eldest daughter
and co-heiress of the late James earl of Murray, regent of Scotland, upon which
he got a charter under the great seal, (Jacobo domino Down) confirming to him
and his heirs, Chart. in pub. archiv.
a vast number of lands and baronies, in the same manner as they had been
granted to the deceast James earl of Murray, the regent, in the year 1569. The
confirmation is dated anno 1578.

He was afterward created earl of Murray, anno 1581, and was the third earl of
the name of Stewart.

He got several charters under the great seal, (Jacobo comiti Moraviae, domino
Down, etc.) of many lands, Ibidem.
inter 1581, et 1584.

By the said lady Elizabeth, he left issue two sons and three daughters.

1. James, his heir.

2. Sir Francis Stewart, knight of the bath.

1st daughter, lady Margaret, married, 1st, to Charles earl of Nottingham;
Stewart's hist.
2dly, to sir William Monson, viscount Castle-main.

2. Lady Mary, married to Alexander lord Salton.

3. Lady Crizel, married to sir Robert Innes of that ilk.

This earl was beset in the night at his house of Dunibristle, by the earl of
Huntly, with a considerable party of men, and was barbarously murdered, anno
1592, and succeeded by his eldest son,

X. JAMES, fourth earl of Murray, who, by the king's mediation and special
appointment, anno 1601, married lady Anne Gordon, daughter of George sixth earl
of Huntly, in hopes thereby to remove the animosities that subsisted between
the two families, which had already occasioned much bloodshed, by their burning
and plundering one another's lands; the earl of Athole, with the Grants,
Dunbars, MacIntosnes, Clanchatton, etc. having taken part with the earl of
Murray, and the Gordons, MacDonalds, Camerons, etc. with the earl of Huntly.

This James got a new investiture of the whole earldom of Murray, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
to him and the heirs-male of his body; which failing, to sir Francis his
brother-german, and the heirs-male of his body, dated 17th April 1611.

He afterward got five charters under the great seal, Ibidem.
Jacobo comiti Moraviae, of many other lands and baronies, inter 1620, et 1636.

By the said lady Anne Gordon, he had a son,

James, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Lady Mary, married to the lord of Grant.

He died anno 1638, and was succeeded by his son,

XI. JAMES, Ibidem.
fifth earl, who got charters under the great seal, Jacobo comiti Moraviae, of
many lands and baronies, inter 1641, et 1646.

He does not appear to have concerned himself with either party, during the
troublesome reign of king Charles I. but for the most part lived retired in the
country, having married lady Margaret, daughter of Alexander earl of Home, by
whom he had four sons and four daughters.

1. James lord Down, who died before his father without issue.

2. Alexander lord Down, his father's heir.

3. Francis Stewart of Culalay, who died without issue.

4. Archibald, ancestor of the Stewarts of Dunearn.

1st daughter, lady Mary, married to Archibald, ninth earl of Argyle.

2. Lady Margaret, married to Alexander, first lord Duffus.

3. Lady Henriet, married to sir Hugh Campbell of Calder.

4. Lady Anne, married to David Ross of Balnagowan.

He died anno 1653, and was succeeded by hisson,

XII. ALEXANDER, sixth earl of Murray, a great loyalist, Cromwell's act of
indemnity, and Guthrie's memoirs.
and steady friend of the royal family, on which account he suffered many
hardships, and was fined by Oliver Cromwell, in the sum of three thousand five
hundred pounds sterling, anno 1654.

Being also a man of extraordinary parts, he was by king Charles II. in reward
of his merit and faithful services, first made lord justice general, and
afterward sole secretary of state for Scotland, anno 1680; but in the year
1682, the earl of Middleton was joined in commission with him, and after him
the earl of Melsort.

Upon king James's accession to the crown, he was again appointed one of the
principal secretaries of state, in which office he continued till the
revolution.

In the year 1686, he was appointed his majesty's high commissioner to the
parliament, and one of the knights of the most noble order of the thistle, anno
1687.

Immediately upon king William's accession to the crown, he was divested of all
his public employments, whereupon he retired to the country, where he led a
private life till he died, anno 1700.

He married Emilia, daughter of sir William Balfour of Pitcullo, lieutenant of
the tower of London, in the reign of king Charles I. by whom he had four sons.

1. James, lord Down.

2. Charles, afterward earl of Moray.

3. Mr. John, who died without issue.

4. Mr. Francis, who also became earl of Moray, and carried on the line of this
family.

JAMES lord Down, eldest son and apparent heir of Alexander sixth earl of
Murray, married Catharine, daughter of sir Lionel Talmash of Heilingham, by
Elizabeth countess of Dysart, duchess dowager of Lauderdale, by whom he had
two daughters.

1. Elizabeth, married to brigadier Alexander Grant of that ilk, without issue.

2. Emilia, married, 1st, to Thomas Fraser of Strichen, to whom she had
Alexander Fraser now of Strichen, one of the senators of the college of
justice; 2dly, to John earl of Crawfurd, and had issue.

Lord Down dying without male issue, the estate and honors, upon the death of
his father, anno 1700, devolved upon the second son,

XIII. CHARLES, seventh earl of Moray, who married lady Anne Campbell, daughter
of Archibald ninth earl of Argyle, and widow of Richard earl of Lauderdale, but
dying without issue anno 1735, he was succeeded by his next surviving brother,

XIII. FRANCIS, eighth earl of Moray, who married, first, Elizabeth, daughter
of sir John Murray of Drumcairn, by whom he had no surviving issue.

He married, 2dly, Jean, daughter of John fourth lord Balmerino, by whom he had
five sons and two daughters.

1. James, now earl of Moray.

2. John, who represented the burghs of Crail, Anstruther, etc. in the ninth
British parliament 1741, and is now colonel of a regiment in the service of the
states general.

3. Francis, who was a colonel in the army, and died in Germany. He married
lady Helen Montgomery, daughter of Alexander ninth earl of Eglington, by whom
he had a son, Francis.

4. Archibald, captain of one of his majesty's ships.

5. Henry, major of a regiment of dragoons. He died lately in the army in
Germany.

1st daughter, lady Anne, married to John Stewart of Blairhall, Esquire; son of Mr.
Dougal Stewart, brother german of James first earl of Bute, and one of the
senators of the college of justice, to whom she had a numerous issue.

2. Lady Emilia, married to sir Peter Halket of Pitfirren, baronet, who
represented the burghs of Dunfermline, Inverkeithing, etc. in the parliament
1734. He was colonel of a regiment of foot, and was killed in general
Braddock's unfortunate engagement with the French, upon the first expedition
against sort du Quesne in America, 9th July, 1755, leaving two sons.

Francis earl of Moray died anno 1739, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIV. JAMES, ninth earl of Moray, who is a knight of the most noble order of
the thistle, and was elected one of the sixteen peers for Scotland, to the
British parliaments called to meet in 1741, 1747, 1754, and the present.

He married, 1st, Grace, daughter of George Lockhart of Carnwath, Esquire; and
widow of John third earl of Aboyne, by whom he has a son,

Francis, lord Down. -- and a daughter,

Lady Eupheme.

He married, 2dly, lady Margaret Wemyss, daughter of David earl of Wemyss, by
whom he has two sons.

1. James.

2. David.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st or, a lion rampant, within a double tressure, (being the arms
of Scotland all within a border compone argent and azure, for Stewart of the
royal family; 2d, or, a sess cheque argent and azure, for Stewart of Down; 3d,
or, three escutcheons pendant, within a double tressure gules, for Randolph
earl of Murray; the 4th as the 1st.

CREST; on a wreath, a pelican in her nest feeding her young.

SUPPORTERS; two greyhounds proper.

MOTTO; Salus per Christum redemptorem.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Dunibristle, a noble seat in the county of Fife; at Castle-Stewart in the
county of Inverness; and at Tarnaway in the county of Nairn.

NAIRN Lord NAIRN.
THE traditional account of the origin of this surname is, that a man of rank
of the city of Narni in Italy, came to Scotland, and settled in the North, gave
the name of Nairn to the town and county where he resided, from the name of the
town from whence he came; that his posterity afterward assumed Nairn for their
surname.

The immediate ancestor of this noble family was,

I. MICHAEL de NAIRN, who flourished in the reign of king Robert III.

In a charter of Robert duke of Albany, governor of Scotland, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
to Andrew de Hamilton, of the lands of Gallyston, the witnesses are, Gilbert
bishop of Aberdeen, chancellor, John Stewart earl of Buchan, Michael de Nairn,
and many others, anno 1406.

He had issue two sons.

1. John, ancestor of the Nairns of Sandford.

2. William Nairn, Chartulary of Dansermline, penes MacFarlane, p. 360.
who is witness in a donation by David Menzies of Weem to the monastery of
Dunfermline, anno 1438.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. JOHN, who is mentioned in the substitution of procurators by king James I.
Book of original writs, penes eund.
under lord Forbes, and is therein designed nobilis vir Johannes de Nairn, etc.
anno 1426.

He was father of

III. ALEXANDER NAIRN of Sandford, who made a great figure in the reigns of
king James II. and III. and was constituted comptroller of the household by the
former.

He was appointed one of the ambassadors extraordinary to the court or England,
Rymer, tom. XI. p. 286.
anno 1451.

King James II. granted two charters, villae de Spynie, Chartulary of Murray,
p. 666 and 668.
in both which Alexander Nairn de Sandford, nostroriam computorum rotulator, is
a witness, anno 1451.

Also to another charter of the same prince, baroniae de Spynie, to which
George earl of Angus, Ibid. p. 670.
with this Alexander, designed as above, are witnesses, anno 1452.

He died in the end of the reign of king James III. leaving issue two sons.

1. Alexander, who carried on the line of the family of Sandford, of whom there
are several considerable cadets, documented by charters under the great seal.

2. John, ancestor of this noble family.

IV. JOHN, second son of Alexander Nairn of Sandford, Chart. in pub. archiv.
comptroller of the household, got a charter of the lands of Muckersy from king
James IV. anno 1511.

He left issue a son and successor,

V. JOHN, who got a charter under the great seal from king James V. Johanni
Nairn de Muckersy, filio quondam Johannis, confirming the above charter of the
lands of Muckersy, Ibidem.
"to him and Margaret Oliphant his spouse; also a salmon fishing upon Tay, to
them and their heirs male, etc." The confirmation is dated anno 1541.

By the said Margaret Oliphant he had a son,

VI. JOHN NAIRN of Muckersy, Ibidem.
who succeeded him, and got a charter under the great seal, of some other
lands, Johanni filio Johannis, etc. anno 1577.

He was succeeded by his son,

VII. THOMAS, who got a charter, under the great seal, of the lands of
Ochtergaven, and mill thereof, "to and in favors of Thomas Nairn of Muckersy,
Ibidem.
and Elizabeth Fife his spouse, and the heirs-male procreate betwixt them;
which failing, to the said Thomas, his heirs and assignies whatsomever, dated
anno 1605."

By the said Elizabeth Fife he had a son,

VIII. ROBERT NAIRN of Muckersy, who succeeded him, and being bred to the law,
and eminent in the profession, acquired a vast estate, upon which he got a
charter, under the great seal, " Roberto Nairn de Muckersy, advocato, Ibidem.
of the lands of Rogertoun, Blackhall, a salmon-fishing on Tay, the lands of
Pitlands, Balbrogo, Lethem, Hole de Strathurd, Cowsurd, Blacklock,
Gourdy's-hill, etc. etc." all erected into one free barony, to be called the
barony of Strathurd, to him and his heirs and assignies whatsoever, dated anno
1621.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir John Preston of Pennycuik, Crawfurd's
peerage.
president of the college of justice in the reign of king James VI. by whom he
had four sons, and two daughters.

1. Robert, afterward lord Nairn.

2. John, to whom he gave the lands of Muckersy.

3. Alexander Nairn of Greenyards.

4. William, a captain in the king's service, who was slain at the battle of
Worcester.

1st daughter, Agnes married to William Blair of Tarsapie.

2. Margaret, married to sir David Falconer of Newton, president of the college
of justice in the reign of king Charles II.

He died anno 1652, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. ROBERT NAIRN designed of Strathurd, who was also bred to the law, and was
a man of great knowledge and learning.

He being a great loyalist, and strongly attached to the interest of the royal
family, laid aside the gown, and took up the sword in defense of the royal
cause; but when he and several others had a meeting at Eliot in Angus, in order
to concert measures for levying men for the king's service, they were surprised
in the night by a strong party of English horse, anno 1650, and he, with
several others, where sent prisoners to the tower of London, where he suffered
a ten years confinement, and was not released till the restoration of king
Charles II. who was pleased, in reward of his constant loyalty and great
sufferings, first, to confer the honor of knighthood upon him, then appointed
him one of the judges of the court of session and justiciary, in which office
he acquitted himself with universal applause.

He got a charter under the great seal, domino Roberto Nairn de Strathurd,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
terrarum baroniae de Strath^rd, etc. anno 1669.

He married Margaret, daughter of Patrick Graeme of Inchbraco, by whom he had
only one daughter,

Margaret, his sole heiress, of whom afterward.

The king was pleased further to dignify this sir Robert with the title of lord
Nairn, in 1681; Diploma in cancellaria.
but, by the patent, the honors were to him only for life, remainder to his
daughter Margaret and lord William Murray, fourth son of John Marquis of
Athole, and brother of the first duke, her future husband, and their
heirs-male, etc. They were accordingly married immediately thereafter.

This lord dying anno 1683, was succeeded in his estate and honors by his said
daughter,

X. MARGARET, baroness of Nairn, whose husband, lord William Murray, assumed
the name and arms of Nairn, according to the above patent, and was second lord
Nairn.

By the said Margaret, baroness of Nairn, he had issue four sons, and eight
daughters.

1. John, master of Nairn.

2. Robert, who married Jean Mercer, heiress of Aldie, whose son, William, now
enjoys that estate, and takes the name of Mercer.

3. William, who died without issue, a captain in the Swedish East India
service.

4. James, an officer in the British service.

1st daughter, Margaret, married to William viscount Strathallan.

2. Emilia, married to Laurence Oliphant of Gask.

3. Catharine, married to William Murray, afterward earl of Dunmore, father of
the present earl.

4. Marjory, married to Duncan Robertson of Drumaquhan, heir-male of the family
of Strowan.

5. Charlotte, married to John Robertson of Lude.

6. Mary.

7. Louisa, married to David Graeme of Orchil.

8. Henriette.

This lord having engaged in the rebellion 1715, was taken at Preston, sent
prisoner to the tower of London, tried by his peers, found guilty, and
condemned to lose his head; but obtained his liberty upon the general act of
indemnity, anno 1717.

The estate being in his lady's person, she claimed the same before the court
of session, and her claim was sustained.

He died anno 1725, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. JOHN, third lord Nairn, who married lady Catharine Murray, daughter of
Charles earl of Dunmore, by whom he had issue four sons, and one daughter.

1. John, master of Nairn, an officer in the British service.

2. Charles, an officer in the service of the states general.

3. Thomas.

4. Henry.

His daughter, Clementina.

But having engaged in the rebellion 1745, was attainted of treason, and his
estate and honors were forfeited to the crown.

He made his escape to France, where he now lives, etc.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th, party per pale, sable and argent, a chaplet charged
with four cinquefoils, all counterchanged for Nairn; second azure, three stars
argent within a double tressure, counterslorie with flowers de lis or, for
Murray; and the third is counterquartered, 1st and 4th pallie of six, or and
sable for Athole; 2d and 3d or, a fess cheque argent and azure, for Stewart
earl of Athole.

CHIEF SEATS,
Were at Naim and Strathurd, in Perthshire.

NAPIER Lord NAPIER.
THOUGH the surname of Napier is of very great antiquity, and were proprietors of
several lands and baronies in the West of Scotland, in very early times, yet
there are few of them to be found upon record, before the reign of king
Alexander III.

The immediate ancestor of this noble family, was,

I. JOHN de NAPIER, Chartulary of Lennox, pen. MacFarlane, p. 32 and 59.
who had considerable possessions of lands in Dunbarton-shire, and is mentioned
in a charter of Malcolm, third earl of Lennox, to Patrick, son of sir Patrick
Lindsay, anno 1280.

He is witness in another charter of the same earl, anno 1294.

He afterward, as a baron of the shire of Dunbarton, Prvnne, vol. III. p. 655,
and 65^.
was forced to swear fealty to king Edward 1. of England, together with Matthew
de Napier, anno 1296.

This John de Napier, with several others of the Scotch nobles, Rymer, tom. II.
p. 950.
oblige themselves to deliver up the castle of Stirling to king Edward of
England, anno 1304.

He died in the end of the reign of king Robert Bruce, leaving issue a son,

II. WILLIAM de NAPIER, who succeeded him, Crawfurd's peerage, and Haddington's
collections.
and got a charter from king David Bruce of the lands of Pitfour, Picknot, etc.
in Perthshire, with several others in Dunbartonshire.

He was proprietor also of some lands in Haddingtonshire, as will be shown
hereafter.

He was father of,

III. JOHN de NAPIER, who being a man of parts, had been employed in several
negotiations with the court of England, and had a pension of fifty merks
sterling per annum settled upon him for life, MacFarlane's collect. vol. I. p.
119.
Johanni Napier, de regno Scotiae, armigero, etc. anno 1368.

He left issue a son and successor,

IV. WILLIAM, who got a charter under the great seal, confirming Willielmo
filio quondam Johannis de Napier, Chart. in rotul. Robert II.
the lands of Easter Garmilton, in the constabulary of Haddington, which
formerly pertained to umquhil William, son of John de Napier, etc. the
confirmation is dated anno 1377.

He got another charter under the great seal from king Robert III. Chart. in
rotul. Rob. III.
of some lands in king's Cramond in the shire of Edinburgh, anno 1391.

He was witness also in a charter of Duncan sixth earl of Lennox, Chartulary of
Levenax.
anno 1394.

He was governor of the castle of Edinburgh, as in a charter Alano Laudre,
Chart. penes comitem de Lauderdale.
in which Willielmus de Napier, custos castri de Edinburgh, is a witness, anno
1401.

He died soon thereafter, leaving issue a son,

V. ALEXANDER NAPIER, Chartulary of Newbottle.
who made a great figure in the reign of king James I. and was provost of
Edinburgh, anno 1437.

He acquired the lands of Merchiston, which afterward became the chief title
of his family.

He was succeeded by his son,

VI. Sir ALEXANDER NAPIER of Merchiston, a man of good parts and learning,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
and in great favor with king James II. who appointed him comptroller of
Scotland, anno 1450.

He went a pilgrimage to Canterbury in England, Rymer, tom. XI. p. 302.
for which he obtained a safe conduct, anno 1451.

He was also provost of Edinburgh, Chartulary of Cambuskenneth, p. 12^.
in the year 1455.

He was appointed one of the Scotch commissioners to treat with the English,
Rymer, tom. XI. p. 421.
anno 1459, and is then designed Alexander Napier de Merchiston, miles.

And being also in great favor with king James III. Ibid. p. 576, and 537.
was by that prince constituted viceadmiral of Scotland, and one of the
ambassadors extraordinary to the court of England, anno 1461, and again in 1464.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of -- Laudre of Hatton, by whom he had a son,

John, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Janet, married to sir James Edmonstone of that ilk.

He was succeeded by his son,

VII. JOHN, who was provost of Edinburgh, anno 1484, and got charters under the
great seal, Chart. penes dominum Cathcart, et chart. in pub. archiv.
Johanni Napier de Merchiston, of many different lands and baronies,
particularly one upon his own resignation, of the lands of Balcormo, in the
county of Fife, dated 15th August 1487.

He married Elizabeth, daughter and coheiress of Murdoch Menteith of Rusky,
Chart. penes dom. de Gleneagles.
son of John Menteith of Rusky, by lady Margaret Menteith, his spouse, daughter
and one of the co heiresses of the sixth earl of Lennox, by whom he had two
sons and two daughters.

1. Archibald, his heir.

2. John Napier, who got from his father the lands of Balcormo, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
which he disponed to sir Robert Abercrombie, 22d January, 1492.

Is It daughter, Janet, married to William Adamson of Bonally, Scotstarvet's
collect. p. 573.
in Edinburgh-shire, by a charter in 1535.

2. Margaret, married to -- Corrie of Kelwood, Ibid. p. 692.
by a charter in 1542.

Elizabeth Menteith, lady Rusky, spouse to John Napier of Merchiston, with
consent of Archibald Napier her son, Ibid. p. 307.
dispones to Archibald earl of Argyle, the half of the lands of
Inchinnan-Rusky, anno 1494.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. Sir ARCHIBALD, who got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
Archibaldo Napier de Merchiston, of many lands, particularly the lands of
Gartness, in Dunbarton-shire, which pertained to Elizabeth Menteith, etc. inter
1493 et 1503.

This Archibald, with consent of Elizabeth lady Rusky, his mother, for the
safety of the souls of Alexander Napier his goodsire, Sootstarvet's collect. p.
330.
and Elizabeth Laudre his goodam, John his father, his own, and Catharine
Douglas his spouse, etc. mortifies to a chaplain at St. Salvator's altar in St.
Giles's kirk, an annualrent of ten merks yearly, 9th November 1493.

He afterward got a new charter of the lands of Gartness, Edinbillie, etc. in
Dunbarton-shire, the lands of Ruskie, Ibid. p. 150.
and others in the stewarty of Menteith, upon his own resignation, all erected
into one free barony, to be called the barony of Edinbillie, 25th May 1509.

By the said Catharine Douglas, a daughter of the family of Lochleven, he had
issue three sons.

1. Sir Alexander, his heir.

2. John.

3. William.

The two last are both mentioned in a charter hereafter narrated.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. Sir ALEXANDER NAPIER of Merchiston, who got a charter of the whole barony
of Edinbillie, to him and Janet Chifholme his spouse, Ibid. p. 261, and chart.
in pub. archiv.
and the heirs-male procreate betwixt them; which failing, to John, then to
William, his brothers-german, and the heirs-male of their bodies; which
failing, to the other heirs-male of his father's body; which all failing, to
his own nearest heirs-male whatsomever, dated 12th June 1512.

By the said Janet, daughter of Edmund Chisholme of Cromlix, he had a son,

Alexander, his heir, -- and two daughters.

1. Helen, Charta penes comitem (...) Leven.
married to sir John Melvil of Raith, ancestor of the earl of Melvil.

2. Janet, married to Archibald Bruce of Pitfouls.

He accompanied king James IV. to the fatal field of Flowdon, where he was
slain with his majesty, anno 1^13, and was succeeded by his only son,

X. ALEXANDER NAPIER of Merchiston, who married Margaret, Crawfurd's peerage.
daughter of sir Duncan Campbell of Glenurchie, by whom he had three sons.

1. Sir Archibald, his heir.

2. Alexander, who settled in the county of Bedford in England, Ibidem.
where his posterity still subsist with luster.

3. Andrew, MacFarlane's collect. vol. II. p. 300.
who is mentioned in a charter anno 1546.

He was slain at the battle of Pinkie, anno 1547, and succeeded by his eldest
son,

XI. Sir ARCHIBALD, who got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
Archibaldo Napier de Merchiston et Edinbillie, of many lands and baronies,
inter 1548 et 1558.

He got another charter from queen Mary, declaring, that albeit the lands of
Balnavade in the isle of Inchinnan, and fishing on Lochlomond, were holden of
the earl of Lennox, Ibidem, and Scotstarvet's collect. p. 874.
and fallen to the crown by his forfeiture, yet her majesty considering, that
this Archibald and his predecessors were in no sort guilty in the crimes of the
earl of Lennox; and that the said Archibald, his predecessors, had accompanied
her majesty and her predecessors at Flowdon and Pinkie, and were there slain;
therefore her majesty gives to the said Archibald, the said lands of
Balnavade, with the isle, fishings thereof, etc. 14th June 1558.

He afterward got several other charters, in which he was designed by the
title of Edinbillie, Ibidem.
inter 1578 et 1584.

He was in great favor with king James VI. Balcarras's memoirs.
who first conferred the honor of knighthood upon him, and then made him
master of the mint, anno 1587.

He married, 1st, Janet, daughter of Mr. Francis Bothwel, Crawfurd's peerage.
one of the senators of the college of justice, and ancestor of lord
Holyrood-house, by whom he had a son,

John, his heir.

He married, 2dly, Elizabeth, daughter of -- Moubray of Barnbougal, by whom he
had likeways a son,

Sir Alexander Napier of Lauriston, one of the senators of the college of
justice, in the reign of king Charles I. -- and two daughters.

1. Margaret, married to James lord Ogilvie.

2. Agnes, married to sir Patrick Gray of Innergowric.

He died anno 1608, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. JOHN NAPIER of Merchiston, a man of exquisite fine parts, great learning,
and a surprising genius for the mathematics.

His logarithms, and other works that have been published, are lasting
monuments of his sublime judgment, knowledge and penetration.

In his father's lifetime he got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
Johanni Napier feodotario de Merchiston, of many lands, inter 1595 et 1599.

He afterward got charters of several other lands, Ibidem.
inter 1612 et 1618.

He married, 1st, Margaret, daughter of sir James Stirling of Keir, Crawfurd's
peerage.
by whom he had a son,

Sir Archibald, afterward lord Napier.

He married, 2dly, Agnes, daughter of sir James Chisholm of Cromlix, Ibidem.
by whom he had five sons, and five daughters.

1. John Napier of Easter-Torrie.

2. Mr. Robert, ancestor of the Napiers of Kilcroich.

3. Mr. Alexander Napier of Gillets.

4. William Napier of Ardmore, of whom also the Napiers of Craiganet are
descended.

5. Adam, progenitor of the Napiers of Blackston.

1st daughter, Margaret, married to James Stewart of Rosythe, in the county of
Fife.

2. Jean, married to James Hamilton of Kilbrackmont, in the same county.

3. Elizabeth, married to William Cunninghame of Craigends.

4. Agnes, married to George Drummond of Balloch.

5. Helen, married to Mr. Matthew Brisbane, parson of Erskine, an eminent
divine. [They all had issue.]

He died anno 1617, and was succeeded by by his only son of the first marriage,

XIII. Sir ARCHIBALD, who got many charters under the great seal, domino
Archibaldo Napier de Merchiston, Chart. in pub. archiv.
of different lands and baronies, inter 1618 et 1621.

He was also a man of good parts, great probity and honor, and highly esteemed
by king James VI. who appointed him one of his privy council.

In the year 1622, he was made treasurerdepute, one of the judges of the court
of session, and lord justice-clerk.

Upon the accession of king Charles I. to the crown, he was continued in the
offices of treasurer-depute and the court of session, Diploma in pub. archiv.
haered. masc. ex corpore suo in perpe^uum.
and was, by that prince, raised to the dignity of the peerage, by the title of
lord Napier of Merchiston, dated 4th May 1627, the honors being limited to the
heirs-male of his body for ever.

He married lady Margaret Graham, daughter of John earl of Montrose, and sister
of the great marquis, by whom he had one son,

Archibald, his heir, -- and one daughter,

Elizabeth, married to sir George Stirling of Keir.

He was a great loyalist, and invariably attached to the interest of the royal
family, and having openly declared his dislike to the proceedings of the
covenanters, Guthry's memoirs.
was by them, without any crime alleged, imprisoned first in the castle of
Edinburgh, then in the tolbooth of Linlithgow, where he continued till he was
liberate by Montrose, after the battle of Kilsyth.

He accompanied that great man to the battle of Philiphaugh, though then very
old; and after their defeat he retired to the North, where, oppressed with age,
and grief for the troubles in which he saw his king and country involved, he
died at Fincastle in Athole, in November 1645.

He was a man of a most unblemislied life and character, Ibidem.
yet the covenanters threatened to have him forfeited after he was dead; but
upon his friends paying to them five thousand pounds, anno 1647, it was
prevented.

He was succeeded by his son,

XIV. ARCHIBALD, second lord Napier, who inherited all his father's virtues,
was olso a firm and steady friend of the royal family, Cromwell's act of
indemnity.
suffered many hardships on that account, and was particularly excepted out of
Cromwells act of indemnity, anno 1654.

He then retired to Holland, where he died in the beginning of the year 1660,
having married lady Elizabeth Erskine, Crawfurd's peerage.
daughter of John earl of Mar, by whom he had two sons, and three daughters.

1. Archibald, his heir.

2. John Napier, Esquire; a youth of great hopes and spirit, who was killed in the
sea fight against the Dutch, in the year 1672, without issue.

1st daughter, Jean, married to sir Thomas Nicholson of Carnock, whose son
succeeded to the honors of Napier.

2. Margaret, who carried on the line of this family, as will be shown
hereafter.

3. Mary, died unmarried.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. ARCHIBALD, third lord Napier, a man of great integrity and honor, and
highly esteemed by king Charles II.

There being no male issue of the patentee's body alive, and this lord being
unmarried, he made a resignation of his estate and honors in the king's hands,
who received it, and granted him a new patent with the former precedence,
Diploma penes dominum Napier.
"to him and the heirs male of his body; which failing, to the heirs female of
his body, the eldest succeeding without division; which failing, to his three
sisters successively, and the other heirs contained in the settlement of the
estate." And in case of an heir female so succeeding, they and their heirs are
obliged to carry the name and arms of Napier, etc. The patent is dated 7th
February 1677.

He dying a bachelor, anno 1683, his estate and honors, in virtue of the
above patent, devolved upon his nephew,

Sir Thomas Nicholson of Carnock, only son of his eldest sister, who was fourth
lord Napier; but he dying unmarried in June 1686, the estate and honors then
went to the second sister,

XV. MARGARET, baroness of Napier, second daughter of the second lord, who
married John Brisbane, Esquire; secretary to the royal navy, and resident from king
Charles II. to the court of France, by whom she had a son,

John, designed master of Napier, -- and a daughter,

Elizabeth, of whom more afterward.

John master of Napier, only son of Margaret the baroness, was bred in the
navy, and appeared to have a great genius for that service, but died on board
the Deptford man of war on the coast of Guinea, anno 1704, without issue,
whereby the representation devolved upon his sister,

XVI. ELIZABETH, only daughter of Margaret the baroness, who, after her
brother's death, was designed mistress of Napier.

In the year 1699, she married sir William, son and heir of sir Francis Scot of
Thirlestane, Bart. to whom she had a son,

Francis, now lord Napier, -- and two daughters, who both died young.

Elizabeth, mistress of Napier, died anno 1705. And her mother Margaret,
baroness of Napier, dying in 1706, the estate and honors devolved upon her
grandson,

XVII. FRANCIS, son of sir William Scot by the said Elizabeth, and
great-grand-son of the second lord.

Upon the death of his grandmother, the baroness, he succeeded to the honors,
and assumed the surname of Napier, in terms of the last mentioned patent, and
is fifth lord Napier.

He married, 1st, lady Henriette Hope, daughter of Charles earl of Hopeton, by
whom he had five sons, and one daughter.

1. William, master of Napier.

2. Charles, a captain in the royal navy.

3. Francis, a captain of marines.

4. John, a lieutenant in the 25th regiment of foot, who died in Germany the
day after the battle of Minden.

5. Mark, a captain of foot.

His daughter, Henriette, died an infant.

He married, 2dly, Mary, daughter of captain George Johnston, by whom he has
four sons, and three daughters.

1. George.

2. James, who died in 1760.

3. Patrick.

4. James-John.

1st daughter, Elizabeth, died an infant.

2. Esther.

3. Mary.

His eldest son, William, master of Napier, a captain in the royal Scotch
dragoons, married Mary-Anne, daughter of Charles eighth lord Cathcart, by whom
he has one son, Francis, and two daughters, 1. Mary-Anne, 2. Henrietta.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st and 4th argent, a saltire engrailed between four roses gules,
for Napier: 2d and 3d or, on a bend azure, a star between two crescents of the
first, within a double tressure counterfloree, with flower de lis of the
second, for Scot of Thirlestane.

CREST; on a wreath, a right arm couped below the elbow, and erect, grasping a
crescent.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter side, an eagle proper; on the sinister, a chevalier
in a coat of mail, holding a lance with a penon, all proper, and below the
shield by way of compartment, a mural crown argent, masoned sable, out of which
issue six lances, disposed in saltire as the former.

MOTTO; R^ady, ay ready.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Ballenton in Perth-shire, Thirlestane in Berwick-shire, and Edinbillie in
Stirlingshire.

LESLY Lord NEWARK.
PATRICK LESLY, first lord Lindores, second son of Andrew fifth earl of Rothes,
by lady Jean Stewart his wife, daughter of Robert third earl of Orkney, had
five sons, and five daughters.

1. Patrick, who died without issue.

2. James, afterward lord Lindores.

3. Robert.

4. Ludovick.

5. David, the first of this family.

For the daughters, vide title lord Lindores, page 408th of this work.

I. DAVID LESLY, fifth son of Patrick first lord Lindores, being a younger
brother, and having a genius for arms, went abroad to push his fortune in the
foreign wars, got into the service of the king of Sweden in Germany, and having
remarkably distinguished himself upon several occasions for his military skill
and capacity, soon rose to the rank of a colonel of horse.

Upon the breaking out of the civil war, he returned to Scotland, entered into
the service of the parliament, was appointed lieutenant general of the forces
they sent to England, to the parliament's assistance against the king.

Immediately after the battle of Nasby, he made a quick march with a
considerable body of horse to Scotland, surprised and defeated the great
Montrose at Philiphaugh, anno 1645, and, for his good and faithful services,
Minutes of parliament.
got a gift from the parliament of fifty thousand merks, to be paid out of the
fine imposed upon the marquis of Douglas for being on the king's side, 18th
March 1646.

He was declared lieutenant general of all the forces in Scotland, Rescinded
acts of parlt.
had a pension of one thousand pounds per month settled on him, 29th February
1647, and that besides his pay as colonel of the Perth-shire horse.

When the Scots determined to raise an army to rescue the king, Rescinded acts,
and minutes of parlt.
Mr. Lesly was made general of the horse, by a commission dated 11th May 1648;
and from this time foreward, he appears to have been a loyal subject; however,
he was then laid aside, and general Middleton obtained the chief command,
Ibidem.
by a commission dated 19th June, that same year.

After the murder of the king (which horrible scene general Lesly had in the
utmost detestation) none appeared more desirous of a restoration of the royal
family than the general.

When the Scots declared for king Charles II. and began to raise forces for his
service, in 1650, general Lesly was appointed one of their chief commanders,
and soon got into great favor with his majesty.

And though he was defeated at Dunbar by Oliver Cromwell, yet it is
acknowledged he acted the part of a brave and able officer.

After the king was crowned at Scoon, in January 1651, there was a new army
levied, which the king commanded in person, and Mr. Lesly was appoined
major general. But at the unfortunate battle of Worcester he was taken
prisoner, and committed to the tower of London, where he continued confined
till the restoration of king Charles II. in May 1660.

The king, in reward of his faithful services, and great sufferings, Diploma in
pub. archiv. haered. masc. ex ejus corp.
was pleased to raise him to the dignity of the peerage, by the title of baron
of Newark, in the county of Fife, by patent to the heirs-male of his body,
dated 31st August 1660, and settled on him a pension of five hundred pounds per
ann.

Lord Newark at that time had some enemies at court, who endeavored to inpress
the king with bad notions of his sincerity and integrity; but the king, being
convinced of his honesty, Original letter, pen. dom. Newark.
wrote a letter to him with his own hand, which is still preserved in the
family; wherein his majesty assures him, that he is perfectly satisfied of his
honor and loyalty; that it is not in the power of the malice of his enemies to
lessen his esteem of him; that if he had occasion to levy an army for his own
service, he would not fail to give his lordship a command in it, etc.

He married Jean, daughter of sir John York, of the kingdom of England, knight,
by whom he had a son,

David, his heir, -- and three daughters.

1. Elizabeth, married to sir Archibald Kennedy of Culzean, Bart.

2. Mary, married to sir Francis Kinloch of Gilmerton, Bart.

3. Margaret, married to colonel James Campbell, fourth son of Archibald ninth
earl of Argyle. [They all had issue.]

This lord, with consent of David master of Newark, his eldest son, on 16th
August 1672, made a resignation of his estate and honors in the king's hands,
upon which he got a new grant of the honors, with the precedence of the former
patent, "to David lord Newark during his life, Signature in the records.
and after his decease to David master of Newark, his eldest son, and the
heirs-male lawfully to be procreate of his body; which failing, to Jean Lesly
his eldest daughter, and the heirsmale or female lawfully to be procreate of
the said Jean Lesly her body; which failing, to the other heirs of tailzie
mentioned in the grant of the lands, they carrying the name and arms of Lesly,
etc. with the title, rank, and dignity of a lord of parliament, etc. etc. etc."

Upon which there passed a charter under the great seal, Chart. penes dom.
Newark.
confirming the lands in terms thereof, containing a novodamus, etc. etc.

The old lord died anno 1682, and was succeeded by his son,

II. DAVID, second lord Newark, who married Elizabeth, daughter of sir Thomas
Stewart of Grantully, by whom he had five daughters.

1. Jean, afterward baroness of Newark.

2. Mary, died unmarried.

3. Christian, married to Thomas Graham of Balgowan, Esquire;.

4. Grizel, married to Thomas Drummond of Logyalmond, Esquire;.

5. Elizabeth, died unmarried.

This lord dying without male issue, anno 1694, the estate and honors devolved
upon his eldest daughter,

III. JEAN, baroness of Newark, who married sir Alexander Anstruther of the
county of Fife, Bart. by whom she had three sons, and six daughters.

1. William, now lord Newark.

2. David.

3. Alexander, married, and has issue.

1st daughter, Christian.

2. Helen, married to Mr. John Chalmers of Raderny, minister of the gospel at
Kilconquhar.

3. Jean.

4. Catharine.

5. Margaret.

6. Johanna.

She died anno 1740, and was succeeded in the estate and honors by her eldest
son,

IV. WILLIAM, who having assumed the name of Lesly, is third lord Newark.

The British parliament having begun lately to make a narrow scrutiny into the
rights and titles of some of our Scotch nobility to their peerages, that of
Newark was of the number, and, after a full hearing, the house of lords, by
their decision in 1761, sustained and confirmed the peerage of Newark to this
lord, according to the patent and resignation abovementioned.

He is now a captain of invalids.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st and 4th argent, on a bend azure, three buckles or, for Lesly;
2d or, a lion rampant gules, debrused with a ribbon sable, for Abernethy; 3d
argent, three piles issuing from the chief sable, for Anstruther; and by way of
surtout a scutcheon gules, charged with a three-towered castle argent, masoned
sable, for Lindores.

CREST; on a wreath, a demi-angel winged or, holding in his right hand a
griffon's head proper.

SUPPORTERS; two griffons argent, beaked, winged, and armed or.

MOTTO; Periissem ni periissem.

CHIEF SEAT,
At Newark in Fife.

BARRET Lord NEWBURGH.
SIR Edward Barret of Evely, of the county of Essex in England, Diploma in
arch. Carol. I.
knight, being a man of parts and spirit, became a favorite of king Charles I.
who created him a peer of Scotland, by the title of lord Barret of Newburgh, on
17th October 1627, by patent to the heirs male of his body.

He married Anne, daughter of sir Edward Carey, knight; but dying without male
issue, the honors became extinct.

LIVINGSTON Earl of NEWBURGH.
THE immediate ancestor of this noble family was,

Sir JOHN LIVINGSTON of Calendar, who flourished in the reign of king Robert
III. and by a daughter of -- Menteith of Carse, left issue three sons.

1. Sir Alexander of Calendar, his successor.

2. Robert, progenitor of the earl of Newburgh.

3. John, etc. Vide page 411th of this work. Robert, second son of sir John
Livingston of Calendar, lived in the reigns of king James I. and II. was
designed by the title of West-Quarter, and of him was lineally descended

I. Sir JOHN LIVINGSTON of Kinnaird, who got charters, under the great seal, of
the lands and barony of Kinnaird, Chart. in pub. archiv.
in Stirlingshire, Smithshope, etc. inter 1617 et 1620.

He left issue a son and successor,

II. Sir JAMES LIVINGSTON of Kinnaird, a man of excellent parts, and greatly
esteemed by king Charles I. who, in the beginning of his reign, appointed him
one of the gentlemen of his bedchamber; and having served his majesty with
great fidelity and honor, Chart. in archiv. Caroli I.
was raised by him to the dignity of the peerage, with the title of viscount
Newburgh, 13th November 1647.

After the murder of his royal master, he continued steady in his loyalty to
his son king Charles II. and kept a close correspondence with his majesty when
abroad; which being discovered by Oliver Cromwell, Lord Clarendon.
he, with difficulty, made his escape out of England, and got safe to the king
at the Hague, anno 1650, was most graciously received, and continued with his
majesty during all the time of his exile.

Immediately after the restoration, he was constituted captain of the guards,
and further dignified with the titles of earl of Newburgh, Diploma in pub.
archiv. haered. quibuscunque.
viscount Kinnaird* lord Livingston of Flancraig, etc. by patent to his heirs
whatsoever, dated 31st December 1660.

He married lady Catharine Howard, daughter of Theop^lus earl of Sussolk, widow
of George lord Aubigny, Peerage of England, vol. II. p. 172.
by whom he had a son,

Charles, his heir.

He died in the year 1670, leaving behind him the character of one of the
finest gentlemen of the age, Lord Clarendon.
of untainted principles of loyalty and honor.

He was succeeded by his only son,

III. CHARLES, second earl of Newburgh, who married Frances, daughter of
Francis lord Brudenel, son and heir apparent of Robert, and brother of George
earls of Cardigan. Peerage of England, vol. II. p. 388.
After his death, she was married to Richard third lord Bellew, in the kingdom
of Ireland, and had issue.

By her he had only one daughter,

Charlotte, his sole heiress, afterward countess of Newburgh.

He died anno 1694, and was succeeded by his only child,

IV. CHARLOTTE, countess of Newburgh, who, according to the patent, succeeded
both to the estate and honors.

She married, Ibid. vol. V. p. 224.
1st, Thomas, son and apparent heir of Hugh lord Clifford of Chudleigh by whom
she had two daughters.

1. Lady Frances.

2. Lady Anne.

She married, 2dly, the honorable Charles Radcliffe, Salmon's abridgment.
second son of Francis earl of Derwentwater, by whom she had two sons, and
three daughters.

1. James, now earl of Newburgh.

2. James-Clement Radcliffe.

1st daughter, lady Charlotte.

2. Lady Barbara.

3. Lady Mary. [All born in France.]

This Charles having been taken at sea in a French ship, anno 1745, was sent
prisoner to the tower of London, and, upon a former sentence of death for the
rebellion 1715, he was beheaded upon Tower Hill, 8th December 1746.

The countess dying in 1755, the honors of Newburgh devolved upon her eldest
son,

V. JAMES, third earl of Newburgh.

ARMS.
Argent on a bend between three gilly-flowers gules, an anchor of the first,
all within a double tressure, flowered and counter-flowered vert.

CREST; a moor's head couped proper, bended gules and argent, with pendants
argent at his ears.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter a savage proper, wreathed about the head and middle
vert, and on the sinister by a horse argent, furnished gules.

MOTTO; Si je puis. -- If I can.

When this family resided in Scotland, Kinnaird was their chief seat.

CHEYNE Viscount NEWHAVEN.
KING Charles II. was pleased to dignifie, with the peerage of Scotland,
Charles Cheyne of the county of Midlesex in England, Chart. in cancellaria,
haered. masc. e corpore suo in perpetuum.
Esquire; descended of an ancient family in Buckingham-shire, by the titles of lord
Cheyne and viscount Newhaven, near Leith, in the county of Mid-lothian, by
patent to the heirs-male of his body for ever, dated at Windsor, 17th May 1681.

He left issue a son,

William, second viscount of Newhaven, who was, by queen Anne, constituted lord
lieutenant of the county of Bucks, Crawfurd's peerage.
in place of the earl of Bridgewater, anno 1712.

But upon king George I.'s accession to the crown, Ibidem.
he was removed, anno 1714.

He had issue only one daughter,

Elizabeth, Scots compendium.
married to sir Henry Monson of Lincolnshire, baronet.

And dying without male issue, anno 1728, the honors became extinct.

MAXWELL Earl of NITHSDALE.
THE surname of Maxwell is mentioned in our oldest records, as soon as sirnames
began to be frequently used in Scotland.

Their immediate ancestor, Machus, or Macus, lived in the reign of king Malcolm
Canmore, appears to have been a man of rank, and had considerable possessions
in the county of Roxburgh, which were afterward called the barony and parish
of Macuswell, and from thence the surname of the family.

A learned and judicious antiquary says, he has often met with the name of
Machus in ancient writs, Sir James Dalrymple.
and that it appears to be Saxon.

He says also, that Herbert, the donor of the church of Macuswell to the
monastery of Kelso, in the reign of king Malcolm IV. was descended of the said
Machus.

From him therefore we proceed to deduce the descent of this most noble family.

I. MACHUS, proprietor of the lands and barony of Macuswell, near Kelso
inRoxburghshire, Ibidem, and Lives of the offic. of state.
is witness to the foundation charter of the monastery of Selkirk, by David
earl of Northumberland, afterward king David I.

He had issue two sons.

1. Hugo.

2. Edmund, who both assumed their surname from their father's lands and barony
of Macuswell, as was the custom of those early times, which in process of time
came to be called Maxwell.

These brothers lived in the reign of king David I. who succeeded to the crown
of Scotland, onno 1124, and died anno 1153.

In a donation of that good prince to the monastery of Newbottle,

II. HUGO de MACUSWELL, Chartulary of Newbottle.
together with Herbert the chancellor, are witnesses.

This Herbert is the first chancellor we find upon record in Scotland, and died
about the year 1140.

In a perambulation and division of the lands of Molla, Chartulary of Kelso.
Edmundus de Macuswell and Hugo de Morville, are witnesses.

This is afterward confirmed by king Malcolm IV. anno 1159.

Whether Herbert, the next of this family, was son of Hugh or Edmund, we cannot
pretend to say, but he succeeded to the estate.

III. HERBERTUS de MACUSWELL flourished in the reign of king Malcolm IV. who
succeeded David anno 1153, and that of king William who succeeded Malcolm, anno
1165.

He appears to have been much about king William's court, was witness to many
of his charters, and is said to have been progenitor of all the Maxwells in
Scotland.

He was high sheriff of the county of Roxburgh, Ibidem.
and made a donation to the monastery of Kelso, of the church of Macnswell,
prosalute animae suae, etc. confirmed by king Malcolm IV.

In a charter of king William to the monastery of Kelso, Ibidem.
of some pasturage on the Molla, Herbertus de Maxwell, Nigellus de Herries, and
Malcolm de Keith, are witnesses.

In another charter of the same prince of a donation to the monastery of Kelso,
Ibidem.
Herbertus de Macuswell, Hugh the chancellor, and William de Lindsay, are
witnesses.

Hugh was chancellor from 1189 to 1199.

The same Herbert is witness to several charters and donations of the said king
William to the monastery of Paisley, Chartulary of Paisley.
betwixt the years 1180 and 1198.

He died about the year 1200, and left issue two sons.

1. Sir John, his heir.

2. Robert de Macuswell, who, in a donation to the monastery of Kelso,
Chartulary of Kelso.
by Bernard de Houdon, is designed son of Herbert the vice-comes, and brother
of sir John, etc.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. Sir JOHN MACUSWELL, a man of good parts. He was concerned in all the
public transactions of his time, and was in great favor with king Alexander
II. who succeeded king William, anno 1214.

He succeeded his father also in the sheriffship of the county of Roxburgh, for
in an agreement betwixt the abbot and convent of Kelso, Chartulary of Kelso.
and William de Vetere Ponte, Johannes de Macusvel vice-comes de Roxburgh, is a
witness, anno 1203.

In a convention betwixt the abbot and convent of Kelso, and Eustachius de
Vesey, John de Macuswell, Ibidem.
vice comes de Roxburgh, is a witness, anno 1207.

He was one of the ambassadors extraordinary sent by king Alexander to the
court of England, Rymer, tom. I. p. 203.
to negotiate some affairs of importance, anno 1215.

He was again sent to that court to negotiate the marriage betwixt king
Alexander and princess Johanna, Ibid. p. 241.
eldest daughter of the king of England, anno 1220, which was happily
accomplished.

The family by this time had got considerable possessions in Dumfries-shire,
particularly the lands and barony of Carlaverock, which continued long to be
one of their chief seats and titles.

In a transact^ion betwixt Bricius bishop of Murray, and John de Byseth,
Malcolm earl of Fife, sir John Macuswell, and John de Haya, Chartulary of
Murray, penes MacFarlane.
are witnesses, anno 1221; likeways to a charter of king Alexander II. in the
year 1225.

He was also witness to a charter of king Alexander, confirming the privileges
of the monastery of Kelso, Chartulary of Kelso.
together with William de Boseth chancellor, Walter de Olifard justiciar, etc.
anno 1222.

He is witness to several donations and charters of the same prince to the
monastery of Paisley, Chartulary of Paisley, penes comitem de Dundonald.
inter 1224 et 1230.

In the year 1231, sir JohnMacuswell, lord of Carlaverock, Lives of the offic.
of state.
was constituted lord great chamberlain of Scotland, in the room of Henry de
Baliol, Chartulary of Coldingham, penes MacFarlane.
and is witness in many charters and donations to the monastery of Coldingham,
by kingAlexander II. inter 1230 et 1236, in which he is designed camerarius
Scotiae, Chartulary of Dunfermline, and Levenax,
etc. Also in several donations to the abbacy of Dunfermline, betwixt the years
1232 and 1238.

He died anno 1241, Chronicle of Melrose.
leaving issue a son,

V. EUMERUS or AYMERUS de MACUSWELL, dominus de Carlaverock, who succeeded him,
Chartulary of Coldingham.
and was witness with his father in a charter by king Alexander II. of a
donation to the monastery of Coldingham, anno 1232.

He is witness in another charter of the same prince, Chartulary of Murray.
dated apud castrum puellarum, 21st April 1235.

He is witness also in a donation to the monastery of Paisley, together with
Malcolm earl, of Fife, Chartulary of Paisley.
Malcolm earl of Lennox, etc. and is then designed dominus Eumerus de
Macuswell, miles, anno 1239.

This sir Eumer was appointed great chamberlain of Scotland, Lives of the
offic. of state,
by kingAlexander III. and was one of the magnates Scotiae who entered into a
solemn engagement not to conclude a peace with the king of England, Rymer, tom.
I. p. 653.
without the consent of the prince and nobles of Wales, anno 1258.

He was also justiciar of Galloway in the same reign.

He married Mary, Lives of the offic. of state, history of the shire of
Renfrew, etc.
daughter and heiress of Roland de Mearns, by whom he got a great accession to
his estate, particularly the lands, barony, and castle of Mearns, in
Renfrewshire, which continued long in this family.

Eumerus de Macuswell et Maria uxor ejus, Rymer, tom. I. p. 566.
are mentioned in Rymer's FoederaAngliae, anno 1255.

By her he had issue two sons.

1. Sir Herbert, his heir.

2. Sir John, first of the Macuswells of Nether-Pollock, who, in a donation of
sir Herbert to the monastery of Paisley, Chartulary of Paisley.
is designed frater dicti Herberti, etc. and was ancestor of the Maxwells of
Pollock, Calderwood, etc.

Sir Eumer was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. Sir HERBERT de MAKSWELL, lord of Carlaverock, a man of great parts, honor
and merit.

He obtained a charter from king Alexander III. of the lands of
Wester-Pencaitland, upon the resignation of John de Pencaitland, Dalrymple's
collect. p. 353.
anno 1276, which continued long in the possession of this family.

He was one of the Scotch nobles who obliged themselves to receive and defend
princess Margaret, Rymer, tom. II. p. 266.
daughter of Eric king of Norway, for their lawful queen and sovereign, in case
of king Alexander's death without male issue, anno 1284.

He, with many others of the Scotch nobility, Ibid. p. 471.
agreed to the marriage of queen Margaret with prince Edward of England, in
1290.

After the death of that young queen, he was one of the magnates Scotiae chosen
on the part of Robert Bruce, Rymer, tom. II. p. 553.
in his competition for the crown with John Baliol, anno 1292.

He was afterward, with many others of his countrymen, forced to swear fealty
to king Edward I. Prynne, vol. III. p. 651, 662, etc.
of England, for lands lying in different counties, and is then designed
dominus Herbertus de Macuswell, miles, anno 1296.

He died before the year 1300, leaving issue three sons.

1. Sir John, his heir.

2. Sir Herbert, who got from his father the lands and barony of Mearns, and
carried on the line of this family, of whom afterward.

3. Alexander Macuswell, who is witness in his brother's donation to the
monastery of Paisley, Chartulary of Paisley.
hereafter mentioned.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. Sir JOHN MAKSWELL, lord of Carlaverock, Prynne's collect. vol. III. p 651.
who with his father swore fealty to king Edward I. of England, anno 1296.

This sir John, designed filius et haeres Herberti de Makswell, MacFarlane's
collect. vol. II. p. 194.
grants a charter domino Adae Gordon, of the lands of Glenkenns in Galloway,
anno 1297.

He died without issue, and was succeeded by his brother,

VII. Sir HERBERT MAKSWELL of Carlaverock, who in his brother's lifetime made a
donation to the monastery of Paisley, Chartulary of Paisley, F. 61.
of eight acres and ane half, and twenty-eight particates of land, lying in his
territory and new village of Mearns in Renfrew-shire, to which his brothers sir
John and Alexander Makswells are witnesses; and his seal, together with that of
Robert bishop of Glasgow, are thereunto appended. This deed has no date, but
Robert was bishop there from 1273 to 1316.

He made another donation to the same monastery, of six merks per annum, out of
his mill of Mearns, Ibid. fol. 62.
to which sir John Makswell of Nether-Pollock is a witness. This deed is also
without date, but by the witnesses appears to have been about the year 1300.

He was succeeded by his son,

VIII. Sir EUSTACE MAXWELL, lord of Carlaverock, a great patriot, and a firm
and steady friend to king Robert Bruce.

He held out his castle of Carlaverock against the English for many weeks, and
at last obliged them to raise the siege. Crawfurd's peerage.
But left it should afterward have fallen into the enemies hands, he
demolished all the fortifications himself, for which generous action king
Robert nobly rewarded him with grants of several lands, pro f^actione et
prostratione castri de Carlaverock, etc. He also remitted him the sum of ten
pounds sterling, Chart. in pub. archiv. and Haddington's collections.
which was payable to the crown yearly out of his lands of Carlaverock, dictas
december libras, praedicto Eustacio et haeredibus suis, per praesentes remittimus
in perpetuum, etc.

Some time thereafter he was accused of having been concerned in some
treasonable practices against the crown, Fordun, vol. II. p. 274, and 275.
at least of concealing them; but upon a strict enquiry, he was found innocent,
and acquitted. He was one of the Scotch nobles who signed that famous letter to
the pope, asserting the independency of Scotland, anno 1320.

In the reign of king David Bruce, Edward Baliol for some time prevailing, gave
the lands of Bonkill (then the property of Sir John Stewart) to sir Thomas --,
Rymer, tom. V. p. 177.
an English knight, to which Eustachius de Maxwell is a witness, anno 1340.

He married Helen, Chart. in pub. archiv. Elena Maxwell, relicta quond. dom.
Eustacii, etc.
daughter of sir -- Maxwell of Nether-Pollock, by whom he had a son,

IX. Sir JOHN MAXWELL of Carlaverock, who succeeded him, and was also designed
dominus ejusdem, et de Pencaitland.

He was a man of great spirit, and a steady friend of king David Bruce, Rymer,
tom. V. p. 534.
whom he accompanied in his unfortunate expedition into England, and was taken
prisoner with him at the battle of Durham, anno 1346, but obtained his liberty
soon afterward.

He made a donation to the monastery of Kelso, pro salute animae suae, and is
then designed Johannes de Maxwell, Chartulary of Kelso.
dominus ejusdem, to which Thomas de Somerville, Andrew de Keith, etc. are
witnesses, circa annum 1350.

And dying soon thereafter, was succeeded by his son,

X. Sir JOHN MAXWELL, also designed dominus ejusdem.

He made a donation to the monastery of Dryburgh, Charta penes comitem de
Lauderdale.
of the patronage of the church of Pencaitland, etc. wherein he is called
filius et haeres domini Johannis de Pencaitland, etc.

He was one of the magnates Scotiae who obtained, Rymer, tom VI. p. 43.
from the estates of the nation, full powers to treat and agree with the
English about king David's liberty, anno 1357, which in that year was happily
accomplished.

He again obtained a safe conduct to go up to England to negotiate with that
court, Ibid. p. 463.
anno 1365.

He made a donation, to the monastery of Kilwinning, Chart. in archivis regis
David.
of the patronage of the church of Libberton, with an acre of land lying
contiguous thereto, pro salute animae suae, et Agnetis sponsae suae, anno 1367.

By the said Agnes he left issue a son,

Sir Robert, Charta penes dom. Pollock de eodem.
his heir, -- and a daughter,

Agnes, married to sir Robert Pollock of that ilk.

He was succeeded by his son,

XI. Sir ROBERT MAXWELL of Carlaverock. Crawfurd's peerage.
He made a great figure in the reigns of king Robert II. and III. and had the
honor of knighthood conferred upon him by the former, with whom he was in
great favor.

He obtained from that prince a charter under the great seal, upon his father's
resignation, to Robert, son and heir of John Maxwell of Carlaverock, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
knight, (wherein he is designed dilectus consanguineus regis) and Christian,
his wife, and their heirs, of all the lands he had holding of the king or
prince, as fully and freely as any of his predecessors possessed the same,
dated at Kilwinning, the 9th day of September, 1371.

He made a donation to the monastery of Dryburgh, of the superiority of all his
lands, in his territory of Pencaitland, Chart. penes comitem de Lauderdale.
which John Maitland lord of Thirlestane held of him, pro salute animae suae,
et Herberti filii sui et haeredis, etc.

This sir Robert being a man of great abilities, was appointed one of the
ambassadors extraordinary to the court of England, Rymer, tom. IX. p. 71.
super arduis materiis regna Scotiae et Angliae tangentibus, etc. anno 1413.

By the said Christian his wife, he had issue two sons and one daughter.

1. Sir Herbert, his heir.

2. Eumerus de Maxwell, who, in a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
anno 1424, is designed frater Herberti, etc.

His daughter, Margaret, married to John lord Montgomery.

He died in an advanced age, about the year 1420, and was succeeded by his
eldest son,

XII. Sir HERBERT MAXWELL of Carlaverock, who, in his father's lifetime,
obtained from Archibald earl of Douglas, a grant of the stewartry of Annandale,
Ibidem.
confirmed by Robert duke of Albany, anno 1409, and afterward by a charter
under the great seal, etc. which added greatly to his power and interest in
that country.

He was appointed one of the hostages for king James I.'s ransom, Rymer, tom.
X. p. 307.
anno 1423, and is then designed Herbertus Maxwell de Carlaverock.

He had the honor of knighthood consered upon him at the solemnity of his
majesty's coronation, anno 1424, and soon thereafter was created a lord of
parliament, by the title of lord Maxwell of Carlaverock, etc.

He was one of the lords who sat on the trial of Murdoch duke of Albany,
Fordun, vol. II. p. 483.
anno 1425.

In 1430, Rymer, tom. X. p. 491.
he was appointed warden of the marches, and is then designed Herbertus dominus
Maxwell; and again, anno 1438.

He married Margaret de Craigy, by whom he had two sons,

1. Robert, master of Maxwell.

2. Eustace, ancestor of the Maxwells of Tealing in the county of Forfar.
Chart. in pub. archiv.


XIII. ROBERT, master of Maxwell, eldest son and apparent heir of Herbert lord
Maxwell, married Janet, Ib. and Crawfurd's peerage.
daughter of John lord Forrester, chamberlain of Scotland, by lady Jean
Sinclair his wife, daughter of Henry earl of Orkney.

He died before his father, leaving issue by the said Janet Forrester, a son,

XIV. HERBERT, second lord Maxwell, who succeeded his grandfather, Rymer, tom.
XI. p. 254.
and was appointed one of the guarantees of a treaty with the English, anno
1449.

He got the officium senescalli vailis Anandiae renewed, Chart. in pub. archiv.
and confirmed to him, and got charters under the great seal, of many lands and
baronies, inter 1440 et 1450.

He married, Crawfurd's peerage.
first, a daughter of sir Herbert Herries of Terreagles, by whom he had two
sons and one daughter.

1. Robert, his heir.

2. Sir Edward, Chart. in pub. archiv.
ancestor of the Maxwells of Tinwald, Monreith, etc.

His daughter, Agnes, married to Gilbert lord Kennedy.

He married, Ibidem.
2dly, Isabel, daughter of William lord Seton, widow of sir Alan Stewart of
Darnly, by whom he had five sons and two daughters.

1. George, ancestor of the Maxwells of Gamsalloch. Ibidem.


2. David.

3. Adam, of whom the Maxwells of Southbar, etc. in Renfrew-shire, are
descended.

4. John.

5. William.

Is It daughter, Janet.

2. Mariotte.

These seven children are all substitute to one another, Ibidem.
in the tailzie of Garnsalloch, anno 1475.

This lord died in October 1452, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. ROBERT, Retour in archivi^ sam. de Maxwell.
third lord, who was retoured heir to his father, Herbert, lord Maxwell, on 4th
February 1453.

He is one of the guarantees of a treaty with the English, Rymer. tom. XI. p.
397 and 426.
in 1457; and to another, in 1459.

In his father's lifetime, he married lady Janet Crichton, only daughter of
George earl of Caithness, and Janet countess thereof, by whom he had three sons
and one daughter.

1. John, his heir.

2. George Maxwell, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who, upon his mother's resignation, got the lands of Barnton in Mid-Lothian
confirmed to him, by a charter under the great seal, anno 1460.

3. Thomas, Ibidem.
of whom the Maxwells of Kirkconnel are descended.

His daughter Janet, married to William lord Carlyle of Torthorald.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVI. JOHN, fourth lord Maxwell, who, upon his father's resignation, Chart. in
archiv. fam. de Nithsdale.
got a charter, under the great seal, of the lands and barony of Maxwell,
Carlaverock, Mearns in Renfrewshire, etc. dated 14th February 1477.

After his father's death, he got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
Johanni domino Maxwell, of many lands and baronies, inter 1490, et 1508.

He married Agnes, daughter of sir Alexander Stewart of Gairlies, by whom he
had three sons and three daughters.

1. Robert, his heir.

2. Herbert, ancestor of the Maxwells of Cloudon.

3. Henry, Rymer, tom. XIV. p. 796.
who was taken prisoner with his brother at Solway, but was released for a
ransom of one hundred pounds sterling, anno 1543.

Is It daughter, Mary, married to sir John Johnstone of that ilk.

2. Agnes, married to -- Charters of Amis^ield.

3. Elizabeth, married to -- Jardine of Applegirth.

This lord was a man of great courage and resolution; Crawfurd's peerage.
he accompanied king James IV. to the field of Flowdon, and there lost his life
with his royal master, anno 1513, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVII. ROBERT, fifth lord Maxwell, a man of great worth and merit, and highly
esteemed by king James V. Ibidem, et Chart. in pub. archiv.
who, as soon as he took the administration into his own hands, appointed lord
Maxwell, captain of the castle of Lochmaben, colonel of his majesty's guards,
and warden of the west marches.

In the year 1538, he was sent ambassador extraordinary to the court of France,
to negociate the marriage betwixt king James, and Mary of Lorrain, daughter of
the duke of Guise, which he happily accomplished, espoused the lady in his
Majesty's name, and brought her safe to Scotland, to the great satisfaction of
the king, who, in reward of his faithful services, confirmed to him the lands
of Eusdale, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Eskdale, and Wachopdale, by a charter under the great seal.

He was possessed of an immense estate, and had no less than fourteen charters
from the king, Ibidem.
of different lands and baronies, inter 1530 et 1540.

In one charter, there are confirmed to him, the lands of Maxwell in
Roxburgh-shire, Carlaverock in Dumsries-shire, Springkell in Annandale, with
the office of steward thereof, and Kirkcudbright, the lands of Garnsalloch,
Dursquhen, and Balmacruth, in Perth-shire, Gordonston and Grenan in
Kirkcudbright, Ibid. et chart. in archiv. fam. de Nithsdale.
with the lands and baronies of Mearns and Nether-Pollock in Renfrew-shire,
etc. etc. This charter proceeds upon a narrative of his faithful services in
the king's minority, as warden of the marches, etc. and is dated 19th July,
1537.

He accompanied the king to the battle of Solway, Rymer, tom. XIV. p. 796.
where he was taken prisoner, and sent to the tower of London, but was
afterward released, for a ransom of one thousand merks sterling, anno 1543.

He married, Crawfurd's peerage.
first, Janet, daughter of sir William Douglas of Drumlanrig, ancestor of the
duke of Queensberry, by whom he had two sons and one daughter.

1. Robert, his heir.

2. Sir John Maxwell of Terreagles, who carried on the line of this family, of
whom afterward.

His daughter, Haddington's collections.
Margaret, married, Is It, to Archibald earl of Angus; 2dly, to sir William
Baillie of Lamington.

He married, 2dly, lady Agnes Stewart, daughter of James earl of Buchan, and
widow of Adam second earl of Bothwel, by whom he had no issue.

He died anno 1546, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVIII. ROBERT, sixth lord Maxwell, who was appointed one of the ambassadors
extraordinary to the court of England, Rymer, tom. XV. p. 263.
anno 1551.

He died 14th September 1552, Chart. in pub. archiv.
having married lady Beatrix Douglas, daughter of James third earl of Morton,
by whom he had a posthumous son,

XIX. JOHN, seventh lord Maxwell, who succeeded him, and became a great
favorite of king James VI. who appointed him warden of the west marches,
Ibidem.
as soon as he was of age; and upon the death and forfeiture of the regent
Morton, he got a charter under the great seal, Johanni domino Maxwell, of the
lands, baronies, earldom, and regality of Morton, etc. also a charter of
several other lands; and being immediately thereafter created earl of Morton,
Ibidem.
got a charter of confirmation under the great seal, Johanni comiti de Morton,
domino Maxwell, etc. of the lands, earldom, and regality of Morton, etc. dated
anno 1581.

Sometime thereafter, upon a change of the ministry, the title of earl of
Morton was revoked, and taken up by Archibald eighth earl of Angus, nephew to
the regent; but he dying without Issue, these honors devolved upon the lord
of Lochleven, anno 1588. Vide page 488th of this work.

However, the lord Maxwell was still highly esteemed by the king; for when his
majesty was going to Norway for his queen, Rymer, tom. XVI. p. 27.
he appointed him one of the regents of the kingdom, and acquainted queen
Elizabeth thereof, by a letter under his own hand, anno 1589.

He married lady Elizabeth Douglas, daughter of David seventh earl of Angus,
Chart. in pub. archiv. ad annum 1571.
by whom he had two sons, and three daughters.

1. John, his heir.

2. Robert, afterward earl of Nithsdale.

1st daughter, Elizabeth, married to William lord Herries.

2. Agnes, married to William Douglas of Penzie.

3. Margaret, married to Hugh Wallace of Craigie.

This lord having been divested of his office of warden of the marches, in
which he had served with great fidelity, it was conferred upon John Johnston of
that ilk, Ibidem.
which occasioned a deal of ill blood betwixt the families, and at last proved
fatal to this noble lord himself; for he lost his life in a scu^^^e with the
Johnstons in December 1593, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XX. JOHN, eighth lord Maxwell, who married lady Margaret, Ibidem.
daughter of John marquis of Hamilton, by whom he had no children.

This lord was of a high and vindictive spirit, and determined to revenge his
father's slaughter upon the Johnstons. At last he found an opportunity,
Crawfurd's peerage, etc.
and put to death sir James Johnston of that ilk, son of the last John, for
which he was tried, condemned, forfeited, and beheaded at the cross of
Edinburgh, 21st May 1613.

He having no issue, the representation devolved upon his brother,

XX. ROBERT, Chart. in archivis fam. de Nithsdale.
ninth lord Maxwell, a man of singular worth and merit, who was rehabilitate,
and put in possession of all his brother's estate anno 1618.

He got charters under the great seal, Roberto domino Maxwell, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
of many lands, in the years 1618 and 1619; and being in great favor with his
majesty, was, in 1620, created earl of Nithsdale, Chart. in archivis fam. de
Nithsdale.
with precedence from his father's creation of earl of Morton in 1581, by
patent to his heirs-male general. He took his place accordingly in the
parliament 1621.

He got charters under the great seal, Roberto comiti de Nithsdale, Eskdale, et
Carleil, of the lands and earldom of Nithsdale, Chart. in pub. archiv.
the lands, lordship, and barony of Mearns, and many others, in the years 1621
and 1622.

Upon the breaking out of the civil war, he heartily espoused the interest of
the royal family, Rescinded acts, and minutes of parlt.
and served them to the end of his days with great fidelity, on which account
he suffered sequestration, imprisonment, and many other hardships.

He married Elizabeth, Haddington's collections.
daughter of sir Frances Beaumont, a near relation of sir George Villiers, the
great duke of Buckingham, by whom he had a son,

Robert, lord Maxwell.

When this lord found he could do the king no more service, in order to avoid
the persecution of his enemies, he retired to the Isle of Man, in the end of
the year 1647, died there, and was succeeded by his only son,

XXI. ROBERT, second earl of Nithsdale, who was also most sincerely attached to
the interest of the royal family, and was imprisoned by the parliament, Minutes
of parliament. and rescinded acts.
when only a young man; but was liberate upon his finding bail to appear when
called, anno 1646.

After the restoration he got charters under the great seal, Roberto comiti de
Nithsdale, of many lands and baronies, Chart. in pub. archiv.
inter 1661 et 1663.

But he dying unmarried, anno 1667, his estate and honors devolved upon his
cousin and heir-male, John lord Herries, lineally descended of sir John Maxwell
of Terreagles, before mentioned, to whom we now return.

XVIII. Sir JOHN MAXWELL of Terregles, second son of Robert, fifth lord
Maxwell, married Agnes, eldest daughter and coheiress of William fourth lord
Herries, with whom he got the lands and barony of Terreagles, etc.

He was a great loyalist, a firm and steady friend of queen Mary, Rymer, tom.
XV. p. 566.
was one of the commissioners appointed by her majesty to treat with the
English, anno 1560, and is then designed sir John Maxwell of Terreagles.

He was again nominated one of her majesty's ommissionres to the court of
England, Ibid. p. 631.
in 1563, and was also constituted warden of the west marches.

At the solemnity of king James VI.'s coronation, he got the honors and titles
of lord Herries of Terreagles conferred upon him, in 1566, and was fifth lord
Herries.

By the said Agnes Herries he left issue two sons, and one daughter,

1. John, afterward lord Herries.

2. James Maxwell of Brachinside, who was father of Alexander Maxwell of
Terrachty, who had two sons, John Maxwell of Terrachty, and William of
Carochan. John Maxwell of Terrachty was father of John Maxwell now of
Terrachty, whose eldest son (in case of this lord Maxwell's dying without
male-issue) is male representative of this most noble and ancient family.

His daughter, Chart. in archivis fam. de Kenmure.
Agnes, married to sir John Gordon of Lochinvar.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIX. JOHN, Chart. in pub. archiv.
sixth lord, who got charters under the great seal, Johanni domino Herries, of
many lands and baronies, inter 1608 et 1612.

He married Elizabeth Maxwell, Ibid. ad ann. 1612.
by whom he had a son and successor,

XX. JOHN, seventh lord Herries, who, upon the death of Robert, second earl of
Nithsdale, without issue, succeeded to his estate and honors, anno 1667, being
next heir male, as before observed, and was third earl of Nithsdale.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of sir Robert Gordon of Lochinvar, Chart. in
archlvis fam. de Nithsdale:
ancestor of lord viscount Kenmure, by whom he had a son,

XXI. ROBERT, fourth earl of Nithsdale, who succeeded him, and married lady
Lucy, daughter of William marquis of Douglas, by whom he had a son,

William, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Lady Mary Maxwell, married to Charles earl of Traquair.

He died anno 1695, and was succeeded by his only son,

XXII. WILLIAM, fifth earl of Nithsdale, who married lady Winifred Herbert,
daughter of William marquis of Powis, by lady Elizabeth Somerset his wife,
daughter of Edward marquis of Worcester, by whom he had a son,

William, lord Maxwell, -- and a daughter,

Lady Anne Maxwell, married to John lord Bellew, of the kingdom of Ireland.

This noble lord had the misfortune to be engaged in the rebellion 1715, was
taken at Preston, and sent prisoner to the tower of London, was tried by his
peers for treason in January 1716, condemned to be beheaded on the 24th of
February thereafter, with the lords Derwentwater and Kenmure, and his estate
and honors were forfeited to the crown; but the night before execution, he
made his escape out of the tower, got beyond seas, and died at Rome, anno 1744.

XXIII. WILLIAM lord Maxwell, only son of William fifth earl of Nithsdale, had
it not been for his father's forfeiture, would have been sixth earl of
Nithsdale.

He married his cousin, lady Catharine Stewart, daughter of Charles earl of
Traquair, by whom he has two daughters.

1. Mary, who died young.

2. Winifred, married to William Constable of Effringhame, of the kingdom of
England, Esquire; to whom she has two sons, and one daughter. 1.
Marmaduke-William, 2. William. Their daughter, Catharine.

ARMS.
Argent, an imperial eagle, displayed sable, beaked and membered gules,
surmounted of an escutcheon of the first, charged with a saltier of the second,
and sur-charged in the center with an urchin or.

CREST; a stag proper, attired argent, couchant before an holly bush proper.

SUPPORTERS; two stags proper, attired argent.

MOTTO; Reviresco.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Terreagles, Carlaverock, etc. in Dumfries-shire.

CARNEGIE Earl of NORTHESK.
AS the rise and descent of the ancient name of Carnegie, is to be found under
the title Southesk, we proceed to deduce the descent of this noble family from
their immediate ancestor,

Sir David Carnegie of Coluthie, the tenth generation of the family of
Southesk, in a direct male line, who married Eupheme, daughter of sir David
Wemyss of that ilk, by whom he had four sons, and three daughters.

1. David, his successor, afterward earl of Southesk. 2. John, the first of
this family.

For the other children, vide title earl o^ Southesk.

I. JOHN CARNEGIE, second son of sir David Carnegie of Coluthie, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
got from his father the lands and barony of Ethie, Boghead, etc. upon which he
got a charter under the great seal from king James VI. anno 1596.

He left issue a son and successor,

II. Sir JOHN, who got charters under the great seal, Ibidem.
domino Johanni Carnegie de Ethie, militi, of the lands of Ethie, Redcastle,
Innerkeilor, and many others, inter 1621 et 1625.

He was a man of good parts, great learning, Minutes of parliament.
and highly esteemed by king Charles I. and though he was at first engaged on
the parliament's side, yet he soon deserted their party, Chart. in pub. archiv.
and returned to his duty, upon which the king raised him to the dignity of the
peerage, by the title of lord Lour, April 20th 1639.

And as he continued to serve his majesty with great fidelity and honor, Chart
in pub. archiv. et penes com. de Northesk.
he was pleased further to digni^y him with the titles of earl of Ethie, lord
Lour, and Inglis-madie, by patent to the heirs-male of his body, dated 1st
November 1647.

He afterward, with consent and approbation of king Charles II. changed these
titles for those of Northe^k and Rosehill, which have ever since continued to
be the chief titles of the family.

After the murder of king Charles I. this earl still persisting in his loyalty,
Cromwell's act of Indemnity.
was particularly excepted out of Oliver Cromwell's act of ind^mnity, and fined
in the sum of six thousand pounds sterling, anno 1654.

After the restoration of king Charles II. he got charters, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
under the great seal, of many lands and baronies, inter 1660 et 1663.

He married Magdalene, daughter of sir James Haliburton of Pitcur; an ancient
family in the county of Angus, by whom he had two sons, and four daughters.

1. David, lord Rosehill.

2. Sir James, ancestor of the Carnegies of Boysack, etc.

1st daughter, lady Anne, married to sir Henry Wood of Bonnytoun.

2. Lady Magdalene, married, 1st, to George Lindsay, lord Spynzie (without
issue); 2dly, to John Lindsay of Edzel, and had issue.

3. Lady Marjory, married to James, son and apparent heir of John Scot of
Scotstarvit, director of the chancery in the reign of king Charles I. and had
issue.

4. Lady Jean, married, 1st, to William Graham of Claverhouse, and was mother
of John viscount Dundee; 2dly, to sir John Preston of Airdrie, Bart. and had
issue.

He died anno 1667, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. DAVID, second earl of Northesk, Chart. penes c^mitem de Northesk.
who married lady Jean Maule, daughter of Patrick earl of Panmure, by whom he
had five sons, and two daughters.

1. David, lord Rosehill.

2. James, of whom the Carnegies of Finhaven, etc. are descended.

3. Patrick, progenitor of the Carnegies of Lour.

4. Alexander, ancestor of the Carnegies of Kinfauns.

5. Robert, died without issue.

1st daughter, lady Jean, married to Colin earl of Balcarras, and had issue.

2. Lady Magdalene, married to John Moodie of Ardbikie, Esquire;.

He died anno 1677, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. DAVID, Retour in cancellaria.
third earl of Northesk, who was served heir to his father, anno 1679.

He married lady Elizabeth Lindsay, daughter of John earl of Crawfurd, by whom
he had two sons, and four daughters.

1. David, lord Rosehill.

2. John Carnegie, Esquire;.

1st daughter, lady Margaret, died unmarried.

2. Lady Christian, married to James duke of Montrose.

3. Lady Jean.

4. Lady Anne.

These two last died young.

The earl died anno 1688, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. DAVID, fourth earl of Northesk, who was one of the lord of the privy
council to her majesty queen Anne, was constituted lord high sheriff of the
county of Forsar, one of the lords of police, and was elected one of the
sixteen Scotch peers to the second, third, and fourth British parliaments.

He married lady Margaret Wemyss, daughter of James lord Burn^island and
Margaret countess of Wemyss, by whom he had two so^, and five daughter.

1. David, lord Rosehill.

2. George, now earl of Northesk.

1st daughter, lady Margaret, married to George lord Balgony.

2. Lady Elizabeth, married to James lord Balmerino.

3. Lady Anne, married to sir Alexander Hope of Carse, Bart.

4. Lady Christian.

5. Lady Mary.

He died anno 1729, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. DAVID, fifth earl of Northesk, who dying without issue, anno 1741, his
estate and honors devolved upon his brother,

VI. GEORGE, sixth earl of Northesk, who being bred to the sea, was, in 1741,
promoted to the command of one of his majesty's ships of war, and in 1751 was
raised to the rank of a flag officer, and is now rear-admiral of the white.

He married lady Anne Lesly, daughter of Alexander earl of Leven. By her he
has a son,

David, lord Rosehill, -- and two daughters.

1. Lady Elizabeth,

2. Lady Margaret.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st and 4th or, an eagle displayed azure, armed and membered gules:
2d and 3d argent, a pale gules.

CREST; on a wreath, a demi-leopard proper.

SUPPORTERS; two leopards proper.

MOTTO; Tache sans tache.

CHIEF SEAT,
At Ethie, in the county of Forfar.

STEWART Lord OCHILTRIE.
THE immediate ancestor of this branch of the illustrious family of Stewart, was

I. ANDREW, third lord Evandale, lineally descended from Robert duke of Albany,
governor of Scotland, as deduced under the title of Stewart earl of Murray.

This Andrew was governor of the castle of Dunbarton, and groom of the stole to
king James IV.

He got six charters, Chart. in pub. archiv.
under the great seal, of many different lands and baronies, inter 1526 et 1536.

He exchanged his lordship of Evandale in Lanerk-shire, with sir James Hamilton
of Fynait, for the lordship of Ochiltrie in Air-shire, and got charters, under
the great seal, of the lands and barony of Ochiltrie, Ibidem.
and several others ( Andreae domino Evandale) inter 1536 et 1540.

He then, with consent of the crown, got the title of Evandale exchanged for
that of Ochiltrie confirmed to him by act of parliament, Records of parliament.
anno 1543.

He afterward got three charters under the great seal ( Andreae domino
Ochiltrie) of different lands and baronies, Chart. in pub. archiv.
inter 1543 et 1546.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir John Kennedy of Blairquhan, Ibid. ad ann.
1500.
by whom he had three sons, and three daughters.

1. Andrew, his heir.

2. Henry, lord Methven, whose male line is extinct.

3. Sir James Stewart, ancestor of the earl of Murray.

For the daughters, vide page 502d of this work.

He died anno 1548, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. ANDREW, second lord Ochiltrie, who died soon after his father, Lives of
the offic. of state.
having married lady Margaret Hamilton, daughter of James earl of Arran, by
Beatrix his first wife, daughter of John lord Drummond, by whom he had a son
and successor,

III. ANDREW, third lord Ochiltrie, who was a great promoter of the
reformation, Chart. in pub. archiv.
and got four charters under the great seal, Andreae domino Ochiltrie, of
several lands and baronies, inter 1570 et 1592.

He married Agnes, daughter of John Cunninghame of Caprington, by whom he had
five sons, and two daughters.

1. Andrew, master of Ochiltrie.

2. Sir James Stewart of Bothwel-muir, afterward earl of Arran, of whom
hereafter.

3. Sir William Stewart of Monkton, who was killed by the earl of Bothwel,
without issue.

4. Sir Henry Stewart, knight, of whom there is no succession.

5. Robert Stewart of Wester-Braco, also without issue.

1st daughter, Isabel, married to Thomas Kennedy of Bargeny.

2. Margaret, married, 1st, to John Knox the reformer; 2dly, to sir Andrew Ker
of Faudonside.

IV. ANDREW, eldest son and apparent heir of Andrew third lord Ochiltrie, got
charters under the great seal, Ibidem.
Andreae magistro de Ochiltrie, of the lands and barony of Ochiltrie, the five
merk land of Portcarrick, and several others, inter 1578 et 1584.

He married Margaret Stewart, daughter of Henry lord Methven, by whom he had
two sons and six daughters.

1. Andrew, afterward lord Ochiltrie.

2. Josias Stewart of Bonnyton, died without issue.

1st daughter, Anne, married to sir Andrew Kerr of Fernyhirst, afterward lord
Jedburgh.

2. Margaret, married to John Stewart of Traquair, and was mother of the great
earl.

3. Marjory, married to sir Roger Ashton of the kingdom of England, gentleman
of the bedchamber to king James VI.

4. Martha, married to Nicol Rutherford of Hundely.

5. Mary, married to sir George Crawfurd of Lifnorris.

6. Isabel, married to Gilbert Kennedy of Bargeny.

The master died before his father, and his eldest son,

V. ANDREW, succeeding his grandfather, was fourth lord, Ibidem.
and got charters under the great seal, Andreae domino Ochiltrie, terrarum
ecclesiasticarum de Ochiltrie, etc. etc. etc. anno 1601.

He was one of the gentlemen of the bedchamber to king James VI. general of
the ordnance, and governor of the castle of Edinburgh.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir John Kennedy of Blairquhan, by whom he
had a son,

Andrew, master of Ochiltrie, afterward lord Castle-stewart.

This lord, with consent of his son the master, and the approbation of the
crown, sold his lordship of Ochiltrie to his cousin sir James Stewart of
Kills, Lives of the offic. of state, and hist. of the Stewart^.
son of his uncle the earl of Arran, who afterward, upon the resignation of
the said Andrew, became lord Ochiltrie; and the master, in lien thereof, was by
the king created lord Castle-stewart of the kingdom of Ireland, by patent,
dated anno 1619.

VI. ANDREW, lord Castle-stewart, only son and heir of Andrew fourth lord
Ochiltrie, Ibidem.
married lady Anne Stewart, fourth daughter of John fifth earl of Athole, by
whom he had a son,

VII. ANDREW, second lord Castle-stewart, who married Joyce, Peerage of
s^^land, vol. III. p. 304.
only daughter and heiress of sir Arthur Blondel of the kingdom of Ireland, by
whom he had a daughter,

VIII. MARY, his sole heiress, Peerage of England, v. II. p. 173.
who married Henry Howard, earl of Suffolk, in the kingdom of England, and had
issue.

Andrew, second lord Castle-stewart, dying without sons, in him ended the male
line of the eldest son of Andrew, third lord Ochiltrie; the representation
therefore devolved upon the descendents of sir James the second son,
beforementioned, to whom we now return.

IV. Sir JAMES STEWART of Bothwelmuir, second son of Andrew, third lord
Ochiltrie, was a man of good parts, an aspiring genius, and most unbounded
ambition. He became a great favorite of king James VI. and was raised to the
highest offices of state.

As there is a full account of his life and transactions, p. 137. etc.
published in the lives of the officers of state, to that we re er our readers,
and shall only here briefly mention some of the most remarkable occurrences of
his life.

He was created earl of Arran, lord Hamilton, Abercorn, Bothwel-haugh, etc. he
was captain of the guards, provost of the town of Edinburgh, governor of the
castles of Edinburgh and St^rling, and chancellor of Scotland, etc. etc. etc.

He married lady Elizabeth Stewart, daughter of John fourth earl of Athole, by
whom he had two sons.

1. Sir James of Kills, afterward lord Ochiltrie.

2. Henry, who had issue only two daughters; the first married to Henry third
lord Methven; the second married to colonel -- Stewart.

The earl of Arran, after many and various scenes of life, was divested of all
his offices and titles of honor, and for several years lived a retired life,
without any other designation than that of captain Stewart; and he having been
the regent Morton's accuser, was, in revenge thereof, put to death by sir James
Douglas of Torthorald, anno 1596.

V. Sir JAMES STEWART of Kills, Stewart's hist.
eldest son of James earl of Arran, became lord Ochiltrie, upon the resignation
of Andrew the fourth lord, as before observed, anno 1615.

He got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Jacobo domino Ochiltrie, of the lands and superiority of Polquharn, and
others, anno 1616.

He afterward most foolishly and unjustly accused the marquis of Hamilton of
having a design upon the crown, which upon trial was found to be without the
least foundation; whereupon the lord Ochiltrie was ordered to be confined in
the castle of Blackness for life. Journals of justiciary.
He remained there many years, but was at last liberate by the English, after
the battle of Worcester, anno 1652.

He died anno 1659, having married Margaret, daughter of Uchtred MacDougal of
Garthland, by whom he had a son,

VI. -- master of Ochiltrie, who died before his father, leaving issue a son,

VII. WILLIAM lord Ochiltrie, who succeeded his grandfather, and was a youth of
great hopes and spirit. He died at the university of Edinburgh, in the 16th
year of his age, unmarried, anno 1675, whereby the honors became extinct.

OLIPHANT Lord OLIPHANT.
THOUGH few families have made a greater figure in the annals of Scotland, than
that of Oliphant, yet the traditional accounts of their origin are various.
Some allege, that when Harold king of Norway invaded Scotland with a powerful
fleet and army, in the reign of king Donald VI. a noble Norwegian, called sir
Donald Oliphard, was taken prisoner by the king of Scots, and being a man of
rank and distinction, was treated according to his quality and merit. A peace
being afterward concluded betwixt the two crowns, sir Donald had liberty to
return home; but being pleased with the entertainment he met with, and having
contracted a friendship with several of the first quality, he married and
settled in this country, and he is said to have been progenitor of all the
Oliphants in Scotland.

However, we shall insist no longer on traditional accounts, but proceed to
deduce the descent of this most ancient and noble family, by unquestionable
documents from,

I. DAVID de HOLIFARD or OLIFARD, a man of rank and figure in Scotland, in the
reign of king Alexander I. He appears to have been much about the court of king
David, who, upon the death of king Alexander, succeeded to the crown of
Scotland, anno 1124.

He was one of the Scotch barons, who accompanied that prince to England, when
he went with an army to the assistance of Maud the empress, his niece, against
king Stephen, but, Sir James Dalrvmple's collections, p. 174.
upon the raising of the siege of Wincester, king David was so hotly pursued by
the English army, that had it not been for the valor and courage of this David
de Oliphard, he had been taken prisoner, anno 1142.

King David, in reward of this noble action, is said to have made him a grant
of several lands, both in the Lothians and in Perth-shire, but we do not find
them so early mentioned in our records.

In king David I.'s grants to the priory of Coldingham, David de Olifard is a
witness, and his seal, Chartulary of Coldingham, Nisbet, vol. I. p. 244.
being three crescents, is thereto appended, which is the armorial bearing of
the Oliphants to this day, a convincing proof that this David was progenitor of
this noble family.

In the reign of the same king David, there happened a dispute betwixt Robert
bishop of St. Andrews, and G. abbot of Dunfermline: It was submitted to king
David and his son prince Henry, Concordia fact, etc. Chartulary of Dunfermline.
and was by them accorded to the satisfaction of both parties, to which David
de Olifard, and Herbert, great chamberlain of Scotland, were witnesses. This
deed is without date, but Herbert was chamberlain from 1122 to 1144, in which
space that agreement must have been concluded.

This David appears to have had issue five sons.

1. David, his heir.

2. William de Olifard, who was one of the hostages for king William the Lion,
Rymer, tom* I. p. 39.
when he was set at liberty by the English, after the battle of Alnwick, anno
1174; and was, with his brother David, Chartulary o^ Coldingham
witness in several charters and donations to the monastery of Coldingham,
inter 1180 et 1190.

3. Walter de Olifard, who was witness to the foundation charter of the abbacy
of Lindores, Chartulary o^ Newbottle ^ Dunfermlino.
by David earl of Huntington, anno 1178, and was witness also with his brother
David, in several donations to the monastery of Dunfermline, etc.

4. Philip de Olifard, witness likewise with his brother David, Ibidem.
in a donation of king William to the monastery of Dunfermline, in or before
the year 1189.

5. Fulcione de Olifard, who is witness in a donation of Alan son of Walter
lord high steward of Scotland, Chartulary Paisley.
to the monastery of Paisley, to which Joceline bishop of Glasgow was also a
witness, and he died anno 1199.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. DAVID de OLIFARD, a man of great worth and merit, and highly esteemed by
king Malcolm IV. who succeeded king David, anno 1153.

In a charter of that prince, to the abbot and convent of Kelso, Chartulary of
Kelso.
Herbert bishop of Glasgow, William bishop of Murray, David de Olifard, etc.
are witnesses, in or before 1162, in which year William bishop of Murray died.

He is witness also in several charters and donations of king William, who
succeeded king Malcolm, anno 1165.

He was likewise in great favor with that prince, Chartulary of Scoon.
who, in the beginning of his reign, constituted him justiciar of Lothian,
which office was long enjoyed by him and his posterity.

In a donation of the said king William, to the abbacy of Dunfermline,
Chartulary of Dunfermline.
Nicol the chancellor, Richard de Morvile constable, David de Olifard, etc. are
witnesses, in or before 1171, in which year the chancellor died.

This David had issue two sons.

1. Sir Walter, his heir.

2. David de Olifard, who is witness in a donation of king Alexander II. to the
abbot and convent of Kelso, Chartulary of Kelso.
and is then designed brother of Walter de Olifard, justiciar of Lothian, anno
1234.

He died before the year 1200, and was succeeded by his eldestson,

III. Sir WALTER OLIFARD, who married Christian, Strathallan's history of the
Drummonds.
daughter of the earl of Strathearn, by whom he got the lands and parish of
Strageith, etc. anno 1200.

He afterward exchanged the lands of Strageith for some others in Perth-shire,
with Gilbert earl of Strathearn, Ibidem.
his brother-in-law, anno 1220.

He was in great favor with king Alexander II. Chartulary of Scoon.
who, in the beginning of his reign, constituted him justiciar of Lothian.

When the marriage betwixt king Alexander II. and princess Johanna, eldest
daughter of king Henry III. of England, Rymer, tom. I. p. 241.
was set on foot, this sir Walter was one of the sureties on the part of king
Alexander, anno 1220.

And when the queen's jointure was adjusted and settled, Ibid. p. 252,
dominus Walterus de Olifard justiciarius Loudoniae, is one of the witnesses,
anno 1221.

He was witness also to king Alexander II.'s confirmation charter, Chartulary
of Kelso.
of the privileges of the monastery of Kelso, anno 1222.

He appears to have ^esided constantly about the court of king Alexander; for
he is witness to innumerable charters and donations of that prince to the
religious of Kelso, Dunfermline, Holyrood-house, Newbottle, and Paisley,
Chronicle of Melrose.
betwixt the years 1220 and 1242, in which last year he died, according to
these words; dominus Gualterus de Olifard justiciarius Loudoniae obiit anno
1242.

By the said Christian he left issue a son and successor,

IV. WALTERUS de OLIFARD, who appears to have been proprietor of lands in
Striling-shire, as well as in the Lothians; Chartulary of Newbottle.
for in a convention betwixt the abbots and convents of Holyrood-house and
Newbottle, there are mentioned the lands of Kallantyr, etc. in Stirling-shire,
which they held in seu-farm of Walter de Olifard and David Cummin, anno 1245.

This Walter afterward renounced any right, he had by his mother, to the
church of Strageith, Crawfurd's peerage.
in favors of Gilbert earl of Strathearn, the patronage whereof that earl had
made over to the monks of Inchaflry, pro salute animae suae, etc.

He had issue three sons.

1. Sir William, his heir.

2. Hugh.

3. Walter.

These two last became bound with their brother sir William, Rymer, tom. II. p.
950.
to surrender the castle of Stirling to king Edward of England, if it was not
relieved in a certain space, in 1304.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. Sir WILLIAM de OLIFARD, dominus de Aberdalgy, the first of the family we
find designed by that title.

He was a great hero and patriot, a strenuous defender of the liberties of his
country.

He was one of the Scotch nobles whom king Edward I. of England compelled to
swear allegiance to him, Ibid. p. 769.
when he had overrun Scotland, anno 1297; but it seems he did not depend much
upon their fidelity; for he carried him, and several others of the first rank,
prisoners to London: however, the year thereafter they obtained liberty to
return to Scotland, upon their obliging themselves, or finding bail, Ibidem,
and Abercrombie, vol. I. p. 498.
to stay no longer at home than was necessary to equip themselves in order to
return, and serve king Edward in the army he designed to employ against France.
But those worthy patriots were so far from thinking, Ibidem.
that oaths extorted by force were binding, that they immediately joined the
nonjurors and loyalists, in defense of the liberties of their country.

This brave man was appointed governor of the castle of Stirling, which he
gallantly defended for a long time.

King Edward at last besieged it in person, with the whole English army, Ibidem.
in 1303, but sir William made such a glorious defense, that he obliged that
great prince to raise the siege.

The year thereafter, king Edward set down before it again, with all the forces
he was able to bring to the field, and it was then the only fort in Scotland
that he was not in possession of. Ibid. and Rymer, v. II. p. 950.
Sir William defended it for three months more against them all; but at last,
for want of all necessaries, he was obliged to capitulate, which he did upon
honorable terms, anno 1304; yet king Edward, contrary to the articles of
capitulation, sent him prisoner to London, where he soon ended his days,
^brdun, vol. I. p. 177, and 224; and ^bercrombie, vol. I. p. 518.
according to a good author, who says, " Willielmus Olifard, miles, insignis
custos castri Strivynlini, contra fidem Anglo datam, carcere truditur, etc.
anno 1304."

By Isabel Douglas, his wife, he left issue a son,

VI. Sir WILLIAM OLIPHANT, lord of Aberdalgy, who succeeded him, and got from
king Robert Bruce a grant of the lands of Muir-house, Chart. in rotul. Rob. I.
in the shire of Edinburgh, upon which he got a charter under the great seal,
from the said king Robert, dilecto et sideli suo Willielmo Oliphant, militi,
terram nostram de Muir-bouse, etc.

This sir William was witness in a charter of king Robert's, confirming an
excambion made by John de Pincerna, Chart. penes Johann. Kinloch de Kilry, etc.
knight, and John de Inchmartin, knight, of part of the barony of Elcheoch, for
part of the barony of Pitmedden, anno regni 10 mo, 1316.

In another confirmation charter of the said king Robert, Ibidem.
of some lands to sir John of Inchmartin, the witnesses are, Bernard the
chancellor, Gilbert de Haya constable, Robert de Keith marishal, David de
Wemyss, William de Oliphant, etc. milites, at Perth, 4th June, 1316.

King Robert also confirms a contract and t^ck, entered into betwixt Neil of
Carrick and William of Oliphant, Ibidem.
knight, of the lands of Easter and Wester-Craigs (now called Kilry) in the
county of Angus. The confirmation is dated at Berwick upon Tweed, 20th day of
April, anno regni 18 vo.

Sir William got a grant from king Robert of the lands of Newtyle, Writs of the
fam. of Oliphant.
Kilspindie, and several others in Perth-shire, anno 1318.

He was one of the magnates Scotiae who signed the famous letter to the pope,
Fordun, vol. II. p. 275.
asserting the independency of Scotland, in 1320.

He died at his seat of Aberdalgy, and was interred in the parish church there,
under a monument of black marble, with his statue in armor, in full
proportion, with the followin inscription in Saxon capitals.

Hic jacet dominus Willielmus Oliphant, dominus de Aberdalgy, qui obiit quinto
die mensis Februarii, anno 1329. Orate, etc.

He was succeeded by his son,

VII. Sir WALTER OLIPHANT, lord of Aberdalgy, who was inferior to none of his
worthy ancestors for magnanimity and fortitude; Hist. of the royal family.
and being also a man of great power and interest, and possessed of a large
estate, had the honor to marry lady Elizabeth Bruce, daughter of the immortal
king Robert, by whom he had a son,

Walter, his heir.

He afterward got a charter from his brother-in-law king David II. Charta in
archivis fam. de Gask.
dilecto et fideli suo Waltero Oliphant, pro bono servitio nobis impenso, et
Elizabethae sponsae suae, sorori nostrae carissimae, etc. erecting his lands of
Gask in Perth-shire into one free barony, with the privilege of fishing on the
water of Earn three days in the week in the forbidden time, dated the last day
of February, 1364.

He was succeeded by his son,

VIII. WALTER OLIPHANT, lord of Aberdalgy, who, Ibidem.
upon his father's resignation, obtained a charter from king Robert II.
confirming to him and his heirs, the lands of Kellie, Pickerie, etc. anno regni
8 vo, 1379.

He married Mary, Ibidem.
daughter of sir Robert Erskine of that ilk, by whom he had two sons.

1. Sir John, his heir.

2. Malcolm Oliphant of Hasleside, in the county of Air.

He died soon after his father, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. Sir JOHN OLIPHANT of Aberdalgy, Crawfurd's peerage.
who had the honor of knighthood conferred upon him by king Robert II.

And, upon his own resignation, obtained from that prince a new grant and
charter, Ibidem.
of all the lands he possessed in this realm, holding of the crown, anno 1388.

He married, 1st, a daughter of sir William Borthwick of that ilk, ancestor of
lord Borthwick, by whom he had a son,

Sir William, his heir.

He married, Ibidem.
2dly, a daughter of sir Thomas Home of that ilk, ancestor of the earl of Home,
by whom he had another son,

Thomas, ancestor of the Oliphants of Kellie in Fife.

He died about the year 1420, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. Sir WILLIAM OLIPHANT of Aberdalgy, who, being a man of great parts, was, by
the estates of the nation, appointed one of the Scotch commissioners to go up
to Durham, ^mer, tom. ^p. 309.
to treat with the English about the redemption of king James I. anno 1423; and
he afterward became one of the hostages for his ransom, anno 1424.

He married Isabel, daughter of sir John Stewart of Innermeath, Hist. of the
royal family.
lord of Lorn, by whom he had a son,

Sir John, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Isabel, Charta penes comitem de Lauderdale.
married to sir James Scrymgeour of Dudhope, constable of Dundee.

He was succeeded by his son,

XI. Sir JOHN, who, in a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
is designed dominus Johannes Oliphant, dominus de Aberdalgy, anno 1444.

He married Isabel, daughter of sir Walter Ogilvie of Auchterhouse,
DiplomataErroliana.
by whom he had two sons, and two daughters.

1. Sir Laurence, afterward lord Oliphant.

2. Thomas Oliphant, designed of Ardchalzie, which lands he got upon the
resignation of William Quhite of Ardchiell, Chart. in pub. archiv.
by a charter under the great seal, dated anno 1471.

1st daughter, Margaret, married to William Wardlaw of Torrie, in Fife.

2. Isabel, married to Alexander Blair of Balthyock, in Perth-shire.

In the minority of king James II. there was a fatal feud subsisting betwixt
the Lindsays and Ogilvies; Crawfurd's peerage, and M. S. hist. of this family.
sir John took part with the latter, and lost his life at the battle of
Arbroath, where the earl of Crawfurd was also slain, on 25th January 1455.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. Sir LAURENCE OLIPHANT of Aberdalgy, a man of fine natural parts, which
were greatly improved by a liberal education and traveling.

He was much in favor and highly esteemed both by king James II. and III. and
appears to have been created a lord of parliament by the former, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
being designed Laurentius dominus de Oliphant, in a charter under the great
seal, anno 1458.

Upon king James III.'s accession to the crown, he was appointed one of his
privy council, high sheriff of the county of Perth, and sat as a peer in the
parliaments called to meet by that prince, Records of parliament.
in the years 1467, 1469, 1476, 1477, etc. which dignity his successors have
enjoyed ever since.

He got a charter, under the great seal, Laurentio domino Oliphant, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
of several lands, in 1468.

He was appointed one of the plenipotentiaries upon the part of Scotland,
Rymer, tom. XII. p. 230.
who met the English commissioners at Nottingham, to treat of a peace, the 6th
day of August, anno 1484.

A truce was concluded, Ibid. p. 241.
and Laurence lord Oliphant was one of the guarantees of the treaty, 27th
September that same year.

He was afterward one of the ambassadors extraordinary, appointed to treat
with the English about a marriage 'twixt James prince of Scotland with Anne de
la Pool, daughter of John duke of Suffolk, Ibidem.
and niece of king Richard of England, which was agreed to; but king Richard's
short reign, and the revolution that happened in England immediately after,
prevented its taking effect.

He was appointed one of the judges of session, Crawfurd's peerage.
from which court there was then no appeal, either by king or parliament.

He appears to have been out of the kingdom upon some foreign negotiation, when
king James III. Black acts of parliament.
was murdered; but soon after king James IV.'s accession to the crown, he was
constituted one of the privy council, and justiciar in all his own bounds, and
that of Strathbrand, anno 1490.

He was again appointed ambassador extraordinary to the court of England,
Rymer, tom. XII. p. 446.
anno 1491, when a five years truce was concluded, and he was one of the
guarantees of the treaty.

There is nothing manifests the power and greatness of this noble lord more,
Indentures in archivis fam. de Gask; and Crawfurd's peerage.
than the bonds of manrent he had of many gentlemen of the first rank, who were
obliged to attend and serve him in peace and war, when required; but they are
too numerous to be here inserted.

He married lady Isabel Hay, Crawfurd's peerage.
daughter of William earl of Errol, by whom he had three sons.

1. John, his heir.

2. William, Chart. in pub. archiv. adann. 1526.
who married Christian Sutherland, only daughter of Alexander fourth baron of
Dussus, with whom he got the lands of Berringdale and Strathbrock; Crawfurd's
peerage, p. 379.
and of him the Oliphants of Gask are lineally descended.

3. George Oliphant of Balmaitern.

He died anno 1500, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. JOHN, Rymer, tom. XIII. p. 92.
second lord Oliphant, who was one of the Scotch lords that sat in the
parliament, when the queen's jointure was settled, anno 1504.

He got charters under the great seal, Johanni domino Oliphant, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
of several lands, inter 1511 et 1513.

He married lady Elizabeth Campbell, daughter of Colin first earl of Argyle, by
whom he had two sons.

1. Colin, master of Oliphant.

2. Laurence, abbot of Inchassry, who was slain in the field of Flowdon, in the
year 1513.

He died anno 1516.

XIV. COLIN, master of Oliphant, got a charter to Colin, Haddington's
collections, p. 377.
son and heir apparent of John lord Oliphant, and Elizabeth Keirh his spouse,
of several lands in Forfar-shire, anno 1504.

He was a man of great spirit and fortitude, and accompanied king James IV. to
the fatal field of Flowdon, Crawfurd's peerage.
where he lost his life with his royal master, anno 1513, leaving issue, by the
said Elizabeth Keith, daughter of William third earl marishal, a son,

XV. LAURENCE, who succeeded his grand father, anno 1516, and was third lord
Oliphant.

He got charters under the great seal, Laurentio domino Oliphant, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
of several lands and baronies, inter 1526 et 1536.

He was taken prisoner at Solway-moss; but was afterward released for a ransom
of eight hundred merks sterling, Rymer, tom. XIV. p. 796.
anno 1543.

He married Margaret, Chart. penes magistr. Kinloch de Kilrie, ad annum 1524.
daughter of sir James Sandilands of Calder, by whom he had two sons, and four
daughters.

1. Laurence, his heir.

2. Peter Oliphant, who got from his father the lands of Turing and Drumie,
which were part of the lands given by king Robert Bruce, Ibid. et chart. in
pub. archiv.
nominee dotis, with his daughter lady Elizabeth, to sir Walter Oliphant, etc.
He was ancestor of the Oliphants of Langton.

1st daughter, Catharine, married, 1st to sir Alexander Oliphant of Kelly;
2dly, to George Dundas of that ilk, and had issue.

2. Margaret, married, 1st, to William Murray of Abercairny, without issue;
2dly, to James Clephane of Carslogie in Fife, and had issue.

3. Jean, married to William Moncrief of that ilk, and had issue.

4. Lilias, married to Robert Lindsay of Balgony.

He died on 26th March 1566, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVI. LAURENCE, fourth lord Oliphant, who was served heir to his father, Chart.
in pub. archiv.
in September 1566.

He was a man of singular merit, a great loyalist, and adhered firmly to the
interest of queenMary, during all the time of the civil war.

He married lady Margaret Hay, M. S. hist of the family, and Crawfurd's peerage.
daughter of George seventh earl of Errol, by whom he had two sons, and three
daughters.

1. Laurence, master of Oliphant.

2. John Oliphant of Newland, of whom more hereafter.

1st daughter, Elizabeth, married to William tenth earl of Angus, and had issue.

2. Jean, married to Alexander Bruce of Cultmalindie, in Perth-shire, and had
issue.

3. Margaret, married to sir James Johnston of Wester-hall, without issue.

He died anno 1592.

XVII. LAURENCE, master of Oliphant, Chart. penes comitem de Morton.
eldest son and apparent heir of the fourth lord, married lady Christian
Douglas, daughter of William earl of Morton, by whom he had a son,

Laurence, afterward lord Oliphant, -- and a daughter,

Anne, M. S. hist. of the family, and Crawfurd's peerage.
marrid to --, lord Lindsay.

The master perished at sea, going over to the Low Countries, anno 1583.

XVIII. LAURENCE, only son of Laurence master of Oliphant, succeeded his
grandfather, anno 1592, and was fifth lord Oliphant.

He got several charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Laurentio domino Oliphant, of many lands and baronies, inter 1603 et 1618.

He married Lilias Drummond, daughter of James lord Maderty, by whom he had
only one daughter,

Anne, married to sir James Douglas of Mordington. Vide lord Mordington.

This lord was a bad oeconomist, and alienated or greatly incumbered the
immense estate the family was possessed of, so that at his death there was
little left, either for his daughter or the heir-male: however, in the reign of
king Charles I. there was a controversy betwixt the said sir James of
Mordington, who married the heir of line of Oliphant, and Patrick Oliphant the
heir-male, which was thus determined by the king, viz. "That Patrick the
heir-male should enjoy the honors and title of Lord Ollphant, Dalrymple's
collect. p. 396.
and sir James Douglas that of lord Mordington, with the precedence of
Oliphant, and both titles to descend to their heirs-male."

Laurence, fifth lord Oliphant, dying without male-issue, the representation
devolved upon his cousin Patrick, son of his uncle John, to whom we now return.

XVII. JOHN OLIPHANT of Newland, M. S. hist. of the family, and Crawfurd's
peerage.
second son of Laurence, fourth lord Oliphant, was father of

XVIII. PATRICK OLIPHANT, who, upon the death of Laurence, the fifth lord,
succeeded to the honors, and was sixth lord Oliphant.

This Patrick, in the lifetime of his cousin, the fifth lord, being looked upon
as the representative of the family was designed master of Oliphant, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
and got charters under the great seal, Patricio magistro de Oliphant, terrarum
baroniae de Aberdalgy, Duplin, etc. etc. etc. inter 1615 et 1618.

After his cousin's death, he got charters under the great seal, Ibidem.
Patricio domino Oliphant, terrarum baroniae de Oliphant, inter 1642 et 1646.

He married, 1st, Elizabeth, daughter of sir Patrick Cheyne of Eslemont, by
whom he had one daughter,

Lilias, married to sir Laurence Oliphant of Gask.

He married, 2dly, Mary, daughter of sir James Crichton of Frendraught, by whom
he had three sons.

1. Charles, his heir.

2. Colonel William, of whom afterward.

3. Captain Francis.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIX. CHARLES, Scots comp. M. S. hist. of the fam. and Crawfurd's peerage.
seventh lord Oliphant, who married Mary, daughter of -- Ogilvie of Milton,
widow of Patrick Meldrum of Leathers, by whom he had a son and successor,

XX. PATRICK, eighth lord Oliphant, who dying without issue, anno 1721, the
honors devolved upon his uncle William, beforementioned, to whom we now
return.

Colonel William Oliphant, second son of the sixth lord, succeeded to the
honors upon the death of his nephew Patrick, and was ninth lord Oliphant; but
he dying without issue,

Francis Oliphant, Esquire; said to be the next heir-male, assumed the titles, and
was tenth lord Oliphant.

He married Mrs. Linly, an English lady of the county of York, and dying
without issue, anno 1748, the honors were then claimed by

William, son of Charles Oliphant, Esquire; one of the clerks of session, who
thereby became the eleventh lord Oliphant; but he dying also without issue,
anno 1751, the titles are now claimed by

David Oliphant of Bachilton, Esquire;.

ARMS.
Gules, three crescents argent.

CREST; on a wreath, an unicorn's head couped argent, armed and maned or.

SUPPORTERS; two elephants proper.

MOTTO; A tout pour voir.

CHIEF SEATS,
Were at Don, in the county of Inverness; at Pittendriech, near Elgin; and
Aberdalgy, in Perth-shire.

SINCLAIR Earl of ORKNEY.
THE surname of Sinclair, or de Sancto Claro, is originally from France, and
sprung from the noble family of St. Clare in that kingdom.

The account of their first settlement in this country, as published in the
appendix to Mr. Nisbet's II. vol. is,

That Waldernus, Jacob Van Ba^^un, M. S. Nishet's append. p. 171.
compte de St. Clare, having married Helena, daughter of the duke of Normandy,
cousin-german of William the Conqueror, came over to England with that great
prince, anno 1066.

That his son William de Sancto Claro came to Scotland soon thereafter, and
being a youth of distinguished merit, was well received by king Malcolm
Canmore, became steward to queen Margaret, obtained from Malcolm a grant of the
lands and barony of Roslin, and several others in the Lothians; and of this
William all the Sinclairs in Scotland are descended.

Certain it is, there were two families of the name of Sinclair that made a
considerable figure in this country soon after that era, viz. the Sinclairs of
Herdmanston, and the Sinclairs of Roslin; and as this illustrious house is
descended of the latter, we shall confine these memoirs to the descendants of
that family. Nisbet's append. p. 172.


I. Sir WILLIAM SINCLAIR, steward to queen Margaret, and said to have obtained
the lands and barony of Roslin, as above, lived many years after 1100, and was
father of

II. WILLIAM SINCLAIR, second baron of Roslin.

He ^lourished in the reign of king David I. Ibidem.
who succeeded to the crown of Scotland, anno 1124, and died in 1153.

He got the lands of Roslin confirmed to him by that good prince, and married a
daughter of the earl of March, Nisbet's appendix.
by whom he had a son and successor,

III. Sir WILLIAM SINCLAIR, third baron of Roslin.

He made a great figure in the reign of king William the Lion, who succeeded to
the crown of Scotland, anno 1165, and died in 1214.

He got the lands and barony of Roslin confirmed to him ( Willielmo de Sancto
Claro; Ibidem.
militi) anno 1180.

He made a donation to the monastery of Newbottle, Chartulary of Newbottle, p.
52.
of one merk sterling yearly, pro salute animae suae, confirmed by king William
before the year 1200.

This sir William is witness in a charter of Thomas Maule, confirming a
donation of Radulphus Masculus, Ibid. p. 77.
or Maule, his grandfather, about the year 1200.

He had issue a son,

IV. Sir HENRY SINCLAIR of Roslin, who succeeded him, and is witness in many
charters and donations of king Alexander II. who succeeded king William, anno
1214.

In the beginning of that prince's reign, he is mentioned in a donation to the
monks of Newbottle, Ibid. p. 94.
by William de Carruthers; and in another by William de Gourlay to the same
monastery.

In a confirmation charter of William bishop of St. Andrews, of a donation to
the monastery of Paisley, Chartulary of Paisley, p. 17.
dominus Henricus Sinclair miles, is a witness, in or before the year 1233, in
which year that bishop died.

He is said to have married a daughter of the earl of Mar, by whom he had a
son and heir,

V. Sir WILLIAM SINCLAIR of Roslin, Chartulary of Newbottle, p. 181.
who is witness in a donation of king Alexander II. to the monastery of
Newbottle, anno 1243.

He is also mentioned in a donation to the same monastery by William de Cheyne,
Ibid. p. 165.
wherein he is designed dominus Willielmus de Sancto Claro, in the eleventh
year of king Alexander III. anno 1260.

He died about the year 1270, and was succeeded by his son,

VI. Sir WILLIAM SINCLAIR of Roslin, who was one of the greatest men of his
time.

He was appointed high sheriff of the shire of Edinburgh, anno 1271, which
office he enjoyed as long as he lived. Of this there are innumerable documents
in the chartularies of Dunfermline, Newbottle, Kelso, etc.

He got a charter of confirmation (which we have seen) of the lands and barony
of Roslin, Chart. penes Willielmum Sinclair de Roslin, armigerum.
Catticune, etc. from king Alexander III. pro servitio dimidii unius militis,
anno regni 31 mo, to which Robert bishop of Glasgow, William Fraser, chancellor
of Scotland, Gilbert earl of Angus, and many others, are witnesses, anno 1280.

He is one of the magnates Scotiae, who obliged themselves to receive, Rymer,
tom. II. p. 266.
and defend for their lawful queen and sovereign, Margaret, daughter of Eric
king of Norway, in case of king Alexander's death without male-issue, anno
1284; Fordun, vol. II. p. 127.
and that same year he was appointed one of the ambassadors extraordinary, to
negotiate king Alexander III.'s marriage, etc.

He was one of the Scotch nobles chosen on the part of king Robert Bruce,
Rymer, tom. II. p. 553.
in his competition for the crown with John Baliol, anno 1292.

He was afterward, with many of his countrymen, Ibid. p. 644.
compelled to swear allegiance to king Edward I. of England, anno 1294.

He left issue three sons.

1. Sir Henry, his heir.

2. William, Keith's bishops. Abercrombie etc. Fordun, vol. II. p. 259.
a man of great parts and spirit, and a true patriot; for though he was bred to
the church, and bishop of Dunkeld, yet he often put on the sword, and fought
with great success, in defense of the liberties of his country.

3. Sir Gregory, Chart. penes dom. Johan. Sinclair de Longformacus, et in pub
archiv.
ancestor of the Sinclairs of Longformacus, in Berwick-shire.

Sir William died about the year 1300, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. Sir HENRY SINCLAIR of Roslin, who was ordered by king Edward I. of
England, to attend him with his horses, Rymer, tom. III. p. 14.
arms, etc. anno 1307; but he did not think fit to obey him: being a great
patriot, and firm friend of king Robert Bruce, he obtained from that prince,
Charta penes Willielmum Sinclair de Roslin.
for his good and faithful services, a grant of the muir of Pentland, and
several other lands, all erected into a free forrestry, for payment of a tenth
part of one soldier yearly, anno regni 11 mo, anno dom. 1317.

He was one of the Scotch nobles who signed that famous letter to the pope,
Fordun, vol. II. p. 275.
asserting the independency of Scotland, and is then designed dominus Henricus
Sinclair, panetarus Scotiae, etc. anno 1320.

He was also one of the guarantees of a treaty with the English, Rymer, tom.
III. p. 1025.
anno 1323.

He acquired a part of the lands of Gourton, for a certain sum of money paid to
the proprietor in his great necessity, Indenture, penes magistrum Sinclair de
Roslin.
etc. This appears by an indenture entered into, in presence of William bishop
of Dunkeld, inter Gilbertum de Gardino dominum de Gourton, et Eustachiam
sponsam ejus, ex part una, et dominum Henricum de Sancto Claro, militem, ex
altera, etc. dated at Roslin, anno 1328.

Sir Henry died soon thereafter, and was succeeded by his son,

VIII. Sir WILLIAM SINCLAIR of Roslin, a worthy patriot, and always a steady
defender of the liberties of his country.

He also, Fordun, vol. II. p. 275.
with his father, signed the letter to the pope, anno 1320.

And as he had been a close companion of the brave sir James Douglas, and had a
share of the glory he obtained in many signal victories over the enemies of his
country, he also accompanied him when he went with king Robert Bruce's heart to
Jerusalem, Ibid. p. 303.
and with him lost his life fighting against the Infidels on his return home,
anno 1331, leaving issue an infant son,

IX. Sir WILLIAM SINCLAIR of Roslin, who succeeded him.

He was too young to be concerned in the wars that happened in the beginning of
the reign of king David Bruce; but he soon appeared to be possessed of the
virtues and abilities of his worthy ancestors, and was employed in several
negotiations of importance, when but a young man.

He was appointed one of the ambassadors extraordinary to the court of England,
to treat super negotiis David de Bruce, etc. and obtained a safe conduct from
king Edward III. for himself and sixty horsemen in his retinue, Rymer, tom. VI.
p. 82, and 108.
anno 1358, and is then designed Willielmus de Sancto Claro, dominus de Roslin,
etc.

He married Isabel, one of the daughters and coheirs of Malise earl of
Strathearn, Crawfurd's peerage, and Chart. in pub. archiv.
by Mathilda, only daughter and heiress of Magnus earl of Orkney and Zetland,
by whom he had two sons, and one daughter.

1. Sir Henry, afterward earl of Orkney.

2. David, who got a charter from king Robert III. confirming a charter and
grant of his brother Henry earl of Orkney, of the lands of Newburgh and
Auchdale, Chart. in rotul. Rob. III.
in Aberdeen-shire, to the said David, and the heirs of his body; which
failing, to return to the granter, and that in full of all claim or title he
had to any part of Orkney or Zetland, in right of his mother Isabel, etc. The
charter is dated in April, and the confirmation in June 1392.

His daughter, Margaret, was married, 1st, to Thomas Stewart earl of Angus;
Crawfurd's peerage,
2dly, to sir William Sinclair of Herdmanston, and had issue to both.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. Sir HENRY St. CLAIR of Roslin, who was created earl of Orkney by Haco king
of Norway, Torpheus's hist. of Orkney.
anno 1379, which title was confirmed to him by king Robert II. that same year.
This appears by a charter granted by that prince, dilecto consanguineo suo
Henrico, comiti Orcadiae, Chart. in rotul. Robert II.
domino Roslin, terrarum baroniae de Roslin, proceeding upon his own
resignation, etc.

He is likeways mentioned under the same designation, in the grant he made to
his brother David, confirmed by king Robert III. as beforementioned.

He was one of the Scotch commissioners appointed to treat with the English,
Rymer, tom. VII. p. 712.
and is then also designed Henry de Sinclair, earl of Orkney, anno 1392.

He married Florentina, daughter of the king of Denmark, with whom he got a
great estate in Norway.

He was also lord of Zetland, and was created duke of Oldenburgh, Nisbet's
appendix.
by Christian first of that name, king of Denmark, and knight of the thistle,
cockle, and golden fleece, by the different sovereigns of these several orders.

He married, 2dly, Jean, daughter of sir Walter Haliburton lord of Dirleton,
and left issue two sons, and three daughters.

1. Henry, his heir.

2. John, who got a charter from Henry earl of Orkney and lord of Sinclair,
Johanni de Sancto Claro fratri suo germano; Chart. in pub. archiv.
et haeredibus suis, of the lands of Smeliehope, Loganhouse, etc. in the shire
of Edinburgh. The charter is dated at Roslin the 12th of September, and
confirmed by Robert duke of Albany governor of Scotland, 24th of the same
month, anno 1410.

1st daughter, Chart. in archivis fam. de Perth.
lady Elizabeth, married to sir John Drummond of Stobhall, ancestor of the
family of Perth.

2. Lady Mary, married to sir Thomas Somerville of Carnwath, ancestor of lord
Somerville.

3. Lady Jean, married to sir John Forrester of Corstorphin.

He died about the year 1400, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. HENRY, second earl of Orkney, a great patriot, and strenuous defender of
the liberties of his country.

He was appointed lord high admiral of Scotland, and governor to the young king
James I. but was taken prisoner by the Engglish, together with his royal pupil,
in their voyage to France.

The king was detained near twenty years in England; Rymer, tom. VIII. p. 415,
429, etc.
but the earl obtained liberty to return to Scotland, upon his finding security
to return to England when called, anno 1405. We find he obtained a safe conduct
to go to England, Rymer tom. IX. p. 341.
anno 1416.

He married lady Egidia Douglas, daughter and sole heiress of William lord
Liddisdale and earl of Nithsdale, by lady Egidia Stewart his spouse, the
beautiful daughter of king Robert II. Fordun, vol. II. p. 404.
He is then designed Henricus de Sancto Claro, Orcadiae comes secundus, et
panetarius Scotiae, etc.

By her he had a son,

William, his heir, -- and a daughter, Lady Beatrix.

He died anno 1420, Ibid. p. 460.
and was succeeded by

XII. WILLIAM, third earl of Orkney, who was one of the ambassadors appointed
to negotiate king James's liberty, Rymer, tom. X. p. 125, and 306.
anno 1421, and was afterward one of the hostages for his ransom, anno 1424;
and being a man of extraordinary parts and integrity, became a mighty favorite
of king James II. Lives of the offic. of state.
managed all his negotiations of the greatest importance with fidelity and
honor, and was by far the greatest subject for wealth, power, and interest, in
the kingdom.

He founded the collegiate church of Roslin, for a provost and seven prebends,
and nobly endowed it, anno 1441. It is a beautiful structure, and as it is
little defaced, the architecture of it is justly admired to this day.

In the year 1453, or beginning of 1454, he was constituted lord chancellor of
the kingdom, Rymer, tom XI. p. 394.
and when a truce was concluded with the English, William earl of Orkney,
chancellor of Scotland, is one of the guarantees of the treaty, in June 1454.

In the year 1455, he obtained, from his majesty, a grant of the earldom of
Caithness, then in the crown by the death of George Crichton earl thereof (
vide page 112th of this work) whereupon he was afterward designed earl of
Orkney and Caithness. Lives of the offic. of state, et chart. in pub. archiv.


In 1458, this great earl resigned the chancellor's office, though still in
great favor with he majesly, Ibidem.
which was immediately conferred upon George Shoreswood, bishop of Brechin.

He was appointed one of the commissioners to negotiate a treaty with the
English, Rymer, tom. XI. p. 423.
in 1459, and is then designed comes Orcadiae et Cathamae.

In the beginning of the reign of king James III. he was again appointed one of
the ambassadors extraordinary to the court of England, Ibid. p. 476.
anno 1461.

He got charters under the great seal, Willielmo comiti Orcadiae et Cathaniae,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
domino Sim,^^ir, etc. of many lands, lordships, and baronies, inter 1450 et
1462.

In the year 1471, he made a surrender of the earldom of Orkney in favors of
king James III. Record. of parliament, and Haddington's Collections in the
lawiers library, Edinr.
which was annexed to the crown by act of parliament; but what he got in lieu
thereof, does not appear upon record, though it is most certain there was no
forfeiture in the case; for we find him soon thereafter negotiating affairs of
state.

He was appointed one of the ambassadors extraordinary to the court of England,
Rymer, tom. XI. p. 774.
and is then designed only, William earl of Caithness, anno 1473.

This noble earl married, 1st, lady Margaret, daughter of Archibald fourth earl
of Douglas, by whom he had a son,

William, who got from his father the lands of Newburgh in Aberdeen-shire, and
was ancestor of lord Sinclair's family. Vide that title; -- also a daughter,

Lady Catharine, married to Alexander duke of Albany.

He married, 2dly, Marjory, daughter of Alexander Sutherland of Dunbeath, by
whom he had four sons, and four daughters.

1. Oliver.

2. William.

The de^cendants of these two have always contended for the seniority.

To his son William he resigned the earldom of Caithness, anno 1476, vide that
title.

To his son sir Oliver he gave by far the greatest part of his estate, as will
be mentioned hereafter. Hay's collections, ad ann. 1498.


The earl's third son was sir David Sinclair of Sivenburgh.

4. John Sinclair, bishop of Caithness.

1st daughter, lady Eleanora, married to John Stewart earl of Athole.

2. Lady Marian, married to sir John Houston of that ilk.

3. Lady Elizabeth, who was second wife to sir David Boswell of Balmuto, to
whom she had a son David, first of the Boswells of Auchinleck, in Air-shire.

4. Lady Marjory.

We now return to sir Oliver, beforementioned, who obtained from his father,
the earl of Caithness, all the lands he was possessed of befouth the river Tay,
viz. the lands and barony of Roslin, the paternal estate of the family, the
lands of Pentland, Pentlandmuir, the lands of Cousland and Carberry, the barony
of Herbertshire in Stilling-shire, the lands and barony of Ravenferaig, Dubbs,
Dyfart, etc. in Fife-shire, which last he afterward resigned in favors of his
eldest brother William, only son of his father's first marriage, above
observed; and of this sir Oliver, William Sinclair of Roslin, Esquire; is now the
undoubted respresentative in a direct maleline. Vide vol. II. of this work,
title Roslin.

HEPBURN Duke of ORKNEY.
JAMES HEPBURN, fifth earl of Bothwel (whose descent is fully deduced under the
title of Hepburn earl of Bothwel, page 83d, etc. of this work, to which we
refer our readers) in the troublesome reign of queen Mary, being one of the
greatest men in the kingdom, her majesty was advised, by a great number of her
nobility, to take him for her husband, under pretense that, by his power and
authority, the animosities then subsisting amongst her subjects might in some
measure be allayed, her majesty thereupon created him duke of Orkney, in the
year 1567.

He afterward had the honor to be married to her majesty; but it was no
sooner done, than the very persons that advised the marriage, took measures to
destroy both the queen and her husband, which they at last effectually
accomplished.

The duke of Orkney was accused of having been accessory to the murder of king
Henry, the queen's former hu^band: he was tried by his peers, and acquitted;
but soon thereafter his enemies, being greatly increased in numbers and power,
he was again accused of the same crime, and was obliged to fly the kingdom. He
took refuge in Denmark, was protected by the king thereof till he died, anno
1577; and having no issue, the title of Orkney again returned to the crown.

STEWART Earl of ORKNEY.
1. SIR ROBERT STEWART of Strathdon, a natural son of king James V. obtained a
grant of the crown lands of Orkney and Zetland from queen Mary, in 1565.

King James VI. erected these lands into an earldom, and created this sir
Robert, earl of Orkney, by patent dated 28th October 1581.

He then got charters under the great seal, terrarum de Orkney et Zetland,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
cum insulis ad easd. s^ectan. also the island of Canna, etc. etc. Roberto
comiti de Orkney, etc. in 1581 and 1582.

He married lady Jean Kennedy, daughter of Gilbert fourth earl of Cassilis,
Stewart's hist. of the royal family.
by whom he had four sons, and four daughters.

1. Patrick, his heir.

2. John, lord Kincleven, and earl of Carrick, vide page 132d of this work.

3. Sir James Stewart, knight, who was one of the gentlemen of the bedchamber
to king James VI. and died without issue.

4. Sir Robert Stewart, who got a charter under the great seal, of several
lands in 1600.

1st daughter, lady Mary, married to Patrick, seventh lord Gray.

2. Lady Jean, married to Patrick, first lord Lindores.

3. Lady Elizabeth, married to sir James Sinclair of Murthel, ancestor of the
earl of Caithness.

4. Lady Barbara, married to -- Halcro of that ilk, of the island of
South-Ronaldsay in the Orkneys.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. PATRICK earl of Orkney, who married a daughter of William lord Livingston,
and got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Patricio comiti de Orkney, totius comitatus et dominii de Orkney et Zetland,
etc. etc. in the years 1599 and 1600.

He became a very turbulent subject, and at last broke out into open rebellion
against his lawful sovereign, who had been his great benefactor, for which he
was apprehended, tried for treason, ^ound guilty, condemned, and beheaded at
Edinburgh, on 6th February 1614, whereby the title of Orkney again returned to
the crown.

HAMILTON Earl of ORKNEY.
WILLIAM DOUGLAS earl of Selkirk, eldest son of the second marriage, of William
marquis of Douglas, married Anne duchess of Hamilton, was created duke, and by
her he had a numerous issue. 1. James, afterward duke of Hamilton. 2. Lord
William.

3. Charles, earl of Selkirk. 4. John earl of Rutherglen. 5. George, earl of
Orkney, of whom afterward.

For the other children, vide title duke of Hamilton.

1. GEORGE, fifth son of William and Anne, duke and duchess of Hamilton,
betaking himself to a military life, rose to the highest rank in the army, and
was inferior to none of his cotemporaries, for his knowledge in the art of war.

He remarkably distinguished himself for his bravery and conduct, at the
battles of the Boyne, Aghrim, Steenkirk, Landen, Audenarde, Ramellies, Mons,
etc. also at the sieges of Athlone, Limerick, and Namur, at the attack of which
last place, he was made a brigadier general by king William.

He was afterward, in reward of his merit and faithful services, Diploma in
cancellaria, haered. masc. ex corp. ejus; quibus deficientibus, haeredibus
quibuscunque.
raised to the dignity of the peerage, by the titles of earl of Orkney,
viscount Kirkwall, and baron Dechmont, by patent to him, and the heirs-male of
his body; which failing, to his heirs whatever, dated 3d January 1696.

In the first of queen Anne, he was made a major general, and immediately
thereafter a lieutenant general.

In February 1703, he was made a knight of the most ancient order of the
thistle.

He was chosen one of the sixteen Scotch peers to the second British parliament
in 1708, and was re-elected to every parliament thereafter, as long as he lived.

In 1710, he was nominated one of her majesty's privy council, and was made a
general of the foot in Flanders, anno 1712.

In 1714, he was appointed one of the lords of the bedchamber to king George
I. and governor of Virginia.

In the beginning of the next reign, he was promoted to the rank of a field
marishal, and made governor of the castle of Edinburgh.

He married Elizabeth, eldest daughter of sir Edward Villiers, and sister of
Edward earl of Jersey, by whom he had three daughters.

1. Lady Anne, afterward countess of Orkney.

2. Lady Frances, married to sir Thomas Lumley-Saunderson, knight of the bath,
afterward earl of Scarborough.

3. Lady Harriot, married to John lord Boil, afterward earl of Orrery and
Cork.

The earl dying without male issue anno 1736, his estate and honors, according
to the tenor of the abovementioned patent, devolved upon his eldest daughter,

II. Lady ANNE HAMILTON, who thereupon became countess of Orkney.

She married William Obrien earl of Inchiquin of the kingdom of Ireland, by
whom she had a numerous issue, whereof only two daughters survived.

1. Lady Mary.

2. Lady Anne.

III. Lady MARY, now countess of Orkney.

ARMS.
Qarterly; 1st, azure, a ship at anchor within a double tressure, with
flowers-de-lis or; 2d and 3d, the quartered arms of Hamilton; and in the 4th,
the arms of Douglas.

CREST; in a ducal coronet, an oak fructuated, as in the arms of Hamilton.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter side, an antelope argent, his horns, ducal collar,
chain, and hoofs or; on the sinister, a stag proper, attired, collared,
chained, and hoofed, as in the dexter.

MOTTO; Thorough.

CHIEF SEATS.
At Clifden and Taplowcourt, both in Buckinghamshire.

MACGILL Viscount OXENFORD.
THE surname of Macgill is said to be of great antiquity in the south and west
of Scotland, Martin's collections, vol. II. p. 385. Nisbet. vol. I. p. 358.
and that there were several families of that name who had considerable
possessions in Galloway, Carrick, etc. in very early times.

The immediate ancestor of this noble family was,

I. JAMES MACGILL, who, in the reign of king James IV. Martin's collections.
was proprietor of the lands of Newton, Dalgavel, Glenquichen, etc. in the west
of Scotland, which lands he sold, and retired to Edinburgh.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of -- Cunninghame of Caprington, by whom he had
a son and successor,

II. Sir JAMES MACGILL, who was provost of Edinburgh, enjoyed all the highest
offices of that metropolis in the reign of king James V. and was amongst the
first men of rank in Scotland who embraced the reformed religion.

He acquired some lands in the neighborhood of Edinburgh, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
anno 1537, upon which he got a charter of confirmation, under the great seal,
from king James V. "to him and Helen Wardlaw his spouse, and their heirs,"
dated 7th September 1538.

By the said Helen, a daughter of Wardlaw of Torie, an ancient family in the
county of Fife, he left issue two sons.

1. James, ancestor of the Macgills of Rankeillor, Ibidem.
which is instructed by many charters under the great seal; and of him Arthur
Macgill, now of Kemback, Esquire; is the male representative.

2. David, progenitor of this family, to whose issue we confine these memoirs.

III. Mr. DAVID MACGILL, second son of sir James, was bred to the law, became
eminent in that profession, and was one of the most famous barristers of his
time.

He first acquired the barony of Nisbet, which appears by his charter and
sasine of these lands, Ibidem.
anno 1561.

He then purchased the lands and barony of Cranston-Riddel in Mid-Lothian,
Ibidem.
which afterward became the chief title of his family.

He was made king's advocate anno 1582, which office he enjoyed till his death,
Ibidem.
and acquitted himself with great reputation for knowledge, candor, and
integrity.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of James Forrester of Corstorphin, ancestor of
lord Forrester, by whom he had two sons, and two daughters.

1. David, his heir.

2. Laurence, who was bred to the law, and made a good figure at the bar. He
died without issue.

1st daughter, Elizabeth, married, 1st, to -- Logan of Restalrig; Charta penes
comi^^m de Ca^^lis.
2dly, to sir Thomas Kennedy of Culzean, Bart. ancestor of the present earl of
Cassilis.

2. Jean, married to -- Ross of Balneil, in the shire of Wigton.

He died in an advanced age, anno 1596, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. DAVID MACGILL of Cranston-Riddel, who, being also bred to the law,
acquired great knowledge in that profession, and was one of the senators of the
college of justice.

He married Mary, daughter of sir William Sinclair of Herdmanston, Crawfurd's
peerage.
by whom he had two sons, and one daughter.

1. David, his heir.

2. Sir James, who carried on the line of this family, of whom afterward.

His daughter, Margaret, married to James, second son of William first lord
Cranston, ancestor of the present lord Cranston.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. DAVID MACGILL of Cranston-Riddel, Crawfurd's peerage, Cambden, etc.
who was also one of the judges of session in the end of the reign of king
James VI. but dying without issue, was succeeded by his brother,

V. Sir JAMES MACGILL of Cranston-Riddel, who, being a man of great parts and
learning, Chart. in pub. archiv.
was highly esteemed by king Charles I. who created him a baronet, anno 1627,
and appointed him one of the senators of the college of justice, anno 1630.

He obtained from his majesty a grant of the teinds, parsonage, and vicarage of
the lands of Nisbet, Ibidem.
and others, in the shires of Haddington and Edinburgh, anno 1631; also the
teinds, parsonage, and vicarage of the lands and barony of Pencaitland, and
others, anno 1636; likeways a charter of the lands and barony of Cousland, etc.
in February 1639; his author being George, brother's son and heir of sir Hew
Herries of Cousland, which sir Hew obtained a grant of these lands from king
James VI. for the noble services he did his majesty at Perth (Gowrie's
conspiracy) anno 1600.

All the above grants and charters are confirmed and ratified in parliament,
Minutes of parliament, ad ann. 1641.
anno 1641.

He was also in the same year appointed, by parliament, Rescinded acts of parlt.
one of the lords of session for life, and one of the commissioners of
exchequer, 1st February 1645.

Though he appears to have been engaged on the parliament's side, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
in the unhappy reign of king Charles I. yet king Charles II. was so much
convinced of his loyalty, Report of the lords of session, etc. ad haeredes
masculos taliae et pr^visionis quoscunque.
and the integrity of his heart, that he raised him to the dignity of the
peerage, by the titles of viscount Oxfurd, lord Macgill of Cousland, etc. by
patent to his heirs-male of tailzi^ and provision whatever, dated 19th April
1651.

After the restoration, he got charters under the great seal, Jacobo vicecomiti
de Oxf^rd, Chart. in pub. archiv.
domino Macgill de Co^sland, of the lands of Cranston, and several others, in
the years 1661 and 1662.

He married, 1st, Catharine, daughter of sir John Cockburn of Ormiston, by whom
he had two daughters.

1. Elizabeth, married to Patrick Hamilton of Preston, as will be mentioned
hereafter.

2. Anne, married to sir James Richardson of Smeaton.

He married, 2dly, Christian, daughter of sir William Livingston of Kilsyth, by
whom he had a son,

Robert, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Christian, married, 1st, to Alexander Crawfurd of Carse; 2dly, to George Ross
of Galston.

He died anno 1663, and was succeeded by his son,

VI. ROBERT, second viscount Oxenford, who married lady Henriet Livingston,
daughter of George third earl of Linlithgow, by whom he had a son,

George, master of Oxenford, who died before his father without issue, anno
1701; -- also two daughters.

1. Christian, who became her father's heir.

2. Henriet, married to James Hamilton of Orbieston, as hereafter.

He dying without male-issue, anno 1706, was succeeded in his estate and
honors by his eldest daughter,

VII. CHRISTIAN, viscountess of Oxenford, who married William Maitland, Esquire;
son of Charles, third earl of Lauderdale, to whom she had a son,

VIII. ROBERT, who, in right of his mother, succeeded to the titles of
Oxenford, and was third viscount.

But these honors were also claimed by James Macgill of Rankeillor, the
heir-male, being descended in a direct male-line from James Macgill, eldest son
of the first sir James in this account, and uncle to the patentee.

This Robert and that James both gave in lists, Report of the lords of session.
and voted with the peers at an election in 1733; but protested against one
another.

The said James also presented a petition to his majesty, claiming that
peerage, as heir-male to the patence, which was laid before the house of peers;
but it seems the lords found, that he had not sufficiently made out his title,
whereby this Robert enjoyed it as long as he lived; but he dying without issue
anno 1755, and the said James of Rankeillor dying also without issue, Arthur
Macgill, now of Kemback, is heir-male and representative, as before observed.

The next heir of line was,

Henriet Macgill, second daughter of the second viscount of Oxenford, married
to James Hamilton of Orbieston, beforementioned. She also assumed the titles
of Oxenford; but dying without issue, the honors have never been claimed
since, though the representation now devolves upon Thomas Hamilton of Fala,
Esquire; the next heir of line, being lineally descended of the first viscount's
eldest daughter, to whom we now return.

VI. ELIZABETH MACGILL, eldest daughter of James first viscount Oxenford,
married to Patrick Hamilton of Preston, as before observed, and had issue a son,

VII. Colonel THOMAS HAMILTON of Preston, who succeeded to the lands of Fala,
which has ever since been the chief title of his family.

He married Elizabeth Stewart, a daughter of the house of Grantully, by whom he
had a son,

Thomas, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Elizabeth, married to Malcolm Gibson, Esquire; a son of the family of Duric.

He was succeeded by his son,

VIII. THOMAS HAMILTON of Fala, Esquire; who, since he became heir of line of the
family of Oxenford, designs himself Hamilton-Macgill of Fala and Oxenford.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of sir John Dalrymple of Cousland, Bart. one of
the principal clerks of session, by whom he has issue one daughter,

IX. ELIZABETH, married to John Darymple, Esquire; younger of Cousland, advocate,
by whom she has issue a son,

Thomas, -- and a daughter,

Elizabeth.

ARMS.
Gules, three martlets or.

CREST; a phoenix in flames, proper.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter side, a horse at liberty argent, gorged with a
viscount's coronet, with a chain thereto affixed, ma^ed and hoosed or; on the
sinister, a bull sable, collared and chained as the former.

MOTTO; Sine fine.

CHIEF SEAT,
At Cranston, in Mid-Lothian.

VALONIIS Lord of PANMURE.
THE surname of Valoniis is originally from France, is local, and was first
assumed by the proprietors of the viscounty and town of Valoines, Cambden,
Hollinshed, and du Chesne's hist. Norman script.
in the country of Constantine in Normandy, where they had large possessions.

The immediate ancestor of this noble family was,

I. Sir PETER de VALONIIS, a man of the first rank in Normandy, who accompanied
William the Conqueror to England, anno 1066, and was one of his chief
commanders.

And as that great prince divided the conquered lands amongst his brave
officers according to their merit, Dugdale's baronage, and Lives of the ^ffic.
of state.
so this sir Peter had a large share in six different counties, viz. Essex,
Norfolk, Suffolk, Hartford, Cambridge, and Lincolnshire.

He being possessed of no less than fifty-seven lordships, Ibidem.
his posterity became peers, or barons majores, and were amongst the most
powerful subjects in England.

Sir Peter de Valoniis was high sheriff of Essex, Ibidem.
and had his chief residence at the castle of Orford in Suffolk.

He lived long after William the Conqueror and his son William Rufus, Ibidem.
and was in great favor with king Henry I. from whom he obtained the manors of
Essenden, Bedgeford, the mills of Hartford, etc.

And being no less an able statesman than a brave soldier, he was joined in
commission with the bishop of Lincoln, Monast. Anglican.
and others, to accommodate the differences concerning the church of Rippon,
which was done to the satisfaction of all parties.

He was a liberal benefactor to the religious, and, with consent of Abreda his
wife, he founded and largely endowed the priory of Benham in Norfolk, for the
salvation of the souls of William the Conqueror, Maud his queen, for the good
state of king Henry I. etc. etc.

In the foundation charter are these remarkable words; Ibidem.
quod beneficium et ele^mosinam specialiter facio pro anima domini mei
Willielmi regis, qui Angliam acquisivit, et qui mihi dedit illud manerium, etc.
etc.

By the said Abreda, Dugdale's ba^onage of England.
daughter of Hubert lord of Rye, and sister of Eude steward to king Henry I. he
left issue a son and successor,

II. ROGER, second lord de Valoniis, who obtained from Maud, the empress, a
confirmation of the manors of Essenden and Bedgeford, Ibidem.
with all the other lands, whereof his father died possessed and saised, etc.

He also confirmed his father's donations to the monks at Benham, Monast.
Anglican.
etc.

By Agnes his wife, Dugdale.
he left issue six sons.

1. Peter, his heir.

2. Robert, who succeeded his brother.

3. Geoffry de Valoniis, lord of Burton in Yorkshire, Ibid. and lives of the
officers of state.
who married Emma de Humet, daughter of the constable of Normandy; but died
without issue, anno 1190, whereupon his estates in England devolved upon
Gunnora, his eldest brother's daughter, and Philip de Valoniis his younger
brother, lord of Panmure.

4. John de Valoniis, who devoted himself to the service of the church.

5. Philip de Valoniis, of whom more hereafter.

6. Roger de Valoniis, who is witness to his brother Peter's confirmation of
Benham. Monast Anglican.
He afterward came to Sotland with his brother Philip, Chartulary of Arbroath,
penes comitem de Panmure.
was designed lord of Kilbride, and is witness in many charters of king William
the Lion.

He died in the reign of king Stephen (who got possession of the crown of
England, in the year 1135) and was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. PETER, third lord de Valoniis, who confirmed his grand-father's donations
to Benham, Monast. Anglican.
and married Gunred de Warren, daughter of William earl of Warren and Surry, by
Elizabeth his wife, daughter of Hugh the great earl of Vermandoes, Dugdale, and
extinct peerage of England, vol. I. p. 363.
and widow to Robert earl of Mellent; but dying without issue his estate and
honors devolved upon his brother,

III. ROBERT, fourth lord de Valoniis, who confirmed his predecessors donations
to the priory of Benham. Monast. Anglican.


Upon the general assessment of England by king Henry II. this Roger appeared
to be possessed of an imense estate, Dugdale.
anno 1166.

He died in the year 1184, leaving issue by Hawi^e his wife, only one daughter,

VI. GUNNORA de VALONIIS, who was married to Robert lord Fitzwalter, general
and marishal of the army of the rebellious barons. Ibidem.
He got with her a vast estate in England, and by her, who was his second wife,
he had only one daughter,

V. CHRISTIAN, married to William de Mandeville, Extinct peerage of England,
vol. II. p. 24.
earl of Essex; but she dying without issue, in her ended the whole line of the
second son of Roger second lord de Valoniis; and there being no succession of
the first, third, and fourth sons of the said Roger, as before observed, the
representation of that most noble family devolved upon the descendants of
Philip the fifth son, beforementioned, to whom we now return.

III. PHILIP, fifth son of Roger second lord de Valoniis, came to Scotland in
the end of the reign of king Malcolm IV. who succeeded to the crown anno 1153.

He being a man of great parts and merit, became a mighty favorite of king
William, who succeeded king Malcolm, Chartulary of Paisley, Arbroath,
Dunfermline, New bottle, etc.
anno 1165.

He appears to have been much about that prince's court, and is witness to most
of his charters and donations to the religious.

After the king had the misfortune to be taken prisoner at the battle of
Alnwick, Rymer, Roger Hovedon, etc.
this Philip de Valoniis was one of the hostages for his ransom, anno 1174.

The king, in reward of his merit, and good and faithful services, Chart. penes
comitem de Panmure,
made him a grant of the baronies of Panmure and Benvine, in Forfarshire, which
first became the chief seat and title of his family.

And as his majesty thought he could never do too much for so good and faithful
a subject, Lives of the offic. of state.
he appointed him lord great chamberlain of Scotland, in 1180, of which there
are innumerable documents in our records and chartularies.

As he was possessed of lands in many different counties in Scotland,
Chartulary of Dun^ermline, Melross, Paisley, Newbottle, etc.
besides that of Forfar, he made several donations to the religious at Melrose,
Paisley, Dunfermline, etc.

He also gave a tossed and a^re of land in his barony of Panmure to the monks at
Coupar, which was afterward confirmed by his descendant, sir Thomas Maule of
Panmure, in 1456.

He succeeded also to part of his brother Geoffrey's possessions in England, as
before observed, whereby he became possessed of a large estate in that kingdom
as well as in Scotland.

Upon the accession of king Alexander II. to the crown, this Philip de Valoniis
was again appointed great chamberlain of Scotland at the first conventus
procerum held by that prince in Edinburgh, Chronicle of Melrose.
anno 1214; but he died upon the 5th November 1215, and was interred with great
solemnity in the abbay church of Melrose, leaving issue a son,

William, his heir, -- and two daughters.

1. Sibilla, Extinct peerages of England, vol. II. p. 102.
married to Robert Stuteville, of the kingdom of England, who got with her a
considerable estate in Cumberland; but their only son Robert died without issue.

2. Lora, married to Henry de Baliol, chamberlain of Scotland, grand-uncle to
king John Baliol, Charta penes comitem de Panmure.
who got with her some lands in Forfar-shire, lying contiguous to Panmure,
which were afterward purchased back by Peter de Maule, lord of Panmure, and
Christian de Valoniis his spouse, etc.

He was succeeded by his only son,

IV. WILLIAM de VALONIIS, second lord of Panmure, who appears to have been much
at the court of England, Monast. Anglican.
when a young man, and is witness in several deeds in that kingdom, in the
reign of king Richard I. inter 1190 et 1198.

He returned to Scotland in the end of the reign of king William, Chart. penes
comitem de Panmure, printed in the appendix to the lives of the officers of
state; p. 468.
and obtained from that prince a charter of confirmation of the lands and
baronies of Panmure and Benvine, in which are these words; Willie^^nus rex,
etc. quas terras Philippo patri ejus dedi, etc. sicut carta praedicti Philippi
de Valoniis patris sui testatur, etc. etc.

Upon the death of his father, who had served so long as lord chamberlain of
Scotland with fidelity and honor, Lives of the offic. of state, chartulary of
Arbroath, Scoon, etc.
the same office was, by king Alexander II. conferred upon this William his
son, in the year 1215, who enjoyed that great dignity with universal applause
as long as he lived, of which there are many incontestable documents upon
record.

In the third year of king Henry of England, he had the tutory and guardianship
of his nephew Robert de Stuteville, Dugdale's baronage.
lord of Lidel in Cumberland, who was then under age, anno 1218; Chartulary of
Newbottle, Obiit Willielmus de Valoniis apud Kel^how, cujus corpus, etiam
contra bone placitum monachorum ejusdem domus, apud Melro^^ deductum est, et
ibidem honorisi^e sepultum in capitulo monachorum ju^ta sepulchrum patris su^.
but he died at Kelso soon thereafter, and was interred beside his father in
the church of Melrose, anno 1219, leaving issue only one daughter,

V. CHRISTIAN de VALONIIS, his sole heiress, who was designed domina de
Panmure, etc.

She married a worthy Scotch knight of French extraction, viz. sir Peter de
Maule, to whom she brought the estates and dignities of this most noble family,
and of whom the present earl of Panmure is the lineal representative, as is
fully set forth under the title of Maule earl of Panmure.

MAULE Earl of PANMURE.
THAT the noble and illustrious name of Maule is of very great antiquity, is
acknowledged by all our historians, Introduction to Fleming's edition of
Fordun, p. 60.
and our best antiquaries are of opinion, that they are originally from France,
and that a noble family, who had large possessions in that country, assumed
their surname from the town of Maule on the confines of Normandy, which had
been their own property in very early times.

Certain it is the family of Maule made a considerable figure in France before
William the Conqueror came over to England, and flourished with great luster in
that kingdom for many ages thereafter, which will sufficiently appear from what
follows.

I. ANSOLD, Labourer's history of Chamont.
lord of Maule, with Rectrude his wife, made a donation to the priory of St.
Martin de Champs at Paris, anno 1015.

He was succeeded by his son,

II. GUARIN, second lord of Maule, who, with Hersende his wife, is mentioned in
a charter of Robert king of France, Du Chesne's hist. of Montmorancy.
to William abbot of St. Germains, before the year 1031.

He left issue a son and successor,

III. ANSOLD, third lord of Maule, Odericus Vitalis church history.
who being possessed of immense riches; was called dives Parisiensis, etc.

He left issue three sons.

1. Peter, his heir.

2. Guarin de Maule, ancestor of this family, of whom afterward.

3. St^phen de Maule, whose grandson Grimald, was with Godfrey of Bulloigne at
the taking of Jerusalem. Ibidem.


Ansold was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. PETER, 4th lord of Maule, who founded the priory of Bendictine monks at
the town of Maule, Historiae Norman^orum scriptores, p. 587.
to whom he gave his churches of St. Mary, St. Germain, and St. Vincent, with
many other lands, per his charter, dated anno 1076.

He likewise made considerable donations to the monastery at Utica in France.

He made a very great figure with his proceres et milites, Odericus Vitalis.
when he was general of the French army against William II. of England, who had
invaded France, Du Moulin's h^st of Normandy, p. 276.
anno 1098. He obliged him to raise the siege of Montsort, conclude a truce
with France, and return to England.

He married Gundismoth, Lodge's peerage of Irland, p. 183.
of the noble family of Troyes in France, by whom he had four sons and four
daughters.

1. Ansold, his heir.

2. Theobald de Maule.

3. Guarin de Maule.

4. William de Maule.

1st daughter, Nisbet, vol. II. p. 48.
--, married to Badry count de Droux.

2. --, Ibidem.
married to Guacer lord Poissy.

3. --, Ibidem.
married to Hugh lord Voisins, of whom are descended the senescals of Toulouse.

4. --

Lord Peter died at Utica in 1101, Ibidem and Crawfurd's peerage.
was interred in the church there, and succeeded by his eldest son,

V. ANSOLD, fifth lord of Maule, who was a great captain, and gave signal
proofs of his military skill in the wars of Italy and Greece. He was with
Robert duke of Apulia, at the siege of Durazzo, and distinguished himself at
that great battle, where Alexis emperor of Constantinople was overthrown, anno
1106.

He confirmed his father's donations to the priory of Maule, Odericus Vitalis,
p. 589* and 590.
in presence of his barons and knights, whom he caused to do homage to his son
Peter.

He died anno 1118, having married Odeline Mauvoisne, Ni^bet, vol. II. p. 48.
daughter of Radolph lord of Rony, governor of Manto, by whom he had issue a
son,

VI. PETER, sixth lord of Maule, who succeeded him. He was one of the greatest
and most powerful men of his time, was a general in the French army at the
battle of Breneville, and fought against king Henry I. of England, anno 1119.

He was also at the siege of Breteville, accompanied with forty knights, all
his own dependents, anno 1138; Odericus Vitalis, and Du Moulin.
but Lewis the Gross, being je^lous of his greatness and power, ordered his
strong castle of Maule to be demolished.

He married Ada, daughter of the earl of G^^ennes, and niece of the lord
Montmorancy, by whom he had a son and successor,

VII. ROGER, Grand pastoral of Paris, ad ann. 1195.
seventh lord of Maule, who married Idone, daughter of Walon viscount of
Chaumont, by Matilda de Montmorancy his wife, etc. etc.

As a further account of the Maules in France, does not regularly fall within
the plan of this work, but is to be found in many French historians, an
abridgment whereof is in Mr. Nisbet, vol. II. p. 48 and 49, to these we refer
our readers, and shall only add, that this family flourished in France with
much grandeur, till the end of the XIVth century, that Robert the last lord was
killed at the battle of Nicopolis in Hungary, fighting against the Turks, anno
1398. His coat of arms, Nisbet, vol. II. p. 49.
which is the very same with the earl of Panmure's, was set up in Notre Dame
church of Maule, Peerage of Ireland, vol. II. p. 183,etc.
and all his great estate went to his daughter and sole heiress,

Reginolde de Maule, who was married to Simon de Moranvilliers, lord of
Harcourt.

The male line of Peter, eldest son of Ansold, third lord of Maule, thus
ending, the representation of that noble family fell to the descendants of his
brother Guarin, to whom we now return.

I. GUARIN, second son of Ansold, third lord of Maule, progenitor of this noble
family. Being then a younger brother, and a man of great spirit and resolution,
Peerage of Ireland, vol. II. p. 183.
accompanied William the Conqueror to England, anno 1066, where he had a
considerable command, and is particularly named as one of his chief officers in
the roll of Battle-abbey.

And as that great prince shared the lands of England, amongst those who
distinguished themselves in the conquest of it, Holinshed, v. II. p. 296.
Guarin de Maule had the great lordship of Hatton de Cleveland, in Yorkshire
assigned him.

He died before 1100, leaving issue two sons,

Robert.

Stephen.

Which of them was the eldest we shall not pretend to determine, but,

II. ROBERT de MAULE, carried on the line of this family, Monast. Anglican.
vol. II. p, 75.
and with his brother Stephen, made donations to the abbacy of Whitby in
Yorkshire, out of the above lands of Hatton, in the reign of king Henry I.

This Robert having contracted a friendship with king David I. while he resided
in England, came to Scotland with that good prince, Peerage of Ireland.
and meeting with encouragement suitable to his great merit, he settled there,
and left his estate in England to his brother Stephen, whose male line is long
since extinct.

Robert died in Scotland about the year 1130, leaving issue three sons.

1. Sir William.

2. Roger de Maule, ancestor of the family of Panmure, of whom afterward.

3. Radulphus de Masculus, or Maule, who, in the beginning of the reign of king
William, made a donation to the monastery of Newbottle, of part of his lands of
Lochgow, Chartulary (...) Newbottle, p. 74 and 77.
pro salute animae suae, etc. which was afterward confirmed by his grandson
Thomas de Maule, about the year 1210, but we can trace his genealogy no further.

III. Sir WILLIAM de MAULE, who succeeded his father, was likewise in great
favor with, and highly esteemed by king David I. whom he accompanied, (when
but a young man) to the battle of Standard, anno 1138; and, for his gallant
behavior, was, by that generous prince rewarded with the lands and barony of
Foulis in Perthsnire, out of which he made donations to the religious, as shall
be shown hereafter. But we must first observe, that the name of Masculus and
Maule, were promiscuously used in this family for a considerable time.

Willielmus Masculus de Foulis, makes a donation to the priory of St. Andrews,
Chartulary (...) St. Andrews penes com. d^ Panmure.
of some lands in his barony of Foulis, pro salute animae suae, etc. Testibus
Waltero priore Sti. Andreae, comite Duncano, Ricardo nepote dicti Willielmi,
etc.

He was witness also to a charter of Henry, Ibidem.
king David's son, ante annum 1152, in which year that prince died.

In a charter of king William, Willielmo de Haya, Ibidem.
Andrew bishop of Caithness, William de Maulia, etc. are witnesses, in or
before 1184, in which year the bishop d^ed.

In a charter of Duncan earl of Fife of a donation to the priory of St.
Andrews, the witnesses are, Helena comitissa, Willielmus Masculus, Rogerus
Masculus, Ibidem.
etc. Duncan succeeded to the earldom, anno 1154, and died 1203; so this
charter must have been granted within that space.

We shall not trouble our readers with further documents about this William,
though he is mentioned in the chartularies of Newbottle, Kelso, and Coldstream.

He had issue three daughters.

1. --, the eldest, was married to sir Alexander Forgun, without issue.

2. Christian, married to Roger de Mortimer, who got with her part of the
estate of Foulis, Ibidem.
which appears by a charter, Rogeri Mortimer de Foulis, etc. Thomae Parsonae,
nepoti Willielmi Mosculi, etc.

3. Cecilia, married to Walter de Ruthven, ancestor of the earls of Gowrie,
Chart. in pub. archiv. and Chartulary of St. Andrews.
who also got with her part of the estate of Foulis, which appears by a
resignation of his right to the lands of Foulis which fell to him, per decessum
Ceciliae, filiae domini Willielmi Maule, militis, dated in the 13th year of
king Alexander III. anno domini 1262.

Sir William dying without sons, the representation devolved upon his nephew
and heir-male, sir Richard, son of his brother Roger, to whom we now return.

III. ROGER de MAULE, second son of Robert, and brother of sir William, is
mentioned in several charters besides these above-noticed; particularly,

In a charter of Duncan earl of Fife, Chartulary of St. Andrews.
of a donation to the priory of St. Andrews, Rogerus de Maule is a witness.

Also in a charter of Richard de Morville, constable of Scotland, Book of
original charters, penes MacFarlane, vol. I. p. 2.
Henrico de Sancto Claro, Rogerus masculus is a witness, inter 1162 et 1188.

He left issue three sons.

1. Sir Richard.

2. John de Maulia, who is witness to a donation of William bishop of St.
Andrews, Chartulary of St. Andrews.
ecclesiae de Haddington, inter annos 1203 et 1223; also of a donation,
ecclesiae de Scoon; and to another donation of the same bishop.

3. Thomas de Maule, who is designed nephew to the above sir William, Ibidem.
in a charter beforementioned.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. Sir RICHARD de MAULE, who was likeways heir-male to his uncle sir William,
as before-observed, Ibidem.
to whom he is designed nephew in several charters, in the reigns of king
William and king Alexander II. particularly in his donation to the priory of
St. Andrews, before noticed.

He left issue two sons.

1. Sir Peter.

2. William de Maulia, Chartulary of Newbottle.
archdeacon of Lothian, who is witness in many charters in the reign of king
Alexander II. Chartulary of Kelso, p. 48, 49, 50, 51, and 52.
and was likeways designed by the title of Bastenden, which appears by a
donation he made to the monastery of Coldstream, Chartulary of Coldstream, p.
45, 47, etc.
in which Robert de Maule, his nephew, is a witness.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. Sir PETER de MAULE, who, about the year 1224, Lives of the offic. of state,
p. 254. 258, etc.
married Christian de Valoniis, daughter and sole heiress of sir William de
Valoniis, lord of Panmure, great chamberlain of Scotland, in the reign of king
Alexander II. son of sir Philip de Valoniis, lord of Panmure, also great
chamberlain of Scotland, in the reign of king William. By her he got the
baronies of Panmure, and Benvine, etc.

Upon the death of Christian, countess of Essex, grandchild and heiress of
Robert lord de Valoniis in England, without issue, anno 1234, this Christian de
Valoniis, her cousin, became the heir and representative of that noble family,
whereby sir Peter de Maule, in her right, Ibid. p. 259.
succeeded to the great estate and honor of Valoniis, in the counties of
Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridge, Essex, and Hartford, by which he came to have
large possessions both in Scotland and England; but king Edward I. deprived his
grandson, sir Henry Maule, of all his English estates, on account of his great
attachment and firm adherence to king Robert Bruce.

This sir Peter de Maule, who, in the chartulary of Arbroath, Ibid p. 260. and
chart. of Arbroath.
is designed dominus Petrus de Malia, dominus de Panmure, and Christian his
wife, entered into an agreement with the abbot of Arbroath, wherein all their
differences were submitted, in presence of the earl of Buchan, Haddington's
collections.
and others, dated in 1254; and that same year he got a charter from the abbot
and convent of Arbroath, to sir Peter Maule of Panmure, and Christian his wife,
of the lands of Cowan, Tulloch, etc.

By the said Christian Valoniis he left issue two sons.

1. Sir William, his heir.

2. Sir Thomas de Maule, Matthew of Westminster, Abe. cr^mb. Peerage of
Scotland, Ireland, etc. Thomas's history of England, edit. 4. p. 116.
who was governor of the castle of Brechin, which he defended for a long time
against king Edward I. of England, with singular courage and magnanimity, till
at last he was killed, anno 1303, upon which the castle immediately surrendered.

Sir Peter died in the end of the year 1254, and was succeeded by his eldest
son,

VI. Sir WILLIAM de MAULE, designed dominus de Panmure. Charta penes Logie
Wish^rt (...) coll. Rymer, tom. II. p. 570.
He was high sheriff of the county of Forfar at the death of king Alexander
III. and was one of those great barons who swore fealty to king Edward I. for
his lands in that county, anno 1292.

King Edward afterward granted to him a discharge of part of the relief due by
him for his entry, which appears by a mandate from the king, directed to Alan
de Dumfries, chancellor of Scotland, ordering him to expede this discharge to
sir William, under the great seal. The original of this mandate is still
preserved amongst the records in the tower of London; a sac simile whereof,
from the record itself, is published in Mr. R^ddiman's learned preface to
Anderson's diplomata, which, as it is a curiosity of its kind, we have here
inserted at large, viz. " Rex et superior dominus regni Scotiae, Ibid. p. 79.
dilecto sibi magistro Alano de Dumfries, cancellario Scotiae, salut. Quia de
centum viginti et d^abus (...) et december solidis, in quibus dilectus et fidelis
noster Willielmus de Maudia de Panmore, in Scotia, nobis tenebatur pro relivio
suo, pardonavimus eidem Willielmo quater (...) et duas libras et december solidos:
Et de residuis quadraginta libris concessimus ei, quod reddat nobis per manum
camerarii Scotiae, ad festum sancti Martini in hieme proxime futuro, viginti
mercas, et ad festu^e Pentecostes proxime sequens, viginti mercas, et ad festum
sancti Martini in hieme proxime sequens, viginti mercas vobis, mandamus, quod
praedicto camerario per literas nostras, sigillo regimini regni, Scotiae
deputato, signatas, detis in mand^tis, quod praedicto Willielmo de praedictis
quadraginta libris terminos illos hab^re, et sic fieri et in rotulario fact. et
datum aqud Berewick super Twedam 11. die Julii."

By the above mandate it appears, that the relief or valued rent of Panmure was
122 l. 10 s. Principal retours penes com. de Panmure, and records of retours in
pub. arch.
A very great sum in those days, which shows the large extent of the barony,
and that king Edward then gave down to sir William Maule 82 l. 10 s. his
relief, and accepted of 40 l. Which sum of 40 l. continued ever after to be the
valued rent of the barony of Panmure, and the extent of the relief payable at
the entry of an heir, etc.

In 1293, this sir William grants a charter of his lands of Benvie and
Balruthrie, with the patronage of the church of Benvie, to Radolph de Dundee,
which the Scrimgeours, constables of Dundee, Charta penes comitem de Panmure.
held long of the family of Panmure, as appears from many lands of man-rent,
granted by them to the earl of Panmure's predecessors, Ibidem.
still extant.

He married Ethama, daughter of John de Vallibus, or Vaus, lord of Dirleton, by
whom he had a son,

VII. Sir HENRY de MAULE, dominus de Panmure, who succeeded him. He was
knighted by king Robert Bruce, for his great merit and faithful services in his
wars against the English; and, in a charter of that great king's, Chart. in
archivis Rob. I. dated anno reg. 23. 1329.
he is designed Henricus de Maule, miles, filius, Willielmi de Maule militis,
domini de Panmure, etc.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir William Hay of Lochwharret, ancestor of
the marquis of Tweedale, Peerage of Ireland.
by whom he had issue three sons and one daughter.

1. Sir Walter, his heir.

2. William de Maule.

3. Peter de Maule, who, entering into holy orders, Chartulary of Arbroath.
had a dignity in the chapter of St. Andrews, in the time of bishop Lamberton.

His daughter, Christian, was married to Alexander Strachan of Cammylie.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. Sir WALTER de MAULE, dominus de Panmure, who was governor of the castle
of Kildrummy, in the reign of king David II.

He gave a charter of the lands of Carnegie, lying in the barony of Panmure, to
John de Bonhaird, to be held of him and his heirs; which charter was confirmed
by king David II. Haddington's collections.
and as this John was ancestor of the family of Southesk, the charter is
narrated at large under that title.

He also gave a charter of the lands of Moncur to Henry Strachan of Carmylie,
dated anno 1346.

He died anno 1348, Chartulary of Brechin.
leaving issue two sons.

1. Sir William, his heir.

2. Henry, Chart. penes com. de Panmure.
first of the branch of the Maules of Glaster.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. Sir WILLIAM MAULE, dominus de Panmure, who married Marian, only daughter
of David Fleming of Biggar, ancestor of the earl of Wigton, by his first wife
Jean, daughter of sir David Barclay lord of Brechin, Ibidem.
by whom he had a son,

Sir Thomas, -- and a daughter,

Jean, Ibidem.
married to Alexander Auchterlony of Kellie, in vicecomitatu de Forfar.

He was succeeded by his son,

X. Sir THOMAS MAULE of Panmure, who was knighted by king Robert III. with whom
he was in great favor.

In the regency of Robert duke of Albany, upon an insurrection of Donald lord
of the Isles, an army was sent against them, under the command of the earl of
M^r, and this sir Thomas, with a great number of his friends and vassals,
joined the royal army in their march, and at the bloody battle of Harlaw, where
he behaved with the greatest resolution and conduct, Peerage of Scotland,
Ireland, and Nifbet.
he and most of his clan were entirely cut off, 25th July 1411.

A little before his death, he married Elizabeth, Chart. penes com. de Pan mure.
daughter of sir Andrew Gray of Foulis, by whom he had a posthumous son,

XI. Sir THOMAS MAULE, who was served heir to his father anno 1412, had the
honor of knighthood conferred upon him by king James I. and was designed
dominus de Panmure, Ibid et chart p^nes dom. Gray.
in a deed betwixt him and John lord Glammis, and also in a discharge he
granted to lord Gray, anno 1427.

Upon the death and forfeiture of Walter earl of Athole, sir Thomas claimed the
lordship of Brechin, in right of his great grandmother, who was sister of sir
David Barclay lord of Brechin, whose daughter and heiress the earl married; but
it being included in the earl's forfeiture, he only recovered the lands of
Hedderwick, Jackstown, Stadockmuir, with Leuchlands, Nisbet, vol. II. p. 51.
part of the lordship of Brechin.

However, he obtained from the duke of Albany, who was then governor of
Scotland, with consent of his council, a discharge of all wardships, Penes com.
de Panmure.
etc. due to the crown by his father's death, in the service of his country.

He died in 1450, leaving issue, by Mary his wife, Chart. penes comitem de Gray.
daughter of sir Thomas Abercrombie of that ilk, an only son,

XII. Sir THOMAS MAULE, lord of Panmure, who succeeded him. He was a man of
singular accomplishments, and made a great figure in the reign of king James
III. He was designed in many writs, nobilis et potens dominus Thomas Maule,
dominus de Panmure, etc.

He ratified to the abbacy of Cupar, Chart. penes com. de Panmure.
certain lands within his own barony, anno 1456, and founded a chapel at his
manor of Panmure, dedicated to the Blessed Virgin, Ibidem.
anno 1487.

He was one of the inquest on two perambulations for the monastery of Arbroath
in 1494. Haddington's collections.


He married, 1st, lady Elizabeth Lindsay, daughter of Alexander, third earl of
Crawfurd, Ibidem.
great grandchild of lady Jean, daughter of king Robert II. by whom he had
issue a son,

Alexander, his apparent heir, -- and a daughter,

Elizabeth, married to her cousin, -- Lindsay of Evelick, a son of the earl of
Crawfurd.

He married, 2dly, Catharine, daughter of -- Cramond of Auldbar, Peerage of
Scotland, Ireland, etc.
by whom he had no issue, and died anno 1498.

XIII. ALEXANDER, his only son and apparent heir, married Elizabeth, daughter
of sir David Guthrie of that ilk, treasurer of Scotland, in the reign of king
James III* and got a charter of the lands of Dundee, Hathersbyke, etc. to
Alexander Maule, son and apparent heir of sir Thomas Maule of Panmure,
Haddington's collect. p. 74.
and Elizabeth Guthrie his spouse, dated anno 1468; Peerage of Scotland,
Ireland, etc.
but he died before his father, leaving issue a son,

XIV. Sir THOMAS MAULE of Panmure, who succeeded his grandfather. He was highly
esteemed by king James IV. who knighted him. He was also in great favor with
the clergy, having been appointed bailie of Barry by the abbot of Cupar in
1511, a jurisdiction of considerable weight before the reformation, and only
bestowed on those who were ^irm friends of the church.

He attended king James to the battle of Flowdon, and, to his singular honor,
when many of the first quality left the king before the armies engaged, he,
though well advanced in years, Peerage of Scotl. Ireland, Scots comp. et chart.
penes commit. de Panmure.
and very corpulent, would not desert him, but fought with remarkable courage,
and received many wounds, of which he instantly died in the field, on 9th of
September 1513.

He married, 1st, Elizabeth, daughter and coheiress of sir David Rollo of
Ballachie, Chart. in pub. archiv.
by Elizabeth his wife, daughter of Andrew lord Gray, by whom he had two sons
and one daughter.

1. Robert, his heir.

2. William, who married Janet, daughter of John Carnegie of Kinnaird, ancestor
of the earl of Southesk, Ibidem.
of whom the Maules of Boath are descended.

His daughter, Isabel, was married to -- Ramsay of Panbride.

He married, 2dly, Christian, daughter of William lord Graham, ancestor of the
duke of Montrose, by Jean his wife, daughter of Archibald earl of Angus, but by
her he had no issue.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. ROBERT MAULE, dominus de Panmure, who was one of those loyal barons that
endeavored to rescue king James V. from the earls of Arran and Angus, by whom
he was kept little better than a captive, and with that view, joined the earl
of Lennox at the fight near Linlithgow bridge, anno 1526; of which generous
design, the king, when he came of age, retained so lasting a sense, that he
treated him ever after with the greatest respect and esteem; and in 1528,
granted him a dispensation (for his true and faithful services) to remain at
home, during life, free from all attendance in parliaments, Chart. penes com.
de Panmure.
courts of justiciary, hostings, roads, within or without the realm, by sea or
land, etc.

Notwithstanding which, he no sooner saw his country threatened with danger by
party and faction, after the death of that king, than he raised his vassals and
followers, and with lord Gray, attacked lord Ruthven in Perth, and held out
that town against the queen's authority. He began the attack, and was taken
prisoner, but the affair was soon thereafter compromised.

He strenuously opposed the match between queen Mary and prince Edward of
England, from an apprehension that his country might suffer in its independency
and its privileges by such an union.

When the war between the two nations commenced, his loyalty being well known,
the English, after the battle of Pinkie, sent a strong party to surprise and
attack him at his own house, where he made a vigorous defense, but, being
overpowered, received many wounds, and was at last forced to surrender. He was
immediately sent prisoner to London, and was confined in the tower above twelve
months, Peerage of Scotland, Ireland, etc.
and at last was released by the interest of the marquis d'Elbuife, the French
ambassador for Scotland, in whose company he returned home, anno 1549.

He married, 1st, Isabel, daughter of sir Laurence Mercer of Aldie, and got a
charter of the lands of Panlethy, in the regality of Kirriemuir, upon the
forfeiture of Archibald earl of Angus, Haddington's collections.
to him and Isabel Mercer, his spouse, etc. By her he had issue three sons and
one daughter.

1. Thomas, his heir.

2. John Maule, Esquire;.

3. Robert Maule, Esquire;.

His daughter, Margaret, was married to -- Haliburton of Pitcur.

He married, 2dly, Isabel, daughter of sir Robert Arbuthnot of that ilk,
ancestor of the viscount of Arbuthnot, by whom he had other three sons.

1. Henry, ancestor of the Maules of Melgum, whose son Henry Maule of Melgum
was a learned antiquary and author.

2. Andrew Maule of Guildie.

3. William Maule of Glaster, who acquired an opulent fortune, which, at his
death, was divided amongst his seven daughters, viz. 1. Marian, married to sir
Alexander Seton of Kilcroich, one of the senators of the college of justice. 2.
Bethia, married to James Murray of Skirling. 3. Margaret, married to sir
Alexander Murray of Blackbarony. 4. Eleanor, married to Alexander Morrison of
Prestongrange. 5. Jean, married to William Oliphant of Kirkhill. 6. Isabel,
married, 1st, to James Dundas of Duddingston; and 2dly, to James Hamilton of
Parkly. 7. Beatrix, married to Mr. Robert Burnet of Crimond. Ibid. et chart.
penes com. de Panmure.


Robert of Panmure died in 1560, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVI. THOMAS MAULE of Panmure, who, with consent of Robert Maule his father,
granted a charter to Elizabeth Beaton, daughter of cardinal David Beaton, of
half of the lands of Skryne and an annualrent of twenty merks, Haddington's
collections.
for a certain sum paid him, anno 1541. In his father's lifetime, he was
designed Feodatarius terrarum et bar^miae de Panmure, Chart. in archiv. f^m. de
Douglas.
haeres apparens Roberts Maulae, domini de Panmure, etc. in a charter dated
anno 1546.

He was a man of great natural accomplishments, which were much improved by a
liberal education. Soon after he returned from his travels, he signalized
himself at the battle of Haldonrig against the English.

He was taken prisoner, and sent to Morpeth, where he remained till king Henry
VIII. after the death of king James V. politically released all the Scotch
prisoners of note, hoping to engage them to promote the intended marriage of
his son prince Edward with queen Mary; which not succeeding, and the war
breaking out afresh, he was in the van of the Scotch army at the bloody battle
of Pinkycleugh, where, with great difficulty, he escaped, many of his friends
and vassals having been killed on the spot.

In 1563, John Scrimgeour, constable of Dundee, renews the bond of man-rent,
formerly granted by his predecessor sir James Scrimgeour, Charta pene^ com. de
Panmure.
to sir Thomas Maule of Panmure, per his obligation dated 10th of May the said
year.

He continued steady in the queen's interest, though he joined in that
memorable association, with many of the first rank, for the inauguration of
king James VI. upon the queen his mother's resignation, anno 1567.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir George Haliburton of Pitcur, Ibidem.
anno 1547, by whom he had eight sons and one daughter.

1. Patrick, his heir.

2. William Maule, Esquire;.

3. David Maule, Esquire;.

4. Robert, who was commissary of St. Andrews, a learned and judicious
antiquary, wrote several treatises with great judgment and knowledge, viz.
Periodi gentis Scot^rum, de antiquitate gentis Scotorum, Peerage of Scotland
and Ireland.
a history of his own family, etc. which are lasting monuments of his great
learning.

5. Thomas Maule of Pitlivie, who married Mary, daughter of -- Leighton of
Ulishaven, and had two sons, viz. 1. Thomas, 2. Robert, who was gentleman of
the privy chamber to king Charles I. Thomas was a man of great honor, loyalty
and courage: he adhered firmly to the king's interest during all the time of
the civil war. He was first lieutenant colonel of the marquis of Ormond's
regiment, and afterward acted as general in Ireland, where he always behaved
with conduct and resolution. He at last married and settled there, Ibidem.
and became the head of a numerous and considerable family in that kingdom,
which still subsists with great luster.

The names of the other three sons have not come to our hands.

His daughter, Margaret, was married to James Stewart, son of John earl of
Athole.

Thomas, dominus de Panmure, died on 7th March 1600, Chart. penes comitem de
Panmure.
and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVII. PATRICK, dominus de Panmure, who was appointed bailie of the barony of
Barry by king James VI. Ibidem.
which jurisdiction his ancestors had long exerced by commission from the
abbots of Coupar and Balmerino, but it has been enjoyed heretably by the family
ever since.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir John Erskine of Dun, superintendant of
Angus and Mearns, by whom he had a son,

Patrick, -- and two daughters.

1. Jean, married to David Erskine of Dun.

2. Barbara, married to James Strachan of Carmylie.

He died anno 1605, and was succeeded by his only son,

XVIII. PATRICK MAULE of Panmure, afterward earl, who, being endowed with many
excellent qualities, and of singular affability, was a mighty favorite of king
James VI. whom he accompanied to London at his majesty's desire, when he went
to take possession of the English throne, anno 1603, and was made one of the
gentlemen of his bedchamber. The king, being perfectly sensible of his great
capacity and fine accomplishments, had him always in great esteem.

Anno 1610, he got a new charter of his ancient barony of Panmure; Chart. in
pub. archiv.
also charters of a great many other baronies.

In the reign of king Charles I. with his majesty's approbation, he purchased
the abbacy of Arbroath, Ibidem.
which had been erected into a temporal lordship, anno 1608, whereby he became
proprietor of a greater number of patronages than were possessed by any other
subject.

And the king's regard for him still increasing, he recommended him, in the
strongest manner, to his son prince Charles, as one he might entirely rely on
for honor and fidelity, of which king Charles, in his troublesome reign, had
many convincing proofs.

He was continued in the bedchamber, and made keeper of his majesty's house
and park at Eltham in England, Chart. in archivis Car. I.
and sheriff principal of the county of Forfar in Scotland, anno 1632, and got
also charters from the king, of a great many other lands and baronies.

During the civil wars he attended the king in all his battles, and never
deserted him on any occasion whatsomever. The king, in regard and recompense of
his constant loyalty and faithful services, was pleased, as a lasting mark of
his affection and esteem, Charta penes comitem de Pa^mure, Crawfurd and Lodge.
to create him earl of Panmure, lord Maule of Brechin and Navar, upon the 30th
day of August, 1646.

When the king, by order of parliament, was deprived of all his domestics at
Holmby, in Northamptonshire, he only desired that two of his old servants
should be allowed to remain with him, of which the earl of Panmure was one. He
attended him close in all his removes, till at last he and all his attendants
were finally discharged by colonel Hammond, in the isle of Wight, which was a
most sensible affliction both to his majesty and the earl, who immediately
repaired to Scotland, when he could do no more service to his royal master.

And though he lived quietly at home, being very aged, yet Cromwell thought fit
to impose a fine upon him often thousand pounds sterling; Printed ordinance of
Cromwell's council, anno 1654.
but it was afterward mitigated to four thousand pounds sterling, which he
paid on 25th June 1655, besides one thousand pounds more for his second son, on
29th September thereafter.

However, he had the happiness to outlive all these misfortunes, and to see the
accomplishment of his most ardent wishes, viz. the king's restoration, though
he did not long survive it.

He married thrice: 1st, Frances, daughter of sir Edward Stanhope of Grin^ton,
Crawfurd's peerage, and peerage of Ireland, etc.
in the county of York, lord president of the council of the north, uncle to
the first earl of Chelterfield, by whom he had two sons, and two daughters.

1. George, earl of Panmure.

2. Henry of Balmakellie, who was likeways a great loyalist, and had the
command of a regiment both under king Charles I. and II. and always performed
the part of a gallant officer, and never deserted the royal cause. He married,
1st, lady Jean, daughter of John earl of Wemyss, Chart. in pub. archiv.
by whom he had one daughter, Mary, who died young. He married, 2dly, Margaret,
daughter of -- Douglas of Spot, by whom he had another daughter, Margaret,
married to Alexander Cochran of Balbachly.

The earl's 1st daughter, lady Jean, was married to David earl of Northesk, and
had a numerous issue.

His 2d daughter, lady Elizabeth, was married, 1st, to John earl of Kinghorn;
2dly, to George earl of Linlithgow, and was mother of three earls, viz.
Strathmore, Linlithgow, and Calendar.

The earl married, 2dly, Mary Waldrum, maid of honor to queen Henrietta.

And, 3dly, he married lady Mary Erskine, daughter of John earl of Mar; but by
neither had he any issue.

He died anno 1661, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIX. GEORGE, second earl of Panmure, who chanced to be traveling through
Italy and France for his education, during the heat of the civil war, yet he no
sooner returned home, than he gave sufficient proof of his inheriting the same
virtues and loyal principles with his predecessors.

When king Charles II. came to Scotland in 1650, he immediately waited on his
majesty, and heartily engaged in his service; and being appointed colonel of
the Forfar regiment of horse, many of the principal gentlemen of the county,
out of respect to his lordship, joined his regiment, and served under him as
officers.

He fought upon their head at the battles of Dunbar and Innerkeithing, at the
latter of which he was wounded, his lieutenan-colonel, his major, and many of
his officers, being killed on the spot.

After the defeat at Worcester, the loyalists, from all parts, resorted to him,
and put themselves under his command; in which station, Crawfurd's peerage, and
peerage of Ireland, etc.
by frequent skirmishes and incursions, he gave great uneasiness to general
Monk, who then commanded in Scotland; but at last he was forced to capitulate
(when he found he could do no more service to the king) without any other
terms, than these of laying down his arms.

He married lady Jean Campbell, daughter of John earl of Loudoun, lord high
chancellor of Scotland, in the reign of king Charles I. by whom he had issue
seven sons, and two daughters, though only three sons, and one daughter, came
to age.

1. George, earl of Panmure.

2. James Maule of Balumby, who succeeded his brother.

3. Harry Maule of Kelly, who carried on the line of the family.

His daughter, lady Mary, was married, 1st, to Charles earl of Mar, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
and was mother of John earl of Mar; she married, 2dly, colonel John Erskine,
son of sir Charles Erskine of Alva.

The earl died on 24th March 1671, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XX. GEORGE, third earl of Panmure, who was of the privy council both to king
Charles II. and king James VII.

He married lady Jean Fleming, only daughter of John earl of Wigton, by whom he
had only one son,

George, lord Maule, who died an infant.

And he dying in 1686, Ibidem.
his estate and honors devolved upon his brother,

XX. JAMES of Balumby, fourth earl of Panmure, who, having got a liberal
education abroad, served in the army as a volunteer, and signalized himself at
the siege of Luxemburgh.

He was sworn one of the privy council to king James VII. but as he could not
comply with the court in abrogating the penal laws, he was soon removed from
being a privy councillor; and though he was always a staunch protestant, yet at
the convention of estates in 1689, he vigorously appeared for the interest of
king James; and when the crown was settled on king William and queen Mary, he
refused to take the oaths to them, and left the house.

He likeways opposed the union with all his interest, as judging it
inconsistent with the honor and independency of Scotland.

In 1715 he joined his nephew, John earl of Mar, Lodge's peerage of Ireland
vol. II. p. 194, and Scots compend.
and behaved most he^oically at the battle of Sheriffmuir, notwithstanding his
age, and the delicacy of his constitution. He was taken prisoner in the field,
but was instantly rescued by his brother Harry.

He afterward retired to Paris, and being attainted of high treason, his
estate and honors were forfeited to the crown.

He married lady Margaret Hamilton, daughter of William duke of Hamilton, and
died at Paris without issue, anno 1723.

XX. HARRY MAULE of Kellie, his brother, would have succeeded both to the
estate and honors of Panmure, had it not been for the earl his brother's
attainder.

This Harry was a man of great parts, both natural and acquired, and had spent
much of his time at the courts of England and France.

He was a member of the convention of estates at the revolution, and followed
his brother's example, when he found they were resolved to forfeit king James,
and then left the assembly.

He afterward retired, and being a man of great learning, spent most of his
time in the study of the laws and antiquities of his country, and was one of
the greatest antiquaries of the age he lived in.

He married, 1st, lady Mary Fleming, daughter of William earl of Wigton,
Crawfurd's peerage, and peerage of Ireland.
by whom he had three sons, and two daughters.

1. George, who died young.

2. James, who died before his father.

3. William, now earl of Panmure.

His 1st daughter, Henrietta, died unmarried.

2. Jean, was married to George lord Ramsay, whose son is now earl of Dalhousie.

He married, 2dly, Anne, daughter of Patrick Lindsay of Kilbirnie, sister of
John first viscount of Garnock, by whom he had five sons and one daughter.

1. Patrick, who died unmarried.

2. John Maule of Inverkeillor, Esquire; who, being an advocate, was made keeper of
the register of sasines in 1737. In 1739, he was chosen member of parliament
for Aberdeen, Montrose, etc. and in 1748, was constituted one of the barons of
exchequer in Scotland.

3. Thomas.

4. David.

5. Charles.

These three last died unmarried, as did His daughter Margaret.

He died in 1734, and was succeeded by his only surviving son of the first
marriage,

XXI. WILLIAM, now earl of Panmure, who was chosen member of parliament for the
shire of Forfar in 1735, and has continued to represent that county ever
since; and as his genius inclined him to a military life, he was made a captain
in the third regiment of guards, anno 1737.

In 1741, he was made colonel thereof, with which he served in Flanders during
all the course of the late war, having been engaged in the battles of
Dettingen, Valdt, Fo^^tenoy, etc. and always acquitted himself with honor and
reputation.

In 1747, he got the command of a regiment of foot, upon the death of the earl
of Crawfurd, and is now a lieutenant general.

He was created a peer of Ireland by his majesty's privy seal at St. James's,
6th April, and by patent at Dublin, on 2d May 1743, by the titles of earl
Panmure of Forth, and viscount Maule of White-church, the honors being limited
to the heirs-male of his own body, and his brother John's.

ARMS.
Quarterly; 1st party per pale argent and gules, on a border, eight scallops,
all counter-changed, for the name of Maule; 2d argent, three pallets wavy
gules, for Valoniis, having married the heiress; 3d quarter counter quartered,
1st and 4th azure, a cheveron between three crosses patee or, for Barclay lord
Brechin; 2d and 3d argent, three piles issuing from the chief, conjoined by the
points gules, for Wishart of Brechin; 4th quarter as the first.

CREST; on a wreath, a wyvern vert, spouting fire before and behind.

SUPPORTERS; two greyhounds proper, each gorged with a collar gules, charged
with three scallop shells argent.

MOTTO; Glementia et animis.

CHIEF SEATS,
At Panmure, a noble seat, with fine gardens and a park, in the county of
Forfar; and at the castle of Brechin, in the same county.

DRUMMOND Earl of PERTH.
THE family of Drummond has been always ranked amongst the most ancient and
illustrious names of the Scotch nation, highly distinguished by a long train of
worthy ancestors, no less remarkable for the noble alliances they made, and the
dignities conferred upon them, than for personal merit.

They have the honor to be several times sprung from the royal house of
Stewart, and can boast what few subjects can do, Strathallan, Lesly, Van
Bassan, sir G MacKenzie, Hathornden, Bail, Mar^^n, etc. etc.
That most of the crowned heads in Europe are descended from them, as will
clearly appear by the following memoirs.

The traditional account of their origin, handed down to us by several good
historians, is,

I. That an Hungarian gentleman named MAURICIUS, or MAURICE, a son of George, a
younger son of Andrew, king of Hungary, had the command of the ship in which
Edgar Atheline, the rightful heir to the English crown, his mother Agatha, and
his sisters, the princesses Margaret and Christian, were embarked, in their
return from England to Hungary. They were overtaken by a storm, driven on the
coast of Scotland, and landed in the frith of Forth, at a place which to this
day retains the name of St. Margaret's Hope, so called after princess Margaret,
who became queen to king Malcolm III. called Canmore, and is well known by the
name of St. Margaret.

This Maurice being a man of parts and merit, was highly esteemed by king
Malcolm, who, to induce him to settle in Scotland, conferred many favors upon
him, and gave him considerable possessions in the shires of Dunbarton and
Stirling, particularly the lands of Roseneath, Cardross, Auchindown, the lands
and parish of Drymen or Drummond, which last afterward became the chief title
and surname of the family. He also made him senescal or steward of Lennox, and
assigned him for his armorial bearing three bars wavy, or undy, gules, in
memory of his having been the happy conductor of her majesty's safe landing in
Scotland.

The queen also bestowed some marks of her esteem upon him, and, for his good
services, gave him one of her maids of honor in marriage. By her he had a son
named,

II. MALCOLM, of whom all the Drummonds in Scotland are descended.

He left issue a son,

III. MAURICE, who succeeded him, and was father of

IV. JOHN, his heir, who had a son and successor,

V. Sir MALCOLM DRYMEN, or DRUMMOND, etc.

Thus our historians have deduced their descent, Strathallan, Sir George
MacKenzie, Hathornden, Bail, Martin, etc. etc.
without mentioning their marriages.

The following succession is attested by indisputable documents.

This sir Malcolm flourished in the reign of king William, who succeeded to the
crown of Scotland, anno 1165, and died in 1214.

He left issue two sons.

1. Malcolm Beg Drummond, his heir.

2. Roderick Drummond, who, in an inquisition on the division of some lands in
Dunbarton-shire, Chartulary of Lennox, p. 117.
is designed brother of Malcolm Beg, etc. anno 1234.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. MALCOLM de DRUMMOND, who, on account of his low stature, was called Beg,
which, in the old Galick language, signifies short.

Though this Malcolm is the first of the family for whom we have any written
documents, the situation in which we find him seems to be a strong confirmation
of the traditional account already narrated. He is in possession of all the
lands said to have been given to his predecessors by Malcolm Canmore, is in
high reputation in Scotland, and married a lady of the very first distinction
for birth and fortune, Ada, daughter of M^ddwin third earl of Lennox, by
Beatrix his spouse, daughter of Walter lord high steward of Scotland.
Circumstances, so distinguished, could only agree with a person descended of
ancestors, whose rank and consequence were established in the nation.

In a charter from Maldwin earl of Lennox, to Humphry de Kilpatrick, of the
lands of Colquhoun, Walter, lord high stewart of Scotland, and Malcolm Beg
Drummond, designed by the earl, Ibid. p. 30.
camerarius meus, etc. are witnesses, anno 1225.

By an inquisition at the division of some lands in Dunbarton-shire, he appears
to have sold off the lands and barony of Kinnearn, Ibid. p. 117.
in 1234, to which his brother Roderick Drummond is a witness, as before
observed.

In a charter by the same earl Maldwin, of a donation of the church lands of
Kirkpatrick, to the monastery of Paisley, Ibid. p. 1.
Amalec, the earl's brother, Malcolm Beg Drummond, etc. are witnesses, anno
1238.

Also in another donation by the same earl, of the church of Roseneath to the
said monastery, Walter son of Alan, lord high steward of Scotland, Malcolm Beg
Drummond, Ibid. p. 8.
etc. are witnesses. This deed has no date; but was confirmed by king Alexander
II. who died in 1249, so must have been made before that year.

He is witness also to another donation by earl Maldwin to the monastery of
Arbroath, Ibid. p. 97.
confirmed by the said king Alexander II. ante 1249.

By Ada his wife, he had two sons.

1. Malcolm, his heir.

2. John, who is witness in a charter of the same Maldwin, earl of Lennox,
Donaldo filio Macynel, etc. wherein he is designed John Drummond, Book of
original writs, penes MacFarlane, vol. I. p. 58.
son of Malcolm Beg. This charter has no date; but earl Maldwin died in the
beginning of the reign of king Alexander III. who succeeded to the crown, anno
1249; however, we can trace this John no further.

Malcolm Beg died before the year 1260, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. MALCOLM DRUMMOND, dominus de eodem, Chartulary of Lennox, p. 72.
or lord of that ilk, who, in a charter of Malcolm, ^ourth earl of Lennox, is
designed son of Malcolm Beg Drummond, and steward or senescal of Lennox, anno
1260.

He is witness in a donation by earl Malcolm to the monastery of Paisley, Ibid.
p. 3. 73. etc.
dated at Renfiew, anno 1273; also to several other charters and donations of
the same earl, in 1274 and 1275.

He had vast possessions in lands, as appears from the considerable estates in
different counties, which he gave to his younger children.

He left issue three sons.

1. John, his heir.

2. Gilbert de Drummond, who is mentioned in several charters of the earl of
Lennox, and is designed filius Malcolmi, Ibid. p. 35. 36. 54. etc.
etc. inter 1280 et 1290. He was also forced to swear fealty to king Edward I.
Prynne's collect, vol. III. p. 657.
of England, anno 2296. He obtained from his father a grant of several lands,
particularly the barony of Balquhaple, Chart. penes dom. deGleneagles.
etc. and had issue a son, Malcolmus de Drummond.

3. Thomas Drummond, who got from his father the lands of Balfrone in
Perth-shire, and made a donation of the patronage of the church thereof to the
abbacy of Inchaffry, which was confirmed by the pope's bull, Freebairn's
history.
in 1305.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. Sir JOHN DRUMMOND, dominus de eodem, who, in many writs, is designed
filius Malcolmi, etc.

He was a man of great parts, and a strenuous defender of the liberties of his
country; and though compelled to swear allegiance to king Edward I. when he had
overrun Scotland, Rymer, tom. II. p. 782. and Abercromb. vol. I. p. 498.
anno 1296, yet we find him carried prisoner to England by the same prince, for
his adhering to the Brucian interest, anno 1297.

However, he soon afterward obtained liberty to return to Scotland, upon his
finding bail to come back to England, with horses, arms, Ibidem.
etc. to assist king Edward in his wars against France.

He married a daughter of Walter Stewart earl of Menteith, brother of
Alexander, great steward of Scotland, by whom he had three sons, and two
daughters.

1. Sir Malcolm, his heir.

2. Gilbert de Drummond, who is mentioned in a ratification by Malcolm fifth
earl of Lennox, Chartulary of Lennox, p. 152.
of the lands and church of Kilpatrick, anno 1330.

3. Walter Drummond, bred to the church, a man of great probity, and a ^ine
genius. He is designed clericus domini regis, and was appointed ambassador to
treat of a peace with the English, Rymer's foed. Angliae.
together with William bishop of St. Andrews, Thomas Randolph earl of Murray,
etc. etc. anno 1323.

1st daughter, Christian.

2. Margaret. They obtained a charter from Malcolm fourth earl of Lennox, of
the lands of Ardcurane, Chartulary of Lennox, p. 80.
Christianae et Margaretae de Drummond, filiabus domini Johannis de Drummond,
etc. anno 1290.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. Sir MALCOLM DRUMMOND, dominus de eodem. He made a great figure in the
reign of king Robert Bruce, to whom he was a firm and steady friend, and
immediately after the battle of Bannockburn, obtained from that great prince,
for his good and faithful services, Chart. in pub. archiv. et chart. in archiv.
familiae de Perth.
a grant of several lands in Perthshire, anno 1315: and perhaps it is no
improbable conjecture, that the caltrops were then first added by way of
copartment to his coat of arms, as they were used on that memorable occasion,
with great success, against the English horse, and very possibly by the advice
or under the direction of sir Malcolm.

The year thereafter, in a full parliament, where he sat as one of the barons
majores regni, he made a resignation into the king's hands, in favors of sir
Malcolm Fleming, father of the first earl of Wigton, of his lands and barony of
Auchindon in Dunbarton-shire, Ibid. etchart* in archiv. Roberti I.
upon which lord Fleming got a charter under the great seal, confirming the
same to him, anno 1316.

He married a daughter of sir Patrick Graham of Kincardine, ancestor of the
duke of Montrose, by whom he had a son and successor,

X. Sir MALCOLM DRUMMOND, dominus de eodem, a man of singular worth and merit.
He was concerned in all the noble efforts that were made by the loyalists in
the minority of king David Bruce, in defense of the liberties of their country;
on which account he suffered many hardships: and about the time that king
Edward of England pretended to forfeit that loyal subject the earl of
Strathearn, he also gave a grant of several lands belonging to sir Malcolm
Drummond, Dugdale's baronage of England, title Clinton.
to sir John Clinton of England, because sir Malcolm had been in arms against
his lawful sovereign, as Edward designed himself.

He afterward got a charter from Malise earl of Strathearn, of the lands of
Culquhalie, in comitatu suo de Strathearn, Chart. in archiv. familiae de Perth.
wherein he is designed Malcolmus filius Malcolmi Drummond, etc.

We have not been able to discover whom sir Malcolm married, but he left issue
three sons.

1. Sir John, his heir.

2. Maurice, ancestor of the Drummonds of Concraig, of whom several
considerable families are descended, who make a good figure in Scotland to this
day.

3. Walter, Chart. in pub. archiv. sir G. MacKenzie, etc.
a man of great merit, and in high ^avour with king David II. from whom he got
a charter, Waltero Drummond, nostrorum rotulorum registro, ac a consiliis, etc.

Sir Malcolm was either slain at the battle of Durham, anno 1346, or died
immediately thereafter, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. Sir JOHN DRUMMOND, dominus de eodem, a man of a noble spirit, and highly
esteemed by king David, who conferred upon him the honor of knighthood.

He maintained a long and troublesome controversy with the house of Menteith,
which proved fatal to several of that noble family, but was at last compromised
by the king's command, very honorably for sir John. The arbiters were Robert,
lord high steward of Scotland, and earl of Strathearn, afterward king Robert
II. the earls of Douglas and Angus, sir Walter Murray of Tullibardine, sir
Archibald Campbell of Lochow, and sir Colin his son, before the two lords
justiciars of Scotland, sir Robert Erskine, and sir Hugh Eglington, Chart. in
archiv fam. de Perth.
who, having met on the banks of the Forth, passed sentence, to which the
parties seals are appended, 1st of May 1360.

By this indenture he gives up several of his lands in Dunbarton-shire, on a
promise from the king of other lands of greater value in Perth-shire; and, in
consequence of this it was, that he got so large a share of the Montefex
estate: for, having married Mary, eldest daughter and co-heiress of sir William
de Montesex, justiciar of Scotland, and head or chief of a great and most
ancient family, with her he got the lands and baronies of Cargill, Stobhall,
Kincardin, Auchterarder, etc. whereby he became one of the most opulent
subjects in the kingdom, and from this era the residence and designation of
the family were both changed. Ibidem.


By her he had issue four sons, and four daughters.

1. Sir Malcolm, his heir.

2. Sir John, who carried on the line of this family.

3. William, who married Elizabeth, one of the daughters and co-heiresses of
sir William Airth of that ilk, with whom he got the lands of Carnock, etc. and
of him the Drummonds of Carnock, Hawthornden, etc. are descended.

4. Dougal Drummond, who was bishop of Dunblain, but died soon after he was
consecrated.

1st daughter, Annabella, a lady of the most exquisite beauty, and most
distinguished merit, who had the honor of being married to Robert third king
of Scotland. Cambden, in his account of Strathearn, takes notice of this
marriage, and has these remarkable words; "The women of the family of Drummond,
Cambden.
for charming beauty and complexion, are beyond all others, in so much that
they have been most delighted in by the kings, etc." It was certainly so with
regard to Annabella; and all our historians agree, that the beauties of her
mind were superior to those of her body, and that she was the grace and dignity
of that court of which she was queen, according to these words of another
author, Buchanan.
" Ab regina incolumis aulae dignitas est sustentata." By him she was mother of
king James I. who, besides his son, king James II. had six daughters, four
whereof were married to foreign princes.

Sir John Drummond's second daughter, Margaret, married to sir Colin Campbell,
lord of Lochow, ancestor of the duke of Argyle.

3. Jean, married to -- Stewart, lord of Dowallie.

4. Mary, married to -- MacDonald, lord of the Isles.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. Sir MALCOLM DRUMMOND, lord of that ilk. As he was a man of the highest
rank and distinguished merit, he obtained in marriage a lady of the first
quality, and the greatest fortune in the kingdom, viz. lady Isabel Douglas,
only daughter of William first earl of Douglas, Chart. in pub. archiv. et in
archiv. familiae de Perth, et Douglas, etc.
by lady Margaret his first lady, daughter of Donald earl of Mar.

Which lady Isabel, after the death of her brother Thomas, in her own right,
became countess of Mar, and sir Malcolm was ever after designed dominus de
Mar.

In the year 1385, the king of France sent 40,000 franks to be divided amongst
his faithful allies the Scots, Rymer, tom. VII. p. 485.
of which sir Malcolm got 400 l. sterling.

He was a man of remarkable courage and fortitude. He accompanied his
brother-in-law, James earl of Douglas, to the battle of Otterburn in 1388; and
sir Malcolm, in recompense of his gallant behavior on that occasion, got a
charter from king Robert III. dilecto fratri suo Malcolmo de-Drummond, Chart.
in pub. archiv. et in archiv. familiae de Perth.
domino de Mar, of an annuity of 20 l. out of the customs of Inverness, in
satifaction to him of his third part of the ransom of sir Ralph Percy, he
having greatly contributed to the taking of that gentleman prisoner.

This great man dying without issue, anno 1400, the earldom of Mar remained
with his lady, the countess and heiress thereof, but he was succeeded in his
own great and opulent estate by his brother,

XII. Sir JOHN DRUMMOND, promiscuously designed of Cargill and Stobhall. He was
one of the greatest men of his time, and was justiciar of Scotland, while his
elder brother was alive. This appears by his pronouncing sentence in a very
remarkable case, viz. sir Alexander Moray of Abercairny and Ogilvie, having
accidentally, and without any premeditated design, Charta penes Jacobum Moray
de Abercairny.
slain a gentleman of the name of Spalding, he pled his privilege of his being
nearly allied to the clan MacDuff, and having proven his propinquity, was
assoilzied by sir John Drummond, at a court of justiciary held at Foulis, 10th
May 1391.

It does not appear that he meddled in court affairs during the administration
of the dukes of Albany; but when the ambassadors for negotiating king James his
liberty were appointed, he was one of those delegated to meet his majesty, who
was his nephew, at Durham, Rymer, tom. X. p. 309, etc.
anno 1423, and became one of the hostages for his ransom in 1424.

He married lady Elizabeth Sinclair, Chart in archiv fam. de Perth, and M. S.
hist. of the fam. by Crawford.
daughter of Henry earl of Orkney, by whom he had three sons and two daughters.

1. Sir Walter, his heir.

2. Robert, who married Barbara, daughter and heiress of sir John Moubray of
Barnbougle, who thereupon was obliged to change his name to Moubray.

3. John Drummond, who settled in the Madeiras, and was progenitor of several
considerable families, who have flourished with luster in the dominions both of
the kings of Spain and Portugal.

1st daughter, Elizabeth, married to sir Archibald Kinnaird of that ilk,
ancestor of lord Kinnaird.

2. --, married to John Lockhart of Bar, in the county of Air.

He died anno 1428, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. Sir WALTER DRUMMOND of that ilk, Ibidem.
lord of Cargill and Stobhall, who had the honor of knighthood conferred upon
him by king James II.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir William Ruthven of that ilk, heretable
sheriff of Perthshire, Ibidem.
and ancestor of the earls of Gowrie, and by her had three sons.

1. Sir Malcolm, his heir.

2. John Drummond, who was dean of Dunblain.

3. Walter of Liddercrieff, of whom the Drummonds of Blair, Gairdrum, Newton,
etc. are descended.

He died anno 1455, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIV. Sir MALCOLM DRUMMOND, lord of that ilk, Chart. in pub. archiv.
etc. who, by his charters under the great seal, appears to have had vast
possessions in lands in the counties of Perth, Dunbarton and Stirling.

He married Mariota, daughter of sir David Murray, Indent. penes ducem de
Athole.
lord of Tullibardin, ancestor of the duke of Athole, by Isabel his wise,
daughter of sir John Stewart, lord Innermeath and Lorn, by whom he had six sons.

1. Sir John, afterward lord Drummond.

2. Walter Drummond, a man of great parts, who was first rector of St. Andrews,
then chancellor of the episcopal see of Dunkeld, dean of Dunblain, and was at
last appointed clerk register by king James IV.

3. James, ancestor of the Drummonds of Corrievechter, etc.

4. Thomas, of whom the Drummonds of Innermay, Cultmalindie, Culdees, etc. are
descended.

5. William Drummond of Muthil, etc.

6. Andrew Drummond, a clergyman.

Sir Malcolm died anno 1470, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. Sir JOHN DRUMMOND, lord of that ilk, and Stobhall, a man of extraordinary
parts and merit, who made a great figure in the reigns of king James III. and
IV. and was concerned in most of the public transactions of his time.

He was appointed one of the lords of session, for the administration of
justice, anno 1471.

He purchased from sir Maurice Drummond of Concraig, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Offic. Senesc. et coronat. de Strathearn, etc.
the stewarty and coronership of the earldom of Strathearn, upon which he got a
charter under the great seal, anno 1474.

In August 1484, he was, by king James III. appointed one of the ambassadors
extraordinary to the court of England; and in November thereafter, obtained a
safe conduct, ad tractandum cum rege Angliae, etc. Rymer, tom. XII. p. 230, and
251.
and a truce was agreed upon to last for three years.

Sir John, having acquitted himself in his negociations, greatly to the
satisfaction of his majesty and the whole nation, was, at the next ensuing
parliament, raised to the dignity of the peerage by the title of lord Drummond,
on the 14th January 1487, according to these words: Records of parliament.
Quo die dominus Johannes Drummond de Cargill effectus fuit dominus
parliamenti, omni tempore futuro nuncupand. dominus Drummond, etc.

He afterward got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Johanni domino Drummond, of several lands, anno 1488.

This noble lord was unhappily engaged with the discontented party, Crawford.
against king James III. after the coronation of James IV. when the earl of
Lennox, in the West, in the North, and other parts of the kingdom, the earl
marishal, lords Forbes and Lyle, took arms, and justified their rebellion by
the pretense of revenging the late king's death. Lord Drummond was sent to stop
Lennox's progress, and prevent him from joining his friends and confederates;
and finding him encamped at Tillymoss, a few miles above Stirling, with 2000
men, careless of danger, and dreading no surprise, he attacked his camp in the
night, with the greatest intrepidity; the advanced guards were killed, or
driven back, confusion and discord spread through every quarter, and the whole
body in a very short time, wereall destroyed, taken prisoners, or dispersed by
this spirited enterprise, quashing a formidable insurrection in the beginning,
giving nerves and strength to the new established government, and peace and
quiet to the whole nation.

The lord Drummond was appointed one of the privy council to king James IV. and
justiciar of Scotland, anno 1489.

He got many charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Johanni domino Drummond, justiciario Scotiae, inter 1490 et 1500, and was
afterward made justice general of all Scotland.

As he had some time before acquired the lands and barony of Concraig, in
Perthshire, from the above designed Maurice Drummond, he obtained a license,
under the great seal, to build a castle and fortalice on these lands, Ibid. et
in archiv. fam. de Perth.
and accordingly built a most noble and stately castle, and gave it the name of
Drummond-castle, which has ever since been one of the chief seats of the
family.

He was appointed one of the ambassadors extraordinary to the court of England,
anno 1495, and again in 1503, where he is designed justiciarius totius regni
Scotiae. He was also one of the Scotch plenipotentiaries to the court of
England, anno 1511, and again in 1513; and was one of the Scotch nobility who
signs the answer of refusal to the king of England, touching his advice to
remove the duke of Albany from the guardianship of the young king, Rymer, tom.
XII. p. 557, tom. XIII. p. 305, 346, 551, etc.
to which his seal is appended, 4th July 1516. This is the last time we find
him engaged in any public business.

But we cannot omit here to mention one remarkable occurrence that happened to
this great man in his old age, viz. He had given some o^^ence to the duke of
Albany, then regent, by promoting the marriage of his grandson, the earl of
Angus, with Margaret Tudor, the widow of king James IV. The lord lion king at
arms was therefore sent to apprehend him. It seems the lord lion did not treat
him with that respect that he thought his quality deserved, he therefore gave
him a box of the ear, which was thought a degree of treason, and was made use
of as a handle against him by his enemies. In short, he was tried capitally,
found guilty, and forfeited, anno 1515; Records of parliament.
but in the very next parliament, his attainder was repealed, and himself
restored to all his estates, honors and dignities, anno 1516.

We have many instances of his acts of piety, viz. he having acquired the lands
of Inchaffrie, anno 1508, founded there a collegiate church, which he largely
endowed with a revenue sufficient for the maintenance of a provost, and several
prebends, etc. etc.

He married lady Elizabeth Lindsay, Writs of the fam. of Perth, and Crawf. M.
S. hist. thereof.
daughter of David earl of Crawfurd, by whom he had three sons and five
daughters.

1. Malcolm, master of Drummond, who died before his father, unmarried.

2. William, master of Drummond, who carried on the line of this family.

3. Sir John Drummond, who got from his father the lands of Innerpeffry, of
whom the Drummonds of Innerpeffry, Riccarton, etc. are descended.

1st daughter, Margaret. She was greatly beloved by king James IV. who was
contracted to her, and would have married her, had not his counselors, and the
great men of the state, interposed, and taken her away, to make room for a
daughter of England. She bore to his majesty, a daughter, lady Margaret
Stewart, married to John lord Gordon, eldest son and apparent heir of Alexander
earl of Huntly.

2. Elizabeth Drummond, married to George master of Angus, son and apparent
heir of Archibald fifth earl of Angus, to whom she had a numerous issue. Her
granddaughter, lady Margaret Douglas, was mother of Henry lord Darnly, father
of king James VI. of whom the kings of Britain, France, Spain, Prussia, the
emperor of Germany, etc. etc. are descended.

3. Beatrix Drummond, married to James lord Hamilton and earl of Arran, nephew
of king James III.

4. Annabella Drummond, married to William earl of Montrose, ancestor of the
duke of Montrose, etc.

5. Eupheme Drummond, married to John lord Fleming, ancestor of the earls of
Wigton.

They all had issue.

The lord Drummond died in an advanced age, anno 1519.

XVI. WILLIAM master of Drummond, son and apparent heir of John lord Drummond,
Writs of the fam. of Perth.
married lady Isabel Campbell, daughter of Colin first earl of Argyle, by whom
he had two sons.

1. Walter, also designed master of Drummond.

2. Andrew, ancestor of the Drummonds of Bellyclone.

This William, master of Drummond, was a man of parts and spirit; but being at
variance with the Murrays, who had openly defied him, and had actually gone, in
a forcible manner, to draw teinds on the Drummonds lands in the parish of
Monivaird, he marched with his followers in order to prevent them, and being
accidentally joined by Duncan Campbell, captain of Dunstaffnage, who had come
down from Argyle-shire with a party of his men to revenge the death of his
father-in-law, Drummond of Meuie, whom, with his two sons, some of the Murrays
had lately killed; upon their approach, the Murrays fled to the kirk of
Monivaird for refuge, whither they were also followed by the Drummonds party.
The master being satisfied with driving them off the field, was returning home,
when a shot, fired from the kirk, unluckily killed one of the Dunstaffnage men,
which so enraged the Highlanders, that they immediately set fire to the kirk,
M. S. hist. of the family, Strathallan's memoirs.
and it being covered with heather, was soon consumed to ashes, and all within
it burnt to death.

The master of Drummond was immediately apprehended, and sent prisoner to
Stirling, where he was tried; and though he pled innocence, as having no hand in
the burning the church, Ibidem.
yet being head of the party, and no favorite at court, he was condemned and
executed, anno 1511: However, this variance betwixt the Drummonds and the
Murrays was made up soon thereafter.

XVII. WALTER, eldest son of William the master, grandson and apparent heir of
John lord Drummond, Ibid. et chart. penes ducem de Montrose.
married lady Elizabeth Graham, daughter of William earl of Montrose, and died
anno 1518, leaving issue a son,

XVIII. DAVID, who succeeded his greatgrandfather, anno 1519, and was second
lord Drummond. Retour in archiv. fam. de Perth.
He was retoured heir to him, tanquam legitimus et propinquior haeres quondam
Johannis domini Drummond, sui proavi, February 17th 1520.

He got no less than eight charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Davidi domino Drummond, of many lands and baronies, inter 1530 et 1540.

He got a new investiture of his whole estate, by a charter under the great
seal, in which are particularly narrated all his lands, lordships, and
baronies, in several different counties, Ibidem.
"to and in favors of David lord Drummond, great-grand-son, and heir of the
deceast John lord Drummond, and the heirs-male of his body; which failing, to
John Drummond of Innerpessry, and the heirs-male of his body; then to Andrew
Drummond of Bellyclone; then to Henry Drummond of Riccarron; then to William
Drummond of --, and the heirs-male of their respective bodies; which all
failing, to the said lord David his nearest heirs whatsomever," dated in 1542.

He kept himself pretty free of the parties and cabals that were so frequent in
the troublesome reign of queen Mary; but when he saw her like to be reduced to
great difficulties, he was one of those noble loyalists who entered into a
solemn bond of association, In the lawiers library, Edin.
to stand by and defend her majesty against all mortals, etc.

He married, 1st, lady Margaret Stewart, daughter of Alexander duke of Albany,
second son of king James II. by whom he had only one daughter,

Sibylla Drummond, Chart. in pub. archivis.
married to sir Gilbert Ogilvie of that ilk.

He married, Writs of the fam. of Perth.
2dly, Lilias, daughter of William, second lord Ruthven, ancestor of the earl
of Gowrie, by whom he had two sons and five daughters.

1. Patrick, his heir.

2. James Drummond, created lord Maderty, of whom the viscounts of Strathallan,
etc. are descended. Vide those titles in this work.

1st daughter, Jean, married to John earl of Montrose, chancellor of Scotland.
She was grandmother of the great marquis.

2. Anne, married to John seventh earl of Mar, treasurer of Scotland.

3. Lilias, married to David lord Lindsay, son and apparent heir of David earl
of Crawfurd.

4. Catharine, married to John earl of Tullibardin, ancestor of the duke of
Athole.

5. Mary, married to sir James Stirling of Keir.

They all had issue.

This worthy lord died anno 1571, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIX. PATRICK, third lord Drummond, who, having been educated in his mother's
principles, Crawfu^d's M. S. hist. of the family, p. 113.
embraced the reformed religion, and after queen Mary was a prisoner in
England, he joined the king's party, and came entirely into the court measures.

He married, Writs of the fam. of Perth.
1st, lady Elizabeth Lindsay, daughter of David earl of Crawfurd, by whom he
had two sons, and five daughters.

1. James, lord Drummond, afterward earl of Perth.

2. John, who succeeded his brother.

1st daughter, Catharine, married to James lord Lesly, whose son, John earl of
Rothes, was father of the duke.

2. Lilias, married to Alexander earl of Dunfermline, chancellor of Scotland.

3. Jean, married to Robert earl of Roxburgh.

4. Elizabeth, married to Alexander lord Elphingstone.

5. Anne, married 1st, to Patrick Barclay of Towie, and, 2dly, to Andrew Fraser
of Murthil, ancestor of lord Fraser.

They all had issue.

He married, 2dly, Agnes, daughter and coheiress of John Drummond of
Innerpeffry, by whom he had no issue.

He died before the year 1600, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XX. JAMES, fourth lord Drummond, a man of extraordinary natural endowments,
improved by a polite and learned education. After having spent a considerable
time in France, and acquired the easy manners and address of that elegant
nation, he returned to Britain, where he soon distinguished himself at the
court of king James VI. by hi graceful behavior, and shining parts. He was
sent ambassador to Philip the III. of Spain, together with the earl of
Nottinghame, lord high admiral of England, in order to settle the ratification
of the treaty of peace betwixt the two nations, and to endeavor to reconcile
matters betwixt Spain and Holland; Diploma in arch. fam. de Perth, haered.
masc. quibuscunq. Crawfurd's M. S. p, 123.
and having acquitted himself in that negotiation with dexterity and success,
his majesty, immediately upon his return, was pleased to dignify him with the
title of earl of Perth, by patent, to him and his heirs-male whatsomever, dated
4th March 1605; and got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Jacobo comiti de Perth, of many lands, inter 1606 et 1609: But these promising
appearances, that portended such honor to his family and country, were soon
blasted by an untimely death, which carried him off in the very bloom of his
years, anno 1611.

He married lady Isabel Seton, daughter of Robert first earl of Winton, by whom
he had only one daughter,

Lady Jane Drummond, Charta penes ducem de Sutherland.
married to John earl of Sutherland, and had issue.

He having no sons, his estate and honors devolved upon his brorher,

XX. JOHN, second earl, who got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
Johanni comiti de Perth, domino Drummond et Stobhall, of many lands and
baronies, betwixt the years 1612 and 1616.

He was a man of great learning, probity and integrity, of unshaken loyalty to
his prince, of steady attachment to the interest of his country, kind and
benevolent to his friends, careful in managing the affairs of his family with
prudence and economy, and singularly just in all his dealings.

He was one of the peers that sat on the jury when Patrick earl of Orkney was
tried for treason and rebellion, Spotiswood's history.
who suffered accordingly, anno 1614.

Though this noble lord was appointed a privy councillor for life, by the
parliament in 1641, Rescinded acts of parl.
yet he was a man of steady loyalty, and a most faithful subject to the king.

He joined the great Montrose, was taken prisoner at the battle of Philiphaugh;
was, with his son lord Drummond, Guthrie's memoirs, and Cromwell's act of
indemnity.
fined by Oliver Cromwell, in the sum of five thousand pounds sterling, anno
1654, and suffered many other hardships on account of his attachment to the
royal family.

He married lady Jean Ker, eldest daughter of Robert earl of Roxburgh, by whom
he had four sons and two daughters.

1. Henry, lord Drummond, who died in infancy.

2. James, afterward earl of Perth.

3. Sir John Drummond of Logiealmond, grandfather of John Drummond, now of
Logiealmond, Esquire; and of Dr. Thomas Drummond.

4. Sir William Drummond, afterward earl of Roxburgh, of whom lord Ballenden,
etc. Vide title duke of Roxburgh.

1st daughter, lady Jane, married to John earl of Wigton, and had issue.

2. Lady Lilias, married to James earl of Tullibardin.

He died anno 1662, and was succeeded by his son,

XXI. JAMES, third earl of Perth, who, being young when the unhappy troubles in
king Charles I.'s reign began, was at first engaged on the parliament's side,
but so soon as Montrose appeared with the king's commission, he joined him at
the battle of Tippermuir, and continued steady in his loyalty ever after.
Cromwell's act of indemnity.
He was (with his father) fined by Oliver Cromwell in five thousand pounds
sterling, anno 1654, as before observed.

He married lady Anne Gordon, eldest daughter of George third marquis of
Huntly, by whom he had two sons and one daughter.

1. James, his heir.

2. John, afterward earl of Melfort, of whom more hereafter.

His daughter, lady Anne Drummond, married to John earl of Errol, lord high
constable of Scotland.

He died anno 1675, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XXII. JAMES, fourth earl of Perth, a man of fine natural parts, great probity
and honor; who having got an education suitable to his noble birth, became one
of the most accomplished men of his time.

He was in great favor with king Charles II. Records of council, and
commissions in the public register.
who appointed him one of his privy council, anno 1678, lord justice-general,
anno 1682, and lord high chancellor of Scotland, 23d June 1684.

When the duke of York, (afterward king James VII.) came to Scotland in 1679,
he contracted a more than ordinary friendship for the earl of Perth, which
subsisted inviolate to the end of his days.

Upon his royal highness's accession to the throne of great Britain, in 1685,
he not only continued the earl of Perth in the chancellor's office, Commission
in the public register.
but appointed him high sheriff of Mid-Lothian, and governor of the Bass.

Certain it is no man in Scotland had a greater share of king James's
confidence and esteem than this noble lord; and it is as certain his majesty
had not one subject in the whole kingdom, that served him with more fidelity
and honor.

It is observed by a noble author, that the administration of justice was never
carried on with more temper and impartiality than during this period.
Balcarras's memoirs.


He made a resignation in the king's hands, of the earldom of Perth, and his
whole other lands, with the heretable offices of the stewarty, coronership and
forestry of Strathearn, Glenerty, and Ballwhidder, etc. in favors of James
lord Drummond, his eldest son, and the heirs-male procreate, or to be
procreate, of his body; which failing, to the said James lord Drummond, and his
other heirs-male whatsoever, etc. whereupon he expede a charter under the great
seal, in which their whole lands, Writs of the family, and chart. in pub.
archiv.
lying in the stewarty of Strathearn, are particularly enumerated, dated in
November 1687.

In the same year, when the ancient order of the thistle was revived,
Balcarras's memoirs
the lord chancellor was named the first knight of that order.

At the revolution, when king James went over to France, the mob begun to
commit great disorders in Scotland. The chancellor being obnoxious to them, on
account of his religion, was advised by his friends (and indeed it was his own
inclination) to follow his majesty. He accordingly, (with his lady and family)
embarked in a small vessel at Burnt-island, but was pursued by a longboat from
Kirkcaldy, full of armed men. His lordship, being noways provided for such an
attack, was soon forced to surrender. He and his lady were plundered of all
they had by the ruffians, Ibidem.
and brought back. The chancellor was imprisoned in the common tolbooth of
Kirkcaldy, and most barbarously used.

He was afterward carried to the castle of Stirling, where he remained
prisoner near four years, and was at last set at liberty upon his promising to
transport himself beyond seas, Ibidem.
without any reason being given for his being so long confined.

He went first to Rome, where he staid about two years, when his old master
sent for him. He came to him at St. Germains in France, where his majesty
heaped all the honors and favors upon him that were in his power to bestow.
Crawfurd's M. S. hist. of the fam. and lives of the offic. of state, p. 233.
He created him duke of Perth, (the patent is said to be to his heirs-male,)
first lord of the bedchamber, knight of the garter, and chamberlain to the
queen. He also appointed him governor to his son.

He married, 1st, lady Jane Douglas, daughter of William marquis of Douglas, by
lady Mary Gordon his second lady, and by her had issue one son,

James, lord Drummond, -- and two daughters.

1. Lady Mary, married to William ninth earl Marishal, and had issue.

2. Lady Anne, who died unmarried.

He married, 2dly, Lilias, daughter of sir James Drummond of Machany, countess
dowager of Tullibardin, by whom he had two sons.

1. John, of whom more hereafter.

2. Charles, who died without issue.

He married, 3dly, lady Mary Gordon, daughter of Lewis marquis of Huntly, by
whom he had a son,

Edward, commonly called lord Edward, who will be mentioned hereafter, -- and a
daughter,

Lady Teresa.

This noble peer died at St. Germains in May 1716, and was interred in the
chapel of the Scotch college at Paris.

XXIII. JAMES, eldest son of the chancellor, commonly designed marquis of
Drummond, was educated in France, and improved his education by traveling into
all the countries in Europe, where strangers resort to acquire the knowledge of
men and things. His acquaintance with the most polite courts, gave him all the
easy address and genteel behavior that distinguish the man of fashion; and an
abundant stock of good natural parts made him reap the advantages that men of
sense only can acquire from an intercourse with foreign nations. He stuck fast
to the principles of his family, and attached himself firmly to the house of
Stewart. He attended king James VII. in his expedition to Ireland, and after
the battle of the Boyne, and the total reduction of that kingdom by king
William, when there seemed no further appearance of any scheme to bring about
his favorite cause, M. S. history of the family.
he returned to Scotland.

As he was zealous for the honor and independency of his country, he opposed
the union strenuously, as, in his opinion, evidently tending to destroy both.

It is much for the credit, and shows the disinterestedness, of this nobleman,
that though he was forward on every occasion, to contribute every thing, to the
utmost of his power, to bring back the exiled family, and was educated, and
firmly established in the principles of the church of Rome, yet when the plot
was carrying on in 1708 to effectuate that restoration, he insists, as a
preliminary, Hook's negotiations.
to secure to a Protestant people the Protestant religion, as well as their
civil liberties.

Upon the earl of Marr's insurrection in 1715, the marquis of Drummond was a
man of great consequence in that cause, by the connections he had with some of
the most considerable chieftains of the clans, and the trust they reposed in
him. Accordingly he joined the earl with all the force he could raise, and
behaved with great gallantry at the battle of Dunblain. After that attempt was
disconcerted, and the partisans of the house of Stewart were entirely
dispersed, he made his escape to France, where he died, and was buried near his
father, in the chapel of the Scotch college of Paris.

He married lady Jane, daughter of George duke of Gordon, by whom he had two
sons, and two daughters.

1. James, his heir.

2. John, commonly called lord John Drummond.

1st daughter, lady Mary Drummond.

2. Lady Henriet, died unmarried.

XXIV. JAMES, eldest son of John marquis of Drummond, commonly called duke of
Perth, succeededed to the whole estate. He was sent abroad in his infancy, to
be educated at the Scotch college of Doway; and, after having gone through the
course of studies usually taught in such seminaries, and obtained a competent
share of academical learning, for his further improvement he went to Paris,
where he acquired those exercises and accomplishments that are necessary for a
young nobleman. He was a good mathematician, and drew with the accuracy and
taste of a master. About the time of his majority, he returned to Scotland, and
applied himself entirely to the management of his private affairs, to the
encouragement of the liberal as well as the useful arts, to the improvement of
husbandry and the manufactures, not only upon his own estate, but through the
whole kingdom, wherever his influence extended, and thereby became a most
excellent member of civil life. As he had early imbibed all the principles of
his family, and devoted himself to the service of the house of Stewart, so soon
as Charles, the young pretender, arrived, he was amongst the first of those who
joined his standard, with all the force he could raise. He was his first
lieutenant general at the battle of Preston, commanded at the siege of Carlisle
and Stirling, and during the whole time of the rebellion, on every occasion
acted with the greatest courage and conduct, having no other point in view,
but, as far as in him lay, to promote the good of the cause in which he was
embarked. In spite of a very delicate constitution, he underwent the greatest
of fatigues, and was the first on every occasion of duty, where his head or his
hands could be of use, bold as a lion in the field of battle, but ever merciful
in the hour of victory. With an heart open to all the delicate feelings of
humanity, these mild and gentle affections that peculiarly distinguished the
brave, filled his breast with universal benevolence, made him attentive to
relieve the miseries and calamities of the distressed, wherever he found
them, and put him always in remembrance, that no distinction of party can blot
out the character of MAN.

After the battle of Cullodden he embarkked for France; but by this time his
constitution being quite exhausted, with the fatigues he had undergone, he died
in the passage upon the 13th day of May 1746. His body was kept for some days,
in expectation of making the land, but being detained by contrary winds, at
last it was obliged to be buried in the sea.

By an act of parliament it was declared, that all persons that were concerned
in the rebellion, and did not surrender before the month of July, should be
deemed convicts for high treason. But as this James died before the limited
time, the attainder did not take place against him: however it sell with all
its weight upon his brother and heir lord John, who was embarked in the same
cause, and in his person the whole estate of Perth was forfeited to the crown.
This John was educated at Doway, where he very soon discovered a strong
propensity and forward genius toward a military life, and accordingly the bent
of his studies were turned that way.

After having acquired some of the accomplishments necessary for a soldier, he
entered into the service of the king of France; and when he had passed through
several gradations, got the command of a regiment, which he raised himself, and
was named the Royal Scotch. He had the same warmth and affection for the
interest of the house of Stewart that his brother and father had, and commanded
the French piquets that were sent over in 1745, in support of that cause.
During the time of the rebellion, he always acted as a good officer, and his
corpse was of considerable advantage on several occasions to his party. After
the defeat at Cullodden, he made his escape to France in the same ship in which
his brother embarked, and resumed the command of his own regiment under the
conduct of Marshal Saxe in Flanders, where he distinguished himself on many
occasions, but in none more than in the care and concern he showed for any of
the British subjects that were taken prisoners, or in distress. Here he exerted
the generosity of his mind, and displayed that goodness of heart that ever
distinguishes true nobility. After the siege of Bergen-op-Zoom, he was
appointed a major general, when lying ill of a fever, of which he soon
thereafter died, and was buried in the chapel of the English nuns at Antwerp.
He also leaving no issue, the representation devolved upon his uncle,

Lord John Drummond, before mentioned, who was eldest son of the chancellor's
second marriage. He had a noble and liberal education, having spent a great
part of his younger years in foreign parts, particularly at the courts of
France and Spain. He was master of a dignity of manners, that claimed the
esteem of every body, kind and benevolent to his friends, affable and polite in
his behavior to all men, firm and steady in the principles which he believed
right; and though divested of an opulent estate, by the attainder of his
nephew, upon an inconsiderable fortune of his own, he maintained the dignity of
his family, and always appeared on every occasion in a manner suitable to his
rank. He married, 1st, the heiress of Balegarno; 2dly, lady Mary Stewart,
daughter of Charles earl of Traquair, but died without issue at Edinburgh, anno
1757, and was buried in the abbay church of Holyrood-house. The next in
succession was his brother,

Lord Edward Drummond, only son of the chancellor's third marriage, born in
Stirling castle, during his father's confinement. He went very early abroad to
France, where he spent the greatest part of his time, and lived in a great
retirement, being very bookish, and, in a manner, quite devoted to religious
duties.

He married lady Elizabeth, daughter of Charles earl of Middleton; but dying
without issue at Paris, anno 1760, in him ended the male-line of the
chancellor's body, whereby the representation of that most noble and
illustrious family devolves upon James Drummond of Lundin, grandson of John
earl of Melfort, to whom we now return.

XXII. JOHN, earl of Melfort, was second son of James third earl of Perth, and
brother-german to the chancellor.

To the account we have already given of this noble peer, page 468th of this
work, we must here subjoin, that after the revolution, when principle induced
him to sacrifice all, and follow the fortunes of king James VII. that same
address, that same genius, and acuteness of parts which distinguished him in
Britain, made him admired at the court of France, and continued him a first
favorite of his unfortunate master. The favorites of princes are always the
objects of envy, and the voice of slander, and detraction is ever loud and
noisy against them. This Melfort found from the tongues and pens of many,
Clarendon's diary.
as much beneath the consideration of the public, as unworthy the nobility and
rank of those who propagated the calumny: Balcarras's memoirs.
As we dare venture to challenge any person to show, from sufficient proof,
that he ever betrayed the interest of his master, or deviated from these
principles of honor and truth for which his family have always been remarkable.

He married, 1st, Sophia, daughter and sole heiress of Margaret Lundin of that
ilk (heiress of that ancient family) by her husband Robert Maitland, second
brother of John duke of Lauderdale, by whom he had two sons, and three
daughters.

1. James, his heir apparent, who died unmarried.

2. Robert, who carried on the line of the family.

1st daughter, lady Anne, married to sir John Houstoun of that ilk, baronet,
and had issue.

2. Lady Elizabeth, married to William viscount of Strathallan, and had issue.

3. Lady Mary, married, 1st, to Walter Scot of High-Chester; 2dly, to sir James
Sharp, Bart. and had issue to both.

He married, 2dly, Eupheme, daughter of sir Thomas Wallace, etc. etc. etc.

XXIII. ROBERT, son of John earl of Melfort's first marriage, succeeding to his
mother's estate, retained the name of Lundin, as representative of that most
ancient and illustrious family.

He married Anne, daughter of sir James Inglis of Cramond, Bart. by whom he had
two sons.

1. John, his heir.

2. James, of whom afterward.

He died anno 1716, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

John, who dying unmarried, anno 1735, was succeeded by his brother,

XXIV. JAMES, grandson and heir of John earl of Melfort's first marriage.

Upon the death of lord Edward Drummond, the last male descendant of the
chancellor's body, the representation of that most noble family devolved upon
this James, as before observed, who now carries the name of Drummond, etc. And
it being understood, that the attainder of the lord Drummond, son of the
chancellor, affected himself only, the chancellor never having been attainted,
and his issue-male being now extinct, this James (as we are informed) is
entitled to the dignity of the earl of Perth; and as his claim to the peerage
appears to be well founded, he will no doubt take up all the honors his
ancestors enjoyed.

He married lady Rachel Bruce, daughter of Thomas seventh earl of Kincardine,
by whom he had issue three sons, and one daughter.

1. Robert, a youth of great hopes and spirit, who died unmarried.

2. Thomas.

3. James.

His daughter, Rachel.

ARMS.
Or, three bars wavy gules.

CREST; on a ducal coronet, in place of the wreath stands a slouth-hound
proper, collared and leished gules.

SUPPORTERS; two savages proper, wreathed about the head and middle with oak
leaves, holding batoons over their shoulders, standing upon a compartment like
to a green hill semee of galtrops.

MOTTO; Gang warily.

CHIEF SEATS,
Are at Drummond-castle and Stobhall, in Perth-shire.

FORBES Lord PITSLIGO.
THE immediate ancestor of this great branch of the noble family of Forbes, was,

Sir John Forbes of that ilk, the fifth generation of that ancient house, in a
direct male-line, who flourished in the reigns of king Robert II. and III. and
had issue four sons. 1. Sir Alexander his heir, afterward lord Forbes. 2. Sir
William, the first of this family. For the other sons, vide page 264th.

I. Sir WILLIAM FORBES, second son of sir John Forbes of that ilk, and brother
of Alexander first lord Forbes, was designed sir William of Kinnaldy.

He married Agnes, daughter of sir William Fraser of Philorth, with whom he got
the lands and barony of Pitsligo in Aberdeen-shire, Chart. in pub. archiv. ad
annum 1424.
which afterward became the chief seat and title of his family; and they, on
account of this marriage, have ever since continued to quarter the arms of
Fraser with these of their own.

By her he had a son,

II. Sir ALEXANDER FORBES of Pitsligo, Lumisden's hist. of the family of
Forbes, M. S.
who succeeded him, and married a daughter of the family of Errol, by whom he
had three sons, and four daughters.

1. Sir Alexander, his heir.

2. George, ancestor of the Forbeses of Lethinty.

3. Sir Arthur, progenitor of the Forbeses of Rires.

1st daughter, --, married to John Gordon of Pitevie.

2. --, married to the sheriff of Cromarty.

3. --, married to --, of Moncoffer.

4. --, married to -- of Balquhalie.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. Sir ALEXANDER, who got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
Alexandro Forbes de Pitsligo, of the lands and barony of Pitsligo, etc. anno
1474.

He married Christian, daughter of sir John Ogilvie of Lintrethan, History of
the family of Forbes, M. S.
ancestor of the earl of Airly, by whom he had two sons.

1. Sir John, his heir.

2. William Forbes of Dauch, afterward of New, who married and had issue, and
of whom captain John Forbes, now of New, is the lineal representative.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. Sir JOHN, who got charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
domino Johanni Forbes de Pitsligo, of the lands of Pittaloquhy, etc. etc. in
1507.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir Patrick Wemyss of Rires, by whom he had a
son,

John, M. S. hist. of Forbes.
his heir, -- and four daughters.

1. --, married to --, lord of Asloune.

2. --, married to William Woodman of Fingask.

3. --, married to William White in Aberdeen.

4. --, married to William Lawson in Dysart.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. JOHN, who got charter-under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Johanni Forbes de Pitsligo, of the lands of Argathin, mill of Ausord, the
lands of Conbarty, and several others, betwixt the years 1530 and 1540.

He married Jean, daughter of sir William Keith of Innerugy, M. S. hist. of
(...) family.
by whom he had four sons, and three daughters.

1. Alexander, his heir.

2. Arthur, killed at the battle of Pinkie, anno 1547, without issue.

3. William.

4. John.

1st daughter, --, married to -- Straiton of Lauriston.

2. --, married to -- Forbes of Watertoun.

3. --, married to -- Keith of Pittendrum.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. ALEXANDER, who got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Alexandro Forbes de Pitsligo, of the lands and barony of Pitsligo, with the
lands of Fingask, mill thereof, etc. betwixt the years 1577 and 1583.

He married a daughter of Alexander lord Salton, M. S. hist. of the family.
by whom he had six sons, and one daughter,

1. Sir William, his heir.

2. Alexander, who carried on the line of the family.

3. John Forbes of Boynlie, who married Agnes Gray, a daughter of -- Shive, and
had issue.

4. Arthur Forbes, who married Margaret Leslie, a daughter of Pitcaple, and had
issue.

5. George.

6. Hector.

His daughter, Anne, married to -- of Lismore.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. Sir WILLIAM FORBES of Pitsligo, who married Catharine Gordon, a daughter
of the lord of Strathdon, Ibidem.
by whom he had two daughters.

The eldest married to the lord of Lethinty.

The second married to the lord of Auchinhoove.

Sir William dying without male issue, was succeeded by his brother,

VII. ALEXANDER FORBES of Pitsligo, who married, 1st, Elizabeth Anderson,
relict of William Forbes of Tolquhoan, by whom he had only one daughter.

Elizabeth, married to George Menzies of Pitsoddels.

He married, Chart. penes comitem Marishall.
2dly, Barbara Keith, daughter of William lord Keith, son and apparent heir of
William fourth earl Marishal, by whom he had a son,

Sir John, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Marjory, married to John Forbes of Brux.

He was succeeded by his son,

VIII. Sir JOHN FORBES of Pitsligo, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who got charters under the great seal, of the lands and barony of Pitsligo,
the town and lands of Kinnaldy, etc. etc. in the years 1599 and 1600.

He afterward got charters of some lands in 1618 and 1620, Ibidem.
domino Johanni Forbes de Pitsligo, etc.

He married Christian, daughter of sir Walter Ogilvie of Finlater and Deskford,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
by whom he had a son,

Alexander, afterward lord Pitsligo, -- and four daughters.

1. Anne, married to Alexander tenth lord Forbes.

2. Jean, married to -- Forbes of Tolquhoun.

3. Mary, married to -- Ogilvie of Boyne.

4. Christian, married to -- Frazer of Strichen.

He was succeeded by his son,

IX. ALEXANDER FORBES of Pitsligo, who, in his father's lifetime, got charters
under the great seal, Ibidem.
Alexandro Forbes filio domini Johannis Forbes de Pitsligo, of the town and
lands of Little Braco, Auchintoun, Bannamone, Keakis, etc. etc. in the years
1617 and 1618.

This Alexander being a man of parts and learning, was highly esteemed by king
Charles I. who raised him to the dignity of the peerage, by the title of lord
Forbes of Pitsligo, 24th June 1633, Diploma in pub. archiv.
by patent, haeredibus masculis quibuscunque, cognomen et arma de Forbes de
Pitsligo gerentibus.

He married lady Jean Keith, daughter of William sixth earl Marishal, by whom
he had a son,

Alexander, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Mary, married to sir John Gordon of Haddo.

He died anno 1635, and was succeeded by his son,

X. ALEXANDER, second lord Forbes of Pitsligo, Crawfurd's peerage, p. 407.
who married lady Mary, daughter of James earl of Buchan, by whom he had a son
and successor,

XI. ALEXANDER, third lord Forbes of Pitsligo, who married lady Sophia Erskine,
daughter of John ninth earl of Mar, Ibidem.
and dying anno 1691, by her left issue a son,

XII. ALEXANDER, fourth lord Forbes of Pitsligo, who succeeded him. He was a
man of good parts, great honor and spirit, and universally beloved and
esteemed.

He married, 1st, Rebecca, daughter of John Norton, an eminent merchant in
London, by whom he had a son,

John, master of Pitsligo.

He married, 2dly, Elizabeth Allan, also an English lady, by whom he had no
issue.

He had the misfortune to be engaged in the rebellion 1745, for which he was
attained by parliament, and his estate and honors were forfeited to the crown.

He died in an advanced age in December 1762.

XIII. JOHN, master of Pitsligo, only son of the fourth lord, had it not been
for his father's attainder, would have been fifth lord Pitsligo.

He married Rebecca Ogilvie, a daughter of the family of Auchincross, by whom
he has no issue.

ARMS.
Quarterly; 1st and 4th, three boar's heads couped argent, and muzzled gules,
for Forbes; 2d and 3d azure, three cinquefoils argent, for Frazer.

CREST; on a wreath, a falcon argent.

SUPPORTERS; two boars proper, muzzled gules.

MOTTO; Altius ibunt qui ad summa nituntur.

CHIEF SEAT,
At Pitsligo, in Aberdeenshire.

STEWART Lord PITTENWEEM.
SIR Alan Stewart of Darnly, ancestor of the duke of Lennox, married Catharine,
daughter of sir William Seton of that ilk, by whom he had two sons.

1. Sir John, his successor, who carried on the line of the Stewarts of Darnly
and Lennox.

2. Alexander, ancestor of lord Pittenweem.

I. ALEXANDER, Stewart's history of the royal family.
second son of sir Alan of Darnly, got from his father the lands and barony of
Galstoun, in Airshire, and left issue a son,

II. ROBERT STEWART of Galstoun, who succeeded him, and was father of,

III. ALEXANDER, who got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pu archiv.
Alexandro Stewart, filio et haeredi quondam Roberti Stewart de Galstoun, of
the lands and barony of Glastoun, etc. 1511.

He left issue two sons and one daughter.

1. Thomas, of Galstoun.

2. Alan Stewart of Threapwood, who was provost of Edinburgh in the reign of
king James V. Stewart's hist.
and captain of his majesty's guards.

His daughter, Nisbet's append. p. 19.
Margaret Stewart, married to James Chalmers of Gadgirth.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. THOMAS STEWART of Galstoun, who, by Isabel Henderson his wife, had issue
two sons. Stewart's hist. etc.


1. Thomas, his heir.

2. Colonel William Stewart of Houston, progenitor of lord Pittenweem, of whom
afterward.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. THOMAS STEWART of Galstoun, who left issue a son and successor, Ibidem.


VI. WILLIAM STEWART of Galstoun, who left issue a son, Ibidem.


VII. LUDOVICK STEWART of Galstoun, who succeeded him, Ibidem.
and died without issue, anno 1650. We therefore return to,

V. Colonel WILLIAM STEWART of Houston, second son of Thomas Stewart of
Galstoun, Keith's bishops.
before mentioned. He was appointed commendator of Pittenween, anno 1567.

He afterward got a charter under the great seal, Willielmo Stewart coronatori
ad prioratum de Pittenweem, Chart. in pub. archiv.
cum terris, dominiis, redditibus, etc. ad dictum prioratum spectant. etc. anno
1583.

He was captain of the guards to king James VI. and married Isabel, daughter of
sir Patrick Hepburn of Waughton, Ibidem.
knight, by Margaret his wife, sister of William Lundin of that ilk, by whom he
had a son,

VI. FREDERICK STEWART, a man of great parts and learning, and highly esteemed
by king James VI. who raised him to the dignity of the peerage, Chart. in
cancellaria.
by the title of lord Pittenween, by patent, to the heirs male of his body,
dated anno 1609.

But he dying without male issue, the honors became extinct.

COLLIER Earl of PORTMORE.
THOUGH the surname of the earls of Portmore is Collier, yet they are
originally sprung from the ancient family of Robertson of Strowan, the chief or
head of that great and numerous clan in Scotland.

The immediate ancestor of this noble family was,

I. Sir ALEXANDER ROBERTSON, a cadet of the said honorable house of Strowan,
who being a man of distinguished merit, Scotch comp. and Salmon's abridg.
was created a baronet by king Charles II. on 26th February 1676. He settled in
the province of Holland, where he made a considerable figure. He assumed the
surname of Collier, and was afterward designed sir Alexander Robertson alias
Collier.

He left issue a son and successor,

II. Sir DAVID, who dropped the name of Robertson altogether, and retained only
that of Collier.

He was a man of a rare military genius. He, on many occasions, remarkably
distinguished himself by his courage and conduct, and deservedly rose to the
highest rank in the army.

He was in great favor with king William, was very instrumental in reducing
Ireland to his majesty's obedience, anno 1691; and for his good and faithful
services, was raised to the dignity of the peerage of Scotland, Chart. in
cancellaria.
with the title of lord Portmore, by patent, dated 1st June 1699.

In the first year of queen Anne, he was made a major general, and was by her
majesty further dignified with the titles of earl of Portmore, viscount
Milsington, Ibid. haered. mase. ex ejus corpore.
in the county of Roxburgh, lord Collier, etc. by patent, to the heirs male of
his body, dated 13th April 1703.

In 1710, he was appointed commander in chief of her majesty's forces in
Scotland; and in January thereafter, he was made a general of foot.

In 1712, he commanded part of the army in Flanders, under the duke of Ormond;
and that same year was constituted one of the privy council to her majesty, and
a knight of the most ancient order of the thistle.

In August 1713, he was appointed governor of Gibraltar. In October
thereafter, he was chosen one of the sixteen Scotch peers to the fourth British
parliament; and in April 1714, he got the command of the royal regiment of
Scotch dragoons.

He married Catharine, daughter of sir Charles Sidley of Great Chart, in the
county of Kent, baronet, who was by king James VII. created countess of
Dorchester for life.

By her he had two sons.

1. David, lord Milsington.

2. Charles Collier, Esquire; who became his father's heir.

David, lord Milsington, eldest son and apparent heir of David earl of
Portmore, married Bridget, daughter of John Noel of Walcot, in the county of
Northampton, Esquire; a son of the viscount Campden, by whom he had several
children, who all died in infancy. He also died before his father, without any
surviving issue.

The old earl died anno 1729, and was succeeded by his son,

III. CHARLES, second earl of Portmore, who, in his father's lifetime, was
chosen member of parliament for Andover, in Hampshire, and after his father's
death, was elected one of the sixteen Scotch peers to the eighth and ninth
British parliaments, in the years 1734 and 1741, and is also a knight of the
most noble order of the thistle.

He married Juliana, duchess dowager of Leeds, daughter of Roger Hele, in the
county of Devon, Collin's peerage of Engl. vol. I. p. 2^4.
Esquire; by whom he had several children, whose names have not come to our
knowledge.

ARMS.
Gules, a cheveron between three wolve's heads couped argent, three trees
argent, fructed, of the first.

CREST; an unicorn's head rampant argent, horned and unguled or.

SUPPORTERS; two wolves argent.

MOTTO; Avance.

CHIEF SEAT,
At Weybridge, a beautiful seat on the river Thames, in the county of Surry.

GRAHAM Viscount PRESTON.
THE immediate ancestor of this noble family was,

Sir John Graham of Kilbride, second son of Malise earl of Strathearn and
Menteith; a branch of the most illustrious house of Montrose.

This sir John got the lands of Kilbride, Port Coldon, etc. from Malise earl of
Menteith, his father, Chart. in pub. archiv.
which are confirmed to him by two charters under the great seal, the one in
1464, the other in 1485.

He married -- Campbell, a daughter of the family of Argyle, Crawfurd's peerage.
by whom he had three sons.

1. Thomas, his heir, ancestor of the Grahams of Gartmore, etc.

2. John, progenitor of this noble family.

3. --, of whom the Grahams of Oibb in Argyleshire are descended.

John, second son of sir John Graham of Kilbride, in the beginning of the reign
of king James V. settled in the north of England, Ib. Salmon's abridg. Scotch
comp. etc.
where he acquired a considerable estate, and of him was lineally descended,

I. Sir RICHARD GRAHAM, who was proprietor of the lands of Norton in Yorkshire,
Net^erby and Plump, etc. in Cumberland.

He made a great figure in the reign of king Charles 1. Ibidem.
who created him a baronet, 1629.

He was a faithful and loyal subject and servant to his majesty, during all the
time of the civil war, on which account he suffered many hardships.

He married Catharine, daughter and coheiress of sir Thomas Musgrave of
Cumeath, Salmon's abridg.
by whom he had two sons and four daughters.

1. Sir George, his heir.

2. Sir Richard Graham of Norton Conyers, in Yorkshire, who was created a
baronet, anno 1662, Ibidem.
of whom is lineally descended sir Reginald Graham, the present baronet.

1st daughter, Catharine, died unmarried.

2. Mary, married to sir Edward Musgrave of Hayton, in Cumberland, baronet.

3. Elizabeth, married to sir Cuthbert Heron of Chipchase, in Northumberland,
baronet.

4. Susan, married to Reginald Carnaby of Hulton, in Northumberland, Esquire;.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. Sir GEORGE GRAHAM, designed of Netherby and Esk, who married lady Mary
Johnston, Ibidem.
daughter of James earl of Annandale, by whom he had two sons.

1. Sir Richard.

2. James Graham, Esquire; who was elected member of parliament for Appleby, Ibidem.
in 1702 and 1705, and for the county of Westmoreland in the five succeeding
parliaments.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. Sir RICHARD GRAHAM of Netherby and Esk, who was a man of great honor and
merit, and highly esteemed by king Charles II. who raised him to the dignity of
the peerage of Scotland, by the titles of lord Graham of Esk, and viscount
Preston, in Haddington-shire, by patent, Chart. in archivis Caroli II.
haeredibus mase. in perpetuum.
wherein he is designed sir Richard Graham of Esk, grandson of sir Richard of
Norton, etc. to him and his heirs-male for ever, dated 12th May 1681.

In the patent are particularly narrated the great fidelity, faithful services,
and sufferings of his grandfather for his attachment to the royal family, and
his own constant loyalty, etc.

He was one of the commissioners of excise, one of the council to her majesty
queen Catharine, and member of parliament for Windsor, anno 1685.

He was appointed one of the secretaries of state for England, in the room of
Robert Spencer earl of Sunderland, anno 1688, but was deprived of that office
at the revolution.

He was, by king James VII. created a peer of England, by the title of baron
Esk, in the county of Cumberland, but the patent being dated at Versailles,
Salmon's abridgement.
after the king's abdication, was rejected by the house of lords.

In 1690, he and his brother James, together with John Ashton, William Pen the
quaker, doctor Turner bishop of Ely, and Henry Hyde earl of Clarendon, Ibidem.
were apprehended for a conspiracy to restore king James. Lord Preston and Mr.
Ashton were tried and condemned; the latter was executed, but the former had
his life granted him.

He married lady Anne Howard, Colin's peerage of Engl. vol. II. p. 408.
daughter of Charles earl of Carlyle, by whom he had a son,

IV. CHARLES, who, had it not been for his father's sentence, would have been
second viscount Preston.

He married a daughter of John Cox, Esquire; sister of the countess of
Peterborough, and died in February 1739, leaving issue a son,

V. WILLIAM GRAHAM, a clergyman of the church of England, etc.

ARMS.
Quarterly; 1st and 4th or, on a chief sable, three escallop shells of the
field; 2d and 3d or, a fesse argent and azure, on a chief a cheveron gules.

CREST; on a wreath argent and azure, two wings conjoined.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter an eagle; on the sinister, a lion, both ermine, and
ducally crowned or.

MOTTO; Reason contents me.

PRIMROSE Viscount PRIMROSE.
AS the descent of this noble family is fully deduced under the title, earl of
Roseberry, page 574th, to that we refer our readers.

DOUGLAS Duke of QUEENSBERRY.
AS the grandeur and antiquity of the noble and illustrious name of Douglas is
fully set forth under the title, duke of Douglas, we shall deduce the descent
of this great branch of that illustrious house, from their immediate ancestor,
viz.

WILLIAM, first earl of Douglas, who, about the year 1340, married lady
Margaret* daughter of Donald, sister, and at last sole heiress of Thomas earl
of Mar, Chart. in pub. arch Rymer's ^^ed. Angliae, Chartulary of Melrose, and
chart. in archiv. ^am. de Douglas.
by whom he got the lands and barony of Drumlanrig, (the original patrimony of
this noble family,) and several other considerable possessions in the south of
Scotland, of which there are many documents.

He dying anno 1384, was succeeded by his eldest son,

JAMES, second earl of Douglas, who commanded the Scotch army at Otterburn,
where he gained a victory over the English, but lost his life in the battle,
anno 1388.

I. Sir WILLIAM, the first of this family, was son of the said James. He got
from his father the lands and barony of Drumlanrig, etc. by a charter, in these
words: Jacobus comes de Douglas, etc. noveritis nos dedisse, etc. Willielmo de
Douglas, filio nostro, omnes terras nostras totius baroniae nostrae de
Drumlanrig, etc. infra vicecom. de Dumfries, tenend. e^ habend. omnes dictas
terras praefatae baroniae, cum pertinen. eidem Williehno et haeredibus suis, de
corpore suo legitime procreandis, in feodo et haereditate in perpetuum, etc.
faciendo servitium unius militis, nomine albae firmae. In cujus rei
testimonium, sigillum nostrum fecimus apponi, testibus domino Archibaldo de
Douglas domino Calovidiae, Jacobo de Douglas domino de Dalkeith, Jacobo de
Lindsay domino de Craufurd, Willielmo de Lindsay, Roberto Colville, Willielmo
de Borthwick, Adamo Forrester, Charta penes ducem de Queensberry.
Adamo de Hope-Pringle, Alano de Laudre, cum multis aliis. The charter is
without date; but appears to have been granted about the year 1387.

It may be here observed, that this noble family has always carried the arms
of the earls of Mar quartered with their own, which denotes their descent from
Margaret heiress and countess of Mar, Nisbet, vol. I. p. 77.
as before-noticed.

This sir William was a man of fine natural parts, which were greatly improved
by a liberal education; and he always appeared like a man of the first rank.

He obtained a safe conduct from king Richard II. for himself, Rymer's foed.
Angliae, tom. VIII. p. 25.
with twenty persons in his retinue, to go into England, anno 1397.

He got another from king Henry IV. to travel through England, anno 1405, in
which he is designed Willielmus dominus de Drumlanrig. Ibid. p. 421. 429.
Also one, anno 1406.

He, like many of his brave ancestors, was a great warrior, and signalized
himself upon several occasions against the enemies of his country.

Anno 1411, he and Gavin Dunbar, son of the earl of March, Extract ex chron.
Scot. and Scotch comp. p. 87.
with remarkable conduct and resolution, attacked, retook, and plundered the
town of Roxburgh, then in the hands of the English.

He being equally qualified for the cabinet and the field, was concerned in all
the public state-transactions of his time.

In 1412, the duke of Albany, governor of Scotland, sent him ambassador to the
court of England, to negotiate the release of king James I. then their
prisoner, Rymer's foed. Angliae. tom. VIII. p. 703. and ib. p. 735.
where he acquitted himself with honor and reputation, though his negotiation at
that time was not attended with the desired success: however he obtained from
his majesty a charter, all fairly writ with his own hand, which, for the sake
of the curious, we have here inserted, and is as follows:

"James, through the grace of God, king of Scottis, till all that this lettre
heiris or seis, sendis gretynge. Wit ze, that we have grantit, and by this
present lettre grantis, a special confirmatioune in the may form, till our
trusty and well belosit cosyng sir William of Douglas of Drumlanrig, of all the
landis that he is possessit and charterit of, within the kingdom of Scotland;
that is to say, the landis of Drumlanrig, of Hawike, and of Selkirk; the which
charter and possessionns, by this lettre we confirm. In witness of the quhilke
these present lettres we wrate with our proper hand, Charta penes ducem de
Queensberry.
under the signet ussit in seyling of our lettres, as now at Croydon, the last
day of November, the zeire of our Lord 1412."

In 1416, a treaty was set on foot for relieving the king, which proceeded so
far, that the king of England consented to his coming to Scotland, Rymer's
foed. Angliae, tom. IX. p. 417.
provided he should return against a certain time, or pay the sum of 100,000
merks sterling, and give hostages for the performance.

This sir William of Drumlanrig, with the earls of Fife, Athole, Buchan, Mar,
Douglas, Crawfurd, the bishops of St. Andrews, Glasgow, etc. were named the
hostages as well as commissioners to bring the treaty to a conclusion; Ibidem.
but for reasons of state even this treaty did not take effect.

In 1420, the English carried king James to France, in hopes of drawing the
Scotch auxiliaries over to their interest, by their king's presence in their
army.

Sir William, at this time, intending to wait on the king in France, Ibid. tom.
X. p. 9.
obtained a safe conduct from king Henry V. of England, for himself and twenty
of his retinue. He arrived in France, and waited on the king accordingly; but
it does not appear that he or any of the Scots could be prevailed on to desert
their old allies the French, though their king was in the army against them; well
knowing, that if their royal master had not been a prisoner, Abercrombie, vol.
I. p. 254.
he would not have been there on that side.

This great man, being in high favor with king James I. had the honor of
knighthood conferred upon him at the solemnity of his majesty's coronation,
anno 1424; and having afterward joined the Scotch auxiliaries in France,
Simson's account of the family of Queensberry.
lost his life in the service of that crown, anno 1427, having married
Elizabeth, daughter of sir Robert Stewart of Durisdeer and Rosythe, by whom he
had a son,

II. WILLIAM, second baron of Drumlanrig, who succeeded him, Charta penes ducem
de Queensberry. et Rymer's foed.
and that same year was sent an hostage to England (in exchange of another
lord) for payment of the remainder of king James's ransom, but was releived
soon afterward.

He was a great patriot, and a gallant officer, having remarkably signalized
himself at the battle of Sark, where the Scotch army obtained an important
victory over the English, under the command of his cousin the brave earl of
Ormond, brother of James earl of Douglas, anno 1448.

He married Janet, daughter of sir Herbert Maxwell, lord of Carlaverock,
ancestor of the earl of Nithsdale, by whom he had

William, Simson's account, etc.
his son and successor, and died anno 1458.

III. WILLIAM, third baron of Drumlanrig, eminently displayed his great
knowledge in the military art at the siege of Roxburgh, where his royal master,
Ibidem.
king James II. lost his life, anno 1460.

He was likeways engaged in the bold attempt of the earl of Angus in 1462,
where he relieved and brought off Mr. Brysack with the French forces, then
closely besieged by the English in the castle of Alnwick: Ibid. Vide title
Douglas.
this was done in sight of the whole English army, which was more than double
the number of the Scotch.

He married Margaret Carlyle, daughter of William lord Torthorald, by whom he
had two sons.

1. Sir William. Chartulary of Arbroath, p. 332. penes Walter. MacFarlane de
eodem.


2. Mr. John Douglas, bred to the church.

He died anno 1464, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. WILLIAM, fourth baron of Drumlanrig, who was a man of great loyalty,
worth, and honor, and a faithful subject to king James III.

In the unnatural rebellion of Alexander duke of Albany, against his brother
the king, this William joined the royal army, Thomson's historical col.
and was killed at the battle of Kirkconnel near Sanquhar, 22d July 1484,
leaving issue by Elizabeth his wife, a daughter of sir Robert Crichton of
Sanquhar, Chart. penes ducem de Queensberry.
ancestor of the earl of Dumfries, four sons, and three daughters.

1. James, of Drumlanrig.

2. Archibald, ancestor of the Douglases of Cashogle and Dalony.

3. George, ancestor of the Douglases of Penziere.

4. John, vicar of Kirkconnel.

1st daughter, Chart. penes dom. Cathcart.
Margaret, married, 1st, to John lord Cathcart; 2dly, to sir Robert Dalziel,
ancestor of the earl of Carnwath.

2. Janet, Scots compend. p. 88.
married, 1st, to William lord Somerville; Ibidem.
2dly, to Alexander Gordon, son and apparent heir of John Gordon of Lochinvar,
Charta penes dom. Cathcart.
ancestor of viscount Kenmure.

3. Elizabeth, Chart. penes ducem de Queensberry.
married to John Campbell, son and heir apparent of James of Loudoun, ancestor
of the earl of Loudoun.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. JAMES, fifth baron of Drumlanrig, who, upon his own resignation, got a new
grant from the crown of his whole estate, Chart. in pub. archivis.
to himself and his heirs, 19th May 1492.

He married Janet, Charta penes ducem de Queensberry.
daughter of David Scot of Buccleuch, ancestor of the duke of Buccleuch, by
whom he had a son,

Sir William, of Drumlanrig, -- and a daughter,

Janet, married to Roger Grierson of Lag.

And dying in 1498, was succeeded by his only son,

VI. Sir WILLIAM, sixth baron, who got a charter under the great seal, Chart.
in pub. archiv.
Willielmo Douglas de Drumlanrig, terrarum baroniae de Hawick, etc. 15th June
1511.

He being a man of good parts, and great spirit, was in high favor with king
James IV. whom he accompanied to the field of Flowdon, where he lost his life
with his royal master, and the flower of the nobility of Scotland, anno 1513.
He married Elizabeth, daughter of sir John Gordon of Lochinvar, ancestor of
viscount Kenmure, Ibidem.
by whom he had two sons, and three daughters.

1. Sir James, of Drumlanrig.

2. Robert, Chart. in archiv. ad ann. 1512.
ancestor of the family of Lincluden, of whom the Douglases of Burford are
descended.

1st daughter, Janet, married to Robert lord Maxwell.

2. Agnes, married to Andrew Cunningham of Kirkshaw.

3. Margaret, married to John lord Cathcart.

VII. Sir JAMES DOUGLAS, seventh baron of Drumlanrig, succeeded his father. He
was a man of great worth, probity, and honor, and a faithful subject both to
king James V. and queen Mary.

In 1526, he was one of the loyalists that attempted to deliver king James V.
from the earl of Angus, and others of the nobility, who, it is said, kept his
majesty in the condition of a prisoner; but their attempt was not attended with
success at that time, which obliged him to take a remission.

He continued faithful and steady to the interest of queen Mary, for which the
duke of Chattelherault, then regent, conferred the honor of knighthood upon
him; Rymer's foed. Angliae.
and in 1553, Chart. penes ducem de Queensberry.
the queen and the regent were pleased to constitute him warden and justiciary
of the west marches of Scotland over against England, which office he
discharged with great fidelity, conduct, and resolution for many years, till
old age obliged him to resign it.

He got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Jacobo Douglas de Drumlanrig, militi, terrarum de Moswald, etc. in Annandale,
8th June 1562.

He married, 1st, Margaret Douglas, daughter of George master of Angus, Charta
penes ducem de Queensberry, ad ann. 1513.
son and heir apparent of Archibald earl of Angus, by whom he had two daughters.

1. Janet, married, 1st, to sir William Douglas of Cashogle; 2dly, to John
Charteris of Amisfield.

2. Margaret, married to John Jardine of Applegirth.

Sir James having divorced his first lady, married, 2dly, (by a dispensation
from the pope's legate,) Christian Montgomery, daughter of John master of
Eglington, Chart. in pub. archiv.
and got a charter under the great seal, Jacobo Douglas de Drumlanrig, et
Christianae Montgomery ejus sponsae, of several lands in Drumfries-shire, 30th
October 1545. By her he had a son,

Sir William Douglas, designed of Hawick, -- and four daughters.

1. Margaret, married, 1st, to Edward lord Sanquhar; 2dly, to William Graham
fifth earl of Menteith; Ibidem.
and, 3dly, to Mr. Wauchop of Niddery.

2. Helen, Ibidem.
married to -- Grierson of Lag.

3. Janet, married, 1st, to James Tweedie of Drumelzier; 2dly, to sir William
Ker of Cesssord, Ibidem.
ancestor of the duke of Roxburgh.

4. Christian, married to Alexander Stewart of Gairlies, ancestor of the earl
of Galloway.

He lived to a great age, and died in 1578.

VIII. Sir WILLIAM DOUGLAS of Hawick, only son of sir James of Drumlanrig, was
a man of great valor and magnanimity. He suppressed several incursions on the
borders with singular prudence and conduct.

When the civil wars broke out in queen Mary's time, he joined the king's
party, whose interest he always adhered to with great fidelity.

In his father's lifetime he got a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
Willielmo Douglas de Drumlanrig, juniori, terrarum de Chaplain, Carroghane,
Lincluden, etc. 28th July 1565.

He married Margaret, Charta penes ducem de Queensberry, and chart. in pub.
archiv.
daughter of sir James Gordon of Lochinvar, ancestor of viscount Kenmure, by
whom he had a son,

Sir James of Drumlanrig, -- and three daughters.

1. Margaret, Charta penes ducem de Queensberry.
married to sir Robert Montgomery of Skelmorly, Bart.

2. Janet, Ibidem.
married to sir James Murray of Cockpool.

3. Christian, married, 1st, to Robert, second earl of Carnwath; Ibidem.
2dly, to sir Alexander Stewart of Gairlies, father of the first earl of
Galloway. -- They all had issue.

Sir William of Hawick died before his father in 1572, and was succeeded by his
son,

IX. Sir JAMES DOUGLAS of Drumlanrig, who succeeded also to his grandfather,
anno 1578.

He obtained a charter of a great many lands from king James VI. Chart. in pub.
archiv.
anno 1586.

He was a man of great judgment and prudence, and was very instrumental in
reconciling the differences amongst the contending parties, which gave great
trouble and uneasiness to king James VI. before his accession to the crown of
England.

He was also very active in suppressing the insurrections on the borders, which
were too frequent in those days; for all which, and his steady adherence to the
king's interest, he was in great favor, and highly esteemed by his majesty.

He married Mary, Charta penes ducem de Queensberry.
daughter of John lord Fleming, and sister of John earl of Wigton, by whom he
had four sons, and two daughters.

1. Sir William, afterward earl of Queensberry.

2. Sir James Douglas of Mouswald.

3. David Douglas of Airdoch.

4. George Douglas of Penziere.

1st daughter, Janet, married to William Livingston of Jarviswood, ancestor of
viscount Teviot.

2. Helen, married to John Menzies of Castlehill.

He died in August 1615, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. Sir WILLIAM DOUGLAS of Drumlanrig, who, being a man of eminent parts and
learning, was a great favorite of king James VI. whom he had the honor of
entertaining at his house of Drumlanrig, in 1617, and to whom he continued a
faithful, dutiful, and loyal subject all his reign; and being in no less favor
with king Charles 1. Chart. in pub. archiv.
he was by that prince raised to the honor of the peerage, by the titles of
viscount Drumlanrig, lord Douglas of Hawick and Tibbers, etc. 1st April 1628.

When the king came to Scotland, he was pleased further to dignify him with the
titles and honors of earl of Queensberry, Ibidem.
viscount Drumlanrig, lord Douglas of Hawick, Tibbers, etc. by patent to him
and his issue-male, 13th June 1633.

He afterward got a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
Willielmo comiti de Queensberry, of the lands of Sanquhar, Cumnock, etc. 13th
June 1638.

He married lady Isabel Ker, Ibidem.
daughter of Mark earl of Lothian, by whom he had four sons, and two daughters.

1. James, earl of Queensberry.

2. Sir William Douglas of Kelhead, created baronet by king Charles II. in
1668, great grandfather of sir John Douglas now of Kelhead, baronet.

3. Archibald Douglas of Dornock.

4. Robert, who died unmarried.

1st daughter, lady Margaret, married to James earl of Hart^ield, grandfather
of the first marquis of Annandale.

2. Lady Janet, married to Thomas lord Kirkcudbright.

And dying in 1639, was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. JAMES, second earl of Queensberry, a man of singular merit, honor and
probity, a firm and steady friend of the royal family during all the time of
the civil war.

In 1645, Minutes of parliament.
he was amerced by the parliament in 100,000 merks for siding with Montrose.

After the battle of Kilsyth, he thought to have joined Montrose; but the
leading men of Glencairn, who had raised a great force for the defense of their
country, as they pretended, surprised him in the mean time* carried him
prisoner to Carlyle, and there delivered him to the governor, who closely
confined him for some time.

After he obtained his liberty, thinking to be even with the Glencairn men, he
obtained from the king a grant of jurisdiction over their country, Ibidem.
the ampleit that could be bestowed, but that grant was taken from him by the
parliament 1649.

In 1654. He was again condemned by Oliver Cromwell to pay 4000 l. Ibidem, and
Cromwell's act of indem.
sterling, as a new mulct, for his malignancy and rottenness of heart,
according to the language of these times.

He married, 1st, lady Mary, daughter of James marquis of Hamilton and earl of
Cambridge, by whom he had no issue.

He married, 2dly, lady Margaret Stewart, daughter of John earl of Traquair,
lord high treasurer of Scotland, by whom he had four sons and five daughters.

1. William, his heir.

2. James, who was a lieutenant general in the army, married, and had issue,
which are now extinct. He died in 1691.

3. John, who was killed at the siege of Treves, anno 1673.

4. Robert, slain at the siege of Maestricht, anno 1676.

1st daughter, lady Mary, married to Alexander earl of Galloway.

2. Lady Catharine, married to sir James Douglas of Kelhead, baronet.

3. Lady Hemiet, married to sir Robert Grierson of Lag, baronet.

4. Lady Margaret, married, 1st, to sir Alexander Jardine of Applegirth; 2dly,
to sir David Thoirs.

5. Lady Isabel, married to sir William Lockhart of Carstairs.

He died anno 1671, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. WILLIAM, third earl of Queensberry, who was a man of fine
accomplishments, and great abilities, was highly esteemed by his majesty king
Charles II. who constituted him one of the lords of his privy council, anno
1667; and in 1680, by a commission under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
he was made justice-general of Scotland.

In his father's lifetime he got two charters under the great seal, Willielmo
domino de Drumlanrig, Charta penes ducem de Queensberry.
domino de Sanquhar, officiorum vicecomitis de Dumfries, et coronatoris ejusd.
etc. in 1664 and 1667.

In February 1682, he was created lord Douglas of Kinmont, Middlebie and
Dornock, viscount of Nith, Torthorald and Ross, earl of Drumlanrig and
Sanquhar, Ibidem.
and marquis of Queensberry, etc. as a mark of the royal favor, on account of
his own, and the unshaken loyalty of his noble progenitors.

In April 1682, he obtained the king's manuel, to the lord lion king at arms,
Nisbet, vol. I. p. 77.
ordering the double tressure to be superadded to his armorial bearings, as it
is in the royal achievement.

In May thereafter, he was constituted lord high treasurer of Scotland.

In September, he was made constable and governor of the castle of Edinburgh,
and one of the extraordinary lords of session, holding at the same time diverse
military commissions besides: and indeed there were few great offices in
Scotland, whether sacred, civil, or military, that, upon every vacancy, were
not left to his disposal during the latter part of this reign; the king, and
his brother the duke of Albany and York, having delegated to him almost all
their authority in that kingdom. This is fully instructed by a vast number of
letters from the duke of Albany to this noble duke, Penes ducem de Queensberry.
still preserved in the family.

And that no honor might be wanting which his prince could bestow, he was
created marquis of Dumfries-shire, and duke of Queensberry, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
by letters patent, to him and his male issue, dated 3d November 1684, and was
afterward made one of the lords of the privy council in both kingdoms.

Upon king James's accession to the crown, he was not only continued in his
former po^^s by that prince, but was appointed high commissioner to represent
his majesty's royal person in the parliament of Scotland, anno 1685; and he and
his son, the earl of Drumlanrig, were at the same time constituted the king's
lieutenants in the county of Dumfries, etc.

In 1686, he was made president of the council; but as he did not altogether
comply with the measures of these times, but opposed the project of taking away
the penal laws and test, he was soon after laid entirely aside.

He then retired to his seat at Drumlanrig, where he lived to the end of his
days, in great splendour and magnificence: he rebuilt his fine castle there,
which, with it is gardens, now highly improved and finished, yields to none in
Scotland for stateliness and elegance.

He also greatly improved his estate, which had been much impaired by the
loyalty and sufferings of his father and grandfather, and the iniquities of
these unhappy times.

He married lady Isabel, daughter of William marquis of Douglas, by whom he had
three sons and one daughter.

1. James, his heir.

2. William, created earl of March, to whom he gave a considerable estate in
Tweeddale. Vide title Douglas earl of March, p. 443.

3. Lord George, a youth of great hopes, who died unmarried, anno 1693.

His daughter, lady Anne, married to David earl of Wemyss, and had issue.

The duke dying in 1695, was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. JAMES, second duke of Queensberry, a man of great abilities, and fine
accomplishments, both natural and acquired.

After he had finished the course of his travels, king Charles II. immediately
upon his return home, made him one of his privy council for Scotland, and
lieutenant colonel of the regiment of horse commanded by general Graham,
afterward viscount of Dundee, anno 1684: which offices he enjoyed till the
year 1688, that he was laid aside for not complying with the measures of the
court.

He came early into the revolution, and was made colonel of the Scotch
horse-guards by the prince of Orange.

After that prince was declared king, his commission was renewed, and he was
made one of the lords of the privy council and exchequer, and one of the lords
of the bedchamber.

In 1690, king William sent him to command a body of troops in Scotland under
general Mackay.

In 1692, he was made one of the lords of the treasury, and in 1693, he had a
patent to sit and vote in parliament as a peer, being then lord high treasurer
of Scotland, and an officer of state, his father being then alive.

In 1695, he gave up all his military employments, was made lord privy seal,
and one of the extraordinary lords of session.

In 1700, he was appointed lord high commissioner, to represent his majesty's
royal person for two sessions of parliament in Scotland. When he returned to
court in 1701, he was elected a knight of the most noble order of the garter,
and was installed at Windsor on the 10th July following.

Queen Anne, being sensible that the duke had served king William with great
fidelity, immediately upon her accession to the throne, made him secretary of
state for Scotland; and having a great opinion of his abilities and good
conduct, did also constitute him her high commissioner in 1702, to represent
her majesty in the Scotch parliament; and then being appointed first
commissioner, on the part of Scotland, to treat of an union between the two
nations, he set out for London accordingly.

The commissioners met at the Cockpit on 22d October; but things not being ripe
for accomplishing the intended union, her majesty again honored the duke with
the office of high commissioner to the parliament of Scotland, anno 1703.

At first matters went on pretty smoothly; but after the act of security for
the kingdom of Scotland came to be strongly insisted on, nothing could be
brought to a conclusion that session, though the disputes (which run very high)
were managed with great dexterity by the commissioner; and having passed some
useful bills, he put an end to that session the 6th September.

In 1704, upon a change of some measures at court, he was removed from all his
public employments; but in July 1705, he was again made first commissioner of
the treasury, and lord privy seal, and also restored to his places in the privy
council and exchequer.

In November following, her majesty was pleased to direct a commission to him
to represent her person as sovereign of the noble order of St. Andrew; by
virtue whereof, he, with the usual solemnity, did invest William Ker, marquis
of Lothian, with the said order.

The English ministry, on account of the forementioned act of security, thought
themselves under a necessity of endeavoring to effectuate an union betwixt the
two crowns; and her majesty being empowered, by the parliament 1705, to
nominate commissioners to treat with those of England, for that purpose, the
duke of Queensberry, now lord privy seal, was one of the number.

The commissioners of both kingdoms met accordingly at London in April 1706,
and against the 22d day of July thereafter, every article thereof was by them
agreed to.

In June the same year, upon his own resignation, he obtained a new diploma,
extending the titles of duke of Queensberry, etc. to the heirs of entail of his
family, whether male or female, Penes ducem de Queensberry.
with rank and precedence according to the former diploma in 1684.

The parliament of Scotland being to meet at Edinburgh on the 3d of September
following, his grace the duke of Queensberry was again appointed her majesty's
high commissioner, being judged the fittest person in the kingdom to bring
about that great and important work of the union, which was accordingly brought
to a conclusion (though not without great opposition) on 10th January 1707.
After which, the duke was elected one of the sixteen Scotch peers, in the first
British parliament.

Before he arrived at London, he was met at some miles distance from that great
metropolis, by many noblemen and gentlemen in their coaches, and on horseback;
and next morning waited on the queen at Kensington, where he found that
gracious reception which his great services had merited.

Her majesty immediately settled on him a pension of 3000 l. sterling per annum
out of the post office; and, as a further mark of her royal favor, in May
1708, created him a peer of Great Britain, by the titles of baron of Rippon,
marquis of Beverly, and duke of Dover; which honors were to descend to Charles
earl of Solway, then his second son.

In 1710, he was appointed one of the principal secretaries of state for both
kingdoms: which office he enjoyed as long as he lived. He was also made joint
keeper of the signet with William lord Dartmouth.

He married Mary Boil, second daughter of Charles lord Clifford, eldest son to
Richard earl of Burlington and Cork, by lady Jean Seymour, daughter to William
duke of Somerset, by whom he had four sons and three daughters.

1. William, earl of Drumlanrig, born in 1696, who died an infant.

2. James, who also died young.

3. Charles, earl of Solway, now duke of Queensberry.

4. Lord George, a youth of great hopes, who died at Paris, in the 24th year of
his age.

1st daughter, lady Isabel, died unmarried.

2. Lady Jean, married to Francis earl of Dalkeith, and had issue.

3. Lady Anne, married to the honorable William Finch, Esquire; brother to the
earl of Winchelsea and Nottingham, his majesty's ambassador at the Hague,
without issue.

The duke died at London on the 6th July 1711, and was succeeded by his son,

XIV. CHARLES, third duke of Queensberry and Dover, who, on account of the
great services done to the crown by his father and ancestors, was created earl
of Solway, anno 1706, when very young, his elder brother being then alive.

When he came to be of age, he claimed his seat in the house of peers, as duke
of Dover; but as, by the articles of the union, it is alleged that no Scotch
peer can be made a British peer, the house of lords therefore set aside his
claim at that time.

This duke was made lord of the bedchamber to king George I. was one of the
privy council both to kings George I. and II. and was appointed vice admiral of
Scotland by the latter. He was also lord of the bedchamber to his late royal
highness Frederick prince of Wales, was appointed lord keeper of the great seal
for Scotland; one of the lords of the privy council to his present majesty;
and, upon the death of the marquis of Tweeddale, in 1762, was constituted lord
justice general of Scotland.

He married lady Catharine Hyde, daughter of Henry earl of Clarendon and
Rochester, by whom he had two sons.

1. Henry, earl of Drumlanrig, who, after finishing his studies at Oxford,
betook himself to a military life, and served two campaigns in the last war,
under the earl of Stair, and three campaigns under the king of Sardinia, where
he gave singular proofs of his military genius, particularly at the siege of
Coni, for which his Sardinian majesty ordered his ambassador at the court of
Britain to wait on the duke of Queensberry, and return him thanks for the
services his son had done in the course of that war. He afterward got the
commission of a regiment in the service of the states of Holland, consisting of
two battalions. He married lady Elizabeth Hope, daughter of John earl of
Hopeton, but died soon afterward, without issue.

The duke's second son, lord Charles, afterward earl of Drumlanrig, was chosen
member of parliament for the county of Dumfries, anno 1747. Being of a delicate
constitution, he went to Lisbon for his health, and narrowly escaped in the
dreadful earthquake 1755; but soon thereafter paid the common debt to nature on
his return to Great Britain, dying unmarried in the 30th year of his age, anno
1756.

ARMS.
Quarterly; 1st and 4th, argent, a heart gules, imperially crowned, proper, on
a chief azure, three mullets of the first, for Douglas; 2d and 3d, azure, a
bend between six cross crosslets fit^hy or, for the earldom of Mar; the whole
within a border or, charged with a double tressure of Scotland, being an
augmentation; as is also the heart in the 1st and 4th quarters, being used in
memory of the pilgrimage made by sir James Douglas, ancestor of his grace, to
the holy land, with the heart of king Robert Bruce, etc. The double tressure
gules, was added by king Charles II. when he honored the family with the
marquisate of Queensberry; before which the border was only plain.

CREST; on a wreath, a heart, as in the coat, between two wings expanded or.

SUPPORTERS; two pegasuses or flying horses argent, their manes, wings, tails,
and hoofs or.

MOTTO; Forward.

CHIEF SEATS,
At Drumlanrig, in the county of Dumfries, a stately palace, with noble
gardens, terrases, etc. At Middleton-stoney, in Oxfordshire, and at Amesbury,
in the county of Wilts.

MACKAY Lord REAY.
THE progenitors of the house of MacKay were settled, and had considerable
possessions in the northern counties of Scotland, Nisbet, vol. I. and Scotch
compend. etc.
as early as the reign of king Alexander II. who succeeded to the crown, anno
1214.

A learned author, who wrote the history of the earls of Sutherland, Sir Rob.
Gordon's history, penes com. de Sutherland, p. 35, et 214.
in a very elegant manner, says, that before they had the surname of MacKay,
they were called the clan Wic-Worgan.

Other authors are of opinion, that one Alexander, son of Ochonacker, came from
Ireland to Scotland, Scotch comp. and Salmon's abridgement.
about the end of the 12th century, settled in the northern parts, and was
progenitor of the clan MacKay.

The traditional account of the family is, that Alexander, a younger son of
John, first of the family of Forbes, was the immediate ancestor of this noble
family. This seems probable, Writs of the family, etc.
as in many authentic writs they are designed MacKay alias Forbes, and
sometimes there are Forbeses alias MacKay.

We therefore proceed to deduce their descent from,

I. ALEXANDER, who flourished in the reign of king Alexander II. and was father
of,

II. MAGNUS, who left issue a son and successor, called,

III. MORGAN, whose descendents were generally called the clan Wic-Worgan.

He lest issue a son,

IV. DONALD, who succeeded him, and was designed son of Morgan, Sir Rob.
Gordon's hist. of Sutherland.
son of Magnus, etc.

He lived in the reign of king David Bruce, and married the daughter of Jye
MacNeil-Ghika, by whom he had a son and successor,

V. JYE MORE, whose son Donald was called Mack-Jye, (that is the son of Jye)
and from hence he and his posterity assumed the surname of MackJye, Ibidem.
afterward called Mackie, MacKay, or Macky.

This Jye More made a great figure in the reign of Robert II. He was proprietor
of the lands of Far, and several others, in Strathnaver, and had many vassals
and followers.

This appears from the history of the earls of Sutherland, Ibid. p. 35.
wherein are these words: "Nicholas earl of Sutherland had great controversy
with the house and family of Mackie, chief of the clan Wic-Worgan, in
Strathnaver." etc. etc.

These families, it seems, had been at variance for some time; and in the
beginning of the reign of king Robert III. there was a meeting appointed at
Dingwall, to accommodate and make up matters betwixt them. The earl of
Sutherland, Jye More, and Donald MackJye, his son, met at the time appointed,
but instead of a reconciliation, Ibidem.
a scuslle ensued, wherein both Jye More, and his son Donald, lost their lives,
anno 1395. However, this sufficiently shows, that the house of Mackie, or the
clan Wic-Worgan, were very considerable in the reign of king Robert III.

VI. DONALD MACK'Y, or MACKIE, son and apparent heir of Jye More, married a
daughter of -- MacLeod of Jews, Ibid. p. 215.
by whom he had four sons.

1. Angus, his heir.

2. Hutcheon Dou Mackie, who married, and had issue.

3. -- Martin, of whom it is said the Mackies in Galloway are descended.

4. Neil Mackie, etc.

And it may be observed, that all these brothers were brave and gallant men,
Ibidem.
and often sought with remarkable courage and intrepidity against their enemies.

VII. ANGUS MACKIE, eldest son of Donald, succeeded his father in the lands and
barony of Far, and many others in Strathnaver, anno 1395.

In the beginning of the 15th century, Donald, lord of the Isles, having been
disappointed of the earldom of Ross, to which he thought he had a good title in
right of his wife, raised a great body of men, and laid waste all Sutherland,
Ross, etc. Angus Mackie of Far raised his Strathnaver men to oppose him.
Ibid. p. 38.
They came to an engagement near Dingwall and a bloody conflict ensued, but at
last Mackie, being overpowered with numbers, was taken prisoner, anno 1410.

The lord of the Isles kept him confined for some time; but at last, he not
only gave him his liberty, but bestowed his daughter upon him in marriage. He
brought her home with him to Strathnaver, Ibid. p. 215.
and by her he had a son,

Neil, his heir.

Some time thereafter Angus raised a considerable body of his vassals and
followers, and invaded Caithness, where he committed vast outrages, Ibidem.
and ravaged and spoiled the whole country, anno 1425.

But king James coming to the north country in person, anno 1426, Mackie threw
himself at his majesty's feet, and implored his mercy, who, out of his innate
lenity and goodness, granted him pardon, but took his son, Neil, an hostage for
the father's good behavior. He confined him in the Bass for some months,
Ibidem.
but set him at liberty anno 1427.

Angus died in 1428, and was succeeded by his son,

VIII. NEIL MACKIE of Far, who was no sooner in possession of his estate,
than he raised his men, invaded Caithness, spoiled the country, had several
skirmishes with the inhabitants, in which he generally had the better, and then
returned home. Ibidem.


He married a daughter of the family of Monro, by whom he had two sons.

1. Angus Dou, his heir.

2. John Roy MacKay, of whom John More Mack Yaukeanigh, and several families in
that country, are descended.

He had also another son, who was ancestor of the MacKays in Fi^e.

Neil died about the year 1436 or 1437, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. ANGUS DOU MACKAY of Far, a brave soldier.

In the beginning of the reign of king James II. there happened some variance
between the Keiths and the inhabitants of Caithness. The Keiths desired the
assistance of the MacKays, which was readily granted. Angus and his brother
John Roy, joined them with a considerable body of men, and they invaded
Caithness. The Caithness men were apprised of their coming, and were prepared
for them. The two armies met at a place called Blair-Tannie, where a cruel
fight followed, Ibidem.
and the Caithness men were overthrown, chiefly by the bravery and conduct of
Angus, anno 1438.

He married a daughter of the family of MacKenzie, by whom he had three sons
and one daughter.

1. John, his heir.

2. Jye Roy, or Odo MacKay, who succeeded his brother.

3. Neil Navaragh MacKay.

His daughter, -- married to -- Sutherland of Dalied.

In the end of the year 1442, or beginning of 1443, Angus was burnt to death in
the church of Tarbet, Ibid. p. 216.
by the Ross men, whom he had often molested, and was succeeded by his eldest
son,

X. JOHN MACKAY of Far, who, in revenge of his father's death, attacked the
Ross men, Ibid. p. 47.
but they being apprised of his coming, were prepared for him, overcame him,
and he was slain on the spot, anno 1479, and having no issue, his estate
devolved upon his brother,

X. JYE ROY, or ODO MACKAY of Far, who got a charter under the great seal
from king James IV. for his good and faithful services, Odoni MacKay in
Strathnaver, Charta in archivis Jacobi IV.
of the lands of Far, Golspey, Catach, Croyn, Kilchallum, Chile, etc. in
Inverness shire, dated 4th of November 1499.

He got another charter under the great seal from the same prince, Ibidem.
of the lands of Assiter, Led^hoigack. etc. 6th of March 1507.

He died in an advanced age, anno 1512, leaving issue a son,

XI. DONALD MACKAY of Far, who succeeded him, and got a charter under the
great seal, Donaldo MakKay in Strathnaver, of the lands of Far, Ibidem.
Armadale, Strathy, Rinovie, etc. etc. anno 1539.

He married Helen Sinclair, but of what family we know not, Ibid. ad ann. 1545.
by whom he had a son and successor.

XII. HUTCHEON MACKAY of Far, who married lady Elizabeth Sinclair, Writs of
the family of Sutherland.
daughter of George fourth earl of Caithness, by whom he had three sons.

1. Hugh, his heir.

2. William MacKay of Bighouse.

3. Donald MacKay of Scaury, Ibidem, and Crawfurd's peerage.
ancestor of general Hugh MacKay commander in chief of the forces in Scotland,
anno 1689.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. HUGH, or HUTCHEON MACKAY of Far, a man of great parts, and universally
esteemed. He was at much pains to have all the differences, Ibid Gordon, p. 213
and 214.
that had long subsisted between the family of Sutherland and his, taken away
and buried in oblivion, which, by his prudence and sagacity, he in a great
measure effectuated. Minutes of parliament.
-- He was also designed Hugh MacKay Forbes, anno 1610.

He married lady Jean, daughter of Alexander earl of Sutherland, by whom he had
two sons and one daughter.

1. Donald, his heir, afterward lord Reay.

2. John MacKay of Strathy, who married a daughter of James Sinclair of
Murthil, ad annum 1619.

His daughter, Annas, married to Alexander Sinclair of Brimms.

He died anno 1614, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIV. DONALD MACKAY of Far, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who got a charter under the great seal, officii coronatoris insule de North
Kintyre; also of the lands of Armadall, and many others, 28th December 1615.

He was a man of great honor and spirit, and had a wonderful military genius.

He raised a regiment of his own name and followers, consisting of 1500 men,
which he carried over to Germany, to the assistance of the king of Bohemia.

He afterward went into the service of the king of Sweden, History of Sutherl.
Craw ford, Scotch compend. etc.
and had some considerable commands under that great general. He always behaved
with such intrepidity and conduct, that he acquired the reputation of a brave
and experienced officer.

He returned to England in the beginning of the reign of king Charles I. to
whom he was a most faithful and loyal subject, and highly esteemed by his
majesty, Chart. in pub. archiv.
who first conferred the honor of knighthood upon him, which appears by a
charter under the great seal, domino Donaldo MacKay de Strathnaver, militi, of
the lands of Sand^de, Reay, etc. etc. all united into one free barony, to him,
his heirs male or assigneys whatsoever, dated 19th February 1628.

Soon thereafter his majesty was pleased to raise him to the dignity of the
peerage by the title of lord Reay, Ibid. haered. masc. omni ^omp. futuro.
by patent, to him and his heirs male for ever, they carrying the name and arms
of MacKay, dated 20th June 1628.

He went into the king's service upon the first breaking out of the civil war,
and was taken prisoner when Newcastle surrendered to the Scots. He was sent to
Edinburgh, in order to be tried, and continued close confined in the tolbooth
there, Minutes of parliam. and Guthrie's memoirs.
till Montrose set him at liberty after the battle of Kilsyth, and he was
afterward excepted from pardon by the then parliament.

He suffered many other hardships on account of his attachment to the interest
of the royal family. At last, when he could do them no more service, he retired
to Sweden, anno 1649, was made governor of Bergen, and died there soon
afterward.

He married, 1st, Barbara MacKenzie, Chart. in pu^. archiv.
daughter of Kenneth lord Kintail, by whom he had a son,

John, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Mary, married to Hector Monro of Clynes, only brother of sir Robert Monro of
Foulis.

He married, 2dly, dame Rachel Harrison, by whom he had two sons.

1. Robert.

2. Hugh, both designed MacKay Forbes.

This appears by a petition and complaint entered into parliament, or the
committee of estates, by dame Rachel Harrison, lady Reay, for an order for the
payment of 2000 l. sterling, Minutes of parliament, and rescinded acts
resting her for the maintenance of her and her sons Robert and Hugh MacKay
Forbes, etc. for which she obtained a decree, anno 1641.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. JOHN, second lord Reay, who, upon his father's resignation, got a charter
under the great seal, Chart. in pub archiv.
Johanni MacKay, filio et haeredi apparenti Donaldi MacKay de Far, of the
lands of Strathnaver, and several others, in the snires of Inverness and
Caithness, dated 1st February 1621.

This lord was also a great loyalist, and after the murder of the king, he
retired to his own country, where he lived privately all the rest of his days.

He married Barbara, daughter of Donald MacKay of Scaury, by whom he had three
sons.

1. Donald, master of Reay.

2. Brigadier general Aeneas MacKay.

3. Colonel Robert MacKay.

XVI. DONALD, master of Reay, eldest son and apparent heir of John second lord
Reay, died before his father, having married Anna, daughter of sir George Monro
of Culcairn, by whom he had a son,

XVII. GEORGE, who succeeded his grandfather, and was third lord Reay.

He was a man of parts and learning, and a fellow of the royal society at
London.

He was most sincerely attached to the interest of the present establishment,
and embraced every opportunity of manifesting his loyalty, particularly in the
years 1715, 1719, and 1745, when he raised his vassals and followers for the
government's service, against the rebels, etc.

He married, 1st, Margaret, daughter of general Hugh MacKay of Scaury, by whom
he had one son,

Donald, his heir.

He married, 2dly, J^net, daughter of John Sinclair of Ulbster, by whom he had
another son,

Colonel Hugh MacKay of Bighouse, who married, and has issue.

Also a daughter, Anne, married to John Watson of M^irhouse, Esquire; and has
issue.

He married, 3dly, Mary, daughter of John Dowel, Esquire; by whom he had two sons
and four daughters.

1. George MacKay of Skibo, Esquire;.

2. Colonel Alexander MacKay.

1st daughter, Mary.

2. Harriot.

3. Christian, married to John Erskine, younger of Carnock.

4. Marian.

He died anno 1748, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVIII. DONALD, fourth lord Reay, who married, 1st, Marian, daughter of sir
Robert Dalrymple of North Berwick, by whom he had one son,

George, now lord Reay.

He married, 2dly, Christian, daughter of -- Sutherland of Pronsy, by whom he
had one daughter,

Mary.

He died anno 1761, and was succeeded by his only son,

XIX. GEORGE, fifth lord Reay, who married, 1st, Marian, daughter of colonel
Hugh MacKay of Bighouse, by whom he had no surviving issue.

He married, 2dly, a daughter of -- Fairly of that ilk, an ancient family in
the county of Air, by whom he has one daughter,

Jean.

ARMS.
Azure, on a cheveron or, between three baar's heads couped argent, and muzzled
gules, a roebuck's head erazed of the last, between two hands holding daggers,
all proper.

CREST; on a wreath, a right hand couped and erect, grasping a dagger, as those
in the arms.

SUPPORTERS; two men in a military dress, with muskets, in a centinel's
posture, all proper.

MOTTO; Manu forti.

CHIEF SEAT,
At Tongue in Strathnaver, in the county of Sutherland.

ROLLO Lord ROLLO.
THE surname of Rollo is of very great antiquity, and appears to be originally
from Denmark, from thence to France, and from France to Britain.

Fordun, that learned historian, mentions one Rello, Fordun, vol. I. p. 195.
a Dane, a man of rank and figure, in the reign of king Gregory the Great, who
was crowned at Scoon in the year 875.

The same author afterward says, that king Charles III. of France, son-in-law
to Edward the elder, king of England, about the year 900 converted to the
Christian faith one Rollo, a famous general of Normandy (afterward called
Robert Rollo.) To him he gave his daughter Gilla in ma^riage, and with her the
whole dukedom of Normandy, to be held of the kings of France, according to the
words of that celebrated author: Ibid. p. 401, and 402.
Normaniam ei dedit cum Gilla filia sua, etc. afterward, et i^se Rollo teneret
Normaniam de rege Francorum sicut de domino suo, etc. and he was the first duke
of Normandy.

He was succeeded in that dukedom by his eldest son William, who was father of
Richard, father of a second Richard, father of the famous Robert duke of
Normandy, Ibidem.
whose natural son William conquered and became king of England, anno 1066.

Puffendorf, in his introduction to the history of Europe, Puffendorf, p. 88.
says, "That William the Conqueror was son of Robert duke of Normandy,
descended from Rollo, who was of Danish extraction, etc. etc."

Robert Rollo, the first duke of Normandy, besides his successor William, had
several other sons who settled in Normandy, and they and their posterity
retained the surname of Rollo.

Some of their descendents came over to England with William the Conqueror, and
being nearly related to that great prince, had considerable commands in his
army.

Richard de Rollo, a son or grandson of one of these, came to Scotland in the
reign of king David I. settled in Perth-shire, and was progenitor of all the
Rollos in Scotland.

In a charter to Robert de Bruis, of the manor of Elwick, or Ailewick, Ricardus
de Rollo, Extracts from the Cotton library, penes MacFarlane, p. 98.
Walterus Espec, Petrus de Bruis, etc. are witnesses. The charter is without
date; but must have been granted in or before 1141, in which year Robert de
Bruis died.

Of this Richard was lineally descended

I. JOHN ROLLO, the undoubted ancestor of this noble family.

He flourished in the reign of king David II. who succeeded to the crown, anno
1329, and obtained a charter from that prince, dilecto et fideli suo, Johanni
Rollo, etc. of a tenement in Edinburgh, dated 23d July 1369, to which William
bishop of St. Andrews, Patrick bishop of Dunkeld, chancellor, Robert high
steward of Scotland, Charta penes dom. Rollo.
earl of Strathearn, the king's nephew, William earl of Douglas, and many
others, are witnesses.

This John de Rollo was clerk of council when the instrument was taken by king
Robert II. in his first parliament, The original instrument in the lower
parliamenthouse, Edinburgh.
when John, his eldest son's title, as apparent heir to the crown, was
ascertained, to which the seals of the bishops and nobility are appended, anno
1371.

In a charter to Laurence de la Haya, dated in the year 1376, John de Rollo is
a witness.

He died soon thereafter, leaving issue a son,

II. JOHN ROLLO of Duncrub, who succeeded him. He is the first we have found so
designed; and that has ever since been one of the chief titles of the family.

He got a charter under the great seal from king Robert II. confirming to him
the lands of Duncrub, Fyndony, Pitenclethy, Lideathy, Pitmedie, etc. in the
earldom of Strathearn, and shire of Perth, "to the said John, and Duncan Rollo,
his eldest son, and the heirs-male of his body, lawfully begotten; which
failing, Chart. in pub. archiv.
to the said John Rollo his nearest heirs whatsomever." The confirmation is
dated at Methven, the 13th day of February, the tenth year of the king's reign,
1381.

This John was clerk and secretary to king Robert III. from whom he got a grant
of ten pounds sterling per annum, out of the customs of Innerkeithing, Charta
penes dom. Rollo.
for his good and ^aithful services, dated 20th August 1400; to which the
bishops of St. Andrews and Glasgow, Robert earl of Fife and Menteith, Archibald
earl of Douglas, etc. are witnesses.

He died in the beginning of the reign of king James I. and was succeeded by
his son,

III. DUNCAN ROLLO of Duncrub, designed son and heir apparent of John, in the
charter 1381, above narrated.

He is witness in a charter by Robert duke of Albany, Chartulary of Newbottle,
in the lawyers library, Edin.
governor of Scotland, to John earl of Buchan, his son, anno 1413.

He died before the year 1437, leaving issue a son,

IV. ROBERT ROLLO of Duncrub, who succeeded him.

In the first parliament held by king James II. at Edinburgh, Records of
parliament, and (...) of the no^il.
this Robert Rollo is mentioned as one of the lords of the articles and judges
of causes, Ibidem.
together with lord Graham, lord Borthwick, lord Gray, etc. they being in all
nine in number, in October 1437.

He died in the beginning of the reign of king James III. and was succeeded by
his son,

V. ROBERT, Books of original charters in the lawyers library.
who got a charter from king James III. Roberto Rollo de Duncrub, of the lands
of Petty, etc. anno 1464.

He afterward got a charter, under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
of several other lands, dated 25th December 1466.

He died before the year 1500, and was succeeded by his son,

VI. WILLIAM, who got a charter under the great seal, Willielmo Rollo de
Duncrub, of the lands of Duncrub, and many others, in Perth-shire, Ibidem.
all erected into one free barony, to be called the barony of Duncrub, in all
time coming, dated 26th August 1511.

He died before the year 1538, having married a daughter of the family of
Oliphant, by whom he had a son,

VII. ROBERT ROLLO, his apparent heir, who married Janet, daughter of William
lord Graham; Ibid. ad ann. 1504.
but died before his father, leaving issue a son,

VIII. ANDREW, who succeeded his grandfather, and got a charter under the great
seal from king James V. Ibidem.
Andreae Rollo de Duncrub, et Mariotae Rollo spo^sae suae, et Georgio little
filio, of the lands of Bello, Bokello, Petty, and many others in Perth-shine,
dated 21st March 1540.

Also a charter under the great seal from queen Mary, Ibidem.
of the lands and barony of Edendoning, etc. dated 18th July 1547.

He married Marjory, daughter and coheiress of sir David Rollo of Ballachie,
Crawfurd's peerage.
by whom he had four sons, and two daughters.

1. George, his heir.

2. James Rollo of Thanesland, who carried on the line of this family.

3. William of Ballogrie.

4. Sir Walter, who got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Waltero Rollo militi, et dominae Jeanae Stewart, ejus sponsae, terrarum
baroniae de Gardin, etc. 19th September 1601.

1st daughter, Marjory, married, 1st, to George Graham of Inchbraco; 2dly, to
John Graham of Balgowan.

2. Mary, married to Laurence Oliphant of Gask.

He died anno 1560, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. GEORGE, who got a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
Georgio Rollo de Duncrub, of of the lands of Pitmedie, etc. 22d December 1574.

And another charter of the lands of Blacberry-hill, Ibidem.
Fairnyknows, etc. to him and Walter Rollo his brother, dated 23d March 1576.

He got also a confirmation of a charter, formerly granted quondam Andreae
Rollo de Duncrub, Ibidem.
of the land^ of Easter-Rossie, etc. The confirmation is dated 4th November
1579.

But he dying without issue on 6th May 1581, was succeeded by his brother,

IX. JAMES ROLLO of Duncrub, who married Agnes, Charta penes dom. Ro^lo.
daughter of Robert Collice of Balnamoon, by whom he had a son,

Sir Andrew, afterward lord Rollo, and two daughters.

1. Marian, married to James Bruce of Pitfouls, Esquire;.

2. Jean, married to Alexander Blair of Rossiehall.

He died before the year 1590, and was succeeded by his son,

X. Sir ANDREW ROLLO of Duncrub, who, being a man of fine parts, and great
integrity, was much in favor with king James VI. who conferred upon him the
honor of knighthood

He then got a charter under the great seal, domino Andreae Rollo de Duncrub,
militi, Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the lands and barony of Rossie, etc. etc. dated 26th June 1621.

And being in no less favor with king Charles I. he obtained from that prince
a commission under the great seal, Commission penes dom. Rollo.
dilecto et fideli suo domino Andreae Rollo de Duncrub, to be sheriff-principal
of the county of Perth, etc. dated at Holyroodhouse, 25th September 1633.

He afterward got a charter under the great seal from the same prince, Chart.
in pub. archiv.
of the lands of Kippans, etc. dated 5th February 1639.

And another charter of the lands and barony of Tillycultry, Ibidem.
in the shire of Clackmannan, dated 1st March 1644.

He was a great loyalist, a firm and steady friend of the royal family, and
never deserted their interest, whereby he suffered many hardships.

King Charles II. in consideration of the many good, faithful, and free
services, done and performed to his majesty and his progenitors, by the said
sir Andrew and his predecessors, Diploma penes dominum Rollo, haeredibus
masculis quibusc.
etc. was pleased to raise him to the dignity of the peerage, by the title of
lord Rollo of Duncrub, by patent to him and his heir^-male whatsomever, dated
10th January 1651.

The lord Rollo was afterward fined by Oliver Cromwell, Cromwell's act of
indemnity.
in the sum of one thousand pounds sterling, for his adherence and attachment
to the royal family, anno 1654.

He married Catharine Drummond, daughter of James lord Maderty, by whom he had
five sons, and four daughters.

1. Sir James, afterward lord Rollo.

2. Sir John, who got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Johanni Rollo, militi, filio legitimo secundo genito domini Andreae de
Duncrub, terrarum baroniae de Bannockburn, etc. dated 25th July 1636.

3. Mr. Laurence Rollo of Rossie.

4. Mr. Andrew Rollo, who, being bred to the Church, was parson of Dunning.

5. Sir William Rollo, a youth of great honor and spirit, who joined the great
Montrose as soon as he declared for his majesty, Guthry's memoirs.
was taken prisoner at the unfortunate battle of Philiphaugh, condemned and
executed at Glasgow, in October 1645.

1st daughter, Margaret, married to sir John Drummond of Carnock, and had issue.

2. Jean, married, 1st, to John Rollo of Powhouse, Esquire; 2dly, to John Drummond
of Pitkellony.

3. Anne, married to William Mercer of Clevedge, and had issue.

4. Isabel, married to William Haliday of Tillibole, and had issue.

He died in an advanced age, anno 1659, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. JAMES, second lord Rollo, a staunch loyalist, and a man of great worth and
merit.

He had the honor of knighthood conferred upon him, when a young man, by king
Charles I. and, upon his father's resignation, obtained from that prince a
charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
domino Jacobo Rollo juniori de Duncrub, militi, of the barony of Duncrub, etc.
dated 18th March 1642.

He married, 1st, lady Dorothea Graham, daughter of John fourth earl of
Montrose, by whom he had no issue.

He married, 2dly, lady Mary Campbell, daughter of Archibald seventh earl of
Argyle, by whom he had two sons, and one daughter.

1. Andrew, his heir.

2. Major Archibald Rollo.

His daughter, Margaret, married to sir George Oliphant of Newton.

He died anno 1671, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. ANDREW, third lord Rollo, who married Margaret Bal^our, daughter of
Robert lord Burleigh, by whom he had two sons, and three daughters.

1. John, master of Rollo, a young man of fine parts, and great hopes; but was
unfortunately killed in a private quarrel by -- Graham younger of Inchbraco,
29th May 1691, without issue.

2. Robert, afterward lord Rollo.

1st daughter, Emilia, married to William Irvine of Bonshaw, Esquire; and had issue.

2. Isabella, married to Robert Johnston of Wamphray, Esquire; and had issue.

3. Susan, married to Robert Gillespie of Cherryvalley, Esquire; in the kingdom of
Ireland, and had issue.

4. Jean, who died unmarried.

He died 1st March 1700, and was succeeded by his son,

XIII. ROBERT, fourth lord Rollo, a man of singular merit and great integrity.

He married Mary, eldest daughter of sir Harry Rollo of Woodside, by whom he
had four sons, and three daughters.

1. Andrew, now lord Rollo.

2. Harry, who was an officer in the army, and married Anne, sister of James
lord Ruthven; but died without issue.

3. John, who married Cicily, daughter of James Johnston merchant in Edinburgh,
and has issue.

4. Clement, married to Maria-Aemelia Irvine, eldest daughter of John Irvine of
Bonshaw, Esquire; and has issue.

1st daughter, Mary, married to David Drummond of Pitkellony, Esquire; and has
issue.

2. Jean, married to captain Robert Johnston of Wamphray, and has issue.

3. Isabel, married to John Aytoun of Inchdairny, Esquire; and has issue.

He died anno 1758, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIV. ANDREW, fifth lord Rollo, who betaking himself to a military life, served
in the army with great reputation, and rose to the rank of a colonel.

In America, where he acted as a brigadiergeneral, he gave many signal proofs
of his military capacity in the service of his king and country.

He married Catharine, daughter and coheiress of lord James Murray of Dowally,
third son of John marquis of Athole, by whom he had a son,

John, master of Rollo, also an officer in the army, a youth of great hopes and
spirit; but died at Martinico, in the flower of his age, much regreted.

He had several other children, who all died young.

ARMS.
Or, a cheveron between three boar's heads erazed azure.

CREST; on a wreath, a stag's head couped proper.

SUPPORTERS; two stags of the last.

MOTTO; La fortune pass par tout.

CHIEF SEAT,
At Duncrub in Perth-shire.

PRIMROSE Viscount PRIMROSE, and Earl of ROSEBERRY.
AS the present earl of Roseberry is the male representative of the peerages of
Primrose and Roseberry, we shall deduce the descent of both under this title.

The surname of Primrose is of great antiquity, and local, and was first
assumed from the lands and village of Primrose, lying near the town of
lnnerkeithing, in Fife-shire.

And though there were a great number of that surname both in Fife and
Perth-shire in very early times, yet as we cannot connect them with this noble
family by authentic vouchers, we shall proceed to deduce their descent from the
first of their ancestors that we find documented by undoubted authority.

I. DUNCAN PRIMROSE, descended of the Primroses of that ilk, Crawfurd's
Peerage. Nisbet, vol. I. p. 380. Scots compend.
settled and fixed his residence near Culross in Perth-shire, in the reign of
queen Mary.

He acquired the lands of Burnbrae, which continued in the possession of this
family till within these few years.

He married Mary, Ibidem.
daughter of -- Main of Auchterhouse, by whom he had two sons.

1. Gilbert.

2. Archibald, ancestor of the present earl of Rofeberry, of whom afterward.

II. GILBERT PRIMROSE, in a charter under the great seal of king James VI. of a
tenement and some lands about Culross, Chart. in pub. archiv.
is designed surgeon burgess of Edinburgh, son and heir of Duncan Primrose
burgess of Culrol, etc. dated anno 1576.

He was father of

III. GILBERT PRIMROSE, a man of parts and learning, who applied himself
chiefly to the study of theology, in which he became a great proficient:
Crawfurd's Peerage, and Nisbet.
he was a doctor of divinity, and wrote several treatises on that subject, very
much esteemed.

He was minister of the Protestant church at Bourdeaux in France, where he
married -- daughter of --, by whom he had a son,

IV. DAVID PRIMROSE, who was educated in England, studied at Oxford, where he
got the degree of a bachelor in divinity. He also wrote some treatises on
divinity, and was an author of good repute.

He went to France, where he became minister of the Protestant church at Roan:
but we can trace him no further; and whether he had any succession or not, we
cannot determine; we therefore return to his granduncle,

II. ARCHIBALD PRIMROSE, second son of Dun^^n, Crawfurd's Peerage, p. 408.
appears to have got from his father the lands of Burnbrae, which were
afterward confirmed to him.

He was likeways a man of good parts, and was very assisting to Mr. Colvil,
abbot of Culro^^, in ^e^tling the fens, and managing the revenue of that abbacy.

He married J^net, daughter of -- Bleau of Castlehill, Ibidem.
in the shire of Perth, by whom he had two sons, and one daughter.

1. David, his successor.

2. James, who carried on the line of this family.

His daughter, Eupheme, married to sir George Bruce of Carnock, ancestor of the
earl of Kincardin.

III. DAVID PRIMROSE, first son of Archibald of Burnbrae, was designed by the
title of Whitehouse.

He left issue a son,

James, Ibidem.
-- and a daughter,

--, married to Alexander Monro of Bearcrofts.

IV. JAMES PRIMROSE, Esquire; only son of David, dying without succession, the
descent of this family was carried on by

III. JAMES PRIMROSE, second son of Archibald of Burnbrae, who was bred to the
law, and being a man of great abilities, was highly esteemed by king James VI.
Records of council, and charta penes comitem de Roseberry.
who appointed him clerk to the privy council, anno 1602, which office he
enjoyed near forty years, and discharged his duty with great fidelity and
reputation.

He married Catharine, Charta in archivis fam. de Primrose.
daughter of Richard Lawson of Boghall, in vicecomitatu de Linlithgow, by whom
he had three sons, and two daughters.

1. Gilbert Primrose.

2. Sir Archibald, who succeeded his brother.

3. James, who was one of the clerks of council, and married Christian,
daughter of -- Mercer of Aldie, by whom he had a son, who died young, and a
daughter, Christian, his sole heiress, married to Walter lord Torphichen.

1st daughter, --, married to George Heriot, jeweller to king James VI. the
founder of that great and stately edifice in Edinburgh, called Heriot's
hospital, which he endowed with vast revenues.

2. Margaret, married to Thomas Young of L^inie, Esquire;.

He died in 1641, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. GILBERT PRIMROSE, who was appointed one of the clerks of council by king
Charles I. Crawfurd's Peerage, and Nisbet.
and, in his father's lifetime, married a daughter of -- Foulis of Ravelston,
by whom he had a son,

James, who died before him, without issue.

And he dying soon after his father, was succeeded by his brother,

IV. Sir ARCHIBALD PRIMROSE, who having got a liberal education, was a man of
great accomplishments, both natural and acquired, and of singular loyalty,
honor and integrity.

He applied himself chiefly to the study of the laws, in which he became a
great proficient, Records of council, and charta penes comitem de Roseberry.
and being highly esteemed by king Charles I. for his many eminent qualities,
was, by his majesty, with the approbation of his whole council, appointed chief
clerk of the privy council, 2d September 1641; and, by a letter under the
king's own hand, was ordered to transmit to court weekly all the transactions
of the council, Ibidem.
as his father had done; in which he acquitted himself entirely to his
majesty's satisfaction, till the troubles in the country rose to such a height,
that a correspondence of that kind was absolutely impracticable.

As he was a most sincere loyalist, he joined the marquis of Montrose
immediately after the battle of Kilsyth, and continued with him till the
unfortunate battle of Philiphangh, where he was taken prisoner.

He was afterward tried by the parliament of St. Andrews for high treason, and
was found guilty, anno 1646; but by the intercession of the marquis of Argyle,
and his other friends, his life was spared, though he remained in prison till
the marquis of Montrose's capitulation with the committee of estates, whereby
the marquis was obliged to depart the kingdom, and sir Archibald, with some
others, obtained their liberty.

When the king was a prisoner in the Isle of Wight, none was more forward in
raising an army for his relief than sir Archibald; and after the murder of his
royal master, he still persisted in his loyalty, and accompanied king Charles
II. into England, where he was created a baronet by a royal patent, dated at
the camp of Woodhouse, Charta penes comitem de Roseberry.
1st August 1651; the preamble whereof runs thus: "In consideration of the many
good and faithful services performed to us, and our royal father of blessed
memory, in our most special affairs, by sir Archibald Primrose, clerk to our
privy council; and being desirous to gratify the deservings of so faithful a
servant with some special mark of our royal favor, etc. Therefore, etc."

After the unfortunate battle of Worcester, sir Archibald's estate was
sequestrated, and he suffered many other hardships during the usurpation, all
which he bore with great firmness and constancy.

King Charles II. was not forgetful of his faithful services; but, immediately
after the restoration, Ibidem.
begun to reward him according to his great merit. He was made lord register
for Scotland in August 1660, and one of the senators of the college of justice,
under the title of lord Carrington, in which office he acquitted himself with
great probity, judgment, and candor, for a considerable number of years.

And as he was a true patriot, and had nothing so much at heart as the interest
of his country, he often opposed the measures of the court, when he thought
they were acting contrary to it, and joined those lords who were for the
redress of grievances; for which he, with the duke of Hamilton, the earls of
Dumfries and Kincardin, the lord Cochran, etc. were turned out of the council.

But the king was so much convinced of his loyalty and fidelity, that for a
long time he could not be prevailed upon to deprive him of the register's
place; till at last, sir Archibald being old and infirm, the king appointed sir
George MacKenzie of Tarbet lord register; Charta penes comitem de Roseberry.
and at the same time to show the real esteem and regard he had for sir
Archibald, made him justice-general in October 1678.

I shall conclude the memoirs of this great man, with a letter written to him
by the earl of Clarendon, when chancellor of England, in these words:

"I cannot, my lord, but congratulate you for the meritorious part you had in
restoring his majesty, and the kingdom of Scotland, to its primitive honor and
interest. I wish the same good spirit may possess you to the end, Ibidem, and
Scots comp. p. 339.
and with the same success, while we here shall endeavor to follow your
example, which indeed has already been of great use to us, etc."

He married, 1st, Elizabeth, daughter of James Keith of Benholm, Crawfurd's
peerage.
son of George earl Marishal, by whom he had three sons, and two daughters.

1. Sir James Primrose of Barnbougle, who died before his father, having
married Elizabeth, daughter of sir Robert Sinclair of Longformacus, by whom he
had only one daughter, --, married to George Hume of Kimmergham.

2. Sir William Primrose of Carrington, who succeeded his father.

3. General Gilbert Primrose, who, being bred to the army, rose to the degree
of a major general in the British service, and died without issue.

1st daughter, Margaret, married to sir John Foulis of Ravelston, to whom he
gave the estate of Dunipace, on condition his heir should carry the name and
arms of Primrose, which accordingly his son sir John did, and was grandfather
of the late sir Archibald Primrose of Dunipace.

2. Catharine, married to sir John Carnegy of Pittarrow.

He married, 2dly, Agnes, daughter of sir William Gray of Pittendrum, sister of
William master of Gray, by whom he had a son,

Archibald Primrose of Dalmenie, ancestor of the present earl of Roseberry, of
whom afterward, -- and a daughter,

Grizel, married to Francis lord Semple.

The lord register died 27th November 1679, and was succeeded by his son,

V. Sir WILLIAM PRIMROSE of Carrington, Charta penes comitem de Roseberry.
who married Mary, daughter of Patrick Scot of Thirlestane, by whom he had two
sons, and three daughters.

1. Sir James, his successor.

2. Captain William Primrose, who was killed in the wars abroad, without issue.

1st daughter, Mary, married to William Hamilton of Bargenie.

2. Jean, to Hugh Montgomery of Coalsfield.

3. Elizabeth, to Charles master of Elphingston, son and apparent heir of John
lord Elphingston.

And dying on 23d September 1687, was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. Sir JAMES PRIMROSE of Carrington, who was chosen one of the commissioners
for the shire of Edinburgh, to the first parliament of queen Anne, who raised
him to the honor of the peerage, Chart. in pub. archivis.
by the title of viscount Primrose, lord Primrose of Castlefield, etc. to him
and his heirs-male, by letters patent, bearing date 30th November 1703.

He married lady Eleanor Campbell, daughter of James earl of Loudoun,
Crawfurd's peerage.
by whom he had three sons, and one daughter.

1. Archibald, his successor.

2. Hugh, who succeeded his brother.

3. William, died in 1724, without issue.

His daughter, Margaret Primrose.

He died in 1706.

VII. ARCHIBALD, second viscount Primrose, was a youth of fine spirit and great
hopes: but dying unmarried, anno 1716, his estate and honors devolved upon his
brother,

VII. HUGH, third viscount Primrose, a man of undaunted courage and resolution,
and was a lieutenant colonel in the army.

He served as a volunteer in the war between the emperor and France, under the
imperial general, prince Eugene, and received a dangerous wound under his ear,
in 173 --.

In 1740, he married miss Dielincourt, daughter of the dean of Armagh in
Ireland, and died in 1741, without issue, in the 39th year of his age, which
ended the male-line of sir William of Carrington, son of the first marriage of
the lord register. And as the present earl of Roseberry is the next heir-male,
who is descended of Archibald of Dalmenie, before mentioned, to him we return.

V. ARCHIBALD PRIMROSE of Dalmenie, only son of the second marriage of sir
Archibald Primrose of Carrington, lord register of Scotland, was a man of good
natural parts, which were greatly improved by a liberal education, and
traveling.

He served a campaign or two in Hungary; and, after his return home, lived a
retired life till 1695, that he was chosen member of parliament for the county
of Edinburgh, where he soon displayed his extraordinary talents; and being
highly esteemed by king William, was raised to the honor of the peerage, by
the title of lord viscount Roseberry, Chart. in pub. archiv.
by letters patent, dated 1st April 1700.

And being in no less favor with her majesty queen Anne, he was made one of
the lords of her privy council immediately upon her accession to the throne;
Diploma in cancel. haered. masculis ex ejus corpore, quibus deficien. haered.
faemellis.
and was further dignified with the titles of earl of Roseberry, viscount
Innerkeithing, lord Dalmenie and Primrose, by letters patent to the heirs-male
of his body; which failing, to the heirs-female, etc. bearing date 10th April
1703.

He was also one of the gentlemen of the bedchamber to prince George of
Denmark, with whom he was in great favor, and was appointed one of the
commissioners for the treaty of union betwixt Scotland and England, which was
concluded anno 1707.

After which he was chosen one of the sixteen peers for Scotland, to the first
four parliaments of Great Britain.

He married Dorothea, daughter and heiress of Everingham Cressy of Birkin, of
Yorkshire, Esquire; representative of four ancient sirnames, viz. Birkin,
Everingham, Normanville, and Cressy, Penes comit^m de Roseberry.
whose arms the earl of Roseberry was empowered to bear, by a warrant from the
lion-office in England, in due form.

It is most certain that both the families of Cressy and Everingham were peers
of England, were summoned, Dugdale, etc.
and sat in parliament as such.

And as Dorothea countess of Roseberry, grandmother to the present earl, was
representative of these two noble families, that representation is now devolved
upon him.

The earl, by the said Dorothea, had issue three sons and four daughters.

1. James, earl of Roseberry.

2. Richard, who died unmarried.

3. John, who died also without issue.

1st daughter, lady Mary, married to sir Archibald Primrose of Dunipace, and
had issue one son and seven daughters.

2. Lady Margaret, married to Alexander earl of Caithness, to whom she had a
daughter, lady Dorothea Sinclair, married to James viscount MacDuff, now earl
Fife.

3. Lady Dorothea.

4. Lady Elizabeth, died young.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. JAMES, second earl of Roseberry, who married miss Mary Campbell, eldest
daughter of John Campbell of Mamore, and sister of the present duke of Argyle,
by whom he had ^our sons and two daughters.

1. Archrbald, lord Dalmenie, who died before his father, without issue.

2. John lord Dalmenie, a man of singular worth and merit, who very early
discovered a great attention to business, and was remarkable for his morals and
generosity. Upon his becoming of age, and being insormed that no provision had
been made for his mother at her marriage, and that by the entail of his estate,
no provision could be made out of it for younger children of the family, he
applied to parliament, and by his interest obtained an edict to enable him to
provide his mother in a jointure suitable to her quality, and to make handsome
provisions for his brother and sister, which he immediately executed. He died
before his father, unmarried, much regreted by all who had the honor of his
acquaintance.

The earl's third son, James, died young.

4. Neil, now earl of Roseberry.

1st daughter, lady Mary, died young.

2. Lady Dorothea.

James, second earl of Roseberry, died anno 1755, and was succeeded by his
fourth son,

VII. NEIL, third earl of Roseberry, who is also representative of the families
of Cressy and Everinghame, as before observed.

ARMS.
Quarterly; 1st and 4th or, a lion rampant vert, for the title of Roseberry; 2d
and 3d vert, three primroses in a double tressure, counterflowered or, for the
name of Primrose.

CREST; on a wreath, a d^mi-lion gules, holding in his dexter paw a primrose,
as in the arms.

SUPPORTERS; two lions vert.

MOTTO; Fide et Fiducia.

CHIEF SEATS,
At Barnbougle and Dalmenie in the county of Linlithgow; and Roseberry in the
county of Edinburgh.

ROSS Earl of ROSS.
THE dignity of earl of Ross was enjoyed by the progenitors of this noble
family as early as the reign of king Malcolm IV. who succeeded to the crown of
Scotland anno 1153.

I. MALCOLM earl of Ross, was a man of the highest rank and distinction. This
appears by a precept from the said king Malcolm, directed to Malcolm earl of
Ross, desiring him to protect and defend the monks of Dunfermline. in their
lawful privileges, possessions, etc. Chartulary of Dunfermline, p. 18^.
to which Arnold bishop of St. Andrews, is a witness. The precept has no date,
but must have been in or before 1162, in which year the bishop died.

This Malcolm made also a considerable figure in the reign of king William, who
succeeded Malcolm, anno 1165.

He left issue a son,

II. FERQUHARD earl of Ross, who succeeded him, and flourished in the reign of
king Alexander II. who succeeded William, 1214.

He grants a charter of several lands in Rossshire, to Walter, Chartulary of
Murray, page 314.
son of the deceast Hugh de Moravia, to which Andrew bishop of Murray, William
the chancellor, and William, son and heir of the said Ferquhard, are witnesses,
in or before 1231, in which year the chancellor died.

When the differences betwixt king Alexander II. of Scotland, and king Henry
III. of England were accommodated, Rymer, tom. I. p. 377.
Ferquhard earl of Ross was one of the guarantees on the part of king
Alexander, anno 1237.

He founded, and largely endowed the abbacy of Fern, Keith's bishops, p. 245.
in Rossshire, in the reign of king Alexander II.

He died in the end of that prince's reign, leaving issue a son and successor,

III. WILLIAM earl of Ross, who made a great figure in the reign of king
Alexander III.

He was one of the Scotch nobles who engaged and bound themselves not to
conclude a peace with the king of England, without the consent of the prince
and nobles of Wales, Rymer, tom. I. p. 763.
anno 1258.

He confirmed his father's donations to the abbacy of Fern, anno 1258, and
made a donation himself to the religious in Murray, Chartulary o^ Murray, page
312 and 317.
to which Robert bishop of Ross is a witness, in or before 1270, being the year
in which the bishop died.

He afterward, with several others of the Scotch nobility, bound and obliged
themselves to maintain and defend princess Matgaret's title to the crown of
Scotland, ^ymer, tom. I. p. 266.
in case of king Alexander III's. dying without issue-male, anno 1284.

He died before the year 1290, and was succeeded by his son,

IV. WILLIAM earl of Ross, who was one of the magnates Scotiae, that wrote to
king Edward I. of England, ^bid, p. 471.
concerning a marriage betwixt Margaret queen of Scotland and Edward prince of
W^les, anno 1290.

He was afterward one of the arbiters chosen on the part of John B^liol, Ibid.
p. 553.
in his competition for the crown with Robert Bruce, anno 1292.

Though this earl, with many of his countrymen, swore fealty to king Edward I.
of England, anno 1294, yet he was carried prisoner to London, where he remained
confined for some years, and his wife, the countess of Ross, obtained a safe
conduct to come up to England and visit him, Ibid p. 644, and 728.
for which she had 100 l. allowed her to bear her charges, anno 1296: however,
he afterward obtained his liberty, was a steady friend of king Robert Bruce,
and signed that famous letter to the Pope, asserting the independency of
Scotland, anno 1320, Fordun, vol. II. p. 275.
and died soon thereafter, leaving issue two sons.

1. Hugh, his heir.

2. John Ross, who got from his father a considerable estate, Had lington's
collections.
but he dying without issue, it returned to the family.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. HUGH, earl of Ross, a great patriot, and a firm friend both of king Robert
Bruce, and his son king David.

He married Jean, daughter of the first marriage of Walter lord high steward of
Scotland, Hist. of the royal family, p. 54.
by whom he had two sons and two daughters.

1. William, his heir.

2. Hugh Ross of Rarichies, who was named one of the hostages for king David's
liberty, anno 1351, Rymer tom. V. p. 124.
and is then designed frater comitis de Ross. He was ancestor of the Rosses of
Balnagowan, of whom Monro Ross of Pitcalny is the male representative.

1st daughter, lady Eupheme, History of the royal family, p. 57.
married, 1st, to John Randolph earl of Murray; 2dly, to king Robert II.

2. Lady Jan^t, Charta penes dom. de Abercairny.
married, 1st, to -- Monimusk of that ilk; 2dly, to sir Alexander Murray of
Abercairny.

He was killed at the battle of Hal^donhill, Fordun, vol. II. p. 311.
fighting valiantly in defense of the liberties of his country, anno 1333, and
was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. WILLIAM, earl of Ross, a man of great parts, worth, and honor. He joined
Robert the high steward of Scotland, Ibid. p. 330.
and governor of the kingdom, was always steady in his interest, and behaved
gallantly on every opportunity against the enemies of his country, Haddington's
collections.
and was appointed justiciar of Scotland benorth the river Forth, anno 1344.

He made a donation to the church of Aberdeen, Ibid. p. 86.
anno 1349.

He was one of the hostages for king David's ransom, Rymer, tom. VI. p. 35.
anno 1357.

He married, 1st, lady Isabel, daughter of John earl of Caithness, by whom he
had two daughters.

1. Lady Fupheme, afterward countess of Ross.

2. Lady Johanna, married to sir Alexander Fraser of Philorth.

He married, 2dly, a daughter of sir David Graham of Montrose, by whom he had
another daughter,

Lady --, married to sir Walter Hamilton, ancestor of the family of Innerwick.

He got a charter, Chart. in archivis regis Davidis.
under the great seal, totius forestae de la Plat, etc. to him and his heirs,
6th May 1369.

He got another charter under the great se^l, upon his own resignation, of the
whole earldom of Ross, and lordship of Sky. (excepting some lands belonging to
the said earl, in the shires of Aberdeen, Dumfries, and Wigton,) to and in
favors of William earl of Ross, and the heirs-male of his body, lawfully
begotten; which failing, to sir Walter Lesly, knight, and Eupheme his spouse,
and the longest liver of them, and the heirs-male of the said Eupheme her body,
lawfully begotten, or to be begotten; which failing, to the heirs female of the
said Eupheme her body, the eldest always succeeding to the whole earldom and
lordship above mentioned, without division, failing heirs of the said Eupheme
her body, to Johanna, second daughter of the said earl, etc. etc. This charter
is dated at Perth the 3d day of October 1370. Ibidem.


The earl dying soon thereafter without male issue, was succeeded in his estate
and honors by his eldest daughter,

VII. EUPHEME, countess of Ross, who married sir Walter Lesly, second son of
sir Andrew Lesly of that ilk, who, in right of his wise, and in virtue of the
above resignation, and charter under the great seal to William earl of Ross,
became possessed of that whole earldom, and was afterward designed both lord
and earl of Ross.

He obtained a safe conduct to go up to England, with forty horsemen in his
retinue, Rymer, tom. VII. p. 53.
anno 1375, and is then designed Walterus de Lesly dominus de Ross, etc.

He got another safe conduct from king Richard II. of England, anno 1379, and
is then designed Walterus de Lesly, Ibid. p. 215.
comes de Ross, etc.

They had issue a son,

Alexander, afterward earl of Ross, -- and a daughter,

Lady Margaret Lesly, married to Donald lord of the Isles, of whom more
afterward.

After the death of sir Walter Lesly, the countess married, 2dly, Alexander
earl of Buchan, son to king Robert II. but to him she had no issue, and was
succeeded in her estate and honors by her son,

VIII. ALEXANDER LESLY earl of Ross, who married lady Isabel Stewart, History
of the Stewarts, p. 115.
daughter of Robert duke of Albany, governor of Scotland, by whom he had only
one child,

IX. EUPHEME, countess of Ross, who became a religieuse, and died without
issue; but having made a resignation of the earldom of Ross in favors of her
uncle John earl of Buchan, he thereupon added that of earl of Ross to his other
titles.

Donald, lord of the Isles, whose wife was really heir to the earldom of Ross,
thought the above resignation in favors of the earl of Buchan, both unjust and
injurious; he therefore highly resented it, and claimed that earldom as his
wife's right, even by force of arms. In consequence whereof, the bloody battle
of Harlaw ensued; but it did not entirely decide the controversy as to the
titles of Ross: however, Alexander lord of the Isles, son of this Donald,
afterward enjoyed the earldom of Ross, as is fully set forth under the title
of MacDonald lord of the Isles, page 357, etc. of this work, to which we refer
our readers.

ROSS Lord Ross.
THE surname of Ross is of great antiquity in this country. There were several
considerable families of that name in the south, north, and west parts of
Scotland, in very early times, and are said to be descended from the Rosses of
Werk or Hamleck in Yorkshire, who fettled in England in the reign of William
the Conqueror.

The Rosses of Sanquhar in Dumfries-shire, of Tarbat in Cunningham, Sir James
Dalrymple's hist. collect.
and of Halkhead in Renfrew-shire, were all considerable families before the
reign of king Robert Bruce.

Also the Roses of Kilravock, an ancient and flourishing family in the north of
Scotland, appears to be from the fame stock, as their a^mo^ial bearings were
originally the same.

In the reign of king William the Lion, who succeeded to the crown of Scotland
anno 1165, king John of England sent one Robert de Ross to Scotland, Stewart's
history of the royal family, p. 17.
who was well received by king William, and married a daughter of that prince,
of whom was descended William de Ross, competitor for the crown.

Sir James Dalrymple, that learned antiquary, mentions one Godfridus de Ross,
witness in a charter of Richard de Morville, Dalrymple's collect. p. 420.
constable of Scotland, to the church of Glasgow, anno 1170.

Also one Petrus de Ross is witness in a composition between the monks of
Melrose and the said Richard de Morville, Book of orig. writs, penes MacFarlane.
who died anno 1189.

The immediate ancestor of this noble family, was,

I. Sir JAMES ROSS, who, in the reign of the said king William, was proprietor
of several lands in the shire of Renfrew; in which county the family have had
their chief residence ever since.

He made a donation to the monastery of Paisley, Chartulary of Paisley, penes
com de Dundonald.
of some lands in his village of Stewarton in that county, pro salute animae
suae, etc.

He was father of,

II. ROBERT de ROSS, Chartulary of Lennox, penes MacFarlane, p. 163.
who is witness in a charter in the first year of the reign of king Alexander
II. anno 1214; and being in great favor with that prince, accompanied him to
England, Rymer, tom. I. p. 224.
when he went to have a conference with king Richard III. anno 1217.

This Robert, together with William de Ross, Chartulary of Lennox, p. 15.
are witnesses to the confirmation charter of the earldom of Lennox to Maldwin
earl thereof, anno 1238.

The same Robert is witness also in the confirmation charter of king Alexander
III. Book of charters penes M^Farlane, page 110.
to the religious at Perth, anno 1250.

In a charter of confirmation of Clement bishop of Dumblain, to the abbacy of
Dunfermline, Robert de Ross, with several others, Chartulary of Dunlermline,
penes eund. p. 220.
are witnesses, anno 1253.

He died about the year 1254, leaving issue a son,

III. Sir GODFRIDE de Ross, who succeeded him in all his lands in the shire of
Ren frew, and did not long survive his father, but dying about the year 1260,
was succeeded by his son,

IV. Sir GODFRIDE de Ross, who confirmed the donation of his predecessor to the
monastery of Paisley, in these words: dominus Godfridus de Ross, Chartulary of
Paisley p. 239.
miles, filius et haeres domini Godfridi de Ross, confirmasse, etc. illam
terram in villa de Stewardton, quamex collatione, bonae memoriae, domini Jacobi
de Ross, tenend. et possidend. etc. The confirmation is dated anno 1281, before
these witnesses, William de Ross, John de Knock, William his son, Thomas de
Fulton, John de Schaw, etc. etc. etc.

When king Edward I. of England had overrun Scotland, dominus Godfredus de Ross
was one of those who were compelled to swear allegiance to him, Prynne's
collect. vol. III. p. 651.
anno 1296.

The Rosses, by this time, were become very numerous in Scotland. Besides this
Godfride, and his son Andrew, hereafter mentioned, we find Walter de Ross a
great patriot, (afterward killed at Bannockburn) William de Ross, Ibid. p.
654, 658, and 659.
Robert de Ross, James de Ross, etc. all swearing allegiance to king Edward I.
for lands lying in different counties, anno 1296.

Sir Godfride was succeeded by his son,

V. ANDREW de Ross, who also swore allegiance to king Edward I. of England, and
is designed filius et haeres domini Godfridi de Ross, Ibidem.
etc.

This Andrew flourished in the reign of king Robert Bruce; in whose time there
appears to have been many considerable men of the name of Ross, though we do
not pretend to connect them with this family, viz.

Dominus Godfridus de Ross was vicecomes of Lanark, Chartulary of Ke^e.
anno 1316.

Hugo de Ross was one of the guarantees of a treaty concluded between king
Robert Bruce and the English, Rymer, tom. III. p. 1025.
anno 1323.

Godfridus de Ross, Fordun, vol. II. p. 316.
was sheriff of Air, anno 1335, etc. etc.

Andrew died in the beginning of the reign of king David Bruce, and was
succeeded by his son,

VI. Sir GODFRIDE de Ross, who obtained a safe conduct from king Edward III. to
go up to England, Rymer, tom. IV. p. 639.
anno 1335.

He was appointed one of the ambassadors extraordinary to the court of England,
to treat super negotiis David de Bruce, Ibid. tom. VI. p. 108.
etc. anno 1358, and is then designed domin^^ Godsridus de Ross, miles, etc.

He died about the year 1360, leaving issue a son,

VII. JOHN de Ross, who succeeded him in all his lands in the shire of Renfrew,
and is the first we have found designed by the title of Halkhead.

He was one of the Scotch commissioners appointed to treat with the English,
Ibid. p. 395.
anno 1362.

The year thereafter he was named one of the ambassadors extraordinary to treat
with the English, Ibid. p. 408.
and obtained a safe conduct to go up to that court, anno 1363.

He died before the year 1392, and was succeeded by his son,

VIII. Sir JOHN, who, in a donation of Adam Fullerton of Crosby to the
monastery of Paisley, Chartulary of Paisley. page 228.
is designed Johannes Ross, dominus de Halkhead, anno 1392.

In a donation of sir John Blair of Adamston to the same monastery, Ibid. p.
238.
dominus Johannes de Ross, miles, dominus de Halkhead, is a witness, anno 1397.

He married Agnes, daughter and sole heiress of sir John Melvile of that ilk,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
by whom he got a great accession to his estate, particularly the lands,
barony, and castle of Melvile, in Mid Lothian, etc.

By her he had a son,

IX. Sir JOHN Ross of Halkhead, who succeeded him, and was appointed heretable
constable of the castle of Renfrew, Hist. of Renfrew, p. 44.
with power to uplift the customs at the principal fairs of the burgh; which
office continued long in the family.

He got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the lands and barony of Melvile, as heir to his mother, anno 1401; and the
family, in consequence of this marriage, have continued to quarter the arms of
Melvile with those of Ross ever since.

He died in the beginning of the reign of king James II. and was succeeded by
his son,

X. Sir JOHN ROSS of Halkhead, Ibidem.
who having acquired the lands of Tarbat and Auchenbath from Robert Ross of
Tarbat, upon his resignation, he got a charter of confirmation, under the great
seal, Rymer, tom. XI. p. 285.
of these lands, anno 1450.

He accompanied William earl of Douglas into England, anno 1451; for which he
got a safe conduct from king Henry VI.

He being a man of parts, was appointed one of the Scotch commissioners to
treat with the English, Ibid. p. 420.
anno 1459, and is then designed dominus Johannes Ross, dominus de Halkhead,
etc.

He got charters under the great seal, of the lands and barony of Melvile,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
and several others, and was appointed high sheriff of the county of Linlithgow
for life, anno 1472.

He was again sent one of the ambassadors extraordinary to the court of England
in 1473; Rymer, tom. XI. p. 774.
and dying soon thereafter, left issue a son,

Sir John, afterward lord Ross, -- and one daughter,

--, married to sir John Auchinleck of that ilk, in the shire of Air, as
appears by a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
anno 1481.

He was succeeded by his son,

XI. Sir JOHN ROSS of Halkhead, who was one of the ambassadors extraordinary at
the court of England, Rymer, tom. XII. p. 241.
when a peace was concluded, anno 1484.

He was raised to the dignity of the peerage by the title of lord Ross of
Halkhead, Creations of the nobility, in the lawyers library, Edin. and records
of parliament.
in the beginning of the reign of king James IV. and sat as a lord of
parliament in the years 1489, 1491, and 1494.

He got charters under the great seal, Johanni domino Ross, of many lands and
baronies, inter 1501 et 1508. Chart. in pub. archiv.


He was a man of great courage and intrepidity, and accompanied king James IV.
to the fatal field of Flowdon, where he lost his life with his royal master,
anno 1513. Having married Christian, daughter of Archibald Edmonston of
Duntreath, by her he had two sons and one daughter.

1. John, who, upon his father's resignation, got a charter under the great
seal, Johanni Ross de Melvile, Ibidem.
militi, filio et haeredi apparenti Johannis domini Ross de Halkhead, etc. of
the lands and barony of Waterston, in Linlithgowshire, dated 31st May 1499; but
he died before his father, without issue.

2. Ninian, who succeeded his father in the estate and honors.

His daughter, Elizabeth, was married to sir Thomas Semple of Elliotston,
Records of parliament.
ancestor of lord Semple.

XII. NINIAN, second lord Ross of Halkhead, who, in the minority of king James
V. was, by the estates of the nation, nominated one of the ambassadors to the
court of France, to endeavor to get Scotland included in their treaty of peace
with the English, Rymer. tom. XIII. p. 509.
anno 1515.

He was also one of the Scotch commissioners at the court of England, when a
peace was concluded, anno 1534.

He married, 1st, Ib. tom. XIV. p. 540.
lady Janet Stewart, daughter of John earl of Lennox, by whom he had a son,

Robert, master of Ross, who was slain at the battle of Pinkie, anno 1547, his
father being then alive, leaving issue a daughter, Elizabeth, married to John
lord Fleming; Crawfurd peerage.
he had also another daughter Agnes, married to John Boil of Kelburn, ancestor
of the earl of Glasgow.

He married, 2dly, Elizabeth, daughter of William lord Ruthven, widow of
William fifth earl of Errol, by whom he had a son,

XIII. JAMES, who succeeded to his father's estate and honors, and was third
lord Ross of Halkhead.

He got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the lands of Melvile, and others, anno 1548.

He was a great loyalist, a firm and steady friend of queen Mary, and never
deserted her interest.

He was one of the peers that sat on the trial of James earl of Bothwell,
Spotiswood's history.
when he was acquitted, for having been concerned in the murder of king Henry,
anno 1567.

He married Jean, daughter of Robert third lord Semple, by whom he had two sons
and one daughter.

1. Robert, his heir.

2. Sir William Ross of Muiriston, who carried on the line of this family, of
whom afterward.

His daughter, Elizabeth, married to Alan, son and apparent heir of Mungo
Lockhart of Cleghorn. Chart. in pub. archiv.
This appears by a charter under the great seal, anno 1582.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIV. ROBERT, fourth lord Ross of Halkhead, who married Jean, Crawfurd's
peerage.
daughter of Gavin Hamilton of Raploch, by whom he had a son,

James, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Grizel, married to sir Archibald Stirling of Keir.

He died anno 1596, and was succeeded by his son,

XV. JAMES, fifth lord Ross of Halkhead, who got several charters, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
under the great seal, of many lands and baronies, inter 1610 et 1621.

He married Mary, daughter of sir Walter Scot of Buccleugh, by whom he had
three sons, and three daughters.

1. James.

2. William.

3. Robert. -- All successively lords Ross.

1st daughter, Margaret, married to sir George Stirling of Keir.

2. Jean, married to John Hepburn of Waughton.

3. Mary, married to sir Robert Innes of that ilk.

He died in 1633, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVI. JAMES, sixth lord Ross, who got charters under the great seal, Jacobo
domino Ross, Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the lands of Easter-Stanly, in the barony of Renfrew, the lands and barony
of Halkhead, etc. in 1634 and 1635.

He died unmarried anno 1636, and was succeeded by his brother,

XVI. WILLIAM, seventh lord Ross, who dying also a minor, Crawfurd's peerage.
anno 1640, was succeeded by his brother,

XVI. ROBERT, eighth lord Ross, third son of the fifth lord, who dying also
without issue about the year 1645, the estate and honors devolved upon sir
William Ross of Muiriston, Ibidem.
the next heir-male, being son of his grand-uncle sir William Ross of
Muiriston, beforementioned, to whom we now return.

XIV. Sir WILLIAM Ross of Muiriston, second son of James third lord Ross,
married --, daughter of --, by whom he had a son and successor,

XV. Sir WILLIAM, who got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
domino Willielmo Ross de Muiriston, militi, of the lands of Torehead,
Toreswoodhead, Kingside-mulr, etc. in 1636.

Upon the death of Robert eighth lord Ross, without issue, he succeeded to the
estate and honors, being next heir-male, as before-observed, and was ninth
lord Ross.

He was a man of parts and learning, and was made sheriff-principal of the
county of Renfrew, Minutes of parliament.
anno 1646.

He was appointed colonel of foot in the counties of Air and Renfrew, anno
1648, and one of the committee of estates in 1649. Ibidem, and rescinded acts


Though this noble lord was employed by the parliament, yet he was a great
loyalist, and suffered many hardships on that account.

He was fined by Oliver Cromwell in the sum of three thousand pounds sterling,
anno 1654, Cromwell's printed act.
and died in an advanced age, in 1656.

He married Helen, daughter of George lord Forrester, by whom he had a son,

XVI. GEORGE, tenth lord Ross, who, immediately upon the restoration of king
Charles II. Hist. of Renfrew. p. 36.
was by his majesty appointed one of the lords of his privy council, and
lieutenant colonel to the royal regiment of guards.

He married, 1st, lady Grizel Cochran, daughter of William earl of Dundonald,
by whom he had a son,

William, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Grizel, married to sir Alexander Gilmour of Craigmiller.

He married, 2dly, lady Jean Ramsay, daughter of George earl of Dalhousie, by
whom he had a son,

General Charles Ross of Balnagowan, who betaking himself to a military life,
served with great reputation, and rose to the highest rank in the army.

George lord Ross died anno 1682, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVII. WILLIAM, eleventh lord Ross, who, in his father's lifetime, got a
charter under the great seal, Willielmo magistro de Ross, Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the lands, lordship, and barony of Melvile, Halkhead, etc. 10th August 1669.

He came early into the revolution, and was one of the lords of the privy
council, both to king William and queen Anne. He was appointed her majesty's
high commissioner to the general assembly of the kirk of Scotland, anno 1704,
and one of the commissioners of the treasury.

He was also nominated one of the commissioners for the treaty of union, anno
1706, of which he was a zealous promoter.

Upon the accession of king George I. to the throne, he was elected one of the
sixteen Scotch peers to the British parliament, to meet in March 1715; which
year he was appointed lord lientenant of the shi^^ (...) Renfrew.

He married, 1st, Agnes, daughter and heiress of sir John Wilkie of Foulden, by
whom he had a son,

George, his heir, -- and three daughters.

1. Eupheme, married to William earl of Kilmarnock.

2. Mary, married to John duke of Athole.

3. Grizel, married to sir James Lockhart of Carstairs -- They all had issue.

He married, 2dly, a daughter of Philip lord Wharton; but by her he had no
issue.

He married, 3dly, lady Anne Hay, daughter of John marquis of Tweeddale, by
whom he had a daughter,

Anne.

He lived to a great age, died in 1738, and was succeeded by his son,

XVIII. GEORGE, twelfth lord Ross, who was one of the commissioners of his
majesty's customs, and married lady Elizabeth Ker, daughter of William marquis
of Lothian, by whom he had issue a son,

William, master of Ross, a youth of great hopes and spirit; but died before
his father unmarried, -- and three daughters.

1. Jean, married to John Ross Mackie of Palgowan, Esquire;.

2. Elizabeth, married to John third earl of Glasgow, and has issue.

3. Mary, died without issue.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st and 4th, a cheveron cheque argent and sable, between three
water budgets of the latter, for Ross; 2d and 3d gules, three crescents, and a
border argent, the latter charged with eight roses of the first, barbed and
feeded proper, for Melvile.

CREST; on a wreath, a hawk's head erazed proper.

SUPPORTERS; two goss hawks of the last, armed, the bells and chesses or.

MOTTO; Think on.

CHIEF SEATS,
Were at Halkhead and Stanly in the shire of Renfrew, and Melvile-Castle in
Mid-Lothian.

LESLIE Earl of ROTHES.
THE traditional accounts of the origin of this most noble and ancient family
are various. Some authors are of opinion, that the surname is local, and was
assumed by the proprietors of the lands and barony of Leslyn, in
Aberdeen-shire, as soon as sirnames began to be used in this country.

Others allege, that one Bartholomew de Leslyn, a noble Hungarian, came to
Scotland with queen Margaret about the year 1067: that he was the son of Walter
de Leslyn, who had assumed his surname from the castle of Leslyn in Hungary,
where he was born, etc.

Sir Robert Sibbald, Mr. Martin of Clermont, and other learned antiquaries,
deduce their descent from that

Bartholomew, who, being in great favor with king Malcolm Canmore, obtained
from that prince grants of several lands in Aberdeen-shire, which he called
Leslyn, after his own surname: that he died in the beginning of the reign of
king David I. leaving issue a son,

Malcolm de Leslyn, who succeeded him, and was progenitor of all the Leslies in
Scotland.

No Scotch surname has made a greater figure in Europe than that of Leslie. We
have now subsisting in Scotland four peers of that name. There were at one time
three general officers of this name to three several crowned heads, viz. Count
Walter Leslie to the emperor of Germany, Alexander earl of Leven to king
Charles I. of Britain, and David (afterward lord Newark) to Gustavus Adolphus
king of Sweden.

There are at this time several counts of this name in Germany, besides many
considerable families in France, Bayle's dictionary, etc.
Muscovy, Poland; and one of the same name governed the kingdom of Hungary as
the emperor's viceroy, whose daughter he had the honor to marry.

We now proceed to deduce the descent of this illustrious family by
unquestionable authority.

I. BARTHOLF, or BARTHOLOMEW de LESLYN, was proprietor of the lands and barony
of Leslyn, in Aberdeen-shire, in the reign of king William the Lion, who
succeeded to the crown of Scotland, anno 1165, and died in 1214.

He was father of

II. MALCOLM de LESLYN, who obtained from David earl of Huntington, the king's
brother, a new grant of the lands of Leslyn in Garioch, which belonged to his
father Bartholf, Charta pene comitem de Rothes.
sicut perambulatae fuerunt coram A. episcopo Aberdonensi, per suas rectas
divisas, etc.

This deed is without date; but as A. or Adam became bishop of Aberdeen, anno
1207, and David earl of Huntington died in 1219, it must have been granted
betwixt the years 1207 and 1219.

Malcolm left issue a son,

III. NORMANNUS de LESLY, dominus ejusdem, who succeeded him.

He got a charter from John earl of Hantington and Chester, confirming his
father's grant, Normanno filio Malcolmi, Ibidem.
de terris de Leslyn, sicut charta patris sui inde teslatur. It contains also a
new gift of the lands of Caskieben, propter servitium unius militis, reserving
a donation of the church of Leslyn to the abbacy of Lindores, etc.

This charter is also without date; but as John earl of Huntington died anno
1237, it must have been granted in or before that year.

The armorial bearing of this family was argent, on a bend azure, three buckles
or.

This Norman, according to sir Robert Sibbald, married a daughter of the lord
Lorn, by whom he had a son and successor,

IV. Sir LEONARD de LESLYN, dominus ejusdem, Sibbald, Martin, etc.
who made a considerable figure in the reign of king Alexander III. and is said
by several authors to have been a valiant knight.

He is witness in a charter granted by Isabel de Bruce, daughter of David earl
of Huntington, wherein he is designed filius Normanni, Charta penes comitem de
Rothes.
etc. confirmed by king Alexander III. the 24th year of his reign, anno 1273.

He married Catharine More, heiress of Taces in Fife, Sir Robert Sibbald, etc.
which barony continued long in the possession of this family. By her he had a
son,

V. Sir NORMAN LESLYN, dominus ejusdem who succeeded him, and being in great
favor with king Alexander III. obtained from that prince a grant of the woods
and lands of Fetekill in Fife; Charta penes comitem de Rothes.
(now called Lesly) the 34th year of his reign, anno 1283.

He appears to have had considerable possessions both in Fife and the north;
for we find him swearing fealty to king Edward I. of England, when he had
overrun Scotland, for many lands lying in different counties, Prynne's
collections, vol. III. p. 651. 657, etc.
and is designed Normannus de Lesly, chevalier, anno 1296.

He is one of the Scotch nobles, who, to oblige the king of England, renounced
the old league with the king of France, and is then designed Normannus dominus
de Leslyn, Rymer, tom. II. p. 720.
anno 1297.

He was afterward appointed vicecomes (sheriff) of Aberdeen, Ibid. p. 1055.
anno 1305.

By Elizabeth Leith his wife, he left issue a son,

Sir Andrew, his heir, -- and two daughters.

1. Margaret, married to sir John Innes of that ilk.

2. Anne, married to sir Alexander Dunbar of Westfield.

He was succeeded by his son,

VI. Sir ANDREW LESLYN, dominus ejusdem, who married Mary, one of the daughters
and co-heiresses of sir Alexander Abernethy, lord of that ilk, by whom he got a
great accession to his estate, viz. the lands and barony of Ballinbreich in the
county of Fife, the lands of Cairny in the shire of Perth, and Rothes, Charta
penes comitem de Rothes.
etc. in the north; and in consequence of this marriage the family have ever
since continued to quarter the arms of Abernethy with their own.

There is an agreement, by way of indenture, between Andrew Lesly, son and heir
of sir Norman Lesly, with consent and assent of Mary his spouse, daughter and
one of the heirs of umquhil sir Alexander Abernethy, knight, on the one part,
and sir William Lindsay, rector of the church of Air, and chamberlain of
Scotland, on the other part; whereby the said Andrew obliges himself to infeft
the said sir William in a twenty-four merk land in the tenement of Cairny in
Perth-shire, Indenture in archiv. tamiliae de Douglas.
to be holden of the granter, dated 19th June 1312.

Note, This sir William Lindsay was brother of sir David Lindsay, who married
Helen, another of these heiresses of lord Abernethy.

Sir Andrew Lesly was one of the magnates Scotiae who signed that famous letter
to the pope, Fordun, vol. II. p. 275.
asserting the independency of Scotland, anno 1320.

By the said Mary Abernethy he had issue four sons.

1. Norman, his heir.

2. Sir Walter, Chart. in pub. archiv. Fordun, Ryme., etc. Walterus de Lesly,
frater ^^rmanni, etc.
who married Eupheme countess of Ross, and was afterward designed both dominus
and comes de Ross. He got several charters, domino Waltero de Leslyne, et
Euphemiae comitissae de Ross, sponsae suae, etc. but their only son, Alexander
earl of Ross, died without male issue.

3. Andrew, who carried on the line of this family, as will be shown hereafter.

4. George, ancestor of the Leslies of Balquhain.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. NORMAN de LESLY, dominus de eodem, a man of great parts, who was
concerned in all the public transactions of his time.

He was named one of the Scotch commissioners to treat with the English, Rymer,
tom. VI p. 82.
super negotiis David de Bruis, etc. anno 1358; and, that same year, was
appointed one of the ambassadors extraordinary to the court of Rome, Fordun,
vol. II. p. 362.
to petition the pope for a grant of the tithes of Scotland to help to pay king
David's ransom.

He was also appointed one of the Scotch commissioners to treat with the
English in 1361 and 1362; Rymer, tom. VI. p. 361.
and was again sent one of the ambassadors extraordinary to the court of
England, anno 1363, Fordun, vol. II. p. 369.
and is then designed frater Walteri, etc.

He made a resignation in the hands of king Robert II. containing an entail of
his lands of Ballinbreich, etc. in the county of Fife, in favors of himself
and the heirs-male of his body; which failing, to George Lesly of Fetekill,
knight, and the heirs-male of his body, lawfully begotten; which sailing, to
his own lawful heirs-male whatever. Charta in archiv. Roberti III.
The resignation was made at the last council held by king Robert II. at
Linlithgow, confirmed by a charter under the great seal from king Robert III.
dated anno 1390.

He married Margaret Lamberton, Charta penes comitem de Rothes.
heir to her uncle Alexander de Lamberton, with whom he got a considerable
fortune, and by her had a son,

VIII. DAVID, who succeeded him, and was one of the Scotch nobles that were
appointed hostages for king James I.'s ransom, Rymer, tom. X. p. 308.
anno 1424, and is then designed David dominus de Lesly.

He remained in England seven years, Ibid. p. 509.
and at last obtained a safe conduct to return to Scotland, anno 1431.

He confirmed his father's entail in favors of the abovementioned sir George
his cousin and heir-male, Charta penes comitem de Rothes.
anno 1438, and died soon thereafter, leaving issue only one daughter, who got
from her father the barony of Leslyn, in Garioch, and married one of her own
name, M. S. hist. of the family.
whose posterity were designed by the title of Leslies of that ilk.

This David dying without male issue, the lands and barony of Ballinbreich,
etc. according to the above entail, devolved upon his cousin and heir-male,

Norman Lesly, grandson of Andrew, beforementioned, to whom we now return.

VII. ANDRLW LESLY, third son of sir Andrew, by Mary Abernethy, obtained in
patrimony the barony of Rothes, being a part of his mother's estate; and dying
before his father, left issue a son,

Sir George of Fetekill -- and a daughter,

Mary, married to -- Elphingston.

VIII. Sir GEORGE LESLY of Fetekill, only son of Andrew, in a contract of
marriage between his said sister Mary and -- Elphingston, Charta penes comitem
de Rothes.
is designed dominus de Rothes, in 1392, which has continued to be one of the
chief titles of the family ever since.

He afterward got a charter from king Robert III. confirming a grant by
Alexander earl of Ross, dilecto consanguineo suo Georgio de Lesly, domino de
Rothes, etc. of the lands of Woodfield, Pitnamoon, the mills of Kincardin,
Fettercairn, de Esty, et de Romuin, infra vicecomitatum de Mernes, etc. The
onerous cause is, that he had advanced the earl two hundred merks to relieve
the earldom of Ross out of the king's hands, Ibidem.
et pro bono consilio et servitiis, etc. The confirmation is dated anno 1400.

He was taken prisoner at the battle of Homildon, anno 1402, Fordun, vol. II.
p. 435.
and is then designed Georgius Lesly de Rothes, miles, etc.

He married Elizabeth, eldest daughter of sir Thomas Hay of Errol, lord high
constable of Scotland, by lady Elizabeth Stewart his spouse, daughter of king
Robert II.

By her he had a son,

IX. NORMAN, lord Lesly of Rothes. There is a sasine given by Robert Graham of
Kynpounte, as bailie of Norman of Lesly of Rothes, to Lucas of Strevline of
Retherne, of the lands of the Kere, wadset by Norman to Lucas. Penes magist.
Stirling de Kelr.
The sasine proceeds on a precept dated 18th December 1433, and is dated 22d
January thereafter.

This Norman, upon the death of David dominus de Lesly, Retour pe^es comitem de
Rothes.
without male issue, succeeded him, as before-observed, and was accordingly
served heir-male and of entail to him, on 19th May 1439.

He married Christian, daughter of John lord Seton, ancestor of the earls of
Winton, for which he got a dispensation from the pope, Dispensation penes
commit. de Rothes.
as being within the forbidden degrees of consanguinity, he being great
grandson of king Robert II. and lord Seton being descended of king Robert I.'s
sister lady Christian, married to sir Christopher Seton, also of his sister
lady Isabel, married to Thomas earl of Murray.

They had issue a son,

X. GEORGE, afterward earl of Rothes, who, by his father and mother, is
descended of both the royal families of Bruce and Stewart.

There is a procuratory by this George for resigning, Penes magist. Stirling de
Keir.
in the king's hands, the half of the lands of Keir in favors of Lucas of
Stirling, dated at Lesly, 7th May 1448.

There is a renunciation by George, Chartulary of Dunfermline, in the lawiers
library, Edin.
designed dominus de Lesly super Leven, son of Norman, son of sir George Lesly,
knight, of the lands of Balvaird, etc. anno 1450.

The same George gets a charter, under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the lands of Taces in Fife, anno 1455, and is then designed dominus de
Lesly.

He afterward got another charter from king James II. of the lands of
Ballinbreich and Taces in Fife, the lands of Cairny in the county of Perth, the
lands of Lower-Taveret, and Fithes in Forfar-shire, the lands of Cushnie,
Fowlis, Mowat, and Rothie-Norman, in Aberdeen-shire, and Rothes in the county
of Elgin, Chart. penes comitem de Rothes.
Georgio comiti Rothes, domino Lesly, etc. dated 20th March, anno regni 22 do,
which is 1459.

On the 21st of March that same year, he got another charter, Georgio comiti de
Rothes, domino Lesly, erecting the town of Lesly-Green into a free burgh of
barony, with a weekly market on Thursday, Ibidem.
and a yearly fair at Michaelmass.

There is also produced in parliament, an instrument of sasine, bearing, "that
king James II. gave to Andrew Lesly, son to George earl of Rothes, Records of
parliament.
the lands of Taces in the shire of Fife, November 16th 1459."

By all which it is evident, he was created earl of Rothes by king James II.
inter 1455 et 1459.

He afterward got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Georgio comiti de Rothes, of several lands and baronies, inter 1465 et 1470.

He married, 1st, Margaret, daughter of -- Lundin of that ilk, Chart. penes
comitem de Rothes.
an ancient family in the county of Fife, by whom he had a daughter,

Lady Margaret, married to George Lesly of that ilk in Garioch, which is
instructed by his obligation to George earl of Rothes, dated 20th May 1478, to
which his seal is appended, and still entire, Ibidem.
viz. three buckles on a fess, etc.

He married, 2dly, Christian, daughter of sir Walter Halyburton, lord of
Dirleton, by whom he had a son,

Andrew, his apparent heir, -- and a daughter,

Lady Elizabeth, married, 1st, to William lord Sinclair; and, 2dly, to William
third earl of Errol.

XI. ANDREW, designed lord Lesly and master of Rothes, only son and apparent
heir of George first earl of Rothes, married lady Marjory Sinclair, Ibidem.
daughter of William earl of Orkney, and dying before his father, by the said
lady Marjory he left issue three sons.

1. John, master of Rothes, who married lady Janet Keith, daughter of William
earl Marishal; but died without issue.

2. George, who became his grand-father's heir.

3. William, who succeeded his brother.

The old earl was a man of great worth and merit, Hollins^ed.
and highly esteemed by king James II. III. and IV.

He lived to a great age, died in 1501 or 1502, and was succeeded by his
grandson,

XII. GEORGE, second earl of Rothes, second son of Andrew lord Lesly, dying
without issue, anno 1512, the estate and honors devolved upon his brother,

XII. WILLIAM, third earl of Rothes, third son of Andrew lord Lesly, who, in
his brother's lifetime, got a charter under the great seal, Willielmo, fratri
germano Georgii comitis de Rothes, Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the lands of Easter-Feths, in the barony of Fethens in Forsar-shire, dated
7th August 1511.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir Michael Balsour of Montquhanie, by whom
he had two sons.

1. George, his heir.

2. John Lesly of Parkhill, who married a daughter of the lord of Moncries, by
whom he had two daughters. He was taken prisoner at Solway-moss; but was
released for a ransom of two hundred merks sterling, Rymer, tom. XIV. p. 132.
anno 1543. He was afterward engaged with his nephew in the slaughter of
cardinal Bethune, and died without male issue.

Earl William was a man of great spirit and resolution. He accompanied king
James IV. to the unfortunate battle of Flowdon, and there lost his life with
his royal master, anno 1513, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. GEORGE, fourth earl of Rothes, a man of great parts, fine
accomplishments, and highly esteemed by king James V. who, in the year 1537,
took him to France, together with the earl of Mar, etc. when he went to espouse
princess Magdalene, a daughter of that crown.

He was afterward sent ambassador extraordinary to the court of Denmark, upon
a negotiation of importance, and acquitted himself with great fidelity and
honor.

He was made heretable sheriff of the county of Fife, and got no less than ten
charters under the great seal from king James V. and queen Mary, Georgio comiti
de Rothes, of many lands and baronies, Chart. in pub. archiv.
inter 1530 et 1550, by which it appears he was possessed of an immense estate.

In 1517 he was betrothed, but not canonically married, to Margaret, daughter
of William third lord Crichton; Ibidem, ad annum, 1517.
for in a charter under the great seal, she is designed his sponsa assidata. By
her he had a son,

Norman, designed master o^ Rothes, to whom his father gave several lands,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
upon which he got several charters under the great seal, Normanno Lesly, filio
Georgii comitis de Rothes, etc. inter 1540 et 1545. This Norman married Isabel,
daughter of John sixth lord Lindsay of Byres; but having been concerned in the
murder of cardinal Bethune, was outlawed and forfeited. All Scotch historians.
He went into the service of the king of France, and at a battle in Picardy he
received a mortal wound, of which he died, anno 1554, without issue. Vide
Melvile's memoirs.

Sometime after the birth of Norman, the earl regularly married Nicholas,
daughter of sir John Somerville of Cambus^ethan, Chart. in pub. archiv. ad ann.
1528,
who, in a charter under the great seal, is designed his lawful wise and
countess of Rothes, anno 1528. By her he had a son,

Andrew, afterward earl of Rothes, -- and two daughters.

1. Lady Janet, married to -- Crichton, lord of Naughton.

2. Lady Helen, married to Mark, commendator of Newbottle.

Nicholas countess of Rothes died in 1539. The earl then canonically married
his former betrothed wife, M. S. hist. of the fam.
Margaret Crichton, who, in a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub.
archivis.
is designed countess of Rothes, anno 1542, whereby his son Norman became
legitimated. By her he had another son,

Robert Lesly, who got from his father the lands of Finrassie, and is
erroneously by some authors said to have been elder brother of Andrew, because
he was born of the same mother with Norman, which is plainly a mistake.

By the said Margaret he had also four daughters.

1. Lady Agnes, married to sir William Douglas of Lochleven, Chart. penes
comitem de Morton.
afterward earl of Morton.

2. Lady Beatrix, married to -- Beaton of Creich.

3. Lady Eupheme, married to -- Learmont of Balcolmie.

4. Lady Margaret, married to Archibald eighth earl of Angus.

By the manuscript history of the family, this earl is said to have had other
two wives, viz. 1st, Elizabeth, daughter of Andrew third lord Gray, widow of
John lord Glammis, and Alexander earl of Huntly; 2dly, Isabel Lundie, widow of
David seventh earl of Crawfurd; but of these there is no succession.

The earl, after his return from his embassy in Denmark, was tried by his
peers, as having been accessory with his friends to the murder of cardinal
Bethune, but was honorably acquitted. He then bought back his lands, M. S.
hist of the family,
which had been forfeited in the person of his son Norman; and being a man of
great prudence and sagacity, was appointed one of the commissioners to attend
her majesty queen Mary to France, when she married the dauphin; but he dying at
Dieppe, not without suspicion of poison, anno 1558, was succeeded by his son,

XIV. ANDREW, fifth earl of Rothes, who, in his father's lifetime, got charters
under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Andreae Lesly, of the lands and baronies of Ballinbreich, Fethes, Balmane,
Rothes, Lesly, etc. inter 1546 et 1550.

He afterward got nine or ten charters under the great seal, Ibidem.
Andreae comiti de Rothes, of many lands, lordships, and baronies, inter 1560
et 1590.

He was a man of great honor and integrity, a firm and steady friend of queen
Mary.

He married, 1st, Jean, daughter of sir John Hamilton of Evandale, by whom he
had three sons, and two daughters.

1. James, his apparent heir.

2. Patrick, afterward lord Lindores.

3. Andrew, who died without issue.

1st daughter, lady Eupheme, married to James eighth lord Lindsay of Byres,
ancestor of the earl of Crawfurd.

2. Lady Margaret, married, 1st, to David, son and apparent heir of sir John
Wemyss of that ilk; and, 2dly, to James earl of Finlater.

He married, 2dly, Charta pene comitem de Rothes.
Jean, daughter of Patrick third lord Ruthven, by whom he had two daughters.

1. Lady Elizabeth, married to sir William Cunningham of Caprington.

2. Lady Mary, married to Robert lord Melvile.

He married, 3dly, Janet, daughter of David Durie of that ilk, Chart. in pub
archiv.
an ancient family in the county of Fife, by whom he had three sons, and one
daughter.

1. George, who died unmarried.

2. Sir John Lesly of Newton, of whom the present lord Lindores is lineally
descended. Vide page 408th of this work.

3. Robert, who died without issue.

His daughter, lady Isable, was married to James master of Sinclair.

XV. JAMES, eldest son and apparent heir of Andrew fifth earl of Rothes, was,
in his father's lifetime, put in possession of several lands, Ibidem.
upon which he got charters under the great seal, Jacobo magistro de Rothes, of
the baronies of Ballinbreich, etc. etc.

He got also a charter officii vicecomitis vicecomitatus de Fife, Ibidem.
cum feodis, salariis, proficuis, etc. inter 1595 et 1599.

He married, 1st, Margaret, daughter of Patrick seventh lord Lindsay of Byres,
ancestor of the earl of Crawfurd, by whom he had four daughters.

1. Margaret, married to Mr. John Murray, minister of Dunfermline, a son of the
family of Abercairny.

2. Isabel, married to the lord of Newhall.

3. Agnes, Chart. in archivis fam. de Keir.
married to Andrew Wardlaw of Torrie.

4. Grizel, married to Alexander earl of Dunfermline.

He married, 2dly, Catharine, daughter of Patrick lord Drummond, by whom he had
a son,

John, afterward earl of Rothes, -- and a daughter,

Jean, married to Alexander Menzies of Weem.

He died before his father.

XVI. JOHN, only son of James master of Rothes, upon the death of his
grandfather Andrew the fifth earl, succeeded to his estate and honors, and
was sixth earl of Rothes.

He got many charters under the great seal, Johanni comiti de Rothes, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
of different lands and baronies, inter 1620 et 1635.

He was a man of good parts, great honor and integrity; and though at the
first breaking out of the civil war, he joined the covenanters for the redress
of grievances, yet he was far from being disloyal to the king. He was first
commissioner from the Scots at the treaty of Rippon, and by his prevailing
address, a ratification was concluded, to the satisfaction of all well disposed
men.

He had a pension of 10,000 l. per annum settled on him for life by parliament,
anno 1640, Rescinded acts of parliament.
and ratified anno 1641; yet the king was perfectly well satisfied of his
sincerity and good inclinations. When he was at London, he wrote to the estates
at Edinburgh, desiring them to be more moderate in their measures, and to do
nothing to irritate the king, who was immediately coming down to Scotland, and
would give them all the satisfaction they could in justice require or desire,
etc. This letter is written in July 1641, Minutes of parliament.
and he died at London, in August thereafter, much regreted by his majesty,
who, in his death, sustained an irreparable loss. A noble author says, "It is
certain the king expected, by his help and interest, to have found such a party
in Scotland, as would have been more tender of his honor than they after
expressed themselves, and he did always impute the failing thereof to the absence
of the earl, Lord Clarendon's hist. v. I. p. 280.
who, being sick at London when the king went for Scotland, within six weeks
after died."

He married, Charta penes com. de Rothes.
lady Anne Erskine, daughter of John earl of Mar, by lady Mary Stewart his
wife, daughter of Esme, duke of Lennox, and by her he had a son,

John, his heir, afterward duke of Rothes, who succeeded him,

XVII. JOHN, seventh earl of Rothes, who was too young to be engaged on either
side, at the breaking out of the civil war; but he soon discovered himself to
be a man of good parts, great spirit, and vivacity, and sincerely attached to
the interest of the royal family.

When king Charles II. came over from Breda to Scotland, anno 1650, the earl
immediately waited on him, was most graciously received, and had the honor to
carry the sword of state at his majesty's coronation, Lives of the offic. of
state, p. 224.
1st January 1651.

When the Scotch parliament at Stirling agreed to raise an army for the king,
the earl of Rothes being now of age, and high sheriff of Fife, by his interest
in that county, got together a regiment of horse, and charged on their head at
the battle of Worcester, in 1651.

A noble author tells us, that they made a brave resistance, and charged the
enemy so vigorously, that they beat back the body that opposed them, Lord
Clarendon.
but were quickly after overpowered, etc.

This brave young earl had the misfortune to be taken prisoner, was sent to the
tower of London, where he suffered a long and tedious confinement, Lives of the
offic. of state.
but at last obtained his liberty, a year or two before the restoration.

He went over to Breda, and waited on the king, with whom he was in great
favor. He returned with him to England at the restoration; and as soon as the
ministry for Scotland was settled, Commission under the great seal.
he was constituted president of the council, and one of the extraordinary
lords of session.

In the year 1663, he was appointed his majesty's high commissioner to the
parliament which met at Edinburgh, on the 18th of June that year, in which many
popular and loyal acts were passed.

They made an offer to the king of 20,000 foot, and 2000 horse, to be ready to
march upon the first orders, with forty days provisions, to any part of his
majesty's dominions, Lives of the offic. of state, p. 225.
to oppose invasions, suppress insurrections, or for any other cause in which
his authority, power, or greatness was concerned, etc.

In the same year also, he was made lord high treasurer of Scotland, upon the
resignation of his father-in-law, the earl of Crawfurd, was made captain of the
troop of life guards, and general of the forces.

In the year 1664, he was made lord keeper of the great seal: all which
employments he enjoyed till the year 1667, when he was made lord high
chancellor of the kingdom; in which great office he continued till the day of
his death.

And having acquitted himself in every station of life entirely to his
majesty's satisfaction, he was pleased further to dignify him with the titles
of duke of Rothes, marquis of Ballinbreich, earl of Lesly, viscount Lugtoun,
lord Auchmoutie and Caskieberry, Diploma in pub. archiv.
by patent, to the heirs-male of his body, dated at Windfor, 29th May 1680.

By this patent, which contains many clauses very honorable for the family, it
is specially provided, that in case of the duke's dying without male-issue of
his body, it shall not prejudge his other heirs, or prevent the dignity and
titles of earl of Rothes to descend to the heirs of entail and provision,
Ibidem.
according to the other settlements of the estate, etc.

He married lady Anne Lindsay, daughter of John earl of Crawfurd, lord high
treasurer of Scotland, by whom he had only two daughters.

1. Lady Margaret, afterward countess of Rothes.

2. Lady Christian, married, 1st, to James third marquis of Montrose, father of
the first duke; and, 2dly, to sir John Bruce of Kinross, baronet.

His grace the chancellor dying without male-issue, in July 1681, the title of
duke became extinct, but the honors and earldom of Rothes, by the settlements
of the family, and the duke's appointment, devolved upon his eldest daughter,

XVIII. MARGARET, countess of Rothes, who married Charles fifth earl of
Haddington, to whom she had three sons.

1. John, afterward earl of Rothes.

2. Thomas, who succeeded to the estate and honors of Haddington. Vide page
319th of this work.

3. Mr. Charles Hamilton, who died young.

XIX. JOHN, eldest son and heir of Margaret countess of Rothes, succeeded to
that earldom in right of his mother, assumed the name and arms of Lesly, and
was eighth earl of Rothes.

This noble lord enjoyed many high offices in the state. He was, by her majesty
queen Anne, appointed lord privy seal, and was elected one of the sixteen peers
for Scotland to the second, fifth, and sixth British parliaments.

Upon the accession of king George I. to the throne, he was made lord high
admiral of Scotland in November 1714; and in 1715 he was appointed governor of
Stirling-castle, and his majesty's commissioner to the general assembly of the
church of Scotland; which high dignity he enjoyed for seven years successively.
He was also lord lieutenant of the counties of Fife, Kinross, and Aberdeen, of
which first he was heretable sheriff.

He married lady Jean Hay, second daughter of John, second marquis of
Tweeddale, by whom he had eight sons and four daughters.

1. John, now earl of Rothes.

2. Charles, a colonel in the service of the States General.

3. Thomas, who is barrack-master-general for Scotland, and was a member of
several parliaments of Great Britain.

4. James, who was bred to the law, was one of the commissaries of Edinburgh,
solicitor of exchequer, and depute-sheriss of the county of Fife. He died on
24th September 1761, without issue.

5. David, who died young.

6. William, major commandant of his majesty's invalids in Ireland.

7. Francis, who also died young.

8. Andrew, one of the equerries to her royal highness the princess Dowager of
Wales.

1st daughter, lady Jane.

2. Lady Mary, died in infancy.

3. Lady Margaret.

4. Lady Anne, also died young.

The earl died anno 1722, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XX. JOHN, ninth earl of Rothes, who entering early into the military service,
was, in the year 1715, appointed to the command of a troop of dragoons.

In 1717, he had a company of the guards.

In 1719, he was lieutenant colonel of the royal Scotch Fusileers.

Upon the death of his father, in 1722, he was appointed governor of
Stirling-castle, and chamberlain of the county of Fife.

In 1731, he had the command of a regiment of foot, and afterward,
successively, the second troop of grenadier guards, the Inniskilling regiment
of dragoons, the royal regiment of Scotch Grays, and is now lieutenant-g^eneral
of his majesty's forces, colonel of the third regiment of guards, governor of
Duncannon fort, commander in chief in Ireland, one of his majesty's privy
council in that kingdom, and knight of the most ancient order of St. Andrew.

He was chosen one of the sixteen peers for Scotland, to the seventh, tenth,
eleventh, and the present British parliament, etc. etc.

He married miss Hannah Howard, second daughter and co-heiress of Matthew
Howard, Esquire; of Thrope, in the county of Norfolk, who died in April 1761, and
by her he had two sons and two daughters.

1. John, Lord Leslie.

2. Charles-Howard Leslie, who died in April 1762, in the 15th year of his age.

1st daughter, lady Jane-Elizabeth.

2. Lady Mary.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st and 4th, argent, on a bend azure, three buckles or, for Lesly;
2d and 3d or, a lion rampant gules, suppressed by a ribband sable, for
Abernethy.

CREST; on a wreath, a demi-griffin, proper.

SUPPORTERS; two griffins partee per fess, argent and gules.

MOTTO; Grip fast.

CHIEF SEAT,
At Lesly, a noble seat, with a park, in the county of Fife.

DUKE of ROTHSAY.
THE first who enjoyed the title of duke in this kingdom, was David, prince of
Scotland, eldest son of king Robert III. by queen Aunabella Drummond. He was
born anno 1378, and created duke of Rothsay, earl of Athole and Carrick, anno
1398.

He was a youth of great resolution and intrepidity. He held out the castle of
Edinburgh against a royal army, History of the royal family, p. 162.
commanded by king Henry IV. of England.

He challenged king Henry to fight him, with three or four, or a hundred nobles
on each side, Ibidem.
to save the blood of his subjects, but the challenge was not accepted.

He married lady Marjory Douglas, daughter of Archibald third earl of Douglas,
and lord of Galloway, but by her he had no issue.

Though this prince wanted neither parts nor spirits, yet it is certain he gave
himself too much up to a voluptuous life, which gave his old and virtuous
father great vexation. He therefore ordered him to be confined in the palace of
Falkland, Winton, extract. e chron. Scotiae, etc.
and narrowly looked after by some particular friends, where according to the
best and cotemporary authors, he died of a dysentery, anno 1401.

We are sensible it has been alleged, that this prince was starved to death by
the duke of Albany's means; but as there is good reason to believe, that that
calumny was raised by the earl of Athole, Ruddiman's notes on Buchanan.
on purpose to asperse the duke of Albany, and as it is certain the earl of
Douglas, then one of the greatest men in the kingdom, and brother-in-law to the
duke of Rothsay never resented it, we think we have followed the best authority.

Ever since this duke's death, the eldest son of the king of Scotland, is born
duke of Rothsay, earl of Carrick, and lord of Renfrew, etc.

KER Duke of ROXBURGH.
THE surname of Ker or Car is of great antiquity in Scotland, and some are of
opinion that they came originally to this island from France, where there were
several considerable families, who made a great figure, even before the tenth
century, and whose posterity are subsisting in that kingdom to this day.

That one of these, a man of rank and spirit, came over to England with William
the Conqueror, anno 1066, had a considerable command in his army, and having
remarkably distinguished himself for courage and conduct, got from that great
prince a large share of the conquered lands, particularly in the north of
England, where his posterity still subsists, and that of him all the Kers in
Great Britain are descended.

Certain it is, the armorial bearing of the Kers in England and France are the
very same: But at what time the Kers settled first in Scotland, or whether they
came from England or France, cannot now be positively ascertained: yet it
appears from good authority, Prynne's collect. Rymer's foed. Aug. etc.
that there were several families of that surname in the west of Scotland, in
the reign of king Alexander III. who succeeded to the crown anno 1249.

Sir George MacKenzie, that learned antiquary, says, that the first of this
family, who settled in the southern parts, was,

I. ROBERT de KER, Sir G. MacKenzie's collections in the lawyers library, Edin.
who flourished in the reign of king Robert Bruce, and that of his son king
David, who succeeded to the crown anno 1329.

He was father of,

II. JOHN KER, who appears to have had considerable possessions in lands, both
in the counties of Selkirk and Roxburgh, by two original charters, which we
have seen, and he was the undoubted progenitor of this illustrious family.

Upon the resignation of John de Copeland, there is a charter, Johanni Ker de
foresta de Selkirk, Charta penes ducem de Roxburgh.
of all his lands and tenements in Auldtounburn, with their pertinents, which
formerly belonged to Adam de Rule, etc. The charter is dated the Monday after
the purification of the Blessed Virgin, anno 1357.

And upon the resignation of William de Blackdene, of part of the lands of Mow
and Auldtounburn, in the regality of Sprouston, and shire of Roxburgh, he got
another charter, Johanni Ker de foresta de Selkirk, Ibidem.
et Mariotae ejus spousae, terrarum de Molla, Auldtounburn, etc. etc. dated at
Auldtounburn, the Thursday after the seast of St. Michael, anno 1358.

As he was soon afterward proprietor of the whole barony of Auldtounburn, that
became one of the chief titles of his family.

By the said Mariota, he had issue a son,

III. HENRICUS, or HENRY de KER, who succeeded him, and appears to have been a
man of considerable rank and distinction, for he obtained letters of safe
conduct from king Edward III. Rymer tom. V. p. 428.
for himself, and twelve knights in his retinue, to pass through England, etc.
anno 1363.

He left issue a son and successor,

IV. ROBERT, who got a charter from Archibald fourth earl of Douglas, Charta
penes ducem de Roxburgh.
Roberto Ker de Auldtounburn, of the lands of Smellholme, and others, holding
blench of the earl, dated 20th June 1404.

He had issue two sons.

1. Richard, his heir.

2. Andrew, who carried on the line of the family.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. RICHARD KER of Auldtounburn, who got charters from the earl of Douglas, of
several lands, wherein he was designed filius et haeres Roberti Ker de
Auldtounburn, anno 1412; but he died without issue, Ibidem.
and was succeeded by his brother,

V. ANDREW KER, the first of the family we have found designed dominus de
Auldtounburn.

He was retoured heir to his brother Richard, anno 1428, Ibidem.
and was armor-bearer to the earl of Douglas.

He got a charter of the lands and barony of Prymside, upon the resignation of
Andrew Rule, Ibidem.
nobili viro Andreae Ker, domino de Auldtounburn, etc. etc. to which Archibald
Douglas of Cavers, James Rutherford of that ilk, Thomas Cranston of that ilk,
and others, are witnesses, 20th November 1430.

He got a charter of confirmation of these lands from Archibald duke of
Turenne, earl of Douglas and Longueville, lord of Galloway and Annandale,
superior thereof, Andreae Ker domino de Auldtounburn, scutifero suo, etc. to
which William, Ibidem.
abbot of Kelso, James Douglas, lord Balveny, Walter Scot of Buccleugh, etc.
are witnesses, 6th August 1432. The earl of Douglas's seal at this charter,
which is still entire, is a savage at full length, holding in his dexter a
shield, containing, quarterly, 1st, three flowers de lis; 2d, a man's heart,
with three mullets in chief; 3d, a saltier; 4th, a spread eagle.

He got another charter from the same duke of Turenne, Ibidem.
dilecto consanguineo suo Andreae Ker de Auldtounburn, of several other lands
in the regality of Sprouston, and shire of Roxburgh, anno 1439.

He got likeways a charter, honorabili viro Andreae Ker de Auldiounburn, Ibidem.
of the lands and barony of Cessford, anno 1446, which afterward became also
one of the chief titles of his family.

He got charters of many other lands and baronies, inter 1440 et 1448, too
numerous to be here inserted, which sufficiently shows what a vast estate this
family was possessed of, as early as the reign of king James II.

He married a daughter of William Douglas of Cavers, Ibidem.
heretable sheriff of the county of Roxburgh, by whom he had three sons.

1. Andrew, his heir.

2. Thomas Ker.

3. James.

Thomas and James are both designed brothers-german of Andrew Ker of
Auldtounburn in a charter of William earl of Douglas to George Ker, Ibidem.
of the lands of Huttonhall, dated 11th January 1451.

He died before the year 1450, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. ANDREW KER, promiscuously designed of Auldtounburn and Cessford, who got a
precept from William earl of Douglas, for infefting him in the lands of
Prymside, Ibidem.
and others, as heir to his father, dated 19th August 1450.

He was a man of great parts, was highly esteemed by king James II. and was
concerned in most of the public transactions of his time.

He accompanied William earl of Douglas into England, anno 1450, for which he
got a safe conduct from king Henry VI. and another in 1451, Rymer, tom XI. p.
277 and 285.
wherein he is designed Andreas Ker, dominus de Auldtounburn.

Though he was in strict friendship with the earls of Douglas, who were
superiors of many of his lands, yet he does not appear to have been concerned
in their rebellion; on the contrary, immediately after their forfeiture, we
find him employed in negociations of state, and got all his lands, which
formerly held of that family, to hold of the crown, etc.

He was one of the guarantees of a treaty of peace with the English, Ibid. p.
397
anno 1457.

He was appointed one of the ambassadors extraordinary to the court of England,
and warden of the marches, anno 1459. In which office he did his country signal
service, in suppressing the insurrections on the borders. Ibid. p. 437.


He obtained from king James III. a gift of the ward of the marriage of Robert
de Mow, upon which he got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Andreae Ker de Auldtounburn, anno 1465.

He married Margaret, daughter of -- Tweedie of Drumelzier, an ancient family
in the county of Peebles, by whom he had four sons.

1. Walter, his heir.

2. Thomas.

3. William.

4. Radulphus, or Ralph Ker.

He died about the year 1480, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. WALTER KER, designed lord of Cessford and Auldtounburn, who, in his
father's lifetime, Charta penes ducem de Roxburgh.
got a precept from William Douglas lord of Cavers, his grandfather, for
infefting him in the lands of Borthwick-shiels, as son and apparent heir of
Andrew Ker of Cessford, anno 1471.

He got two charters, under the great seal, of the lands, Chart. in pub. archiv.
barony, and castle of Cessford, the lands of Caverston, etc. anno 1473.

He obtained also from his father a charter of some lands in the barony of
Oxenham, in the county of Roxburgh, Charta penes ducem de Roxburgh.
in January 1474; all which lands, with several others, were confirmed to him
by a charter containing an entail, viz. "To Walter, son and apparent heir of
Andrew Ker of Cessford, and the heirs-male of his body; which failing, to
Thomas Ker; then to William; then to Ralph, brothers-german of the said Walter,
and the heirs-male of their respective bodies; which failing, to the said
Andrew his nearest heirs whatsomever, Ibidem.
reserving a third part to Margaret Tweedie, his spouse, dated 5th April 1474."

He was named one of the Scotch commissioner to treat with the English, Rymer,
tom. XII p. 246. 469 and 555.
anno 1484.

He was also appointed one of the ambassadors extraordinary to the court of
England, anno 1491, and again in 1494.

He got six charters under the great seal, Waltero Ker de Cessford, of the
lands and baronies of Cessford, Cockburn, Toderick, Castlestead of Roxburgh,
Auldtounburn, Auld-Roxburgh, Caverston, Chart. in pub. archiv.
etc. etc. inter 1480 et 1496.

He married --, daughter of --, by whom he had a son,

Sir Robert, his apparent heir, -- and a daughter,

Elizabeth, married to Philip Rutherford, son and apparent heir of James
Rutherford of that ilk, Contract penes ducem de Roxburgh.
the two fathers being the parties contracters, 12th February 1484.

He made a donation to the monastery of Kelso, Ibidem, and Chartulary of Kelso.
pro salute corporis sui, et pro salute animae Roberti Ker, militis, filii sui
nuper defuncti, etc. 2d November 1500.

He died anno 1502.

VIII. Sir ROBERT KER, only son and apparent heir of Walter of Cessford,
married Christian, daughter of James Rutherford of that ilk, Chart. penes ducem
de Roxburgh.
whose contract was signed at the same time with that of his sister, at
Roxburgh, 12th February 1484.

There is a precept for infefting Robert Ker, knight, son and apparent heir of
an honorable man, Walter Ker of Cessford, and Christian Rutherford his spouse,
in certain lands in the barony of Cessford, Ibidem.
anno 1486.

He died in the beginning of the year 1500, leaving issue, by the said
Christian Rutherford, a son,

IX. Sir ANDREW KER of Cessford, who succeeded his grandfather, Retour ibid.
anno 1502, and was retoured heir to him, anno 1511.

He was a man of great parts, was often employed in negotiations of importance,
which he managed with dexterity and success.

He was sent one of the ambassadors extraordinary to the court of France,
Rymer, tom. XIII. p. 509.
to endeavor to get Scotland comprehended in their treaty with England, anno
1515.

He was afterward appointed one of the Scotch commissioners to treat with the
English, Ibid. p. 735.
anno 1521.

He married Agnes, daughter of William, third lord Crichton of Sanquhar, by
whom he had five sons, and two daughters.

1. Sir Walter, his heir.

2. Marc Ker, commendator of Newbottle, father of Marc, first earl of Lothian.
Vide page 420.

3. Andrew Ker.

4. Thomas, who was abbot of Kelso.

5. Radulphus, or Ralph, who is often, with his brother, mentioned in the
chartulary of Kelso.

1st daughter, Katharine, married to sir John Ker of Fernyhirst.

2. Margaret, married to sir John Home of Ersilton, Chart. in pub. archivi.
ancestor of the earl of Home, as appears from a charter under the great seal,
etc.

He died anno 1527, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. Sir WALTER KER of Cessford, who was retoured heir to his father, Retour
penes ducem de Roxburgh.
anno 1528.

He got a charter under the great seal (containing many clauses very honorable
for the family) of the lands, barony, and castle of Cessford, Huntly's lands,
the barony of AuldRoxburgh, and castle thereof, the lands and barony of
Auldtounburn, with several others, all erected into one free barony, to be
called the barony of Cessford, "to and in favors of sir Walter Ker of
Cessford, and the heirs male of his body; which failing to his brother Marc;
then to Andrew his next brother-german; then to George Ker of Fawdonside; then
to Marc Ker of Dolphington; then to Gilbert Ker of PrymsideLoch; Chart. penes
comitem de Roxburgh.
then to James Ker of Mersington; then to George Ker of Linton; then to
Lancelot Ker of Gaitshall, and the heirs-male of all their respective bodies;
which all failing, to the said sir Walter his nearest heirs-male whatsomever,"
dated at St. Andrews, 21st September 1542.

He got also charters, under the great seal, of a vast number of lands and
baronies, Chart. in pub. archiv.
in the years 1542 and 1543.

He was a great promoter of the reformation, and sat in the convention or
parliament, Records of parlt. and Calderwood's church hist.
when the reformed religion was established, anno 1560.

He was also one amongst the Scotch nobility, who entered into a bond of
association to maintain and defend king James's authority and government,
Ibidem, and M S. in the lawiers library Edinburgh.
after the queen his mother had been forced to resign the kingdom, anno 1567.

He afterward got charters under the great seal, Waltero Ker de Cessford,
militi, terrarum burgi de Roxburgh, Chart. in pub. archiv.
terrarum de Halyden cum manerio de Huntlywood, etc. etc. anno 1569.

He married Isabel, daughter of sir Andrew Ker of Fernyhirst, which appears by
a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
Waltero Ker de Cessford, et Isabellae Ker, filiae domini Andreae Ker de
Fernyhirst, suae sponsae.

By her he had issue two sons.

1. Andrew, who, in his father's lifetime, got a charter under the great seal,
Andreae Ker apparenti de Cessford, of the lands and barony of Cessford, Ibidem.
Auldtounburn, etc. anno 1554; but he died before his father without issue.

2. Sir William, who carried on the line of the family.

Sir Walter lived to a great age, died in the year 1584, or 1585, and was
succeeded by his son,

XI. Sir WILLIAM, who got charters under the great seal, Willielmo Ker de
Cessford, militi, Ibidem.
of a vast number of lands and baronies, in the years 1587, 1588, and 1591.

He married Janet, daughter of sir James Douglas of Drumlanrig, Chart. penes
ducem de Roxburgh.
ancestor of the duke of Queensberry, by whom he had two sons.

1. Sir Robert, afterward earl of Roxburgh.

2. Marc, who got from his father the lands of Ormiston, by a charter under the
great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Willielmo Ker de Cessford, et Marco, ejus filio secundo genito, anno 1591.

At last he got a charter, Willielmo Ker de Cessford, of the lands and barony
of Elisheugh, etc. anno 1595; Ibidem.
and dying soon thereafter, was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. Sir ROBERT KER of Cessford, who, in his father's lifetime, got a charter
under the great seal, Ibidem.
Roberto filio et haeredi apparenti Willielmi de Cessford, baroniae de
Cessford, etc. dated anno 1573.

He was a man of great parts and spirit, and much esteemed by king James VI.
who conferred the honor of knighthood upon him, made him one of the gentlemen
of his bedchamber; Rymer, tom. XVI. p. 60.
and he was one of the Scotch nobles that assisted at the coronation of queen
Anne, anno 1590.

He was a most loyal subject, joined the king, with a considerable retinue of
his own followers, against Bothwel and his associates, Ibid. p. 107
then in rebellion, anno 1591.

He got a charter under the great seal, domino Roberto Ker, feodotario de
Cessford, Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the lands of Sprouston, etc. anno 1591; and being still more and more in
favor with king James VI. he was pleased to raise him to the dignity of the
peerage, by the title of lord Roxburgh. He then got two charters under the
great seal, Roberto domino Roxburgh, et haeredibus quibuscunque, Ibidem.
of the lands of the abbacy of Kelso, and several others, in 1602; and in these
charters there are particularly mentioned the great services he and his
ancestors had done their country, as wardens of the marches, etc.

He accompanied his majesty up to England, Rymer's soed. Angliae.
anno 1603, and was appointed one of the commissioners to treat of a nearer
union betwixt the two nations, anno 1604, which at that time took no effect.

He got charters under the great seal, Roberto domino Roxburgh, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
et dominae Joannae Drummond suae sponsae, of many lands, anno 1613 et 1614.

In the year 1616, he was further dignified with the titles of earl of
Roxburgh, lord Ker of Cessford, Caverston, etc. and got a charter under the
great seal, containing a novodamus of many lands and baronies, to Robert earl
of Roxburgh and lady Jean Drummond his spouse in liserent, and Henry their son
and apparent heir in see, and the heirs of his body whatsomever; which failing,
to John earl of Perth, and the heirs procreate or to be procreate betwixt him
and lady Jean Ker, Ibidem.
countess of Perth, his spouse; which failing, to the said earl Robert, his
heirs and assignies whatsomever, they bearing the name and arms of Ker, etc.
dated 19th August 1618.

He got afterward no less than ten charters, under the great seal, of
different lands and baronies, Chart. in pub. archiv.
three whereof are to him and Henry lord Ker, his son and apparent heir, inter
1630 et 1642.

He was a most faithful and dutiful subject to king Charles I. with whom he was
also in great favor, Charta penes ducem de Roxburgh. and Guthry's memoirs.
and was by that prince made lord privy seal, anno 1637, which office was
confirmed to him by parliament, anno 1641.

And the king being fully convinced of his loyalty, Ibidem.
appointed him one of the commissioners he sent to treat with the Scotch
rebels, anno 1642.

This earl, with some others of the loyal nobility, joined in a letter to the
queen, giving an account of the difficulties the earl of Derby was reduced to,
with some other particulars relating to his majesty's affairs, Rescinded acts
of parlt.
etc This letter was intercepted by general Fairfax, anno 1643, which brought
the earl into great trouble.

He married, 1st, Mary, daughter of sir William Maitland of Leithington, by
whom he had one son,

William, who got a charter, Willielmo magistro de Roxburgh, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
filio natu maximo Roberti domini Roxburgh, terrarum dominii et baroniae de
Halyden, etc. anno 1614; but he died without issue before the year 1625.

Of this marriage he had also three daughters.

1. Lady Jean, married to John second earl of Perth, whose son sir William
Drummond succeeded to the estate and honors of Roxburgh, as will be shown
hereafter.

2. Lady Mary, married to James Scrymgeour, second lord viscount Dudhope, and
had issue.

3. Lady Isabel, married, 1st, to -- Haliburton of Pitcur, to whom she had no
issue; she married, 2dly, James second earl of Southesk, and had issue.

The earl married, 2dly, Jean, daughter of Patrick third lord Drummond, by whom
he had a son,

Henry, lord Ker, his apparent heir.

XIII. HENRY, only surviving son and apparent heir of Robert earl of Roxburgh,
got a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
Henrico domino Ker, of the lands and barony of Prymside, etc. anno 1625.

He was also a great loyalist, Minutes of parliament, and reseindedacts, etc.
and sussered many hardships on account of his attachment to the royal family.

He married lady Margaret Hay, daughter of William tenth earl of Errol, by whom
he had four daughters.

1. Jean, afterward countess of Roxburgh, who carried on the line of this
family.

2. Anne, married to John earl of Wigton.

3. Margaret, married to sir Henry Innes of that ilk.

4. --.

Henry lord Ker died anno 1643, and his father, earl Robert, dying in 1650, his
estate and honors, by entail, devolved upon his grandson,

XIV. Sir WILLIAM DRUMMOND, son of his eldest daughter lady Jean,
beforementioned; who, by his grand-father's appointment, married his own
cousin-german, Jean, eldest daughter of Henry lord Ker, and undoubted heir of
line of the family. He was accordingly served heir of entail to his
grandfather, anno 1650, Retour penes ducem de Roxburgh.
was second earl of Roxburgh, and he and his posterity thereby became bound to
carry the name and arms of Ker, etc. etc.

Sir William, his genius in his younger years leading him to a military life,
went into the service of the States General, where, by his merit, he soon got
the command of a regiment, and acquired the reputation of a brave and gallant
officer; but upon the breaking out of the civil war in Scotland, he returned
home, joined the loyalists, was steady in the interest of the royal family,
Cromwell's act of indem.
for which he was fined by Oliver Cromwell in the sum of six thousand pounds
sterling.

After the restoration he got a charter under the great seal, containing a
novodamus totius comitatus de Roxburgh, Chart. in pub. archiv.
etc. Willielmo conuti de Roxburgh, dated 10th January 1663.

By the said Jean, countess of Roxburgh, he left issue two sons, and one
daughter.

1. Robert, his heir.

2. John, afterward lord Ballenden. Vide that title, page 63d.

His daughter, lady Jean, was married to Colin earl of Balcarras.

He died anno 1675, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. ROBERT, third earl of Roxburgh, a man of great worth and honor, and one
of the privy council to king Charles II.

He married lady Margaret Hay, daughter of John marquis of Tweeddale, by whom
he had three sons.

1. Robert, his heir.

2. John, afterward duke of Roxburgh.

3. General William Ker.

He accompanied his royal highness the duke of York, Crawfurd's peerage, and
Scotch comp.
(who was coming from London to Scotland by sea,) in the Gloucester srigate,
and had the misfortune to be cast away on the Yarmonth coast, May 1682, and was
succeeded by his eldest son,

XVI. ROBERT, fourth earl of Roxburgh, a youth of great hopes and spirit;
Ibidem.
but dying abroad in his travels without issue, in 1696, his estate and honors
devolved upon his brother,

XVI. JOHN, fifth earl of Roxburgh, a man of great parts and learning, who, by
her majesty queen Anne, was appointed secretary of state for Scotland, anno
1704; and having been very faithful in promoting the union of the two crowns,
was raised to the honor of duke of Roxburgh, marquis of Beaumont and Cessford,
earl of Kelso, viscount Broxmouth, lord Ker of Cessford and Caverston, by
patent to the heirs-male of his body; Diploma in cancellaria.
which failing, to the heirs succeeding to the estate and honors of earl of
Roxburgh, etc. dated 27th April 1707.

He was elected one of the sixteen Scotch peers to the first British
parliament, summoned to meet in October 1707, and was re-elected to the second,
fifth, and sixth.

He was one of the regency appointed by king George I. from the queen's death
till his arrival at London, and was immediately named one of his privy council,
lord lieutenant of the counties of Roxburgh and Selkirk, keeper of the great
seal, and was again constituted secretary of state for Scotland, anno 1716.

In 1722, he was made one of the knights of the most noble order of the garter;
and after the death of king George I. he retired from all public business, and
led a private life the remainder of his days. He died 24th February 1741.

He married lady Mary Finch, daughter of Daniel late earl of Winchelsea and
Nottingham, and widow of William marquis of Halifax, by whom he had a son,

XVII. ROBERT, second duke of Roxburgh, who succeeded him.

He was created a peer of England, by the title of baron and earl Ker of
Wakefield, in the county of York, anno 1722.

He married his cousin-german, miss Essex Mostyn, eldest daughter of sir Roger
Mostyn in Flint-shire, Bart. by lady Essex Finch, eldest daughter of Daniel
earl of Winchelsea and Nottingham; and by her he had two sons, and two
daughters.

1. John, now duke of Roxburgh.

2. Lord Robert Ker.

1st daughter, lady Essex.

2. Lady Mary.

He died anno 1755, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVIII. JOHN, third duke of Roxburgh.

ARMS.
Quarterly; 1st and 4th vert, on a cheveron between three unicorn's heads
crazed argent, horned and maned or, as many mullets sable, for the name of Ker;
2d and 3d gules, three mascles or, for Weepont, as being descended from that
family.

CREST; on a wreath, an unicorn's head, as those in the coat.

SUPPORTERS; two savages wreathed about the waist with laurel, each holding a
batoon over his shoulder, all proper.

MOTTO; Pro Christo et patria dulce periculum.

CHIEF SEATS,
At Floors in Roxburgh-shire; at Friars in the same county; at Broxmouth in the
county of Haddington; and at Bray in the county of Bucks.

HAMILTON Earl of RUGLANE.
WILLIAM DOUGLAS earl of Selkirk, eldest son of the second marriage of William
marquis of Douglas, by lady Mary Gordon, daughter of George marquis of Huntly,
married Anne duchess of Hamilton, was created duke of Hamilton, and by her had
issue seven sons, and three daughters.

1. James earl of Arran, afterward duke of Hamilton.

2. Lord William, who died without issue.

3. Lord Charles, afterward earl of Selkirk.

4. Lord John, afterward earl of Ruglane.

For the other children, vide, page 335th.

Lord John, fourth son of William and Anne duke and duchess of Hamilton, was
created earl of Ruglane by king William, 15th April 1697, by patent under the
great seal, ad haeredes masculos de ejus corpore; Diploma in cancellaria.
quibus deficientibus, haeredes de ejus corpore quoscunque, etc.

He married, 1st, lady Anne Kennedy, daughter of John seventh earl of Cassilis,
by whom he had a son,

William, designed lord Dair and Riccarton, who died in his father's lifetime,
without issue.

He had also two daughters.

1. Lady Anne, of whom afterward.

2. Lady Susan, married to John, eighth earl of Cassilis, but died without
issue, in February 1763.

The earl married, 2dly, Elizabeth, relict of John lord Kennedy, eldest son and
apparent heir of John seventh earl of Cassilis, by whom he had no issue.

Upon the death of Charles earl of Selkirk, his elder brother, without issue,
anno 1739, these honors came to this earl of Ruglane; as his next heir-male,
but he dying also without male issue, anno 1745, the titles of Selkirk devolved
upon Dunbar, the grandson of lord Basil, the next heir-male, who is now earl of
Selkirk, ( vide that title,) but the honors of Ruglane being to heirs-general,
went to his eldest daughter, lady Anne, who became countess of Ruglane, and
married William Douglas earl of March, etc. etc.

Vide title Douglas earl of March, page 443d of this work.

RUTHERFOORD Lord RUTHERFOORD.
THE traditional account of the origin of this most ancient family is, that a
man of distinction, on the borders, having conducted Ruther king of the Scots
safely through the river Tweed, in an expedition against the Britons, at a
place from that event called Rutherfoord, the king, after the expedition was
over, bestowed some lands, contiguous thereto, upon his faithful conducter,
from which his posterity assumed the name of Ruther-foord, as soon as sirnames
became hereditary in Scotland.

Certain it is, the Rutherfoords have always been looked upon amongst the most
ancient and most powerful families on the borders; were a race of brave and
gallant men, who, on many occasions, signalized themselves, and fought
valiantly against their enemies, in defense of the liberties of their country.

There were several considerable families of this surname in the south of
Scotland, viz. the Rutherfoords of that ilk, of Hunthill, of Edzerston, of
Hundelie, of Nisbet, of Fairnytoun, of Fernelie, of Capehope, and many others;
but the first of them we have found upon record, is,

I. HUGO de RUTHERFOORD, who is witness in a grant by Philip de Valoniis, of
the lands of Terpenhow, in Northumberland, to Robert de Stuteville, Book of
orig. writs, penes MacFarlane.
etc. in or before 1215, in which year Philip de Valoniis died.

He was father of,

II. Sir NICHOL de RUTHERFOORD, who flourished in the reign of king Alexander
III. Charta penes eund.
and is mentioned in a charter of that prince, anno 1261.

He is witness also in several donations to the monastery of Kelso, Chartulary
of Kelso, penes eund.
and is designed Nicholaus de Rutherfoord miles, in the years 1270 and 1272.

He had issue two sons.

1. Sir Nichol, his heir.

2. Aymer de Rutherfoord, who, with many of his countrymen, Prynne's collect.
vol. III. p. 655.
was compelled to swear allegiance to king Edward I. of England, anno 1296.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. Sir NICHOL de RUTHERFOORD, who appears to have had considerable
possessions; for after king Edward I. had overrun Scotland, we find him
swearing fealty to him for lands lying in different counties, Ibid. p. 651, etc.
and is designed Nicholaus de Rutherfoord, chevalier, dominus Nicholaus de
Rutherfoord. etc. anno 1296.

He was father of,

IV. Sir ROBERT RUTHERFOORD, designed dominus de eodem, a great patriot, and
steady friend of king Robert Bruce. Barber, Nisbet and Crawfurd.
He is particularly mentioned as a brave and gallant man in Barber's history of
that great prince.

He had issue a son,

V. Sir RICHARD RUTHERFOORD of that ilk, who succeeded him. He is witness in a
charter granted to the abbacy of Coupar, Chart. penes MacFarlane.
and is designed Ricardus dominus de Rutherfoord, anno 1328.

In a donation to the monastery of Dryburgh, by William de Felton, Chartulary
of Dryburgh, penes magist. Erskine de Carnock.
Ricardus de Rutherfoord dominus ejusd. William de Bosvile, Robert de Colvile,
etc. are witnesses, anno 1338.

He was succeeded by his son,

VI. WILLIAM, who, in a donation to the monastery of Kelso, Chartulary of Kelso.
is designed Willielmus de Rutherfoord dominus ejusd. anno 1354.

It seems he was afterward forseited of part of his lands, though for what
reason we know not; but there is a charter under the great seal from king
Robert II. Johanni de Allen, clerico regis, confirming a charter of king David,
in which are these words: omnes terras quae fuerunt quondam Ricardi de
Rutherfoord, infra vicecomitatum de Lanark, quae nos contingunt ratione
forisfacturae Willielmi de Rutherfoord, filii et haeredis dicti quondam
Ricardi, contra pacem et fidem nostram existentis, Chart. in pub. archiv.
etc. the charter is dated in 1357, and the confirmation in 1377.

He had issue a son,

VII. Sir RICHARD RUTHERFOORD of that ilk, who was in possession of all the
estates and dignities of the family.

He made a great figure in the reign of king Robert III. with whom he was a
mighty favorite.

In a confirmation of that prince, of a charter of William Turnbull of Minto,
Willielmo Stewart nepoti suo, Ibidem.
Ricardus de Rutherfoord, dominus ejusd. is a witness, anno 1390.

This sir Richard being a man of parts, was appointed one of the ambassadors
extraordinary to the court of England, Rymer, tom. VIII. p. 54.
anno 1398, and managed his negotiation with dexterity and prudence.

Soon thereafter he and his sons were made wardens of the marches, anno 1400,
and did their country signal service in repelling the insurrections on the
borders. Ibid. p. 162.


He married -- Douglas, by whom he had three sons.

1. James, his heir.

2. John, of Chatto, etc. He was ancestor of the Rutherfoords of Hunthill,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
who at last enjoyed the honors of lord Rutherfoord, as will be shown
hereafter.

3. Nichol Rutherfoord, who got charters under the great seal, Ibidem.
of the lands of Grubet, Mackerston, and others, in the years 1426 and 1430. He
was ancestor of the Rutherfoords of Hundalee, etc.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. JAMES RUTHERFOORD of that ilk, who, together with his brother Nichol,
Rymer, tom. XI. p. 254.
were appointed guarantees of a treaty with the English, anno 1449.

He got charters under the great seal, Jacobo Rutherfoord de eodem, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
of the lands-of Leithbert, Leithbertsheils, and many others, in the years 1451
and 1452.

He died soon thereafter, leaving issue a son and successor,

IX. JAMES RUTHERFOORD of that ilk, who, in a gift of the patronage of the kirk
of Rutherfoord, which formerly belonged to the earl of Douglas, is designed
filius et haeres, Ibidem, and Nisbet's append. p. 219.
quondam Jacobi Rutherfoord de eodem, 13th July 1457.

He appears to have been in great favor both with king James II. and III.

He was named one of the conservators of a truce with the English, Rymer, tom.
XI. p. 397.
anno 1457.

He was afterward appointed one of the wardens of the marches, Ibid. p. 434.
anno 1459.

He got a charter under the great seal, Jacobo Rutherfoord de eodem, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
of the lands and barony of Hownam, Capehope, Swinset, etc. 8th August 1471.

He got another charter, Ibidem.
de jure patronatus ecclesiae de Bethrule, etc. 13th June 1482.

Also a charter of several other lands, to him and Margaret Erskine his spouse,
Ibidem.
dated 17th December 1483.

He was appointed one of the commissioners for settling the marches on the
borders, Rymer. tom. XII. p. 246.
under the designation of James lord Rutherford, anno 1484.

He afterward got a charter from king James IV. Chart. in pub. archiv.
terrarum baroniae de Edzerston, 15th January 1492.

Also another charter from the same prince, confirming a charter granted by
William Douglas of Cavers, as superior, of the lands of Rutherfoord and Wells,
to himself and Richard Rutherfoord, his grandson and apparent heir, and his
heirs-male; which failing, to his second son Thomas Rutherfoord, and Robert his
son and apparent heir, Ibidem.
and his heirs-male, etc. The confirmation is dated the said 15th day of
January 1492.

He died in the year 1493; and by the said Margaret, a daughter of the lord
Erskine, he had issue two sons and one daughter.

1. Philip, his apparent heir.

2. Thomas, who, at last, became heir-male of the family, as will be shown
hereafter.

His daughter, Charta penes ducem de Roxburgh, ad annum 1484.
Christian, was married to sir Robert Ker, only son and apparent heir of sir
Walter of Cessford, ancestor of the duke of Roxburgh.

X. PHILIP, eldest son and apparent heir of James Rutherfoord of that ilk,
married Elizabeth, daughter of the said sir Walter Ker of Cessford, Contract ib.
(the two fathers being the parties contracters) by whom he had a son,

Richard, who succeeded his grandfather, -- and two daughters.

1. Helen, married, 1st, to sir John Foreman of Davine, knight; 2dly, to Andrew
Rutherfoord of Hunthill, which appears by a charter under the great seal,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
Andreae Rutherfoord de Hunthill, et Helenae Rutherfoord ejus sponsae, of the
lands of Kephope, etc. 20th August 1529, but she had no issue to either.

2. Catharine, married to James Stewart of Traquair. She at last became heir of
line of the Rutherfoords of that ilk; on which account the family of Traquair
have ever since continued to quarter the arms of Rutherfoord with their own.

Philip died before his father, and was succeeded by his son,

XI. RICHARD RUTHERFOORD of that ilk, who was served heir to his grandfather
James, Ibidem.
on 5th May 1499; but he dying without issue, there happened several disputes,
with regard to the succession to the estate, between the heirs-male and the
heirs of line.

Thomas, uncle to Richard, served himself heir-male to him, but Richard's
eldest sister, Helen, reduced that service as heir of line; and she dying
without issue, as before observed, sir William Stewart of Traquair, grandson of
Catharine, served himself heir to the said Helen, Ibidem.
his grandmother's sister, and got the lands of Rutherfoord and Wells confirmed
to him as heir of line; but the lands and barony of Edzerston remained with the
heir-male, viz. Richard, son of the said Thomas, who got a charter under the
great seal, Ibidem.
of the lands and barony of Edzerston, on 13th January 1559. This family still
subsists, and they now design themselves Rutherfoords of that ilk.

The next great branch of this ancient family, is Rutherfoord of Hunthill,
descended from John of Chatto, before mentioned, to whom we now return.

VIII. JOHN RUTHERFOORD, second son of sir Richard Rutherfoord of that ilk,
Haddington's collections, in the lawyers library, Edin.
got a grant of the lands of Chatto from Archibald earl of Douglas, anno 1424.

He was succeeded by his son,

IX. ROBERT RUTHERFOORD of Chatto, who got a charter under the great seal to
him and Margaret his wife, Chart. in pub. archiv.
mediae partis villae de Scaresburgh, dated 18th January 1466.

He lived after the year 1500, and by the said Margaret, left issue a son,

X. ANDREW, who got a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
Andreae Rutherfoord de Hunthill, of the lands of Kephope, and many others,
dated 20th August 1529.

He was the first of the family we have found designed by this title, and was
succeeded by his son,

XI. JOHN, who got two charters under the great seal, Ibidem.
Johanni Rutherfoord de Hunthill, of several lands and baronies, in the years
1535 and 1537.

He left issue a son,

XII. JOHN RUTHERFOORD of Hunthill, who succeeded him, and was designed the
Cock of Hunthill.

He left issue three sons. Ibidem.


1. Thomas, his heir.

2. John Rutherfoord, father of John of Bankend, whose male line is extinct.

3. Richard Rutherfoord of Littlehaugh, who carried on the line of this family,
of whom afterward.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. THOMAS, who got a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
Thomae Rutherfoord, filio et haeredi Johannis Rutherfoord de Hunthill, et suae
sponsae, etc. of several lands, 30th June 1612.

He was father of,

XIV. JOHN RUTHERFOORD of Hunthill, Retourincancellaria.
who was served heir to his grandfather John, and left issue three sons.

1. Sir Thomas.

2. Archibald.

3. Robert.

These three brothers were all successively lords Rutherfoord.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. Sir THOMAS RUTHERFOORD of Hunthill, of whom more hereafter.

We now proceed to give an account of the first lord Rutherfoord.

William Rutherfoord of Quarryholes, a cadet of the family of Hunthill, History
of the royal family, p. 176.
about the year 1600, married Isabel, daughter of James Stewart of Traquair, by
whom he had a son,

Andrew, afterward lord Rutherfoord, -- and a daughter,

Christian, married to Robert Durie of Grange, in the county of Fife, whose
descendents claim the peerage, etc. as will be shown hereafter.

This Andrew betaking himself to a military life, went into the French service,
where he soon obtained the command of a company of soot. He gave so many
testimonies of his valor and conduct, that he quickly rose to the rank of a
lieutenant general, and acquired great reputation for his knowledge in the art
of war.

He continued in the French service till the restoration of king Charles II. He
then came over to England, and having been particularly recommended to his
majesty by the king of France, he soon became a favorite, and was raised to
the dignity of the peerage of Scotland, by the title of lord Rutherfoord,
Diploma in pub. archiv.
19th January 1661.

The patent contains many clauses very honorable for this great man, but we
shall here narrate only what concerns the dignity and honors. Creasse, etc.
ipsum Andream Rutherfoord, ejusque haeredes masculos, ex corpore suo legitime
procreatos seu procreandos; quibus deficientibus, quamcunque aliam personam seu
personas, quas sibt, quoad vixerit, quin etiam in articulo mortis, ad eum
succedendum, ac fore ejus haeredes talliae et provisionis in eadem dignitate,
nominare et designare placuerit, secundum nominationem et designationem manu
ejus subscribendam; subsque provisionibus, restrictionibus, et conditionibus, a
dicto Andrea, pro ejus arbitrio, in dicta designatione exprimendis: ac dedisse,
etc. et ejus antedict. dictum titulum, honorem, dignitatem, et gradum domini
parliamenti, ut ita tempore futuro vocitentur et denominentur, cum potestate
sibi suisque antedict. denominandi et designandi semetipsos dominos
Rutherfoord, etc. etc.

This lord continued in great favor with his majesty, and was appointed
governor of Dunkirk. He managed the sale of that important place with such
dexterity, and so much to the king's satisfaction, that immediately upon his
return home, he was created earl of Teviot, by patent, to the heirs-male of his
body, dated 2d February 1663. Vide that title.

Soon thereafter he was appointed governor of Tangier; and according to the
power given him by the crown, in his patent of lord Rutherfoord, ^e, by his
deed of settlement, duly signed and executed by him at Portsmouth the 23d
December 1663, did nominate and appoint sir Thomas Rutherfoord of Hunthill to
succeed him in his whole estate and dignity of lord Rutherfoord, to him and his
eldest son; which failing, to his nearest heirsmale, etc.

This noble lord, immediately after executing this deed, went and took
possession of his government at Tangier; and having made a sharp and bold sally
upon the Moors, they were so well prepared to receive him, that he and his
whole party were cut off on the 3d May 1664; Crawfurd's peerage.
and he having no issue, the honors of Rutherfoord, according to the above
destination, devolved upon sir Thomas Rutherfoord of Hunthill, before
mentioned, to whom we now return.

XV. Sir THOMAS RUTHERFOORD of Hunthill, eldest son of John, thus succeeding to
the estate and honors of Rutherfoord, anno 1664, Retour incancellaria.
was accordingly served and retoured heir of tailzie in general and special to
lord Andrew, 16th March 1665, before a jury of two peers, the lord president,
six lords of session, the lord register, king's advocate, three or four
knights, etc. and was second lord Rutherfoord.

He got a charter under the great seal, with a novo damus, Thomae domino
Rutherfoord, Chart. in pub. archiv.
and took his seat in parliament accordingly.

But he dying without male-issue, anno 1668, was succeeded by his brother,

XV. ARCHIBALD, third lord Rutherfoord, who was served heir-male in special to
him, in his whole lands, titles, and dignities, Retour ibid.
on 8th March 1670.

He also sat in parliament as a peer; but dying without male-issue, Records of
parliament.
anno 1685, the estate and honors devolved upon his brother,

XV. ROBERT, fourth lord Rutherfoord, who sat as a peer in the parliaments of
Scotland till the union, Ibidem.
and thereafter voted at the elections for the sixteen Scotch peers; but he
dying also without male-issue, anno 1724, the honors have been since claimed
by the next collateral heir-male, viz.

Captain John Rutherfoord, lineally descended from Richard Rutherfoord of
Littlehaugh, before mentioned, to whom we now return.

XIII. RICHARD RUTHERFOORD of Littlehaugh, third son of John, called the Cock
of Hunthill, and grand uncle of Thomas the second lord, was father of,

XIV. JOHN RUTHERFOORD, designed of Capehope, who had issue two sons.

1. Walter, whose male line is extinct.

2. John.

XV. JOHN RUTHERFOORD, second son of John of Capehope, was designed of Kirkraw.

He had issue a son,

XVI. Captain JOHN RUTHERFOORD, who claimed the honors of Rutherfoord, as
heir-male to Robert the fourth lord, and was accordingly served and retoured
heir-male to him, on 2d September 1737. His connection and descent, as above
deduced, being fully and distinctly proven, before a jury of the most
considerable gentlemen of the county of Roxburgh, he thereby became fifth lord
Rutherfoord.

In like manner his son,

XVII. ALEXANDER, who also claims the same honors, (if his claim is sustained
by the house of peers) will be sixth lord Rutherfoord.

But it must here be observed, that the honors of Rutherfoord have also been
claimed by George Durie of Grange, as heir of line to the patentee, being
lineally descended from Christian, daughter of William Rutherfoord of
Quarryholes, beforementioned, and sister german of the first lord Rutherfoord.
The said George therefore served himself heir of line to the first lord, anno
1733: he assumed the titles of lord Rutherfoord; and that year voted at an
election of a peer without any objection; but at the next election in 1734,
Report of the lords of session to the house of peers
captain John Rutherfoord having claimed the same honors, protested against
him, and he, in his turn, protested against the said captain John, and both
voted. At the election in 1738, the two claimants renewed their protests
against each other, etc. etc. etc. so that the right to the titles of lord
Rutherfoord can only be determined by the house of lords.

ARMS.
Argent, an orle gules, and in chief three martlets sable.

CREST; on a wreath, a martlet as in the coat.

SUPPORTERS; two horses proper.

MOTTO; Nec sort nec fato.

RUTHVEN Lord RUTHVEN.
AS the rise and descent of the great and ancient name of Ruthven is to be
found under the title of earl of Gowrie, page 303d of this work, to that we
refer our readers, and proceed to deduce the descent of this noble family from
their immediate ancestor,

WILLIAM, second lord Ruthven, the thirteenth generation of the illustrous
house of Gowrie, in a direct male line. He married Janet Haliburton, daughter
and co-heiress of Patrick lord Haliburton of Dirleton, by whom he had two sons,
and seven daughters. 1. Patrick, his successor, who was father of William first
earl of Gowrie; 2. Alexander Ruthven, progenitor of this family. For the
daughters vide title Gowrie.

I. ALEXANDER, second son of William lord Ruthven, got from his father the
lands and barony of Freeland in Perth-shire, which has continued to be one of
the chief titles of his family ever since.

He got from his nephew William, earl of Gowrie, a charter, dilecto patruo suo
Alexandro Ruthven de Freeland, Chart. penes dominum Ruthven.
et Isabellae Fotheringham, sponsae suae, of part of the lands of Fort-Teviot,
1st August 1585.

He afterward got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Alexandra Ruthven de Freeland, of some lands and an orchard, lying on the side
of the water of Earn, with a fishing on that river, dated anno 1598.

By the said Isabel, a daughter of -- Fotheringham of Powrie, he left issue two
sons, and three daughters.

1. William, his heir.

2. Alexander, whose only son, colonel William Ruthven, died in the king's
service without issue.

1st daughter, Jean, married to -- Mercer of Clevidge.

2. Barbara, married to Henry Rattray of that ilk, ancestor of the Rattrays of
Craighall.

3. Isabel, married to baron Reid in Strathardale, of whom Alexander Robertson
of Straloch, alias baron Reid, is now the representative.

He died in the beginning of the year 1600, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. WILLIAM, who got a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
Willielmo Ruthven de Freeland, of the lands of Kirkton-Malar, and a fishing on
the water of Earn, anno 1607.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of sir William Moncrief of that ilk, by whom he
had a son,

Sir Thomas, afterward lord Ruthven, -- and two daughters.

1. Mary, married to George Hay of Naughton, and had issue.

2. Elizabeth, married to sir David MacGill of Rankeillor, and had issue.

He died of the plague, anno 1608, and was succeeded by his son,

III. Sir THOMAS RUTHVEN of Freeland, a man of great parts and spirit.

He was deeply engaged on the parliament's side during the civil war, Rescinded
acts of parl.
and was appointed one of the commissioners to the treaty of Rippon, anno 1641.

He was made colonel of one of the regiments that were sent against the earl of
Huntly, Guthrie's memoirs.
anno 1644.

He was one of the committee of estates in the years 1646 and 1647, and was
appointed one of the colonels for Perth-shire, for putting the nation in a
posture of defense, after the murder of the king, Rescinded acts of parlt.
and was made one of the commissioners of exchequer, anno 1649.

However king Charles II. was so much convinced of his attachment to the
interest of the royal family, Rolls of parliament in the public regist.
that he was pleased to raise him to the dignity of the peerage, by the title
of lord Ruthven of Freeland, anno 1651.

After the restoration he got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
Thomae domino Ruthven, of the lands of Forgundenny, etc. etc. in 1663.

He married Isabel Balfour, daughter of Robert lord Burleigh, by whom he had a
son,

David, his heir, -- and three daughters.

1. Anne, married, 1st, to sir William Cunningham of Cunninghamhead; 2dly, to
William Cunningham younger of Craigends; but of her there is now no succession.

2. Elizabeth, who carried on the line of this family, of whom more afterward.

3. Jean, died without issue.

This lord Ruthven died in an advanced age, anno 1674, and was succeeded by his
son,

IV. DAVID, second lord Ruthven, who was in great favor with king William, Mr.
Martin's collections, vol. II. p. 127.
and was one of the lords of the treasury, but died without issue, anno 1701;
and there being no descednents of his eldest sister Anne, as before observed,
the representation devolved upon the issue of Elizabeth his second sister, to
whom we now return.

IV. ELIZABETH, second daughter of Thomas first lord Ruthven, and sister-german
of David the second lord, married sir Francis Ruthven of Reidcastle, descended
of the house of Gowrie, by whom she had only one surviving daughter,

V. ISABEL, grandchild of Thomas first lord Ruthven, who, upon the death of
her uncle David the second lord, and his eldest sister Anne, without
succession, became undoubted representative of this noble family.

She succeeded accordingly, Penes dom. Ruthven.
and had letters as a baroness to the coronations of both king George I. and II.

She married colonel James Johnston of Gratney, a cadet of the most noble
family of Annandale, to whom she had a son,

James, now lord Ruthven, and a daughter.

Anne, married, 1st, to Henry Rollo, Esquire; second son of Robert fourth lord
Rollo; 2dly, to Frederick Bruce of Bunzeon, Esquire; but has no issue.

Isabel baroness of Ruthven died anno 1732, and was succeeded by her son,

VI. JAMES, who now enjoys the estate and honors of lord Ruthven of Freeland,
is the third lord of this family, and has voted as a peer at several elections.

The patent was accidentally burnt with the house of Freeland some years ago,
and is not upon record; but if the honors were to the heirs general of the
patentee's body, this lord's title to the peerage is indisputable.

And it must be observed, that in the year 1706, when the roll of the Scotch
peers was adjusted for the union parliament, the lord Ruthven was continued on
the roll, though the male line of the first lord was extinct some years before.
He was ranked, according to his creation, immediately after the lord Colvile,
and before lord Rutherfoord; and by the articles of the union this was to be
the established and fixed roll in futuram rei memoriam, etc.

In the year 1739, when the house of peers gave an order to the lords of
session to make a particular enquiry into the titles of the Scotch peerage, the
roll of 1706 was their rule; and they found the titles of no less than
twenty-five peers of that roll dubious: Report of the lords of session to the
H. of peers, printed in 1740.
the lord Ruthven was none of that number; but has continued on the rolls in
his proper place uncontraverted to this day.

James, third lord Ruthven, married, 1st, Janet, daughter of William Nisbet of
Dirleton, Esquire; by whom he had two sons.

1. James, master of Ruthven, an officer in the army.

2. William, who died unmarried.

He married, 2dly, lady Anne Stewart, daughter of James earl of Bute, by lady
Anne Campbell, daughter of Archibald duke of Argyle, by whom he had two sons,
and eight daughters.

1. Stewart, who died young.

2. John, a captain of a ship of war.

1st daughter, Anne.

2. Isabel, married to captain John MacDougal.

3. Wortley-Montague.

4. Elizabeth.

5. Jean, died young.

6. Crace, died young.

7. Janet.

8. Crawford, died young.

ARMS.
Pallee of six argent and gules.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter a ram, and on the sinister a goat, both proper.

CREST; a ram's head coupee.

MOTTO; Deed shaw.

CHIEF SEAT,
At Freeland, now Ruthven-house, in Perth-shire.

ABERNETHY Lord SALTON.
AS the rise and descent of the ancient surname of Abernethy, is to be found
under the title lord Abe^ethy, page 9th of this work, to that we refer our
readers, and proceed to deduce the descent of this noble family from their
immediate ancestor,

IV. Sir PATRICK ABERNETHY; knight, the fourth generation of that illustrious
house in the male line, who left issue three sons, and one daughter.

1. Hugh, his successor, whose male line is extinct.

2. William, progenitor of the family of Salton.

For the other two children, vide page 10th.

V. Sir WILLIAM ABERNETHY, second son of sir Patrick, flourished in the reign
of king Alexander III. who succeeded to the crown of Scotland, anno 1249.

He was proprietor of the lands and barony of Salton, etc. which afterward
became the chief title of his family.

He made a donation to the monastery of Dryburgh, Chartulary of Dryburgh; penes
MacFarlane, p. 109.
of two merks per annum out of his mill of Ulkilstone, now Ugiston, in
Lauderdale, etc. anno 1273.

He was afterward concerned in the slaughter of Duncan earl of. Fife, anno
1288, for which he was apprehended and cast into prison, where he died soon
thereafter, Fordun, vol. II. p. 148.
etc. leaving issue a son,

VI. Sir WILLIAM ABERNETHY, designed dominus de Salton, Chartulary of Dryburgh,
p. 246.
who succeeded him, and in a donation to the monastery of Dryburgh, is designed
filius et haeres domini Willielmi, etc. anno 1294.

This sir William of Salton made a donation to the monastery of Dryburgh, de
uno messwagio in villa sua de Salton, Ibid. p. 239.
etc. ante annum 1300.

He afterward confirmed his father's donations out of the mill of Ulkilston,
Ibid. p. 218.
to the same monastery, anno 1318.

And though we find him, with many of his countrymen, submitting and swearing
allegiance to king Edward I. Prynne, vol. III. p. 656.
anno 1296, yet he was one of the Scotch patriots who signed that famous letter
to the pope, Fordun, vol. II. p. 275.
asserting the independency of Scotland, anno 1320.

He had issue two sons.

1. Sir William, his heir.

2. Laurence de Abernethy, Chart. in pub. archiv.
of whom there are many documents. He was a brave and gallant soldier, but was
often on the Baliol's side, and against the interest of his country. He had the
better of the brave sir William Douglas, lord of Nithsdale, in five engagements
in one day; yet was at last defeated, and taken prisoner by the said sir
William before sunset that same day, Fordun, vol. II. p. 330.
anno 1338.

Sir William died in the end of the reign of king Robert Bruce, and was
succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. Sir WILLIAM ABERNETHY, dominus de Salton.

In a donation to the monastery of Newbottle by sir William Livingston of
Drumry, Chartulary of Newbottle, penes MacFarlane, p. 63.
dominus Willielmus de Abernethy, Alexander de Seton, David de Wemyss, Johannes
de Elphingston, milites, etc. are witnesses, anno 1338.

He left issue a son and successor,

VIII. GEORGE ABERNETHY, lord of Salton, who, in his father's lifetime, is
mentioned in a donation-charter of Walter lord high steward of Scotland, Books
of original writs, penes eund. vol. I.
of the patronage of the church of Maxton to the monastery of Dryburgh, in or
before 1328, in which year Walter the high steward died.

He was a man of great worth and honor, a faithful and steady friend of king
David Bruce, Rymer, tom. V. p. 534.
whom he accompanied in his unfortunate expedition into England, and was taken
prisoner with him at the battle of Durham, anno 1346.

He obtained from that prince, for his good and faithful services, Crawfurd's
peerage.
a grant of the lands of Rothemay, which afterward became one of the chief
titles of his family.

He left issue two sons.

1. Sir George, his heir.

2. Sir John Abernethy of Balgony, who got a safe conduct to go up to England,
Rymer, tom. VI. p. 428.
and from thence to return to Scotland, anno 1363. He afterward got two
charters under the great seal from king David Bruce, King David's book of
charters.
of several lands in the constabulary of Kinghorn and county of Fife, anno 1368.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. Sir GEORGE, Charta penes dom. Johann. Sinclair, and Dalrymple's
collections. p. 431.
who,etc. in a charter of king Robert II. confirming the lands of Longformacus
to sir James Sinclair, is designed Georgius de Abernethy dominus de Sawylton,
miles, 22d June 1384.

He left issue a son and successor,

X. Sir WILLIAM ABERNETHY, lord of Salton, who made a great figure under the
reign of king Robert III. Fordun, vol. II. p. 435.
but had the misfortune to be taken prisoner at the battle of Homildon, anno
1402.

However he obtained his liberty soon afterward; for we find Willielmus de
Abernethy dominus de Salton, Rymer, tom. VIII. p. 417.
miles, got a safe conduct to go up to England, anno 1405.

He married a daughter of Robert duke of Albany, Stewart's history of the royal
family, p. 115.
governor of Scotland, by whom he had two sons.

1. William, his apparent heir.

2. Patrick Abernethy, who, in a charter of Robert duke of Albany, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
governor of Scotland, to his son Alexander earl of Buchan, is designed
grandson of the governor, etc. anno 1413.

Sir William, Fordun, vol. II. p. 460.
according to Fordun, who calls him miles magnanimus, died anno 1420.

XI. WILLIAM, eldest son and apparent heir of sir William Abernethy, lord of
Salton, and grandson to the governor of Scotland, was a man of great courage
and resolution.

He joined the earl of Mar before the battle of Harlaw, and lost his life in
that action, according to said author, who says, Willielmus de Abernethy, Ibid.
p. 445.
filius et haeres domini de Salton, et nepos gubernatoris, apud Harlaw occisus
est, etc. anno 1411.

By Margaret, his wife, a daughter of sir William Borthwick of that ilk, he
left issue a son,

XII. Sir WILLIAM ABERNETHY, lord of Salton, who succeeded his grandfather, in
1420.

When king James I.'s liberty was negotiating with the English, this sir
William was one of the magnates Scotiae appointed to meet his majesty at
Durham, anno 1423. Rymer, tom. X. p. 309.


And when his liberty was concluded, he was one of the hostages for his ransom,
anno 1424; Ibid. p. 327.
and his land-possessions were then valued at five hundred merks per annum, a
very considerable estate in those days.

He had issue two sons.

1. Laurence, afterward lord Abernethy.

2. Oswald Abernethy, Esquire; who will be mentioned hereafter.

He died in the end of the reign of king James I. and was succeeded by his
eldest son,

XIII. LAURENCE, designed lord of Salton and Rothemay.

He was a man of parts, and in great favor with king James II. Fordun, p. 542.
who created him a lord of parliament, anno 1445. He sat in the parliament
called to meet at Edinburgh, Records of parliament.
anno 1456.

He left issue four sons, and one daughter.

1. William, his heir.

2. James, who succeeded his brother.

3. George Abernethy, Esquire;

4. Archibald Abernethy. -- These brothers are all mentioned in an entail
hereafter narated.

His daughter, Chart. in pub. archiv. ad annum 1468.
Christian, was married to John, son and apparent heir of sir John Wemyss of
that ilk, knight.

He died in the beginning of the reign of king James III. and was succeeded by
his eldest son,

XIV. WILLIAM, second lord, who got a charter under the great seal, Willielmo
domino Abernethy, upon his own resignation, containing an entail as follows,
viz. "First to himself and the heirs-male of his own body; which failing to
James Abernethy; then to George; then to Archibald, his brothers-german, and
the heirs-male of their respective bodies; then to his cousin John Abernethy,
son of Oswald, and the heirs-male of his body; which all failing, to his own
nearest heirs whatsomever, they carrying the name and arms of lord Abernethy;
of all and haill the lands of Rothemay, with their pertinents, lying in the
shire of Banff; also the lands of Reddy, etc. in Forfar-shire, and the lands of
Dalders, etc. in Stirling-shire; also the lands of Glencross, etc. in
Edinburgh-shire, and the lands of Salton, etc. in the constabulary of
Haddington, with the lands of Lileston and Ugistoun, etc. in the lordship of
Lauderdale, and shire of Berwick; also the lands of Prenderleith, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
etc. in Roxburgh-shire, etc. etc." This charter is dated 28th January 1463.

He got also a charter of confirmation of all the above lands, Ibidem.
dated 5th August 1464.

He sat in the Scotch parliaments as a peer, Records of parliament.
in the years 1469, 1475, 1477, and 1482.

He at last got a charter confirming all the above lands in the said shires,
with several others, in the county of Fife, etc. to the same persons in the
above substitution, Chart. in pub. archiv.
only Archibald, being designed quondam, was then dead. This confirmation is
dated 28th January 1482-3.

He dying soon thereafter, without issue, his estate and honors devolved upon
his brother,

XIV. JAMES third lord Abernethy of Salton, Writs of the family of Strathmore.
who was served heir to his brother, in all the above lands, anno 1484.

He had issue a son,

Alexander, his heir, -- and three daughters.

1. Margaret, Chart. in pub. archiv.
married to John Stirling of Craigbernard, Esquire;.

2. Janet, married to Walter Ogilvie, grandson and heir apparent of sir James
Ogilvie of Deskford, Ibidem, ad annum 1509.
knight, ancestor of the earl of Finlater.

3. Elizabeth, married to Alexander Hay, son and heir apparent of Gilbert Hay
of Ardendroch, Ibidem.
whose posterity were afterward designed of Dalgity.

He was succeeded by his son,

XV. ALEXANDER, fourth lord, who got a charter under the great seal, Alexandro
filio et haeredi Jacobi domini Abernethy, Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the baronies of Salton, Glencross, etc. dated 9th March 1491.

He got another charter, Alexandro domino Abernethy et Salton, Ibidem.
of the lands of Quorsque, Knockkorth, etc. dated 10th August 1515. Which lands
of Quorskque are now the property of John Abernethy, Esquire; a cadet of this
family.

He afterward got four charters from king James V. Ibidem.
of the lands of Auchinkerdor, Romoyre, Ardmallie, Torax, Murealehouse, etc. in
the year 1516.

He left issue a son,

William, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Beatrix, married to Alexander Forb^^ of Pitsligo, ancestor of lord Pitsligo.

He was succeeded by his son,

XVI. WILLIAM, fifth lord Abernethy, who, in his father's lifetime, got a
charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
Willielmo, filio et haeredi apparenti Alexandri domini Abernethy, et
Elizabethae Hay, sponsae ipsius Willielmi, of the lands of Daldras, etc. dated
25th July 1512.

He got another charter, Ibidem.
Willielmo domino Salton, of the lands of Park, Corncarn, etc. to him and his
said spouse, dated 27th November 1536.

He afterward got a charter of confirmation from king James V. Willielmo
domino Abernethy, of the lands of Cromby, Ibidem.
Corskie, and many others, in the shires of Aberdeen and Banff, dated 11th
December 1538.

Also a charter of the lands and barony of Quhelplaw, Ibidem.
in the shire of Berwick, dated 22d March 1542.

By the said Elizabeth Hay, a daughter of John lord Hay of Yester, and widow of
George lord Seton, he had issue a son,

XVII. ALEXANDER, sixth lord, who succeeded him, Ibidem.
and got a charter, Alexandro domino Salton, terrarum dominicalium de
Strathislay, etc. in the shire of Banss, dated 24th January 1570.

He got other two charters, under the great seal, Ibidem.
of the superiority of the lands and barony of Lessendrum, etc. dated in
February 1581.

This Alexander, with consent of Elizabeth Hay his mother, and his other
curators, married lady Alison Keith, daughter of William earl Marishal, 28th
August 1550, Ibidem.
and died in April 1587, leaving issue a son,

XVIII. GEORGE, seventh lord Salton, who, in the year 1588, Stewart's hist. of
the royal family.
married lady Margaret Stewart, daughter of John earl of Athole, lord high
chancellor of Scotland, by lady Elizabeth Gordon, daughter of George earl of
Huntly, by whom he had a son,

John, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Margaret, Chart. in pub. arch. ad ann. 1598.
married to Alexander Fraser, son of sir Alexander Fraser of Frasersburgh.

He died anno 1600, and was succeeded by his son,

XIX. JOHN, eighth lord Salton, who was served heir to his father George, the
seventh lord, Retour in chancery.
29th June 1601, and to his grandfather Alexander, the sixth lord, anno 1603.

He got a charter under the great seal, Johanni domino Abernethy de Salton, of
the lands and barony of Abernethy in Rothemay, Chart. in pub. archiv.
etc. dated 21st February 1603.

Also a charter of the lands and barony of Balveny, Ibidem.
Bartorphine, Aberlour, etc. etc. all united into one barony, 26th April 1610.

He married Margaret Stewart, daughter of Walter lord Blantyre, by whom he had
a son,

Alexander, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Jean, who, in 1607, was married to sir John Lindsay of Kinfauns, knight of the
bath, and son of -- earl of Crawfurd, Ibidem.
who died before his father, without issue.

He died before the year 1617, and was succeeded by his son,

XX. ALEXANDER, ninth lord Abernethy of Salton, Retour in cancellari^.
who was served heir to his goodfir Alexander, the sixth lord, 6th April 1658.

But he dying without issue, anno 1669, his estate and honors devolved upon
his cousin and heir of line, Alexander Fraser of Philo^th, son of Margaret
Abernethy, only daughter of his grandfather George, seventh lord Salton, before
mentioned, who thereupon succeeded to the honors of the lords Abernethy of
Salton. Vide title Fraser lord Salton.

We must here observe, that though the honors of Abernethy lord Salton went to
the Frasers, with the heir-female, yet there are some descendents of the
male-line subsisting to this day, though we do not hear of their ever having
claimed the honors, viz. Abernethy of Corskie, formerly of Natardale, elder
brother to doctor Abernethy-Drummond of Hawthornden, descended of a younger son
of the family, and documented by several charters under the great seal, whose
representative now enjoys the lands of Corskie, which were the property of the
lords Abernethy in 1515 and 1538, as before observed.

Also the Abernethies of Auchnacloich, now of Mayen, who, according to Mr.
Nisbet, vol. I. page 288, are descended of the lords Abernethy, whose arms they
bear, etc. etc.

ARMS of lord Abernethy of Salton.

Quarterly; 1st and 4th or, a lion rampant gules, surmounted of a ribbon sable,
for Abernethy; 2d and 3d, argent, three piles, points, conjoined in base gules,
for Wishart.

CREST; a parrot seeding on a bush of cherries, proper.

SUPPORTERS; two falcons proper, armed, chased, and belled or.

MOTTO; Salus per Christum.

FRASER Lord SALTON.
AS the origin of the great and illustrious name of Fraser is fully set forth,
page 427th of this work, under the title lord Lovat, we proceed to deduce the
descent of this noble family from,

Sir Alexander Fraser, second son of sir Simon of Oliver-castle, and brother of
that hero and patriot sir Simon, who had so great a share of the glory acquired
by the Scots near Roslin, All Scotch historians.
where they defeated three English armies in one day, in the year 1303.

This sir Alexander was one of the greatest men of his time, was lord high
chamberlain of Scotland in the reign of king Robert Bruce, and married lady
Mary, sister of that great prince, by whom he had five sons.

1. Sir John, his heir, who died without male-issue.

The other sour sons were sir William, Simon, James and Andrew. Vide page 429th.

The undoubted ancestor of this noble family was,

I. Sir WILLIAM, son of the above sir Alexander, who obtained from his father
the thanedom of Cowie, Chart. in pub. archiv.
and lands of Assentully, etc. which were confirmed to him by a charter from
king David Bruce.

He also got from the same prince, a confirmation-charter of the lands of
Doors, Ibidem.
and others, which were the property of his father.

And though there is a full and elegant historical account of this noble
family, published in the lives of the officers of state, Lives of the offic. of
state, p. 268, etc.
to which we refer our readers, yet we shall here, by authentic vouchers,
briefly deduce their descent, with the most remarkable occurrences that
happened in the family.

This sir William was a man of great honor and loyalty, and performed many
brave actions in defense of the liberties of his country, in the minority of
his cousin king David Bruce, with whom he was afterward in great favor.

He accompanied him in his unfortunate expedition into England, Fordun, vol.
II. p. 343.
where he lost his life, and his royal master was taken prisoner at the battle
of Durham, anno 1346.

By a lady of the family of Douglas, he left issue two sons.

1. Sir Alexander, his heir.

2. John, who got a charter under the great seal from king Robert II. of the
lands of Wester Assentully, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Johanni, filio quondam domini Willielmi Fraser, militis, etc. dated 8th June
1374.

Sir William was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. Sir ALEXANDER FRASER, designed thane of Cowie, afterward of Philorth, who
being young at his father's death, we find little mention made of him till
after the year 1360.

He first got charters of confirmation from king David Bruce, of the whole
thanedom of Cowie. He then got the lands of Doors erected into one free barony,
by a charter from the same prince, Ibidem.
in which he is designed dilectus consanguineus suus, dated the 40th year of
his reign, anno 1369.

This sir Alexander was also a man of great parts and merit, Haddington's
collections, p. 120.
and highly esteemed by king Robert II. who appointed him high sheriff of
Aberdeen.

He remarkably signalized himself at the battle of Otterburn, Froissart, and
lives of the offic. of state.
where the brave earl of Douglas their general was slain, anno 1388.

He married lady Johanna, second daughter of William earl of Ross, with whom he
got the lands and barony of Philorth, which afterward became one of the chief
titles of his family.

In a charter of king Robert II. Haddington's collection^. p. (...)
he is designed dominus Alexander Fraser de Philorth, miles, vicecomes de
Aberdeen, etc. anno 1386.

By the said lady Johanna Ross, he had issue two sons.

1. Sir William, his heir.

2. Alexander, Lives of the offic. of state.
ancestor of the Frasers of Doors.

Sir Alexander, for new infeftment, resigns his lands of Little Drumquhendal,
in the hands of James Douglas lord of Abercorn, upon which he got a charter of
confirmation from Archibald earl of Douglas, lord of Galloway, the superior,
Ibid. et chart. penes dom. Salton.
and brother of the lord Abercorn, dilecto consanguineo suo, domino Alexandro
Fraser, militi, etc. anno 1408.

He dying soon thereafter, was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. Sir WILLIAM FRASER, designed dominus de Philorth, who, upon his father's
resignation in his favors, got a charter of confirmation from Archibald earl
of Douglas, of the lands of Over and Nether Pittullie, and many others,
charissimo consanguineo suo, domino Willielmo Fraser, Ibidem.
etc. quae terrae fuerunt domini Alexandri Fraser, militis, patris sui.

He married lady Eleanor Douglas, or, according to Mr. Simson's essay on that
family, published in Collier's dictionary, lady Mary, daughter of Archibald
third earl of Douglas, and lord of Galloway, by whom he had a son,

Sir Alexander, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Agnes Fraser, married to sir William Forbes of Kinnaldie, Ibidem.
who got with her the lands and barony of Pitsligo, and was ancestor of the
lords Forbes of Pitsligo.

He died before the year 1441, and was succeeded by his son,

IV. Sir ALEXANDER FRASER, baron of Philorth, Ibidem.
who had the honor of knighthood conferred upon him by king James II.

He, with a great many other persons of distinction, Rymer's foed. Angliae.
accompanied James earl of Douglas to the jubilee at Rome, anno 1450.

Some time after his return home, he was served and retoured heir to sir
Alexander Fraser of Cowie and Doors, Service and retour, penes dom. Salton.
his grandfather, anno 1461.

He married Marjory, daughter of Gilbert Menzies of Findon, ancestor of the
Menzies's of Pitsoddils, by whom he had two sons.

1. Alexander, his heir.

2. James, who got from his father the lands of Memsey, Lives of the offic. of
state.
which, as we are informed, continues in the possession of his posterity to
this day.

He died in April 1482, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. ALEXANDER FRASER, baron of Philorth, Retour penes dom. Salton.
who was served and retoured heir to his father, 8th May 1482.

He was a man of great honor and loyalty, and was bringing up his friends and
followers to the assistance of king James III. against his rebellious subjects,
Lives of the offic. of state.
but his majesty was slain near Stirling or Bannockburn, before Mr. Fraser
arrived, anno 1488.

He married lady Margaret Hay, daughter of William earl of Errol, by whom he
had two sons.

1. Alexander, his heir.

2. Sir William, who succeeded his brother.

VI. ALEXANDER, eldest son of Alexander Fraser of Philorth, by lady Margaret
Hay, Ibidem.
succeeded his father in all his lands, but dying without issue, anno 1499, his
estate devolved upon his brother,

VI. Sir WILLIAM FRASER of Philorth, Retour penes dom. Salton.
who was served and retoured heir to him, 10th December 1501.

He got a charter under the great seal from king James IV. Chart. in pub.
archiv.
Willielmo Fraser de Philorth, militi, of the lands of Skallarty, in his barony
of Kynnedward in Aberdeenshire, dated 17th December 1505.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of sir Gilbert Keith of Innerugie, knight, and
died at Paris, 5th September 1513, leaving issue by the said Elizabeth, a son,

VII. ALEXANDER FRASER of Philorth, who succeeded him, and in his retour is
designed filius et haeres domini Willielmi Fraser de Philorth, Retour penes
dom. Salton.
militis, 6th May 1516.

He got charters under the great seal of the lands and barony of Philorth,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
and several others, in the years 1534 and 1535.

He got another charter, Ibidem.
de piscaria infra maris fluxum, dated 4th December 1542.

He afterward got four charters from queen Mary, of many lands and baronies,
one whereof erected his village of Faithley, now called Frasersburgh, into a
burgh of barony, etc. These charters are dated in the years 1546, Ibidem.
1549, and 1553.

He married, 1st, Catharine Berkely, a daughter of the house of Gairntully,
Lives of the offic. of state.
an ancient family in Aberdeenshire, by whom he had four sons.

1. Alexander, his apparent heir.

2. William, ancestor of the Frasers of Techmurray.

3. Thomas Fraser of Strichen, who lest issue only two daughters, Catharine and
Violette, his co-heiresses.

4. John Fraser, a man of great learning and knowledge, who wrote several
treatises of philosophy, Lives of the offic. of state.
that were well estcemed. He was rector of the university at Paris, where he
died in an advanced age, anno 1609.

He married, 2dly, Catharine Menzies, which appears by two charters under the
great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
to him and Catharine Menzies his spouse, of the lands of Kinglassie, etc.
dated in 1556 and 1562; but by her he had no issue, and died 12th April 1569.

VIII. ALEXANDER, eldest son and apparent heir of Alexander Fraser of Philorth,
married lady Beatrix Keith, Lives of the offic. of state.
daughter of William third earl Marishal, and died before his father, on 30th
November 1564, leaving issue, by the said lady Beatrix, a son,

IX. Sir ALEXANDER FRASER of Philorth, who succeeded his grandfather, on 12th
April 1569, Retour penes dom. Salton.
to whom he was served and retoured heir, on 28th March 1570.

He was a man of good parts, great integrity, and highly esteemed by king James
VI. from whom he got several charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
containing many clauses very honorable for his family, in the years 1583,
1588, and 1592.

He lent the king several sums of money, about the time of his marriage with
the princess of Denmark, which appears by his majesty's letters, still extant
in the family's possession.

He had the honor of knighthood conferred upon him at the solemnity of prince
Henry's baptism, Lives of the offic. of state.
anno 1594.

He got his town of Frasersburgh erected into a burgh of regality, with many
ample privileges, and with power to erect an university there, etc.

He built a noble house, Ibidem.
called the castle of Frasersburgh, which has ever since been one of the chief
seats and titles of the family.

He married Magdalene, Ibidem.
daughter of sir Walter Ogilvie of Dunlugas, ancestor of lord Banff, by whom he
had ^our sons and three daughters.

1. Sir Alexander, his heir.

2. Walter, who died unmarried.

3. James, ancestor of the Frasers of Tyrie.

4. Thomas, an ingenious antiquary, who wrote memoirs of this family, etc.
which are much esteemed.

1st daughter, Isabel, married to Patrick Cheyne, of Eslemont.

2. Margaret, married to -- Hay of Urie.

3. Elizabeth, married to William Crawford of Federet.

They all had issue.

He got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
domino Alexandro Fraser de Philorth et Frasersburgh, militi, of several lands,
united to the barony of Philorth, dated 4th April 1601.

He died at his castle of Frasersburgh in an advanced age, 12th April 1623, and
was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. Sir ALEXANDER FRASER of Philorth, who, in his father's lifetime, married
Margaret Abernethy, daughter, and at last sole heiress of George lord Abernethy
of Salton, by lady Mary Stewart, his wife, daughter of John fourth earl of
Athole, and got charters under the great seal, Ibidem.
Alexandro Fraser apparenti de Frasersburgh, et Margaretae Abernethy suae
sponsae, of the lands of Over and Nether Pittullie, etc. in the shires of
Aberdeen and Banf^^, dated 23d March 1598.

By the said Margaret Abernethy, he had issue two sons and two daughters.

1. Sir Alexander, afterward lord Salton.

2. John, who got from his father the lands of Pittullie; but he dying without
issue, that barony returned to the family.

1st daughter, --, married to -- Forbes of Blacktoun.

2. --, married to -- Baird of Auchmeddin.

He died soon after his father, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. Sir ALEXANDER FRASER, born in March 1604, who got an education suitable to
his rank and quality, both at home and abroad.

After he returned from his travels, he got a charter under the great seal from
king Charles I. Alexandro Fraser, Ibidem.
nepoti quondam domini Alexandri Fraser de Frasersburgh, militis, of the lands
and barony of Philorth, and many others, dated 15th March 1628.

He was a great loyalist, and suffered many hardships on account of his
attachment to the interest of the royal family.

In 1647, he went into the engagement for the king's relief with great zeal,
Lives of the os^e* of state
and had the command of a regiment in that service.

In 1650, he raised a regiment upon his own charge, for the service of king
Charles II. with which he accompanied his majesty to the battle of Worcester,
Ibidem.
where he narrowly escaped being made prisoner.

While the king continued in Scotland, he lent him several considerable sums,
for which his majesty's letters and receipts are still preserved in the family.

He married, 1st, a daughter of William Forbes of Tolquhoun, by whom he had one
daughter,

--, Lives of the offic. of state.
married to Alexander Fraser of Techmurray.

He married, 2dly, Elizabeth, daughter and heiress of Alexander Seton of
Meldrum, by whom he had a son,

Alexander, his apparent heir.

After the restoration of king Charles II. he got a charter under the great
seal, domino Alexandro Fraser de Philorth, et Frasersburgh, militi, et
Alexandro suo filio, of the lands of Boghead, Chart. in pub. archiv.
and others in Aberdeen-shire, dated 5th October 1663.

Also charters of several other lands and baronies, wherein he is designed
Alexander senior de Philorth, Ibidem.
in the years 1663 and 1667.

His cousin, Alexander lord Salton, dying without issue, anno 1669, as observed
under the preceding title, he thereupon served himself heir of line to George
lord Abernethy of Salton, his grandfather, and assumed the title and dignity of
lord Salton, which honors, as heir of line of that family, Records of
parliament.
he got confirmed to him by act of parliament, anno 1670. He died the 11th of
August 1693, in the 90th year of his age.

XII. ALEXANDER, only son and apparent heir of Alexander Fraser lord Salton,
got a charter under the great seal, Alexandro Fraser juniori de Philorth,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
terrarum baroniae de Balveny, etc. etc. 17th September 1669. After his father
succeeded to the honors, he was designed master of Salton.

He married, 1st, lady Anne Ker, daughter of William earl of Lothian, Lives of
the offic. of state.
by whom he had two sons.

1. Alexander, who died unmarried, anno 1673.

2. William, who became his grandfather's heir.

He married, 2dly, lady Marian Cunningham, daughter of William eighth earl of
Glencairn, and countess dowager of Finlater.

He married, 3dly, lady Sophia Erskine, daughter of Alexander third earl of
Kelly; but by these two last he had no issue; and dying in November 1682, was
succeeded by his son,

XIII. WILLIAM, who succeeding also to his grandfather in 1693, was second lord
Salton, of the name of Fraser.

He had a liberal education, and was a man of great probity and honor; and as
his genius seemed to incline him to a military life, king Charles II. bestowed
upon him a company of foot, when but a young man.

But upon the death of his father in 1682, he quitted the army, and betook
himself to a country life, where he lived in splendour and magnificence, yet
greatly improved his estate.

He was a mighty promoter of the project of Darien, and opposed the union with
all his interest.

He married Margaret, daughter of doctor James Sharp, archbishop of St.
Andrews, by whom he had three sons, and four daughters.

1. Alexander, his heir.

2. Mr. William Fraser of Fraserfield, advocate, who married lady Catharine
Erskine, daughter of David earl of Buchan, by whom he had one son, William, now
of Fraserfield.

3. Mr. James Fraser of Lonmay, married to lady Eleanor Lindsay, daughter of
Colin third earl of Balcarras, and had one son, who died young.

1st daughter, Helen, married to sir James Gordon of Park, Bart.

2. Henriet, married to John Gordon of Kinnedder, Esquire;.

3. Mary, married to William Dalmahoy of Ravelrig, Esquire;. They all had issue.

4. Isabel.

He died anno 1716, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIV. ALEXANDER lord Salton, who married lady Mary Gordon, daughter of George
earl of Aberdeen, lord high chancellor of Scotland, by whom he had three sons,
and two daughters.

1. Alexander, who succeeded his father, but died without issue.

2. William, who died also without issue.

3. George, now lord Salton.

1st daughter, Anne.

2. Sophia.

XV. GEORGE, lord Salton, third son of lord Alexander, married his
cousin-german, Helen, daughter of John Gordon of Kinnedder, Esquire; by whom he has
two sons, and two daughters.

1. Alexander, master of Salton.

2. John Fraser, Esquire;.

1st daughter, Henriet.

2. Mary.

ARMS.
Quarterly; 1st, azure, three cinquefoils argent for Fraser; 2d, or, a lion
rampant gules, debruised with a ribbon sable for Abernethy; 3d gules, a lion
rampant argent; 4th as the 1st.

CREST; on a wreath, an ostrich, with a horse shoe on it is beak.

SUPPORTERS; two angels.

MOTTO; In God is all.

CHIEF SEATS,
At Philorth and Frasersburgh, in Aberdeen-shire.

MACKENZIE Earl of SEAFORTH.
ALL our historians agree, that the immediate ancestor of this illustrious
family was from Ireland, being a son of the Geralds or Fitzgerald, earls of
Desmonds, Kildare, etc. one of the most considerable and powerful families in
that kingdom.

He was called Calinus, and, upon some discontent, having left his own country,
came to Scotland about the year 1261, with a considerable number of his friends
and followers. He and his retinue were kindly received by king Alexander III.
Doctor MacKenzie, Abercrombie, Crawfurd, etc.
and he served him faithully as long as he lived.

About two years after his arrival, Haco king of Norway invaded Scotland with a
powerful fleet and army, with which he landed in the shire of Air.

King Alexander immediately marched against him, and was joined by this brave
stranger and his followers: they soon came to an engagement, and king Alexander
obtained a complete victory over king Haco at Largis in Cunningham, All Scotch
historians.
anno 1263.

In this action the gallant Calinus acquired great glory and reputation, by his
conduct and intrepidity, and became a mighty favorite of king Alexander, who,
to encourage him to settle in Scotland, naturalized him; and in reward of his
great merit and faithful services (as the charter bears) made him a grant of
the whole lands of Kintail in Inverness-shire, Chart. in archiv. familiae de
Seaforth.
erected into a free barony to him and his heirs for ever, by his royal
charter, dated 9th January 1266. From him therefore we proceed to deduce the
descent of this noble family.

I. CALINUS or CALIN, first baron of Kintail, having been naturalized by king
Alexander III. as before observed, was much about that prince's court; and
having, at a hunting match, with an arrow, killed a stag, that, Doctor
MacKenzie's hist. of this family, p. 31.
in full career, was making toward the king; his majesty, on that account,
assigned ed him a stag's head, etc. for his armorial bearing.

He was a man of good parts, and took great pains to make himself agreeable to
the inhabitants of that part of the country where he resided, and became
greatly beloved and esteemed.

According to doctor George MacKenzie, who has wrote a full and elaborate
history of this noble family, Ibid. vol. I. p. 32.
he married a daughter of Walter lord high steward of Scotland, by whom he had
a son,

Kenneth, who succeeded him.

He died at his castle of Island-Donan, and was buried in the famous monastery
of Icolmkill, anno 1278.

II. KENNETH, second baron of Kintail, being a man of great affability and
benevolence, became very popular in the northern parts; but what part he acted
during the disputes betwixt the Bruce and the Baliol, our historians are silent.

He married Morba MacDowal, daughter of Alexander lord of Lorn; Ibidem.
and dying anno 1304, by her he left issue a son and successor,

III. KENNETH, third baron of Kintail, who in the Galic (the language then
used) was called Kenneth MacKenneth, or the son of Kenneth. This in English
came to be called MacKenny or MacKenzie, and from him all the MacKenzies in
Scotland are descended.

He was a great loyalist, and a firm friend of king Robert Bruce.

He was very assisting to him when he was in the greatest distress, before he
was settled on the throne, Doctor MacKenzie's his^ vol. I.
and behaved gallantly at the memorable battle of Bannockburn, in 1314.

He died in the year 1328, having married Margaret, daughter of David de
Strabolgie, earl of Athol, and niece of John Cumin lord of Badenoch, by whom he
had a son,

IV. KENNETH MACKENZIE, fourth baron of Kintail, who succeeded him, and married
Fingala, daughter of Rorie MacLeod of Lewis, by whom he had a son,

Murdoch, his heir.

He had also a natural son called Murdoch Reach, Ibidem.
a brave and gallant man, of whom several families of the name of MacKenzie are
descended.

This Kenneth, at the instigation of the earl of Ross, was murdered at Perth,
in the slower of his age, Ibidem.
when he was going to join king David Bruce, in his expedition into England,
anno 1346.

He was succeeded by his son,

V. MURDOCH, fifth baron of Kintail, who, from his swarthy complexion, was
called Murdoch Dow, or Black Murdoch.

He got a charter of confirmation from king David of all his lands, Chart. in
archiv. famil^^ de Seaforth.
wherein he is designed filius Kennethi, etc. anno 1360, according to Mr.
Crawford; but according to doctor MacKenzie, anno 1362.

He married Isabel, daughter of Murdoch MacAula, Doctor MacKenzie's hist. p. 72.
with whom he got the lands of Lochbroom, etc. and by her had a son,

Murdoch, his heir.

He had also other three sons.

2. Hector.

3. Duncan.

4. Alexander.

Of these three several families of the name of MacKenzie are descended. Ibid.
p. 76.


He died anno 1375, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. MURDOCH, sixth baron of Kintail, Chart. in archiv. familiae de Seaforth.
who got a charter under the great seal from king Robert II. confirming all his
lands, to him and his heirs, anno 1380.

He married Fenvola, daughter of -- MacLeod of Herries, Doctor MacKenzie, p. 81.
and died anno 1416, leaving issue an infant son,

VII. ALEXANDER, seventh baron of Kintail, who succeeded him. When king James
I. made an expedition into the northern parts in the year 1426, the young baron
of Kintail was brought before him at Inverness. The king being pleased with his
appearance, ordered him to be sent to school at Perth, where the court then
generally resided, which was done accordingly, Ibid. p. 82.
and he was much taken notice of by his majesty.

He was a faithful and loyal subject to the three James's, in whose reigns he
lived, and was greatly instrumental in putting an end to the rebellion of the
earls of Ross, Ibid. Crawfurd's peerage, and chart. in archiv. familiae de
Seaforth.
on which account he obtained from king James III. a new grant of several
lands, in the years 1463 and 1477.

He married, Mill's collect. penes MacFarlane.
1st, lady Agnes Campbell, daughter of Colin first earl of Argyle, by whom he
had a son,

Sir Kenneth, his heir.

He married, 2dly, -- MacDowal, a daughter of the family of Lorn, MacKenzie and
Crawfurd.
by whom he had two sons.

1. Duncan, ancestor of the MacKenzies of Logie, Hiltoun, etc.

2. Hector, of whom the MacKenzies of Garloch, and others, are descended.

He died in an advanced age, anno 1488, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. Sir KENNETH MACKENZIE, eighth baron of Kintail, who had the honor of
knighthood conferred upon him by king James IV.

He was a man of parts and resolution, and contributed greatly to the
civilizing of the northern parts, wherefore he was highly esteemed by his
majesty.

He married Agnes Fraser, MacKenzie's hist. etc. p. 119. 122. and 123.
daughter of Hugh second lord Lovat, by whom he had four sons, and two
daughters.

1. John, his heir.

2. Alexander, ancestor of the MacKenzies of Davachmaluack, and others.

3. Roderick, progenitor of the MacKenzies of Achilty, Fairburn, etc.

4. Kenneth, of whom the MacKenzies of Suddy, Ord, Corrovulzie, Highfield,
Inverlal, Little-Findon, Scatwell, and several others, are descended.

1st daughter, Agnes, married to Roderick MacLeod of Lewis.

2. Catharine, married to Hector Monro of Foulis.

He died about the year 1506 or 1507, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. JOHN, ninth baron, who got a charter under the great seal from king James
IV. Johanni MacKenzie de Kintail, of the lands and barony of Kintail, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
the barony of Eleandounan, etc. etc. dated 25th February 1508.

He accompanied king James IV. with a good body of his vassals and followers,
to the field of Flowdon, Doctor MacKenzie's hist. p. 146.
when but a young man, where he behaved with singular courage and intrepidity,
and narrowly escaped being made prisoner, anno 1513.

He was a man of great parts and merit, Ibidem, and Crawfurd.
and highly esteemed by king James V. who appointed him one of his privy
council.

By his charter in the public register, he appears to have been possessed of an
immense estate.

He got a charter, under the great seal, of the lands of Fotherty, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
and others, in the shires of Ross and Inverness, dated 25th May 1532.

And a charter of the lands of Kinloch, Banquhare, Inverquhory, Ibidem.
etc. united to the barony of Eleandounan, 30th August 1538.

Another charter of the lands of Lagane, Killenane, Ibidem.
Athedrome, Bravane, etc. 12th December 1540.

Also a charter of the lands of Mcikle Brawne, etc. which afterward became one
of the titles and chief seats of his family. Ibidem.
The charter is dated 15th September 1541.

And lastly, he got a charter from queen Mary, Johanni MacKenzie de Kintail, et
Elizabethae Grant suae sponsae, of the lands of Loch-bryne, with the fishings,
the lands of Calcaloid and Dryne, Ibidem.
etc. 13th September 1543.

He was a faithful subject to queen Mary, and though an old man, MacKenzie's
hist. p 152.
he sought gallantly at the battle of Pi^kie, anno 1547.

He died before the year 1554, and by the said Elizabeth, a daughter of the
lord of Grant, he left issue a son and successor,

X. KENNETH, the tenth baron, who got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
Kennetho MacKenzie de Brahan, filio et haeredi Johannis MacKenzie de Kintail,
of the lands and barony of Lochalsh, and others, in the shires of Ross and
Inverness, dated 24th November 1554.

He married lady Elizabeth Stewart, daughter of John second earl of Athole,
Stewart's history of the royal family, p. 172.
by lady Mary Campbell, daughter of Colin earl of Argyle, by whom he had two
sons and five daughters.

1. Colin, his heir.

2. Roderick or Rorie, ancestor of the MacKenzies of Redcastle, Crawford and
MacKenzie.
Kincraig, Rosend, etc.

1st daughter, Chart. in pub. arch. ad ann. 1577.
Janet, married, 1st, to Alexander MacDonald of Glengary; 2dly, to Alexander
Chisholm of Comer.

2. Agnes, married to Lauchlan MacIntosh of Dunachtane.

3. Margaret, Ibidem, ad annum 1566.
married to sir Walter Innes of that ilk.

4. --, married to David Ross of Balnagowan.

5. Elizabeth, married to Walter Urquhart of Cromarty.

He died anno 1568, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. COLIN, eleventh baron, who got a charter under the great seal, Colino
MacKenzie de Kintail, Ibidem.
of the lands and village of Allangrange, and mill thereof, with several
others, in the shires of Inverness and Ross, dated 10th July 1574.

He got another charter of the same date, to him and Barbara Grant, Ibidem.
his spouse, of the lands of Loch-bryne, etc. etc.

He got other three charters from king James VI. Ibidem.
of the lands of Cultileod, Glenshanyth, Kirktown of Fodderty, Balmuldie,
Little and Meikle Usie, Auchinsclachit, and several others, in the years 1582
and 1583.

He got afterward two charters of the lands and barony of Assint, Ibidem.
the lands of Fyldawick, Ardteslak, Baldicakill, Kirktown of Applec^oss, etc.
etc. in the shires of Ross and Inverness, dated 20th January, and 4th February
1591.

He was a staunch loyalist, a firm and steady friend of queen Mary, and fought
gallantly for her at the battle of Langside, where her majesty's troops were
dispersed; Remiss in archiv fam. de Seaforth.
for which he was afterward obliged to take a remission from the regent.

The king was so much convinced of his worth and merit, that as soon as he took
the management of affairs into his own hands, he nominated him one of his
privy council; and, by his prudent conduct, he did his majesty signal service
in quelling several insurrections in the North.

He married, 1st, Barbara, daughter of James Grant of that ilk, Chart. in p^
archiv.
by whom he had four sons and three daughters.

1. Kenneth, afterward lord Kintail.

2. Sir Roderick MacKenzie of Tarbat, ancestor of the earls of Cromarty. Vide
that title, page 167th.

3. Colin MacKenzie, of whom Kennock and Pitlundie are descended.

4. Alexander, who got a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
to him and Jean Fraser his wife, of the lands of Kilcoy, Muren of Drumnamark,
etc. dated the 29th day of January 1618; and of him the MacKenizes of Kilcoy,
etc. are descended.

1st daughter, Margaret, married to Simon lord Lovat.

2. --, married to Lauchlan MacLean of Dowart.

3. Mary, married to Donald MacDonald of Slate.

He married, 2dly, Mary, Crawfurd's peerage.
eldest daughter of Rorie MacKenzie of Davamaluack, by whom he had a son,

Alexander, of whom the MacKenzies of Applecross, Coul, Delvin, Assint, etc.
are descended.

He died anno 1594, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. KENNETH, twelfth baron, who got a charter under the great seal, Kennetho
MacKenzie de Kintail, of the church lands of Cullecudden, the lands of Fairne,
Wester Culbole, Woodhead, Balmughie, mill of Rosemarkie, Chart. in p^ archiv.
cum officio constabularii episcopatus de Ross, etc. etc. dated 26th March 1595.

He got another charter of the lands and village of Littlescattel, Ravogie,
Kinnellan, etc. in the shires of Ross and Inverness.

Also a charter of the lands and barony of Pluscardin, Ibidem.
and others, in the shires of Elgin and Forres, erected into a regality. Both
charters are dated in the said year 1595.

He afterward got a charter of the lands and barony of Lochalsh, Lochearron,
the castle of Strome, etc. and another to him and Elizabeth Ogilvie his wife,
of the barony of Pluscardin, with the manor and mill thereof, etc. Ibidem.
These charters are both dated in March 1607.

He being possessed of an opulent fortune, and a man of good parts, his majesty
was pleased to raise him to the dignity of the peerage, Chart. in (...)
cellaria.
by the title of lord MacKenzie of Kintail, by patent, dated 19th November 1609.

He afterward got two charters under the great seal, Ibidem.
Kennetho domino MacKenzie de Kintail, of the church lands of Cullicudden, etc.
with the lands and barony of Lewis, Rasay, Stronway, with the castle, etc. etc.
dated in June and July 1610.

He married, 1st, Anne, daughter of George Ross of Balnagowan, by whom he had
two sons and two daughters.

1. Colin, his heir.

2. John, designed of Lochslyne, who married Barbara, daughter of -- MacKenzie
of Garloch, Contract penes John MacLeod of Mureavenside, Esquire; ad ann. 1641.
by whom he had one daughter, married to sir Norman MacLeod of Bernary, of whom
John MacLeod now of Mureavenside is the representative; but John of Lochslyne
dyed without male issue.

1st daughter, Barbara, married to Donald lord Reay.

2. Janet, married to sir Donald MacDonald of Slate, baronet.

He married, 2dly, Elizabeth, daughter of sir Gilbert Ogilvie of Powrie, by
whom he had three sons and one daughter.

1. George, afterward earl of Seaforth.

2. Thomas MacKenzie of Pluscarty, a great loyalist, and firm friend of the
royal family.

3. Simon, of Lochslyne, father of the great sir George MacKenzie of Rosehaugh,
king's advocate, etc.

His daughter, Sibilla, was married to John MacLeod of that ilk.

He died in March 1611, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. COLIN, second lord, who got charters under the great seal, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
Colino domino Kintail, of many lands, et de officio mari infra comitatum de
Ross, in the shire of Inverness, dated in the years 1621 and 1622.

He was a man of worth, honor and merit, and a great favorite of king James
VI. who was pleased further to dignify him with the title of earl of Seaforth,
Diploma ibidem, haeredibus masculis.
by patent to him and his heirs-male, dated 3d December 1623.

He afterward got a charter under the great seal, Colino comiti de Seaforth,
of the twenty-seven merk land of Moydart, Ibidem.
the twenty-four merk land of Arasach, etc. etc. in Invernessshire, dated 13th
March 1627.

He married lady Margaret Seton, daughter of Alexander earl of Dunfermline, by
whom he had two daughters.

1. Lady Margaret, married, 1st, to John lord Berrendale, to whom she had
George fifth earl of Caithness; 2dly, to Alexander lord Duffus.

2. Lady Anne, married, 1st, to Alexander second earl of Balcarras, and had
issue; 2dly, to Archibald earl of Argyle, to whom she had no issue.

The earl dying without sons, anno 1633, and John of Lochslyne, his
brother-german, dying also without male-issue, as before observed, his estate
and honors devolved upon his half-brother being his next heir-male.

XIII. GEORGE, second earl, got three charters under the great seal, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
Georgio comiti de Seaforth, of the lands and barony of Balmangie, the village
and lands of Avachie, the lands of Rasay, the barony of Lewis, and many others,
in the years 1635 and 1637.

He got another charter, to him and Barbara Forbes, his spouse, Ibidem.
of the lands of Lochalsh, etc. dated 4th July 1642.

He was a man of great integrity, a staunch loyalist, and suffered many
hardships on account of his attachment to the interest of the royal family.

After the murder of the king, he repaired to Holland, was most graciously
received by king Charles II. who nominated him principal secretary of state for
Scotland, but he did not enjoy that high office long, for he died anno 1651,
leaving issue, by the said Barbara, a daughter of Arthur, ninth lord Forbes,
two sons and one daughter.

1. Kenneth, his heir.

2. Doctor George MacKenzie, who has obliged the world with two volumes of a
biography of our learned countrymen; a performance generally esteemed.

His daughter, lady Mary, was second wife to John ninth earl of Mar, and had
issue.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIV. KENNETH, third earl of Seaforth, also an eminent loyalist, who never
deserted the interest of the royal family during all the time of the civil war.
Rescind. acts of parlt. and Cromwell's act of indem. ad ann. 1654.
He was excepted from pardon by Oliver Cromwell, and his estate sequestrate,
without the least provision being allowed for the subsistence of his wife and
family.

He was at last apprehended, and thrown into prison, where he remained till he
was released by the restoration: Soon after which king Charles II. Haddington's
collections.
appointed him high sheriff of Rossshire, by his commission under the great
seal, dated 23d April 1662.

He married Isabel, daughter of sir John MacKenzie of Ta^bat, Bart. father of
George, first earl of Cromarty, by whom he had three sons and four daughters.

1. Kenneth, his heir.

2. Mr. John MacKenzie of Assint.

3. Colonel Alexander MacKenzie, who married and had issue.

1st daughter, lady Margaret, married to James lord Duffus.

2. Lady Anne.

3. Lady Isabel, married, 1st, to Roderick MacLeod of that ilk; 2dly, to sir
Duncan Campbell of Lochnell.

4. Lady Mary, married to Alexander MacDonald of Glengary, and had issue.

He got a new commission of the sheriffship of Ross, to him and Kenneth his
eldest son, Haddington's collections.
dated 31st July 1675; and dying anno 1678, was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. KENNETH, fourth earl of Seaforth, high sheriff of Ross, a man of great
integrity and honor.

He was one of the privy council to king James VII. who appointed him also one
of the knights of the most ancient order of the thistle, anno 1687.

After the revolution, he followed king James both to France and Ireland, and
was created marquis of Seaforth; but as his patent had not past the seal, that
dignity was never allowed him here.

He married lady Frances Herbert, daughter of William marquis of Powis, by lady
Elizabeth Somerset, daughter of Edward marquis of Worcester, and by her had a
son,

William, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Lady Mary, married to -- Caryl, Esquire;.

He died anno 1701, and was succeeded by his son,

XVI. WILLIAM, fifth earl of Seaforth, who married Mary, only daughter and
heire^s of Nicholas Kennet of Coxhow, in Northumberland, Esquire; by whom he had
three sons, and one daughter.

1. Kenneth, lord Fortrose.

2. Ronald, who died unmarried.

3. Nichol MacKenzie, Esquire;.

His daughter, lady Frances, married to John, representative of the family of
Kenmure, and has issue.

This noble lord had the misfortune to be engaged in the rebellion 1715, for
which he was attainted of treason, and his estate and honors were forfeited to
the crown.

He made his escape to France, where he remained till his majesty king George
I. was pleased to grant him a pardon for his life, in 1726; upon which he
returned to Scotland, and spent the remainder of his days in a quiet
retirement, till he died anno 1740.

XVII. KENNETH, lord Fortrose, eldest son of earl William, had it not been for
his father's attainder, would have been sixth earl of Seaforth.

He was elected member of parliament for the burghs of Fortrose, etc. in the
years 1641, and for the county of Ross in 1747 and 1754.

He married lady Mary Stewart, daughter of Alexander earl of Galloway, by lady
Anne Keith, daughter of William earl Marishal, by whom he had a son,

Kenneth, his heir, -- and six daughters.

1. Margaret.

2. Mary.

3. Agnes.

4. Catharine.

5. Frances.

6. Euphemia.

He died anno 1762, and was succeeded by

XVIII. KENNETH, his only son, who is now representative of the most noble
family of Seaforth, and is the eighteenth generation in a direct male line.

ARMS.
Azure, a stag's head cabossed or.

CREST; on a wreath, a mountain inflamed, proper.

SUPPORTERS; two savages wreathed about their temples and middles with laurel,
each holding in his exterior hand a batoon erect, with fire issuing out of the
top of it, all proper.

MOTTO; Luceo non uro.

CHIEF SEATS,
At the castle of Island Donan in the county of Inverness, and at the castles
of Fortrose and Brahan, in Ross-shire.

DOUGLAS Earl of SELKIRK.
I. LORD WILLIAM DOUGLAS, eldest son of William first marquis of Douglas, by
lady Mary Gordon his second wife, daughter of George marquis of Huntly, was by
king James I. created a lord of parliament, by the titles of earl of Selkirk,
Chart. in pub. archiv. ad haeredes masculos quoscunque.
lord Dair and Shortcleuch, to him and his heirsmale whatever, by patent dated
4th of August 1646.

He afterward married Anne duchess of Hamilton, was created duke of Hamilton,
and by her had issue seven sons, and three daughters, who all took the name of
Hamilton.

1. James, earl of Arran, afterward duke of Hamilton.

2. Lord William, who died without issue.

3. Lord Gharles, afterward earl of Selkirk.

4. John, earl of Ruglane, who died without surviving male issue. Vide page
533d of this work.

5. George, earl of Orkney, who died also without male issue, Vide page 533d.

6. Lord Basil, grandfather of Dunbar, now earl of Selkirk, of whom afterward.

For the other son and daughters, vide page 335th of this work.

II. Lord CHARLES, third* son of William and Anne duke and duchess of
Hamilton, upon his father's resignation, obtained from king James VII. the
titles and honors of earl of Selkirk, Chart. in pub. archiv haeredibus
masculis quibuscunque.
with the former precedence, confirmed to him by a charter under the great
seal, to him and his heirs-male whatever, dated anno 1687, and was second earl
of Selkirk.

He also got the command of his brother the earl of Arran's regiment; and
comin^ early into the revolution, was appointed one of the lords of the
bedchamber to king William. He enjoyed the same office under queen Anne, king
George I. and II.

He was elected one of the sixteen Scotch peers to the fourth, sixth, seventh,
and eighth, British parliaments, and was appointed sheriff of the county of
Lanark.

He dying a bachelor, anno 1739, was succeeded by his brother, John earl of
Ruglane, who was third earl of Selkirk; but he dying also without male issue,
the estate and honors of Selkirk devolved upon Dunbar-Hamilton his next
heir-male, being grandson of his brother lord Basil, to whom we now return.

II. Lord BASIL HAMILTON, sixth son of William and Anne, duke and duchess of
Hamilton, was a man of good parts, great honor and integrity.

He married Mary, daughter and sole heiress of sir David Dunbar of Baldoon,
Bart. by whom he had two sons, and two daughters.

1. William, who died young.

2. Mr. Basil, his heir.

1st daughter Mary, married to John Murray of Philiphaugh, Esquire; hererable
sheriss of the county of Selkirk, and had issue.

2. Catharine, married to Thomas earl of Dundonald, to whom she had a son,
William, earl of Dundonald, a youth of great resolution and spirit, who was an
officer in the army; and was killed at the taking of Cape Breton, in the year
1758. She had also another son, Basil, who died unmarried, and two daughters,
lady Mary and lady Catharine.

Lord Basil died anno 1701, and was succeeded by his son,

III. BASIL HAMILTON of Baldoon, Esquire; a man of great probity and merit, who
married Isabella, daughter of the honorable colonel Alexander MacKenzie, son
of Kenneth third earl of Seaforth, by whom he had two sons, and two daughters.

1. Dunbar, now earl of Selkirk.

2. Basil, who died young.

1st daughter, Mary, married to Ronald MacDonald of Clanronald, to whom she had
a son, who died in infancy.

2. Elizabeth, who died young.

IV. DUNBAR, fourth earl of Selkirk, eldest son of Basil of Baldoon, resumed
the name of Douglas, the paternal one of his family, upon his succeeding to the
honors of Selkirk, in 1745. Vide page 597.

He married Helen, third daughter of the honorable John Hamilton Esquire; son of
Thomas sixth earl of Haddington, by whom he has two sons, and two daughters.

1. Sholto-Basil, who died an infant

2. Basil-William, lord Dair.

1st daughter, lady Isabella.

2. Lady Helena.

ARMS.
Quarterly; 1st and 4th argent, a heart gules, ensigned with an imperial crown
or, on a chief azure three mullets of the first, for Douglas; 2d gules, three
cinquefoils ermine, for Hamilton; 3d gules, a lion rampant argent, within a
border of the 2d, charged with ten roses of the 1st, for Dunbar of Baldoon.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter a savage wreathed about the loins with laurel; and
on the sinister an antelope, both proper.

CREST; a salamander in flames.

MOTTO; Jamais arriere.

CHIEF SEATS.
At the castle of Crawfurd in the county of Lanark; at St. Mary's-Isle in the
stewarty of Kirkcudbright; and at Baldoon in the county of Galloway.

SEMPLE Lord SEMPLE.
THE surname of Semple is of great antiquity in the west of Scotland. They had
large possessions in the counties of Lanark, Air, and Renfrew, of which last
they were heretable bailies and chamberlains, under the lord high stewards of
Scotland, who were superiors of most of that county. They were also sheriffs
thereof, whereby they had great authority, dignity, and power over all that
part of the country.

The first of them we have found upon record, is,

I. ROBERT de SEMPILL. He flourished in the reign of king Alexander II. who
succeeded to the crown of Scotland, anno 1214, and died in 1249.

He is witness to a donation of Walter lord high steward of Scotland,
Chartulary of Pais^^y, penes comitem de Dundonald.
of the church of Largy^s, to the monastery of Paisley, about the year 1246.

He was father of,

II. ROBERT de SEMPILL, who was senescal or chamberlain of Renfrew, in the
reign of king Alexander III.

He was witness in a charter of Malcolm earl of Lennox, Chartulary of Lennox,
penes MacFarlane, p. ^4.
together with William Fleming, Maurice Buchanan, etc. about the year 1280.

He was witness also to a grant which James lord high steward of Scotland,
grandfather of king Robert II. made to Stephen, son of Nicholaus, History of
the shire of Renfrew, p. 52.
of these lands which formerly belonged to Patrick de Selvinland, lying near
where the water of Grief runs into Clyde, etc.

He left issue two sons.

1. Robert, his heir.

2. Thomas de Sempill, a great patriot, and firm friend of king Robert Bruce,
from whom he obtained a charter, under the great seal, of several lands in the
tenement of Long-Niddery, Charta in rotul. Rob. I.
then in the crown by the forfeiture of Nicholaus de Disponsa, etc.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. ROBERT de SEMPILL, senescal of Renfrew, who made a great figure in the
reign of king Robert Bruce, and performed many brave actions in defense of the
liberties of his country, under the conduct of that great prince, who, in
reward of his merit and ^aithful services, made him a grant under his great
seal, dilecto et fideli suo Roberto de Sempill, totam terram cum pertinen. in
tenemento de Largis, et vicecom. de Air, quae ^uit Johannis de Baliolo, etc.
etc. all erected into one free barony, Ibidem.
to him and his heirs for ever.

This Robert was witness to the donation of the church of Largis to the
monastery of Paisley, by Walter lord high steward of Scotland, pro salute
animae suae et Marjoriae Bruce, Chartulary* Paisley.
quond. sponsae suae, etc. anno 1318.

He died before the year 1330, leaving issue a son,

IV. WILLIAM de SEMPILL, steward of Renfrew, who succeeded him, and is witness
in a ratification of Malcolm fourth earl of Lennox, Chartulary Lennox, p. 152.
to the monastery of Paisley, together with Malcolm Fleming, Gilbert Drummane,
etc. anno 1330.

In the same year he is witness in another charter of the said earl Malcolm, to
sir James Stewart, Ibidem.
brother of Walter lord high steward of Scotland.

In a charter of Adam de Fullerton, Book of charters, penes MacFarlane.
Willielmus Sempill de Eliotstoun, is a witness, 13th April 1344.

He is the first of this family we have found designed by the barony of
Eliotstoun; but it continued long to be one of their chief titles.

He was succeeded by his son,

V. THOMAS, second lord of Eliotstoun, and steward of Renfrew.

In the confirmation-charter which Robert lord high steward of Scotland, earl
of Strathearn, and John lord Kyle, his son and apparent heir, gave to the
monastery of Paisley, of the lands of Sanquhar, etc. Thomas de Sempill,
Chartulary o^ Paisley.
dominus de Eliotstoun, is a witness, anno 1367.

He was father of,

VI. Sir JOHN SEMPILL, third lord of Eliotstoun, who got a charter of
confirmation under the great seal, from king Robert II. of the lands and barony
of Glassford, and several others in the shire of Lanark, to him and the
heirs-male of his body; which failing, to the heirs whatever of his father
Thomas, Chart. in ^tul. Rob. II.
etc. dated at Dun^ermline, 22d day of July 1375.

In a donation of sir Adam Fullerton of that ilk, out of his lands of Crosbie,
to the monastery of Paisley, Johannes Sempill dominus de Eliotstoun, Chartulary
of Paisley.
is a witness, anno 1392.

He is witness in another charter of sir John Blair of Adamstoun, Ibidem.
anno 1397.

He died soon thereafter, leaving issue a son,

John, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Jean, married to sir John Stewart, sheriff of Bute, ancestor of the earls of
Bute.

VII. JOHN, fourth lord of Eliotstoun, was a man of great parts, and employed
in several negotiations of state, which he managed with dexterity and honor.

In a charter of Robert duke of Albany, governor of Scotland, to Dougal
MacDougal, of the lands of Yester, Chart. in pub. archiv.
John Semple, lord of Eliotstoun, is a witness, anno 1409.

He was one of the Scotch commissioners, appointed to treat with the English in
1421, was very active in negotiating the liberty of king James I. Crawfurd's
peerage.
and waited upon his majesty at Durham, when he was returning home.

He died before the year 1440, leaving issue a son,

VIII. Sir ROBERT SEMPLE, fifth baron of Eliotstoun, who succeeded him, and had
the honor of knighood conferred upon him by king James II. with whom he was in
great favor.

He obtained from that prince a charter under the great seal, domino Roberto
Semple de Eliotstoun, Chart. in pub. archiv.
militi, et Elizabethae sponsae suae, of the lands of Southennan, and others,
31st October 1451.

By the said Elizabeth (but of what family we know not) he left a son and
successor,

IX. Sir WILLIAM SEMPLE, sixth baron of Eliotstoun, who, in a precept directed
to him by Robert lord Lyle, Chartulary of Paisley.
is designed Willielmus, filius et haeres domini Roberti Semple de Eliotstoun,
anno 1452.

He appears to have been in great favor with king James III. who appointed him
sheriff-principal of Renfrew, and from whom he got a charter under the great
seal, Willielmo Semple, militi, of the lands and baronies of Eliotstoun, Chart.
in pub. archiv.
Glassford, Castletoun, etc. 4th October 1474.

He died before the year 1483, leaving issue a son,

X. Sir THOMAS, seventh baron of Eliotstoun, who succeeded him. He was a
faithful subject to king James III. and is designed vicecomes de Renfrew,
Records of parliament.
at the parliament held at Edinburgh, in February 1483.

He married Elizabeth, Ibidem. where she is designed relicta ejus, ad ann. 1489.
daughter of John first lord Ross, by whom he had a son,

Sir John, afterward lord Semple, -- and two daughters.

1. Margaret, married to Robert Craw^urd of Kilbirny.

2. Marian, married to sir John Stewart of Glanderstoun.

Sir Thomas being steady in hisloyalty, accompanied his royal master to the
field of Bannockburn, Crawfurd's peerage.
where they both lost their lives, anno 1488.

He was succeeded by his son,

XI. Sir JOHN SEMPLE, eighth baron of Eliotstoun, a man of great parts, worth
and honor, who, in reward of his own merit, and the loyalty and sufferings of
his ancestors, was raised to the dignity of the peerage, Ibidem, and hist. of
Renfrew.
by the title of lord Semple, in the first year of the reign of king James IV.
1488.

He appears, by his charters under the great seal, to have been possessed of a
great estate.

He got two charters from king James IV. Johanni domino Semple, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
of the lands of Montgrenan, and several others, anno 1495.

He got afterward other three charters of the lands of Eliotstoun, Castletoun,
Shuterflat, Hairspenneld, Nether-Penneld, Bar in Kilbarchan, Whitelands,
Bordland, Craiginfeoch, Southennen, the barony of Glassford, etc. in the shires
of Renfrew, Air, and Lanark, in the years 1501 and 1503; Ibidem.
all erected into the lordship and barony of Semple, in 1505.

He afterward got two charters, under the great seal, of several other lands,
in 1506 and 1508; and a third, wherein he got them all ^e novo united into the
barony of Semple, Ibidem.
anno 1511.

He founded and largely endowed a chapel near his castle of Semple, Chart^in
pub. archiv. And Keith's bishops, p. 288.
anno 1505, and afterward mortified ten merks per annum for a chaplain to it,
anno 1509.

He married, 1st, Margaret, daughter of sir Robert Colvile of Ochiltree, by
whom he had two sons.

1. William, his heir.

2. Gabriel, who got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Cabrieli Semple fratri germano Willielmi domini Semple, castri et fortalicii
de Cathcart, etc. 23d December 1545. He was ancestor of the Semples of Cathcart.

He married, 2dly, Margaret, daughter of James Crichton of Ruthvendenny, by
whom he had no issue.

He accompanied king James IV. Crawfurd's Peerage, and Hist. of Renfrew.
to the fatal field of Flowdon, and was there slain with his royal leader, anno
1513.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. WILLIAM, second lord Semple, a a man of great honor, prudence, and
sagacity, and highly esteemed by king James V. who made him one of his privy
council, and justiciar in the regality of Paisley.

He got two charters under the great seal, Willielmo domino Semple, Chart. in
pub. archivis.
et Elizabethae Arnot suae sponsae, of the lands of Auchin-flower, etc. in
Renfrew, Previck, etc. in Air-shire, in the years 1523 and 1529.

He got also two charters from king James V. Chart. in pub. archiv.
of many other lands and baronies, in the shires of Renfrew, Air, and Lanark,
in 1539.

He afterward got a charter from queen Mary, Ibidem.
of the five pound land of Belltrees, in October 1545; and another of the
twenty pound land of Drumrye, Dalmure, etc. in October 1546.

At a meeting of a great number of the Scotch nobility, concerning a marriage
between Mary queen of Scots and prince Edward of England, Rymer, tom. XV. p. 4.
William lord Semple was one of those who agreed to the treaty, anno 1543.

He married, 1st, lady Margaret Montgomery, daughter of Hugh first earl of
Eglington, by whom he had two sons and two daughters.

1. Robert, his heir.

2. David, ancestor of the Semples of Craigbetts; a branch whereof settled in
Spain above a hundred years ago, flourish there with luster to this day,
Crawfurd's peerage.
and value themselves of being sprung from the illustrious house of Semple.

1st daughter, Helen, married to Alan third lord Cathcart.

2. Mary, married to sir John Stirling of Keir.

He married, 2dly, Elizabeth, daughter of -- Arnot of that ilk, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
an ancient family in the county of Fife.

He married, 3dly, Marian, daughter of Hugh Montgomery of Hazlehead; but by
these two last he had no issue.

He died anno 1548, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. ROBERT, third lord Semple, who, in his father's lifetime, got two
charters under the great seal; Ibidem.
the first, Roberto, filio et haeredi apparenti Willielmi domini Semple, of
many lands, in vitali redditu; the other appointing him constable, and keeper
of the castle of Douglas, then in the crown by forfeiture; both dated in
October 1533.

He got also six charters more under the great seal, Ibidem.
of the lands and barony of Semple, etc. the lands of Cruikston, Dernlie, and
many others, in the years 1543, 1545, 1546, and 1547.

This lord was a man of great spirit and resolution, and sought gallantly
against the enemies of his country at the battle of Pinkie, where he had the
misfortune to be taken prisoner, and was long confined in England.

He continued loyal, and most dutiful to queen Mary, till after the murder of
king Henry. He then entered into a bond of association, with several others of
the nobility, to defend the young king against all mortals, etc. and upon the
breaking out of the civil war, he joined the regent Murray's party, raised a
considerable number of his vassals and followers, and fought upon their head at
the battle of Langside, where the queen's army was routed and dispersed.

The regent, Hist. of Renfrew, Crawford's peerage, etc.
in reward of his faithful services, bestowed upon him for life the dissolved
abbay of Paisley, anno 1569; of which the brave and loyal lord Claud Hamilton
had been forfeited, for his inviolable attachment to the interest of queen Mary.

He married, 1st, Isabel, daughter of sir William Hamilton of Sanquhar, by whom
he had two sons and four daughters.

1. Robert, master of Semple.

2. Andrew, ancestor of the Semples of Bruntshiel and Millbank.

1st daughter, Grizel, married to James Hamilton of Stanhouse, and had issue.

2. Margaret, married, 1st, to John Hamilton of Broomhill, ancestor of lord
Belhaven; 2dly, to John Whiteford of that ilk.

3. Janet, married to Hugh Montgomery of Hazlehead, and had issue.

4. --, married to Alexander Fleming of Barrochan.

He married, 2dly, Elizabeth Carlyle, 2 daughter of the family of Torthorald,
by whom he had one son,

John, Crawfurd's peerage.
ancestor of the Semples of Belltrees, still subsisting, -- also three
daughters.

1. Jean, married to James third lord Ross.

2. Grizel, married to John Blair of that ilk.

3. Dorothy, married to sir Robert Montgomery of Skelmorly.

They all had issue.

He died in an advanced age, anno 1571.

XIV. ROBERT, master of Semple, eldest son and apparent heir of Robert the
third lord, married Barbara, daughter of Archibald Preston of Valleyfield,
Ibidem.
and died anno 1569, leaving issue a son,

XV. ROBERT, who succeeded his grandfather, anno 1571, and was fourth lord
Semple.

He got a charter under the great seal, Roberto nepoti et haeredi Roberti
domini Semple, Chart. in pub^ archiv.
of the lands and barony of Semple, Craiginseoch, and others, in the shires of
Renfrew and Air, dated 15th December 1572.

He got another charter, Roberto domino Semple, Ibidem.
of the lands and barony of Glassford, etc. in Lanarkshire, 11th June 1573.

He was a man of good parts, great integrity, and highly esteemed by king James
VI. who sent him ambassador extraordinary to the court of Spain, where he
acquitted himself with honor and reputation; but as he still professed the
Roman catholic religion, he never enjoyed any public offices of state,
notwithstanding his merit, and the large share he had of his majesty's favor.

He married, 1st, lady Agnes Montgomery, daughter of Hugh third earl of
Eglington, by whom he had a son,

Hugh, his heir, -- and four daughters.

1. Anne, married to sir Archibald Stewart of Castlemilk.

2. Barbara, married to sir Colin Lawmont of Inneryne.

3. Grizel, married to John Logan of Raiss.

4. Margaret, married to Robert Brisbane of Bishoptoun.

They all had issue.

He married, 2dly, dame Johanna de Evieland, a lady of the Low Countries, by
whom he had a son,

Sir William Semple of Letterkeny, who settled in Ireland, where he married,
and had issue only one daughter, married to sir Francis Hamilton, knight.

He died anno 1611, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVI. HUGH, fifth lord, who got a charter under the great seal, Hugoni domino
Semple, et Francisco ejus filio, Ibidem.
terrarum barontae de Craiginfeoch, etc. etc. 22d February 1634.

He was a man of great abilities, worth and honor.

He never went to court, nor meddled in any public affairs, but lived close at
home, in great splendour and magnificence.

He married, 1st, lady Anne Hamilton, daughter of James earl of Abercorn, by
whom he had one daughter,

Marian, married to sir George Preston of Valleyfield.

He married, 2dly, lady Elizabeth Hay, daughter of Francis ninth earl of Errol,
by whom he had four sons and two daughters.

1. Francis, his heir.

2. Robert, who succeeded his brother.

3. Archibald Semple of Dykehead.

4. James, who went into holy orders abroad.

1st daughter, Elizabeth, married to William second lord Mordington.

2. Jean, married to William Menzies of Pitsoddils.

He died anno 1637, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVII. FRANCIS, sixth lord Semple, who married lady Elizabeth Seton, daughter
of George earl of Winton, Charta penes dom. Semple, et in cancellaria.
but dying without issue, anno 1644, his estate and honors devolved upon his
brother,

XVII. ROBERT, seventh lord Semple, a man of great integrity and honor. Though
he never meddled, nor was concerned in any affairs of state, yet he suffered
greatly on account of his attachment to the interest of the royal family, and
was sined by Oliver Cromwell, for being a malignant, Cromwell's printed act of
indemnity.
(as the loyalists were then called) in the sum of one thousand pounds
sterling, anno 1654.

He married Anne Douglas, daughter of James first lord Mordington, brother of
William first marquis of Douglas, by whom he had two sons and two daughters.

1. Robert, master of Semple, a youth of great hopes and spirit, who died
unmarried in the 18th year of his age.

2. Francis, afterward lord Semple.

1st daughter, Anne, carried on the line of this family, of whom more hereafter.

2. Jean, married to Alexander Sinclair of Roslin, and had issue.

He died anno 1675, and was succeeded by his son,

XVIII. FRANCIS, eighth lord Semple, who was, by the care of his noble
relations, educated in the protestant religion, came to court, and took his
place in parliament in the end of the reign of king Charles II. where none of
his ancestors had sat from the reformation to that time, they having been all
of the Roman catholic persuasion.

He was retoured heir to his father 14th October 1680. Retourin cancella^^^.


He married Grizel, daughter of sir Archibald Primrose of Dalmeny, ancestor of
the earl of Roseberry; but dying without issue, anno 1684, his estate and
honors devolved upon Anne his eldest sister, and heir of line, to whom we now
return,

XVIII. ANNE, baroness of Semple, eldest daughter of Robert the seventh lord,
succeeded to the estate and honors of Semple, as above observed, and married
Francis Abercromby of Fetternier, descended of the ancient family of Abercromby
of that ilk, in Fifeshire, Charta incancellaria.
who, by king James VII. was created lord Glassford for life, anno 1685.

Vide title lord Glassford. page 286.

By him she had issue five sons and one daughter.

1. Francis, afterward lord Semple.

2. Captain Robert, who was killed in the wars abroad, without issue.

3. John, who succeeded to the honors of Semple, as will be shown hereafter.

4. Alexander, who died in childhood.

5. Hugh, father of the present lord, of whom afterward.

Their daughter, Jean, died unmarried.

There is in the public register, a charter of confirmation, under the great
seal, upon the resignation of Anne baroness of Semple; Charta incancellaria.
containing an entail of the lands and barony of Semple, to and in favors of
herself, and her husband in liferent, and in fee to Francis her eldest son, and
the heirs-male of his body; which failing, to Robert the second son, then to
John the third son, then to Alexander the fourth son, and their heirs-male;
which failing, to the heirs-female of the said four brothers respective, the
eldest always secluding the younger, and succeeding without division, etc. etc.
The confirmation is dated the 16th May 1688.

But it must here be observed, that Hugh the fifth son was born after the
making of this entail.

Anne baroness of Semple died anno 1691, and was succeeded in the estate and
honors of Semple by her eldest son,

XIX. FRANCIS, ninth lord Semple, a man of great honor and integrity, who took
his place in the first parliament of queen Anne, anno 1703, and always stood up
firmly for what he believed to be for the good of his country, and liberties
thereof.

He opposed the union with all his interest, and voted against every article of
it.

He died unmarried, and was succeeded by his next surviving brother,

XIX. JOHN, third son of the baroness, who was tenth lord Semple; but he dying
also without issue, the estate and honors devolved upon his brother,

XIX. HUGH, fifth son of the baroness, who was eleventh lord Semple.

He went into the army when a young man, and served with great reputation in
queen Anne's wars, both in Flanders and Spain.

In the year 1718, he was major to the 26th regiment, and was appointed colonel
to the 42d regiment, anno 1740, with which he went abroad in the year 1743 to
Flanders, where he and his regiment acquired great glory, having always
distinguished themselves in every battle they were engaged in against the
French.

He commanded in the town of Aeth, when it was besieged by the French, made a
gallant defense, and returned to Britain that same year, when he was appointed
colonel of the 25th regiment, the command whereof he enjoyed till his death.

At the battle of Cullodden, in 1746, he had the command of the left wing of
the king's army, where he acted as a brigadier general. He remarkably
signalized himself for his conduct and bravery, and had no small share of the
glory acquired by the king's troops against the highlanders, in that memorable
engagement.

After this battle, the lord Semple commanded in Aberdeen, and there lost his
life, by the tendon of his arm being pricked, when he was let blood.

He married Sarah Gaskall, daughter and co-heiress of -- Gaskall, Esquire; in the
county of Lancashire, by whom he had issue five sons and six daughters.

1. John, now lord Semple.

2. George, a captain in the army.

3. Hugh, also a captain in the army.

4. Philip, who died young.

5. Ralph, who died at sea.

1st daughter, Sarah, married to Patrick Crawford of Auchinames, who died anno
1750, leaving issue one daughter.

2. Jean.

3. Betty, who died young.

4. Anne, married to doctor Adam Austin, physician in Edinburgh, to whom she
has one son and four daughters.

5. Marian.

6. Rebecca.

Lord Hugh was succeeded by his eldest son,

XX. JOHN, twelfth lord Semple, who married Janet Dunlop, only daughter and
heiress of -- Dunlop of Bishoptoun, Esquire; by whom he has a son,

Hugh, master of Semple, -- and a daughter,

--.

ARMS.
Argent, a cheveron cheque gules, and of the first, accompanied with three
bugles sable, garnished of the second.

CREST; on a wreath, a stag's head proper, attired argent.

SUPPORTERS; two gray hounds argent, each having a plain collar gules.

MOTTO; Keep tryste.

CHIEF SEAT,
At Semple-house, in Renfrew-shire, on the river Clyde.

SINCLAIR Lord SINCLAIR.
AS the origin of the great and illustrious name of Sinclair, is to be found
under the title of Sinclair earl of Orkney, page 529th of this work, we proceed
to deduce the descent of this noble family from their immediate ancestor,

William third earl of Orkney, who was also earl of Caithness. He lived in the
reigns of king James I. II. and III. and had to his first wife lady Margaret
Douglas, daughter of Archibald fourth earl of Douglas, by lady Margaret
Stewart, daughter of king Robert III. By her he had one son,

William, the first of this family, -- and a daughter,

Lady Catharine Sinclair, married to Alexander duke of Albany.

For his second marriage, and the children thereof, vide page 532d.

I. WILLIAM, eldest son of William earl of Orkney, etc.

Though he did not succeed to his father in his titles of honor, yet we have
undoubted proof of his being his eldest son, and he certainly obtained
considerable possessions in lands.

This appears by an infeftment produced in parliament, Records of parliament.
given by king James II. dilecto consanguineo suo Gulielmo de Sancto Claro,
filio et haeredi apparenti Gulielmi, comitis Orcadiae et Cathaniae, of the
lands and barony of Newburgh, and several others, in Aberdeenshire, 16th March
1459.

He got also, upon his brother's resignation, the lands of Dysart, Cousland,
Ravenscraig, etc. which is instructed by a contract, Chart. in archiv. fam. de
Sinclair.
wherein his brothers William and sir Oliver, acknowledge him to be their elder
brother, anno 1481.

He married lady Elizabeth Lesly, daughter of George earl of Rothes, by
Christian Haliburton, his second wife, daughter of Walter lord of Dirleton. By
her he had issue a son and successor,

II. HENRY, who was created lord Sinclair in the end of the reign of king
James, III. or beginning of that of king James IV. He got a charter under the
great seal, Henrico domino Sinclair, Chart. in pub. archiv.
et Margaretae Hepburn, suae sponsae, of the lands of Cousland, cum fortalicio
de Ravenscraig, the lands of Carberry, Woolstoun, Balbugy, etc. 4th December
1488.

At the first parliament, held by king James IV. in Edinburgh, it is declared
by our sovereign lord the king, and the estates of parliament, that this Henry
is son and heir of William of Sinclair, eldest son and heir of William earl of
Orkney and Caithness; that he is chief of the blood, Records of parliament.
and that he and his successors are to be called lords Sinclair in timecoming,
with all the dignities, immunities and privileges thereto belonging, 14th
January 1489.

He got another charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
to him and his said spouse, of the lands and barony of Dysart, Ravenscraig,
etc. 9th January 1493.

He afterward obtained from king James IV. a lease of the lands and lordship
of Orkney and Zetland, Ibidem.
and was made justiciar and keeper of the castle of Kirkwall, all for payment
of 550 merks per annum, anno 1501.

He sat as peer in the parliament called to meet at Edinburgh, Records of
parliament.
in February 1504.

He got a charter under the great seal, of the lands and barony of Newburgh,
mill thereof, Chart. in pub. archiv.
land fishing on the water of Ithane, etc. 3d March 1508.

He got another charter of an annuity out of the lands of Logyrate, Ibidem.
21st August 1511.

By the said lady Margaret Hepburn, daughter of Patrick earl of Bothwell, he
had a son,

William, his heir, -- and three daughters.

1. Catharine, married to sir David Wemyss of that ilk.

2. Helen, married to James, fourth lord Ogilvie of Airly.

3. Jean, married to Alexander master of Crawfurd, son and apparent heir of
David, seventh earl of Crawfurd.

He was a man of spirit and resolution, and accompanied king James IV. to the
field of Flowdon, where he was slain with his royal leader, and many of his
brave countrymen, on the 9th September 1513.

He was succeeded by his son,

III. WILLIAM, second lord, who got a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
Willielmo domino Sinclair, et Elizabethae Keith sponsae suae, of the lands and
barony of Newburgh, etc. in Aberdeenshire, dated 17th April 1524.

Also a charter of several other lands in the same county, Ibidem.
all united to the barony of Newburgh, 15th May 1533.

And another charter, to him and his said lady, Ibidem.
of the lands of Woolstoun, Carberry, Balbugie, etc. 28th June 1547.

By the said lady Elizabeth Keith, daughter of William earl Marishal, he had
issue two sons.

1. Henry, his heir.

2. Magnus, who got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Magno Sinclair, filio legitimo Willielmi domini Sinclair, et Mariotae Bruce
sponsae suae, of part of the lands of Kinninmonth, in Fife, dated 6th December
1561; but we can give no account of his posterity.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. HENRY, third lord, who, in his father's lifetime, got a charter under the
great seal, Ibidem.
Henrico magistro de Sinclair, of the lands and barony of Dysart, town and
manor thereof, dated 14th November 1548.

He got also a charter of the lands and barony of Ravenscraig, Ibidem.
and others, of the same date with the preceding one.

He was a great favourer of the reformation, M. S. in the lawiers library
Edinburgh.
and was one of the lords that sat in the convention, when the protestant
religion was established, anno 1560; yet he was a firm and steady friend of
queen Mary, and was one of those noble lords who entered into a bond of
association, Ibidem.
to stand by, and defend her majesty against all mortals, anno 1568.

He married Elizabeth, Chart. in pub. arch. ad ann. 1560.
daughter of William seventh lord Forbes, by whom he had a son,

James, master of Sinclair, -- and a daughter,

Helen, married to Andrew Kinninmonth of that ilk.

He lived to a great age, and died anno 1601.

V. JAMES, only son and apparent heir of Henry third lord Sinclair, got a
charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
Jacobo magistro de Sinclair, of the lands and barony of Ravenscraig, Dysart,
and Newburgh, with the fishing upon the water of Ithane, etc. dated 14th July
1577.

Also a charter of the barony of Dysart, Ibidem.
mill thereof, and the right of patronage annexed thereto, dated 5th July 1592.

He married lady Isabel Lesly, daughter of Andrew fifth earl of Rothes, by whom
he had two sons.

1. James, his heir.

2. Patrick, who succeeded his brother.

He died before his father, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. JAMES, who succeeded also to his grandfather, Ibidem.
anno 1601, was fourth lord Sinclair; but he dying soon thereafter, without
issue, his estate and honors devolved upon his brother,

VI. PATRICE, fifth lord Sinclair, who married Margaret, Crawfurd's peerage.
daughter of sir John Cockburn of Ormiston, by whom he had a son,

John, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Julian, married to sir Duncan Campbell of Glenurchy, ancestor of the earl of
Breadalbane.

He died anno 1615, and was succeeded by his son,

VII. JAMES, sixth lord, who got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
Johanni domino Sinclair, of the baronies of Ravenscraig, Newburgh, etc. etc.
dated the penult day of July 1631.

He got also a charter, to him and Mary Wemyss, Ibidem.
his sponse, of several other lands, dated 26th June 1637.

Upon the breaking out of the civil war, he appeared first to be on the
parliament's side, Rescinded acts of parlt.
and was by them appointed one of their committee, and a privy councillor for
life, anno 1641.

He was also one of the committee of estates, in the years 1644 and 1645, and
colonel of the Fife regiment of horse; but being a sincere loyalist, he was
concerned in duke Hamilton's engagement, anno 1648, and was afterward, Ibidem,
and Cromwell's act of indem^^nity.
for his attachment to the interest of the royal family, excepted from pardon
by Oliver Cromwell, anno 1654.

He married lady Mary, daughter of John earl of Wemyss, by whom he had only one
daughter,

Catharine, to whom, with consent of the crown, he conveyed both his estate and
honors, and was accordingly succeeded by,

VIII. CATHARINE, baroness of Sinclair, only daughter and sole heiress of John
the sixth lord, who was married to sir John Sinclair of Herdmanston, by whom
she had a son,

IX. HENRY, who, succeeding to both the estate and honors of his grandfather,
was seventh lord Sinclair.

He got a charter, or diploma, under the great seal, from king Charles II.
confirming all the honors, dignities, privileges, etc. enjoyed by his
predecessors lords Sinclair, with the former precedence, to him and the
heirs-male of his body; which failing, to John, Robert, George, and Matthew
Sinclairs, successively brothers-german to the said sir John of Herdmanston,
and the heirs-male of their bodies; Diploma in cancellaria.
which all failing, to the said Henry his nearest heirs-male whatever, 1st June
1677.

He was a man of great probity and honor, and invariably attached to the
interest of the Stewart family. At the convention of estates in 1689, when he
saw they were determined to forfeit king James VII. and settle the crown on the
prince of Orange, he took a protest against their proceedings, and left the
house.

He married Grizel, daughter of sir James Cockburn of that ilk, by whom he had
five sons and five daughters.

1. John, master of Sinclair.

2. General James Sinclair.

3. Major William Sinclair, who died without issue.

4. Henry Sinclair, Esquire;.

5. Matthew, died without issue.

1st daughter, Grizel, who carried on the line of this family, of whom
afterward.

2. Catharine, married to sir John Erskine of Alva, baronet, and had issue.

3. Mary, married to sir William Baird of Newbyth.

4. Elizabeth, who was third wife to David earl of Wemyss, to whom she had
issue two daughters, one married to the earl of Sutherland, the other to the
earl of Murray.

5. Anne.

Henry lord Sinclair died in 1723 or 1724.

X. JOHN, master of Sinclair, eldest son of lord Henry, had the misfortune to
be engaged in the rebellion 1715, for which he was attainted of treason, and
made his escape beyond sea, but was afterward pardoned for his life, anno
1726. He returned home, and had it not been for his attainder, would have been
eighth lord Sinclair.

He married, 1st, lady Margaret Stewart, daughter of James earl of Galloway,
countess dowager of Southesk; 2dly, Emilia, daughter of lord George Murray,
brother of the duke of Athole, but died without issue, anno 1750.

Lord Henry, having survived his son the master's attainder for several years,
conveyed and settled his estate upon his second son,

X. General JAMES SINCLAIR, but he restored it to his brother, when he obtained
his pardon, and succeeded him at his death.

He betook himself early to a military life, served with great reputation for
many years, and rose to the highest rank in the army.

He was twice member of parliament for Sutherland, three times for the burghs
of Dysart, Kinghorn, etc. and at last for the county of Fife.

He married Janet, daughter of sir David Dalrymple of Hales; king's advocate,
widow of sir John Baird of Newbyth, by whom he had no children; and none of his
brothers having any issue, he therefore settled his estate upon James Paterson,
Esquire; son of Grizel, his eldest sister, before mentioned, to whom we now return.

X. GRIZEL, eldest daughter of Henry seventh lord Sinclair, married to John
Paterson of Prestonhall, Esquire; eldest son of John archbishop of Glasgow, by whom
she had a son,

Colonel James, -- and three daughters.

1. Barbara.

2. Margaret, married to John Thomson of Charleton, Esquire;.

3. Grizel, died unmarried.

XI. JAMES, only son of Grizel, eldest daughter of Henry seventh lord Sinclair,
upon the death of the general in the year 1762, succeeded to the estate of
Sinclair, and now carries the name and arms of that family.

ARMS.
Quarterly; 1st and 4th, azure, a ship at anchor, her oars erect in saltire,
within a double tressure, with flowers de lis counterfloree, or; 2d and 3d,
azure, a ship under sail or; and over all, by way of surtout, an escutcheon
argent, charged with a cross, engrailed sable.

CREST; on a wreath, a swan argent, having a ducal collar and chain or.

SUPPORTERS; two grissins proper, armed and beaked or.

MOTTO; Fight.

CHIEF SEAT.
At Dysart in Fifeshire.

SOMERVILLE Lord SOMERVILLE.
THE Somervilles are of Norman extraction, and came over to Britain with
William the Conqueror, anno 1066.

The rank they bore in Normandy entitled them to the highest regard of their
prince; the considerable commands they had in the army, and their gallant
behavior in England, gave them a just claim to a share of the conquests of
that country; and accordingly,

I. Sir GUALTER, or WALTER de SOMERVILLE, obtained from the Conqueror, (having
been one of his chief commanders) the whole lordship and territory of
Whitchnour, Roll of Battle Abbay, du Moulin's hist. of Normandy, and Dugdale's
baronage of England.
in the county of Stafford, where he settled, as also Somerville Aston in
Glocestershire. He was progenitor of all the Somervilles in Great Britain.

He lived after the year 1100, and left issue several sons.

1. Sir Walter de Somerville, who succeeded him in the lordship of Whitchnour,
and carried on the line of that great and opulent family, Dugdale's baronage.
which flourished with luster in England for many ages. He lived in the reigns
of king Henry I. and king Stephen, and of him was lineally descended sir Philip
de Somerville, lord of Whitchnour, who made a considerable figure in the reigns
of kings Henry IV. and V. and was so famous for his great hospitality, that he
is recorded for having given a flitch of bacon as a reward to any husband and
wife, Addison's works.
who could say that they never had the least difference, nor contradicted one
another within the space of twelve months after marriage, etc. The figure of a
flitch of bacon, neatly carved on wood, is at this day in Whitchnour house,
near Litchfield, now the seat of -- Offby, Esquire; but the male line of the
Whitchnour family is long since extinct, having ended in a single daughter,
married to the great Stafford duke of Buckingham, constable of England,
forfeited and beheaded in Henry the VIII's time.

Sir Gualter's second son was,

2. William, of whom all the Somervilles in Scotland are descended, as will be
shown hereafter.

3. Roger, who got from his father the batony of Aston in Glocestershire,
which, after him, was called Somerville Aston, etc.

Sir John of Somerville-Aston, Dugdal. hist. of Warwickshire, and Archer's
hist. of Glostershire.
son or grandson of Roger, flourished in the reign of king Henry III. and
married Cecilia de Limefie, with whom he got the manor of Stockton, and several
other considerable possessions in Warwickshire.

Sir William of Somerville-Aston lineally descended of the above sir John,
about the year 1607, married Elizabeth, daughter of sir Humphry Ferrers,
descended of William lord Ferrers of Groby, Dugdale, vol. II. p. 688.
second son of William Ferrers earl of Derby, by Margaret, daughter of Roger de
Quin^y earl of Winchester, by Helen, daughter of Alan lord of Calloway, and
Margaret, eldest daughter of David earl of (...), brother of king William the
Lion, etc.

The late William Somerville, Esquire; of Edston in (...),-shire, and
Somerville-Aston, in Gloucestershire, who was author of that celebrated poem
called the Chase, was his lineal heir; but having no issue, and desiring to
continue his estate in this ancient family, in the year 1730, concluded a
bargain with the present lord Somerville, for the reversion of his estates at
his death, which took place in the year 1742, and since his accession thereto,
he has greatly improved and beautified it.

We now return to the progenitor of the Somervilles in Scotland.

II. WILLIAM de SOMERVILLE, second son of the first sir Gualter, having
contracted a friendship with king David I. when in England, came with him to
Scotland, and being highly esteemed, and in great favor with that prince, he
bestowed upon him the lands and barony of Carnwath, Nisbet's append. p 79.
in the county of Lanark, to him and his heirs for ever.

He appears to have been much about the king's person, being witness to most of
the grants and donations of that good prince to the religious, Chartulary of
Melross penes MacFarlane.
particularly (with many others of the nobility) to the foundation-charter of
the abbacy of Melross, anno 1136.

Also to his donations to the monasteries of Dunfermline, Chartulary of
Dunfermline, penes eund. p. 162. 165. 184. etc.
Kelso and Melross.

In a donation of king David, Deo et ecclesiae Sancti Andreae de Kilrymont,
William de Somerville, Robert bishop of St. Andrews, John bishop of Glasgow,
Chartulary of St Andrews, penes eund p. 227.
William Common chancellor of Scotland, etc. are witnesses, ante annum 1147, in
which year John bishop of Glasgow died.

He is witness also to another donation, together with prince Henry, Ibid. p.
238.
the king's son, who died anno 1152.

Likeways to other two charters Henrici filii regis David, donationum super
Swyntun monachis Sancti Cuthberti,etc. Origin. writ^ of Coldinghame, pene eund.
p. 12 and 13.
wherein William de Somerville, Herbert great chamberlain of Scotland, etc. are
witnesses, ante annum 1148, in or before which year Herbert the chamberlain
died.

He left issue two sons.

1. William de Somerville.

2. Walter de Somerville, who is witness to a charter of conFirmation of king
Malcolm

IV. Chartulary (...) Newbottle, penes eund p. 385.
together with Herbert bishop of Glasgow, donationum de Harwold, etc. inter
1154 et 1160.

He died before 1162, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. WILLIAM de SOMERVILLE, who made a great figure at the courts of king
Malcolm IV. and king William the Lion.

He is witness in a charter of king Malcolm's with Herbert bishop of Glasgow,
Ibid. p. (...)
who died in 1164.

Also to two charters of donations to the priory of St. Andrews, Chartulary of
St. Andrews, penes eundem, p. 249. and 255.
with the same prelate, ante annum 1164.

And to another charter of king Malcolm's, Chartulary of Dunfermline, p. 184.
of a donation to the monastery of Dunfermline, inter 1160 et 1165.

He is witness likeways to the division of the lands of Molla, Chartulary of
Kelso, penes eand. p. 150.
together with Hugh de Morville, David Olifard, etc. circa annum 1170.

He is witness to many other donations to the monastery of Kelso by king
William the Lion; Ibid. p. 219. 322. 325, etc.
and by Alan, son of Walter lord high steward of Scotland, etc. inter 1170 et
1198.

He obtained from king William a grant of the lands and barony of Linton, in
Roxburghshire, M. S. hist of the family of Somerville, penes dom. Somerville.
anno 1174, for killing, as is said, a monstrous serpent that greatly infested
the neighborhood. It is also said that this William was the king's falconer.

He lest issue a son and successor,

III. WILLIAM de SOMERVILLE, designed baron of Carnwath and Linton. He was in
great favor with king Alexander II. who particularly distinguished him at his
marriage, being one of the nobles appointed by that king to exercise at a
tournament at the castle of Roxburgh, where, for agility and strength of body,
Ibidem.
he was excelled by none.

He married Margaret, Principalcontract penes dom. Somerville.
daughter of Walter of Newbigging, lord of Dunsyre, by whom he had a son,

Sir William, -- and a daughter,

Margaret, married to sir Archibald Campbell of Lochow, of whom all the earls
and dukes of Argyle are descended.

He died anno 1242, Chronicle of Melross, penes MacFarlane.
was buried at Melross, and succeeded by his son,

IV. Sir WILLIAM de SOMERVILLE, designed dominus de Linton, who was highly
esteemed by king Alexander III. M. S. hist. of the family.
from whom he had the honor of knighthood conferred upon him.

He remarkably distinguished himself at the battle of Largis in Cunninghame,
where king Alexander III. commanded in person, and obtained a glorious victory
over Haco king of Norway, Ibidem.
who had invaded Scotland with a numerous army, anno 1263.

In a charter of Henricus de Halyburton, of the lands of Molla, to the
monastery of Kelso, sir William de Somerville, Chartulary of Kelso, p. 149.
Nicholas de Rutherfoord, etc. are witnesses, anno 1270.

He is witness also to a bond of man-rent betwixt sir Walter of Newbigging,
History of the ^^m wherein the bond is ^ully narrat ^^
and sir David of Towie, anno 1281.

This William de Somerville, cum consilio Willielmi patris sui, gave to the
episcopal see of Glasgow, Chartulary of Glasgow.
pro salute animae su^e, etc. ecclesiam de Carnwath, etc.

He lived to a great age, died anno 1282, and was succeeded by his son,

VI. Sir THOMAS de SOMERVILLE, designed dominus de Linton et Carnwath, who was
one of the great barons of Scotland, that agreed and wrote to king Edward I.
about the marriage of queen Margaret (daughter to the king of Norway, Rymer's
foed. Angliae, tom. II. p. 472.
grandchild of king Alexander III. undoubted heir to the crown of Scotland)
with prince Edward, anno 1290.

Though this sir Thomas was compelled, with many of his countrymen, to swear
fealty to king Edward I. of England, in the years 1294 and 1296, for lands
lying in different counties; Prynne's collections, vol. III. p. 649. and 654.
yet we find he embraced the first opportunity of endeavoring to shake off the
English yoke. He joined the brave sir William Wallace, and had no small share
of the glory acquired by that great man, in defense of the liberties of his
country.

He made several donations to the religious at Melross, Chronicle of Melross.
out of his barony of Linton.

He died about the year 1300, leaving issue two sons.

1. Sir Walter, his heir.

2. Sir John de Somerville, who was a great patriot, Abereromb. (...) p. 571.
576, etc.
a firm and steady (...) of king Robert Bruce, under whom he performed many
brave actions in the service of (...) country.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. Sir WALTER de SOMERVILLE. dominus de Linton et Carnwath, who was (...) of
the greatest warriors of his time. He joined king Robert Bruce, and never
forsook him in his greatest distress.

He married Giles, Nisbet's append p. 79. and (...) of the family of Somerville.
only daughter and heiress of sir John Herring, with whom he got the lands of
Gilmerton, Drum, Goodtrees, etc.

By her he had issue three sons.

1. Sir James, his heir.

2. Sir Thomas, Chartulary of Lennox, penes MacFarlane, p. 66.
who succeeded his brother.

3. Richard de Somerville, who is witness to a charter of Duncan earl of
Lennox, anno 1340.

Sir Walter died anno 1330, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. Sir JAMES SOMERVILLE, who, like many of his brave ancestors, was a true
patriot, a gallant soldier, and accompanied king David in his unfortunate
expedition into England, where he lost his life at the battle of Durham,
Abererombie etc Nisbet, etc.
anno 1346; and leaving no issue, was succeeded by his brother,

VIII. Sir THOMAS SOMERVILLE of Linton and Carnwath, who was no less a steady
friend to king David Bruce than his father had been to king Robert.

He also attended the king into England, and behaved with the utmost resolution
and conduct at the battle of Durham, where his royal master was taken prisoner;
but he had the good fortune to escape; and being a man of great parts, Rymer's
faed. Angliae, tom. V. p. 791.
was sent into England by the estates of the kingdom, to treat about the king's
liberty, anno 1354.

He was also appointed one of the commissioners, together with William earl of
Doulas, the earls of March, Ibid. tom. VI. p. 395. and 497.
Mar, etc. to treat with the English, supper negotiis David de Bruis, anno
1362; and again, with several others, in 1366.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of sir James Douglas, designed de Loudonia,
ancestor of the earls of Morton, by whom he had issue three sons, and two
daughters.

1. Sir William.

2. Thomas de Somerville, to whom he gave the lands of Gilmertoun, Drum, and
Good-trees; but he dying without issue, M. S. hist. of the family.
these lands returned to the family.

3. John de Somerville, to whom he gave part of the lands of Newbigging. He is
witness in a charter of king Robert II. Laurentio de Haya domino de Eskindy,
Chart. in rotul. Rob. II.
in vicecomitatu de Inverness, anno 1376.

His 1st daughter, --, married to sir John Sandilands of Calder.

2. --, M. S. hist. of the family.
married to sir Laurence Baird of Posso.

He died before 1370, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. Sir WILLIAM de SOMERVILLE, promiscuously designed of Linton and Carnwath,
who was one of the noble Scotch heirs that were appointed sureties for king
David's ransom, Rymer, tom. VI. p. 35.
anno 1357.

He had vast possessions in lands, and being a man of parts, was in great
favor and highly esteemed by king Robert II.

He married Catharine, daughter and heiress of -- Maxwell, in the county of
Stirling, which is confirmed by a charter under the great seal, Willielmo de
Somerville militi, et Catharinae Maxwell, sponsae suae, totam medietatem
baroniae de Manwell, cum pertinen. jacen. Chart. in rotul. Rob. II.
infra vicecomitatum de Stirling, etc. dated anno 1371.

By her he had issue two sons.

1. Sir Thomas.

2. William, ancestor of the Somervilles of Cambdo, etc.

He died anno 1103, and was succeeded by his eldest son.

X. Sir THOMAS de SOMERVILLE, who succeeded also to his uncle Thomas's estates
of Gilmerton, Drum, and Goodtrees, and was the first lord Somerville.

He was a man of great honor and virtue, and a liberal benefactor to the
religious.

He made a donation to the monastery of Lesmahagoe, to which William Somerville
his brother was a witness, Chart. in pub archiv.
anno 1421; and it was afterward confirmed by king James I. anno 1427.

He made another mortification out of his lands of Manuel, for a chaplain to
the same monastery, with consent of William Somerville his son and heir
apparent, pro salute animae suae, etc. dated third June 1424, and confirmed by
king James, Ibidem.
June 5th that same year.

He was one of the commissioners sent to England to negotiate king James I.'s
liberty, anno 1423, and is then designed Thomas Somerville of Carnwath; but
upon the king's return home the year thereafter, Rymer, tom^ X. p. 308.
he was called to parliament by his majesty, as a lord baron, along with five
others that had been hostages for his ransom, most of whom are either arrived
at higher dignities, or are extinct.

He was one of the sureties for a seven years truce with the English, was
appointed one of the wardens of the marches toward England, Ibid. p. 332^
and is then designed Thomas dominus Somerville, Fordun, vol II. p. 483.
anno 1424. That same year he sat as a peer on the trial of Murdoch duke of
Albany, etc.

As therefore there is sufficient proof that lord Somerville was a lord of
parliamen^ in the year 1424, he appears to be the first lord baron of Scotland;
and by a resolution of the house of lords of Great Britain, in the year 1722,
when the honors were confirmed to this lord, there is a saving clause, that,
upon application to that house at any time, Records or parliament
and upon proper proof, he may have his rank ascertained.

He also sat as a peer in the parliament held at Edinburgh, anno 1429, and was
by his majesty appointed justice-general of Scotland besouth the river Forth,
which appears by an authentic decree pronounced by him, wherein he is designed
justiciarius domini (...) regis, ex part austrail aquae de Forth. He passed
sentence against the delinquents at Stirling, the 4th day of November, in the
year of God 1430. The decree concludes thus: The (...) decree, ^nes dom. S^
merville.
In cujus rei testimonium, sigillum officii nosiri justiciarii est appensum,
anno die mensis, et l^co suprascript.

Immediately thereafter, Thomas demi^us Somerville was appointed one of the
warden^ of the marches toward England, Rymer. tom. X. p. 491.
in December 1430.

He married Janet, daughter of Alexander Stewart, lord Darnly, ancestor of king
James VI. with whom he got the lands and barony of Cambusnethan, which is
confirmed by a charter from king Robert III. Thomae de Somerville, filio et
haeredi apparenti Willielmi Somerville, militis, et Janetae Senescal sponsae
suae, et eorum diutius viventi, omnes terras baroniae de Cambusnethan, etc.
jacen. in vicecom. de Lanark, Chart. in pub. archiv.
quae fuerunt dilecti consanguinei nostri Alexandri Senescalli de Darnly,
militis, etc. dated in July 1392.

By her he had issue two sons, and three daughters.

1. William, lord Somerville.

2. Thomas de Somerville, who married Elizabeth Airth, which appears by a
charter under the great seal, Thomae Somerville, filio Willielmi domini
Somerville et Elizabeth^e Airth, Ibidem.
sponsae dicti Thomae, terrarum de Carnock, Fordale, etc. dated anno 1449.

1st daughter, Mary, married to sir William Hay of Yester, ancestor of the
marquis of Tweeddale, M. S. hist. of the family.
who got with her the lands of Auchtermure.

2. Giles, married to sir Robert Logan of Restalrig.

3. Margaret, Sir George MacKenzie's baronage in the lawyers library.
married, 1st, to -- Kilpatrick of Closeburn, in Nithsdale; 2dly, to Thomas Ker
of Fernyhirst, ancestor of the marquis of Lothian.

He died anno 1444, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. WILLIAM, second lord Somerville, who, in his father's lifetime, had the
honor of knighthood conferred upon him by king James 1. upon the birth of his
two sons, anno 1430, and was then designed sir William Somerville of Plain.

He was served heir to his father in the baroni^s of Linton and Cambusnethan,
Retour penes dom. Somerville.
in June 1445.

He got a charter from king James II. Willielmo domino Somerville saciend.
villam de Go^^wath, in (...) de Lanark, liberum burgum baroni^e, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
etc. dated 20th June 1451.

He was a man of good parts, great honor and probity, a firm and steady friend
both to king James I. and II. and was often employed in negotiations of
importance.

After the murder of king James I. lord Somerville attended the parliament
1439, and was very instrumental in procuring the queen's liberty, who was kept
little better than a prisoner by the ruling faction of the time.

He was one of the guarantees of a treaty of peace with the English, Rymer,
tom. XI. p. 254. etc.
anno 1449, and to another in 1451, Ibid. p. 28^.
in which last year he was appointed one of the ambassadors extraordinary to
the court of England, etc.

He appears to have been much at the court of king James II. being witness to
most of that prince's grants and charters. In his confirmation of all the
donations made to the abbacy of Dunfermline, by king Malcolm Canmore and queen
Margaret, Chartulary of Dunfermline, penes MacFarlane, p. 348.
king Duncan, king Edgar, king Alexander I. king David I. etc. the witnesses
were William lord Somerville, Patrick lord Glammis, etc. anno 1450.

He was witness to other three charters of king James II. Chartulary of Murray,
penes ^und. p. 666. 668. and 670.
together with William earl of Douglas, chancellor Crichton, etc. anno 1451 et
1452, de villa de Spyuie, etc.

And to another charter of that same prince, Chartulary of Newbottle, penes
eund. p. 521.
Willielmo de Ledale, etc. anno 1453.

He married Janet, daughter of sir John Mowat of Stanhouse, by whom he had two
sons, and two daughters.

1. John, lord Somerville.

2. William de Somerville, who married Margaret, Memeirs of the family of
Somerville.
daughter of William Hamilton of Preston, and was ancestor of the Somerville^
of Plain. His son Thomas got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
of the lands and b^rony of Plain.

1st daughter, Janet, married to Ralph Weir of Blackwood, Esquire;.

2. Mary, married to William Cleveland of that ilk, Esquire;.

He died anno 1456, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. JOHN, third lord Somerville, who, in an instrument of resignation of John
and Alexander Thane of the lands of Fe^^yhill, is a witness, together with
Patrick Hepb^^n, Chartulary of Dunfermline, penes^ Mac(...) p. (...).
lord of Hailes, sir William Cranston of Cor^by, etc. and is designed John, son
and apparent heir of William lord Somerville, etc. in 1451.

He was a man of singular courage and resolution, and remarkably distinguished
himself at the battle of Sark, where he had the command of the Clydsd de horse,
though but a young man, and performed the part of a brave officer, Memoirs of
the family of Somerville.
where the Scots obtained a glorious victory over the English, and their great
champion Magnus, anno 1449.

He was one of the conservators of a treaty with the English, Rymer, tom. XI.
p. 397.
anno 1457.

He was appointed one of the ambassadors extraordinary to the court of England,
Ibid. p. 426.
and warden of the marches, anno 1459.

He behaved with singular magnanimity at the siege of Roxburgh, Memoirs of the
family of Somerville.
where his royal master, king James II. was slain, anno 1460.

This lord was a particular favorite of king James III. who often took the
diversion of hunting in the southern parts, Memoirs of the family of Somerville.
and would have staid several days at lord Somerville's house of Cowthaly,
where he and his whole retinue were royally entertained.

He married, 1st, Helen, daughter of sir Adam Hepburn, lord of Hailes, by whom
he had a son,

William, master of Somerville, -- and two daughters.

1. Elizabeth, married to Archibald, eldest son of Duncan Campbell, Nisbet's
appendix.
lord of Lochow, ancestor of the duke of Argyle. Her second son, --, was
ancestor of the earl of Breadalbane.

2. Helen, married to sir John Jardine of Applegirth.

He married, 2dly, Mary, daughter of William Baillie of Lamington, Esquire; which
is instructed by a charter under the great seal, Johanni domino Somerville, et
Mariotae Baillie, sponsae suae, Chart. in pub. archiv.
terrarum baroniae de Cambusnethan, etc. dated anno 1477.

By her he had a son,

Sir John Somerville, -- and a daughter,

Mary, married to sir Stephen Lockhart of Cleghorn.

Sir John Somerville, son of the second marriage of John third lord Somerville,
got from his father the lands and barony of Cambusnethan, Ibidem.
upon which he got a charter under the great seal, dated anno 1503. He was a
man of great parts and spirit, and in high favor with king James IV. whom he
accompanied to the field of Flowdon, where he lost his life, anno 1513. He
married Elizabeth, daughter of -- Carmichael of Balmedie, Nisbet's appendix, p.
277.
by whom he had issue, and his posterity, barons of Cambusnethan, made a
considerable figure in Scotland afterward.

John, third lord Somerville, died in 1491.

XIII. WILLIAM, master of Somerville, got a charter from king James III.
Willielmo Somerville, filio et haeredi apparenti Johannis domini Somerville,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
terrarum baroniae de Carnwath, Linton, etc. cum superioritate terrarum de
Gilme^toun, etc. dated the 2d day of May 1477.

He married, 1st, Margaret, daughter of Hugh lord Montgomery, upon which his
father put him in possession of the above estates.

By her he had two sons.

1. John, lord Somerville.

2. Hugh, who succeeded his brother.

He married, 2dly, Janet, daughter of sir William Douglas of Drumlanrig, by
whom he had no issue.

He died before his father, anno 1488, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIV. JOHN, who succeeding also to his grandfather, anno 1491, was fourth lord,
and got a charter from king James IV. Johanni domino Somerville, Ibidem.
baroniae de Carnwath, and a great many other lands, dated 13th March 1507.

But he dying without issue, before the year 1526, his estate and honors
devolved upon his brother,

XIV. HUGH, fifth lord Somerville, who being a man of a noble spirit, was in
high favor with king James V. who did him the honor to be frequently (with
his whole retinue) at his house of Cowthaly, (called, by king James V. in a
jocular way, Cowdaily, because he observed a cow and ten sheep killed every
day,) for several days together, which put this noble lord to such
extraordinary expense, that he greatly incumbered his vast estate; for though
none of the nobility had a greater share of the king's favor than this lord,
Memoirs of the family of Somerville.
yet he never accepted of any place or pension from the government, and
continued a most faithful and loyal subject to the end of his days.

In the year 1542, he accompanied the king in his unfortunate expedition to
Solway, where he was taken prisoner, carried to the court of England, Stow's
chron.
and confined; but he and other six lords were lodged in great state by Henry
VIII.'s orders: lord Somerville was consigned to the lord Audley, chancellor of
England, Rymer, tom. XIV. p. 796.
at a seat now called Audley-end; but he was at last released for a ransom of
one thousand merks sterling.

During his stay in England, he contracted a friendship with king Henry VIII.
became entirely of his party, and an enemy to the French interest.

He was a great promoter of the match between Mary queen of Scts, and prince
Edward of England, believing it might turn to the advantage of his country; but
it never took effect, though king Henry had it very much at heart.

He got three charters under the great seal, Hugoni domino Somerville, Chart.
in pub. archiv.
of many lands and baronies, in the years 1535, 1540, and 1545.

He made a donation to St. Mary Magdalene's hospital in Edinburgh, of one
hundred and forty pounds per annum, out of his barony of Carnwath, anno 1540;
Writs of the family.
and another of twenty pounds per annum out of the same barony, anno 1541.

He married, 1st, lady Anne Hamilton, daughter of James earl of Arran, by whom
he had no issue that came to maturity.

He married, 2dly, Janet, daughter of William Maitland of Leithington, which
appears by a charter under the great seal, Hugoni domino Somerville et Janetae
Maitland, Chart. in pub. archiv.
ejus sponsae, etc. dated 10th January 1526.

By her he had three sons, and three daughters.

1. James, lord Somerville.

2. John, who died without issue.

3. Hugh, ancestor of the Somervilles of Spittle.

1st daughter, Margaret, married to sir Charles Murray of Cockpool, Ibidem.
ancestor of the earl of Annandale.

2. Marjory, married to James Tweedie of Drumelzier.

3. Elizabeth, married to sir John Carmichael of that ilk.

He died anno 1549, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. JAMES, sixth lord Somerville, who got a charter under the great seal,
Jacobo domino Somerville, et Agnetae Hamilton suae sponsae, Ibidem.
terrarum de Blackpule, Blackcastle, etc. dated 25th July 1550.

He was a great loyalist, always adhered firmly to the interest of queen Mary,
and strenuously opposed the reformation.

At the convention 1560, he, with the earl of Athole and lord Borthwick,
entered a protest against any alterations being made in the established
religion of the country, etc. The only reasons given were, that their
ancestors, they thought, were as wife as they.

In 1568, he joined the queen's party at Hamilton, with about 300 horse of his
own friends and vassals, and fought upon their head at the battle of Langside,
where the queen's army was defeated and dispersed. Lord Somerville was fore
wounded, and narrowly escapea being made prisoner.

By the said Agnes, Ibidem, Nisbet's append. et charta penes dom. Somerville.
daughter of sir James Hamilton of Finart, lord of Evandale, he had two sons
and two daughters.

1. Hugh, lord Somerville.

2. --, who got from his father some lands in the barony of Carnwath. He
married and had issue, and his posterity are still subsisting in Clydsdale.

1st daughter, Margaret, died without issue.

2. Agnes, married to her cousin -- Somerville of Plain.

He dying anno 1570, was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVI. HUGH, Chart. in pub. archiv.
seventh lord Somerville, who was served heir to his father in the year 1571.

He recovered the lands of Gilmerton, Drum, and Guttarris, which had been for
some time in the possession of the Somervilles of Cambusnethan, Ibid. et charta
penes dom. Somerville.
upon which he got a charter under the great seal, anno 1578, and built the
house of Drum anno 1585.

He was a man of great parts and abilities, was long one of the lords of the
privy council to king James VI. with whom he was in great favor.

He married Eleanor, daughter of George lord Seton, Mill's genealogical colect.
penes M'Farlane, vol. II. p. 291.
ancestor of the earls of Winton, by whom he had sixteen children; four sons
and four daughters of whom came to maturity.

1. William, master of Somerville, a youth of a fine genius and great hopes,
but died before his father without issue.

2. John, who was accidentally shot by his elder brother, when they were both
young, which appears by a remission under the great seal, In pub. arch.
Willielmo magistro de Somerville, etc. dated 1587, but he died also before his
father, without issue.

3. Gilbert, who became his father's heir.

4. Hugh, ancestor of the present lord Somerville, of whom afterward.

1st daughter, --, married to -- Hamilton of Stonyflat.

2. --, married to Thomas Somerville, Esquire; in vicecom. de Lanark.

3. --.

4. --.

These both died unmarried.

Lord Hugh died anno 1597, and was succeeded by his third son,

XVII. GILBERT, eighth lord Somerville, a very weak man, Memoris of the family,
Mill's collect. etc.
who lived in such splendour and magnificence, or rather in so extravagant a
manner, that he consumed and sold his whole estates, Chart. in pub. archiv.
most whereof were purchased by the earls of Mar and Buchan.

He married Margaret, daughter of John Somerville of Cambusnethan, by whom he
had a son,

James, who died an infant, -- and three daughters.

1. Mary, married, 1st, to James lord Torphichen, without issue; and, 2dly, to
William Douglas of Pumhperston, to whom she had a son, sir Joseph Douglas of
Pumpherston, who, with many others, Mill's collect. penes M'Farlane.
was drowned in the retinue of the duke of York, returning to Scotland, without
issue.

2. Margaret, married to -- Colquhoun of Balvie, brother-german to the lord of
Luss, without issue.

3. --, married to -- Stewart of Minto, Ibidem.
and died also without issue.

Gilbert eighth lord Somerville dying without sons, anno 1618, the honors of
Somerville devolved upon his immediate younger brother, and undoubted
heir-male, to whom we no return.

XVII. HUGH, fourth son of Hugh, seventh lord Somerville, brother-german of
Gilbert the eigth lord, was one of the pages of honor to king James VI. Upon
the death of the said Gilbert, without male-issue, he was undoubtedly ninth
lord Somerville, in right of blood, though he declined taking up the titles, or
exerting the privileges of his peerage, because he got no part of his brother's
estate, and also on account of the confusion of the times by the civil wars; so
that the honors of this noble family lay dormant from the death of the said
Gilbert, till they were reassumed by the present lord, as will be shown
hereafter.

This Hugh got from his father the lands and baronies of Drum, etc. upon which
he got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Hugoni Somerville, filio legitimo quondam Hugonis domini Somerville, terrarum
de Drum, Gilmerton, Guttars, etc. dated 3d February 1626.

Also a charter of confirmation, Hugoni So merville de Drum, Ibidem.
et Margaretae Hamilton ejus sponsae in vitali redditu, et Jacobo Somerville,
eorum filio et haeredi, etc. decimarum garbalium de Gilmerton et Drum, etc.
proceeding upon a charter dated anno 1631; the confirmation being dated 15th
February 1634.

By the said Margaret, daughter of Gavin Hamilton of Raploch, Mill's
genealogic. collect. etc.
Esquire; he had issue two sons and two daughters.

1. James, his heir.

2. Gavin Somerville, Esquire;.

1st daughter Jean, married to James Tennant of Cairns, Esquire;.

2. Margaret, died without issue.

He died at Drum in the 70th year of his age, anno 1640, was buried in the
church of Liberton, and succeeded by his eldest son,

XVIII. JAMES, tenth lord, who got a charter under the great seal, Jacobo
Somerville, Chart. in pub. archivis.
filio legitimo natu maximo quondam Hugonis Somerville de Drum, et Liliae
Bannantyne suae sponsae, terrarum de Gilmerton, etc. dated 2d December 1644.

Also a charter from king Charles II. Jacobo Somerville de Drum, Ibidem.
terrarum baroniae de Drum, etc. dated 28th January 1670.

He served several years in the army of France, with great reputation, as also
in the Venetian service; and, upon his return home, was raised to the degree of
a lieutenant colonel.

By the said Lilias, daughter of sir James Bannantyne of Newhall, one of the
senators of the college of justice, he had a son,

James, his heir.

He died 3d January 1677, of a great age, was buried at Holyroodhouse, and
succeeded by his son,

XIX. JAMES, eleventh lord Somerville, who married Martha, Mill's collect and
memoin of the family
daughter of -- Bannantyne of Corhouse, by whom he had three sons.

1. James, his apparent heir.

2. John, lieutenant colonel to general Ramsay's regiment.

3. George, general adjutant to the foot guards.

He died anno 1690.

XX. JAMES, first son and apparent heir of the eleventh lord, by Martha
Bannantyne his spouse, in the year 1671, married Elizabeth, daughter of George
Graham, of the family of Montrose, an eminent merchant in Edinburgh, by whom he
had a considerable fortune.

By her he had a son,

James, born anno 1674, at whose baptism there were present his father,
grandfather, and great grandfather, Ibidem.
four generations in a direct line of the same name, and all their father's and
mother's first born.

He was unfortunately killed by Thomas, son of Mr. Thomas Learmont, advocate,
his father being then alive, and was succeeded by his son,

XXI. JAMES SOMERVILLE of Drum, who succeeding also to his grandfather, anno
1690, was the twelfth lord Somerville.

He married a daughter of -- Murray of Deuchar, descended of the ancient family
of Philiphaugh, by whom he had four sons and two daughters.

1. James, the present lord.

2. George, of Dinder, in Somersetshire, who had several sons; the eldest a
prebend in the cathedral of Bath and Wells; the second a captain of foot; the
third a lieutenant of a man of war, who was killed at the affair of St. Cas. He
has also two daughters.

3. John.

4. William.

These two last both died without issue.

1st daughter, Eupheme.

2. Elizabeth, died without issue.

He died 4th December 1709, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XXII. JAMES, thirteenth lord Somerville, who claimed his peerage, and in the
year 1722, by application to his majesty, had his cause laid before the house
of lords, where his title was sustained and approved; and he has not only
continued to vote at every election since, but was himself chosen one of the
sixteen peers for Scotland to the ninth British parliament, called to meet in
June 1741.

He is now one of the lords of police, one of the commissioners of the board of
trade and manufactures for Scotland, and one of the commissioners upon the
annexed forfeited estates, etc.

He married; 1st, in 1724, Anne, only daughter of Henry Baynton of Spey Park,
in the county of Wilts, Esquire; whose mother was eldest daughter and coheiress of
John Wilmot, the celebrated earl of Rochester. By her he had two sons and one
daughter.

1. James, master of Somerville, who has served several campaigns with credit
and esteem in his majesty's army.

2. Hugh, who has no less distinguished himself in the same profession, London
gazette.
particularly in Portugal.

His daughter, Anne Whichnour Somerville, is married to George Burgess, Esquire;
one of the commissioners of his majesty's excise for Scotland, and has issue
one son and a daughter.

He married, 2dly, in 1736, Frances, daughter and coheiress of John Rotherham,
Esquire; of Much-waltham in Essex, by whom he had one daughter, who died at
Holyroodhouse when six years old.

ARMS.
Azure, three stars or, accompanied with seven cross crosslets fitchee argent,
three in chief, one in fess, two in the flanks, and the last in the base.

CREST; on a wreath, a wheel or, surmounted of a weyvern vert, spouting fire.

SUPPORTERS; two greyhounds proper; each gorged with a plain collar gules.

MOTTO; Fear God in life.

CHIEF SEATS,
At Somerville-house near Edinburgh, and Somerville-Aston in Gloucestershire.

CARNEGIE Earl of SOUTHESK.
THAT the surname of Carnegie is of great antiquity in Scotland, is
acknowledged by all our historians, but the traditional accounts of their
origin are various.

Some deduce them from a noble Hungarian that came to Scotland with queen
Margaret, in the reign of king Malcolm Canmore.

Others trace their origin even higher.

But the most probable conjecture seems to be, that it is a local surname, and
was first assumed by the possessors of the lands and barony of Carnegie, in the
county of Forsar.

Mr. Martin of Clermont, a learned and judicious antiquary, Genealogical
collect. penes magist. Arth. Martin de Kincaple, vol. I. p. 330.
in his genealogical collections, says, that in the reign of king William the
Lion, there was one of the name of Carnegie, who was the king's constable at
Fe^tercairn, but we have no account of his issue^

The first of them we find upon record, (...) John, designed de Ballinhard,
etc. and as (...) was progenitor of this noble family, from hi^ we deduce their
genealogy by unquestionabl^ documents.

I. JOHN, ancestor of the Carnegies of Southesk, lived in the reign of king
Alexander III. and is particu^arly mentioned in (...) charter of confirmation
(hereafter narrated) of the lands of Ballinhard, in the county of Forfar, from
the baron of Panmure, superior thereof.

He died about 1290, and was succeeded by his son,

II. CHRISTINUS, designed also of Ballinhard in the said charter, who was
father of,

III. JOHN, also mentioned in the same charter, who left issue a son and
successor,

IV. JOHN CARNEGIE, who having got possession of the lands and barony of
Carnegie, was designed of that ilk.

He obtained from king David Bruce a char^er of confirmation of the lands of
Ballinhard, ^olding of the baron of Panmure, in which ^re these words:
H^ddington's collections, p. 114 and 574.
Tenend. et habend. eidem Johanni de Carnegie filio et haeredi quondam Joannes
filii Christini, filii Joannis de Ballinhard, etc.

This third John died about 1390, and left issue two sons.

1. John Carnegie of that ilk, whose male ^ine is sometime ago extinct.

2. Duthacus de Carnegie, who carried on ^he line of this family.

V. DUTHACUS de CARNEGIE, made a considerable figure in the reign of king
Robert III. and the beginning of king James I.

He acquired the lands of Kinnaird in Angus from Mariota Kinnaird, Chart. in
archivis Roberti ducis Alban.
upon which he obtained a charter under the great seal, in 1409.

The castle and barony of Kinnaird afterward became their chief residence, and
the title of the family.

He was killed at the battle of Harlaw, anno 1411, leaving issue, an infant son,

VI. WALTER CARNEGIE, who succeeded him, and was promiscuously designed of
Kinnaird, and of that ilk.

He was a man of great spirit, courage and resolution, but had the misfortune
to be engaged in the Douglases rebellion, and was with the earl of Crawfurd at
the battle of Brechin, where the earl of Huntly obtained a remarkable victory
over the rebels, Martin's collections, vol. I. p. 331.
anno 1452; after which his house of Kinnaird was burnt by order of the earl of
Huntly, and all their ancient writs consumed, which is the reason of their
being so few documents extant of the ancestors of this noble family.

Here we have taken the liberty to differ from Mr. Crawford, who says, that
this Walter joined the earl of Huntly, etc. and have followed Mr. Martin, who
was a friend and relation of the family, and had access to all their writs.

In a perambulation of the moor of Balnamoon, betwixt the abbot of Arbroath and
John Stewart of Lorn, lord of the barony of Innerkeillor, this Walter, and his
son John, are particularly mentioned, Chartulary of Arbroath, penes commit. de
Panmure.
and he is designed Walter Carnegie of that ilk. The agreement is dated 27th
July 1456.

He died anno 1478, and was succeeded by his son,

VII. JOHN CARNEGIE of Kinnaird, who obtained from his cousin, David earl of
Crawfurd, Chart. in the archiv. of the fam. of Southesk.
a grant of a liferent out of his barony of Glenesk, anno 1479, and dying in
1508, was succeeded by his son,

VIII. JOHN CARNEGIE of Kinnaird, a man of great worth, honor, and integrity,
and was in high favor with his majesty king James IV. Crawfurd's peerage,
Martin's genesis collect. and Scotch compend.
whom he accompanied to the fatal field of Flowdon, where he lost his life in
the service of his country, anno 1513, having married -- Vauss, by whom he had
a son,

Sir Robert, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Janet, married to William, son of sir Thomas Maule of Panmure.

IX. Sir ROBERT succeeded his father, and got three charters under the great
seal, domino Roberto Carnegie de Kinnaird, Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the lands and barony of Kinnaird, and several others, inter 1536 et 1539.

Also charters, Ibidem.
terrarum de Glenstock, Set de Couthlie, sylvae, forestae, etc. inter 1540 et
1542.

Likeways charters from queen Mary, of the lands of Murdocairny, Ibidem, inter
1543 et 1548.
etc. etc.

He being a man of great parts, and knowledge in the management of state
affairs, was concerned in most of the public transactions, both in the regency
of the duke of Chattelherault, and afterward.

In 1547, he was made one of the senators of the college of justice.

In 1548, he was sent ambassador to England, to treat about the redemption of
the earl of Huntly, Rymer's foed Angliae.
lord chancellor, who had been taken prisoner at the battle of Pinkie, and upon
his return, had the honor of knighthood conferred on him.

In 1551, he was sent ambassador to France, and was afterward the chief person
that prevailed on the duke of Chattelherault to resign the regency in favors
of the queen mother, Crawfurd's peerage, and Scotch comp.
which gave great satisfaction to the whole nation.

In 1555, he, with sir John Ballenden of Auchinoul, were sent plenipotentiaries
to England, where they concluded a treaty of commerce to the satisfaction of
both nations.

And in 1557, Rymer's foed, Angliae.
he was one of the commissioners sent to England to treat of a peace, which
they happily concluded.

He married Margaret, daughter of -- Guthrie of Lunen, by whom he had six sons
and seven daughters.

1. Sir John Carnegie of Kinnaird.

2. David Carnegie of Coluthie, who carried on the line of this family.

3. William Carnegie of Leuchland and Futhie.

4. Mr. Robert Carnegie, preceptor of the maison dieu of Brechin.

5. James Carnegie, ancestor of the Carnegies of Balmackie.

6. Alexander Carnegie of Cookston.

1st daughter, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Margaret, married to sir James Scrimzour of Dudhope, constable of Dundee.

2. Helen, married, 1st, to William Lundie of Benholm; Ibidem.
2dly, to Robert Turren of Foveran.

3. Elizabeth, married to Andrew Arbuthnot of that ilk.

4. Catharine, married to David Ramsay of Balmain.

5. Isabel, married to -- Gordon of Glenbucket.

6. Jean, married to -- of Colicston.

7. Mary, married to -- Strachan of Carmylie.

Sir Robert dying in 1565, was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. Sir JOHN CARNEGIE of Kinnaird, a man of singular worth, honor and
integrity. He was a faithful and loyal subject, and a steady friend to queen
Mary: he never deserted her interest in her greatest distress, of which her
majesty was so perfectly sensible, that she wrote to him, consulted him, and
took his advice in matters of the highest consequence.

He married, 1st, Agnes, daughter of David Wood of Craig, comptroller of
Scotland, in the reign of king James V. by whom he had one daughter,

--, married to Patrick Kinnaird of that ilk.

He married, 2dly, dame Margaret Keith, by whom he had no children.

He had a natural son, John, who acquired the lands of Carnegy, and was
afterward designed of that ilk, which appears by a charter under the great
seal, to him and Catharine Fotheringhame his wife, Ibidem.
anno 1581.

Sir John dying in 1585, without lawful male issue, was succeeded by his
brother,

X. Sir DAVID CARNEGIE of Coluthie. afterward of Kinnaird, second son of sir
Robert, Crawfurd's peerage, Martin's genealogies, Scotch comp.
a man of good parts, great probity and honor, and was in high favor with hi,
majesty king James VI. who constituted him one of his privy council.

In 1595, he appointed him one of the senators of the college of justice, also
one of the commissioners of the treasury; both which offices he enjoyed with
honor and reputation till his death, which happened in 1599, according to
Spotiswood, Ibid. and bp. Spotiswood's church hist.
who gives him a great character for integrity, capacity, and skill in the
management of state affairs.

He married, 1st, Elizabeth, daughter and heiress of William Ramsay of
Coluthie, by whom he got the lands of Leuchars, Martin's genealogies.
Broadlands, Coluthie, etc. in the county of Fife.

By her he had issue three daughters.

1. Catharine, married to sir John Ayton of Kinnaldie, but died without issue.

2. Margaret, Chart. in pub. arch. ad ann. 1582.
married to William Dundas of Fingask, who died without issue.

3. Elizabeth, married to John Inglis of Tarvat, Writs of the fam. of South^k,
Martin's genealog. etc.
who had several children, of whose daughter Catharine, the learned antiquary
Mr. George Martin of Clermont, so often quoted in his work, is descended.

He married, Martin's geneal. Crawfurd's peerage, Scotch compend. etc.
2dly, Eupheme, daughter of sir David Wemyss of that ilk, by whom he had four
sons and three daughters.

1. David, afterward earl of Southesk.

2. Sir John Garnegie, first of the family of Northesk. Vide title Carnegie
earl of Northesk, page 520th.

3. Sir Robert Carnegie of Dunichen. Chart. in pub. archiv.


4. Alexander, Ibidem.
ancestor of the Carnegies of Balnamoon.

1st daughter, Agnes, married to sir Alexander Falconer of Halkerton.

2. Jean, Contract penes Thomam Dundas de Fingask.
married, 1st, to James Carmichael of Balmedie; 2dly, to Archibald Dundas of
Fingask, Esquire;.

3. Eupheme, married to Robert Graham of Morphy.

They all had issue.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. DAVID, who having got a liberal education, applied himself chiefly to the
study of the laws, wherein he acquired great knowledge; of which king James VI.
being very sensible, first made him one of the (...) of the college of justice,
then raised him to the dignity of the peerage, by the title or lord Carnegie of
Kinnaird, by patent dated 24th April 1616.

As he had been a faithful servant to king James VI. he soon came into great
favor with king Charles I. who was pleased to create him earl of Southesk,
Chart. in the archiv. of the family, and in the public register.
on the 22d June 1633. In the preamble to the patent, his own great merit, the
loyalty and faithful services of his father and grandfather to queen Mary, and
king James VI. are fully narrated. The patent is to his heirs-male.

He was appointed high sheriff of the county of Forfar, was always a loyal and
faithful subject to king Charles I. and never deserted his interest during all
the time of the civil war, for which he was imprisoned by the covenanters,
suffered many other hardships, Cromwell's act of indem.
and had a fine of no less than three thousand pounds sterling imposed upon him
by Onver Cromwell in 1654.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir David Lindsay of Edzel, by whom he had
four sons and six daughters.

1. David lord Carnegie, who married lady Margaret Hamilton, daughter of Thomas
earl of Haddington, by whom he had two daughters. 1. Margaret, married to Gavin
earl of Carnwath. 2. Magdalene, married, 1st, to Gideon Baillie of Lochend;
and, 2dly, to sir John Crawfurd of Kilbirnie. He died long before his father,
without issue-male, anno 1633.

2. James, afterward earl of Southesk.

3. Sir John Carnegie of Craig, whose only son succeeded him, and died without
issue.

4. Sir Alexander Carnegie of Pitarrow, whose great grandson now represents the
family, and of whom more hereafter.

1st daughter, lady Margaret, married to William earl of Dalhousie, and had
issue.

2. Lady Agnes, married to James lord Abercrombie.

3. Lady Catharine, married to John earl of Traquair, lord high treasurer of
Scotland, and had issue.

4. Lady Margaret, married, 1st, to William Haliburton of Pitcur; and, 2dly, to
Robert viscount of Arbuthnot, and had issue.

5. Lady Elizabeth, married to Andrew lord Balvaird, ancestor of viscount
Stormont.

6. Lady Magdalene, married to James, the great marquis of Montrose.

The earl lived to a great age, and dying in 1658, was succeeded by his son,

XII. JAMES, second earl of Southesk, a man of untainted loyalty, and great
integrity, adhering always to the interest of the royal family, during the
whole course of the civil war.

King Charles II. immediately upon his restoration, appointed him one of the
lords of his privy council, Chart. in pub. archiv.
and renewed his father's grant of the sheriffship of Forfar to him and his
son, for their joint lives.

He died in 1669, having married lady Isabel Ker, daughter of Robert first earl
of Roxburgh, by whom he had a son, Crawfurd's peerage, Martin's geneal, and
Scotch compend.


Robert, earl of Southesk, -- and two daughters.

1. Lady Elizabeth, married, 1st, to James Murray earl of Annandale; and, 2dly,
to David viscount Stormont.

2. Lady Catharine, married to Gilbert, eleventh earl of Errol.

XIII. ROBERT, third earl of Southesk, succeeded his father. He was a man of
fine natural parts, which were highly improved by a liberal education and
traveling, he having visited and staid for some time at most of the polite
courts in Europe.

He was remarkably distinguished by Lewis XIV. of France, His commis. is still
amongst the writs of the family.
who made him one of the captains of his foot guards, etc.

After his return home, king Charles II. appointed him colonel of the Angus
militia, and renewed his commission of high sheriff of that county, to him and
his son, anno 1682.

He married lady Anne, daughter of William second duke of Hamilton, Ibidem.
by whom he had two sons.

1. Charles, lord Carnegie.

2. William Carnegie, Esquire; a youth of great hopes, who was unfortunately killed
in his travels at Paris, by William Talmash, son of Anne duchess of
Lauderdale, anno 1681.

The earl dying in 1688, was succeeded by his son,

XIV. CHARLES, fourth earl of Southesk, who never went to court after the
revolution; but being possessed of an opulent fortune, lived at home in great
splendour and magnificence, and died in 1699, having married lady Mary Maitland,
daughter of Charles earl of Lauderdale, by whom he had a son,

XV. JAMES, fifth earl of Southesk, who succeeded him, and married lady
Margaret Stewart, daughter of James earl of Galloway, by whom he had a son and
a daughter, who both died young; and the earl engaging in the rebellion 1715,
was attainted of high treason, and his estate and honors were forfeited to the
crown, but he made his escape to France, where he died in 1729, without any
surviving issue, which ended the male line of James second earl of Southesk,
son and heir of the first earl, whereby the estate and honors, had it not been
for the forfeiture, would have devolved upon sir James Carnegie of Pitarrow,
baronet, the next heir male, being lineally descended of sir Alexander Carnegie
of Pitarrow, before mentioned, to whom we now return.

XII. Sir ALEXANDER CARNEGIE of Pitarrow, fourth son of David first earl of
Southesk, and brother of James the second earl, married Margaret, daughter of
sir Robert Arbuthnot of that ilk, by whom he had issue two sons and one
daughter.

1. Sir David Carnegie of Pitarrow.

2. Mr. Mungo Carnegie of Birkhill, advocate.

His daughter, --, was married to captain Walter Keith of Montrose.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. Sir DAVID CARNEGIE of Pitarrow, who married, 1st, Catharine, daughter of
sir Archibald Primrose, lord register, by whom he had two sons and two
daughters.

1st son, --, died without issue.

2. Sir John Carnegie of Pitarrow.

1st daughter, Margaret, married to Henry Fletcher of Salton, Esquire; father of
the present Andrew Fletcher, Esquire; one of the senators of the college of justice.

2. Catharine.

He married, 2dly, Catharine Gordon, lady dowager of Arbuthnot, but by her had
no issue.

He married, 3dly, Jean, daughter of -- Burnet of Lagaion, by whom he had two
sons and two daughters.

1. David.

2. James.

They both died without issue.

1st daughter, Elizabeth, married to -- Strachan of Tarry.

2. Jean, died unmarried.

XIV. Sir JOHN CARNEGIE succeeded him, and married Mary, daughter of sir Thomas
Burnet of Leyes, by whom he had five sons and five daughters.

1. Sir James of Pitarrow.

2. John,

3. Alexander.

4. Harry.

These three died without issue.

5. George, a merchant of Gottenburgh.

1st daughter, Margaret, died unmarried.

2. Mary, married to colonel -- Scot.

3. Helen, married to Alexander Aberdeen of Cairnbulg, Esquire;.

4. Jean, married to Robert Tailor of Kirktonhill, Esquire;.

5. Elizabeth.

Sir John was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. Sir JAMES CARNEGIE of Pitarrow, lineal heir male and representative of the
family of Southesk, as before noticed.

He is now member of parliament for the shire of Kincardine.

He married Christian, eldest daughter of David Doig of Cookston, by Magdalene
Symers, only daughter and heiress of Balyordie, by whom he has four sons and
two daughters,

1. David.

2. James.

3. John.

4. George.

1st daughter Mary.

2. Elizabeth.

ARMS.
Or, an eagle displayed azure, beaked and membered gules.

CREST; on a wreath, a right hand, couped at the wrist, and erect, holding a
thunderbolt, inflamed at both ends, all proper, shafted saltire, and winged in
fess, or.

SUPPORTERS; two greyhounds argent, each gorged with a plain collar gules.

MOTTO; Deum timete.

CHIEF SEATS,
Were Kinnaird, a noble seat in the county of Angus, and the castle of Leuchars
in Fifeshire, etc.

LINDSAY Lord SPYNIE.
DAVID, eighth earl of Crawfurd, the sixteenth generation of that illustrious
family, in the male-line, having married Margaret, daughter of Cardinal David
Bethune, by her he had issue four sons and one daughter.

1. David, his heir.

2. Sir Henry, afterward earl of Crawfurd.

3. Sir Alexander, the first of this family.

For the other children, vide page 159.

I. Sir ALEXANDER LINDSAY, third son of David eighth earl of Crawfurd, being a
man of parts and learning, became a great favorite of king James VI. Chart. in
pub. archiv.
who first appointed him one of the gentlemen of his bedchamber, and then
raised him to the dignity of the peerage, by the title of lord Spynie, by
patent, to the heirs-male of his body, dated 6th May 1690.

He afterward got a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
Alexandro domino Spynie, of the lands and barony of Spynie, Church-land, etc.
anno 1693.

He got three other charters under the great seal, Ibidem.
of the lands of Ballysack, and mill thereof, the lands of Bu^^side, and
several others, in Forfarshire, between the years 1604 and 1607.

He married Jean Lion, daughter of John lord Glammis, countess dowager of
Archibald earl of Angus, and Robert, son and heir of Robert earl of Morton, by
whom he had a son,

Alexander, his heir, -- and two daughters.

1. Anne, married to sir Robert Graham of Innermay.

2. Margaret, married to John Erskine of Dun.

He was unfortunately killed by the young lord of Edzell, Crawfurd's peerage.
anno 1607, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. ALEXANDER, second lord, who got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
Alexandro domino Spynie, et Joannae Douglas suae sponsae, of several lands in
Forfarshire, anno 1607.

He being bred to a military life, served the king of Sweden in his wars in
Germany, where he had considerable commands, and acquired the reputation of a
brave and gallant officer.

A little before the breaking out of the civil war, he returned to his own
country, and got a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
of the lands and barony of Finhaven, the barony and sorest of Plattane, mill
thereof, etc. anno 1631; and being a great loyalist, he immediately joined the
king's party, and was, by his majesty king Charles I. made
muster-master-general of Scotland, but died anno 1647, leaving issue, by the
said Jean Douglas, two sons and two daughters.

1. Alexander, his heir.

2. George, who succeeded his brother.

1st daughter, Jean, was second wife to John Lindsay of Edzel.

2. Anne, died unmarried.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. ALEXANDER, third lord Spynie, who was also a great loyalist, and suffered
many hardships on account of his attachment to the royal family.

He was colonel of the Clackmannan and Stirlingshire horse, Rescinded acts of
pari
at duke Hamilton's engagement, anno 1648.

He was afterward excepted from pardon by Oliver Cromwell, Cromwell's printed
act indemnity.
anno 1654.

He married, 1st, lady Margaret Hay, daughter of George earl of Kinnoul; 2dly,
lady Jean Carnegie, daughter of John earl of Northesk, but dying without issue,
anno 1670, his estate and honors devolved upon his brother,

III. GEORGE, fourth lord Spynie, who dying also without issue, the honors
became extinct.

STEWART Lord ST. COLME.
JAMES lord Down, ancestor of the earl of Murray, married lady Margaret
Campbell, daughter of Archibald fourth earl of Argyle, and by her had issue two
sons and two daughters.

1. James, his heir, afterward earl of Murray.

2. Henry, afterward lord St. Colme.

For his daughters, vide title Stewart earl of Murray, page 500th.

I. HENRY, second son of James lord Down, got from his father the commendatory
of St. Colme, and by the favor of king James VI. had that benefice erected
into a temporal lordship, to him and his heirs-male; upon which he got a
charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub ^ archiv.
Henrico domino St. Colme, in baronia de Both, Croftguire, Brego, Dunibirsell,
etc. anno 1511.

He married lady Jean Stewart, daughter of John fifth earl of Athole, and died
anno 1612, leaving issue a son,

II. JAMES, lord St. Colme, who succeeded him, and being of a military genius,
went into the service of the great Gustavus Adolphus king of Sweden, where, by
his merit, he soon rose to the rank of a colonel; but dying without issue, the
estate and dignity fell to his cousin the earl of Murray.

DALRYMPLE Earl of STAIR.
THE surname of Dalrymple is local, and of great antiquity in the west of
Scotland. It was assumed by the possessors of the lands and barony of
Dalrymple, in the county of Air, as soon as sirnames became hereditary in this
country.

I. ADAM de DALRYMPLE flourished in the reign of king Alexander III. who
succeeded to the crown of Scotland, anno 1249.

He was proprietor of the barony of Dalrymple, and others, which is instructed
by a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
hereafter narrated.

He died about the year 1300, leaving issue a son,

II. GILCHRIST de DALRYMPLE, who succeeded him in all his lands, Ibidem.
and lived in the reign of king Robert Bruce. What part he acted in the
disputes betwixt him and Baliol, we can give no account; but he died in the
beginning of the reign of king David II. and was succeeded by his son,

III. MALCOLM DALRYMPLE, designed dominus de eodem.

He was also proprietor of the whole lands Ibidem.
and barony of Dalrymple, and had issue two sons. Chart. in pub. archiv.


1. John.

2. Roland.

He divided his lands betwixt these two.

IV. JOHN, eldest son of Malcolm de Dalrymple, was also designed dominus de
eodem; but sir John Kennedy of Dunnure, ancestor of the earl of Cassilis,
acquired his half of the lands of Dalrymple, which he got confirmed to him, by
a charter under the great seal from king Robert II. in these words:
confirmasse, etc. dilecto et fideli suo Johanni Kennedy, etc. medietatem
baroniae de Dalrymple, cum pertinen. infra vicecomitatum de Air, quae quidem
medietas fuit Malcolmi filii Gilchristi, filii Adae de Dalrymple, etc. etc. The
confirmation is dated the penult day of March 1371, before these witnesses,
William, Walter, and Patrick, bishops of St. Andrews, Glasgow, and Brechin,
John earl of Carrick, steward of Scotland, the king's eldest son, Chart. in
rotul. Rob. II.
the earls of Mar, Douglas, and Menteith, with many others.

This John, Ibid. Crawford and Nisbet, etc.
in the writs of the family, is designed filius Malcolmi de Dalrymple, in the
years 1412, and afterward.

Sir John Kennedy acquired also Roland's half of the barony of Dalrymple, which
he got confirmed to him by a charter from king Robert II. Chart. in pub.
archivis, et charta penes comitem de Cassilis.
in these words: medietat. baroniae de Dalrymple, quae fuit Hugonis filii
Rolandi de Dalrymple, etc. anno 1378.

John de Dalrymple, eldest son of Malcolm, died in the end of the reign of king
James I.

There were about this time several considerable families in Scotland of this
surname, viz. the Dalrymples of Ingliston, of Canragan, of Gosford, of Beltone,
of Laucht, and many others, whose possessions are all instructed by charters
under the great seal in our public register; also Jacobus de Dalrymple was
clericus regis, anno 1402; but the immediate and undoubted ancestor of this
noble family was,

V. WILLIAM de DALRYMPLE, said to be son of John, and grandson of Malcolm de
Dalrymple, dominus de eodem, beforementioned.

He married Agnes Kennedy, heiress of Stair, with whom he got that barony,
which afterward became the chief title of his family; but they being within
the degrees of consanguinity, forbidden by the church, there was a dispensation
obtained from archbishop Kennedy, the pope's legate, for William Dalrymple and
Agnes Kennedy of Stair, Dispensation (...) archiv. familiae de tair.
to marry, etc. anno 1450; and he was the first of this family designed by that
title.

By the said Agnes Kennedy he had issue a son,

VI. WILLIAM DALRYMPLE, second baron of Stair, who succeeded him, Crawfurd's
peerage, and Knox's hist.
and married Marian, daughter of sir John Chalmers of Gadgirth, by whom he had
a son,

William, his apparent heir.

He lived to a great age, and died in the beginning of the reign of queen Mary.

VII. WILLIAM, only son and apparent heir of William second baron of Stair,
Crawfurd's peerage.
died before his father, leaving issue a son,

VIII. WILLIAM, third baron of Stair, who succeeded his grandfather.

The old man, a little before his death, made over his whole estate to this
William, Chart. in pub. archiv.
his grandson and apparent heir, reserving to himself and his spouse a
reasonable liferent, anno 1541.

He married Margaret, daughter of -- Wallace of Cairnhill, by whom he had a son
and heir,

IX. JAMES, fourth baron of Stair, a man of parts and learning.

He was a great promoter of the reformation, and joined the earls of Lennox and
Glencairn, in accomplishing that great work. He was, with them, at the conflict
on Glasgowmuir, for which he afterward got a remission from the duke of
Chattelherault, Remission in archiv. fam. de Stair.
when regent, etc.

He married Isabel, daughter of George Crawfurd of Lifnorris, by whom he had a
son and successor,

X. JAMES, fifth baron of Stair, who was also a great encourager of the
reformed religion, and joined in every measure for establishing it. He was
amongst the first men of rank who signed the new Confession of Faith, Knox's
hist. of the reformation.
and, with many others, entered into a solemn association in defense of the
protestant religion, anno 1562.

In 1565, he joined the duke of Chattelherault, in opposing the queen's
marriage with Henry lord Darnly, Remission in the writs of the privy seal.
because he was a Roman Catholic; and for his being of the party who
endeavored to get him sent to England, he got a remission in 1566.

After the murder of king Henry, he most zealously joined in that famous
association, Origin. bond in the lawiers library Edin.
for protecting the young prince against all mortals, anno 1567.

He married Isabel, daughter of James Kennedy of Bargenie, and died anno 1586,
leaving issue a son,

XI. JAMES, sixth baron of Stair, who succeeded him, and got a charter under
the great seal, to him and Janet Kennedy his spouse, terrarum baroniae de
Stair, comprehen. lie Mains de Stair, cum molendino, granario, etc. Chart. in
pub. archiv.
terrarum de Davidstoun, Mackestoun, Meadowhead, Perlehill, Kill de Dennistoun,
and many others, dated 16th November 1620.

He died anno 1625, and by the said Janet, a daughter of Fergus Kennedy of
Knockdaw, he left issue a son and successor,

XII. JAMES, seventh baron, afterward viscount Stair, born 1619, who studied
at the college of Glasgow was a fine scholar, and passed all the regular
degrees of learning at that university.

When the civil war broke out in the reign of king Charles I. he accepted of a
captain's commission from the parliament in the earl of Glencairn's regiment;
but it does not appear that he did any thing remarkable in that service.

He was a man of great parts and knowledge, applied himself chiefly to the
study of the laws, and became most eminent in that profession.

In the year 1649, when the estates of the nation sent commissioners to Breda,
to invite king Charles II. to come to Scotland, and take possession of his just
right, the baron of Stair was appointed secretary to that embassy, and
acquitted himself so much to his majesty's satisfaction, that he held him in
high esteem ever after.

He arrived in Scotland with the commissioners, before the king; and upon his
majesty's landing in 1650, he immediately waited upon him, was most graciously
received, and contributed all that lay in his power to raise forces for his
majesty's service, which, after the fatal battle or Worcester, were dispersed.

The baron of Stair continued his practice at the bar with great reputation;
but never could be prevailed on to take any oaths to the government during the
usurpation, though he had great offers made him.

As the brevity of this work will not permit us to give a full account of all
the transactions of this great man's life, we shall only briefly mention some
of the most remarkable occurences, and refer our readers to Mr. Crawfurd's
peerage, page 453, etc.

Upon the restoration of king Charles II. he went to London with the earl of
Cassilis, a great loyalist, to congratulate his majesty upon that happy event.
The king, having a great opinion of his abilities, first conferred the honor
of knighthood upon him, then appointed him one of the senators of the college
of justice in the beginning of 1661; and in November thereafter, upon sir John
Gilmour the lord president's being called up to London, he was constituted
vice president during his absence.

In the year 1664, the king, as a further mark of his royal favor, created him
a knight baronet, by patent to him and the heirs-male of his body for ever.

He afterward got a charter under the great seal, domino Johanni Dalrymple de
Stair, militi baronetto, Chart. in pub archiv.
of the lands and barony of Stair, etc. etc. dated the 15th day of February
1669.

In the year 1671, he was appointed lord president of the session, in which
high office he discharged his duty with great sufficiency, knowledge, and
integrity.

As the lord president did not approve of all the measures of the court toward
the end of king Charles II.'s reign, he spoke his mind very freely in
parliament; and having many enemies in the ministry, was removed from all his
offices, anno 1682. He thereupon retired to Holland, where he remained till the
year 1688, when he came over with the prince of Orange, with whom he was in
great favor; and who was no sooner settled on the throne, than he restored him
to his office of lord president of the session, anno 1689, and raised him to
the dignity of the peerage, by the title of viscount Stair, lord Glenluce and
Stranrawer, Chart. in (...) cellaria.
by patent to him and the heirsmale of his body, dated at Kensington, 1st April
1690.

He married Margaret, daughter of James Ross of Balneil, by whom he got a great
accession to his estate in lands; and in consequence thereof the family ever
since continued to quarter the arms of Ross with their own. By her he had issue
five sons, and four daughters.

1. John, afterward earl of Stair.

2. Sir James Dalrymple of Borthwick, baronet, one of the principal clerks of
session, a man of great merit, learning, and knowledge, and one of the best
antiquaries of his time, which the works he has published sufficiently testify.
He married and had issue.

3. Sir Hugh Dalrymple of North-Berwick, Bart. a man of great abilities and
knowledge in our laws, and was long lord president of the session. He also
married and had issue.

4. Doctor Thomas Dalrymple, physician in ordinary to the king for Scotland.

5. Sir David Dalrymple of Hailes, Bart. also an eminent lawier, who was lord
advocate in the reigns of queen Anne, and king George I. He also married and
had issue.

1st daughter, Janet, married to David, son and apparent heir of sir David
Dunbar of Baldoon, Bart. but died without issue.

2. Elizabeth, married to Alan, seventh lord Cathcart.

3. Sarah, married to Charles lord Crichton, son and apparent heir of William
earl of Dumfries.

4. Isabel, married to sir David Cunningham of Millcraig, Bart. The last three
had issue.

The viscount died in the 76th year of his age, anno 1695, and was succeeded by
his eldest son,

XIII. JOHN, second viscount Stair, who was also bred to the law, and acquired
great knowledge in that profession.

He was a man of fine parts, and great abilities, was appointed advocate by
king James VII. anno 1686, and afterward lord justice-clerk by the same prince.

He went early and most zealously into the revolution, and at the convention of
estates in 1689, he expressed a great desire that a treaty of union might be
set on foot between the two nations, which afterward he had a great hand in
accomplishing; and as he had been very instrumental in getting the crown
declared vacant by the convention, he was one of the commissioners appointed to
make an offer thereof to the prince and princess of Orange, in the same year,
1689.

He was, by their majesty's, appointed lord advocate for Scotland, anno 1690;
and the year thereafter was constituted one of the principal secretaries of
state. As the massacre of Glencoe happened while he was in that office, the
parliament begun to make some enquiry into the authors of it, in the year 1695;
and no doubt he was able to justify himself: for as the orders for that bloody
tragedy were generally believed to have proceeded from a higher power, the
affair was immediately dropped; but the secretary was laid aside for the time.

Upon queen Anne's accession to the crown, he was nominated one of her privy
council; and, as a testimony of her majesty's favor and esteem, he was further
dignified with the titles of earl of Stair, viscount Dalrymple, lord Newliston,
Glenluce, and Stranrawer, by patent to the heirs-male of his body; which
failing, to the heirs-male of the body of the deceast James viscount Stair,
Diploma in cancellaria.
his father, dated 8th April 1703.

He was named one of the commissioners for the treaty of union, of which he was
a most sincere and servent promoter; but he died of an apoplexy just before it
was completed, on 8th January 1706-7, in the 59th year of his age.

He married Elizabeth, daughter and heiress of sir John Dundas of Newliston, in
consequence whereof he quartered the arms of Dundas with his own, and by her
had issue three sons, and one daughter.

1. John, his heir.

2. Colonel William Dalrymple of Glenmure, of whom more afterward.

3. George, one of the barons of exchequer, who married a daughter of sir
Andrew Myrton of Gogar; and dying anno 1745, left issue a son, captain John
Dalrymple, who married miss Middleton.

His daughter, lady Margaret Dalrymple; was married to Hugh third earl of
Loudoun.

XIV. JOHN, second earl of Stair, succeeded his father in January 1707, and was
in his stead appointed one of the commissioners to finish the treaty of union
betwixt the two nations.

He had a liberal education, was a man of great integrity, and good parts, both
natural and acquired.

He gave early proofs of his having an extraordinary military genius. In 1702,
he was appointed lieutenant colonel to the third regiment of guards, and served
as a volunteer in Flanders, under the duke of Marlborough, where he remarkably
distinguished himself, particularly at the taking of Venlo and Liege.

Soon thereafter he was made aide-de-camp to that great general; and colonel of
the royal Scotch dragoons.

He commanded a brigade of soot at the battle of Ramellies. In 1706, he was
made a brigadier, and served in that post at the battle of Audenard, and
brought the news of that victory to England, anno 1708.

He was elected one of the sixteen Scotch peers to the first parliament of
Great Britain, and was re-elected to the fifth, sixth, and seventh.

In 1709, he commanded as a major general at the taking of Tanier, and as a
lieutenant general at the taking of Doway, anno 1710, in which year he was, by
a special order from queen Anne, invested with the most noble order of the
thistle.

In the end of the queen's reign, he not coming into the measures of the court,
was laid aside, and sold his regiment to the earl of Portmore; but upon the
accession of king George I. to the throne, he was named one of his privy
council, was appointed one of the lords of his bedchamber, and was restored to
his regiment of dragoons.

And being no less an able statesman than a good soldier, he was sent
ambassador extraordinary to the court of France, upon a negotiation of the
highest importance. He made his public entry in January 1718, and performed the
business of his embassy with great dexterity and honor. In the year 1733, he
resigned all his offices, and retired from public business for some years.

Iu 1741, he was made a field marishal of the forces, and sent ambassador to
the states general. He had the government of Minorca, and was commander in
chief of the allied army, anno 1743, till his majesty took the command at the
battle of Dettingen.

In 1745, he had a third time the command of the royal Scotch dragoons.

He married lady Eleanor Campbell, daughter of James second earl of Loudoun,
dowager of James viscount Primrose; but died without issue, anno 1747.

Sometime before his death, he assigned his estate and honors (which he
thought he had a right to do by the patent) to John, son of his youngest
brother George the baron, in prejudice of the sons of colonel William, the
eldest brother; but the same being contested in the house of lords, the honors
were adjudged to James, son of the said colonel William, to whom we now return.

XIV. Colonel WILLIAM DALRYMPLE of Glenmure, second son of John first earl of
Stair, and immediate younger brother of John the second earl, married Penelope
countess of Dumfries, by whom he had a numerous issue.

1. William, now earl of Dumfries and Stair.

2. John, who died unmarried.

3. James, to whom the honors of Stair were adjudged by the house of lords, as
before observed.

For the other children, vide page 201st of this work.

XV. JAMES, third son of colonel William Dalrymple, succeeding to the honors
of Stair, as above, was the third earl; but he dying without issue, anno 1761,
these honors went to his elder brother,

XV. WILLIAM, who is now sourth earl both of Dumfries and Stair, etc. Vide
title Crichton earl of Dumfries, page 198th of this work.

ARMS.
Quarterly; 1st and fourth or, on a saltire azure, nine lozenges of the 1st for
Dalrymple; 2d argent, a lion rampant gules for Dundas; 3d or, a cheveron cheque
argent and sable, between three water budgets of the last, for Ross.

CREST; on a wreath, a rock proper.

SUPPORTERS; two lions of the last,

MOTTO; Firm.

CHIEF SEATS,
Were at Castle-Kennedy, in the county of Wigton; at Stair, in the county of
Air; and at Newliston, in West-Lothian, six miles from Edinburgh.

ALEXANDER Earl of STIRLING.
IT is the general opinion of our antiquaries, that those of the surname of
Alexander, MacAlaster, Robertson, etc. are descended of the MacDonalds.

That Alexander MacDonald, a younger son of the lord of the Isles, having
acquired some lands in Stirling and Clackmannanshires, fixed his residence at
Menstric, and that his posterity assumed the surname of Alexander from their
predecessor's christian name.

Certain it is the Alexanders were making a figure in these countries several
centuries ago, Mr. Nisbet's system of heraldry, vol. 1. p. 25.
and have continued to quarter the arms of MacDonald with their own, to denote
their being sprung from that illustrious house.

And though we cannot six the precise time of their settlement in that country,
yet we shall deduce the descent of this noble family by authentic documents,
from

I. THOMAS ALEXANDER, who was proprietor of the lands of Menstrie, in the shire
of Clackmannan, and flourished in the reign of king James IV. who succeeded to
the crown of Scotland, anno 1488.

In a dispute betwixt the abbot of Cambusnethan, and sir David Bruce of
Clackmannan, about the marches of some of their lands, which was submitted to a
perambulation and assize of the principal gentlemen in the neighborhood, this
Thomas Alexander of Menstrie, together with Andrew Mercer of that ilk, William
Stirling of Tillicoultry, and some others, were appointed arbiters: Chartulary
o^ Cambusnethan penes MacFarlane.
they made up the differences, and settled the marches by their
decreet-arbitral, 6th March 1505.

Thomas was father of

II. ANDREW ALEXANDER, who succeeded him in the lands of Menstrie, of which the
earl of Argyle was then superior.

He married Catharine Graham, Charta penes ducem de Argyle.
daughter of -- by whom he had two sons.

1. Alexander, his heir.

2. Andrew Alexander, who was bred to the church, and in a sasine of Colin earl
of Argyle, dated 15th November 1529, Ibidem.
is designed Andreas Alexander, presbyter, etc.

He died before 1527, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. ALEXANDER ALEXANDER, third baron of Menstrie, who made a considerable
figure in the reign of king James V.

Amongst the writs of the family of Argyle, there is an instrument of sasine,
wherein Alexander Alexander, son of the deceast Andrew Alexander of Menstrie,
transfers all right he had to the lands of Menstrie, Ibidem.
in favors of Colin earl of Argyle, his superior, dated 12th of February 1527.

In a sasine of Colin earl of Argyle, this Alexander was appointed the earl's
bailie, and is designed honorabilis vir Alexander Alscinder de Menstrie, Ibidem.
etc. anno 1529.

There is a charter by Colin earl of Argyle, to Alexander Alscinder of
Menstrie, of the lands of Duslater, in the shire of Stirling, of which Andrew
Alexander his father and Catharine Graham his mother, Ibidem.
were proprietors, dated 15th January 1529.

Also a charter by the same earl, of the lands of mains of Menstrie, and mill
thereof, to and in favors of Alexander Alscinder, and Elizabeth Douglas his
spouse, in liferent, and Andrew Alscinder their son and heir apparent in fee,
Ibidem.
dated 26th August 1529, both which charters are confirmed by king James V. by
a charter under the great seal, Chart in pub. archiv.
dated 20th April 1530.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of sir Robert Douglas of Lochleven, ancestor of
the earl of Morton, by whom he had two sons, and one daughter.

1. Andrew, his heir.

2. William Alexander, who was proprietor of the lands of Clow in Perth-shire,
and married Janet Marishal, Ibid. Willielmo Alexander et Janetae Marishal ejus
sponsae, etc.
which appears by two charters under the great seal, to him and Janet Marishal
his spouse, of the lands of Clow, with the pertinents, etc. dated anno 1553.

His daughter, Isabel, married to James Mushet younger of Torrie, Ibidem.
in the county of Stirling.

He died anno 1545, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. ANDREW ALEXANDER, fourth baron of Menstrie, who, in the said charter of
Colin earl of Argyle, 26th August 1529, is designed son and apparent heir of
Alexander, etc. as before noticed.

He died soon after his father, leaving issue three sons.

1. Alexander, his heir.

2. John, designed promiscuously in Middleton and in Gogar, of whom more
hereafter.

3. James, who got a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
Jacobo Alexander in Menstrie, of some lands in that neighborhood, anno 1584.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. ALEXANDER ALEXANDER, fifth baron of Menstrie, who is witness, with his
grandfather, to a sasine of the lands of Menstrie, in favors of Archibald earl
of Argyle, the superior, proceeding upon a charter from king James V. wherein
the lands of Menstrie, Duslater, Pannols, Little-Saline, etc. are erected into
one barony, called the barony of Menstrie, Sasine penes ducem de Argyle.
and wherein he is designed Alexander Alscinder junior, etc. The sasine is
dated 19th April 1541.

This Alexander junior, is also attorney for the earl of Argyle to another
sasine of the barony of Menstrie, Ibidem.
dated 31st of October 1542.

After the death of his father and grandfather, he was designed Alexander
Alscinder of mains of Menstrie, and is particularly mentioned, with his brother
John, in a sasine in favors of Colin earl of Argyle, Ibidem.
dated 7th October 1572.

He died in an advanced age, anno 1594, leaving issue a son and successor,

VI. Sir WILLIAM ALEXANDER, sixth baron of Menstrie, afterward earl of
Stirling, who got a precept of clare constat from the earl of Argyle, Charta
penes Willielm. Abererombie de Tullibody.
for insefting him in the mains of Menstrie, as heir to his father, dated 18th
March 1596.

He afterward got a charter, Chart. in pub. archiv.
under the great seal, of the lands and barony of Menstrie, mill thereof, etc.
dated anno 1603.

Also a charter, cum mineris, mineralibus, et metallis cujusc^nque generis,
infra integras bondas terrarum baroniae de Menstrie, Ibidem.
dated anno 1606.

He was a man of good natural parts, which were greatly improved by a liberal
education and traveling: he had a fine genins for poetry, and composed several
pieces that were greatly esteemed; and being a man of polite learning, was
pitched upon to travel with the earl of Argyle, as a tutor and governor.

After his return home, he went to court, where he was soon distinguished for
his rare accomplishments, Ibidem, Chart. Willielmo domino Alexander equiti.
dominii et baroniae Novae Scotiae in America, etc.
and became a great favorite of king James VI. who knighted him, and made him
master of requests, anno 1604.

And being a great projector, he settled a colony in Nova Scotia in America,
upon his own charges, of which king James made him a grant, by his royal deed,
dated 21st September 1621.

He got also charters, under the great seal, of several lands and baronies in
Scotland, Ibidem.
too numerous to be here inserted.

After the death of king James VI. his son king Charles resolved, that no
encouragement should be wanting to the settlement of a colony that appeared to
be of so great advantage to the nation: he therefore appointed sir William
lieutenant of Nova Scotia, and instituted the order of knight baronet for the
advancement of it, of which order sir William was the first, and obtained the
privilege of coining small copper money, which was a step greatly inveighed
against at that time: however the king being fully convinced of his abilities
and integrity, appointed him one of his privy council, and secretary of state,
in the year 1626, which high offices he enjoyed with honor and reputation as
long as he lived.

In November 1627, he was constituted keeper of the signet in Scotland. In July
1628, he was made one of the commissioners of exchequer, and one of the lords
of session, anno 1631.

The king's esteem and favor for him still increasing, he was pleased to raise
him to the dignity of the peerage, by the titles of earl of Stirling, Diploma
in pub archiv. haered. masculis in perpetuum.
viscount Canada, lord Alexander of Tullibody, etc. by letters patent to his
heirs-male for ever, bearing the name and arms of Alexander, dated 14th June
1633.

The earl being one of the council of Plymouth for the affairs of New England,
in consideration of his interest therein, the said council, by a deed bearing
date the 22d day of April 1635, granted to him all that part of New England
between the rivers of Kenebeek and St. Croix; also all those islands of
Stirling, or Long Island, which now make a considerable part of the province of
New York; and he was at a very great expense in settling colonies therein,
particularly in Long Island, where he introduced the first British inhabitants;
which settlement gave rise to the now flourishing colony of New York.

He married Janet, daughter and heiress of sir William Erskine knight,
cousin-german to the earl of Mar, Ibidem.
the regent, by whom he had seven sons and two daughters.

1. William, viscount Canada and lord Alexander.

2. Sir Anthony Alexander, who married a daughter of sir Henry Wardlaw of
Pittreavie, and died without issue.

3. Henry, who succeeded to the earldom of Stirling, as will be shown hereafter.

4. John Alexander, who got a charter under the great seal, of the lands of
Over-Isgall, etc. anno 1642, and married a daughter of John Graham of Gartmore,
Ibidem.
by whom he had one daughter, but died without male-issue.

5. Charles Alexander, who got a charter under the great seal, of the lands of
Tullybody, anno 1642, and married --, daughter of --, Ibidem.
by whom he had only one son, Charles, who died without issue.

6. Ludovick.

7. James.

These two likeways died without issue.

1st daughter, lady Jean, married to Hugh lord viscount Montgomery, of the
kingdom of Ireland, Lodge's peerage of Ireland, vol. I. p. 372.
whose son Hugh was created earl of Mount-Alexander, anno 1661; which title he
assumed in honor of his mother's surname.

2. Lady Mary, married to sir William Murray of Clermont, created a baronet in
June 1626, Chart. in pub. archiv.
of whom sir James Murray, general receiver of the customs of Scotland, is the
heir-male.

The earl died anno 1640.

VII. WILLIAM viscount Canada and lord Alexander, eldest son and apparent heir
of William earl of Stirling, was his majesty's president in Nova Scotia, as
deputy to his father; in which station he remained there many years, and was at
great pains in settling the country.

He married lady Margaret Douglas, eldest daughter of the first marriage of
William first marquis of Douglas, Ibidem.
by whom he had one son,

William, afterward earl of Stirling, -- and three daughters.

1. Catharine, married to Walter lord Torphichen, whose only child Anna
Sandilands, married to Robert Menzies of Weem, grandfather of the present sir
Robert, etc.

2. Margaret, married to sir Robert Sinclair of Longsormacus, and had issue
only two daughters, of whom sir Hugh Dalrymple, Swinton, etc. are descended.

3. Lucy, Genealogy of the family of Harrington in England, penes MacFarlane.
married to Edward Harrington, Esquire; of the kingdom of England, who was page of
honor to the prince of Orange, anno 1630.

He died before his father, anno 1638, and was succeeded by his only son,

VIII. WILLIAM, who succeeded also to his grandfather, anno 1640, and was
second earl of Stirling, but dying without issue about three months thereafter,
his estate and honors devolved upon Henry Alexander, his uncle and heir-male,
to whom we now return.

VII. HENRY, third earl of Stirling, third son of the first earl, upon the
death of his nephew, succeeded to the earldom of Stirling, as before observed,
and found the estate greatly incumbered, most of it being soon thereafter
carried off by apprisings and adjudications, Several writs in the archiv. of
the family of Argyle, and in the public register.
at the instance of his father's and brother's creditors: He therefore retired
to England, and went to court, where he was well received, and much esteemed.

He married a daughter of sir Peter Vanlore, knight, and alderman of the city
of London, by whom he got a considerable fortune, and acquired an estate in
England, where he settled, and where (...) his posterity continued to reside,
but always voted by proxy at the elections of the sixteen Scotch peers, etc.

He died anno 1650, leaving issue one son,

VIII. HENRY, fourth earl of Stirling, who succeeded him, and married -- Lee,
daughter of --, by whom he had issue four sons and three daughters.

1. Henry, his heir.

2. William.

3. Robert.

4. Peter.

They all died without issue.

1st daughter, lady Mary, married to -- Philips, Esquire; by whom she had William
Philips-Lee, Esquire; of Binfield, in the county of Berks, who has resided mostly
in the city of York.

2. Lady Judith, married to sir William Turnbull of East ^^^mstead-park, in the
county of Berks, by whom she had William Turnbull, Esquire; who died in April 1760.

3. Lady Jean, died without issue.

The earl dying anno 1690, was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. HENRY, fifth earl of Stirling, who married the widow of sir -- Hobby, but
dying without issue, anno 1739, was succeeded in his estate in England by his
two sisters, ladies Mary and Judith, before mentioned, who became his
coheiresses; and in him ended the male-line of Alexander Alexander, fourth
baron of Menstrie, father of the first earl of Stirling, but the
representation, in virtue of the parent, haeredibus masculis in perpetuum,
appears to have devolved upon William Alexander, who now claims the title of
earl of Stirling, being lineally descended from John Alexander, uncle to the
patentee, to whom we now return.

V. JOHN, second son of Andrew, fourth baron of Menstrie, is particularly
mentioned with his brother Alexander, Sasine penes ducem de Argyle.
(father of the first earl of Stirling) in Archibald earl of Argyle's sasine,
dated in April 1541, before observed.

Likeways, Ibidem.
in a sasine of Colin earl of Argyle, wherein he is designed John Alexander in
Middleton, dated in October 1572, also before noticed.

He left issue a son,

VI. ALEXANDER ALEXANDER in Millnab, who succeeded him, Retour in cancellaria.
and left issue three sons.

1. Alexander Alexander in Kinkell, whose male-line is now extinct. Ibidem.


2. David, who carried on the line of this family.

3. Patrick, who married and had issue.

VII. DAVID ALEXANDER, designed in Ward of Muthil, second son of Alexander in
Millnab, married --, daughter of --, by whom he had two sons and two daughters.
Ibidem.


1. William Alexander, whose only son William died without issue, Ibidem.
anno 1747.

2. James, father of William, who now claims the peerage.

1st daughter, Janet, married to Mr. Mac-Leith.

2. Christian, married to Mr. Caw in Crieff.

VIII. JAMES ALEXANDER, second son of David in Ward of Muthil, went to America,
anno 1714, with the king's commission of surveyor-general of the province of
New Jersey, was many years of the council of that province, and also of
New York, and held some of the most considerable offices there.

He acquired a large proprietary in New Jersey, and a considerable landed and
personal interest in New York.

He married Mary, daughter of John Spratt of Wigton, in the county of Galloway
in Scotland, by whom he had issue one son,

William, his heir, -- and four daughters.

1. Mary, married to Peter Vanbrugh-Livingston, merchant in New York.

2. Elizabeth, married to John Stevens, Esquire; of Perth A^^boy, in New Jersey.

3. Catharine, married to major Walter Rutherfoord.

4. Susannah.

He died anno 1756, and was succeeded by his only son,

IX. WILLIAM ALEXANDER, who now claims the honors of earl of Stirling, was one
of his majesty's council, and surveyor-general of the province of New Jersey,
and arrived in England from that colony, anno 1756.

Anno 1757, he sued out a writ of mortancestor in the chancery of Scotland,
according to the laws of that kingdom, and claimed to be cognosced heir-male to
the last earl.

The evidence of his claim being laid before a jury of fifteen gentlemen of the
first rank in Scotland, they unanimously made their return, declaring him to be
nearest heir-male to Henry Alexander the fifth earl, and was served as such
accordingly, 20th March 1759; Retour in cancellaria.
and if his claim is sustained by parliament, he will be the sixth earl of
Sirling.

He married Sarah, daughter of Philip Livingston, Esquire; descended of the family
of Linlithgow, by whom he has issue two daughters.

1. Mary.

2. Catharine.

One of these daughters is lately married to John, son and apparent heir of
Alexander Robertson of Stralochy, alias baron Reid, in Scotland.

ARMS.
Quarterly; 1st and 4th, partee per pale argent and sable, a cheveron, and in
base a crescent, all counter-charged; 2d and 3d or, a ship, with the sails
furled up sable, between three cross crosslets fitchee gules; and over all, in
surtout, the badge of a baronet of New-Scotland, which is argent, on a saltire
azure, the royal arms of Scotland ensigned on the top with an imperial crown,
proper.

CREST; on a wreath, a bear sejant erect, proper.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter side an Indian man, with long hair, and a dart in
his right hand, having a plain circle or rim of gold on his head, beautified
with a plume of seven feathers or and azure, and round his waist a like circle
and feathers; on the finister, a mermaid, with her comb and mirror, all proper.

MOTTO; Per mare per terras.

CHIEF SEAT,
Was at Menstrie in Stirlingshire.

MURRAY Viscount STORMONT.
AS the origin of the great and ancient surname of Murray, is to be found under
the title of duke of Athole, page 51st of this work, to that we refer our
readers, and proceed to deduce the descent of this noble family from their
immediate ancestor,

X. Sir WILLIAM MURRAY of Tullibardine, progenitor of the present duke of
Athole, the tenth generation of that illustrious house, in a direct male line,
made a great figure in Scotland in the reign of king James III. and married
Catharine, daughter of Andrew lord Gray of Foulis, by whom he had a numerous
issue.

1. Sir John, who died before his father without issue.

2. Sir William, who succeeded him, and carried on the line of the family of
Athole.

3. Sir Andrew, the first of the family of Stormont.

For the other children, vide page 53d.

I. Sir ANDREW MURRAY, third son of sir William Murray of Tullibardine, married
Margaret, daughter and sole heiress of James Barclay of Kippo and Arngosk,
Charta penes ducem de Athole, and chart. of Cambuskenneth, penes MacFarlane, p.
14. ad ann. 1499.
descended of the ancient Barclays lords of Brechin, with whom he got the lands
and baronies of Arngosk, Balvaird, Kippo, etc.

She resigned in the hands of king James IV. her whole estate, for new
infe^tment to herself and sir Andrew Murray her husband in liferent, and the
heirs procreate or to be procreate betwixt them in see, Ibidem.
25th January 1507.

She afterward, with consent of her said husband, and sir David their son and
heir, founded a chaplainry in the parish church of Arngosk, and endowed it with
an annuity of fourteen merks, and two acres of land, lying contiguous to the
church, for the prosperity of their sovereign James V. king of Scotland, and
for the health and welfare of themselves, their heirs and successors, etc.

The charter of mortification is dated at their castle of Balvaird, Ibid. p. 33.
1st of August 1527.

Sir Andrew, Nisbet's append. p. 212.
by the said Margaret Barclay, left issue two sons, and one daughter.

1. Sir David, his heir.

2. John Murray, who got from his father the lands of Conland, Chartulary of
Cambuskenneth.
holden in vassalage of the family, which afterward returned to them.

His daughter, Elizabeth, married to sir Archibald Douglas of Kilspindie.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. Sir DAVID MURRAY of Arngosk and Balvaird, who married Janet, daughter of
John lord Lindsay of Byres, Chart. in pub. archivis, ad ann. 1526.
ancestor of the present earl of Crawfurd, by lady Helen Stewart his wife,
daughter of John second earl of Athole, by whom he had three sons.

1. Sir Andrew, his heir.

2. Sir William Murray of Letter-Bannachy, ancestor of the present viscount of
Stormont, Ibidem.
of whom afterward.

3. David Murray of Airdith, who got a charter of these lands under the great
seal, Ibidem.
anno 1563.

He died anno 1550, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. Sir ANDREW MURRAY of Arngosk and Balvaird, who was one of the barons that
were on the assize of Alexander earl of Huntly, when condemned to death for
heading the rebellion at the battle of Corrichie, Nisbet's append. p. 212.
anno 1563.

He married, 1st, Margaret Ross, daughter of Ninian second lord Ross of
Halkhead, which appears by a charter under the great seal, anno 1541, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
but by her he had no issue.

He married, 2dly, lady Janet Graham, daughter of William second earl of
Montrose, by lady Janet Keith, Ibid. ad ann. 1547.
daughter of William earl Marishal, by whom he had issue four sons.

1. Sir Andrew.

2. Sir David Murray of Gospitrie, created lord Scoon and viscount Stormont, of
whom more hereafter.

3. Mr. Robert Murray, who was bred to the church, Ibid. ad ann. 1584.
and had the deanery of Dunkeld bestowed upon him by king James VI. but he died
without issue.

4. Sir Patrick Murray of Been and Drumcairn, a man of spirit and genius, and
employed by the king in several different characters. He was lieutenant of his
majesty's guards, but not confined to appear in a military capacity only, we
see him acting sometimes in civil matters, Spoti^wood's and Calderwood's
ecclesiast. histories.
sometimes in ecclesiastical, always with applause. He married Isabel, daughter
of -- Blair of Balthyock, in Perthshire, but died without succession, anno
1604, and was succeeded by his brother sir David of Gospitrie, Retour in the
public regist.
who was served heir to him, anno 1607.

Sir Andrew died anno 1576, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. Sir ANDREW MURRAY of Arngosk and Balvaird, who was one of the gentlemen of
the bedchamber to king James VI. with whom he was in great favor.

He got charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the lands and baronies of Arngosk, Kippo, Park, and a great many others,
betwixt the years 1572 and 1588, and took a new investiture of his estate, by
way of entail, to himself in liferent, and Andrew Murray his son and apparent
heir, and the heirs-male of his body, in fee; which failing, to David Murray
his brother-german, and the heirs-male of his body; which failing, to Mr.
Robert, then to sir Patrick, and their heirs-male; which failing, to David
Murray of Airdith, Ibidem.
his uncle, etc. This is confirmed by a charter under the great seal, anno 1588.

It may here be observed, that William Murray of Letter-Bannachie, uncle to
this sir Andrew, and elder brother to David of Airdith, is omitted in this
substitution, for what reason we know not, Ibidem.
but he was afterward reponed and put in his due place.

Sir Andrew married Margaret, daughter of John Crichton of Strathurd, descended
of George earl of Caithness, lord high admiral of Scotland in the reign of king
James II. and by her he had issue a son,

Sir Andrew, -- and a daughter,

Anne, married to sir Mungo Murray of Drumcairn, a younger son of John earl of
Tullibardine, of whom more hereafter.

He died before 1604, and was succeeded by his only son,

V. Sir ANDREW MURRAY of Balvaird, who was the first of this family that
relinquished the title of Arngosk.

He made a new entail of his estates of Balvaird, Arngosk, Pitlochie, Conland,
etc. to himself and the heirs-male of his own body; which failing, to his uncle
sir David of Gospitrie, his majesty's comptroller, and the heirs-male of his
body; which failing, to his uncle Robert, and the heirs-male of his body; which
failing, to his cousin David of Balgonie, son and heir of William of
Letter-Bannachie; and failing of his heirs-male, to William, son to David of
Airdith, another cousin-german, etc.

The charter, Ibidem.
in which he is designed Andreas Murray de Balvaird, filius et haeres quondam
Andreae Murray de Arngosk, militis, is dated 8th May 1604.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir William Menteith of Carse; but dying
without issue, anno 1624, his estate devolved upon his uncle and heir-male,

IV. Sir DAVID MURRAY of Gospitrie, second son of sir Andrew Murray of Arngosk
and Balvaird, who, from his youth, was bred at the court of king James VI. and
being a man of extraordinary parts, great honor, and integrity, was highly
esteemed by his majesty, who first made him his cup bearer; then master of the
horse, and captain of the guard; and having conferred on him the honor of
knighthood, made him comptroller of the royal revenue, upon the removal of sir
David Home of Wedderburn, Ibid. et chart. penes vicecom. de Stormont.
anno 1599; in which offices he served his majesty with great fidelity and
loyalty.

He attended the court from Falkland to Perth, on the memorable 5th of August
1600, when the earl of Gowrie and his brother made that audacious attempt upon
his majesty's sacred person, History of Gowry's conspiracy.
where he was greatly instrumental in saving the king's life.

He did another remarkable piece of service to the court at this juncture; for
after the earl of Gowrie, then provost of Perth, was killed, the whole town was
in an uproar, and heavily threatened the authors of his death; but sir David,
by his great prudence and resolute conduct, with the assistance of his young
cousin William second earl of Tullibardine, quelled the tumult, Ibidem.
and conducted the king and court safe back to Falkland.

For which good services, he was ever after amongst the first favorites of the
king, who thought he could never bestow too much upon so good and faithful a
subject and servant.

He first gave him the barony of Ruthven, the chief seat of the Gowrie family,
which came to the crown by the earl's forfeiture, and was afterward called
Huntingtower. Soon thereafter he bestowed upon him the lands of the whole abbay
of Scoon, Chart. in pub. archiv. et penes vicecom. de Stormont.
of which the earl of Gowrie had been commendator, erected it into a temporal
lordship, to be called the lordship of Scoon, with a seat and vote in
parliament; and he was therein, with the greatest solemnity, invested, 7th
April 1605, by a special commission, directed to the earl of Dunfermline, then
chancellor for that effect, Workman's M. S. a herald who assisted at the
investiture.
the earls of Angus, Sutherland, Marishal, Linlithgow, the lords Fleming,
Drummond and Thirlestane, being witnesses to the ceremony; which erection was
confirmed to the lord Scoon by a special act of parliament, anno 1606; about
which time he had the office of ranger of the Lummonds, the ^orestry of the
woods, and the old castle-stead of Falkland conferred upon him, Charta penes
vicecom* de Stormont.
with several other beneficial grants.

Some time thereafter, he made a settlement of his estate and honors, which
was ratified and confirmed by a charter from king James VI. under his own hand,
in these terms:

1st, To our well-beloved cousin David lord Scoon, and the lawful heirs-male of
his body; which failing,

2dly, To sir Andrew Murray of Balvaird, his nephew, and the lawful heirs-male
of his body; which failing,

3dly, To sir Mungo Murray of Drumcairn, and the lawful heirs-male of his body;
which failing,

4thly, To sir John Murray of Lochmaben, (afterward earl of Annandale,) and
the heirs-male of his body; which failing,

5thly, To Gilbert Murray, eldest lawful son of David Murray of Balgony, and
the heirs-male of his body; which failing,

6thly, To Andrew Murray, second lawful son of the said David, and the
heirs-male of his body, (who carried on the line of this family); which failing,

7thly, To William Murray, son of sir William Murray of Clermonth, and the
heirs-male of his body, (of whom sir James Murray, general-receiver of the
customs of Scotland is now the representative.) Quibus omnibus deficientibus,

8thly, Legitimis et propinquioribus haeredibus praefati nostri praedilecti
consanguinei Davidis domini Scoon quibuscunque haereditarie, Ibidem.
cognomen et insignia de Murray familiae de Balvaird gerentibus, etc. The
charter is dated 14th October 1616.

The lord Scoon being a man of great understanding and steady resolution, was
appointed his majesty's high commissioner to several general assemblies of the
church, where he conducted himself with such prudence, and intrepidity, that he
had a great hand in carrying through some things that met with much opposition,
Spotiswood's and Calder wood's ecclesiast. histories.
in reference to the bringing the church of Scotland to some nearer degrees of
uniformity with that of England, which the king had very much at heart.

And as he behaved with no less zeal for his majesty's service, when the five
articles of Perth assembly were ratified in the parliament 1621, he was
immediately dispatched by the marquis of Hamilton, the king's high
commissioner, to communicate his success to the court, when his majesty was
graciously pleased, in recompense of his great and many services, Charta pen^
vicecom^ de Stormont.
further to dignify him with the title of lord viscount Stormont, by patent
Creavimus, etc. praefatum Davidem, dominum Scoon, vicecomitem de Stormont, ac
damus, etc. sibi et haeredibus ^uis masculis, de corpore suo legitime
procreatis seu procreandis; quibus deficientibus, haeredibus masculis et
taliae, cognomen et insignia de Murray gerentibus, in inseosamento dominii de
Scoon comprehensis, titulum honorem, gradum, et dignitatem vicecomitis de
Stormont; et iisdem titulo, ordine, et dignitate, dictum dominum de Scoon,
haere^esque suos praedictos, tenore praesentium investimus, etc.
under the great seal, dated 22d February 1622, to and in favors of David lord
Scoon, and the lawful heirs-male of his body; which failing, to the heirs of
entail, as contained in the substitution of the charter, dated 14th October
1616, as before narrated.

He was now possessed of an immense estate, which appears by twelve or thirteen
charters under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
of many different lands and baronies, too numerous to be here inserted.

Upon the death of his nephew sir Andrew, he settled the estate of Stormont,
with the lordship of Scoon, (being all his own acquisition) to and in favors
of the said sir Mungo Murray, and the heirs-male of his body; which failing, to
John earl of Annandale, and the heirs-male of his body; which failing, to Mr.
Andrew Murray then minister at Abdie, his own heir-male, on whom he immediately
settled the baronies of Balvaird and Arngosk, Charta penes vicecom. de Stormont.
the old inheritance of the family, anno 1625.

This great man married Elizabeth, daughter of sir David Beaton of Creich, in
vicecom. de Fife, by whom he had no issue; and dying on 27th August 1631, was
interred in a vault of the church of Scoon, under a stately monument of various
colored marble, with his statue, as big as the life, and on a tablet of black
marble, most of his remarkable great actions are recorded.

1. The first viscount of Stormont thus dying without issue, in him ended the
male-line of sir Andrew, eldest son of sir David Murray of Arngosk.

2. Sir Andrew Murray of Balvaird, the second person in the substitution and
entail above recited, dying also without issue, anno 1624, as before noticed,
the honors of Stormont devolved upon the third person in the substitution, viz.

3. Sir Mungo Murray of Drumcairn, son of John earl of Tullibardine, who was
second viscount Stormont.

This sir Mungo was designed master of Stormont in the first viscount's
lifetime, as if he had been his lawful son, and got a charter under the great
seal, Kentigerno Murray magistro de Stormont, Chart. in pub. archiv.
terrarum baroniae de Balwhidder, etc. dated anno 1626.

He got afterward a charter under the great seal, Kentigerno vicecomiti de
Stormont, terrarum de Kirktoun de Errol, Ibid. p. 54.
dated anno 1633.

Mungo, second viscount Stormont, married, 1st, (as before observed) Anne, only
daughter of sir Andrew Murray of Balvaird, niece of the first viscount; 2dly,
lady Anne, daughter of John earl of Wemyss, but died without issue, anno 1642,
whereby the lordship of Scoon, and honors of Stormont, devolved upon

4. James, second earl of Annandale, son of John the first earl, and fourth
person in the foresaid substitution, who was third viscount Stormont, Sasine in
the public regist.
and was served heir of tailzie to the said Mungo in the lordship and barony of
Scoon, in May 1642.

The honors of Stormont continued in the possession of the earl of Annandale
for sixteen years, Ibidem, and Nisbet's appendix, p. 215.
that the earl died without issue, anno 1658.

5. Gilbert Murray, the fifth person in the said substitution, dying also
without issue, the honors of Stormont devolved upon his brother,

6. Andrew Murray, the sixth person in the substitution, and undoubted
heir-male of the patentee, being lineally descended of William of
Letter-Bannachy, before mentioned, to whom we now return.

II. WILLIAM MURRAY of Letter-Bannachy, second son of sir David Murray of
Arngosk, by Janet, daughter of John lord Lindsay of Byres, got a charter from
his brother sir Andrew Murray of Arngosk, father of the first viscount, Chart.
penes Jacob. Murray dom. de Abercairny.
Willielmo Murray, fratri suo germano, de terris de Letter-Bannachie, in
^icecomitat. de Perth, et haeredibus suis, etc. dated anno 1553.

He also got charters under the great seal, Willielmo Murray de
Letter-Bannachie, of the lands of Auchloy, Chart. in pub. archivis.
and others, et tenementum vasti vetus capellan. Sancti Andreae spectan. etc.
dated anno 1574.

He married a daughter of -- Pitcairn of that ilk, by whom he had two sons, and
three daughters.

1. Andrew, who died before his father without issue.

2. David, his heir.

1st daughter, Writs of Balcanquel.
--, married to Balcanquel of that ilk, and had issue.

2. --, married to -- Murray younger of Ochtertyre, and had issue.

3. --, married to -- Kinross of Cambusne^han in Strathallan, Writs of the fam.
of Stormont.
now part of the estate of Cromlix.

He was succeeded by his only surviving son,

IV. DAVID MURRAY, promis^uously designed of Balgony, Kippo, and Been.

In a charter of Mr. Murray of Abercairny, he is designed David Murray de
Balgony, filius et haeres quondam Willielmi Murray de Letter-Bannachie, Penes
Abercairny.
etc. anno 1612; and is in the substitution of the entail of David lord Scoon
by the same designation, anno 1616, before observed.

He got a charter, under the great seal, of the lands and barony of Been, etc.
in which he is designed David Murray olim de Kippo, Chart. in pub. archiv.
etc. anno 1626.

He had acquired the estate of Kippo from the family of Balvaird; Herald books
etc.
but sold it to doctor David Philp, anno 1623.

He married Agnes, Chart. in pub. archiv. and Nisbet's append. p. 216.
daughter of -- Moncrief of that ilk, by whom he had issue four sons, and one
daughter.

1. Gilbert, who succeeded his father, was the fifth person in the preceding
substitution; but died without issue.

2. Sir Andrew, who succeeded his brother, of whom more hereafter.

3. William.

4. David.

His daughter, Catharine, married to John Arnot of Pittorvie, Esquire; and had
issue.

He died before the year 1631.

V. Sir ANDREW MURRAY, afterward lord Balvaird, who was second son of David,
succeeded his brother Gilbert, and was the sixth in the substitution before
noticed. Being himself a younger brother, was bred to the church, and was
appointed minister of the parish of Abdie in Fife, Ibidem.
anno 1618.

He succeeded to the estates of Balvaird and Arngosk, upon the death of his
cousin David viscount Stormont, anno 1631, in virtue of his destination and
entail, made anno 1625, before mentioned, and got a charter, under the great
seal, of his whole estate, which was then very considerable, Charta penes
vicecom. de Stormont, et in publicis archivis.
to himself and the heirs-male of his own body; which failing, to the
heirs-male of his brothers William and David, respective, dated 14th July 1632.

He had the honor of knighthood conferred upon him at the solemnity of the
king's coronation, anno 1633, and got another charter under the great seal,
domino Andreae Murray de Balvaird, militi, terrarum de Pitlochie, etc. Ibidem.
anno 1636.

He was a man of great piety, prudence, and discretion, was thought a proper
member for the assembly of Glasgow, anno 1638, where, by his temper, authority,
and moderation, he greatly allayed the heats and animosities that were agitated
with so much warmth and zeal, in reference to episcopacy, and the government of
the church by bishops. His conduct was greatly approved by the marquis of
Hamilton, the king's commissioner, which he fully represented to his majesty:
therefore when he came to Scotland, in the year 1641, to hold a parliament in
his own royal person, in hopes of cementing all differences, etc. he was
pleased to raise sir Andrew to the dignity of the peerage, Minutebooks in the
public register.
by the title of lord Balvaird, by letters patent, dated 14th November 1641.

Soon after this he got a considerable accession to his estate, by the death of
Mungo viscount Stormont, Retour in the public regist.
to whom he was served and retoured heir of tailzie and provision in the barony
of Stormont, in May 1642.

He married lady Elizabeth Carnegie, Nisbet's append. p. 217.
daughter to David first earl of Southesk, by whom he had five sons, Scotch
comp. p. 354.
and three daughters.

1. David, afterward viscount Stormont.

2. Sir Andrew of Pitlochie, ancestor of the Murrays of Murrays-hall in
Perth-shire.

3. Doctor James Murray, an eminent physician, whose daughter and heiress was
married to Robert Carmichael of Balmblae, Esquire; in the county of Fife.

4. Sir John Murray of Drumcairn, a man of great parts and learning, who being
bred to the law, and remarkable for his knowledge and integrity, was promoted
to be one of the senators of the college of justice; in which station he
continued to act with universal applause, till the revolution. His only
daughter, Elizabeth, was married to Francis earl of Murray.

5. Mr. William, who being also bred to the law, was accounted one of the most
famous and celebrated lawiers before the court of session in his time.

1st daughter, Catharine, died unmarried.

2. Barbara, married to Andrew lord Gray of Foulis.

3. Marjory, married to sir Alexander Gibson of Durie, whose only daughter was
married to John Murray of Polmaise, Esquire; in the county of Stirling.

He died 24th September 1644, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. DAVID, second lord Balvaird, who, upon the death of James earl of
Annandale, and third viscount Stormont, succeeded to the lordship of Scoon, and
title of Stormont, in virtue of the substitution in the charter 1616, and the
patent in 1622, above narrated, where the honors are limited to the heirsmale,
etc. and was the fourth viscount Stormont.

He was served heir of tailize to Mungo viscount Stormont, in the lordship and
barony of Scoon; the service of James earl of Annandale, and infestment
following thereon, as heir to the said Mungo, having been declared void by a
decree of declarator of the court of session, obtained at lord Balvaird's
instance against him, for having contraveened the provisions in the entail, by
contracting of debts, Decree penes vicecom* de Stormont.
which debts are also declared void and null. The decree of declarator is
dated 27th February 1662.

He got a charter under the great seal, Davidi vicecomiti de Stormont, Chart.
in pub. archiv.
of the lands of Reidpark, etc. anno 1663.

And upon his own resignation he got another charter, under the great seal, of
his whole lands and estate in Perth, Fife, and Dumfries-shires, erecting them
into an entire and free viscounty, to be called the viscounty of Stormont,
lordship of Balvaird, Cockpool, and Lochmaben, Charta penes vicecom. de
Stormont.
etc. The charter, which contains a novo damus, is dated the 22d of August 1666.

He was a great loyalist, and adhered to the interest of the royal family in
their greatest distress with inflexible fidelity; on which account he suffered
many hardships, and was fined by Oliver Cromwell in the sum of one thousand
five-hundred pounds sterling, Cromwell's act of indem.
in the year 1654.

He married lady Elizabeth Carnegie, daughter of James second earl of Southesk,
dowager of James earl of Annandale, by whom he had a son,

David, -- and two daughters.

1. Catharine, married to William earl of Kintore.

2. Amelia, died unmarried.

He died in July 1668, and was succeeded by his only son,

VII. DAVID, fifth viscount Stormont, who was served heir to his father in
October 1668. Retour penes vicecom. de Stormont.
He was a man of good parts, honor and integrity.

He married Marjory, daughter of David Scot of Scotstarvit, Esquire; (heir-male of
the most noble family of Buckcleugh) by Nicholas his wife, eldest daughter of
sir John Grierson of Lag, whose mother, Margaret, was eldest daughter of sir
James Murray of Cockpool, elder brother of John earl of Annandale, whereby the
present viscount Stormont is heir of line of the Murrays of Cockpool, earls of
Annandale, etc.

By her he had issue six sons, and eight daughters.

1. David, his heir.

2. James, who was a member of the house of commons in the two last parliaments
of queen Anne.

3. John, who died young.

4. William, who, in 1742, was appointed sollicitor-general to his majesty; in
1744, attorney general; in November 1756, was created a peer of Great Britain,
by the title of lord Mansfield, baron of Mansfield, in the county of
Nottingham; and lord chief justice. He has since been made one of the cabinet
and privy council, and nominated one of the governors of the charter house. He
married lady Elizabeth Finch, daughter to the earl of Winchelsea and Nottingham.

5. Charles.

6. Robert.

These two last died without issue.

1st daughter, Catharine.

2. Elizabeth.

These two daughters died unmarried.

3. Marjory, married to colonel John Hay of Cromlix, second son of Thomas earl
of Kinnoul.

4. Emilia, married to sir Alexander Lindsay of Evelick, in the county of
Perth, Bart.

5. Margaret.

6. Jean, died unmarried.

7. Nicholas.

8. Mary, died unmarried.

The viscount died in November 1731, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. DAVID, sixth viscount of Stormont, a man of great learning, knowledge,
and integrity, who married Anne, only daughter and heiress of John Stewart of
Innernytie, Esquire; by whom he had issue two sons, and two daughters.

1. David, now viscount Stormont.

2. James.

1st daughter, Anne.

2. Marjory.

He died anno 1748, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. DAVID, seventh viscount Stormont, lord Balvaird, Cockpool, and Lochmaben,
one of the sixteen Scotch peers to the present British parliament, who was
appointed his majesty's envoy extraordinary and plenipotentiary to the king of
Poland, elector of Saxony, and to the republic of Poland, anno 1755, and
acquitted himself in that negotiation with great prudence and dexterity.

He is at present appointed to be his majesty's ambassador extraordinary, and
minister plenipotentiary to the emperor and empress of Germany.

He married Henrietta Frederica, daughter of Henry count Bunau, of the ancient
family of the Bunaus of the branch of Puchem, privy councillor and envoy from
the court of Saxony to the courts of London and Vienna, by his lady, a daughter
of Gustavus baron of Ragknitz, by his lady, mademoiselle Schomberg, descended
of the same family with the famous duke of that name.

By her he has issue a daughter,

Elizabeth-Mary.

ARMS.
Quarterly; 1st and 4th azure, three stars within a double tressure,
counter-^loree with flowers de lis or for, Murray; 2d and 3d gules, three
crosses pattee argent, for Barclay of Balvaird.

CREST; on a wreath, a buck's head couped proper, with a cross pattee, between
his antlers, argent.

SUPPORTERS; two lions gules.

MOTTO; Meliora spero.

CHIEF SEATS,
At Cumlangum-Castle, in Annandale; and at Scoon in Perth-shire.

DRUMMOND Viscount of STRATHALLAN.
THE ancestor of this noble family was, DAVID, second lord Drummond, the
eighteenth generation of the illustrious house of Perth, in a direct male line,
who, by Lilias, daughter of William lord Ruthven, ancestor of the earl of
Gowrie, left issue two sons and five daughters. 1. Patrick, his successor, who
carried on the line of the family of Perth. 2. James, ancestor of the lords
Maderty, Strathallan, etc.

For the daughter, vide page 553d.

I. JAMES, second son of David second lord Drummond, who was created lord
Maderty by king James VI. married Jean, daughter of sir James Chisholm of
Cromlix, by whom he had two sons, and four daughters.

1. John, second lord Maderty, his successor.

2. Sir James Drummond of Machany, of whom more hereafter.

For the daughters, vide page 436th.

II. JOHN, second lord Maderty, married Margaret Lesly, daughter of Patrick
lord Lindores, by whom he had five sons, and three daughters.

1. David, third lord Maderty, whose male line is extinct.

5. General William Drummond, afterward viscount of Strathallan.

For the other children, vide page 537th.

III. General WILLIAM DRUMMOND of Cromlix, son of John second lord Maderty, was
a man of good parts, great honor, and most sincerely attached to the interest
of the royal family.

He betook himself to a military life when a young man; by his merit he rose to
the highest rank in the army, and was inferior to none of his cotemporaries for
his knowledge in the art of war.

He had a considerable command in the army that was raised for the king's
relief, when he was prisoner in the Isle of Wight, anno 1648.

He had the command of a regiment at the battle of Worcester, where he was
taken prisoner; but afterward made his escape, retired to the North, joined
the loyalists, and kept close with them till they were dispersed by general
Morgan, anno 1654.

When he found he was able to do no more for the king at home, he went abroad
into the service of the czar of Muscovy, where he had the highest commands; and
by his bravery and conduct acquired to himself great reputation and honor.

After the restoration, king Charles II. called him home, and made him
major general of all the forces in Scotland, anno 1666; in which character he
served the crown with great fidelity for many years, and was made general of
the ordnance in 1684.

Upon king James VII.'s accession to the crown, he was made general of all the
forces in the kingdom, and one of the lords of the treasury.

And as a further mark of his majesty's favor and esteem, he was raised to the
dignity of the peerage, by the titles of viscount of Strathallan, lord Drummond
of Cromlix, etc. by patent, (in which all the great services he had done to the
crown are fully narrated,) to him and the heirs-male of his body; Diploma in
cancellaria
which failing, to his nearest heirs-male whatever, dated 16th August 1686.

This great man married Elizabeth, daughter of sir Archibald Johnston of
Waristoun, by whom he had a son,

William, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Elizabeth, married to Thomas Hay of Balhousie, Charta pene^ comitem d^ Kinnoul.
afterward lord Duplin and earl of Kinnoul, and had issue.

He died anno 1688, and was succeeded by his son,

IV. WILLIAM, second viscount of Strathallan, who succeeding also to the
honors of Maderty upon the death of his uncle David, the third lord, without
male issue, was fourth lord Maderty.

He married lady Elizabeth Drummond, daughter of John earl of Melfort, Chart.
in archiv. fam. de Strathallan.
by whom he had a son,

V. JAMES, third viscount of Strathallan, and fifth lord Maderty, who succeeded
him anno 1702, but dying unmarried in the sixteenth year of his age, anno 1711*
the honors, in virtue of the above patent, devolved upon his cousin and
heir-male William Drummond of Machany, lineally descended of sir James of
Machany, before mentioned, to whom we now return.

II. Sir JAMES DRUMMOND of Machany, second son of James first lord Maderty, and
uncle to William first viscount of Strathallan, Chart. in pub. archiv.
got a charter under the great seal from king Charles I. Jacobo Drummond de
Machany, terrarum baroniae de Luncardie, etc. anno 1646.

He was also a great loyalist, and was one of the colonels of the Perthshire
foot for duke Hamilton's engagement, Rescinded acts of parlt.
anno 1648.

He married Catharine, daughter of sir John Hamilton of Letrick, sister of the
first lord Bargeny, by whom he had three sons and one daughter.

1. Sir James, his heir.

2. Captain John Drummond, a brave and gallant officer, who was killed in the
king's service, without issue.

3. Colonel Andrew Drummond, also an officer in the king's army, died without
issue.

His daughter, Catharine, married to Alexander Robertson of Strowan, Esquire;.

He died before the restoration, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. Sir JAMES DRUMMOND of Machany, who was also a great loyalist, and a man
of singular worth and honor.

He was fined by Oliver Cromwell in the sum of 500 l. sterling, anno 1654, for
his adhering to the interest of the royal family, Cromwell's act of indem.
and is then designed James Drummond younger of Machany, etc.

He married, 1st, Mary, daughter of sir James Haliburton of Pitcur, by whom he
had one son, who died in infancy.

He married, 2dly, Anne, daughter of sir George Hay of Keillor, son of Andrew
eighth earl of Errol, and grandfather of John the twelfth earl. She was widow
of sir William Moray of Abercairny, and by her he had issue two sons and two
daughters.

1. Sir John, his heir.

2. David, who died a student at Leyden unmarried.

1st daughter, Lilias, married, 1st, to James earl of Tullibardine; 2dly, to
James earl of Perth, and had issue.

2. Anne, married to Thomas Graham of Balgowan, Esquire;.

He was succeeded by his son,

IV. Sir JOHN DRUMMOND of Machany, who married Mary, daughter of sir William
Stewart of Innernytie, second son of sir William Stewart of Gairntully, by whom
he had a son,

V. WILLIAM DRUMMOND of Machany, who succeeded him, and upon the death of his
cousin James, third viscount of Strathallan, without male-issue, anno 1711,
succeeded also to the honors of Strathallan and Maderty, as next heir-male,
and was fourth viscount of Strathallan, and sixth lord Maderty.

He married Margaret, daughter of William lord Nairn, by whom he had four sons
and four daughters.

1. James, master of Strathallan.

2. William.

3. Robert.

4. Henry.

1st daughter, Margaret.

2. Anne.

3. Mary.

4. Aemilia.

This lord having engaged in the rebellion 1745, was killed at the battle of
Culloden in April 1746, and by that means escaped being attainted, though
included amongst oers, in the act of parliament then past for that purpose.

VI. JAMES, master of Strathallan, his eldest son, having also engaged in the
same rebellion, made his escape to France, but being included in the act of
attainder with his father, under the denomination of James Drummond, eldest son
of William viscount of Strathallan, though he was at that time truly viscount
of Strathallan himself, these honors became forfeited to the crown, unless
they are saved on account of a misnomer, and in that case he is now fifth
viscount of Strathallan, and seventh lord Maderty.

He married Eupheme, daughter of Peter Gordon of Abergeldy, Esquire; by whom he had
a numerous issue.

1. James, etc. etc.

ARMS.
Quarterly; 1st and 4th or, three bars wavy gules, for Drummond; 2d and 3d or,
a lion's head erased gules, within a double tressure, flowered and
counterflowered, with flowers de lis of the last, as a coat of augmentation.

CREST; a gose hawk, with wings displayed, proper.

SUPPORTERS; two savages, each holding a batton over his shoulder, proper, and
wreathed about his temples and middle with laurel.

MOTTO; Lord have mercy.

CHIEF SEATS,
At Inchaffry and Machany, both in Perthshire.

Earl of STRATHERN.
THIS dignity, by some authors, is said to have been first conferred upon

WALENUS, a man of rank in England, who having contracted a friendship with
king Malcolm Canmore, when in that kingdom, accompanied him to Scotland, and
assisted him in recovering his crown; wherefore that generous prince nobly
rewarded him, promoted him to great honors, gave him considerable possessions
in lands in Perthshire, Sir Ja. Balfour, Martin, etc.
and created him earl of Strathern, anno 1068.

He is said, by the same authors, to have married Felina, sister of Macduff
earl of Fife, by whom he had a son.

Rothericus or Rotherius, etc. etc. but the first we have any certain authority
for is,

I. MALLUS or MALISIUS, who was undoubtedly earl of Strathern, Chartulary of
Scoon, penes vicecom. de Stormont.
and is so designed in the foundation charter of the monastery of Scoon, by
king Alexander I. anno 1115.

He was a brave and gallant man, and remarkably signalized himself in the
service of his king and country at the battle of Standard, Abb. Revel's hist.
p. 342.
anno 1138.

He was father of,

II. FERETH or FERQUHARD, second earl of Strathern, who is particularly
mentioned by Fordun, at a meeting of some of the nobles in Perth, in the
beginning of the reign of king Malcolm IV. Fordun, vol. I. p. 450.
who succeeded to the crown of Scotland, anno 1153.

He is also mentioned in a charter of the same king Malcolm, Charta penes
MacFarlane.
anno 1160.

He left issue two sons.

1. Gilbert, his heir.

2. Malisius or Malise, who, in the foundation charter of the monastery of
Inchaffry, is designed frater Gilberti comitis de Strathern, Ibidem.
anno 1198.

This earl died anno 1171, Chron. of Melross, penes eund.
and was succeeded by his eldest son,

III. GILBERT, third earl of Strathern, who flourished in the reign of king
William, and married Maud or Matilda, daughter of William d'Aubigny earl of
Albemarle, Chartulary of Inchaffry.
by whom he had five sons and two daughters.

1. Gilchrist, who died before his father without issue.

2. William.

3. Ferquhard.

These two are both mentioned in a charter hereafter narrated, but died without
issue.

4. Robert, who became his father's heir.

5. Fergus, designed frater domini Roberti, comitis de Strathern, in the
chartulary of Arbroath, about the year 1200.

1st daughter, Christian, married to sir Walter Oliphant, Strathallan's memoirs
of the family of Perth.
ancestor of the lord Oliphant, who got with her the lands of Strageith in
Perthshire, anno 1200.

2. Mary, Charta penes ducem de Hamilton.
married to William, progenitor of the family of Hamilton.

This earl, and his wife the countess, founded, and largely endowed the
monastery of Inchaffry, according to these words in the foundation charter,
viz. Ego Gilbertus, filius Ferquhardi, comes de Strathern, et ego Matilda filia
Willielmi d'Aubigny, comitissa, etc. damus et concedimus, etc. ecclesiam Sti.
Kattani de Abbyrothven, etc. etc. pro salute nostra, et liberorum nostrorum, et
praecipue pro anima Gilchristi primogeniti nostri, ibidem quiescentis, etc.
etc. anno 1198, Foundation charter, pene^ MacFarlane.
confirmed by king William, before these witnesses, Roger, John, and Jonathan,
bishops of St. Andrews, Dunkeld and Dumblain, Henry abbot of Arbroath, Robert
and Saer de Quincy, Malise, brother to earl Gilbert, William, Ferquhard, and
Robert, his sons, etc. The confirmation is dated anno 1200.

He was succeeded by his son,

IV. ROBERT, fourth earl of Strathern. He made a considerable figure in the
reign of king Alexander II. who granted a charter of the whole earldom of Fife
to Malcolm, son of earl Duncan, in which Radulphus abbot of Arbroath, Book of
charters, penes eund. vol. I p. 142.
Robert earl of Strathern, etc. are witnesses, anno regni 11 mo, et anno domino
1225.

When the differences between king Alexander and the king of England were
accommodated, the earl of Strathern was one of the guarantees on the part of
the king of Scotland, Rymer, tom. I. p. 377.
anno 1237.

He died before the year 1244, leaving issue a son,

Malise, who succeeded him, -- and three daughters.

1. Annabella, married to sir David Graham, ancestor of the duke of Montrose.

2. Matilda, married to Malcolm earl of Fife.

3. Lucia, married to sir William Sinclair of Roslin, ancestor of the earls of
Orkney, etc.

V. MALISE, fifth earl of Strathern, a man of great parts, and was concerned in
most of the public transactions of his time.

When a peace was concluded between king Alexander II. of Scotland, and king
Henry III. of England, Rymer, tom. I. p. 428.
Malisius comes de Strathern, was one of the guarantees of the treaty on the
part of king Alexander, anno 1244.

When king Alexander III. changed his ministry, the earl of Strathern, by the
advice and consent of the whole nobility, was admitted one of the council,
Ibid. p. 559 and 566.
anno 1255.

He married a daughter of Eugene de Ergadia, relict of the king of Mann,
according to these words in Fordun: Malisius comes de Strathern, Fordun, vol.
II. p. 109.
viduam regis Manniae, filiam Eugenii de Ergadia uxorem duxit, etc.

By her he had issue a son,

Malise, his heir.

This great earl died anno 1271, according to these words of the same author:
Malisius comes de Strathern, Ibid. p. 114.
in partibus Gallicanis decessit, vir genere et liberalitate praeclarus, et
super omnes compatriotas munificus, etc. et apud Dumblane sepelitur.

He was succeeded by his son,

VI. MALISE, sixth earl of Strathern, also a man of singular merit, and a true
lover of his country. He was one of the Scotch nobles who agreed to the
marriage of princess Margaret, Ibid. tom. II. p. 1083.
daughter of king Alexander III. with Eric king of Norway, anno 1281.

He was also one of those worthy patriots who entered into a solemn engagement
to maintain and defend princess Margaret's right to the crown of Scotland,
Rymer, tom. II. p. 266.
in case of king Alexander's death without male-issue, anno 1284.

This earl, with several others of the nobility, joined in a letter to king
Edward I. of England, concerning a marriage between Margaret of Norway,
undoubted heir to the crown of Scotland, Ibid. p. 471.
and prince Edward of England, anno 1290.

He was afterward one of the arbiters chosen on the part of Robert Bruce,
(...). p. 553.
in his competition for the crown with John Baliol, anno 1292.

He was at last forced to submit to king Edward's determination in favors of
John Baliol, and was obliged to acknowledge him, Ibid. p. 644.
anno 1294; but he died soon thereafter.

He married Mary, daughter of sir John Cummin of Badenoch, who, in Mr. Rymer's
collections, is designed spouse of Malise earl of Strathern, Ibid. p. 727.
anno 1296.

By her he had a son,

Malise, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Mary, married to sir John Murray of Drumsargard, knight, of whom more
hereafter.

He was succeeded by his only son,

VII. MALISE, seventh earl of Strathern, a worthy patriot, a steady loyalist,
and always unvariably attached to the interest of his king and country.

He was one of the Scotch nobles who signed that famous letter to the pope,
Fordun, vol. II. p. 275.
asserting the independency of Scotland, anno 1320.

During the minority of king David Bruce, he opposed Edward Baliol with all his
interest; wherefore, when that prince prevailed, he was by him forfeited, and
his earldom of Strathern given to an English lord, John de Warren earl of
Surrey, cousin to king Edward III. Rymer, tom. IV. p. 595.
in compensation sumptum et laborum quos idem comes in guerra Scotiae apposuit,
etc. 2d March 1334.

Earl Malise used all his interest to recover his estate, by the influence of
his friends with Edward Baliol, and lest he should have succeeded, king Edward
III. of England wrote two letters to Baliol in favors of his cousin the earl
of Surrey, dated also in March 1334. Immediately thereafter, we find this John
de Warren designed comes Surriae et de Strathern, in that scandalous deed,
whereby Edward Baliol renounces and surrenders to king Edward of England, these
counties of Scotland, with their castles, Ibid. p. 614.
viz. Berwick, Roxburgh, Jedworth, Selkirk, Etrick, Edinburgh, Haddington,
Linlithgow, Peebles, and Dumfries, 12th June 1334.

This worthy earl (according to Mr. Crawfurd) married, 1st, a daughter of the
earl of Orkney, but she having been concerned in some treasonable practices
against the king, was, with some others, condemned to perpetual imprisonment,
where she died, according to these remarkable words of a good author, Fordun,
vol. II. p. 274.
viz. " dominus Willielmus de Soulis et comitissa de Strathern, convicti de
crimine lasae majestatis et confessi conspirando contra regem, sententiam
perpetui carceris acceperunt," etc. anno 1320.

He married, 2dly, Marjory, daughter of Robert de Muscamp, which is instructed
by a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
wherein it is said, Malisius comes de Strathern, uxorem habuit Marjoriam,
filiam Roberti de Muscampo, etc.

But it seems he had no surviving issue by either; for the earldom of
Strathern, of which earl Malise had been forfeited by Baliol, was again resumed
by king David, carl Malise having died without children; and that earldom was,
by the said king David, conferred upon his friend and favorite sir Maurice
Moray, the heir of line of the family, being son of his sister Mary, before
mentioned, to whom we now return.

VII. MARY, only daughter of Malise sixth earl of Strathern, and sister of the
seventh earl, married to sir John Moray of Drumsargard, as before observed, who
got with her from her father the lands of Abercairny, Ogilvie, Glensherop,
Charta penes Abercairny.
etc. which were afterward confirmed to him by Malise earl of Strathern, her
brother. The charter is still extant.

We shall here only observe, that, according to Mr. Crawfurd, this sir John was
son of sir Andrew Moray lord of Bothwell, et panetarius Scotiae, whose
succession is deduced under the title Moray lord of Bothwell, page 80th, etc.
of this work, to which we refer our readers.

By the said Mary he had issue three sons.

1. Sir Maurice, his heir.

2. Sir Alexander, who succeeded his brother, and carried on the line of the
family of Abercairny.

3. Walter, ancestor of the Morays of Ogilface, in Linlithgowshire.

VIII. Sir MAURICE MORAY, eldest son of the above Mary, by the said sir John,
was a steady loyalist, and firm friend of king David Bruce, with whom he was in
great favor.

The earldom of Strathern being now in the crown, by the expulsion of the
English possessors, and the death of the last earl Malise, without surviving
issue, the king conferred that earldom upon this sir Maurice, Ibidem.
as before observed, to him and the heirs-male of his body; which failing, to
return to the crown, by charter dated anno 1343, he thereby became eighth earl
of Strathern, and is afterward designed Mauritius comes de Strathern, Ibidem.
et in pub. archiv.
in many authentic writs, too numerous to be here inserted.

This brave earl accompanied king David in his unfortunate expedition into
England, and lost his life at the battle of Durham, where his royal master was
taken prisoner, anno 1346; and having no issue, the earldom of Strathern,
according to the investiture, returned to the crown, but he was succeeded in
his other estates of Abercairny, etc. by his immediate younger brother,

VIII. Sir ALEXANDER MORAY of Abercairny, etc. before mentioned, who is heir of
line of the ancient earls of Strathern, and of whom James Moray now of
Abercairny, Esquire; is the lineal heir and representative, whose descent is fully
deduced in the second volume of this work.

STEWART Earl of STRATHERN.
THIS earldom continued in the crown from the death of the last earl in 1346,
till king David II. conferred it upon his nephew,

I. ROBERT, lord high steward of Scotland, (afterward king Robert II.) anno
1358, when that of earl of Strathern was added to his other titles.

He afterward got a charter under the great seal, upon his own resignation,
from the said king David, Chart. in archivis regin Davidis.
carissimo nepo^i suo Roberto senescallo Scotiae, comiti de Strathern, of the
whole lordship of Methven, with its pertinents, in the county of Perth, dated
7th September 1369.

Also a charter to him and his son David, of an annuity out of the lands of
Kindeloch, Ibidem.
in the same county, 7th October 1370.

Upon king Robert II.'s accession to the crown, he immediately erected the
earldom of Strathern into a county palatine, in favors of the said,

II. Prince DAVID, the eldest son of his second marriage, by lady Eupheme,
daughter of Hugh earl of Ross. This whole earldom to be enjoyed by him and his
heirs, as ^^lly and freely as they were possessed by the last Malise earl of
Strathern, or any of his predecessors, etc. Chart. in ^^chiv (...) II.
by his royal charter, dated 9th July, anno regni 1 mo, anno dom. 1371.

He got also two charters under the great seal, from the king, domino Da^idi
(...) militi; comiti de Strathern, filio suo carissimo, of the barony of
Urquhart, with the castle thereof, in Inverness-shire, and others in the county
of Perth, Ibidem.
dated in July and August the said year.

He afterward got four charters, under the great seal, of many other lands and
baronies, in all which he is designed the king's beloved son, Ibidem.
and earl of Strathern, in the years 1376 and 1377.

He left issue an only child,

III. Lady EUPHEME STEWART, designed comitissa palatina de Strathern, who
married sir Patrick, son of sir Patrick Graham lord o^ Kincardin, etc.

Their son

IV. MALISE, in her right, was earl of Strathern; but king James I. divested
him of that earldom, finding it to be a male-fee, and in lien thereof conferred
upon him the earldom of Menteith, as is fully set forth under the title of
Graham earl of Menteith, page 47 4th of this work.

LION Earl of STRATHMORE.
THIS illustrious family is of French extraction, and descended from the
ancient house of de Leonne in that kingdom, who derived their origin from the
noble race of the Leones of Rome.

As there were several great and flourishing families of the de Leonnes in
France in the tenth century, one of the first rank amongst them came to England
with William the Conqueror, anno 1066, and had a considerable command in his
army. His son, sir Roger de Leonne, Lord Carse's history of the family, M. S.
penes comitem de Strathmore.
came to Scotland with king Edgar, son to king Malcolm Canmore, about the year
1098; and for the good and faithful services performed by him against Donald
Bain the usurper, he obtained from king Edgar certain lands in Perth-shire,
which, after him, were called Glen-Lyon; and this sir Roger de Leonne is
witness in a charter of that prince to the monastery of Dunfermline, which the
author of the manuscript says he has seen, Ibidem.
dated anno regni 7 mo, which is anno dom. 1105.

Of this sir Roger was lineally descended,

I. Sir JOHN LION, a man of great worth and merit, who flourished in the reigns
of king Robert Bruce, and his son king David, from which last prince he
obtained a charter, dilecto et fideli suo Johanni Lion, militi, propter fidelem
et fortem operam sibi et patri suo praestitam, etc. of the lands and baronies
of Forteviot and Forgundenny, Charta penes comitem de Strathmore.
in Perth-shire; the lands of Curtestoun and Drumgovan, in Aberdeen-shire, etc.
This charter has no date; but, by the witnesses, appears to have been granted
about the year 1342 or 1343.

He left issue two sons.

1. Sir John, afterward lord Glammis.

2. -- Lion, who had two sons, Patrick and Michael, Ibidem.
both mentioned in a charter hereafter narrated.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. Sir JOHN LION, first designed of Forteviot, who obtained from king David
Bruce, pro fideli servitio suo impenso et impendendo, an annuity of ten merks
sterling yearly, during all the days of his life, to be uplifted out of the
proceeds of the justice eyres benorth the river Forth. This is instructed by a
charter proceeding upon a precept, directed to the king's chamberlain for the
time, Ibidem.
dated 10th April 1368.

He acquired from John de Barclay, lord of Tullibothwel, the lands of
Tullinact, in the forest of Boyn, in Banf-shire, with the lands of
Ballandirest, in the barony of Culace, in the shire of Forfar. This appears by
two charters still extant; Ibidem.
the one without a date; the other dated 28th May 1369.

He also acquired from Walter Lesly, afterward earl of Ross, all his lands in
the territory of Forgundenny, Ibidem.
by a charter, dated anno 1370.

This sir John was a man of great parts and fine accomplishments, and became a
mighty favorite of king Robert II. from whom he got a charter under the great
seal, pro laudabili et fideli servitio suo impenso et impendendo, Chart. in
archivis Roberti II.
of the whole lands and thancdom of Glammis in Forfar-shire, dated 18th day of
March 1372.

Soon thereafter, Stewart's hist. of the royal family, and lives of the offic.
of state.
the king made him his own secretary, and bestowed upon him in marriage his
daughter, lady Jean Stewart, in 1376, and appointed him lord great chamberlain
of Scotland, anno 1378.

He obtained from his majesty (nomine dotis) with his said daughter, the
thanedom of Tannadyee in Forfar-shire, and the barony of Kinghorn in Fife,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
carissimo filio suo domino Johanni Lion, etc.

He also assigned him for his armorial bearing, argent, a lion rampant azure,
armed and langued gules, Sir George MacKenzie.
within a double tressure, counterflowered, with a woman's head for a crest,
etc.

He got afterward no less than eight charters under the great seal, viz. of
the lands and thanage of Glendouachy in Banf-shire, the lands of Longforgan in
Perth-shire, with many others in the counties of Fife, Chart. in archiv. Rob.
II.
Forfar, and Aberdeen, between the years 1378 and 1382, in all which he is
designed by the king, filius noster carissimus.

He then got another charter from the same prince, upon his own resignation,
containing an entail of his whole lands and baronies, "to and in favors of
himself and the lawful heirs of his own body; which failing, to Patrick Lion
his nephew, and the heirs-male of his body; whom failing, to Michael Lion,
brother to the said Patrick, and the heirs-male of his body; which all failing,
Charta penes comitem de Strathmore.
to his own nearest heirs whatever," dated the penult day of January, anno
regni 9 no, 1380.

He was also created a lord of parliament; and being appointed ambassador
extraordinary to the court of England, obtained a safe conduct for himself and
forty horses in his retinue, Rymer, tom. VII. p. 343.
anno 1382.

This worthy lord was killed in a duel at a place called the moss of Balhall,
near Forfar, by James Lindsay, Lives of the offic. of state.
lord of Crawfurd, nephew to the king, anno 1383, who, on that account, greatly
incurred his majesty's displeasure, though he was pardoned afterward. The lord
Glammis was interred in the royal burial-place at Scoon by the king's express
orders.

By the said lady Jean Stewart, he left issue a son,

III. JOHN, second lord Glammis, who succeeded him.etc. He being young at his
father's death, the king, his grandfather, took him immediately under his own
protection, gave him an education suiatble to his high birth; Retour penes
comitem de Strathmore.
and he was served heir to his father, anno 1396.

He was a man of great courage and intrepidity, and behaved gallantly at the
bloody battle of Harlaw, anno 1411; but how, or for what reason, he came to be
confined in the tower of London, we can give no account; but we find him
liberate from thence by order of the king of England, Rymer, tom. IX. p. 5.
anno 1413.

This lord was also a man of parts and honor, and was one of the commissioners
appointed to negotiate king James's liberty, in 1423; and both he and Patrick
master of Glammis, Ibid. tom. X. p. 308. 325. and 369.
his eldest son, became hostages for his ransom, anno 1424, from whence the
said Patrick did not obtain his liberty till the year 1427.

He married lady Elizabeth Graham, daughter of Patrick earl of Strathern, by
whom he had three sons.

1. Patrick, his heir.

2. Michael Lion, who got several lands from his father; but he dying without
issue, they returned to the family.

3. David Lion, Chart. penes comitem de Strathmore.
who got from his brother the lands of Lethen, etc. and married Margaret
Strachan; but we can give no account of his posterity.

The lord Glammis died anno 1435, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV. PATRICK, third lord Glammis, a man of great abilities and integrity, and
in high favor with king James II. He was of the privy council to that prince,
who also made him great master of his household.

He got a charter under the great seal, Patricio dom. Chart. in pub. archiv.
Glammis, of the lands of Cardean, Barclay, Drumgley, Drumgeith, etc. etc. 10th
January etc. 1451.

He was appointed one of the ambassadors extraordinary to the court of England,
Rymer, tom. XI. p. 349.
when a truce was concluded, and he became one of the hostages, anno 1454.

He married Isabel, daughter of sir Alexander Ogilvie of Auchterhouse, by whom
he had three sons, and one daughter.

1. Alexander, his heir.

2. John, who succeeded his brother.

3. William, of whom the Lions of Ogil, caster and wester, are descended.

His daughter, Chart. in pub. archiv. ad ann. 1452.
Elizabeth, married to Alexander Robertson of Strowan, head or chief of all the
clan Robertson, etc.

He died anno 1459, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. ALEXANDER, fourth lord Glammis, who, in his father's lifetime, got a
charter under the great seal, Alexandro Lion filio et haeredi apparenti
Patricii domini Glammis, et Agnetae Crichton sponsae suae, of several lands and
baronies, Ibidem.
dated the 17th day of February 1449.

He afterward got three charters under the great seal, Alexandro domino
Glammis, of the lands of Kinghorn, Ibidem.
castle thereof, with many others, in the years 1463 and 1464.

He married Agnes, a daughter of William lord Crichton, chancellor of Scotland;
but dying without issue, anno 1485, his estate and honors devolved upon his
brother,

V. JOHN, fifth lord, who got a charter under the great seal, Johanni domino
Glammis, of the lands and barony of Baiky, etc. dated 4th July 1489, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
and was that same year named justiciar of Scotland.

He was appointed one of the ambassadors extraordinary to the court of England,
Ibidem.
anno 1491.

When his elder brother was alive, he acquired the coronery of the shire of
Forfar and Kincardin, Ibidem.
anno 1472.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir John Scrymgeour of Dudhope, constable of
Dundee, by whom, Ibidem.
according to lord Carse's memoirs, he had four sons, and nine daughters.

1. John, his heir.

2. David Lion, first of the family of Cossin, who, in a charter under the
great seal, is designed filius Johannis domini Glammis, et frater jumoris
Johannis magistri de Glammis, Ibidem.
anno 1492.

3. William Lion.

4. George.

These three last were killed at the battle of Flowdon, anno 1513.

His 1st daughter, Christian, was second wife to William earl of Errol, but had
no issue.

2. Margaret, Contr. penes comitem de Strathmore.
married to James Rind of Broxmouth, per contract ad annum 1495.

The names of the other daughters have not come to our hand.

He died anno 1497, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. JOHN, sixth lord Glammis, who, in his father's lifetime, got a charter
under the great seal, Johanni Lion, filio et haeredi apparent^ Johannis domini
Glammis, Chart. in pub. archiv.
et Elizabethae Gray sponsae suae, of several lands and baronies, in July 1489.

This lord did not long survive his father; but died anno 1500, leaving issue,
by the said Elizabeth, a daughter of Andrew, third lord Cray, three sons, and
one daughter.

1. George, his heir.

2. John, who succeeded his brother.

3. Alexander Lion, Esquire;.

His daughter, Elizabeth, was married, 1st, to John master of Forbes; 2dly, to
John Crichton of Strathurd.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. GEORGE, seventh lord, who got a charter under the great seal, Georgio
domino Glammis, Ibidem.
of the lands of Balnevis, Hatton of Kinneil, etc. 31st October 1501.

But he dying unmarried, anno 1505, his estate and honors went to his brother,

VII. JOHN, eighth lord Glammis, who married Janet Douglas, Chart. in archiv.
familiae de Douglas.
daughter of George master of Angus, by whom he had a son,

John, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Elizabeth, Chart. in pub. archiv.
married to -- Ross of Craigy, which is instructed by a charter under the great
seal, ad annum 1529.

He died in the flower of his age, in 1528, and was succeeded by his only son,

VIII. JOHN, ninth lord Glammis, who, being young at his father's death, was
educated under the care of his uncle Alexander Lion, Esquire;.

His mother, having been engaged with her brother, the earl of Angus, in some
treasonable practices against the king, was tried and condemned for treason,
for which she suffered death, anno 1538. Her son, the lord Glammis, though then
but a minor, was also convicted as art and part in his mother's treason, for
which he was condemned to suffer death, and his estate and honors were
forfeited to the crown; but his execution was suspended on account of his
youth: however, he continued in prison till queen Mary's accession to the
crown; and at her first parliament his forfeiture was repealed, Records of
parliament.
and he was restored to his estate and honors, anno 1543.

He got a charter under the great seal, Johanni oomini Glammis, et dominae
Joannae Keith suae sponsae, Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the baronies of Ballachy, Courrestoun, etc. in Aberdeen-shire, 6th February
1545.

Also a charter of the lands and barony of Kinghorn, Ibidem.
and several others in Fife-shire, 12th September 1548.

By the said lady Jean Keith, daughter of William third earl Marishal, he left
issue two sons, and one daughter.

1. John, his heir.

2. Sir Thomas Lion of Auldbar, lord high treasurer of Scotland, who got
charters, under the great seal, Ibidem.
of many lands; but his only son dying without succession, his estate returned
to the family.

His daughter, Margaret, married, 1st, to Gilbert fourth earl of Cassilis;
2dly, to John first marquis of Hamilton.

He dying anno 1560, was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. JOHN, tenth lord Glammis, who got charters under the great seal, Johanni
domino Glammis, Ibidem.
et Elizabethae ejus sponsae, of the lands and thanage of Glammis, the barony
of Baiky, and many others, in the years 1567 and 1569.

He was a man of good parts and great integrity, was first made a privy
councillor, then preferred to be lord high chancellor of Scotland, Lives of the
offic. of state.
anno 1575.

He got three charters under the great seal, Johanni domino Glammis,
cancellario Scotiae, of the lands of Huntly, Longforgun, Littletown, Fothers,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
Chanwell, King's-Seat, etc. in January, March, and April, 1576.

He acted in that high office in these troublesome times, to the great
satisfaction of the whole nation; but was accidentally shot in the open street,
in a squabble betwixt the earl of Crawfurd's servants and his own, anno 1578,
greatly regreted by all good men. A reverend author speaks thus of that
unfortunate event: "The death of the chancellor was much lamented, falling out
in the time when the king and country stood in most need of his services. He
had carried himself with much commendation in his place, and acquired great
authority: most careful was he to have peace conserved both in the country and
the church, and labored much to have the question of church policy settled,
Spotiswood's church hist. p. 283.
etc. etc. etc."

By the said Elizabeth, daughter of Alexander, sixth lord Abernethy of Salton,
he left issue a son,

Patrick, afterward earl of Kinghorn, -- and two daughters.

1. Jean, married, 1st, to Robert Douglas of Lochleven, son and apparent heir
of William earl of Morton; 2dly, to Archibald, eighth earl of Angus; 3dly, to
Alexander lord Spynie.

2. Elizabeth, married to Patrick seventh lord Gray.

X. PATRICK, eleventh lord Glammis, succeeded, who being young at his father's
death, was carefully educated under the inspection of his uncle sir Thomas, the
lord treasurer.

He got charters under the great seal, Patricio domino Glammis, of the town and
lands of King's-Seat, the patronage of Balhelvie, the lands of Ardroke, Chart.
in pub. archiv.
etc. in the years 1605 and 1606.

He was a man of good parts, both natural and acquired, and in great favor
with king James VI. who appointed him one of his privy council, and named him
one of the commissioners to treat of a nearer union with England, anno 1604.
His majesty further dignified him with the titles of earl of Kinghorn, Ibid. et
charta penes comitem de Strathmore.
lord Lion and Glammis, by patent dated 10th day of July 1606.

He afterward got five charters under the great seal, Patricio comiti de
Kinghorn, of the following lands and baronies, viz. of the island of Inchkeith,
the patronage of Kinghorn, the barony of Tannadyce, Chart. in put. archiv.
the lands of Huntly, Longforgun, Tullibardin, with several others, in the
years 1609, 1610, and 1613.

He married lady Anne Murray, daughter of John earl of Tullibardin, by whom he
had three sons, and one daughter.

1. John, his heir.

2. James, who obtained from his father the lands of Auldbar; but dying without
succession, they returned to the family.

3. Frederick, who got from his father the lands of Brigton, upon which he got
a charter under the great seal, anno 1622, and was ancestor of the Lions of
Brigton.

His daughter, lady Anne, was married to William tenth earl of Errol.

He died anno 1615, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. JOHN, second earl, who got several charters under the great seal, Johanni
comiti de Kinghorn, domino Lion, Glammis, etc. of many lands and baronies,
Ibidem.
in the years 1617 and 1621.

He got also charters of the whole lands and territory of Glammis, Ibidem.
etc. in July 1634.

He married, 1st, lady Martha Erskine, daughter of John seventh earl of Mar,
by by whom he had no issue.

He married, 2dly, lady Elizabeth Maule, daughter of Patrick earl of Panmure,
by whom he had a son,

Patrick, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Lady Elizabeth, married to Charles earl of Aboyne.

He was a man of great honor, and a firm friend of the royal family.

Though he was appointed a privy councillor by parliament, anno 1641, and one
of the committee of estates, anno 1644, yet he was one of those worthy patriots
who strenuously opposed the delivering up of the king to the English, Rescinded
acts of part.
anno 1647; and dying soon thereafter was succeeded by his son,

XII. PATRICK, third earl of Kinghorn, also a great loyalist, who suffered many
hardships on account of his attachment to the royal family; Guthrie's memoris,
and Cromwell's act of indemnity.
and though but a very young man, was fined by Oliver Cromwell in the sum of one
thousand pounds sterling, anno 1654.

Immediately after the restoration of king Charles II. he was appointed one of
the lords of his privy council, one of the lords of the treasury, and one of
the senators of the college of justice.

He also, with consent of the crown, changed the title of Kinghorn for that of
Strathmore, and was afterward designed earl of Strathmore and Kinghorn.

He married lady Helen, daughter of John earl of Middleton, by whom he had two
sons and two daughters.

1. John, his heir.

2. Mr. Patrick Lion of Auchterhouse, a man of great worth and honor, but had
the misfortune to join the earl of Mar in 1715, and was slain at the battle of
Sherriffmuir, on 13th November that year, without any surviving issue.

1st daughter, lady Grizel, married to David third earl of Airly.

2. Lady Elizabeth, married, 1st, to Charles second earl of Aboyne; 2dly, to
Patrick lord Kinnaird.

This noble earl was also one of the lords of the privy council to king James
VII. but after the revolution, he retired to the country, where he lived in
great splendour and magnificence all the rest of his days; and being a man of
prudence and economy, he improved his estate, and greatly beautified his seats
of Glammis and Huntly, and gave the name of Castle-Lion to the latter, which it
has retained ever since.

He died anno 1695, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. JOHN, fourth earl, designed of Strathmore and Kinghorn, a man of great
integrity and merit, and was one of the privy council to her majesty queen Anne.

He married lady Elizabeth Stanhope, daughter of Philip earl of Chesterfield, a
lady of singular probity and virtue, by whom he had six sons and two daughters.

1. Patrick, lord Glammis, who died unmarried in the 17th year of his age.

2. Philip, who died also unmarried, aged nineteen years.

3. John, who became his father's heir.

4. Charles.

5. James.

6. Thomas.

These three were all successively earls of Strathmore, of whom afterward.

1st daughter, lady Helen, married to Robert lord Blantyre.

2. Lady Mary.

He died anno 1712, and was succeeded by his third son,

XIV. JOHN, fifth earl, a man of good parts, of a most amiable disposition and
character; but having engaged in the earl of Marr's rebellion, was killed at
the battle of Sheriffmuir, on 13th November 1715, unmarried, and universally
regreted.

He was succeeded by his brother,

XIV. CHARLES, sixth earl, also a man of great honor and integrity.

He married lady Susan Cochran, daughter of John earl of Dundonald, but having
been accidentally killed on the street of Forfar, anno 1728, without issue, his
estate and honors devolved upon his next brother,

XIV. JAMES, seventh earl, a man of life and spirit, who, when a younger
brother, went into the army, and had a commission in the British service.

He married Mary, daughter of Charles Oliphant of Langton, Esquire; but dying
without issue in January 1735, was succeeded by his brother,

XIV. THOMAS, eighth earl, who was member of parliament for the county of
Forfar when he succeeded to the estate and honors.

He married miss Jean Nicholson, eldest daughter and co-heiress of James
Nicholson, of the county of Durham, Esquire; with whom he got a considerable
estate, and by her had issue three sons and four daughters.

1. John, now earl of Strathmore

2. James.

3. Thomas.

1st daughter, lady Susan.

2. Lady Anne.

3. Lady Mary.

4. Lady --.

The earl died anno 1755, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. JOHN, ninth earl of Strathmore and Kinghorn, etc.

ARMS.
Argent, a lion rampant azure, armed and langued gules, within a double
tressure, flowered and counter-flowered with flowers de lis of the latter.

CREST; on a wreath, a lady to the girdle, holding in her right hand the royal
thistle, enclosed with a circle of laurel, proper, in honor of the family's
marriage with king Robert II.'s daughter.

SUPPORTERS; on the dexter side, an unicorn argent, armed, maned, and unguled
or; on the sinister a lion gules.

MOTTO; In te domine speravi.

CHIEF SEATS,
At the castle of Glammis, a noble seat in the county of Forsar, and at
Castle-Lyon in Perthshire.

SUTHERLAND Earl of SUTHERLAND.
THIS great and illustrious family yields to none in the kingdom for antiquity.
Our historians mention thanes and earls of Sutherland, as soon as those
dignities were known in Scotland.

They are said to be sprung from a warlike people called the Moravii, who came
from Germany to this country, in the reign of king Corbred I. to whom they gave
great assistance in his wars against the Romans.

King Corbred rewarded them nobly, gave them large possessions in the Northern
parts, Martin's collect. Gordon's history of Sutherl. Cambden, Collier's dict.
Scotch compend. etc.
where they settled; from them the county of Murray had, its name; and their
posterity became proprietors of all that large tract of country now called
Murray, Ross, Sutherland, Caithness, etc.

There is a very good history of this noble family written by sir Robert Gordon
of Gordonstoun, a man of great ingenuity, learning and knowledge; but he
deduces their descent no farther back than,

ALAN, thane of Sutherland, a man of great power and authority, who flourished
in the reigns of king Duncan and MacBeth the usurper. When the Northern parts
had been invaded by a considerable body of Danes and Norvegians, under the
conduct of their king Olaus, and had possessed themselves of a great part of
Rossshire, etc. this Alan raised his vassals and followers, attacked them, gave
them a total overthrow on a muir called Drumlea, near Creigh, Gordon's history
of Sutherland, penes commit. de Sutherland.
in Sutherland, and drove them entirely out of the country, anno 1031, and the
vestiges of that conflict are still to be seen on the said muir of Drumlea,
where a helmet and coat of mail were lately dug up, etc.

After MacBeth had murdered king Duncan, he greatly dreaded the power of the
thane of Sutherland. He knew he was a great patriot, and had been very active
in keeping up the spirits of the loyalists in favors of prince Malcolm, the
rightful heir of the crown: he therefore ^ound means to get him put to death
also, Ibidem.
a little before the restoration of king Malcolm.

He was succeeded by his son,

WALTER, thane of Sutherland, who, in reward of his father's faithful services,
Gord. Home, Buchanan, Crawf. etc.
and great sufferings, and his own merit, was created earl of Sutherland by
king Malcolm III. in the very beginning of his reign, anno 1057, and was one of
the first in the kingdom who enjoyed that dignity.

He died in 1097, leaving issue a son,

ROBERT, second earl of Sutherland, who succeeded him, and flourished in the
reign of king Alexander I. Ibidem.


He built the castle of Dunrobin, which has ever since been one of the chief
seats of the family.

He was succeeded by his son,

HUGH FRISKIN, etc. etc. Thus our authors have accounted for the first earls of
Sutherland.

This Hugh was indeed the real and undoubted progenitor of this noble family,
but was not the son of Robert, which will appear from unquestionable authority.

He was the son of Friskin or Friskinus, who was proprietor of all those
Northern countries.

Whether this Friskin was brother or cousin to Robert second earl of
Sutherland, we cannot pretend to determine, but from him we proceed to deduce
the descent of this most ancient family, by indisputable documents.

I. FRISKINUS, who, it is said, had that name put upon him by his being a great
warrior; Friskin, in the old language, signifying the man with the ready
hanger, etc.

He was one of the greatest men in the kingdom, had vast possessions in lands
in the counties of Murray, Ross, Sutherland, and Caithness, etc. which he
divided amongst his children, whose posterity assumed their sirnames from their
possessions, as was the custom of those early times.

To his son William he gave a great estate in Murray; the lands of Duffus,
Rossile, Inchikil, Machir, Kintrai, and many others, all mentioned in a charter
of confirmation of king William, in which are these remarkable words: Chart.
(...) com. de buchan, et ^ha^tul. of Murray.
Quas terras Friskinus, pater ejus, te^^it tempore regis Davidis, etc. Of this
William all the Murrays in Scotland are descended. Vide titles Murray duke of
Athole, Murray lord Bothwell, etc. pages 51st and 80th.

Friskin had another son,

II. HUGH, who in many authentic writs, is designed son of Friskin,
Dalrymple's collections.
and brother of William, etc.

In a confirmation charter by king William, of a donation of the church of
Kingussen, by Bricius bishop of Murray, Willielmus filius Friskini, Chartulary
of Murray, page 156.
et Hugo Friskin frater ejus, are witnesses. This charter has no date, but as
Bri^ins was made bishop in 1203, and king William died anno 1214, it must have
been within that space.

In another charter of the same prince, of the church of Aberkerdor, upon the
determination of a controversy betwixt the bishop of Murray and Gilchrist earl
of Mar, Chartulary of Arbroath, penes commit. de Panmure.
Hugo filius Friskini, William de Bosch, chancellor, etc. are witnesses, ante
1214.

Though many more documents might be adduced, we shall only add, that the
Murrays, the descendents of William son of Friskin, and the Sutherlands,
Nisbet's append. p. 191.
the descendents of his brother Hugh, had the same armorial bearing, viz. three
stars, etc.

This Hugh got from his father Friskin, several lands in Sutherland, which are
still in the family's possession, Sir James Dalrymple.
and from which his posterity assumed their surname. He, according to sir
Robert Gordon, Mr. Crawfurd, etc. was third earl of Sutherland, but was only
the first of this line.

He was also a gallant officer, and defeated a considerable body of the Danes,
Gordon and Crawfurd.
and slew their general at Embo in Sutherland, in the end of the reign of king
William the Lion.

He made a donation to Gilbert archdeacon of Murray (afterward St. Gilbert) of
the lands of Skelbo, Charta penes commit. de Sutherland.
etc. in Sutherland, confirmed by a charter under the great seal from king
William, which is still extant.

He died in the beginning of the reign of king Alexander II. who succeeded king
William, anno 1214, and left issue a son,

III. WILLIAM, second earl of Sutherland, who succeeded him.

He confirmed his father's donation of the lands of Skelbo to St. Gilbert, and
built the cathedral church of Dornock in Sutherland, Writs of the family of
Sutherland.
and called it St. Gilbert's church: the south-isle whereof has been the
burial place of the family ever since.

This noble earl had also several encounters with the Danes and Norvegians, who
often invaded that part of the country. He gained one remarkable victory over
them in the reign of king Alexander II. in memory whereof, there was a cross
erected, called Ree-cross to this day. Gordon's history of Sutherland.
Ree-cross in Galic, signifies the king's cross, to denote that the Danish king
or general was buried there.

He died anno 1248, and was succeeded by his infant son,

IV. WILLIAM, third earl of Sutherland, who was a man of great parts, a true
patriot, and no less a brave soldier than an able statesman.

There was a controversy, which had long subsisted betwixt the bishops of
Caithness and earls of Sutherland, about the lands of Skelbo, Pronsie,
Thirbolt, etc. which was at last amicably compromised between Archibald bishop
of Caithness and this earl. The indenture or agreement, which is still
preserved, bears, controversia, etc. inter venerabiles patres, Gilbertum,
Willielmum, et Walterum, bonae memoriae episcopos Cathaniae, praedecessores
nostros, ex part una, et nobiles viros, Willielmum clarae memoriae, et
Willielmum ejus filium, comites Sutherlandiae, ex part altera, etc. etc. The
agreement, Indent. penes commit. de Sutherland.
to which the bishop's and the earls seals are appended, is dated the 10th of
the calends of October 1275.

This earl was one of the Scotch nobles who entered into a solemn agreement or
association, to receive and defend princess Margaret of Norway, Rymer, tom. II.
p. 266.
for their lawful queen and sovereign, in case of king Alexander III.'s death
without issue-male, anno 1284.

He, with several others of the nobility, joined in a letter to king Edward I.
of England, concerning a marriage between queen Margaret of Scotland, Ibid. p.
471.
and his eldest son Edward prince of Wales, anno 1290.

He was also one of the arbiters chosen on the part of Robert Bruce, Ibidem.
in his competition for the crown with John Baliol.

And though he, with many others of his countrymen, was forced to swear
allegiance to king Edward I. of England, when he had overrun Scotland,
Prynne's collections, vol. III. p. 653.
anno 1296; yet he joined king Robert Bruce as soon as he began to assert his
title to the crown, continued steady in his interest as long as he lived, and
performed many brave actions in defense of the liberties of his country, under
the conduct of that great prince; particularly at the battle of Bannockburn,
where he was one of the chief commanders, Crawfurd, Gordon, etc.
and had no small share of the glory acquired by the Scots on that memorable
24th June 1314.

He was also one of the first of the Scotch nobility who signed that famous
letter to the pope, asserting the independency of Scotland, anno 1320, Fordun,
vol. II. p. 275.
to which his seal is appended.

He died anno 1325, in the 77th year of his age, was buried in the isle of the
cathedral church of Dornock, and left issue two sons.

1. Kenneth, his heir.

2. John, designed filius comitis de Sutherland, Rymer and Fordun.
who died an hostage in England, anno 1362.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. KENNETH, fourth earl of Sutherland, a man of singular worth and merit, a
firm and steady friend both of king Robert Bruce, and his son king David, and
one of the ablest generals of the age he lived in.

He married a daughter of Donald earl of Mar, Writs of the family of
Sutherland.
by whom he had two sons and one daughter.

1. William, his heir.

2. Nicholas, who got from his brother earl William, the lands of Therboll in
Sutherland, upon which he got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
etc. and was ancestor of the Sutherlands of Duffus.

His daughter, Eustach, married to Gilbert, Gordon's history of Sutherland.
son and apparent heir of Reynald Murray of Cowbin.

This brave earl had the command of the right wing of the Scotch army, at the
bloody battle of Halidonhill, where he behaved with incredible valor and
intrepidity; and having rushed in amongst the middle of his enemies, lost his
life fighting valiantly in defense of the liberties of his country, Fordun,
vol. II. p. 311.
on 22d July 1333, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. WILLIAM, fifth earl of Sutherland, who inherited all the good qualities of
his noble ancestors, was a true lover of his country, a great statesman, and a
gallant soldier; and in king David's minority, did signal services to his
country, by often invading England, and distressing the enemy.

He accompanied king David Bruce in his unfortunate expedition into England,
and was taken prisoner with him at the battle of Durham, anno 1346: Fordun and
Rymer.
however, he soon obtained his liberty, and was, by the estates of the nation,
appointed one of the ambassadors extraordinary to treat with the English
commissioners at Newcastle about the king's liberty, anno 1351; Rymer, tom. V.
p. 711.
and, at the same time, Johannes filius et haeres comitis Sutherlandiae, was
one of the noble Scotch heirs proposed as hostages; s^ages Ibid. p. 724.
but at that time the negotiation took no effect.

In the beginning of the year 1357, William earl of Sutherland was again named
one of the Scotch commissioners to treat with the English at Berwick, and got a
safe conduct from king Edward III. Ibid. tom. VI. p. 33.
for himself and sixty horse in his retinue.

That same year king David obtained his liberty, and both the earl of
Sutherland and John his son and heir, became hostages for his ransom, Ibid. p.
35, 36, and 44.
and entered themselves prisoners in England, etc. and though the earl did not
obtain his full liberty till the year 1365, yet he got safe conducts to come to
Scotland in 1359, 1360, and 1362, but always gave hostages for his returning to
England within a certain short space. Ibid. p. 362, etc.


This great man, in the year 1344, married lady Margaret Bruce, eldest daughter
of the immortal king Robert's second marriage, Stewart's hist. of the royal
family, p. 39.
and sister-german of king David II.

He got a charter from king David, Willielmi comiti de Sutherland, et
Margaretae sponsae suae, sorori nostrae carissimae, et haeredibus inter ipsos
legitime procreat. Charta penes commit. de Sutherland, anno reg. 17 mo.
seu procreand. totum comitatum Sutherlandiae, in liberam regalitatem in
perpetuum, etc. dated the 10th November 1345.

He also got charters of the thanedom of Douny in Forfarshire, the thanedom of
Kincardine, with the park and castle thereof, the thanedom of Fettercairn, with
many other lands and baronies, Ibidem.
too numerous to be here inserted.

By the said lady Margaret Bruce, who died anno 1358, Gordon's history, p. 30.
he had issue a son,

John, afterward earl of Sutherland.

The earl married, 2dly, Johanna, but of what family we know not. This appears
by a safe conduct granted by king Edward III. for Johanna countess of
Sutherland to go up to England, with only ten servants in her retinue, anno
1364, Rymer, tom. VI. p. 456.
her husband the earl being still confined there; but by her he had no issue.

After he obtained his liberty, he got a charter under the great seal from king
David II. totam illam medietatem thanagii nostri de Fermartine, Chart. in
archivis regi. Davidis.
cum pertinen. jacen. in vicecomitatu de Aberdeen, etc. dated at Dundee the
penult day of July 1366.

He died in 1370, and was succeeded by his only son,

VII. JOHN, sixth earl of Sutherland, who was one of the noble Scotch heirs
proposed as sureties for king David's liberty in the years 1351 and 1354,
Rymer, tom. V. p. 724 and 791, and tom. VI. p. 35.
was one of the hostages for his ransom, anno 1357, and is always designed
filius et haeres comitis de Sutherland, as before observed.

In his father's lifetime he obtained from king David, a charter of the lands
and barony of Urquhart, Charta penes commit. de Sutherland.
in Inverness-shire, the castle thereof, etc. The charter is dated at Scoon the
last day of February 1359.

This earl was also a brave warrior, and remarkably signalized himself upon
several occasions, Gordon and Crawfurd.
against the enemies of his country, particularly at the battle of Otterburn,
where their brave general the earl of Douglas was slain, anno 1388.

He married lady Mabilla Dunbar, daughter of Patrick tenth earl of March, by
whom he had three sons.

1. Robert, afterward earl of Sutherland.

2. Nicholas, who succeeded his brother.

3. Hector, ancestor of the Sutherlands of Dalrid, of whom are descended the
most of the gentlemen of the name of Sutherland, in the county of Sutherland.

He died in the beginning of the year 1389, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. ROBERT, seventh earl, who, in a charter of king Robert II. to the
episcopal see of Murray, is designed Robertus comes Sutherlandiae, etc.
Chartulary of Murray, page 359.
2d November 1389; but he dying soon thereafter without issue, his estate and
honors devolved upon his brother,

VIII. NICHOLAS, eighth earl of Sutherland, who had a long controversy with the
clan Wic-Worgin in Strathnaver, ancestor of the MacKays, which was not ended in
his days; Gordon's history, etc.
but at last was adjusted, greatly to the advantage of the earl of Sutherland.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of John MacDonald, Ibidem and Crawfurd.
lord of the Isles, by whom he had three sons.

1. Robert, his heir.

2. John-Beg, ancestor of the Sutherlands of Berrindale, etc.

3. Kenneth, who got from his brother earl Robert, a charter of the lands of
Backies, Drummay, and Torrish, which was afterward confirmed by a charter from
the duke of Albany; and of him captain John Sutherland of Force, is the lineal
representative.

He died anno 1399, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. ROBERT, ninth earl of Sutherland, a man of great authority and power; for
though he lived in very troublesome times, yet he restrained the turbulent and
oppressive people in his neighborhood, and kept the country in perfect peace
and good order.

He remarkably signalized himself at the battle of Homildon, Ibidem.
and on several other occasions, against the enemies of his country.

He married lady Mabilla, daughter of John Dunbar, second earl of Murray of
that surname, by whom he had three sons.

1. John, his heir.

2. Robert Sutherland.

3. Alexander.

He died anno 1442, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. JOHN, tenth earl, who got a charter under the great seal, Johanni comiti
Sutherlandiae, et Margaretae sponsae suae, Chart. in pub. archivis.
of many lands and baronies, 24th April 1451.

By the said Margaret, a daughter of sir William Baillie of Lamington, he had
issue four sons, Gordon's hist.
and two daughters.

1. Alexander, who got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Alexandro Sutherland magistro ejusd. anno 1444; but he died before his father
without issue.

2. John, afterward earl of Sutherland.

3. Nicholas.

4. Thomas-Beg.

1st daughter, lady Jean, married to sir James Dunbar of Cumnock.

2. Lady Elizabeth, married to -- Meldrum of that ilk.

He died anno 1460, and was succeeded by his son,

XI. JOHN, eleventh earl, who got a charter from king James III. Charta penes
comitem de Sutherland.
of the lands of Polrossie, and others, Johanni comiti Sutherlandiae, etc. anno
1467.

He married lady Margaret MacDonald, daughter of Alexander earl of Ross, and
lord of the Isles, Gordon's hist. p. 45.
by whom he had two sons, and one daughter.

1. John, his heir.

2. Alexander, who died unmarried.

His daughter, lady Elizabeth, afterward countess of Sutherland, carried on
the line of this family, as will be shown hereafter.

He died anno 1508, and was succeeded by his only surviving son,

XII. JOHN, twelfth earl of Sutherland, a man of a very valetudinary
constitution. He was served heir to his father, anno 1509, and infeft in the
whole earldom of Sutherland, Charta penes comitem de Sutherland. Gordon's
history, p. 50.
in 1512; but dying soon thereafter without issue, his estate and honors
devolved upon his sister, lady Elizabeth, his undoubted heir of line, to whom
we how return.

XII. ELIZABETH countess of Sutherland, only daughter of John eleventh earl,
was served and retoured heir in the estate and honors of the family to John
the twelfth earl, her brother-german, Retour ibid.
on 3d October 1514, and thereupon got a charter from king James V. to her and
her heirs, of all the rights, titles, honors, privileges, and dignities
whatsomever, pertaming to her predecessors, Chart. ibid.
the earls of Sutherland, dated anno 1515.

She married sir Adam Gordon, lord of Aboyne, second son of George second earl
of of Huntly, by lady Jean Stewart his wife, daughter of king James I. and
widow of James earl of Angns. This Adam, in her right, became earl of
Sutherland, and was the thirteenth earl. Gordon's hist. p. 52.
By him she had issue four sons and two daughters.

1. Alexander, master of Sutherland.

2. John Gordon, who lived at Tilliehoudie, married, and had issue but one
daughter.

3. Mr. Adam Gordon, who was killed at the battle of Pinkie, without issue, in
1547.

4. Gilbert Gordon of Gartay, who married Isabel, daughter of -- Sinclair of
Dunbeath, and had issue.

1st daughter, lady Beatrix, married to -- of Gormack.

2. Lady Eleanor, married to -- of Tilliehoudie.

Though sir Adam became earl of Sutherland, by marrying the countess thereof,
yet he retained the surname of Gordon, Nisbet, vol. I. p. 259.
and marshalled the arms of Sutherland and Huntly together: but of late the
family have laid aside the name of Gordon, and now use only that of Sutherland.

The countess died anno 1535, Gordon's hist. p. 64.
and the earl her husband in 1537.

XIII. ALEXANDER, master of Sutherland, upon the resignation of Elizabeth
countess of Sutherland, with consent of the earl her husband, obtained a
charter under the great seal from king James V. Alexandro Gordon magistro de
Sutherland, filio et haeredi Adae comitis, et Elizabethae comitissae de
Sutherland sponsae suae, totum comitatum de Sutherland, et omnes terras ejusd.
etc. etc. (reserving their liferent) which he and his heirs were to possess and
enjoy as fully, freely, and honorably as the said Elizabeth and her
predecessors, earls of Sutherland, Chart. in pub. archiv.
possessed and enjoyed the same. The charter is dated the 1st day of December
1527.

The master married lady Janet Stewart, daughter of John second earl of Athol,
by lady Mary Campbell his wife, daughter of Colin earl of Argyle. This appears
by a charter under the great seal, Alexandra Gordon magistro de Sutherland,
filio et haeredi Adae comitis de Sutherland, et Janeta Stewart ejus sponsae,
terrarum de Nevendale, etc. etc. etc. Ibidem.
dated 4th March 1528.

By her he had issue three sons, Gordon's hist. p. 57.
and two daughters.

1. John, afterward earl of Sutherland.

2. Alexander.

3. William.

1st daughter, Jean, married to Patrick Dunbar, sheriff of Murray.

2. Beatrix, married to -- Sinclair of Dunbeath.

He died anno 1529, his father and mother being both alive. Ibid. p. 62.


XIV. JOHN, eldest son of Alexander master of Sutherland succeeded his father
in 1529, his grandmother the countess in 1535, his grandfather the earl in
1539, and was fourteenth earl of Sutherland.

He was served and retoured heir to his father, Alexander master of Sutherland,
Retour penes comitem de Sutherland, Gordon's hist. p. 71.
anno 1545, and to his grandmother the countess of Sutherland 23d June 1557.

He got a charter under the great seal, to him and Elizabeth Campbell countess
of Murray, his spouse, of the whole lands and carldom of Sutherland, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
castle of Dunrobin, etc. dated 6th August 1546.

He was a man of great parts and spirit, a firm and steady friend of queen
Mary, and was appointed lord lieutenant of Murray, Gordon's hift p. 63 and 85.
and the northern counties, anno 1547 and 1548.

In the year 1550, the earls of Sutherland and Huntly accompanied the
queen mother to France, Ibidem.
where they both had the honor of being made knights of St. Michael.

In 1555, the queen made him governor of the earldom of Ross, of which he
appointed -- MacKenzie of Kintail chamberlain, to whom also he gave several
lands in Ross-shire, Ibidem.
which hold of the earls of Sutherland to this day.

In 1562, after the battle of Corrichie, he was banished and forfeited for his
attachment to the queen's interest; but was recalled again anno 1565, Ibid. p.
93. and 95.
and his doom of sorfeiture was esteemed per modum justiciae by a decree,
dated in April 1567.

He married, 1st, lady Elizabeth Campbell, daughter of Archibald earl of
Argyle, countess dowager of Murray, by whom he had no issue.

He married, 2dly, lady Helen Stewart, daughter of John, and sister of Matthew
earl of Lennox, Ibid. p. 71
regent of Scotland, by whom he had two sons, and four daughters.

1. John, who died in infancy.

2. Alexander, afterward earl of Sutherland.

1st daughter, lady Margaret, died unmarried.

2. Lady Janet, married, 1st, to -- Innes of that ilk; 2dly, to Mr. Thomas
Gordon, a younger son of the earl of Huntly.

3. Lady Eleanora, died unmarried.

4. Lady Beatrix, married to William Sinclar of Dunbeath.

He married, 3dly, Marian, daughter of George lord Scton, widow of -- earl of
Menteith, by whom he had no issue.

He died anno 1567, and was succeeded by his son,

XV. ALEXANDER, Retour penes comitem de Sutherland.
fifteenth earl of Sutherland, who was served and retoured heir to his father,
18th July 1573.

He was a man of great honor and integrity, and obtained the superiority of
Strathnaver, anno 1583. That same year, he was made lord lieutenant and
heretable sheriff of Sutherland and Strathnaver, Chart. ibid. and Gordon's
hist. p. 120. and 122.
which was afterward confirmed to him by a charter under the great seal.

He got four charters under the great seal, Alexandro comiti Sutherlandiae,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the lands and village of Gawldwell, etc. the bailiary of the episcopal see
of Caithness, the barony of Far and Armadill, the lands of Straquharane,
Balnagowan, etc. the office of sheriff-ship of Sutherland, Caithness, etc. etc.
in the years 1581, 1583, 1584, and 1590.

He married, 1st, lady Barbara Sinclair, daughter of George earl of Caithness,
by whom he had no issue.

He married, 2dly, lady Jean Gordon, countess of Bothwell, Gordon's history, p.
113. and 114.
daughter of George earl of Huntly, by whom he had five sons, and two daughters.

1. John, master of Sutherland.

2. Alexander.

3. Adam.

These two died in infancy.

4. Sir Robert Gordon of Gordonstoun, born in 1580, Ibidem.
created baronet in 1625.

5. Sir Alexander of Navidale, knight, born in 1585.

1st daughter, lady Jean, married to Hutcheon MacKay of Far, ancestor of lord
Rae.

2. Lady Mary, married to David Ross of Balnagowan.

He died anno 1594, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVI. JOHN, sixteenth earl of Sutherland, who was put in possession of the
earldom upon his father's resignation, which he got confirmed to him by a
charter under the great seal from king James VI. Johanni magistro de
Sutherland, Chart. in pub. archiv.
filio et haeredi apparenti Alexandri comitis, etc. dated 23d March 1580.

After his father's death, he had the honor to carry the sword of state before
the king, Gordon's history, p. 157.
to the parliament held at Edinburgh, anno 1597.

He afterward got a charter under the great seal from king James VI. Johanni
comiti de Sutherland, confirming all the dignities, privileges, and
precedencies, granted by king David II. and others his predecessors, to the
said earl his predecessors earls of Sutherland, with the free regality of
Sutherland, all erected into one distinct sheriff-ship and jurisdiction, to be
called the shire of Sutherland in all time coming, Chart. in pub. archiv.
dated 29th April 1601.

He got another charter, under the great seal, of several lands, cum officio
balivatus episcopatus Cathanien. Ibidem.
ultimo Septembris 1608.

This earl continued firm in the Roman Catholic religion, on which account he
suffered many hardships, Gordon's history, p. 211.
and was imprisoned in 1614; but was released soon thereafter.

He married Anne, daughter of Alexander fourth lord Elphingston, lord high
treasurer of Scotland, Ibid. p. 162.
by whom he had three sons, and two daughters.

1. John, his heir.

2. Adam Gordon.

3. George.

1st daughter, lady Elizabeth, married to sir James Crichton of Frendraught,
and had issue.

2. Lady Anne, married to sir Gilbert Menzics of Pitfoddils.

He died anno 1615, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVII. JOHN, Retour penes comitem de Sutherland.
seventeenth earl of Sutherland, who was served heir to his father, 4th June
1616.

He got a charter under the great seal, Johanni comiti Sutherlandiae, of the
lands and barony of Ardurness in Caithness, Chart. in pub. archiv.
etc. etc. dated 6th March 1627.

He got another charter from king Charles I. wherein the whole earldom of
Sutherland, regality and sheriff-ship thereof, is, de nova, confirmed to him,
with all the privileges and precedencies disponed to William earl of
Sutherland, his predecessor, by king David Bruce, and others, his predecessors,
Ibidem.
dated 4th April 1631.

This earl having been educated a protestant, became very zealous in that
religion. He joined the parliament upon the first breaking out of the civil
war, and continued steady in that interest to the very last.

In 1633, Minutes of parliament. rescinded and unprint. acts.
the regality of Sutherland was confirmed by parliament to be a distinct
sheriff-ship, Dornock was made a royal burrow, and he was made a privy
councillor for life, anno 1641.

In 1644, he was sent to the north with a commission for disarming malignants;
Ibidem.
and in 1645, he was made one of the commitee of estates.

After the murder of the king, he was made colonel of a regiment of 1200 foot,
to be raised in the north, one of the last committee of estates, Ibidem.
and lord privy seal, in the year 1649.

He married lady Jean Drummond, only daughter of James earl of Perth, which
appears by a charter under the great (...), dominae Joannae Drummond comitissae
de Sutherland, comitatus Sutherlandiae, etc. Chart. in pub. archiv.
10th March 1631.

By her he had a son,

XVIII. GEORGE, eighteenth earl of Sutherland, who succeeded him, and was a man
of great integrity, probity and honor.

Upon his father's resignation, he got a charter under the great seal, Georgio
domino Strathnaver, totius comitatus de Sutherland, Ibidem.
dated 25th February 1662.

He married lady Jean, eldest daughter of David earl of Wemyss, widow of
Archibald earl of Angus, by whom he had a son,

John, lord Strathnaver, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Lady Anne, married to Robert viscount of Arbuthnot.

He died anno 1703, and was succeeded by his son,

XIX. JOHN, nineteenth earl of Sutherland, who, in his father's lifetime, was
one of the privy council to king William, and had the command of a regiment of
foot.

He was also one of the privy council to queen Anne, was appointed one of the
commissioners for the treaty of union, and was elected one of the sixteen
Scotch peers to the first parliament of Great Britain.

Upon the accession of king George I. to the throne, he was made president to
the board of trade and manufactures, and was named lord lieutenant of the
counties of Inverness, Elgin, Nairn, Cromarty, Ross, Sutherland, Caithness,
Orkney, and Zetland, etc. anno 1715.

In June 1716, he was made a knight of the most noble order of the thistle. In
September following, the king settled a yearly pension of 1200 l. upon him; and
he was elected one of the sixteen Scotch peers to the fifth, sixth, and seventh
British parliaments.

He married, 1st, Helen, daughter of William lord Cochran, son and apparent
heir of William earl of Dundonald, by whom he had a son,

William, lord Strathnaver, -- and two daughters.

1. Lady Jean Sutherland, married to John lord Maitland, son and apparent heir
of John earl of Lauderdale.

2. Lady Helen, died unmarried.

He married, 2dly, Catharine Talmash, sister of Lionel earl of Dysart, widow of
James lord Down, son and heir apparent of James earl of Murray.

He married, 3dly, the widow of sir John Travel, an English lady of a great
fortune; but by these two last he had no issue. He died anno 1733.

XX. WILLIAM, lord Strathnaver, only son and apparent heir of John nineteenth
earl of Sutherland, betook himself to a military life, and had the command of a
regiment.

He married Catharine, daughter of William Morison of Prestongrange, and died
anno 1720, leaving four sons, and two daughters.

1. George, who died young.

2. John, who died soon after his father, without issue.

3. William, who carried on the line of the family.

4. Charles.

1st daughter, lady Helen Sutherland, married to sir James Colquhoun of Luss,
Bart.

2. Lady Janet, married to George Sinclar of Ulbster, Esquire;. They both have
issue.

XXI. WILLIAM, only surviving son of William lord Strathnaver, succeeded his
grandfather, anno 1733, and was twentieth earl of Sutherland.

In his grandfather's lifetime, he was member of parliament for the county of
Sutherland; and, after his decease, he was elected one of the sixteen Scotch
peers to the eighth and ninth British parliaments.

The noble part he acted in 1745, in defense of the government, and the
liberties of his country, are so recent in every body's memory, that it is
needless to insert particulars here.

He married lady Elizabeth, daughter of David earl of Wemyss, by whom he had a
son,

William, lord Strathnaver, now earl of Sutherland, -- and a daughter,

Lady Elizabeth Sutherland, married to James Wemyss of Wemyss, Esquire; son of
James earl of Wemyss, and has issue.

The earl died at Montauban in France, in 1750, and was succeeded by his only
son,

XXII. WILLIAM, twenty-first earl of Sutherland, who, betaking himself to a
military life, was promoted to be a captain of the 56th regiment of foot, and
in 1759, when Britain was threatened with an invasion from France, he proposed
to the ministry to raise a regiment of his own vassals and followers, which was
readily accepted of; and his lordship got the commission of lieutenant colonel
commandant. He completed his regiment in less than two months, which continued
in the service till the peace was concluded.

He was elected one of the sixteen Scotch peers to the present British
parliament, in the room of the marquis of Tweeddale deceast, in March 1763.

He married miss Mary Maxwell, eldest daughter of William Maxwell of Reston,
Esquire;.

ARMS.
Gules, three mullets or, within a border of the latter, charged with a double
tressure, flowered and counter-flowered, with flowers de lis of the first.

CREST; on a wreath, a cat sejant proper.

SUPPORTERS; two savages wreathed about their heads and waists with laurels,
each holding a batton over his shoulder, all proper.

MOTTO; Sans peur.

CHIEF SEATS,
At the castle of Dunrobin, Dornock castle, etc. in the shire of Sutherland.

SCOT Earl of TARRAS.
FRANCIS, second earl of Buckcleugh, married lady Margaret Lesly, daughter of
John sixth earl of Rothes, by whom he had only two daughters.

1. Lady Mary.

2 Lady Anne.

He died anno 1652, and was succeeded by his eldest daughter,

Lady MARY SCOT, afterward countess of Buckcleugh.

She was married to Walter Scot of Highchester, descended of the ancient family
of Harden, Diploma in pub. archiv.
who was, by king Charles II. created earl of Tarras for life, 4th September
1660, but he died without issue.

Mary countess of Buckcleugh dying also without issue, anno 1662, her estate
and honors devolved upon her sister, lady Anne Scot, afterward duchess of
Buckcleugh.

Vide title Scot duke of Buckcleugh, page 99th.

RUTHERFORD Earl of TEVIOT.
GENERAL Andrew Rutherford, who was created lord Rutherford by king Charles II.
anno 1661, was by that prince further dignified with the title of earl of
Teviot by patent, Diploma in pub. archiv.
to the heirs-male of his body, dated 2d February 1663.

He being killed at Tangier the year thereafter, without issue, the title of
earl of Teviot expired with him.

Vide title Rutherford lord Rutherford, page 597.

SPENCER Viscount TEVIOT.
THE honorable Robert Spencer, Esquire; second son of William lord Spencer of
Wormlington, of the kingdom of England, born anno 1628, Collin's peerage of
England, vol. I. p. 387.
was raised to the honor of the peerage of Scotland by king James VII. by the
title of viscount Teviot, anno 1686, the honors being limited to the heirs of
his body.

He married Jane, daughter of sir Thomas Spencer of Yarnton, in the county of
Oxford, but dying without issue, the honors became extinct.

LIVINGSTON Viscount TEVIOT.
THE immediate ancestor of this noble family, was a younger son of the house of
Kilsyth, a considerable branch of the illustrious family of Calendar.

William Livingston of Kilsyth, son and heir of Edward of Kilsyth, by Mary his
wife, daughter of Thomas lord Erskine, flourished in the reigns of king James
III. and IV. and by Margaret Graham, his wife, had issue two sons.

1. William, who carried on the line of the family of Kilsyth.

2. James, designed of Inches, the first of this family.

I. JAMES LIVINGSTON of Inches, second son of William of Kilsyth, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
acquired the lands of Brownlee and Jerviswood, upon which he got a charter
under the great seal, anno 1512; which last continued long to be the chief
title of his family.

He married, 1st, a daughter of sir James Lockhart of Lee; 2dly, a daughter of
James Hamilton of Silvertounhill, and had issue only one son,

II. JAMES LIVINGSTON, his apparent heir, who married Agnes, daughter of
William Cunninghame of Bonnytown, and died before his father, Ibidem.
leaving issue a son,

III. WILLIAM of Jerviswood, who succeeded; and, upon his grandfather's
resignation, got a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
Williehno Livingston, nepoti Jacobi Livingston de Jerviswood, of the lands and
barony of Jerviswood, etc. dated 6th March 1548.

He married Jean, daughter of John Johnston of that ilk, ancestor of the
marquis of Annandale, by whom he had two sons.

1. John Livingston of Jerviswood, who succeeded his father, but died without
issue.

2. William, who succeeded his brother.

IV. WILLIAM, who got a charter under the great seal, Ibidem.
Willielmo fratri domini de Jerviswood, of the lands and barony of Jerviswood,
etc. dated anno 1611.

He married Jean, Charta penes ducem de Queensberry.
daughter of sir James Douglas of Drumlanrig, ancestor of the duke of
Queensberry, by whom he had two sons.

1. William Livingston of Jerviswood, who sold the estate to George Baillie
merchant in Edinburgh, and died without succession, in the reign of king
Charles I.

2. Mungo Livingston.

V. This MUNGO LIVINGSTON, designed of Newbigging, married Jean, daughter of
John Lindsay of Covington, Chart. in pub. archiv.
an ancient family in the county of Lanark, by whom he had a son,

VI. Sir THOMAS LIVINGSTON, who succeeded him, and was created a baronet by
king Charles I.

He betaking himself to a military life, obtained a commission in one of the
Scotch regiments in the service of the States of Holland, where he settled;
and, by his valor and merit, rose to the rank of a colonel, and had the
command of a regiment of foot.

He married a daughter of the famous and eminent colonel Edmund, a Scotchman,
and native of the town of Stirling, with whom he got a considerable estate, and
by her had issue two sons.

1. Sir Thomas, afterward viscount Teviot.

2. Sir Alexander, who will be mentioned hereafter.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. Sir THOMAS LIVINGSTON, who, from his youth, was bred a soldier in the
service of the States of Holland, had several considerable commands under the
prince of Orange, and always acquitted himself with honor and reputation.

In that prince's expedition to England, he was colonel of a regiment of foot;
and after he attained the crown, got the command of a regiment of dragoons,
wherewith he performed many brave actions; and being in great favor with king
William, he was named one of his privy council, and commander in chief of all
his forces in Scotland; and as a further mark of his majesty's esteem and
regard for him, Chart. in pub. archiv.
he raised him to the dignity of the peerage, by the title of lord viscount
Teviot, by patent to the heirs-male of his body, dated 4th December School.

But he dying at London, without issue, anno 1711, the peerage became extinct,
and he was succeeded by the title of baronet by his brother,

VII. Sir ALEXANDER LIVINGSTON baronet, who was also bred a soldier, and had
the command of a regiment of foot in the service of the States of Holland.

He left issue only two daughters, who were co-heiresses to his whole estate.

They both married in Holland, and their posterity arc heirs of line of the
Livingstons of Jerviswood in Scotland.

SANDILANDS Lord TORPHICHEN.
THE surname of Sandilands is by some authors said to be of English extraction:
that a considerable family of that name, in the county of Northumberland, being
driven from their possessions by William the Conqueror, took refuge in
Scotland, and were kindly received by king Malcolm Canmore, etc.

Others are of opinion that it is a local surname, and was first assumed by the
proprietors of the lands and barony of Sandilands, in the county of Lanark, as
soon as sirnames became hereditary in Scotland.

The immediate ancestor of this noble family was,

I. Sir JAMES SANDILANDS, who flourished in the reign of king David Bruce, and
obtained from that prince a grant of the lands of Craiglokard and Stanipath;
also annuos redditus debitos five exuntes de Horsebruk et de Heschelis, Chart.
penes dom. Torphichen, and father Hay's vindication of Eliz. More.
infra vicecomitatum de Peebles, by his royal charter, dated at Lanark, 6th
October 1336.

He obtained also a confirmation charter from William lord Douglas, Jacobo de
Sandilands, dilecto et fideli armigero suo, of the whole lands of Sandilands
and Rednure, with their pertinents, lying in the lordship of Douglas, and shire
of Clydsdale, dated the thursday before Christmas, Ibidem.
anno 1348; to which William Douglas lord of Liddisdale, sir Andrew, and sir
John Douglas, knights, with many others, are witnesses.

He married Eleanora, daughter of Archibald the tenth lord, and sister of
William the first earl of Douglas, relict of Alexander earl of Carrick, nephew
of king Robert Bruce.

He obtained a grant from the said William de Douglas, then designed dominus
ejusdem, Jacobo de Sandylandis, et Eleanorae sorori suae, totam baroniam de
Wester Calder, Ibidem.
cum omnibus suis pertinentiis, in liberum maritagium; which grant is
afterward confirmed by king David II. at a parliament held in Dundee, anno
1350. In consequence of which marriage, this family has ever since continued
to quarter the arms of Douglas with their own. Nisbet, vol. I: p. 94.


By the said Eleanora, he had issue a son,

Sir James, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Martan, married to sir Gilbert Kennedy of Dunnure, ancestor of the earl of
Cassilis.

He was succeeded by his son,

II. Sir JAMES, promiscuously designed of Sandilands and of Calder; which last
continued long to be the chief title of his family.

He made a great figure in the reign of king Robert II. and was a mighty
favorite of that prince, who bestowed upon him in marriage his daughter lady
Jean Stewart, relict of sir John Lion lord of Glammis.

He obtained from the said king Robert, upon his own resignation, a charter
under the great seal, Chart. in archivis Roberti II.
Jacobo de Sandielands, m^liti, et Joannae Stewart sponsae suae, filiae nostrae
carissimae, of the baronies of Dalyel, Modervile, the barony of Whiston, with
their pertinents; in Lanarkshire; also the lands and baronies of Airth, Bisset,
Otterbannock, Slamannan-muir, etc. in Stirling-shire, to them and the heirs
lawfully procreate betwixt them; which failing, to the said James his nearest
heir, whateever, dated anno 1385.

The king gave another grant, Charta penes dom. Torphichen.
dilecto filio suo Jacobo Sandilands militi, illos quadraginta solidos
sterlingorum, pro castri warda baroniae de Calder in perpetuum, dated anno 1386.

By the said lady Jean Stewart, he left issue a son,

III. Sir JAMES SANDILANDS of Calder, who succeeded him, and got a charter from
king Robert III. Ibidem.
of several lands, in which he is designed nepos regis, etc.

This sir James being also a man of parts, was often employed in negotiations
of state.

He was one of the commissioners appointed to treat with the English about king
James's liberty, Rymer, tom. X. p. 125 and 309.
anno 1421, and was afterward one of the hostages for his ransom, anno 1424.

He got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the lands of Airth, Bisset, etc. dated 7th December 1426.

He died anno 1434, leaving issue a son,

IV. Sir JOHN SANDILANDS, Charta penes dom. Torphichen.
designed dominus (...) Calder, who succeeded him, and was infeft in the lands
and barony of Calder, upon a precept from the earl of Douglas, the superior,
anno 1435,

He was a man of great honor and integrity, and highly esteemed by king James
II. Buchanan, Crawfurd,etc.
but was barbarously assassinated at Thornton, anno 1446, leaving issue a son
and successor,

V. Sir JOHN SANDILANDS of Calder, who resigned, and made over his whole
estate, Charta penes dom. Torphichen.
to and in favors of sir James his son and apparent heir, anno 1466, and dying
soon thereafter, was accordingly succeeded by his son and heir,

VI. Sir JAMES, who got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Jacobo Sandilands de Calder militi, et Margaretae Ker sponsae suae, of the
lands and barony of Airth, Bisset, Slamannan, Bannockburn, etc. dated 14th July
1489.

By the said Margaret, his first wife, a daughter of the family of Cessford, he
had a son,

John, his apparent heir.

He married, 2dly, Margaret, daughter and heiress of John Kinloch of Cruvie, by
whom he got a considerable estate in the county of Fife, and by her had a son,

Sir James Sandilands, ancestor of the lord Abercrombie. Vide page 5th of this
work.

He had also a daughter, Christian, married to David Hepburn of Waughton, which
appears by a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
dated in 1498.

VII. JOHN, eldest son and apparent heir of sir James Sandilands of Calder,
Crawfurd's peerage.
married a daughter of sir James Scrimgeour of Dudhope, and died before his
father, leaving issue a son,

VIII. Sir JAMES, who succeeded his grandfather, and got a charter under the
great seal, Jacobo Sandilands de Calder, Chart. in pub. archiv.
militi, of the lands and barony of Cruvie, Newton of Colessie, etc. in the
county of Fife, dated 7th July 1509.

Also a charter to him and Mariotte Forrester his spouse, Ibidem.
of the lands of Corswoods, and others, in the county of Stirling, dated 17th
June 1512.

By the said Mariotte, a daughter of Archibald Forrester of Corstorphin, he had
issue two sons and two daughters.

1. John, who carried on the line of this family, of whom more hereafter.

2. Sir James, afterward lord St. John.

1st daughter, Alison, married to sir John Cockburn of Ormiston, knight.

2. Margaret, married to William Wachop of Niddry. They both had issue.

He died about the year 1530.

As sir James was the first of this family who was raised to the dignity of the
peerage, we proceed to give an account of him before his elder brother.

Sir JAMES SANDILANDS, second son of sir James of Calder, a man of great parts
and learning, who having, in the course of his travels, resided some time in
the island of Malta, he there gave such proofs of his great capacity and
universal knowledge, that upon the death of sir Walter Lindsay, lord of St.
John, he was preferred by the knights of Malta to the preceptory of Torphichen,
the chief residence of the knights of the order of St. John of Jerusalem and
the temple of Solomon, in Scotland. He was received by the grand prior of the
hospital, with all the necessary forms, and was constituted chief or head of
that order, with the jurisdiction of lord St. John of Jerusalem, Crawfurd's
peerage, and father Hay's vindication of Eliz. More.
in Scotland, and got possession of the whole revenues of the preceptory of
Torphichen, which then were very considerable, anno 1543.

He was also a man of great honor and integrity, Ibidem.
as well as of prudence and sagacity, and was often employed in negotiations of
importance, both by king James V. and queen Mary, Ibidem.
and always acquitted himself with dexterity and reputation.

When the reformation was established in 1560, the lord St. John embraced the
protestant religion. He resigned in the queen's hands the whole preceptory of
Torphichen, and got that military benefice erected into a temporal lordship,
containing the baronies of Torphichen, Liston, Balintrode, Tankerton, Denny,
Marycoulter, Stenhope, Galtna, etc. etc. lying within the shires of Edinburgh,
Peebles, Linlithgow, Stirling, Lanark, Kincardin, etc. to be called the barony
and lordship of Torphichen, with all the dignities and privileges of a lord of
parliament, to him and his heirs and assignees whatever, Chart. in pub. archiv.
by a charter under the great seal, dated 24th January 1563; for which he
instantly paid down ten thousand crowns of the sun, and he and his successors
became bound to pay a seuduty of five hundred merks per annum.

We must here observe, that both the brothers, sir John and sir James, were
great promoters of the reformation; and it is reported, that the first
protestant sacrament that was administered in Scotland, was by John Knox, in the
great hall of Calder-house, sir James being then lord Torphichen.

He married Janet, daughter of -- Murray of Polmais; Crawfurd's peerage.
but dying without issue, his estate and honors devolved upon James Sandilands
of Calder, his grand nephew, and heir-male, and of line, being lineally
descended of his brother John before mentioned, to whom we now return.

IX. JOHN, eldest son of sir James Sandilands of Calder, and brother of James
lord St. John and Torphichen, got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
Johanni Sandilands, filio et haeredi quondam Jacobi Sandilands de Calder,
militis, of the lands of Wester Corswoods, the lands of Blackhall, etc. dated
12th March 1531.

Also another charter, Ibidem.
to him and Margaret Barton, his wife, of the lands and barony of Airth,
Bisset, etc. in Stirling-shire, dated 29th November 1553.

By the said Margaret, a daughter of sir Robert Barton, Contract pen. dom.
Torphichen, ad ann. 1524.
lord high treasurer of Scotland, in the reign of king James V. he left issue a
son,

Sir James, his heir.

He married, 2dly, Jean, daughter of John lord Fleming, by whom he had no
surviving issue.

This John died before the year 1567, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. Sir JAMES, who got a charter under the great seal, Jacobo, filio et haeredi
quondam Johannis Sandilands de Calder, Chart. in pub. archiv.
terrarum baroniae de Calder, cum palatio, manerio, silvis, molendinis, etc.
dated 12th May 1566.

He married Jean, Chart. penes dom Torphichen.
daughter of James third lord Ross, and died anno 1577, leaving issue a son,

XI. JAMES, who was served and retoured heir to his father in the lands and
barony of Calder, Retour ibid.
etc. anno 1578.

He succeeded also to his grand uncle James lord St. John and Torphichen, and
was the second lord of parliament of this family.

He married, 1st, Elizabeth, daughter of James Heriot of Trabrown, Crawfurd's
peerage.
by whom he had three sons, and one daughter.

1. James, master of Torphichen, his heir.

2. John, afterward lord Torphichen.

3. Walter Sandilands of Hilderstoun, Esquire;.

His daughter, Isabel, married to Hugh Wallace of Ellerslie, and had issue.

He married, 2dly, Mary, daughter of Gilbert eighth lord Somerville, by whom he
had no issue; and dying anno 1617, was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. JAMES, third lord Torphichen, who dying unmarried, in the year 1622, was
succeeded in his estate and honors by his brother, Ibidem.


XII. JOHN, fourth lord Torphichen, who got the titles of honor, with all the
dignities and privileges thereto belonging, as granted to his great grand
uncle, Records of parliament. ad ann. 1633.
James lord St. John, in 1563, confirmed to him by act of parliament, anno 1633.

He married Isabel, daughter of sir Walter Dundas of that ilk, by whom he had
two sons and two daughters.

1. John, master of Torphichen.

2. Walter, who succeeded his brother.

1st daughter, --, married to sir Thomas Kilpatrick of Closeburn.

2. Margaret, married to Thomas Marjoribanks of that ilk. They both had issue.

He died anno 1637, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. JOHN, fifth lord Torphichen, who was on the parliament's side during the
troublesome reign of king Charles I. but dying unmarried in the end of the year
1648, Minutes of parliament, and reseinded acts.
his estate and honors devolved upon his brother,

XIII. WALTER, sixth lord Torphichen, who was also engaged on the same side
with his brother, and was one of those who protested against the proceedings in
parliament, in favors of the king. Ibidem, and Guthrie's memoirs, p. 232, and
268.
He was also one of the fourteen peers conveened in parliament, 4th January
1649; but nothing was done to prevent the king's murder.

He married, 1st, Jean, daughter of Alexander Lindsay of Edzel, by whom he had
no issue.

He married, 2dly, Catharine, daughter of William lord Alexander (eldest son
and apparent heir of William earl of Stirling) by lady Margaret Douglas his
wife, eldest daughter of the first marriage of William marquis of Douglas. By
her he had two daughters.

1. Anne, married to Robert Menzies eldest son and heir of sir Alexander
Menzies of that ilk, and was grandmother of the present sir Robert.

2. Catharine, married to David Drummond of Cultmalindie, without issue.

He married, 3dly, Anne, daughter of Alexander sixth lord Elphingston, by whom
he had no issue.

He married, 4thly, Christian, daughter and sole heiress of James Primrose,
Esquire; brothergerman of sir Archibald Primrose of Dalmenie, ancestor of the earl
of Roseberry, by whom he had three sons, and two daughters.

1. Walter, master of Torphichen, who died young, without issue.

2. James, afterward lord Torphichen.

3. John Sandilands, Esquire; who died young, without having issue.

1st daughter, Christian, married to Robert Pringle, Esquire; who left an only son
Robert, now a councillor at law at London.

2. Magdalen, who died unmarried.

He died in May 1696, and was succeeded by his son,

XIV. JAMES, seventh lord Torphichen, who went early into the army, having at
first got a company of foot, and afterward was promoted to be lieutenant
colonel of dragoons, in which station he served abroad in queen Anne's wars:
and brigadier Kerr's regiment, which he then belonged to, being in Scotland
when the rebellion broke out in the 1715, he had the honor to command that
regiment, which behaved gallantly at the battle of Dunblain, where his grace
the duke of Argyle commanded the army against the rebels.

His lordship quitted the army in the year 1722, and his majesty king George I.
was pleased to appoint him one of the lords of police in Scotland, which was
afterward confirmed to him by his late majesty king George II. and which place
he enjoyed till his death.

He married lady Jean Hume, daughter of Patrick earl of Marchmont, then lord
high chancellor of Scotland, by whom he had eight sons and three daughters.

1. James, master of Torphichen, who was a captain in the army, and was
miserably wounded at the battle of Prestonpans in the year 1745, having
received no less than twenty wounds. He lingered for above three years under
his distress, and died of a consumption, unmarried, in his father's lifetime.

2. Walter, the present lord Torphichen.

3. Patrick, who was bred to the sea, and, having gone over to the East Indies,
was lieutenant in one of the company's coasting ships, which he afterward
obtained the command of, for his gallant behavior in disboarding a crew of
Angria the pirate, after they had taken possession of the ship. He some years
thereafter perished in a storm, and left no issue.

4. Alexander, who died young.

5. Andrew, who was major of the royal Scotch fuziliers, and had the misfortune
to be shot through the thigh at the battle of Fontenoy, in the year 1745; and
though he recovered so far as to be able to serve all that war, yet,
immediately upon the peace, he was obliged to retire from the army on account
of the bad state of his health, occasioned by his wound.

6. George, who died young.

7. Charles, who was a lieutenant in the army, and went over to the West Indies
in the expedition commanded by lord Cathcart and admiral Vernon, and lost his
life in that expedition.

8. Robert, who is at present a lieutenant in the corpse of light dragoons
commanded by lord Aberdour.

1st daughter, Grizel.

2. Christian, who died unmarried.

3. Willielmina-Carolina.

He died anno 1753, and was succeeded by his son,

XV. WALTER, eighth lord Torphichen, who being bred to the law (an advocate)
was, in the year 1745, one of the sheriff-deputes of the county of Edinburgh;
and during the surcease of justice within the city, (there being no magistracy
during the rebellion,) he was extremely active and useful in that character, in
preserving the peace, and getting the inhabitants of the city and county to
provide necessaries of all kinds for his majesty's army, which was sent down to
Scotland after the battle of Prestonpans.

His lordship is at present his majesty's sheriff-depute for the county of
Edinburgh.

He married Elizabeth, only daughter and heir of doctor Alexander Sandilands,
an ancient cadet of this noble family, by whom he has three sons.

1. James, master of Torphichen.

2. Alexander.

3. Walter.

ARMS.
Quarterly; 1st and 4th party per fess azure and or, on the 1st a crown, and
on the 2d a thistle, both proper, being the coat of augmentation; for as sir
James Sandilands, lord of St. John, was great prior of Malta, in Scotland, the
crown and thistle is born by his family as a b^dge of that office; the 2d and
3d quarters are counter-quartered, 1st and 4th argent, a bend azure, for
Sandilands; 2d and 3d the arms of Douglas.

CREST; on a wreath, an eagle displayed or.

SUPPORTERS; two savages, each wreathed about the head and middle with laurel,
and holding in his outer hand a batoon, all proper.

MOTTO; Spero meliora.

CHIEF SEATS,
At Calder-house in Mid-Lothian; and Castle of Torphichen in West-Lothian.

STEWART Earl of TRAQUAIR.
THE immediate ancestor of this great branch of the illustrious family of
Stewart, was,

Sir JAMES STEWART, called the black knight of Lorn, lineally descended of sir
John Stewart of Bo^kyll, second son of Alexander sixth lord high steward of
Scotland, who married queen Jean, daughter of John duke of Somerset, son of
John of Gaunt duke of Lancaster, son of king Edward III. of England, and widow
of king James I. of Scotland.

By her he had two sons.

1. John, earl of Athole, whose male line ended in John the fifth earl, only
son of his great grandson. Vide title Stewart earl of Athole, page 49th of this
work.

2. James, earl of Buchan, who married, 1st, Margaret, daughter of sir
Alexander OOgilvie of Auchterhouse, by whom he had a son, Alexander, who
succeeded him in the earldom of Buchan, and whose male line ended in his great
grandson.

This earl, by Margaret his second wife, a daughter of Patrick Murray of
Philiphaugh, Stewart's history, and Crawfurd's peerage.
an ancient family in the county of Selkirk, had another son,

James, the first of this family. -- He had also three daughters; for which
vide title Stewart earl of Buchan, page 94th.

I. JAMES STUART, second son of James earl of Buchan, obtained from his father,
in patrimony, the lands and barony of Traquair in the county of Peebles, which
is instructed by a charter from the said earl, "to and in favors of James
Stuart his son, of the lands and barony of Traquair, Charta penes comitem de
Traquair.
to him and his heirs for ever, dated 18th May 1491."

He afterward got the lands and barony of Traquair confirmed to him, by a
charter under the great seal from king James IV. dated 23d January 1492; Chart.
in pub. archiv.
which barony has ever since continued to be one of the chief titles of the
family.

This James also obtained from his brother, Alexander earl of Buchan, a grant
of the lands of Melross in Banss-shire, to be holden of the said earl, Jacobo
Stuart fratri suo carissimo; also a precept for infefting him therein; both
which writs are signed, Alexander earl of Buchan, Chart. et ^asina penes
comitem de Traquair.
have the seal of the family appended thereto, are still entire, and are dated
9th December 1499.

He married Christian, sister and co-heiress of Richard Rutherfoord of that
ilk, and daughter of Philip Rutherfoord by Elizabeth his wife, daughter of sir
Walter Kerr of Cessford, ancestor of the duke of Roxburgh; for which marriage,
they being within the degrees of consanguinity forbidden by the church, they
obtained a dispensation from the pope, Original bull ibid.
dated 9th November 1505.

He got with her the lands of Rutherfoord and Wells, in Roxburgh-shire; and in
consequence of this marriage, the family have ever since continued to quarter
the arms of Rutherfoord with their own. Nisbet, vol. I. p. 180.


By her he had a son,

William, who succeeded him.

This James being a man of great spirit and fortitude, accompanied king James
IV. to the fatal field of Flowdon, where he lost his life with his royal
master, anno 1513.

II. WILLIAM, second baron of Traquair, upon his father's resignation, got a
charter under the great seal from king James IV. Willichno Stuart, filio et
haeredi apparenti Jacobi de Traquair, Chart. in pub. archiv.
et Catharinae Rutherfoord suae sponsae, of the lands and barony of Traquair,
etc. dated 11th of August 1512.

He got afterward a charter from king James V. "to and in favors of William
Stuart of Traquair, and Christian Hay his spouse in liferent, and Robert Stuart
their eldest son and apparent heir in fee, of the whole lands and barony of
Traquair, the lands of Shillinglaw, Ibidem.
etc. dated 29th of March 1538."

In the reign of king James V. John earl of Buchan, who was cousin-german to
this William of Traquair, made an entail of his whole earldom of Buchan, "to
and in favors of John Stuart his eldest son, and the heirs-male lawfully
begotten of his body; which failing, to James Stuart his second son, and the
heirs-male lawfully begotten of his bobody; which failing, to the heirs-male of
the lord of Traquair; which failing, to the heirs-male of the earl of Athole;
which all failing, to his own nearest heirs whatever."

This is instructed by a confirmation and signature, (wherein the above entail
is fully narrated,) signed by king James VI. by Montrose his chancellor, and
sir Robert Melvile his secretary, Original signature penes comitem de Traquair.
ordering a charter under the great seal to pass upon the same. The signature
is dated the penult day of April 1585.

We must here observe, that though the male issue of the lord of Traquair and
the earl of Athole are, in the above substitution, preferred by the earl of
Buchan to his own daughters; yet it never took effect; and in the end the heir
of line succeeded to that earldom, but the lord of Traquair is justly
preferred to the earl of Athole, he being one degree nearer in propinquity to
the said earl.

This William, by the said Christian Hay, a daughter of John second lord
Yester, ancestor of the marquis of Tweeddale, had issue four sons.

1. Robert.

2. Sir John.

3. Sir William.

4. James.

These four sons were all successively ^^rons of Traquair.

III. ROBERT STUART, third baron of Traquair, Writs of the family ibid.
eldest son of William, succeeded. He did not long survive his father; but
dying without issue anno 1548, was succeeded by his brother.

III. Sir JOHN STUART of Traquair, second son of William, who was served heir
to his brother Robert, in the whole lands and barony of Traquair, Retour penes
comitem de Traquair.
by a precept from the chancery, dated 10th November 1552.

He was a man of great integrity and merit, and a steady friend of queen Mary.
He had the honor of knighthood conferred upon him at the creation of the duke
of Albany, Stewart and Crawfurd.
and was captain of her majesty's guards.

He was one of those who, with the queen and her privy council, signed a
protection to the earl of Murray to appear before her majesty, Ibidem.
and discover the alleged conspiracy, 19th July 1565.

He was also one of those noble persons who entered into a bond or association,
Bond in the lawiers libr. Edinburgh, M. S.
to stand by and defend queen Mary against all mortals, anno 1568.

He died without issue about the year 1580, and was succeeded by his brother,

III. Sir WILLIAM STUART of Traquair, third son of the above William, who was
governor of the castle of Dunbarton, anno 1582, and got a charter under the
great seal, Willielmo Stuart de Traquair, militi, of the lands of Caverston,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
and others, dated 18th February 1584.

He was afterward served and retoured heir to his brother sir John, Retour and
sasine penes comitem de Traquair.
in the whole lands and barony of Traquair, etc. 14th March 1594.

He then got a charter, under the great seal, of the lands of Gaithope,
Seithope, Craig-Douglas, Black-house, etc. dated 26th March 1495. Chart. in
pub. archiv.


He was also a man of worth and honor, and was one of the gentlemen of the
bedchamber to king James VI. but dying unmarried, anno 1604, his whole estates
devolved upon his brother,

III. JAMES, fourth son of William of Traquair, then a very old man. He was
served and retoured heir to his brother sir William, Retour and sasine penes
comitem de Traquair.
4th July 1605, and upon the 9th of August thereafter, he got a sasine of the
whole lands and barony of Traquair, etc. etc. etc.

Who this James married, we have not been able to discover; but he had issue
two sons, and one daughter.

1. John, who carried on the line of this family.

2. Sir Robert Stuart, who got two charters under the great seal, domino
Roberto Stuart de Shillinglaw, Chart. in pub. archiv.
militi, of the lands of Hopecailzie, the lands and barony of Horsburgh and
Hutcheonfield, etc. The first dated in January 1614, and the other in July
1617. He was tutor in law to his nephew John, the great earl of Traquair; and
dying without issue, his estate returned to the family.

Isabel, daughter of James of Traquair, was married to William Rutherfoord of
Quarrieholes, father of Andrew first lord Rutherfoord.

This James died in the beginning of the year 1606.

IV. JOHN STUART of Caverston, eldest son and apparent heir of James Stuart of
Traquair, married Margaret Stewart, Writs of the fam. of Traquair.
daughter of Andrew master of Ochiltrie, and died before his father, leaving a
son,

V. JOHN, who was served and retoured heir to James Stuart of Traquair, Retour
penes comitem de Traquair.
his grand father, in the whole lands and barony of Traquair, 10th May 1606.

This John was a man of extraordinary natural parts, which were greatly
improved by a liberal education, of remarkable steadiness and integrity, of
great learning, a consummate statesman, and invariably attached to the interest
of the royal family, on which account he afterward suffered great and many
hardships.

When a young man, he was elected knight of the shire of Tweeddale to the
parliament 1621, where he soon displayed his extraordinary talents, and had the
honor of knighthood conferred upon him by king James VI. was appointed one of
his privy council, and got a charter under the great seal, domino Johanni
Stuart de Traquair, Chart. in pub. archiv.
militi, of the lands of Innerlethen, then called Hornhunterland, etc. dated
29th January 1622.

Upon the accession of king Charles I. to the crown, who soon discovered his
great capacity, he became a mighty favorite of that prince; who, first,
appointed him treasurer-depute, then raised him to the dignity of the peerage,
Diploma in pub. archiv.
by the title of lord Stuart of Traquair, 19th April 1628.

He afterward got two charters under the great seal, Ibidem.
Johanni domino Stuart de Traquair, of several lands and baronies, anno 1630.

Also a charter of the lands and barony of Linton, Ibidem.
Kilbucko, etc. dated 13th July 1631.

At the coronation of king Charles I. in Scotland, Ibid. Haered. mase. in
perpetuum, cognomen et arma de St^wart gere^.
he was further dignified with the titles of earl of Traquair, lord Linton,
Caverston, etc. by patent to his heirs-male for ever, they carrying the name
and arms of Stuart, dated 22d June 1633.

He then got a charter under the great seal, Johanni comiti de Traquair,
terrarum ecclesiasticarum ecclesiae parochialis de Peebles, Ibidem.
dated 26th July 1634.

In the year 1635, he was made lord high treasurer of Scotland; and his
majesty, having had many proofs of his loyalty and fidelity, appointed him his
high commissioner, Records of parliament of the church.
both to the parliament and general assembly anno 1639.

In that high station he asserted the king's prerogative with such firmness and
intrepidity, that he gained himself many enemies, even amongst the more
moderate sort; so that his majesty was most unwillingly forced to lay him
aside, though he knew him to have been a most faithful minister.

He was afterward impeached for treason by the parliament 1641, of which they
found him guilty; but submitted his punishment to the king, who knew his only
crime had been his steady attachment to his interest; he therefore ordered him
a pardon under the great seal, Ibidem.
wherein is fully narrated an ample testimony of his great abilities, and
singular integrity in the discharge of his duty.

Though the brevity of this work will not permit us to give a minute detail of
all the transactions and vicissitudes of fortune that attended this noble lord,
yet we cannot but observe, that though he has been most unjustly aspersed by
the sactious party which then prevailed, yet his royal master was always
convinced of his fidelity, and the uprightness of his heart, which many
original letters from his majesty, all written with his own hand, and still
preserved in the family, which we have seen, do sufficiently testify; we
therefore take the liberty to insert some few of them here; the first was
written immediately after the parliament had passed sentence against him.

Whitehall, July 1st, 1641.
TRAQUAIR, I have thought fit, by these few lines, to assure you, that I am so
far from having chased you away as a delinquent, that I esteem you to be as
faithful a servant as any I have, believing that the greatest cause of malice
that you are vexed with is, for having served me as you ought: therefore I
desire you to be consident, that I shall both find a fit time for you to wipe
away all these slanders that are now against you, and likeways to recompense
your bypast sufferings for my service; so you shall truly see, that I am,

Your assured friend, CHARLES, R.


Windsor, 26th June, 1642.
TRAQUAIR, I have so much to say, that I shall say very little, because I will
refer myself to the faithful relation of this honest bearer; these few lines
being enough to assure you, that I nether forget you, nor esteem you as an
useless servant; and that in spite of all your enemies, I shall still remain,

Your assured friend, CHARLES R.


Notingham, August, 1642.
TRAQUAIR, You know that I trust this bearer; and I know you have reason to do
so too: he has instructions concerning my affairs, and a command to
communicate with you: the time is now come for my faithful servants to show
themselves: I will say no more, but that I am,

Your loving friend, CHARLES R.


Chester, 26th September, 1642.
TRAQUAIR, The former experience I have of your zeal for my service, and your
dexterity in it, makes me address this bearer particularly to you, that though
his business may seem equally addressed to many others, yet you are he whom I
chiefly, (and indeed only,) trust for the right managing of it: the particulars
I leave to this trusty servant of mine, assuring you, that you shall ever find
me,

Your constant friend, CHARLES R.


York, May 7th, 1643.
TRAQUAIR, I am so confident in your affection to my service, that I have
commanded the bearer to follow your directions in all he is sent about; and you
have not hitherto deceived my expectation: the conjunction is extremely
considerable in the business; therefore what is to be done, must either be now
or not at all: I will say no more, but that I am,

Your assured friend, CHARLES R.


Newcastle, 15th June, 1646.
TRAQUAIR, I have so fully instructed this trusly bearer, Robin Car, that I
will only tell you, that I long to see you, which if I had publicly expressed,
it might have hindered what I desired.

Your most assured constant friend, CHARLES R.


This is written about nine months after the battle of Philiphaugh.

Though there are many others of the same nature amongst the writs of this
family, both from his majesty and other ministers, wherein his fidelity is
applauded by all; yet we think it unnecessary to trouble our readers with any
more of them.

After the parliament passed sentence upon him in 1641, his estate was
sequestrated, and he was banished his native country. He went directly to the
king, was most graciously received; and the above letters show, that he was
constantly trusted and employed by his majesty ever after.

He was with the king at Oxford in 1644, when the Scotch army was to march into
England, which they bound themselves to do by the solemn league and covenant.

He was one of the few Scotch peers who signed a remonstrance against that
conjunction of their countrymen with the parliament at Westminster. Rushworth's
collect. and Lives of the offic. of state.


He afterward came to Scotland, but lived retired till 1647.

He was then permitted to come to parliament, where he used all his interest to
get an army raised for the king's relief, then a prisoner in the isle of Wight.
He levied a regiment of horse upon his own charges, and, with his son the lord
Linton, marched into England, and fought on their head at the battle of
Preston, anno 1648, where they were both taken prisoners. The lord Linton
obtained his liberty some time thereafter, but the old earl was, Lives of the
offic. of state, minutes of parliam. and rescind. acts.
by order of the English parliament, confined in the castle of Warwick for four
years, and the sequestration of his estate still continued.

At last Oliver Cromwell, believing he could do him no more harm, being denuded
and deprived of all his possessions, permitted him to return to Scotland, where
he led a private life till he died.

This noble earl married lady Catharine Carnegie, Contr. penes comitem de
Traquair.
daughter of David first earl of Southesk, by whom he had a son,

John, lord Linton, -- and four daughters.

1. Lady Margaret, married to James earl of Queensberry.

2. Lady Elizabeth, married to Patrick lord Elibank.

3. Lady Anne, married to sir John Hamilton of Reidhouse.

All these three had issue.

4. Lady Catharine, married to John Stewart, Esquire; without issue.

We shall sum up this great man's character in the words of a noble historian,
who is not suspected of partiality toward the Scots.

"He was without doubt not inferior to any of the Scotch nation, in wisdom and
dexterity, and though he was often provoked by the insolence of some of the
bishops to a dislike of their overmuch servor, and too little discretion, his
integrity to the king was without blemish, and his affection to the church so
notorious, that he never deserted it, till both it and he were overthrown and
trod under foot, and they who were the most notorious persecutors of it, Earl
of Clarendon.
never left persecuting him to death, etc. etc. etc."

He died anno 1659, and was succeeded by his son,

VI. JOHN, second earl of Traquair, who was also a steady loyalist, and, though a
young man, he raised a considerable body of horse in the county of Peebles,
with which he joined the great Montrose at the battle of Philiphaugh, Stewart's
history, etc.
which was fought on 13th September 1645.

He accompanied his father to the battle of Preston in 1648, as before
observed, and suffered many hardships on account of his attachment to the royal
family, during the usurpation.

He married, 1st, lady Henriet Gordon, daughter of George marquis of Huntly,
widow of George lord Seton, by whom he had no issue.

He married, Contr. pen^^ comitem de Traquair.
2dly, lady Anne Seton, daughter of George earl of Winton, by whom he had four
sons and three daughters.

1. William, his heir.

2. George, who died before his father, unmarried.

3. Charles, afterward earl of Traquair.

4. John, who died without issue.

1st daughter, lady Elizabeth, died unmarried.

2. Lady Isabel.

3. Lady Lucy.

He died anno 1666, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII. WILLIAM, third earl of Traquair, who dying unmarried, his estate and
honors devolved upon his brother,

VII. CHARLES, fourth earl of Traquair, a man of great integrity, worth, and
honor, who married lady Mary Maxwell, daughter of Robert earl of Nithsdale, a
lady possessed of all the good qualities that can adorn the sex, by whom he had
issue two sons and six daughters, that came to maturity.

1. Charles, now earl of Traquair.

2. John Stuart, Esquire; who married Christian, daughter of sir Philip Anstruther
of Anstrutherfield, in the county of Fi^e, by whom he has a son, Charles, and
three daughters, Christian, Mary, and Lucy.

1st daughter, lady Lucy.

2. Lady Anne.

3. Lady Mary, married to John, commonly called lord John Drummond, eldest son
of the second marriage of James fourth earl of Perth, lord high chancellor of
Scotland.

4. Lady Catharine, married to William lord Maxwell, son and heir of Robert
earl of Nithsdale, to whom she has a daughter, Winifred, married to William
Constable of Effringham, Esquire; in England, and has issue two sons, Marmaduke
and William, and one daughter, Catharine.

5. Lady Barbara.

6. Lady Margaret.

The earl died anno 1741, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. CHARLES, fifth earl of Traquair, who married Theresa, daughter of sir
Baldwin Conyers of Horden, in the county palatine of Durham, baronet, an
ancient family which has flourished with luster in England, ever since the
time of William the conqueror.

ARMS.
Quarterly; 1st or, a fess cheque argent and azure for Stuart; 2d azure, three
garbs or for Buchan; 3d sable, a mullet argent; 4th argent, an orle gules, and
three martlets in chief sable, for the name of Rutherfoord.

CREST; on a wreath, a garb or, surmounted of a crow proper.

SUPPORTERS; two bears of the latter.

MOTTO; Judge naught.

CHIEF SEAT,
At Traquair, a noble seat with fine gardens, etc. in the county of Peebles.

MURRAY Earl of TULLIBARDIN.
AS the origin and descent of the great and illustrious family of Murray earl
of Tullibardin, is fully set forth and deduced under the title of Murray duke
of Athole and earl of Tullibardin, page 51st of this work, etc. to that we
refer our readers.

HAY Marquis of TWEEDDALE.
THE antiquity of the noble and illustrious name of Hay, is sufficiently
attested both by ancient and modern historians; and though we shall not pretend
to disprove the traditional account of their origin from the battle of Loncarty
about the year 980, which is so fully narrated in many Scotch histories, and
particularly under the title of Errol, page 247th of this work, yet we beg
leave to offer to the reader's consideration some conjectures, which are
supported by many presumptive proofs, and concurring circumstances, viz.

That the surname of Hay came originally from France: that there were lands and
a lordship or that deno^^^ation in ^yormandy, from which its pre^^^able the
surname was first assumed, Histoire sommaire de Nor mandie par le sireur de
Massavile, penes MacFarlane.
long before the time or William the Co^^^. This is attested by undoubted
authority.

Humphry (...) de Vetulis, lord of Pont-Aude^^^, in (...) and one of the most
considerable (...) in that country, married Albreda de (...), or (...), by whom
he had a son, Roger de Bellamont, or Bea^mont, lord o^ Pont-Andemar, who gave
the name of Beaumont-^oger to a town in Normandy, Ibidem, and Dugdale's
baronage of England.
and was one of the council who persuaded William duke of Normandy to invade
England, before the year 1066.

In the list of the great captains that came over from Normandy to England with
that heroic prince, Hist. of Normandy, vol. I. p. 201. and roll of Battle
Abbay, etc.
le sieur de la Haya is expressly mentioned, with several others of the same
name; which plainly shows, that they were a numerous and flourishing family
before the conquest.

That there were several religious houses founded by them, appears from the
same history: particularly le Abbay de Blancheland, in the diocese of
Contasines, Histoire de Normandy.
was founded and endowed by Richard de la Haya in Normandy, anno 1155.

That the Hays in Normandy had the same a^morial bearings with these in
Scotland. Books of arms of old French families, pen. MacFarlane.


And that for some generations after they were settled in Scotland, many of
them were designed by the appellation of de la Haya: all which (...) strong
presumptive proofs, that they came originally from France; Prynne's collect.
Rymer's foed. Angliae.
and it is certain, that there are families of that surname subsisting in
Normandy to this day, who deduce their pedigree above a hundred years before
the conquest.

As then there is clear proof, that several of that name came to Britain in the
year 1066; and as it appears, from our records, that they were settled and
making a figure in Scotland within less than an hundred years thereafter, it is
extremely probable, that some of that race came to Scotland with our king David
I. as it appears from all our histories, that several of Norman extraction, who
had contracted a friendship with that amiable prince, when in England, came
along with him, and settled in this country, of whom some of the most
considerable families in Scotland are descended, Introduction to Fordun's hist.
p. 60.
such as Bruces, Maules, Somervilles, Colviles, Normanviles, Montgomeries,
Baliols, and many others.

It Is hoped, therefore, that it reflects no dishonor on this illustrious
family, to appear to have sprung from a noble family in France, who certainly
settled in this island within less than an hundred years after the battle of
Loncarty, and were a great and flourishing family in Normandy before it.

And as he first of the family of Errol we find upon record, Chartulary of
Scoon, Murray, Cupar, St. Andrews, etc.
was William de la Haya, who was settled in Perthshire in the reigns of king
David I. and king Malcolm IV. so there is sufficient proof, that William de la
Haya, Chartulary of Newbottle, Kelso, Dunfermline, etc.
ancestor of the family of Tweeddale, was settled in Lothian much about the
same era.

And as it does not appear from any record, that they were of the same family,
it is highly probable, that the latter was a son or grandson of one of those
great captains, of the name of Hay, who came over to England with William the
Conqueror; and attending king David into Scotland, settled in the South parts,
as the ancestor of the family of Errol settled in the North of that kingdom.

We now proceed to our documents.

I. WILLIELMUS de la HAYA, the undoubted ancestor of this noble family,
flourished in the reign of king Malcolm IV. and the beginning of king William
the Lion.

He is particularly mentioned in a donation to the abbot and convent of Kelso,
to which Engelram, Chartulary of Kelso, penes MacFarlane, p. 327.
who was chancellor of Scotland, anno 1151, and bishop of Glasgow in 1164, is a
witness.

In a charter of confirmation of several donations to the monastery of
Dunfermline, Willielmus de la Haya, David the king's brother, Chartulary of
Duntermline, penes eund. p. 205.
Nicholaus the chancellor, Duncan earl of Fife, and several others, are
witnesses, before 1171, in which year the chancellor died.

He was witness also to a charter by king William, Chartulary of Newbottle,
penes eund. p. 5.
of a donation to the abb^cy of Newbottle, by Ada comitissa, matter regis
Scotiae, who died anno 1178.

He left issue two sons.

1. William de la Haya.

2. Robert de la Haya. There is a charter of confirmation, libertatum et
immunitatum priorat. Dunelm. et de Coldinghame per dominum Willielmum,
episcopum, Origin. writs of Coldingham, penes eund. p. 112.
etc. in which this Robert de la Haya, Walter de Insula, and Bricius bishop of
Murray, are witnesses, anno 1204.

This William died before the year 1187, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. WILLIAM de la HAYA, who was a man of parts, and made a great figure in the
reign of king William the Lion, by whom he was highly esteemed.

In a charter of a donation to the abbot and convent of Kelso, William de la
Haya, Hugh bishop of St. Andrews, Chartulary of Kelso, p. 337.
Walter de Berkeley, and several others, are witnesses, in or before 1187, in
which year the bishop died.

He was witness also to many other donations to the monastery of Dunfermline,
Chartulary of Dunfermline, p 194. 199. 202. 520.
inter 1190 et 1200, needless to be here inserted.

This Willielmus de la Haya was sent ambassador extraordinary from king William
to the court of England, Roger Hovedon's hist. p. 794.
at the coronation of king John, and demanded Cumberland, Northumberland, etc.
anno 1200.

He died in the beginning of the reign of king Alexander II. leaving issue a
son,

III. Sir WILLIAM de la HAYA, who succeeded him. In a charter of king Alexander
II. confirming a donation to the abbot and convent of Kelso, this Willielmus de
Haya, miles, Walterus filius Alani senescalli, justiciarius Scotiae, David de
Lindsay, Willielmus de Douglas, Ranulphus de Dundas, Chartulary of Kelso, p. 57.
etc. are witnesses, dated anno regni Alexandri II. vicesimo sexto, anno domini
1240.

He died soon thereafter, leaving issue a son and successor,

IV. Sir JOHN de HAYA, Chartulary of Newbottle, and Lives of the offic. of
state, p. 235.
who, in a charter of a donation to the monastery of Newbottle, is designed
Johannes filius Willielmi de Haya, miles, etc.

In a charter of king Alexander II. to Maldwin earl of Lennox, antiqui
comitatus de Levenax, this Johannes de la Haya, in his father's lifetime, is a
witness, together with Walter, Chartulary of Lennox, penes MacFarlane, p. 15.
son of Alan seneseal, W. Olisard justiciar of Lothian, Patrick earl of Dunbar,
etc. etc. The charter is dated at Selkirk 28th July 1238.

He married Margaret, daughter and coheiress of Robert de Lindesay, Chartulary
of Newbottle.
with whom he got the lands and barony of Locherwood, or Locharret, which
afterward became the chief title of the family. Vide title earl of Crawfurd.

By her he had issue two sons.

1. Sir William Hay.

2. Sir Hugh, who was a brave soldier, and a great patriot. He was taken
prisoner at the battle of Methven, Prynne's collect. vol. III. p. 1123.
while he endeavored to save his royal master king Robert Bruce, then in the
utmost distress, anno 1306.

Sir John died ante annum 1263, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. Sir WILLIAM de la HAYA, who, in a convention with the abbot and convent of
the monastery of Inchcolm, Reg. of Inchcolm, penes MacFarlane, p. 24.
is designed Willielinus de Haya, dominus de Locharret, anno 1263.

He is also designed dominus Wiliielmus de Haya, filius Johannis de Haya,
militis, domini de Locharret, when he confirms to the monastery of Newbottle,
peteram de Locharret, etc. quam Robertus de Lindesay, filius David quondam
domini de Locharret, et ipsius pater illis dedit, etc. The confirmation is
without date; but as William bishop of St. Andrews, sir Hugh Berklay justiciar
of Lothian, Chartulary of Newbottle, penes Mac-Farlane, p. 9.
William de Sinclair vicecomes de Edinburgh, etc. are witnesses, it must have
been inter annum 1272 et 1295.

William of Locharret is witness also in a charter granted by Donald earl of
Mar, to sir Nicol Hay of Errol, Charta penes comitem de Errol.
which is without date, but, by the witnesses, appears to have been about the
year 1290.

He was a lover of peace, and a true friend to his country. He used his utmost
endeavors to get the differences between Bruce and Baliol, about the
succession to the crown, settled and adjusted in an amicable manner, without
the aid of foreigners; but died about 1292 or 1293, without having the pleasure
of seeing his good designs accomplished.

He left issue a son,

Sir Gilbert, -- and a daughter,

Margaret, married to sir Henry Maule of Panmure.

He was succeeded by his only son,

VI. Sir GILBERT de HAYA, dominus de Locharret, who was cotemporary with that
great hero and patriot sir Gilbert Hay of Errol.

This sir Gilbert was one of the great barons who swore ^calty to king Edward
I. of England, Prynne's collect vol^ III. p. 359.
for his lands in Mid-Lothian, anno 1296; but no (...) did king Robert begin to
assert his title to the crown, than he joined him, (...) steady in his
interest, and under him performed many brave actions in the service of his
country.

He entered into a memorable association with sir Alexander Seton and sir Neil
Campbell, wherein they bound themselves to defend the liberties of their
country, and king Robert Bruce's title to the crown, The original is amongst
the archives of the family of Mar.
against all mortals, French, English, and Scots, etc. The association is
signed and dated at Cambuskenneth, 9th September 1308.

He married Mary, one of the daughters and co-heiresses of sir Simon Fraser
lord of Oliver castle, with whom he got a considerable estate in the county of
Tweeddale, wherefore the family have continued to quarter the arms of Fraser
with their own.

He died about 1320, leaving issue, by said Mary his wife, a son,

VII. Sir THOMAS HAY of Locharret, who succeeded him, and was a man of singular
worth and merit, and gave many instances of his courage and conduct in several
encounters against the English, both in the reigns of king Robert Bruce, and
his son king David; which last prince he accompanied in his fatal expedition
into England, Scotch comp. and Nisbet, v. I. p. 185.
and was taken prisoner with him at the battle of Durham, anno 1346, and dying
soon thereafter, was succeeded by his only son,

VIII. Sir WILLIAM HAY of Locharret, who being appointed one of the hostages
for king David's ransom, Rymer's foed, Angliae, tom. V. p. 794.
is then designed Willielmus Hay de Locharret, anno 1354, though the king's
redemption was not completed till three years thereafter.

He married a daughter of the family of Douglas, by whom he had a son and
successor,

IX. Sir THOMAS HAY of Locharret, who was one of the noble Scotch heirs that
were sent to England as sureties for king David's ransom, anno 1357, and is
then designed Thomas, Ibid. tom. VI. p. ^5.
son and heir of sir William Hay of Locharret, etc.

He afterward got a safe conduct from the king of England, to return to
Scotland, and is then designed Thomas de Hay del Scotia, Ibid. p. 619.
qui in obsidem pro David de Bruys, etc. 6th May 1369.

Some time thereafter, there were forty thousand franks sent by the king of
France to king David, Ib. tom. VII. p. 485
to be divided amongst his friends in Scotland, of which sir Thomas Hay of
Locharret got four hundred, anno 1385.

He married Christian, sister of Walter Wardlaw, M. S. hist. of the family.
archbishop of Glasgow, and eardinal, by whom he had issue a son,

Sir William, -- and a daughter,

Christian.

He died before 1400, and was succeeded by his only son,

X. Sir WILLIAM HAY of Locharret, who, being a man of fine parts, and a great
statesman, was often employed in negociations of importance, and always
acquitted himself with fidelity and honor; particularly, he was appointed one
of the commissioners to treat of a peace with the English, anno 1409, and is
then designed dominus Willielmus Hay, Rymer's faed. tom. VIII. p. 584.
vicecomes de Peebles, miles, etc.

He married, 1st, Johanna, eldest of the four daughters and coheiresses of sir
Hugh Gifford, Charta penes marchion. de Tweeddale.
lord of Yester, with whom he got the lands and barony of Yester, which he
immediately assumed for his chief title, and added the arms of Gifford to his
former bearing, as appears from his seal, appended to the foundation charter of
the collegiate church of St. Nisbet, cap. 2. vol. II. p. 53.
Bathans, anno 1421.

By her he had issue three sons and one daughter.

1. William, who died before his father, without issue.

2. Sir Thomas, his heir.

3. Sir David, who carried on the line of the family.

His daughter, Charta penes famil. de Douglas, etc.
Margaret, married to William earl of Angus.

He married, 2dly, Alicia, daughter of sir Thomas Hay of Errol, who survived
her husband long, and got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. arch.
ad ann. 1449
Aliciae Hay sponsae quondam Willielmi Hay de Yester, etc.

By her he had issue a son,

Edmund, -- and a daughter,

Alicia, Charta penes commit. de Errol.
married to sir Gilbert Hay, son and apparent heir of sir William Hay of Errol.

Their son Edmund, got a charter under the great seal of the lands of Thalek,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
Kingelduris and Linplum, anno 1440; and in a donation to the collegiate church
of Yester, by Alicia Hay, relict of sir William Hay of Yester, ( pro salute
animae suae) Edmund Hay of Linplum, her son, is a witness, 22d February 1447.
Haddiagton's collections in, the lawyers library, Edin.
Of this Edmund the Hays of Bar^a in the North, and Linplum, of whom Adderston,
Mordington, etc. in the South, are descended.

Sir William died in the end of the year 1421, and was succeeded by his son,

XI. Sir THOMAS HAY, designed dominus de Yester, Chartulary of Arbroath, penes
Mac Farlane, p. 145.
and was served heir to his father in the lands of Eccermuir, etc. dated anno
1422.

He was one of the hostages sent to England for king James I. Rymer's faed.
Angliae, tom. X p. 308 et 348.
his ransom, anno 1423, and obtained liberty to return to Scotland, anno 1425;
but dying without issue, anno 1432, was succeeded by his brother,

XI. Sir DAVID HAY, Retour penes marchion. de Tweeddale.
dominus de Yester, who was retoured heir to his brother, anno 1434, and got a
charter under the great se^l, domino David Hay, Chart. in pub. archiv.
domino de Yester, militi, of a great many lands, anno 1450.

He added several prebends to the collegiate church of Yester, Chart. penes
marchion. de Tweeddale.
and greatly augmented their revenue.

He married lady Elizabeth Douglas, Charta penes fam. de Douglas.
daughter of George earl of Angus, by lady Margaret Stewart, Martin's geneal.
collect. vol. I. p. 380.
daughter of king Robert III. by whom he had two sons and one daughter.

1. John.

2. Andrew, rector of Biggar, ad annum 1469.

His daughter, Margaret, was married to sir Neil Cunningham of Barns, in
vicecomitatu de Fife.

He died in 1462, and was succeeded by his eldest son.

XII. JOHN, dominus de Yester, Lives of the offic. of state, p. 235, and
records of parliament.
a man of fine parts, and in great favor with king James III. who raised him
to the dignity of the peerage, by the title of lord Hay of Yester, in pleno
parliamento, 29th January 1487.

He was appointed one of the procurators for the abbacy of Arbroath, Chartulary
of Arbroath, p. 120.
anno 1488, and is then designed John lord Hay of Yester, etc.

He married, 1st, Charta penes marchion. de Tweeddale, ad ann. 1462.
Maria, daughter of John lord Lindsay of Byres, ancestor of the earl of
Crawfurd, by whom he had one son,

John, his heir.

He married, Ibid. ad ann. 1468.
2dly, Elizabeth, daughter and sole heiress of George Cunningham of Belton, by
whom he had two sons and two daughters.

1. John, who succeeded to his mother's estate, Chart. in pub. archiv.
and got a charter under the great seal, Johanni Hay de Belton, militi, etc.
anno 1503.

2. George, Charta penes marchion de Tweeddale, ad ann. 1491.
who was bred to the church.

1st daughter, Margaret, married to William lord Borthwick.

2. Isabel, Ibidem, ad annum 1496.
married to Robert Lauder of Bass.

He died anno 1509, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. JOHN, second lord, who got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
Johanni domino Hay de Yester, etc. anno 1511.

He was a man of singular worth and merit, and a great favorite of king James
IV. whom he accompanied to the fatal battle of Flowdon, where he lost his life
in the service of his country, with his royal master, 9th September 1513.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of Robert Crichton of Sanquhar, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
by whom he had issue three sons and two daughters.

1. John, his heir.

2. George Hay of Oliver-castle.

3. William, ancestor of the Hays of Monkton.

1st daughter, Elizabeth, married to James Tweedie of Drumelzier.

2. Christian, married to William Stewart, second baron of Traquair. Ibidem.


He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIV. JOHN, third lord Hay of Yester, who, in his father's lifetime, married
Elizabeth Douglas, daughter of George master of Angus, eldest son and apparent
heir of Archibald earl of Angus, Ibidem, et in arch. fam. de Douglas.
and got a charter under the great seal, Johanni Hay, filio et haeredi
apparenti Johannis Hay domini de Yester, et Elizabethae Douglas sponsae dicti
Johannis junioris, etc. of the twenty pound land of Wester Hoprew, dated anno
1509.

He got afterward a charter of the lands of Line, Chart. in pub. archiv.
and many others, Johanni domino Yester, anno 1533.

By the said Elizabeth, he had issue one son,

John his heir, -- and a daughter,

Elizabeth, Charta penes marchion. de Tweeddale.
married, 1st, to George lord Seton, and, 2dly, to William lord Salton.

He married, 2dly, the daughter and sole heiress of -- Dickson of Smithfield,
by whom he had a son,

John, who, succeeding to his mother's estate, got a charter under the great
seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Johanni Hay de Smithfield, of the half of the lands of Posso, etc. anno 1543.
Of him Dr James Hay of Haystoun, Esquire; is now the male representative.

John lord Yester died anno 1643, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XV. JOHN, fourth lord Yester, a man of great courage and resolution, who
signalized himself in several encounters against the English, particularly at
the battle of Pinkycleugh, anno 1547, where he was taken prisoner, sent to the
tower of London, and there confined till a peace was concluded betwixt Scotland
and England.

He married Margaret, daughter of William lord Livingston, Ibidem.
by whom he had issue two sons and one daughter.

1. William.

2. Thomas, who being bred to the church, was provost of Bathans.

His daughter, Martin's genesis collections.
Mary, married to -- Congalton of that ilk.

He died anno 1557, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVI. WILLIAM, fifth lord Yester, who was retoured heir to his father, anno
1559. He was a man of good parts, and a great promoter of the reformation, yet
a firm friend to queen Mary, and adhered always to her interest. When king
James took the administration upon himself, he was one of these noblemen, who,
with lord Ruthven and others, invited the king to the castle of Ruthven, where
they seized his person, and put from him several of his council; which being
afterward declared treason, he was obliged to fly beyond seas, where he
remained till the general act of indemnity in 1585, when he returned home, but
died soon thereafter.

He married Margaret, daughter of sir John Ker of Fernyhirst, Charta penes
marchion. de Tweeddale.
warden of the middle marches, by whom he had two sons and four daughters.

1. William, his heir.

2. James, who succeeded his brother,

1st daughter, Margaret, was married, 1st, to William lord Borthwick; Chart. in
pub. archiv.
2dly, to Robert Lauder of Popil, knight, son and heir of Robert Lauder of Bass.

2. Catharine, married to sir John Swinton of that ilk.

3. Jean, married to sir James Hay of Bara, commissary of Glasgow.

4. Elizabeth, married to William Ker of Broomland.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVII. WILLIAM, sixth lord Yester, who got a charter under the great seal,
Ibidem.
Willielmo domino Hay de Yester, baroniae de Yester, cum molendino, etc. dated
anno 1590.

He married Elizabeth Maxwell, daughter of John lord Herris, by whom he had
four daughters.

1. Jean, married to -- Tweedie of Drumelzier, who was the last of his family.

2. Christian, married to Archibald Newton of that ilk.

3. Grizel, married to George Hay of Adderston.

4. Mary, married to Alexander Horseburgh of that ilk.

He dying in 1591, without male-issue, his estate and honors devolved upon his
brother,

XVII. JAMES, seventh lord Yester, second son of William the fifth lord, Ibidem.
who got a charter under the great seal, Jacobo, fratri germano quondam
Willielmi domini Hay de Yester, terrarum baroniae de Yester, cum molendino,
etc. anno 1592.

A singular event happened in this lord's family, viz. His page, Hepburn,
accused his master of horse of a design to poison him; the master of horse
denied it; the affair was brought before the council, and was agreed to be
determined by a single combat, etc. This, Extract from the records of council,
penes marchion. de Tweeddale.
it is thought, was among the last trials by single combat in Scotland, and was
fought in presence of the judges, in October 1595.

He married lady Margaret Ker, daughter of Mark, Charta penes marchion. de
Lothian.
first earl of Lothian, by whom he had two sons and one daughter.

1. John, his heir.

2. Sir William Hay of Linplum.

His daughter, Margaret, married, 1st, to Alexander earl of Dunfermline, and
was his third wife; she was married, 2dly, to James Livingston earl of Calendar.

He died anno 1600, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVIII. JOHN, eighth lord Yester, who got charters under the great seal, Chart.
in pub. archiv.
of many lands and baronies, too numerous to be here inserted.

He was a man of great parts and judgment, and opposed the introduction of the
liturgy with all his interest, in the parliaments 1633 and 1637; yet was a
great loyalist, and had the command of a regiment in the king's army. Scotch
comp. p. 141.


He, with his son the master of Yester, and several of the nobility, waited on
the king at Newcastle. His majesty was so well satisfied with his fidelity and
good behavior, that he raised him to the dignity of earl of Tweeddale, 1st
December 1646. Chart. in cancellaria.


He married, 1st, lady Jean Seaton, daughter of Alexander earl of Dunfermline,
by Grizel his second wife, daughter of James lord Lesly, by whom he had a son,

John, his heir.

He married, 2dly, lady Margaret Montgomery, daughter of Alexander earl of
Eglington, by whom he had several children, who all died young, except one son,

William, for whom he purchased the lands of Drumelzier, who married, and had
issue.

He died anno 1653, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIX. JOHN, second earl of Tweeddale, who was a nobleman of great
accomplishments, and always steady in the interest of king Charles I.

When the king set up his standard at Nottingham in 1642, he joined him, and
continued in his army for some time.

In 1648, when several of the loyal nobility went into a resolution of raising
an army to rescue the king, the lord Yester joined them, and had the command of
the East Lothian regiment, consisting of twelve hundred men. He marched with
them into England, was at the battle of Preston, Lives of the offic. of state,
p. 236.
where their army was defeated, and the duke of Hamilton, their general, taken
prisoner.

After the murder of the king, he continued with the loyal party, and assisted
at the coronation of king Charles II. Ibidem.
at Scoon, anno 1651.

When the king marched into England, he garrisoned his castle of Niedpath for
his majesty's service, which held out against Oliver Cromwell longer than any
place besouth the Forth.

Immediately after the restoration, he got charters under the great seal,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
of all his lands; and king Charles II. as a reward of his loyalty and
fidelity, appointed him one of the lords of his privy council, a commissioner
of the treasury, and one of the extraordinary lords of session. In all which
offices he continued till 1674, when he resigned them, on account of some
differences between him and the duke of Lauderdale, whose daughter his son had
married; but in 1682, he was again restored to his employments in the council
and exchequer; in both which offices he continued till the end of the reign of
king James VII. Lives of the offic. of state, p. 238.
who appointed him one of his privy council in March 1685.

In the year 1686, finding himself greatly oppressed with debts, chiefly
occasioned by cautionry for the earl of Dunfermline, and others, he sold his
whole estate in Tweeddale, to William duke of Queensberry, which he gave to his
second son the earl of March.

The earl of Tweeddale came early into the revolution, and king William and
queen Mary knowing his great abilities and skill in the management of public
business, appointed him one of the lords of the privy council in May 1689,
Commissions in pub. arch.
and one of the commissioners of the treasury in September thereafter.

In January 1692, he was made lord high chancellor of Scotland; and, for his
great fidelity and faithful services, was further dignified with the titles of
marquis of Tweeddale, earl Gifford, viscount Walden, lord Hay of Yester, Charta
penes marchion. de Tweeddale, et chart. in pub. archiv.
etc by patent, haeredibus masculis quibuscunque, dated 17th December 1694. The
preamble to the patent contains many clauses very honorable for the family.

In 1695, he was appointed lord high commissioner to the parliament of
Scotland, and discharged his duty in all the high offices he enjoyed with
candor and reputation.

He married lady Jean Scot, daughter of Walter first earl of Buckcleugh, Scotch
comp. p. 141. lives of the officers of state, etc.
by whom he had seven sons and seven daughters.

1. John, his heir.

2. Lord Francis, who died young.

3. Lord David Hay of Belton, who married, and had issue, John Hay now of
Belton, Esquire; etc. etc.

4. Lord Charles, who died young.

5. Lord Alexander Hay of Spot, who married, and had issue, William Hay now of
Spot, Esquire; and a daughter, Catharine, married to sir Philip Anstruther of
Balcaskie, baronet.

6. Lord Gilbert.

7. Lord William.

1st daughter, lady Margaret, married to Robert earl of Roxburgh.

2. Lady Jean, married to William earl of March.

They both had issue.

All the other daughters died young.

He died anno 1697, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XX. JOHN, second marquis of Tweeddale, etc. The first time this noble lord
acted in a public capacity, was at the earl of Argyle's invasion, when he was
made colonel of the East Lothian regiment.

Soon after the revolution, Chart. in pub. archiv. lives of the officers of
(...), page 245.
he was appointed one of the privy council to king W^lliam and queen Mary, and
sheriff principal of East Lothian.

He was also one of the privy council to queen Anne, Appendix, ibidem, page 461.
and her majesty's high commissioner to the parliament in 1704, when the act of
security was confirmed and passed into a law.

In October the same year, Chart. penes marchion de Tweeddale, and lives of the
officers of state, p. 245.
he was made lord high chancellor of Scotland.

In the parliament 1706, he was very active in promoting the union between the
two crowns, which in that year was concluded.

In 1707, he was chosen one of the sixteen peers to represent Scotland in the
first British parliament.

He married lady Anne Maitland, only daughter of John duke of Lauderdale, by
whom he had three sons and two daughters.

1. Charles.

2. Lord John Hay, a brigadier-general in the army, a brave officer, and
colonel of the Scotch royal regiment of dragoons.

3. Lord William Hay.

1st daughter, lady Anne, married to William lord Ross.

2. Lady Jean, married to John earl of Rothes.

And dying anno 1713, was succeeded by his eldest son,

XXI. CHARLES, third marquis of Tweeddale, a man of great abilities, knowledge
and judgment.

Upon king George I.'s accession to the throne, he was made lord lieutenant of
the county of East Lothian, president of the court of police, and was chosen
one of the sixteen peers for Scotland, anno 1714.

He died in December 1715, having married lady Susan, daughter of William and
Anne, duke and duchess of Hamilton, widow of John Cochran earl of Dundonald,
by whom he had four sons and three daughters.

1. John, his heir.

2. Lord James, who died young.

3. Lord Charles, who, betaking himself to a military life, served at the siege
of Gibraltar, and afterward in Germany, as a volunteer under prince Eugene; he
also served during all the war 1741, and was wounded at the battle of Fontenoy,
where he behaved with distinguished bravery. Soon after the breaking out of the
late war, he rose to the rank of a major general, served in that capacity in
America, but died soon after his return to Britain in 1759.

4. Lord George.

1st daughter, lady Susan, died unmarried,

2. Lady Catharine.

3. Lady Anne.

XXII. JOHN, fourth marquis of Tweeddale, succeeded his father anno 1715, a man
of great accomplishments, of unsuspected integrity, untainted honor, and
becoming dignity. After having spent his younger years in diligent application
to the study of the civil law, and the laws of his country, he was, in the year
1721, appointed one of the extraordinary lords of session, and for many years
attended that court with the greatest care and fidelity.

He was elected one of the sixteen peers for Scotland, to the sixth, seventh,
ninth, tenth, eleventh, and twelfth parliaments of Great Britain.

In the year 1742, he was appointed principal secretary of state for Scotland,
also principal keeper of the signet; both which offices he resigned in the year
1746.

He was also admitted one of the lords of his majesty's most honorable privy
council.

Upon the decease of Archibald duke of Argyle, he was appointed lord
justice-general of Scotland in June 1761.

He married lady Frances Carteret, daughter of John earl Granville, by whom he
left issue one son,

George, now marquis of Tweeddale, -- and two daughters,

1. Lady Grace.

2. Lady Catharine.

He died anno 1762, and was succeeded by his only son,

XXIII. GEORGE, fifth marquis of Tweeddale.

ARMS.
Quarterly; 1st and 4th, azure, three cinquefoils argent, for Frazer; 2d and
3d, gules, three bars ermine, for Gifford of Yester; over all, by way of
surtout argent, three efcutcheons gules, being the paternal coat of Hay.

CREST; on a wreath, a stag's head erazed argent, horned or.

SUPPORTERS; two bucks, attired and unguled or, each having a collar azure,
charged with three cinquefoils, as in the coat.

MOTTO; Spare naught.

CHIEF SEATS,
At Yester in East Lothian, and Pinkie in Mid Lothian; the first fifteen, the
other four miles distant from Edinburgh.

WEMYSS Earl of WEMYSS.
AS the descent of the noble and illustrious family of Wemyss, from the ancient
earls of Fife, is instructed by charters in our public records, and other
authentic documents, still preserved in the family, and mentioned by several
historians, to these we refer our readers, Sir Rob Sibbald's hist of Fife, sir
James Dalrymple's hist. collect appendix to Nisbet, 2dvol. Malcolm's history of
the family, who had perused all their writs, etc.
and shall here only give a brief account of the origin of their surname,
which, like many others in this country, is certainly local, and was first
assumed by the proprietors of the lands (of old) called Wemyss-shire, which
contained all that tract of ground lying betwixt the lower part of the water of
Ore and the sea.

These lands got their name from the great number of caves that are on them,
all along the sea coast. A cave in the old Galic or Celtic language was called
Vumhs; from that these lands got the name of Vams-shire. In process of time
they came to be called Wemyss-shire; which name they still retain, as will
appear from several charters under the great seal, hereafter narrated; and from
hence the surname of the family.

The lands of Wemyss-shire, the parishes of Kennoway, Markinch, Lochoreshire,
etc. which lie contiguous to one another, were the undoubted property of the
ancient earls of Fife; a great part whereof were given by Gillimichael the
fourth earl, and Duncan, his eldest son, to his second son Hugo, the progenitor
of this noble family. And as the many ample privileges conferred upon the great
MacDuss by king Malcolm Canmore, and enjoyed by his posterity, are fully
narrated by our historians, and briefly under the title earl of Fife, page 27
4th of this work, we proceed to deduce the descent of the family of Wemyss from
their immediate ancestor.

IV. GILLIMICHAEL, fourth earl of Fife, great grandson of MacDuff the first
earl, was witness to the foundation charter of the abbay of Holyroodhouse,
Chartulary of St Andrews, and Dunfermline.
anno 1128, and is mentioned in several other charters of king David I.

He died anno 1139, leaving issue two sons.

1. Duncan, his heir.

2. Hugo, of whom the family of Wemyss is lineally descended.

Duncan, fifth earl of Fife, succeeded his father Gillimichael, Chartulary of
St. Andrews, penes MacFarlane, page 301.
and made a donation, Deo et ecclesiae Sti. Andreae, etc. ecclesiam de
Markinch, cum omnibus pertinen. etc. pro salute animae suae, et Helae
comitissae sponsae suae, etc. before the year 1154; in which year earl Duncan
died. His male line ended in Duncan the thirteenth earl, who died anno 1353,
leaving issue only one daughter, who died without children.

V. HUGO, second son of Gillimichael, the fourth earl, Ibid. and Chartul. of
Dunfermline.
got from his father the lands of Wemyss-shire, some lands in Lochore-shire,
and in the parish of Kennoway, all holding of himself and his successors, earls
of Fife.

He obtained also from his brother Duncan, the fifth earl, some lands in the
parish of Markinch, with the superiority of the patronage of the church
thereof, which is instructed by a donation hereafter mentioned.

There is, in the chartulary of Dunfermline, in the reign of king Malcolm IV.
Ibid. p. 187.
a precept directed to Duncan earl of Fife, and Hugo son of Gillimichael, etc.
before the year 1165; in which year king Malcolm died.

Hugo died in the year 1167 or 1168, and was succeeded by his son,

VI. HUGO or EGO, who, being proprietor of the lands of Markinch, confirmed his
uncle's donation, in these words: Omnibus, etc. Hugo, filius Hugonis filii
Gillimichael, comitis de Fife, sciatis me confirmasse et corroborasse Deo et
ecclesiae beati Andreae apostoli, et canonicis ibidem deo servientibus, etc.
ecclesiam de Markinch, una cum tosta ex orientali part ecclesiae, cum decimis
et omnibus rectitudinibus eidem ecclesiae just pertinentibus, etc. pro anima
mea, etc. to which Nicolaus the chancellor, who died in 1171, and Richard
bishop of St. Andrews, Chartulary of St. Andrews, p. 302.
who died anno 1173, are witnesses.

This Hugo lived after the year 1200, and left issue a son,

VII. Sir JOHN, who succeeded him in all his lands. He appears to have been a
man of distinguished rank and figure, and in his younger days took the
app^llation of John of Methkil, from a seaport town of that name, which is
situate near the east end of Wemyss-shire.

This is instructed by a convention betwixt the prior and convent of St.
Andrews, and the archdean thereof, wherein Johannes de Methkill, Ibid. p. 382.
Andreas de Moravia, Robertus de Haya, Galfridus vicecomes de Fife, are
witnesses, anno 1212.

He afterward made a donation of the patronage of the church of Wemyss to the
monastery of Soltray, in these words: " Dominus Johannes de Methkill, miles,
etc. -- dedisse, etc. -- deo et ecclesiae Sanctae Trinitatis de Soltray,
magistro et fratribus ibidem deo servientibus, etc. totum jus quod babeo vel
habere potui, vel antecessores mei habuerunt, vel successores mei habere
poterunt in ecclesia Sanctae Mariae de Wemyss, Chartulary of Soltray, in the
lawiers library, Edin.
pro anima mea, et anima comitis Duncani, et pro animabus patris et matris,
etc. etc." This donation has no date, but appears to have been made in the end
of the reign of king William, who died anno 1214.

As sirnames began about this time to be frequently used in Scotland, sir John,
in the beginning of the reign of king Alexander II. from his lands of
Wemyss-shire, assumed that of Wemyss for his surname, which his whole posterity
has enjoyed ever since.

He had issue three sons.

1. Michael de Wemyss, his heir.

2. Hug^ de Wemyss, who is mentioned in the chartulary of Arbroath, anno 1242;
but we can trace him no further.

3. David de Wemyss, to whom his father gave the lands of Cambrun in Kennoway
parish, and he is designed David de Wemyss dominus de Cambrun, Chartulary of
St. Andrews, p. 471.
in a charter of John Whyt prior of St. Andrews, who died anno 1258. He married
and had issue.

Sir John died between the years 1232 and 1236, and was succeeded by his eldest
son,

VIII. MICHAEL de WEMYSS, who confirmed his father's donation to the monastery
of Soltray, Ibidem.
of the patronage of the church of Wemyss, etc.

He died before the year 1260, leaving issue a son and successor,

IX. Sir JOHN, the first we have found designed dominus de Wemyss. He renewed
the donations of his predecessors to the monastery of Soltray, which is
confirmed by Gameline bishop of St. Andrews, in these words: " Confirmasse,
etc. magistro et fratribus de Soltray, deo ibidem servientibus, etc. ecclesiam
de Wemyss, quam quidem dominus Johannes de Wemyss, filius Michaelis de Wemyss,
tanquam verus patronus ejusdem ecclesiae eis confirmavit, etc. etc. etc." The
confirmation is dated on the Monday after the feast of Epiphany, Chartulary of
Soltray, p. 1.
anno 1261.

This sir John was a man of parts and honor, a brave soldier, and in great
favor with king Alexander III. He is particularly mentioned by a good author,
who designs him Johannes de Wemyss, miles strennus, etc. immediately before the
battle of Largis in Cunningham, Fordun, vol. II. p. 97.
where king Alexander III. obtained a glorious victory over Haco king of
Norway, who had invaded Scotland with a powerful slect and army, anno 1263.

He had issue two sons.

1. Sir Michael, his heir.

2. David de Wemyss, who, with many of his countrymen, Prynne's collect. vol.
III. p. 361.
was compelled to swear fealty to king Edward I. of England, in 1296.

Sir John died about the year 1286, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

X. Sir MICHAEL de WEMYSS, dominus de eodem, a man of singular worth and merit,
of eminent parts and spirit, great prudence and sagacity.

After the death of king Alexander III. king Edward I. of England was extremely
desirous to have princess Margaret, daughter to the king of Norway (undoubted
heir of the crown of Scotland) married to his eldest son prince Edward. In
1290, the estate^ of the kingdom sent two noble knights, sir Michael Wemyss,
and sir Michael Scot, ambassadors to Norway to bring home the princess, now
queen Margaret, nobiles Scotiae duos milites, scientia et motibus praeclaros,
Michaelem Wemyss, Fordun, vol. II. p. 136.
et Michaelem Scot, ad regem Norvegiae pro matrimonio perficiendo, et pro
puella ad regnum deducenda, solenniter dire^^erunt, etc.

Buchanan calls them equites Fisani illustres, etc.

They went their embassy to Norway; but, unhappily for them and their country,
queen Margaret died at Orkney in her way to Scotland, Fordun, vol. II. p. 136.
anno 1290, or, according to Fordun, anno 1291.

A monument of this honorable embassy is still preserved in the family of
Wemyss, viz. a silver basin of an antique figure, which was given by the king
of Norway in a present to this sir Michael de Wemyss.

He was one of the commissioners chosen on the part of John Baliol, Rymer's
foed. Angliae, tom. II. p. 553.
in the competition for the crown with Robert Bruce, anno 1292.

In the same year the commissioners met at Berwick upon Tweed, and sir Michael
took the oath to king Edward, as sole arbiter in the case, Ibid. p. 594.
and it is well known how king Edward determined that important affair in
favors of Baliol.

There is still extant an indenture betwixt dominus Michael de Wemyss, In
archivis familiae de Wemyss.
dominus de eodem, et dominus Michael Scot, de Balweary, milites, in presence
of king John Baliol, dated at the monastery of Lindores, anno 1294.

We also find this dominus Michael de Wemyss swearing fealty to king Enward I.
Prynne, vol. III. p. 662.
of England, anno 1296.

He was one of the magnates Scotiae that sat in the parliament of Air, when
king Robert Bruce settled the succession to the crown, Fordun, vol. II. p. 256.
in 1315.

In a charter, granted by Duncan earl of Fife to John Clephan of Carslogie,
this sir Michael, David his son and apparent heir, and Michael de Wemyss,
Charta penes Geo. Clephan de Carslogie.
junior, his grandson, are witnesses. The charter has no date, but appears to
have been about 1316.

In a perambulation of the marches of some lands belonging to the monastery of
Dunfermline, and others, dominus Michael de Wemyss, senior, et dominus David de
Wemyss, filius ejus, Chartulary of Dunfermline, p. 499.
are amongst the arbiters, anno 1319, in which year sir Michael died in an
advanced age, and was succeeded by his son,

XI. Sir DAVID de WEMYSS, dominus de eodem. He was one of the great barons who
signed that famous letter to the pope, asserting the independency of Scotland,
Fordun, vol. II. p. 275.
in the year 1320.

He, with consent of his son Michael, confirmed to the monastery of Soltray all
the donations made by his predecessors, and added several other parcels of land
to them, Chartulary of Soltray.
as mentioned and bounded in the donation charter,

He married, 1st, Anabella, daughter of sir William Sinclair, which is
instructed by an original charter of several lands in Lochoreshire, granted by
David de Wemyss, son and heir of Michael de Wemyss, dominae Anabellae, filiae
domini Willielmi de Sto. Claro, militis, sponsae suae, Chart in archiv fam. de
Wemyss.
et haeredibus inter ipsos legitime procreat. etc.

He married, 2dly, Marjory, daughter of Walter de Ramsay, which appears by a
charter of king Robert Bruce, confirming the lands of Glassmont, etc. in
tenemento de Kinghorn. to David de Wemyss and Marjory Ramsay his spouse, Ibidem.
dated anno regni 23tio, anno dom. 1329.

It may here be observed, that by the preceding account it is fully proven by
authentic documents, before 1330, that the family of Wemyss had in their
possession all the lands premised to have been given by Gillimichael fourth
earl of Fife, and his eldest son Duncan, to Hugo his second son, their
undoubted ancestor, viz. the lands of Wemyss-shire, some lands in
Lochore-shire, lands in the parishes of Kennoway, Markinch, etc. all which they
continued to hold of the earls of Fife, their superiors, till Isabel countess
of Fife, only daughter and heiress of Duncan the last earl, having no heirs of
her own body, resigned all her lands and superiorities in favors of Robert
duke of Albany, which were afterward annexed to the crown by the forfeiture of
duke Murdoch, ( Vide title earl of Fife.) Then, and ever after, they got their
lands holding of the crown.

Sir David de Wemyss died in the end of the reign of king Robert Bruce, leaving
issue a son and successor,

XII. Sir MICHAEL de WEMYSS, Charta penes Carslogie, and book of charters in
the lawiers library Edinburgh, fol. 36.
dominus de eodem, who, in his grandfather's lifetime, was designed dominus
Michael de Wemyss, junior, about the year 1316, as before observed.

He confirmed all the donations made by his father and his predecessors, to the
religious of St. Andrews and Soltray, pro salute animae suae, etc. to which
James bishop of St. Andrews, Thomas Randolph earl of Murray, David de Wemyss
his cousin, David de Lochore, etc. are witnesses. The confirmation has no date;
Chartulary of Soltray, No 23.
but, by the witnesses, must have been made betwixt the years 1328 and 1332.

He obtained a charter from Duncan earl of Fife, of the lands of
Easter-Munichie, Wester-Dron, etc. Chart. in archiv. familiae de Wemyss.
in which he is designed Michael de Wemyss, filius et haeres quondam domini
David de Wemyss, militis, anno 1333.

This sir Michael, with David his son, are particularly mentioned by a good
historian, in his account of the siege of Lochleven, Fordun. vol. II. p. 31^.
in 1335.

In 1336, there were three Scotch knights sent to the parliament of England,
viz. sir Michael de Wemyss, sir William de Munlant, and sir Henry de Ramsay:
sir Michael had forty pounds Sterling. allowed him for his expenses, Rymer's foed.
Angliae, tom. IV. p. 694.
sir William Matulant twenty pounds, and sir Henry Ramsay ten pounds.

He left issue three sons.

1. Sir David, his heir.

2. Sir John Wemyss of Rires and Kincaldrum, who carried on the line of this
family, as will be shown hereafter.

3. Michael de Wemyss.

Sir Michael died anno 1342, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. Sir DAVID de WEMYSS, dominus de eodem, who being a man of good parts and
great interest, made a considerable figure in the reign of king David II. who
appointed him high sheriff of the county of Fife.

In a donation to the monastery of Inchcolm, confirmed by Duncan bishop of
Dunkeld, Chartulary of Inchcolm, p. 5.
David de Wemyss, vicecomes de Fife, is a witness, anno 1351.

He is witness also in a charter of Duncan earl of Fife, to -- Green of Ferny,
wherein he is designed David de Wemyss, miles, vicecom. de Fife; and in a
charter of dame Helen de Maxwell, Chart. in pub. archiv. Nibet's append. etc.
domina de Kelly, to John Strange of Easter-Pitcorthie, confirmed by king David
II. anno regni 29 no, 1358.

He died soon thereafter, leaving issue a son and successor,

XIV. Sir DAVID de WEMYSS, dominus de eodem, who, in his father's lifetime, was
one of the noble Scotch heirs proposed as sureties for king David's liberty,
anno 1354, and was afterward one of the hostages sent to England for his
ransom, Rymer's foed. Angliae, tom. V. p. 791. tom. VI. p. 35. and 109.
in 1357, and was then designed David, son and heir of senior David de Wemyss,
knight, etc. anno 1358.

This sir David having no male issue, and but one daughter, made a resignation
of his whole lauds and estate in the hands of his superior, in favors of sir
John Wemyss of Rires and Kincaldrum, his undoubted heir-male. The resignation
is in these words: in manibus nobilis domini, Roberti Stewart comitis de Fife
et de Menteith, omnes terras quas idem dominus David de Wemyss tenet de
praedicto comite, Chart. in archiv. familiae de Wemyss.
etc. This deed was solemnly execute in the parish church of Wemyss, anno 1373.

He died in 1375, leaving issue a daughter,

XV. MARGARET WEMYSS, his only child, Chart. in rotul Rob. II.
married to sir John de Inchmartine, knight, to whom she had but one child,

Isabel de Inchmartine, their sole heiress, married to sir Alan Erskine,
knight, who, in her right, became possessed of the barony of Inchmartine. Lives
of the offic. of state, p. 246.
They had issue two daughters, their co-heiresses. 1. Isabel. 2. Margaret,
married to sir John Glen, knight, but died without male issue.

Isabel, who was great grandchild and heir of line of the last sir David de
Wemyss, married her cousin, sir John Wemyss of Rires, the undoubted heir-male
of the family, being grandson of sir John of Rires and Kincaldrum, before
mentioned, to whom we now return.

XIII. Sir JOHN WEMYSS of Rires, second son of sir Michael, who died in the
year 1342, and brother-german of sir David, who was sheriff of Fife in the
reign of king David II. Chart. in pub. archiv.
got from his father the lands and barony of Rires; also some lands in
Lochore-shire, and made a grant of the mill thereof to Andrew de Valoniis,
Ibidem.
which were afterward confirmed to him by a charter under the great seal from
king Robert II. dated 5th November 1373.

He obtained likeways from sir Alexander Abernethy, a grant of the lands and
barony of Kincaldrum, Ibidem.
which became one of his chief titles, and were confirmed to his grandson by a
charter under the great seal, after narated.

He died in the end of the year 1357, or beginning of the year 1358, leaving
issue a son,

XIV. Sir DAVID WEMYSS of Rires and Kincaldrum, Rymer, tom. VI. p. 109.
who succeeded him, and was one of the hostages sent to England for king
David's ransom, in the year 1358.

He died before the year 1373, leaving issue a son and successor,

XV. Sir JOHN WEMYSS of Rires and Kincaldrum, who (when but a young man)
married Isabel, daughter and co-heiress of sir Alan Erskine, as before
observed, whereby the male and female lines of this noble family were united;
Lives of the offic. of state.
and this sir John was ever after designed sir John of that ilk.

This is fully instructed by an authentic writ, Books of original writs, penes
MacFarlane, et ex autographo apud Wemyss.
still preserved, wherein sir Alan Erskine, dominus de Inchmartine, gave and
set to his lovit son, John of Wemyss of that ilk, knight, the lands of
Pitlessie, etc. 5th December 1380.

In consequence of this marriage, and sir David's resignation in 1373, before
mentioned, sir John became possessed of almost all the estates given by
Gillimichael, fourth earl, and his son Duncan, fifth earl of Fife, to the
predecessors of the Wemyss family, upon which he got charters from Robert duke
of Albany and earl of Fife, superior thereof; all which were afterward
confirmed to him by a charter under the great seal from king Robert III. in
these words: " Robertus, etc. Sciatis nos approbasse confirmasse, etc.
concessiones illas quas Robertus comes de Fife, frater noster carissimus, fecit
et concessit dilecto nostro Johanni de Wemyss, militi, de terris de Rires, et
de aliis terris quibuscunque, qua idem miles tenuit de ipso comite de Fife, et
de terris de Myrecairny, de Newton, de Markinch, de Nether-Cambrun, de
Methkill, de Wester-Tarvit et Tullibreck, cum pertinen. Confirmavimus etiam
concessiones illas quas quondam Alexander de Abernethy, miles, fecit et
concessit quondam Johanni de Wemyss, militi, avo dicti Johannis, haereditarie,
de terris de Kincaldrum, cum pertinen. Confirmavimus etiam concessiones illas
quas Alanus de Erskine, Robertus de Livingston, et Johannes de Boswell,
milites, fecerunt et concesserunt haereditarie dicto Johanni de Wemyss, de
terris de Reath, Glenniston, Powguilde, cum pertinen. jacen. in vicecomitatu de
Fife, etc. etc. etc." The confirmation is dated at Dunfermline, Chart. in
rotul. Rob. III.
16th October 1393.

He got also, of the same date, another charter under the great seal, with a
license to build a castle upon the lands of Rires, cum turribus, etc. ad formam
et fortitudinem prout fibi videbitur expediens, Ibidem.
etc. etc. anno regni tertio.

He afterward built the chapel of St. Mary at Rires, Malcolm's collections.
and mortified lands sufficient for maintaining a chaplain to it, anno 1404.

He was appointed one of the ambassadors extraordinary, to treat with the
English about king James's liberty, Rymer, tom. IX. p. 5. and tom. X. p. 309.
anno 1413, and was afterward one of the hostages for his ransom, anno 1423.

By the said Isabel his wife, he lest issue three sons and two daughters.

1. Sir David, his heir.

2. Duncan de Wemyss, who got from his father the lands and barony of Rires,
etc. He was a man of parts, and made a considerable figure in his time. He went
to England an hostage for king James's ransom, Chart. in pub. archiv. Rymer,
tom. X. etc. p. 509. 712. etc.
in the place of Alexander de Ogilvi, anno 1432, and was often employed
afterward in negotiations with the English. He married, and had a son, Michael
of Rires; but his male line is long since extinct.

3. Alexander Wemyss. He was father of John of Kilmenie, who got a charter
under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Johanni Wemyss de Kilmanie, et Janetae Wardlaw sponsae suae, de ossicio
constabulariae castri et civitatis Sti. Andreae, Charta penes Walterum Wemyss,
de Lathocker.
dated 12th August 1440. Of this John, Walter Wemyss of Lathocker, Esquire; is the
lineal male representative.

1st daughter, Elizabeth, married sir Andrew Gray, Contr. penes dom. Gray, ad
ann. 1418.
lord of Foulis, ancestor of lord Gray.

2. Eupheme, Ibid. ad ann. 1428.
married to sir William Livingston of Drumray.

Sir John died in an advanced age, in 1428. and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVI. Sir DAVID de WEMYSS, deminus de eodem, who, in his father's lifetime,
entered into an obligation with sir Andrew Gray, lord of Foulis. As the style
of it is a little singular, we have taken the liberty to insert it here in its
own words, viz. "Be it known, etc. me Davy of the Wemyss, son and apparent
heir of sir John of the Wemyss, lord of Rires, and dame Isabel of the Wemyss,
my modyr, to be obleist for me and mine airs, till an honorable man, Andrew
Gray, the son and air of Andrew Gray lord of Foulis, etc. to resign freely
twenty pounds worth of land in demayne be year, lyand within Strathardel, in
the sheriffdome of Perth, the which lands were the lords of Inchmartine, my
fore-bears; to the whilks dame Isabel, my modyr, succeedit throw line of
heretage, to the said Andrew the son, and till Elizabeth my sister, and all the
airs command betwixt them in the fee, as soon as the said sir John of the
Wemyss, my fadyr, is decessit and dead, In arch. dom. Gray.
etc. etc. etc." dated 24th day of August 1418.

This sir David married Christian, daughter of sir William Douglas of
Lochleven, by lady Elizabeth Lindsay his wife, Chart. in archiv. familiae de
Wemyss, et penes com. de Morton.
daughter of David earl of Crawfurd, by lady Catharine Stewart his wife,
daughter of king Robert II.

By her he had two sons and one daughter.

1. Sir John, his heir.

2. David de Wemyss.

His daughter, Eupheme, married --.

Sir David died anno 1461, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVII. Sir JOHN WEMYSS lord of that ilk, who got a charter, under the great
seal, of the lands of Wardropstoun, Balhavel, Strathardil, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
Inchmartine, Pittmiddle, Kinnaird, Elioch, etc. etc. dated 25th July 1468.

He was a man of parts and honor, and was one of the commissioners appointed
to negotiate with the English in August 1484. They concluded a treaty, and sir
John Wemyss of that ilk was one of the hostages on the part of king James III.
in September thereafter. Rymer, tom. XII. p. 243.


He married Margaret, Chart. in archiv. familiae de Wemyss, et penes dom. Gray.
daughter of sir Robert Livingston of Drumray, by whom he got the lands of
Easter-Wemyss, some lands in Lochore-shire, etc. and by her had a son,

Sir John, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Grizel, Writs of the family of Wemyss.
married to David Boswel of Balmuto, Esquire;.

He died in the 86th year of his age, anno 1502, and was succeeded by his son,

XVIII. Sir JOHN WEMYSS, lord of that ilk, who, in his father's lifetime, was
designed John of Strathardel, which appears by a charter under the great seal,
Johanni Wemyss de Strathardel, et Christian^ de Abernethy sponsae, suae, of two
parts of the lands of Strathardel in Perth-shire, Chart. in pub. archiv.
dated 25th July 1468.

By the said Christian, his first wife, a daughter of Laurence, first lord
Abernethy of Rothemay and Salton, Writs of the family of Wemyss.
he had issue five sons and one daughter.

1. Sir David, his heir.

2. Gavin Wemyss.

3. Charles.

4. Thomas, ancestor of the Wemysses of Winthank.

5. John, who married a daughter of sir John Arnot of that ilk, and was father
of Henry Wemyss bishop of Galloway.

His daughter, Agnes, married to Patrick Kinnynmonth of that ilk.

He married, 2dly, Helen Dunbar, who is designed relict of sir John Wemyss of
that ilk, Chart. in pub. archiv.
anno 1507, but by her he had no issue.

He did not long survive his father, but dying in the year 1506, was succeeded
by his eldest son,

XIX. Sir DAVID WEMYSS, lord of that ilk, who was served and retoured heir to
his father, in September 1508.

He was a man of great fortitude, singular worth and merit, and highly esteemed
by his majesty king James IV. from whom he got charters under the great seal,
Davidi Wemyss de eodem, militi, erecting all his lands into one free barony,
viz. the lands of Wemyss-shire, Little-Lun, Tulliebreck, Cameron-mill,
Duniface, Pitconochie, West-Tarvet, etc. in Fife; West-Dron, Elcho, Balhabron,
Strathardel, Ardargie, and Kinnaird, in Perth-shire; and Balhavel, Ibid. et
chart. in archiv. familiae de Wemyss.
etc. in Forfar shire, all comprehended in the barony of Wemyss, dated 28th
August 1511.

He married, 1st, Elizabeth, daughter of -- Lundin of that ilk, by whom he had
three sons and one daughter.

1. Sir David, his heir.

2. James.

3. Robert, whose son David got a charter under the great seal, Davidi de
Wemyss, filio quondam Roberti de Wemyss, fratris germani Davidis Wemyss de
eodem, of the lands of Lathrisk and Montorpie, Chart. in pub. archiv.
dated 24th October 1542.

His daughter, Elizabeth, died unmarried.

He married, Contr. penes dom. Gra^.
2dly, Janet, daughter of Andrew third lord Gray, by whom he had a son,

John, who obtained from his father the lands of Balhavel in Forfar-shire, and
Kinnaird in Perth-shire.

Sir David accompanied king James IV. to the field of Flowdon, where he was
slain in the service of his country, with his royal master, on 9th September
1513, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XX. Retour in archiv. familiae de Wemyss.
Sir DAVID WEMYSS, lord of that ilk, who was served and retoured heir to his
father, anno 1514.

In his father's lifetime he got a charter under the great seal, Davidi de
Wemyss, filio et haeredi apparenti Davidis Wemyss de eodem, militis, et
Catharinae Sinclair sponsae suae, of the lands of Dron, Chart. in pub. archiv.
and others, in Perthshire dated 28th August 1513.

He afterward got other four charters from king James V. Davidi Wemyss de
eodem, militi, of the lands of Wemyss-shire, and many other lands and baronies,
too numerous to be here inserted, Ibidem.
in the years 1530, 1537, 1540, and 1541.

He married, 1st, Catharine, daughter of Henry lord Sinclair, by whom he had
two sons, and one daughter.

1. Sir John, his heir.

2. James, who married Janet Wardlaw, heiress of Caskieberry, of whom James
lord Burntisland, who married the countess of Wemyss, is lineally descended, as
will be shown hereafter.

His daughter, Margaret, married to James Wemyss, brother to the lord of
Pittencrief.

He married, Writs of the family of Wemyss.
2dly, Mariota, daughter of sir John Towers of Innerleith, by whom he had a son,

Captain David Wemyss, who got from his father the lands of Strathardel in
Perth-shire, etc. upon which he got a charter under the great seal, wherein he
is designed frater germanus Johannis Wemyss de eodem, militis, Chart. in pub
archiv.
18th June 1553. Of him the Wemysses of Pitkenie are descended.

He had also a daughter, Grizel, married, 1st, to Patrick Kinnynmonth of that
ilk; 2dly, to David Ramsay of Brackmont.

Sir David died anno 1544, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XXI. Sir JOHN, who got from queen Mary four charters under the great seal,
Johanni Wemyss domino de eodem, militi, of the lands of Cameron, Ibidem.
Easter-Wemyss, Elcho, and many others, in the years 1548, 1552, 1560, and 1564.

He was a man of great honor, courage, and magnanimity, a firm and steady
friend to queen Mary.

In 1547, he, upon the head of the gentlemen of Fife, gave the English, who
landed in that county, a considerable defeat, and killed above seven hundred of
them. Bishop Lesly's hist.


In 1556, when it was said that queen Mary intended to impose a tax for levying
an army of mercenaries, in cafe of a war, about three hundred gentlemen met at
Edinburgh, and commissioned sir John Wemyss and the lord of Calder, to wait on
her majesty, and endeavor to dissuade her from such an unpopular measure,
Ibidem.
and they easily prevailed.

In 1559, sir John got a commission from Francis and Mary, king and queen, to
be lord lieutenant of Fife, Kinross, and Clackmannan-shires, for suppressing
her rebellious subjects, Commission among the family writs.
in which he acquitted himself with great fidelity and reputation.

He was one of the Scotch nobles who entered into a solemn bond or association,
Bond in the lawiers library, Edinr. M. S.
to stand by, and defend her majesty with their lives and fortunes, against all
her enemies.

He was a great protector and benefactor to the religious, Writs of the family.
particularly to the nuns at Elcho, who constituted him their heretable bailie.

He got the patronage of the parsonage and vicarage of Methil, disponed to him
by archbishop Hamilton, Ibidem.
and was made bailie of the water of Leven.

He married, 1st, Margaret, daughter of sir Adam Otterburn of Redhall, lord
advocate in the reign of king James V. by whom he had two sons, and four
daughters.

1. Sir David, his heir.

2. John de Wemyss, who signalized himself in the wars abroad, Ibid. M. S. in
French, transmitted from Italy by count Wemyss to the late earl, in 1734.
married a lady of great rank and fortune in Brescia, where he settled; and of
him are descended count Wemyss, and several other considerable families of that
surname, which are subsisting in Italy to this day.

1st daughter, --, married to sir David Barclay of Cullairny.

2. Elizabeth, married to David Balsour of Montquhany.

3. Agnes, married to sir John Ayton of Dunmore.

4. Eupheme, married to sir David Carnegie of Coluthie, ancestor of the earl of
Southesk. -- They all had issue.

He married, 2dly, Janet, daughter of Alexander Traill of Blebo, by whom he had
a son, Ibid. ad ann. 1558.


Gavin Wemyss of Powguild, who married Catharine Wemyss, heiress of Winthank,
of whom James Wemyss, now of Winthank, Esquire; captain John Wemyss
lieutenant governor of the castle of Edinburgh, etc. are lineally descended.

By said Janet he had also a daughter,

Isabel, married to Andrew Fernie of that ilk.

He died anno 1571, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XXII. Sir DAVID, who get a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
domino Davidi Wemyss de eodem, militi, of the lands of Newton, Markinch, and
others, dated 28th January 1574.

He married Cecilia, Writs of the family of Wemyss.
daughter of William second lord Ruthven, ancestor of the earls of Gowrie, by
whom he had five sons, and five daughters.

1. Sir John, his heir.

2. Sir James Wemyss of Bogie, Lodge's pe^rage of Ireland v. III. p. 307
of whom the present sir James Wemyss of Bogie is lineally descended; also some
considerable families of the name of Wemyss in Ireland.

3. David, ancestor of the Wemysses of Fingask.

4. Henry, progenitor of the Wemysses of Foodie.

5. Patrick, of whom the Wemysses of Rumgay, Craighall, etc. are descended.

1st daughter, Margaret, married to James Bethune of Creich.

2. Cecilia, married to -- Kinnynmonth of that ilk, anno 1585.

3. Jean, married to James Macgill of Rankeillor, in 1578.

4. Elizabeth, married to Alexander Wood of Lamyletham, in 1597.

5. Isabel, married to John Auchmoutie of that ilk.

He died anno 1591, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XXIII. Sir JOHN WEMYSS, lord of that ilk, who, in his father's lifetime, got a
charter under the great seal, Johanni Wemyss apparenti de eodem, Chart. in pub.
archivis.
of the lands of Wemyssshire, with the castle and mains thereof, Cameron mill,
etc. etc. etc. 10th May 1589.

He married, 1st, lady Margaret Douglas, daughter of William, Charta penes com.
de Morton.
first earl of Morton of the house of Lochleven, by whom he had no surviving
issue.

He married, 2dly, Anne Stewart, daughter of James lord Down, by lady Margaret
Campbell, Writs of the family of Wemys^.
daughter of Archibald fourth earl of Argyle, by whom he had two sons, and four
daughters.

1. David, his heir.

2. Sir John, afterward earl of Wemyss.

1st daughter, Cecilia, married to William second earl of Tullibardin, without
issue.

2. Jean, married to Robert lord Colvil of Cliesh.

3. Isabel, married to Hugh eighth lord Lovat, and had issue.

4. Catharine, married to John Haldane of Gleneagles.

He obtained from the duke of Lennox a disposition to the admiralty betwixt
Dysart and the water of Leven, Writs of the family of Wemyss.
anno 1610.

He died in the 85th year of his age, anno 1616, and was succeeded by his
eldest son,

XXIV. DAVID, who, in his father's lifetime, got a charter under the great
seal, David, filio et haeredi apparenti Johannis Wemyss de codem, militi,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the lands and barony of Wemyss-shire, with several others, de novo unit.
dated 27th June 1605.

He married lady Elizabeth Lesly, daughter of Andrew earl of Rothes, but dying
soon after his father, without issue, was succeeded in the whole estate by his
brother,

XXIV. Sir JOHN WEMYSS, lord of that ilk, a man of good parts, great honor,
and highly esteemed by king Charles I. who created him a baronet, Ibidem.
by patent, domino Johanni Wemyss, baronetto de eodem, militi, of the lands,
barony, and regality of New Wemyss in Nova Scotia in America, to his
heirs-male, dated 29th May 1625.

He then raised him to the dignity of the peerage, Ibidem.
by the title of lord Wemyss of Elcho, by patent, dated 1st April 1628.

He got a charter under the great seal, Johanni domino Wemyss, of the lands and
barony of Wester Wemyss, Ibidem.
etc. dated 9th August 1630.

His majesty was afterward pleased further to dignify him with the titles of
earl of Wemyss, lord Elcho, Methill, etc. by patent to him, Diploma ibidem.
ejusque haeredibus masculis, in perpetuum, cognomen et insigniade Wemyss
gerentibus, dated 25th June 1633.

Though he was a man of mild and moderate principles, he appears to have been
on the parliament's side, in the troublesome reign of king Charles I. and was
made a privy councillor for life, Minutes of parliament, and rescinded acts.
and one of the committee of parliament, anno 1641; and the same in 1644.

Yet his majesty being fully satisfied of his integrity, Guthry's memoirs, p.
22.
appointed him his high commissioner to the general assembly, anno 1641.

He married Jean, daughter of Patrick seventh lord Gray, by whom he had a son,

David, afterward earl of Wemyss, -- and five daughters.

1. Lady Mary, married to James sixth lord Sinclair.

2. Lady Anne, married, 1st, to Alexander Lindsay of Edzell; 2dly, to Mungo
second viscount Stormont.

3. Lady Jean, married, 1st, to sir John Towers of Innerleith; 2dly, to Henry
Maule of Balmakelly, Esquire; second son of Patrick first earl of Panmure.

4. Lady Elizabeth, married to sir John Ayton of that ilk.

5. Lady Catharine, married to sir David Carnegie of Craig.

He died 22d November 1649, and was succeeded by his son,

XXV. DAVID, second earl of Wemyss, who, in his father's lifetime, got a
charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Davidi magistro de Wemyss, of the lands and barony of Wemyss, Little-Lun,
Tullibreck, Cameron-mill, and many others, in the shires of Fife and Perth, all
united to the barony of Wemyss, 14th January 1632.

He afterward got a charter, Davidi comiti de Wemyss, Ibidem.
annui redditus mill et viginti librarum monetae Scotiae, levand. de baronia
de Craig, etc. dated 10th June 1661.

He married, 1st, Jean, daughter of Robert lord Burleigh, by whom he had one
daughter,

Lady Jean Wemyss, married, 1st, to Archibald earl of Angus; 2dly, to George
earl of Sutherland. She had issue to both.

He married, 2dly, lady Eleanora Fleming, daughter of John earl of Wigton, by
whom he had no issue.

He married, 3dly, lady Margaret Lesly, daughter of John earl of Rothes,
dowager of James lord Balgony, and Francis earl of Buckcleugh, by whom he had
another daughter,

Lady Margaret, afterward countess of Wemyss.

The earl having no male-issue, resigned his honors in the king's hands, and
got a new patent, with the former precedence, to and in favors of his daughter
lady Margaret, and the heirs-male of her body; Diploma in cancellaria.
which failing, to the heirs of entail, as contained in her contract of
marriage, etc. dated at Whitehall the 3d day of August 1672.

This earl was a man of a great and public spirit. He built a fine and
commodious harbor at Methil, upon his own charges, made considerable additions
to his house, the castle of Wemyss, and greatly beautified that fine seat with
terrases, gardens, etc.

He died anno 1680, and was succeeded in his estate and honors by his daughter,

XXVI. MARGARET, countess of Wemyss, who married sir James Wemyss of
Caskieberry, lineally descended of James, second son of sir David de Wemyss,
lord of that ilk, before mentioned, the 20th generation of this account.

He got a charter under the great seal, domino Jacobo Wemyss, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
etc. castri de Burntisland, etc. dated 3d March 1669.

King Charles II. was pleased afterward to create him lord Burntisland for
life, with all the privileges of a lord of parliament, Diploma in cancellaria.
by patent, dated at Whitehall the 18th day of April 1672.

He died anno 1685, leaving issue by the said countess, a son,

David, afterward earl of Wemyss, -- and two daughters,

1. Lady Anne, married to David earl of Leven and Melvil.

2. Lady Margaret, married to David earl of Northesk.

Countess Margaret died anno 1705, and the estate and honors devolved upon her
son,

XXVII. DAVID, third earl of Wemyss, a man of great honor and integrity, and
was one of the lords of the privy council to her majesty queen Anne.

In 1706, he was constituted lord high admiral of Scotland, and was named one
of the commissioners for the treaty of union with England; upon the conclusion
whereof, he was declared vice admiral of Scotland; which office he enjoyed till
the queen's death.

He was elected one of the sixteen Scotch peers, to the first and second
British parliaments.

He married, 1st, lady Anne Douglas, daughter of William duke of Queensberry,
by whom he had two sons.

1. David, lord Elcho, a youth of great hopes and spirit, who died unmarried in
the 17th year of his age, much lamented.

2. James, afterward earl of Wemyss.

He married, 2dly, Mary, daughter of sir John Robertson of Farningwood in
Northamptonshire, baronet, by Mary his wife, daughter of sir William Dudly of
Clopton, baronet, by whom he had no issue.

He married, 3dly, Elizabeth, daughter of Henry lord Sinclair, by whom he had
two daughters.

1. Lady Elizabeth, married to William earl of Sutherland, and was mother of
the present earl.

2. Lady Margaret, married to James earl of Murray, and has issue.

He died anno 1720, and was succeeded by his son.

XXVIII. JAMES, fourth earl of Wemyss, a man of great merit, universal
benevolence and hospitality.

He married Janet, daughter and sole heiress of colonel Francis Charteris of
Amisfield, by whom he had three sons and four daughters.

1. David, lord Elcho, who having engaged in the rebellion 1745, was attainted
of treason, but made his escape to France, where he now resides.

2. Francis Charteris Wemyss, Esquire; who succeeded to his grandfather's estate;
and married lady Catharine, daughter of Alexander duke of Gordon, and has
issue one son and four daughters.

3. James, who now represents the family.

1st daughter, lady Frances, married to sir James Stewart of Goodtrees, baronet.

2. Lady Walpole, married to --, and died without issue.

3. Lady Anne, married to John Hamilton of Bargeny, Esquire;.

4. Lady Helen, married to Hugh Dalrymple of Fordel, Esquire;.

As David lord Elcho was incapable of succeeding, on account of the preceding
attainder, earl James made a conveyance of his estate in favors of his son
James, and dying anno 1756, was accordingly succeeded in the estate of Wemyss
by the said,

XXIX. JAMES WEMYSS of Wemyss, Esquire; third son of James fourth earl of Wemyss,
who is now member of parliament for the county of Fife, etc. He married lady
Elizabeth, daughter of William earl of Sutherland, by whom he has issue three
sons.

1. James.

2. William.

3. David.

ARMS.
Or, a lion rampant gules, armed and langued azure.

CREST; on a wreath, a swan proper.

SUPPORTERS; two lions guardant, gules,

MOTTO; Je pense.

CHIEF SEATS,
At the castle of Wemyss, in the county of Fife; a noble situation, with fine
gardens, parks, etc. The family had also Elcho castle, in Perthshire, etc.

FLEMING Earl of WIGTON.
ALL our historians and antiquaries agree, that the progenitors of this noble
family are originally from Flanders; that a man of rank came from that country
in the beginning of the reign of king David I. settled in Scotland, and was
called Le Flammang, from the country from whence he came; which afterward was
pronounced Fleming, and from hence the surname of the family.

It appears from our histories; that for some time they were promiscuously
designed Flandrenses, Flamang, Le Flamang, and De Flamaticus, etc. Sir Ja^
Dalrymple's hist. collect. etc.
and after they had assumed Fleming for their surname, that in Latin was called
Flandrensis.

The first of them we find mentioned in any record is,

I. BALDOWINUS le FLAMANG, who is witness in a grant of Robert bishop of St.
Andrews, Ibidem, and chartulary of Glasgow.
to Herbert bishop of Glasgow, of the church of Locherworna, etc. in the reign
of king David I. who succeeded to the crown of Scotland, anno 1128, and died in
1153.

He had issue one son,

II. JORDANUS le FLAMANG, who, in the reign of king Malcolm IV. is witness in a
donation-charter of Ada comitissa, Chartulary of Dunferm. penes MacFarlane, p.
514.
to the monastery of Dunfermline, pro salute animae suae, etc. Ada comitissa
was wife of Henry earl of Northumberland, and died in 1178.

This Jordanus appears to have been much about the court of king William, is
witness to many of his charters, Rymer's foed.
and was taken prisoner with him at the battle of Alnwick, anno 1174.

The next upon record is,

III. WILLIELMUS FLANDRENSIS, or le Flamang, who flourished in the reigns of
king William and king Alexander II. and was the first of this family that
settled in the Western parts of Scotland.

In a deed of king William to the monastery of Kelso, Chartulary of Kelso,
penes MacFarlane.
Willielmus Flandrensis, Huge cancellarius, Patricius comes, etc. are
witnesses, before the year 1199, in which year the chancellor died.

He is witness to another charter of the same prince, Chart. in archiv. fam. de
Linlithgow.
confirming the teinds of Linlithgow to the nuns of Manuel, before the year
1214, in which king William died.

In a donation of Richard le Bard, to the monastery of Kelso, Chartulary of
Kelso.
confirmed by king Alexander II. Willielmus Flamang is a witness, anno 1228.

In the end of the reign of king Alexander II. and beginning of king Alexander
III. we find in Scotland several of the surname of Fleming, or de Flandrensis,
whom we cannot pretend to connect with one another, besides sir Malcolm,
progenitor of this family, of whom afterward, viz.

Dominus Duncanus Flandrensis, Chartulary of Paisley, penes comitem de
Dundonald.
who is witness to the donation of the lands of Haldingston to the monastery of
Paisley, confirmed by king Alexander II. who died anno 1249.

Also Simon Flandrensis, who is mentioned in the resignation which Johannes
filius Rogeri made to the monks of Paisley, Ibidem.
of the lands of Auldhouse, etc. afterward confirmed by king Alexander III.
etc. etc. etc.

We now return to,

IV. Sir MALCOLM, first designed Flandrensis, but afterward Fleming, which
has ever since continued to be the surname of the family.

In a donation of Walter lord high steward of Scotland, of the church of
Largyss, to the monastery of Paisley, Chartulary of Paisley.
Malcolmus Flandrensis is a witness, in or before 1246, in which year Walter
the high steward died.

This sir Malcolm was a man of great distinction in the west of Scotland, had
the honor of knighthood conferred upon him, and was appointed sheriff of
Dunbarton by king Alexander III.

In a confirmation-charter of Malcolm (first of that name) earl of Lennox, of
the lands of Luss, Ibidem.
to Malcolm son of John de Luss, Malcolmus vicecomes de Dunbarton, et Hugo
Fleming milites, are witnesses. The charter has no date, but appears to have
been granted before the year 1280. Whether this sir Hugh was brother of sir
Malcolm, we cannot pretend to determine; but the Flemings were become numerous
in Scotland before the reign of king Robert Bruce, there being no less than
eight of that surname to be found swearing allegiance to king Edward I. of
England, Prynne's collect. vol. III. p. 651, 654, etc.
anno 1296; and that besides sir William Fleming of Barochan, who is witness in
a charter of Malcolm earl of Lennox, Chartulary of Lennox, penes MacFarlane, p.
35.
of the lands of Dalquharne, to Walter Spruel, in the end of the reign of king
Alexander III. The same sir William of Barochan is witness also to a donation
of Colin, Chartulary of Newbottle, penes eund. p. 13.
son of sir Gillespic Campbell, ancestor of the duke of Argyle, anno 1293. And
William Fleming is to be found swearing fealty to king Edward of England,
Rymer, tom. II. p. 1015.
anno 1304.

Sir Malcolm was succeeded by his son,

V. Sir ROBERT FLEMING, a great hero and patriot. Rymer, tom. II. p. 471.
He was one of the Scotch nobles who wrote to king Edward I. of England,
concerning the marriage of queen Margaret with his son prince Edward, anno 1290.

And though he, with many of his countrymen, had been compelled to swear
allegiance to king Edward I. of England, yet as he believed a forced oath was
not binding, he was amongst the first men of rank in the kingdom that joined
king Robert Bruce, in defense of the liberties of his country, was with him at
Dumfries, Abercrombie, and all Scotch historians.
when the Cummin was dispatched for betraying him, and was very instrumental in
getting the crown set upon that great man's head, anno 1306.

Sir Robert being deservedly in great favor, and highly esteemed by king
Robert Bruce, obtained from him, for his many faithful services, grants of
several lands, particularly the lordship of Lenzie, Writs of the fam. of Wigton.
and barony of Cumbernauld, then in the crown, by the forfeiture of the Cummins.

He left issue two sons.

1. Sir Malcolm, his heir.

2. Sir Patrick Fleming of Biggar, who carried on the line of this family, of
whom afterward.

This great man died before the year 1314, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. Sir MALCOLM FLEMING, designed of Fulwood and Cumbernauld, a man of
singular honor and integrity, who, on account of his own merit, Charta in
rotul. Rob. I. baroniam de Kirkintulloch, cum pertinen. quae fuit quondam
Johanni^ Cummin, militis, etc.
and the great services of his worthy father, obtained from his majesty a new
grant of the whole lands and barony of Kirkintulloch, in Dunbartonshire, which
formerly belonged to sir John Cummin, knight, by his royal charter, dated anno
1314.

He got another charter under the great seal, Chart. in rotul. Rob. I.
of the lands and barony of Auchindoun, in the same county, upon the
resignation of sir Malcolm Drummond of that ilk, anno 1316.

He obtained also from Walter lord high steward of Scotland, Writs of the fam*
of Wigton.
an annuity out of the barony of Kers, by a charter dated on the feast of St.
Dunstan, anno 1321.

He was likeways, by his majesty, appointed high sheriff of the county, Ibidem,
and chartulary of Lennox.
and governor of the castle of Dunbarton; which offices he executed with great
fidelity.

He died in the end of the reign of king Robert Bruce, and left issue a son,

VII. Sir MALCOLM FLEMING of Cumbernauld, who succeeded him, and inherited all
the virtues of his worthy ancestors, was a firm and steady friend of the royal
family; Ibidem.
and in the beginning of the reign of king David Bruce, was constituted
governor of Dunbarton castle; in which office he did his country signal service.

This sir Malcolm's capacity and integrity being well known to the whole
nation, he was entrusted with the tuition of the young king.

After the unfortunate battles of Duplin and Halidonhill, when the Baliol's
party begun to prevail and increase, the governor and estates of the nation
thought it advisable to send his majesty and his royal consort to France, for
the more security of their persons, and the faithful sir Malcolm was pitched
upon to be their conductor; which important charge he executed with dexterity
and success. Abercrombie, and all Scotch historians.
They arrived safe in France, and met with a most noble and kind reception from
king Philip.

Sir Malcolm immediately returned to his government and command of the castle
of Dunbarton, which he nobly defended, ahd kept out against the whole Baliol
party, when almost every other fort in the kingdom had furrendered to them;
Fordun, vol. II. p. 311.
so that it became the only asylum and safe retreat for the loyalists during
the absence of king David.

The guardians of Scotland, having at last recovered a great part of the nation
to the king's obedience, longed much to have his majesty again amongst them.
The brave sir Malcolm Fleming was thought the fittest man in the kingdom to be
employed in that great trust. He went to France accordingly. He again performed
his office with prudence and fidelity, Ibidem.
and had the good fortune to conduct his majesty safe back to Scotland in July
1342.

King David was no sooner in possession of his kingdom, than he begun to reward
his faithful servants. He created sir Malcolm Fleming earl of Wigton, and
bestowed upon him all the lands belonging to that earldom, to him and the heirs
male of his body, Chart. in the archives of the family of Wigton, haered. de
corp. suo perlineam mascul. descendentibus.
etc. by his royal charter, dated at Air, 9th November 1342; and as this
charter, which contains many clauses very honorable for the family, is fully
narrated in Crawfurd's peerage, page 493, to that we refer our readers.

In the beginning of the year 1346, he made a donation to the monastery of
Newbottle, Chartulary of Newbottle, p. 169.
pro salute animae suae, etc. to which Duncan and Walter Flemings were
witnesses.

This noble earl accompanied king David in his unfortunate expedition into
England, was taken prisoner with him at the battle of Durham, Rymer, tom. V. p.
537.
anno 1346; was for some time confined in the tower of London, but was released
soon afterward, and was very instrumental in forming embassies for procuring
his royal master's liberty, which at last was happily accomplished in the year
1357; the earl himself being then one of the Scotch commissioners who managed
that important negotiation. Rymer, tom. VI. p. 43.


The earl had a son,

VIII. --, his apparent heir, whose Christian name is not come to our knowledge,
but he died before the year 1351, leaving issue a son,

Thomas.

The old earl died about the year 1362, and was succeeded in his estate and
honors by his grandson,

IX. THOMAS, second earl of Wigton. He was one of the noble Scotch heirs
proposed to be sureties for king David's liberty, in the year 1351, and is then
designed nepos et haeres comitis de Wigton; Ibid. tom. V. p. 724.
but that negotiation took no effect.

He was afterward sent to England one of the hostages for his majesty's
ransom, Ibid. tom. VI. p. 109.
and is still designed grandson and apparent heir of Malcolm earl of Wigton,
anno 1358.

After the death of his grandfather, he got a charter, under the great seal
from king David II. totius comitatus de Wigton, cum pertinen. to be holden, and
possessed as fully and freely by this Thomas earl of Wigton, as the same was
granted to, and enjoyed by the deceased Malcolm earl of Wigton, Chart. in
archivis regis Davidis.
his grandfather, etc. The charter is dated 26th January, the 37th year of his
reign, anno 1366.

This earl having no lawful children, and being very sensible that in
consequence of the king's royal grant of the earldom of Wigton, failing lawful
male issue of his body, that earldom must return to the crown: he therefore,
and on account of the seuds subsisting betwixt him and the great men of that
earldom (as the deed bears) fells and dispones to Archibald Douglas, lord of
Galloway, for the sum of five hundred pounds sterling, the whole foresaid
earldom, with its pertinents, by his charter thereof, In archiv. familiae de
Wigton.
dated 16th February 1371, which was afterward ratified and confirmed to the
earls of Douglas, Chart. in pub. archiv.
by many charters under the great seal.

Immediately thereafter, the earl resigned his baronies of Lenzie, Cumbernauld,
and several others of his lands, in favors of his cousin and heir-male, sir
Malcolm Fleming of Biggar, which were also ratified and confirmed by charters
under the great seal, as will be shown hereafter.

This earl dying without lawful issue, in him ended the male line of sir
Malcolm of Cumbernauld, eldest son of the said sir Robert Fleming. The
representation, therefore, of this noble family devolved upon sir Malcolm
Fleming of Biggar, son of sir Patrick, before mentioned, to whom we now return.

VI. Sir PATRICK FLEMING, second son of sir Robert, and brother german of the
first sir Malcolm of Cumbernauld, was likeways a faithful and steady friend of
king Robert Bruce, Charta penes marchionem de Tweeddale
who appointed him high sheriff of the county of Peebles.

He married one of the daughters and coheiresses of the brave sir Simon Fraser
of Oliver-castle, by whom he got the lands and barony of Biggar, which became
one of the chief titles of the family; and, SirGeo. MacKenzie, Nisbet,
Crawfurd, etc.
in consequence of this marriage, they have ever since continued to quarter the
arms of Fraser with their own.

He was succeeded by his son,

VII. Sir MALCOLM FLEMING of Biggar, who obtained from Malcolm earl of Wigton,
dilecto consanguineo suo, Malcolmo Fleming de Biggar, Chart. in archiv.
familiae de Wigton.
a grant of the lands of Auchmoir, Seymoir, etc. by a charter, dated anno 1357.

He was also a man of great worth and merit, and was by king David II.
appointed sheriff of the county of Dunbarton, Chartulary of Levenax.
anno 1364.

Upon the resignation of his cousin Thomas earl of Wigton, he got the lands and
barony of Lenzie, and others, as before observed, which were confirmed to him
by a charter under the great seal from king Robert II. Malcolmo Fleming domino
de Biggar, Chart. in rotul. Rob. II.
militi, totam baroniam de Lenzie, etc. etc. dated anno 1383.

He died soon thereafter, and, by Christian his wife, left issue two sons.

1. Sir David, his heir.

2. Patrick, to whom he gave a part of the lands of Lenzie, upon which he got a
charter under the great seal, Patricio Fleming, filio secundo genito Malcohni
domim de Biggar, etc. dated anno 1375. Ibidem.
He was ancestor of the Flemings of Board, etc.

Sir Malcolm was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII. Sir DAVID FLEMING, promiseuously designed of Biggar and Cumbernauld, a
man of great courage and resolution, who remarkably distinguished himself at
the battle of Otterburn, where the Scots obtained a victory over the English,
though their brave general, Crawfurd, etc.
the earl of Douglas, was slain, anno 1388.

He got a grant from king Robert III. of an annuity of fifty pounds per annum
for his life, payable by the religious at Holyrood-house, by his royal charter,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
Davidi Fleming domino de Biggar, dated in 1390.

He afterward got charters of the lands of Glenrusco, Cumbernauld, and many
others, in the years 1395, Chart. in archiv. familiae de Wigton.
1399, and 1404, by which it appears he was possessed of an opulent estate.

He was one of the Scotch commissioners appointed to settle a truce with the
English, and is then designed David Fleming, Rymer, tom. VIII. p. 363.
dominus de Biggar, miles, anno 1404.

He was a liberal benefactor to the religious, and made several considerable
donations to the monasteries of Holyrood-house and Cambuskenneth, of which we
shall here mention only one: David Fleming dominus de Biggar, cum consensu
Malcolmi Fleming filii nostri, et haeredis, pro salute animae domini Malcolmi
Fleming, quond. nostri genitoris, et Christianae quond. genitricis nostrae, --
animae nostrae et Isabellae sponsae meae, Chartulary of Cambusken. penes
MacFarlane, p. 258.
confirmasse monasterio de Cambuskenneth, -- terrarum de Mautoun cum pertinen.
quae dudum vocatur Ladyland, etc. etc. 8th November 1399.

He married, 1st, Jean, daughter of sir David Barclay, lord of Brechin, by whom
he had only one daughter,

Marian, married to sir William Maule, baron of Panmure, who carried on the
line of that family.

He married, Crawfurd's peerage.
2dly, Isabel, heiress of the barony of Monycabo, by whom he had two sons.

1. Sir Malcolm, his heir.

2. David, ancestor of the Flemings of Boghall, whose son, Malcolm, got a
charter under the great seal, Malcolmo Fleming de Boghall, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
of the lands and barony of Boghall, Hadolistane, etc. dated 15th June 1452.

Sir David, with a considerable body of his friends and followers, accompanied
prince James (afterward king James I.) when he went to take shipping at the
Bass, intending to go to France. He saw him safe on board, and, in his return
home, was, at the instigation of sir Alexander Seton, attacked at
Longhermiston-muir by sir James Douglas, with a body of men; where, after a
smart conflict, sir David was slain on 24th February 1405. As this dissers
greatly from doctor Abercrombie and Mr. Crawfurd's account of this affair, we
shall here take the liberty to insert the words of our author: Fordun, vol. II.
p. 439.
" Dominus David Fleming de Cumbernauld, in redeundo, Jacobus de Douglas,
filius secundo genitus Archibaldi Douglas, comitis ejusd. provocatus per
Alexandrum de Seton, qui postea fuit dominus de Gordon, et cum sibi faventibus,
insecutus est dictum David, quem apud moram de Longherdmanstoun apprehendit,
ubi dira pugna commissa, occisus est dominus David, etc."

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. Sir MALCOLM FLEMING, lord of Biggar and Cumbernauld, a man of singular
merit and great integrity, who had the honor of knighthood conferred upon him
by king Robert III.

He was one of the Scotch commissioners, appointed to treat with the English
about king James I.'s liberty, Rymer, tom. X. p. 125. and 309.
anno 1421, and was afterward one of the hostages for his ransom, anno 1424.

He married lady Elizabeth Stewart, daughter of Robert duke of Albany, governor
of Scotland, Stewart's hist.
by whom he had a son,

Sir Robert, afterward lord Fleming, -- and a daughter,

Margaret, married to Patrick, son and apparent heir of Andrew second lord Gray.

Sir Malcolm's near connection with the duke of Albany, made him suspected to
have been concerned with him in some treasonable practices against the state:
he was therefore apprehended, and confined; but his innocence being made
appear, Hathorndeni
he was soon set at liberty.

He was a constant and faithful friend of the young earl of Douglas, and was
invited along with him to the castle of Edinburgh, by the chancellor Crichton,
where he was barbarously murdered, Ibidem.
with that noble lord, and his young brother, in November 1441.

He was succeeded by his only son,

X. Sir ROBERT, who got several charters under the great seal, Roberto Fleming
domino de Biggar, of the lands of Pitkenny, Culzeny, Chart. in pub. archiv:
and Balardy, in Fife-shire, with the lands of Auchtermonzy, and others, in the
Lennox, anno 1451.

In the same year he got another charter from king James II. erecting the town
of Biggar into a free burgh of barony, and by the same prince was created a
lord of parliament, Ibidem, and records of parliament.
by the title of lord Fleming of Cumbernauld.

He married, 1st, lady Janet, daughter of James seventh earl of Douglas, by
whom he had a son,

Malcolm, master of Fleming, -- and two daughters.

1. Elizabeth, married to John lord Livingston.

2. Beatrix, married to sir William Stirling of Keir.

Robert lord Fleming got a safe conduct to go up to England, Rymer, tom. XII.
p. 251.
anno 1484, and to return again within twelve months.

He lived to a great age, and died in 1495.

XI. MALCOLM, master of Fleming, only son and apparent heir of Robert lord
Fleming, was designed sir Robert of Monycabo.

He was witness in the earl of Crawfurd's commission, as procurator for king
James III. concerning his marriage with princess Margaret of Denmark, and is
then designed son and apparent heir of Robert lord Fleming, Ibidem, tom. XI. p.
821.
in 1474.

He married Eupheme, Writs of the fam. of Wigton.
daughter of James lord Livingston, by whom he had two sons.

1. Sir David, who got a charter under the great seal, Davidi Fleming, militi,
of the lands and barony of Lenzie, Cumbernauld, etc. etc. with the castle and
forest thereof, in the year 1480; Chart. in pub. archiv.
but he died before his father without issue.

2. John, who carried on the line of this family.

The master died betwixt the years 1482 and 1485, and was succeeded by his only
surviving son,

XII. JOHN, who succeeding also to his grandfather, anno 1495, was second lord
Fleming.

Though he was young at his father's death, yet he got a liberal education
suitable to his high birth, under the care of his grandfather, and was a man of
great parts and fine accomplishments.

He got a charter under the great seal from king James IV. Johanni domino
Fleming, et Euphemiae Drummond ejus sponsae, Ibidem.
of the lands and barony of Thankerton, and others, dated 5th March 1496.

He was served and retoured heir to his father and grandfather, Retours in the
writs of the family.
anno 1500.

When the queen got infeftment of the earldom of Dunbar, as part of her
jointure, John lord Fleming was one of the witnesses, Rymer, tom. XIII. p. 66.
anno 1503.

He got another charter, under the great seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the lands and barony of Monycabo, and others, dated 8th May 1509.

In the beginning of the reign of king James V. he was, by the estates of the
nation, Lives of the offic. of state, p. 325.
sent one of the plenipotentiaries to the court of France, and managed the
negotiation with dexterity and success.

Upon his return home, the queen regent appointed him one of the lords of her
council, and he was again sent ambassador to the court of France, to receive
100,000 franks, and some arms and ammunition, from king Lewis XII. with which
he had promised to assist his old allies the Scots. Ibidem.


Upon the queen's marriage with the earl of Angus, the regency devolved upon
the duke of Albany, with whom lord Fleming was in great favor, and was one of
the Scotch nobles who signed and sealed the answer of refusal to the king of
England, Rymer, tom. XIII. p. 551.
touching the removal of the duke of Albany from the guardianship of the young
king, anno 1516.

He was then appointed lord great chamberlain of Scotland, and was one of the
lords sitting in parliament when a treaty with the English was approven of and
ratified in 1517. Ibid. p. 600.


During the duke of Albany's regency, Scotland being threatened with an
invasion from England, the regent himself went to France to desire succors
from that crown. The affair took up longer time than was expected, and the
estates of the nation in 1519 sent the lord chamberlain to hasten his return
home: he was very assisting to him in his negotiation, and managed his business
with such prudence and dexterity, that the duke regent and he arrived in
Scotland together, Lives of the offic. of state, p. 325.
with assurance of the desired supplies, anno 1520.

He married, 1st, Eupheme, daughter of John lord Drummond, by whom he had two
sons, and three daughters.

1. Malcolm, his heir.

His other son, also called Malcolm, was bred to the church, and, by king James
V. was appointed prior of Whittern. Ibidem.


1st daughter, Elizabeth, married to William lord Crichton of Sanquhar,
ancestor of the earl of Dumfries.

2. Margaret, married to John Cunningham of Glengarnock.

3. Jean, married, 1st, to John, eldest son and apparent heir of sir James
Sandilands of Calder; 2dly, to David Crawfurd of Kerse.

He married, 2dly, lady Margaret Stewart, daughter of Matthew second earl of
Lennox: 3dly, Agnes Somerville; but had no issue by either.

The lord Fleming continued in the chamberlain's office with the universal
applause of the whole nation, till he was barbarously assassinated by John
Tweedie of Drumelzier, Writs of the family of Wigton.
and his accomplices, 1st day of November 1524.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII. MALCOLM, third lord Fleming, a man of great abilities, integrity and
honor, and a mighty favorite of king James V. who, immediately upon his
father's death, constituted him lord high chamberlain of Scotland; which office
he enjoyed, Lives of the offic. of state.
as long as he lived, with great reputation and honor.

He was possessed of an immense estate, which appears by no less than twelve
charters, under the great seal, of many lands and baronies lying in different
counties, too numerous to be here inserted, granted between the years 1525 and
1540; Chart. in pub. archiv.
several of them to him and Janet Stewart, the king's sister, his spouse, etc.

When the king went to France to espouse princess Magdalene, daughter of king
Francis I. he took the lord chamberlain along with him, who was very assisting
to his majesty in all his negotiations, Lives of the offic. of state.
some whereof were of very great importance.

When the king raised an army to invade England by the western borders, the
lord chamberlain joined them, and was taken prisoner at the unfortunate battle
of Solwaymoss, in 1542; but obtained his liberty for paying a ransom of 1000
m^erks sterling, Rymer, tom. XIV. p. 79^.
anno 1543.

The lord chamberlain was at first on the king of England's side, in relation
to the match between the young queen Mary and prince Edward of England; but the
reformation being begun in that kingdom, and he being a staunch Roman Catholic,
determined to oppose every appearance of innovation or change in the
established religion of the kingdom: he therefore left the English party, and
went over to the French, Lives of the offic. of state.
believing it more for the interest of his country.

In the year 1545, he founded and largely endowed a collegiate church at
Biggar, for a provost, eight prebends, sour singing boys and six poor men,
Foundation amongst the writs of the family.
reserving the presentation and patronage thereof to himself and his successors
for ever.

Soon after this a war broke out between Scotland and England. The earl of
Hartford, protector of that kingdom, invaded this country with a powerful ^leet
and army. The governor of Scotland raised what forces he could to oppose him.
They came to an engagement at Pinkie-field, near Musselburgh. The English
obtained the victory, and the lord chamberlain, with a great many of the flower
of the nobility of Scotland, were killed on the spot, ^^ves of the offic. of
state.
on the 10th day of September 1547.

By the said Janet Stewart, a natural daughter of king James IV. Ibidem, and
Stewart's hist* of the royal family.
by Agnes countess of Bothwell, daughter of James earl of Buchan, he left issue
two sons, and four daughters.

1. James, his heir.

2. John, who succeeded his brother.

1st daughter, Janet, married, 1st, to John master of L^vingston, without
issue; 2dly, to Richard, son and apparent heir of Andrew Brown of Hartry, Esquire;.

2. Agnes, married to William lord Livingston, mother by him of Alexander first
earl of Linlithgow.

3. Margaret, married, 1st, to Robert master of Montrose, eldest son of William
the second earl; 2dly, to Thomas master of Erskine, son and heir apparent of
John fifth earl of Mar; 3dly, to John fourth earl of Athole, chancellor of
Scotland in the minonority of king James VI.

4. Mary, married to sir William Maitland of Leithington, secretary of state in
the reign of queen Mary.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIV. JAMES, sourth lord Fleming, also a man of great worth and merit.

He was, by the favor of queen Mary, with consent of the duke of
Chattelherault, the governor, constituted great chamberlain of Scotland for
life, by a patent under the great seal, 10th March 1553, in which are fully set
forth the great and faithful services done to the crown by his father and noble
ancestors, Patent in the writs of the family.
with many other clauses very honorable for the family.

As his capacity and integrity were well known to the whole nation, he was
named one of the commissioners by parliament, to go to France, and assist in
completing the queen's marriage with the dauphine, anno 1557, where he
strenuously stood up for the rights and liberties of his country; but he died
at Paris in the year 1558, Lives of the offic. of state.
not without suspicion of soul play.

By lady Barbara Hamilton, his wise, daughter of James duke of Chattelherault,
he had only one daughter,

Jean, married, 1st, to John lord Thirlestane; 2dly, to Gilbert earl of
Cassilis.

And having no male issue, his estate and honors devolved upon his brother,

XIV. JOHN, fifth lord Fleming, who, in his brother's lifetime, got a charter
under the great seal, Johanni Fleming, fratri germano Jacobi domini Fleming,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
of the lands of Auchtermony, and others, 17th January 1557.

He was a man of great integrity, honor, and probity, and invariably attached
to the interest of queen Mary, who, on account of his own merit, and the
sufferings of his predecessors in the service of the royal family, was pleased
to appoint him lord high chamberlain of Scotland for life, Writs of the family.
by patent dated 30th June 1565.

In 1567, he had a grant of the thirds of the profits and rents of the priory
of Whittern, was appointed justiciar within the bounds of the Over-ward of
Clydsdale, and sherrifdom of Peebles, Ibidem.
and was also made governor of Dunbarton castle.

He was one of the noble Scotch lords who entered into a solemn bond of
association, to stand by and defend queen Mary with their lives and fortunes,
M. S. history, lawyers library Edin.
against all mortals. Signed at Hamilton the 8th day of May 1568.

He held out the castle of Dunbarton long for queen Mary against her enemies;
but it was at last surprised and taken by captain Crawford of Jordanhill; Lives
of the offic. of state.
and the governor, with great difficulty, escaped in a small boat, anno 1571.

He married Elizabeth, only daughter and heiress of Robert master of Ross, son
and apparent heir of Ninian second lord Ross, by whom he had one son,

John, afterward earl of Wigton, -- and three daughters.

1. Mary, married to sir James Douglas of Drumlanrig, ancestor of the duke of
Queensberry.

2. Elizabeth, married to sir Alexander Bruce of Airth.

3. Margaret, married to sir James Forrester of Carden.

They all had issue.

This worthy lord was accidentally wounded in the knee by a musket ball, Ibidem.
on the street of Edinburgh, of which he died universally regreted, in April
1572, and was succeeded by his only son,

XV. JOHN, sixth lord, who got a charter under the great seal, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
Johanni domino Fleming, of the lands of Boghall, Milntown, Arrotshill, etc.
anno 1582.

He was appointed principal housekeeper to the king anno 1587, Ibidem.
and got another charter of the lands and baronies of Auchtermony, Lenzie, the
burgh of Kirkintulloch, Cumbernauld, etc. etc. anno 1588.

We think it proper here to observe, that amongst the writs of the family of
Wigton, there is a procuratory of resignation, whereby this John lord Fleming
resigns into the king's hands, his whole lands, for new infestment to himself,
and the heirs-male of his body; which sailing, to Alexander Fleming of
Barochan, and the heirs-male of his body; which sailing, to his own nearest
heirs-male whatever, bearing the name and arms of Fleming; which yet failing,
to his own nearest lawful heirs or assignees whatsoever, with this provision,
that in case this lord has no heirs-male of his own body, but only daughters,
then the other heirs-male succeeding were to pay 20,000 merks to one, 30,000
merks to two daughters, and 40,000 merks if more; upon payment whereof, the
said daughter or daughters should be obliged to denude, Writs of the family.
etc. etc. Sealed and dated at Edinburgh the 8th July 1595, with charter and
sasine following thereon, anno 1596.

This noble lord was in great favor with king James VI. who was pleased
further to dignify him with the titles of earl of Wigton, lord Fleming and
Cumbernauld, Ibidem.
by patent dated at Whitehall, 19th March 1606.

This patent we have not seen, but it is said to be to heirs-male general; and
there is a procuratory of resignation by this earl, in implement of his son
John lord Fleming, master of Wigton, his contract of marriage, which runs thus:
Ibidem.
"For new infeftment to be given to the said master, and the heirs-male to be
procreate of that marriage; which failing, to the heirs-male of his body, of
any subsequent marriage; which failing, to return to the said earl, and his
heirs of tailzie mentioned in his last infeftment," etc. This procuratory is
dated 2d September 1609; upon which there passed a charter under the great
seal, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Johanni magistro de Wigton, filio et haeredi apparenti Johannis comitis de
Wigton, et Margaretae Livingston,, filiae secundae Alexandri comitis de
Linlithgow sponsae dicti magistri, et haeredibus masculis, etc. dated 25th
August 1614.

The earl married, 1st, lady Lilias Graham, daughter of John third earl of
Montrose, by whom he had two sons and five daughters.

1. John, his heir.

2. John Fleming of Boghall, of whom there is now no male succession.

1st daughter, lady Jean, married to George master of Loudoun, only son and
apparent heir of Hugh lord Loudoun.

2. Lady Anne, married to sir William Livingston, eldest son of sir William
Livingston of Kilsyth.

3. Lady Margaret, married to sir John Charteris of Amis^ield.

4. Lady Lilias, married to sir David Murray of Stanhope.

5. Lady Mary, married to sir Archibald Stewart of Castlemilk.

He married, 2dly, Sarah, daughter of William lord Herries, by whom he had one
daughter,

Lady Rachel, married to John Lindsay of Coventon, Esquire;.

He died anno 1619, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVI. Ibidem.
JOHN, second earl, who got a charter under the great seal, Johanni comiti de
Wigton, domino Fleming et Cumbernauld, of several lands and baronies, 28th
March 1620.

Also a charter of the patronages of the churches of Stobo, Chart. in pub.
archiv.
Drumelzier, Broughton, Dawick, etc. 17th July 1621.

He got another charter of the lands of East and West Castle Rankins, etc. 16th
June 1632. Ibidem.


And a charter, Johanni comiti de Wigton, et suo filio, Ibidem.
of the lands of Cattiscleugh, and others, in Stirlingshire, 24th December 1634.

Also a charter of the lands of Drumgryne, and others, Ibidem.
in Dumfries-shire, dated the penult day of January 1637.

Though he was one of the committee of parliament anno 1640, Rescinded acts of
parlt.
and was appointed a privy counselor for life anno 1641, yet he was a man of
great honor and loyalty, and sincerely attached to the interest of the royal
family. Guthrie's memoirs.


He married lady Margaret Livingston, daughter of Alexander earl of Lithgow, by
whom he had two sons and three daughters.

1. John, his heir.

2. Sir William Fleming, who was gentleman usher to king Charles I. and
chamberlain of the household to king Charles II. He was a steady loyalist,
Ibidem.
and was employed in several negotiations for king Charles I. during his
troubles; all which he managed with great fidelity and honor.

1st daughter, lady Eleanor, married to David earl of Wemyss.

2. Lady Anne, married, 1st, to Robert seventh lord Boyd; 2dly, to George
second earl of Dalhousie.

3. Lady Jean, married to sir John Grierson of Lag, and had issue.

He died anno 1650, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVII. JOHN, third earl of Wigton, who, in his father's lifetime, Chart. in
pub. archiv.
got a charter under the great seal, Johanni domino Fleming, magistro de
Wigton, of the lands, lordship, and barony of Cumbernauld, de novo united, 1st
February 1634.

He was a man of untainted honor and loyalty. He joined the king's party in
the very beginning of his troubles, and never deserted his interest.

He was with Montrose at the unfortunate battle of Philiphaugh, Guthrie's
memoirs.
and made his escape with him to the Highlands; but afterward, by the interest
of his friends, he obtained liberty to return home, and lived a private and
retired life till the restoration.

He married lady Jean Drummond, daughter of John second earl of Perth, by whom
he had six sons and two daughters.

1. John, his heir.

2. Sir Robert.

3. Henry.

4. James.

These last three died unmarried.

5. William, afterward earl of Wigton.

6. Charles, who died young.

1st daughter, lady Margaret.

2. Lady Jean.

They both died unmarried.

The earl died anno 1663, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVIII. JOHN, fourth earl of Wigton, who got a charter under the great seal,
Chart. in pub. archiv.
Johanni domino Fleming, et Annae Ker sponsae suae, of the earldom of Wigton,
lordship of Baldouie, etc. 10th May 1662.

By the said Anne, a daughter of Henry lord Ker, he had only one daughter,

Lady Jean, married to George third earl of Panmure.

And dying without male-issue, anno 1668, his estate and honors devolved upon
his next surviving brother,

XVIII. WILLIAM, fifth earl of Wigton, a man of great worth and merit. He was
one of the lords of the privy council to king Charles II. and was constituted
sheriff of the county of Dunbarton, and governor of the castle; which offices
he enjoyed as long as he lived.

He married lady Henriet Seton, daughter of Charles earl of Dunfermline, by
whom he had two sons and one daughter.

1. John, his heir.

2. Charles, afterward earl of Wigton.

His daughter, lady Mary, married to Mr. Harry Maule of Kelly, father of the
present earl of Panmure.

He died anno 1681, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIX. JOHN, sixth earl of Wigton, a man of great honor and integrity.

In 1706, he opposed the union of the two kingdoms with all his interest,
believing it inconsistent with the independency of Scotland.

In the year 1715, he was committed prisoner to the castle of Edinburgh, but
was set at liberty the year thereafter, without any trial.

He married, 1st, lady Margaret Lindsay, daughter of Colin third earl of
Balcarras, by whom he had one daughter,

Lady Margaret, married to sir Archibald Primrose of Dunipace.

He married, 2dly, lady Mary Keith daughter of William earl Marishall, by whom
he had another daughter,

Lady Clementina, of whom afterward.

He married, 3dly, Eupheme, daughter of George Lockhart of Carnwath, Esquire; by
whom he had no children.

He died anno 1743, and having no maleissue, his estate and honors, devolved
upon his brother,

XIX. CHARLES, seventh earl of Wigton, who dying unmarried anno 1747, the
representation of this noble family devolved upon lady Clementina Fleming,
before mentioned, to whom we now return.

XX. Lady CLEMENTINA, only surviving child of John sixth earl of Wigton,
married Charles, now lord Elphingston, third son of Charles ninth lord
Elphingston, to whom she has three sons and four daughters.

1. John, married to Anne, eldest daughter to James lord Ruthven, by lady Anne
Stewart, daughter of James earl of Bute.

2. William.

3. George-Keith.

1st daughter, Mary.

2. Eleanora.

3. Primrose.

4. Clementina.

The honors of Wigton are now claimed by Doctor Fleming physician in Dublin;
but he has not hitherto proven his descent from, or connection with, this noble
family.

ARMS.
Quarterly; 1st and 4th, argent, a cheveron, within a double tressure, flowered
and counter-flowered with flowers de lis gules, for Fleming; 2d and 3d; azure,
three cinque^oils argent, for Fraser.

CREST; on a wreath; a goat's head erased argent, armed or.

SUPPORTERS; two stags proper, attired and unguled or, each gorged with a
collar azure, charged with three cinquesoils argent.

MOTTO; Let deed shaw.

CHIEF SEATS,
At Cumbernauld, in the county of Dunbarton, and Boghall in Clydsdale.

SEATON Earl of WINTON.
THIS noble family yields to none in the kingdom for antiquity, and their
surname is said to have been assumed by the proprietors of the lands and barony
of Seaton, in East Lothian, in the reign of king Malcolm Canmore. Certain it
is, they had vast possessions in lands, Dugdale's baronage of England.
both in Scotland and England, in very early times; but they were deprived of
their English territories by king Edward I. as will be shown hereafter.

Their surname of old was variously syllabicated, viz. Seatoun, Seaton, Setton,
and Setun, but are all the same name. Martin's genesis collect. vol. II. p. 226,
Sir Richard Maitland's hist. of the fam. Nisbet, vol. I. p. 236, Scotch
compend. etc.


Some of our antiquaries deduce their descent from,

DOUGAL de SEATON, who flourished in the reigns of king Edgar and king
Alexander I. both sons of king Malcolm Canmore; which king Alexander succeeded
to the crown of Scotland anno 1107, and died in 1124.

That he was father of.

SECHER de SEATON, who is said by the same authors, to have been proprietor of
several lands, both in East and West Lothian; that he was progenitor of all the
Seatons in Scotland, and died in the reign of king David I. leaving issue a son,

Alexander de Seaton, etc.

As this Alexander is the first we have found mentioned in any authentic
document, from him we proceed to deduce the descent of this noble family.

I. ALEXANDER de SEATON lived in the reign of king David I. who succeeded to
the crown of Scotland anno 1124, Sir James Dalrymple's collect. page 426.
and died in 1153. He is witness in a charter granted by that prince to Walter
de Riddel, of several lands in Roxburgh-shire, which are now called the barony
of Riddel.

This Alexander was proprietor of the lands of Seaton and Winton, in East
Lothian, and Winchburgh, in Linlithgow-shire, which is instructed by a charter
hereafter narrated.

He died in the end of the reign of king Malcolm IV. who succeeded king David,
and left issue a son and successor,

II. PHILIP de SEATON, etc. He got a charter from king William the Lion, who
succeeded king Malcolm in 1165, Philippo de Seaton, Charter in the archives of
the family.
terram de Seaton et Winton, et Winchburgh, quae suit Alexandri de Seaton, sui
patris, etc. tenend. etc. per servitium unius militis, etc. to which David earl
of Huntington the king's brother, Richard de Morville constable, Walter Olifard
justiciar, Walter de Barclay chamberlain, William de Lundy, etc. are witnesses.
The king's seal is thereto appended, and entire, according to Mr. Nisbet, who
had seen and perused it.

In a donation of the said king William, of the church of Strathardel, to the
monastery of Dunfermline, Philippus de Setun, Duncan earl of Fife, Chartulary
of Dunfermline, p. 204.
Gilbert earl of Strathern, Robert de Quinci, etc. are witnesses, ante annum
1203; in which year earl Duncan died.

He had issue two sons and one daughter.

1. Sir Alexander, his heir.

2. Thomas Seaton, who is witness in several charters with his brother,
hereafter mentioned.

His daughter, Emma, was married to Adam de Polysworth, who obtained from her
brother sir Alexander, the lands of Fleming's Beath, in Fife-shire, Ibid. p.
529 and 530.
in maritagium Adae de Polysworth, cum Emma sorore sua, etc. To which his
brother Thomas Seaton is a witness.

He died in the end of the reign of king William, and was succeeded by his
eldest son,

III. Sir ALEXANDER SEATON, lord of that ilk, who, in the chartularies of
Dunfermline and Arbroath, is designed filius Philippi, etc.

He appears to have been much about the court of king Alexander II. (who
succeeded king William in 1214,) being witness to many charters and donations
of that prince to the religious, Chartulary of the priory of St. Andrews, p.
406.
particularly to his confirmation of all the donations made by his predecessors
to the abbacy of Kinlofs, anno 1226.

In a donation-charter of sir David de Graham, to the monastery of Soltray,
dominus Alexander de Seton, et magister Thomas de Seton, are witnesses. The
charter has no date, but appears to have been inter 1226 et 1230. Chartulary of
Soltray, No. 10


In a donation of Sayer de Quinci, earl of Winton and Winchester, to the abbacy
of Dunfermline, William bishop of St. Andrews, Alexander de Setun, Roger de
Quinci, Thomas de Lundy, Chartulary of Dunfermline, p. 518.
then sheriff of Fife, etc. are witnesses, etc. This donation is also without
date, but must have been in or before 1233, in which year the bishop died.

This sir Alexander is also mentioned in a donation of the same Sayer de Quinci
to the monastery of Newbottle, to which Simon de Quinci, Chartulary of
Newbottle, p. 39.
and the said William bishop of St. Andrews are witnesses, ante 1233.

He made a donation to the abbacy of Dunfermline, pro salute animae suae, etc.
to which his brother Thomas de Setun, John de Lundy, and others, Chartulary of
Dunfermline.
are witnesses, before the year 1246.

The family of Seaton appears to have been much connected with the Quincies
earls of Winton and Winchester. This sir Alexander gave the name of his son and
heir to the late earl, who, in the history of the extinct peers of England, is
promiscuously designed Secher and Serlo earl of Winchester. Hist. of extinct
peers, vol. I. p. 42^.
He was present when king William did homage to king John, for his lands he
held of him in England, in the year 1202 or 1203.

Sir Alexander married Margaret, daughter of Walter de Barclay, Nisbet, vol. I.
p. 236.
chancellor to king William, and died in the end of the reign of king Alexander
II. leaving issue a son and successor,

IV. Sir SERLO or SECHER de SEATON, lord of that ilk. In a donation of
Alexander de Unyeth, Chartulary of Dunfermline, p. 354.
to the monastery of Dunfermline, Secher de Seton, with Malcolm earl of Fife,
etc. are witnesses, anno 1254.

In a confirmation-charter of a donation made by sir William Livingston of
Gorgyn, to the monastery of Holyroodhouse, Origin. writs of Holyroodhouse, No.
14.
this Serlo de Seaton, Alexander his son, William de Lysuris, constable of the
castle of Edinburgh; etc. are witnesses, anno 1263.

Also, in a donation to the abbacy of Aberbrothwick, dominus Serlo de Seton,
miles, Chartulary of Arbroath, p. 52.
is a witness, anno 1265.

He had issue two sons and one daughter.

1. Sir Alexander, his heir.

2. Sir John Seaton* who, in a donation of Robert de Bruce, lord of Annandale,
to the priory of St. Andrews, Chartulary of St. Andrews, p. 149.
is designed dominus Johannes de Seaton, miles, anno 1294.

His daughter, Barbara, married to fir William Keith, great marishal of
Scotland.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. Sir ALEXANDER SEATON, lord of that ilk. In a donation of Roger de Quincy,
earl of Winton, constable of Scotland, and Alenore, his spouse, to the priory
of St. Andrews, Alexander de Seton, Ibid. p. 406.
Gilbert de Ruthven, Reginald de Crawford, Patrick de Ogilvie, and William de
Haya, knights, were witnesses, anno 1262.

He was, with many of his countrymen, compelled to swear allegiance to king
Edward I. of England, Prynne* vol. III. p. 66^.
when he had overrun Scotland, anno 1296, and is then designed Alisandre de
Seton, miles.

He was a man of singular merit, worth and honor; and, though in an advanced
age, he joined king Robert Bruce, as soon as he began to assert his title to
the crown, but was unfortunately taken prisoner, and sent up to England, Rymer,
^om* II. p. 1014*
by king Edward I. anno 1305, and died soon thereafter, leaving issue three
sons,

1. Sir Christopher, his heir.

2. John de Seaton, a steady friend of king Robert Bruce, who was barbarously
put to death by king Edward I. of England, Matthew of Westminster.
as will be shown hereafter.

3. Alexander de Seaton, who is witness in a charter of the said king Robert,
Chartulary of St. Andrews, p. 99.
Alano de Liddel, anno 1317.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI. Sir CHRISTOPHER SEATON, lord of that ilk, a worthy patriot, and one of the
greatest heroes of his time. He joined the brave sir William Wallace, in
defense of the liberties of his country, and was a firm and steady friend of
king Robert Bruce, whose sister, lady Christian, he had the honor to marry.

At the unhappy battle of Methven, when king Robert was actually in the English
hands, and in the greatest distress, sir Christopher was one of the brave
Scotch worthies who rescued his majesty, All Scotch Authors.
and got him set at liberty at that time; from whence he retired to the
Highlands.

Soon thereafter, sir Christopher had the misfortune to be taken prisoner
himself in the castle of Lochdown, and was, with his brother John, and several
other brave loyalists, most cruelly put to death by king Edward, in different
places in Scotland and England. Both Scotch and English historians agree in
this, but we shall here narrate the words of an English author, Matthew.
Westminster, apud Prynne, page ^126.
who says, " Post hoc captum est castrum de Lochdown, in quo inventus est
Christopherus Setonus sororius Roberti de Brus. Jussit rex deduci usque
Dumfries, ibique tractus, suspensusque, ac ultimo decollatus. Johannes vero
Setonus Christopheri germanus, apud Novum castrum super Tinam, tractus,
suspensus, atque decollatus, horribiliter vitam terminavit, anno regni Edwardi
I. 3410. 1306."

King Robert afterward, in memory of this brave sir Christopher, erected a
chapel near Dumfries, where he was put to death; the ruins whereof are still to
be seen, and it retains the name of Christel's chapel to this day.

By the said lady Christian Bruce, daughter of Robert earl of Carrick, and
sister of king Robert, he left issue a son,

VII. Sir ALEXANDER SEATON, lord of that ilk, who succeeded him, a man of
singular worth and merit; and, according to doctor Abercrombie, one of king
Robert's fastest friends. That great prince soon put him in possession of all
the estates his father enjoyed in Scotland, of which he had been most unjustly
forfeited by king Edward I. for his loyalty to his lawful prince. That monarch
also deprived him of his estates in England, which were very considerable, and
bestowed them upon his English nobles, who had been most active in the Scotch
wars.

His lands in Yorkshire, called Whitbystrand, he gave to sir Edmund Manly,
Dugdale's baronage, tom. 11.
who had performed many brave actions against the Scots; and his lands in
Northumberland he gave to the noble family of Dalavale, Ibidem and Nisbet.
which retains the name of Seaton-Dalavale to this day; but it was never
afterward in the power of this family to recover these lands out of the hands
of the English: However, king Robert, in reward of his own merit, and the
sufferings of his predecessors, granted him several noble privileges, made him
his own secretary, and governor of Berwick, erected his lands of Seaton into a
free barony, with the privileges of a free warreny, discharging all persons to
hunt, hawk, or fish within his bounds, without the consent of sir Alexander, or
his successors, Charter in the archives of the family.
by his royal charter, dated the 16th year of his reign.

He was one of the Scotch patriots who signed that famous letter to the pope,
Fordun, vol. II. p. 275.
asserting the independency of Scotland, anno 1320.

He got a charter under the great seal, Alexandro de Seaton, Chart in archiv.
Rob. I.
militi, of the lands of Travnent, Longniddry, etc. which formerly belonged to
Alan de Zouch.

Also the lands and barony of Dundas, the lands of Wester Cragyn, Queensferry;
and Barns, Ibidem, and Mill's genealog. collect.
in East Lothian, with many others, by his charter, dated at Berwick upon
Tweed, 13th April 1322.

He got likeways, on account of his maternal descent, his armorial bearing of
three cresscents, surrounded with a double tressure, Sir George MacKenzie; and
Mr. Nisbet.
flowered and counterflowered with flowers de lis* which, with the coat of
augmentation given to his father, being gules, a sword, supporting an imperial
crown, has remained in the family ever since.

He married lady Isabel, daughter of Duncan, tenth earl of Fife, by whom he had
two sons.

1. Sir Alexander, his heir.

2. --, who was killed with his father near Kinghorn in Fife, Fordun, vol. II.
p. 304.
anno 1332.

After the death of king Robert Bruce, his son king David being but a child,
the Baliols thought this a fit opportunity to renew their pretensions to the
crown of Scotland: Edward Baliol therefore, with the assistance of the king of
England, invaded Scotland with a fleet and army, Fordun, vol. II. p. 304. Cui
Alex. deSeton et filius, cum paucis in ^acie resistens, ibid. occubuit.
and landed in Fife: though the Scots were no ways prepared for such an
unexpected attack, yet the brave sir Alexander Seaton immediately got together
what forces he could to oppose them, but lost his life in the encounter, near
Kinghorn, anno 1332.

He was succeeded both in his estate and the government of Berwick, by his son,

VIII. Sir ALEXANDER SEATON, a man of most remarkable valor and magnanimity,
who gallantly defended the town of Berwick against king Edward, and the whole
English army.

King Edward having summoned the town to surrender, threatened, in case of a
refusal, to put to death the governor's two sons, then in his hands as
hostages; but nothing could prevail with the brave sir Alexander to give up the
town, as long as it was possible to defend it. King Edward thereupon most
barbarously executed those two hopeful young men, William and Thomas Seatons,
even in their father's view; Fordun, v. II. p. 311, Abercrombie, etc.
which shocking sight he bore with a constancy of mind scarce to be paralleled.

After the unfortunate battle of Halydonhill, when there was no further hope of
relief, sir Alexander was at last obliged to surrender that important place to
the then victorious English, Ibidem.
anno 1333.

He married Christian, daughter of -- Cheyne of Straloch, a lady endowed with a
most heroic spirit, who was a great comfort to her husband, in the afflicting
scene of their sons murder, which she also bore with a constancy of mind beyond
her sex.

By her he had issue four sons.

1. William.

2. Thomas.

These two were put to death by king Edward, as above.

3. Sir Alexander, who carried on the line of this family.

4. Sir John, Chart. in pub. archiv.
ancestor of the Seatons of Parbroath, Lathrisk, etc.

Sir Alexander obtained a safe conduct and protection to go into England in the
year 1337, Rymer, tom. IV. p. 823.
and dying soon thereafter, was succeeded by his son,

IX. Sir ALEXANDER SEATON of Seaton, who was one of the Scotch nobles that met
the English commissioners about obtaining the liberty of John earl of Murray,
Ibid. tom. V. p. 200.
in the year 1340.

He was afterward one of the Scotch commissioners appointed to treat about
king David's liberty, Ibid. p. 634.
and is then designed dominus Alexander de Seaton, miles, anno 1348.

He married Margaret, sister of William Murray, M. S. hist. of the family,
Nisbet, etc.
captain of the castle of Edinburgh, by whom he had a son,

Sir William, -- and a daughter,

Christian, married to George earl of March.

He was succeeded by his son,

X. Sir WILLIAM SEATON of Seaton, Fordun.
a brave officer, and strenuous defender of the liberties of his country.

He married Catharine, daughter of sir William Sinclair of Herdmanston, by whom
he had two sons and four daughters.

1. Sir John, afterward lord Seaton.

2. Sir Alexander, who married Elizabeth, daughter and heiress of Adam lord
Gordon, Writs of the family of Winton.
of whom the duke of Gordon, the Seatons of Touch, Meldrum, etc. are descended.

1st daughter, Margaret, married to John lord Kennedy, ancestor of the earl of
Cassilis.

2. Marian, married to sir John Ogilvie of Lintrethan, ancestor of the earls of
Airly.

3. Jean, married to John lord Lyle.

4. Catharine, married to Bernard Halden of Gleneagles.

He died in the beginning of the reign of king Robert III. and was succeeded by
his eldest son,

XI. Sir JOHN SEATON of Seaton, a man of great parts and spirit, who made a
considerable figure in the reign of king James I. against the enemies of his
country.

He obtained two safe conducts to go into England, Rymer, tom. VIII.
with the earl of Douglas and his sons, in the years 1405 and 1406.

He was one of the Scotch commissioners appointed to treat of king James I. his
liberty, anno 1423, Ibid. tom. X. p. 266.
and is then designed Johannes de Seaton, miles.

The year thereafter, he was created a lord of parliament by his majesty, and
being one of the hostages for his ransom, Ibid. p. 307* and 332.
is designed Johannes dominus Seaton, anno 1424.

He was in great favor with king James I. who appointed him master of his
household. He attended his daughter princess Margaret when she went to France to
be married to king Lewis XI. M. S. hist. of the family.


He married lady Janet Dunbar, daughter of George earl of March, by whom he had
a son,

Sir William, his apparent heir, -- and two daughters.

1. Janet, married to Robert, master of Keith, eldest son and apparent heir of
William first earl Marishal.

2. Christian, married to Norman lord Lesly of Rothes.

He lived to a great age, and died anno 1441.

XII. Sir WILLIAM, only son and apparent heir of John first lord Seaton, was a
man of remarkable courage and intrepidity. He accompanied the brave and valiant
John earl of Buchan to France with 7000 auxiliaries, to the assistance of king
Charles VI. and was slain with that noble earl at the battle of Vernoil,
Fordun, vol. II. p. 337.
anno 1424, leaving issue a son,

George, afterward lord Seaton, -- and two daughters.

1. Catharine, married, 1st, to sir Alan Stewart of Darnly, of whom the royal
family is descended; Stewart's hist. of the royal family, p. 152.
2dly, to Herbert lord Maxwell, ancestor of the earl of Nithsdale.

2. Janet, married to John second lord Haliburton.

XIII. GEORGE, only son of sir William, succeeded his grandfather, anno 1441,
and was second lord Seaton.

As this succession of the four last generations differs from Crawford, Nisbet,
and even the M. S. history of the family, we shall here insert the words of a
cotemporary auther, who, Fordun, vol. II. p. 337.
after sir Alexander No. XI. of this account, says:

" Willielmus etiam filius suus, postea miles insignis, Hierosolymis fuit, et
obiit veteranus. Cujus filius,

Johannes Seton miles acerrimus, et Anglis dum vixerat infestus. Cujus etiam
filius,

Dominus Willielmus, interfectus est in Francia, apud Vernoil, Cujus filius,

Dominus Georgius adhuc superstes. Hos quatuor milites ego, qui haec chronica
collegi, been cognovi, de quibus tres primi statura proceri et valentes
fuerunt, etc."

This George lord Seaton was sent ambassador extraordinary to the court of
England, Rymer, tom. XI. p. 213.
anno 1448.

He married, 1st, lady Jean Stewart, only daughter and heiress of John earl of
Buchan, in whose right he claimed that earldom, Stewart's history, p. 115.
and to denote their pretensions, have been in use to marshal the feudal arms
of that family with their own. Nisbet, vol. I. p. 238.
By her he had a son,

John, master of Seaton.

He married, 2dly, Christian --, and got a charter under the great seal, Chart.
in pub. archiv.
Georgio domino Seaton, et Christianae sponsae suae, of the lands of Hertshede,
Clentis, etc. dated 8th January 1458. By her he had a daughter,

Christian, Ibid. ad ann. 1478.
married to Hugh Douglas of Borgue.

He died about the year 1470.

XIV. JOHN, master of Seaton, only son and apparent heir of George the second
lord, married Mary, Writs of the family of Winton.
daughter of John lord Lindsay, and died before his father, leaving a son,

XV. GEORGE, who succeeded his grandfather, Rymer, tom. XI. p. 750, and 774.
and was third lord Seton. He was a man of great integrity and merit, and was
sent one of the ambassadors to negotiate a treaty with the English, anno 1473.

He founded and endowed the chapel of Seton in East-Lothian for a provost,
Keith's bishops, p. 288.
six prebends, two singing boys, and a clerk, 20th June 1493.

He was again sent one of the commissioners to treat of a peace with the
English, Rymer, tom. XII. p. 677.
and was one of the hostages of the treaty, anno 1498.

He was afterward one of the Scotch nobles that were witnesses to the settling
of the queen's jointure, Ibidem, tom. XIII. p. 64.
anno 1503.

He married lady Isabel Campbell, daughter of Colin first earl of Argyle, by
whom he had two sons, and one daughter.

1. George, his heir.

2. John, who married -- Sinclair, heiress of Northrig, with whom he got that
barony, Chart. in pub. archiv.
and was ancestor of the Setons of Northrg.

His daughter, Martha, married to sir William Maitland of Leithington, ancestor
of the earl of Lauderdale.

He died in the end of the year 1507, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVI. GEORGE, fourth lord Seton, a man of spirit and fortitude, and in great
favor with king James IV.

He got a charter under the great seal, Georgio magistro de Seton, Ibidem.
filio et haeredi apparenti Georgii domini Seton, et Janetae Hepburn, ejus
sponsae, of the forty pound land and town of Seton, 25th January 1506.

He afterward got two charters, Georgio domino Seton, and his said spouse, of
the lands and baronies of Winton, Ibidem.
Barns, etc. dated in April 1508, and February 1511.

By the said lady Janet Hepburn, daughter of Patrick first earl of Bothwel, he
had a son,

George, his heir, -- and a daughter,

Marion, married to Hugh second earl of Eglington.

He accompanied king James IV. to the unfortunate battle of Flowdon, where he
lost his life, with his royal master, anno 1513* and was succeeded by his son,

XVII. GEORGE, fifth lord, who got no less than five charters, under the great
seal, from king James V. Georgio domino Seton, of the lands of Winchburgh,
Gamilstoun, Reidhills, the baronies of Seton, Ibidem.
Winton, etc. etc. in the years 1526, 1531, and 1539.

He married, 1st, Elizabeth Hay, daughter of John lord Yester, ancestor of the
marquis of Tweeddale, by whom he had two sons, and four daughters.

1. George, his heir.

2. John, who married Isabel Bal^our, with whom he got the lands and bar^ny of
Carriston, in Fife-shire, and got a charter under the great seal, Johanni Seton
fratri germano Georgii domini Seton, et Isabellae Balfour suae sponsae,
terrarum de Cardlastoun, etc. Chart. in pub. archiv.
19th April 1553. He was ancestor of the Setons of Carristoun.

1st daughter, Marian, married to John fourth earl of Menteith.

2. Margaret, married to sir Robert Logan of Restalrig.

3. Eleanor, married to Hugh seventh lord Somerville.

4. Beatrix, married to sir George Ogilvie of Dunlugas, ancestor of lord Banff.

He married, 2dly, Mary Paris, a French lady, who had been maid of honor to
queen Mary of Lorrain. By her he had issue a son,

Robert, who got a charter under the great seal, Roberto filio quondam Georgii
domini Seton, of the lands of Miles and Greendykes, Ibidem.
22d February 1562.

This lord was one of the Scotch nobles that consented and agreed to the
marriage of queen Mary of Scotland with prince Edward of England, Rymer, tom.
XV. p. 4.
anno 1543.

He died in 1545, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVIII. GEORGE, sixth lord, who got charters under the great seal, Georgio
domino Seton, et Isabellae Hamilton, sponsae suae, of the lands and baronies of
West-Niddrie, Chart. in pub. archiv.
Seton, Winton, etc. in the years 1552 and 1554.

He was a man of great merit, honor, and integrity, invariably attached to the
interest of queen Mary, whom he never deserted in her greatest distress.

During the regency of queen Mary of Lorrain, he was provost of Edinburgh, and
was one of the commissioners, appointed by the estates of the nation, to treat
with the king of France about the marriage of queen Mary with Francis the
dauphin. In archiv. familiae de Winton.
His commission is dated in March 1557.

Upon her majesty's return from France, he was made master of her household, one
of the lords of her privy council, Ibidem, and Nisbet.
and a knight of the most noble order of the thistle.

He was one of the Scotch nobles who entered into a solemn bond of association,
whereby they bound themselves to stand by, and defend the queen with their
lives and fortunes, Bond in the lawiers libr. Edinburgh.
against all mortals, signed at Hamilton, 8th May 1568.

This lord was likeways in great favor with king James VI. who appointed him
ambassador extraordinary to the court of France, Commission in the archiv. of
the family.
in 1583, where he managed his negotiation with dexterity and success.

He married Isabel, daughter of sir William Hamilton of Sanquhar, lord high
treasurer of Scotland, in the reign of king James V. By her he had four sons,
and one daughter.

1. Robert, afterward earl of Winton.

2. John, ancestor of the Setons of Barns, of whom James Seton, Esquire; now
lieutenantcolonel to general Leighton's regiment of foot, is the lineal
representative.

3. Alexander, afterward earl of Dunfermline. Vide page 220th of this work.

4. Sir William Seton, who married and had one son, but he died without issue.

His daughter, Margaret, married to Claud Hamilton, lord Paisley, ancestor of
the earl of Abercorn.

He died anno 1584, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIX. ROBERT, seventh lord, who got charters under the great seal, Roberto
domino Seton, portum et burgum baroniae de Cockeny, in liberum portum, etc.
Also the lands and baronies of Seton, and many others too numerous to be here
inserted, Chart. in pub. archiv.
in the years 1590, 1591, and 1599.

This lord was also in great favor with king James VI. who was pleased further
to dignify him with the titles of earl of Winton, lord Seton, Tranent, etc. and
erected all his lands and lordship of Seton into the earldom of Winton, to him
and his heirs male, by his royal charter, Ibidem.
dated 16th November 1600.

He married lady Margaret Montgomery, eldest daughter of Hugh third earl of
Eglington, by whom he had five sons, and one daughter.

1. Robert, lord Seton, who married Anne Maitland, daughter of John lord
Thirlestane, but died before his father without issue.

2. George, afterward earl of Winton.

3. Sir Alexander, who succeeded to the honors of Eglington. Vide that title,
page 226.

4. Sir Thomas, ancestor of the Setons of Olivestob.

5. Sir John Seton of St. Germains, whose only daughter, --, was married to
Alexander Menzies of Coulterallers.

His daughter, lady Isabel, married, 1st, to James earl of Perth; 2dly, to
Francis Stewart, son of Francis earl of Bothwel.

He died anno 1608, and was succeeded by his son,

XX. GEORGE, second earl, who, in his father's lifetime, got a charter under
the great seal, Georgio magistro de Winton, confirming the lands, lordship,
barony of Seton, and earldom of Winton, omni tempore futuro post obitum patris,
to him and the lawful heirs male of his body; which failing, to sir Alexander;
then to sir Thomas; then to sir John, his brothers german, and the lawful
heirs-male of their respective bodies; which all failing, to the nearest
heirs-male, as mentioned in the infeftments of the estate of Winton; they
carrying the name and arms of Seton, Chart. in pub. archiv.
etc. dated the 12th day of May 1607.

He afterward got charters under the great seal, Georgio comiti de Winton, of
the lands of Innernytie, with the hereditary office of justiciar general
besouth the river Forth, Ibidem.
etc. etc. in the years 1612 and 1618.

He then got a charter, Georgio comiti de Winton, et Georgio domino Seton, ejus
filio, of the whole earldom, lordship, and barony of Winton and Seton, Ibidem.
22d April 1619.

Also charters of the port and burgh of the barony of Cockeny, the lands and
barony of Brocksburn, Ibidem.
etc. in 1634 and 1638.

He was a man of good parts, great integrity, and most sincerely attached to
the interest of the royal family, on which account he suffered many hardships.

He married, 1st, lady Anne Hay, daughter of Francis earl of Errol, by whom he
had two sons, and one daughter.

1. George, lord Seton.

2. Alexander, afterward viscount of kingstoun, whose male line is now
extinct. Vide title viscount Kingston, page 380th.

His daughter, lady Elizabeth, married to William earl Marishal.

He married, 2dly, Elizabeth, daughter of John lord Herries, by whom he had two
sons and three daughters.

1. Sir John Seton of Garleton, whose descendents are now the representatives
of this noble family, as will be shown hereafter.

2. Sir Robert Seton of Windygowl, created a baronet by king Charles II. but
died without issue. Ibidem.


1st daughter, Isabel, married to Francis lord Semple.

2. Lady Anne, married to John earl of Traquair.

3. Lady Mary, married to James earl of Carnwath.

This earl built the noble and stately house of Winton, and died 17th December
1650.

XXI. GEORGE, lord Seton, eldest son and apparent heir of George second earl of
Winton, was also a steady loyalist. He was imprisoned by the parliament in the
tolbooth of Edinburgh, Minutes of parliament.
in May 1645, and was sined in 40,000 l.

In July thereafter, he was ordered to sell his baronies of Winchburgh and
Niddry at seven years purchase, Ibidem.
at least as much thereof as would pay his fine.

In 1646, he was imprisoned in the castle of Edinburgh; but was liberate upon
his father's giving a bond of presentation, that he should appear when called,
Ibidem.
under the penalty of 100,000 l.

Notwithstanding all these hardships, he joined the great Montrose; Guthrie's
memoirs.
but died a few months before his father, leaving issue, by lady Henriet
Gordon, daughter of George Marquis of Huntly, one son,

XXII. GEORGE, who succeeding his grandfather in December 1650, was third earl
of Winton; and though he was but a young man, and could scarce give the least
assistance to the loyalists during the usurpation, Cromwell's act of indemnity.
yet he was fined by Oliver Cromwell in the sum of 2000 l. sterling, in April
1654.

He had his education in France, went into the army, and remarkably
distinguished himself for courage and conduct, at the siege of Besancon in
Burgundy.

When he returned to England, being a man of fine accomplishments, was most
graciously received by king Charles II. who appointed him one of the lords of
his privy council for Scotland.

He married, 1st, lady Mary Montgomery, daughter of Hugh seventh earl of
Eglington, by whom he had only one daughter,

--, who died in infancy.

He married, 2dly, Christian, daughter and co-heiress of John Hepburn of
Aldistoun, by whom he had two sons.

1. George, his heir.

2. Christopher Seton, Esquire; who died unmarried.

The earl died anno 1704, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XXIII. GEORGE, fourth earl of Winton, who having unhappily engaged in the
rebellion 1715, was taken at Preston, brought prisoner to London, and committed
to the tower.

In March following, he was tried by his peers, found guilty of treason,
received sentence of death, and his estate and honors were forfeited to the
crown.

In August thereafter, he made his escape out of the tower, went beyond seas,
and died at Rome, anno 1749; and having no issue, in him ended the male line of
George lord Seton, eldest son of George second earl of Winton.

The male line of Alexander viscount Kingston, his second son, having also
failed, as before observed, the representation of this noble family devolved
upon the descendents of sir John, his third son, before mentioned, to whom we
now return.

XXI. Sir JOHN SETON of Garleton, third son of George second earl of Winton,
married Christian, daughter of Alexander Home of Renton, Esquire; and sister of sir
-- Home of Renton, one of the senators of the college of justice, by whom he
had three sons.

1. Sir George, his heir.

2. John Seton, Esquire; who married and left issue two sons, Ralph and John, which
last married in England, and had issue a son John, now a merchant in London,
etc. etc. etc.

His third son, Alexander, died without issue.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XXII. Sir GEORGE SETON of Garleton, who married Mary, daughter of Andrew
Wauchop of Niddry, Esquire; an ancient baron in the county of Mid-Lothian, by whom
he had three sons, and one daughter.

1. Sir George, his heir.

2. Captain James, now an officer in the French service.

3. John, who was bred to the church, and died without issue.

His daughter, Mary, married to John Arrot of Fafarty, in Forfar-shire.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XXIII. Sir GEORGE SETON of Garleton, who, had it not been for the sentence and
forfeiture of George the fourth earl, would now have been fifth earl of Winton.

He resides in France, and is yet unmarried.

ARMS.
Quarterly; 1st and 4th or, three crescents within a double tressure, flowered
and counter-slowered with flowers de lis gules, for Seton; 2d and 3d azure,
three garbs or, for Buchan, as having pretension to that earldom; and over all,
by way of surtout, a scutcheon party per pale gules and azure, the first
charged with a sword in pale proper, pommeled and hilted or, supporting an
imperial crown, with a double tressure of the last, given by king Robert Bruce
for their bravery and loyalty; and the 2d is charged with a star of twelve
points argent, for the title of Winton.

CREST; on a ducal coronet or, a dragon vert, spouting fire, his wings elevated.

SUPPORTERS; two foxes proper, collared and chained or, each collar charged
with three crescents gules; and upon a scroll coming behind the shield and
passing over the middle of the supporters, are these words: Intaminatis fulget
honoribus, relative to the surtout.

MOTTO; Invia virtuti via nulla.

CHIEF SEATS,
At Seton, in East-Lothian, a noble palace, fine gardens, etc. and at
Winton-house, in the same county, etc. etc.

GIFFARD Lord YESTER.
THE surname of Giffard is of Norman extraction. According to Mr. Nisbet, and
the manuscript history of the family of Tweeddale, a man of rank of that name
came to England with William the Conqueror, where he settled, and having had a
considerable command in the army, got a share of the conquered lands.

Osbert de Giffard is said to have obtained from that prince, the lands and
barony of Fonteil in Wilt-shire, and was father of another Osbert de Giffard,
lord of Fonteil, who left issue two sons.

1. Osbert de Giffard, his heir.

2. Hugo, the first of this family.

I. HUGO de GIFFARD, according to that learned antiquary sir James Dalrymple,
settled in Scotland in the reign of king Malcolm IV. who succeeded king David
I. anno 1153, Preface to sir James Dalrymple's coll. p. 75.
and died in 1165.

He was father of

II. HUGO de GIFFARD, afterward lord of Yester. He appears to have been much
about the court of king William the Lion, and was witness to many of that
prince's charters, who succeeded king Malcolm IV. in 1165, and died anno 1214.

In a charter of a donation to the monastery of Dunfermline, by Walter, son of
Alan lord high steward of Scotland, Hugo de Giffard is a witness, together with
Richard bishop of St. Andrews, Ingelram bishop of Glasgow, Chartulary of
Dunfermline, p. 520.
Gregory bishop of Dunkeld, Andrew bishop of Caithness, and Duncan earl of
Fife, in or before 1174, in which year bishop Ingelram died.

When king William obtained his liberty, after being unfortunately taken
prisoner by the English at Alnwick, Rymer, tom. I. p. 39.
anno 1174, Hugo de Giffard was one of the hostages for his ransom, and being
in great favor with that prince, obtained from him a grant of the lands of
Yester in East-Lothian, to which Richard de Morvile, Crawfurd's peerage.
constable, and Philip de Valoniis, chamberlain to king William, were
witnesses; and Yester continued ever after to be the chief title of this family.

In a charter of Waldave fourth earl of March, of a donation of the patronage
of the church of Innerkeithing, to the monastery of Dunfermline, Chartulary of
Dunfermline, p. 522.
Hugo de Giffard is a witness, in or before 1182, in which year earl Waldave
died.

He is witness also in a charter of king William to the abbay of
Holyrood-house, Writs of Holyroodhouse, penes MacFarlane.
together with William bishop of St. Andrews, ante 1214.

He appears to have been possessed of other lands besides those of Yester, and
made a donation to the priory of St. Andrews, of the patronage of his church of
Theiling, etc. confirmed by king William, Book of original writs, ibid. p. 326.
vol. I.
to which Hugh the chancellor, and earl Duncan justiciar, etc. were witnesses,
ante annum 1214.

He left issue a son,

III. WILLIAM de GIFFARD, second baron of Yester, who succeeded him, and in his
father's lifetime is mentioned in a charter of king William, of a donation to
the monastery of Paisley, to which Hugo the chancellor is a witness, Chartulary
of Paisley. p. 63.
in or before 1199, in which year the chancellor died.

He got a new grant from king William, of his lands of Yester, etc. to which
Florence elect of Glasgow is a witness, Crawfurd's peerage.
who obtained that office anno 1202.

When a peace was concluded between king Alexander II. of Scotland, and king
Henry III. of England, this William de Giffard, lord of Yester, Rymer, tom. I.
p. 428.
was one of the guarantees of the treaty, anno 1244.

He died soon thereafter, leaving issue a son and successor,

IV. HUGO de GIFFARD, third lord of Yester, who was admitted one of the council
to king Alexander III. Ibid. p. 559. and 566.
upon the change of his ministry, anno 1255.

This lord made a donation to the monastery of Melrose, pro salute animae suae,
etc. of the monks lands of Yester, Keith's bishops. p. 254.
et unum to^^^m in villa sua de Yester, et duas bovatas terrae in villa sua
praedicta, etc. about the year 1260.

He appears to have had several sons.

1. William, his heir.

2. Hugh de Giffard, Prynne's collect. vol. III. p. 659.
who, with many of his countrymen, was compelled to swear allegiance to king
Edward I. of England, anno 1296, and is said to have been progenitor of the
Giffards of Sherriffhall.

3. James de Giffard, Ibidem.
who also swore fealty to king Edward the same year.

This Hugh de Giffard, lord of Yester, had a remarkable castle or dungeon,
where he died in the year 1267, according to these remarkable words of a good
author, Fordun, vol. II. p. 105.
viz. " Hugo Giffard de Zester moritur, cujus castrum, vel saltem caveam et
dongionem, art demonica antiquae relationes ferunt fabricatas, etc."

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

V. WILLIAM de GIFFARD, fourth lord of Yester, Rymer, tom. II. p. 950.
who was also forced to swear allegiance to king Edward I. of England, anno
1304.

He died in the beginning of the reign of king Robert Bruce, leaving issue a
son and heir,

VI. Sir JOHN GIFFARD, fifth lord of Yester, who ratifed the donations to the
monastery of Melrose, made by Hugh de Giffard, avus suus, Crawfurd's peerage.
to that abbacy, in puram et perpetuam eleemosinam, etc.

This sir John made a donation to the abbacy of Dryburgh, pro salute animae
suae, of an annuity out of his village of Bothan, Haddington's collections.
anno 1320.

He married Eupheme, Preface to sir James Dalrymple, page 38.
daughter and heiress of sir Thomas Morham of that ilk, knight, by whom he got
a great accession to his estate, and by her had one son,

Hugh, his heir, -- and four daughters.

1. Jean or Johanna, married to sir William Hay of Locharret, ancestor of the
marquis of Tweeddale, of whom more hereafter.

2. Alice, married to sir Thomas Boyd, ancestor of the earls of Kilmarnock.

3. Mary, married to Eustace Maxwell of Tyling.

4. Eupheme, married to Dougal MacDougall of Mackerston.

He died between the years 1342 and 1345, and was succeeded by his only son,

VII. HUGH, sixth lord, who, in a charter of a donation to the monastery of
Holyrood-house, Book of original Writs, penes MacFarlane, p. 209.
is designed Hugo de Giffard, dominus de Yester, filius et haeres Euphemiae
dominae de Morham, et de Baru, sponsa quondam domini Johannis de Giffard, etc.
etc. anno 1345.

This lord lived to a great age. He founded and endowed the collegiate church
of Bothan, for a provost, Keith's bishops, p. 284.
seven prebendaries, and two singing boys, anno 1418; but dying soon
thereafter, without issue, his great estate went amongst his four sisters,
whereof,

VIII. JEAN or JOHANNA, the eldest, married to sir William Hay, before
mentioned, who got with her the lands and barony of Yester, which has ever
since continued to be one of the titles and chief seats of the most noble
family of Tweeddale,

By him she had issue four sons and two daughters, as may be seen more at large
under the title Marquis of Tweeddale, page 677th of this work.

ARMS.
Gules, three bars ermine.

ADDENDA et CORRIGENDA.
ABERCORN.
PAGE 5th, at the end of the family of Abercorn, add, this earl was elected one
of the sixteen Scotch peers to the British parliament called to meet in 1761.

AIRLY.
Page 13th, col. 2d, line 13th, for three daughters, read four, and add,

4. Margaret, married to Gilbert Ramsay of Banff, Esquire per contract penes dom.
Jacobum Ramsay de Banff, ad annum 1482.

Page 14. line 7. for Ballindoch, read Ballindach.

Page 15. line 41. after Inverlochie, add, And by lady Patricia Ruthven his
wife, a daughter of the earl of Brentford, he left issue two daughters.

1. Christian, married to sir James Ramsay of Banff, per contract of marriage
penes dom. Jacobum Ramsay de Banff.

2. --, married to -- Fletcher of Bonshaw, Esquire, and both had issue.

ANNANDALE.
Page 26. line 50. for Matthew Johnston, read Matthew de Johnston.

Page 27. col. 2. line 15. for Lochwoodhouse, read, Loch-house.

ARGYLE.
Page 44. at the end of the family of Argyle, after he has issue, add a son,

George, earl of Campbell, -- and a daughter* Lady Augusta.

ATHOLE.
Page 49. col. 2. line the last, for six daughters, read seven; and in the
beginning of page 50. add,

7. Lady Helen, married to John MacFarlane of that ilk, and had issue.

Page 54. col. 2. line 26. add, He married, 2dly, a daughter of sir John Wemyss
of that ilk, by whom he had no issue.

Page 57. after line 5. add,

In the year 1762, his grace having resigned the privy seal, was constituted
lord keeper of the great seal of Scotland, upon the duke of Queensberry's
resignation, who was made justice-general; which high office he enjoyed till
his death.

Ibidem, after line 18. add, by whom he had no issue; and dying on 8th January
1764, the representation of this most noble family devolved upon his nephew and
heir-male, John Murray of Strowan, Esquire; who is now third duke of Athole.

The late duke was a man of strict honor and integrity, invariably attached to
the interest of his country, a steady friend, of great hospitality, and
universal benevolence.

XX. JOHN, now duke of Athole, eldest son of the deceast lord George Murray,
the late duke's brother-german, having married lady Charlotte Murray, his
grace's only surviving child, she, as his heir of line, is baroness of Strange
in England; and, by this marriage, the heirs-male and of line, of this
illustrious family, are conjoined.

They have issue four sons, and two daughters.

1. John, now marquis of Tullibardin.

2. Lord James.

3. Lord George.

4. Lord William.

1st daughter, lady Charlotte.

2. Lady Amelia.

BALCARRAS.
Page 61. col. 2. line 6. and 7. for lord Borthwick of Lock-kill, read, David
Borthwick of Loch-hill.

Page 62. at the end of Balcarras, add, a seventh son,

John, born in 1762, and another daughter,

Lady Elizabeth, born in 1763.

N. B. His sixth son was christened Charles-Dalrymple.

BANFF.
Page 67. line 5. for two sons, read three, and add,

3. William Ogilvie of Strathearn, who was lord high treasurer of Scotland in
the beginning of the reign of king James V.

BORTHWICK.
Page 79. at the end of the family of Borthwick add, he had the peerage
confirmed to him by a decree of the house of lords, in April 1762.

BRECHIN.
Page 88. at the end of the family of Brechin, add, Though the earl of Athole
kept possession of this lordship till he was executed for the murder of king
James I. anno 1437, yet when he was under sentence of death, he declared, that
after his wife's death he possessed the lordship of Brechin only by the
courtesy of Scotland, without any other title; whereupon sir Thomas Maule of
Panmure claimed this lordship, as nearest heir to Margaret Barelay countess of
Athole, to whose heirs it was provided, failing heirs of her own body, which is
instructed by a charter in the public register, dated anno 1378. Accordingly
sir Thomas took instruments in the tolbooth of Edinburgh, immediately before
the earl's execution, wherein his right by proximity of blood to the lordship
of Brechin is fully set forth, the original instrument being still in the earl
of Panmure's custody; and Thomas Bysset of Balwylo judicially declares, that
dame Jean Barclay, wife to sir David Fleming, was grandmother to sir Thomas
Maule, who was killed at Harlaw, etc. which also appears from the writs of the
family of Panmure; notwithstanding all which, the lordship of Brechin was
forfeited, with the earl of Athole's other estates, and annexed to the crown.

BUCKCLEUGH.
Page 100. col. 2. line 54. after Crawfurd, and before Avendale, add Lord.

BURLEIGH.
Page 107. after line 15. add, It must here be observed, that the lands and
barony of Kilwinning are erected into a temporal lordship, with the title,
honor, and dignity of a free baron, and lord of parliament, in favors of this
Michael lord Balfour of Burleigh, his heirs and successors, by a charter under
the great seal in the public register, dated at Windsor, 7th September 1614.

BUTE.
Page 110. col. 2. line 35. after 1761, add, and he the said Stewart Mackenzie
was appointed lord keeper of the privy seal for Scotland, in the year 1762.

Ibidem, after line 46. add, one of the senators of the college of justice.

CAITHNESS.
Page 114. col. 2. after line 37. add, whose father dying in 1763, is now earl
Fife.

CAMERON.
Page 116. title, read, Fairfax lord Fairfax of Cameron.

Page 119. line 20. for Henry, etc. read, Thomas first lord Fairfax of Cameron.

CARLYLE. [DOUGLAS.]
Page 122. after line 9. add, He was also provost of Edinburgh in the years
1576 and 1577, an office both of dignity and authority in those times. He was
in great favor with his brother the regent Morton, who employed him in several
transactions and negotiations of importance.

Ibidem, lines 42. and 43. dele the words (was killed at the battle of Pinkie,
anno 1547;) for it was his father sir George who was killed there.

CARRICK.
Page 127. col. 2. line 26. sir William Dugdale, etc. the voucher on the
margin, viz. Rymer, tom. II. p. 448. belongs to that paragraph.

CASSILIS.
Page 135. col. 2. line 44. for two daughters, read three, and add,

3. --, married to sir George Campbell of Loudoun.

Page 138. at the end of the family of Cassilis, add, upon the 22d of January
1762, the house of lords determined the peerage of Cassilis in favors of sir
Thomas Kennedy of Culzean, the heir-male of the family, who is ninth earl of
Cassilis.

CATHCART.
Page 140. col. 2. line 39. for Helen, read, Agnes.

Page 142. after line 24. add, he is also governor of the castle of Dunbarton;
and, upon the resignation of Hugh earl of Marchmont, was made first
commissioner of the police, in January 1764.

COLVILE.
Page 144. line 18. for 1502, read, inter 1504 et 1508.

Ibidem, lines 41. and 42. for 13th August 1502, read, 10th April 1509.

Page 145. col. 2. lines 38. and 39. for daughter of -- Dundass of that ilk,
read, Daughter of Alexander Dundass of Fingask, by Elizabeth his wife, daughter
of sir David Bruce of Clackmannan. By her he had two sons, then add, and two
daughters. After line 50. say,

1st daughter, Grizel, married to sir John Preston of Valleyfield, and was
mother of sir George Preston of Valleyfield, and Robert Preston of that ilk.

2. Jean, married to Robert Bruce of Blairhall.

Page 146. after Alexander fourth lord Colvile, etc. add, In November 1763, he
was appointed commander in chief of all his majesty's fleet in North America,
and will have between thirty and forty ships of war under his command.

Page 147. line 25. for two daughters, read, three, and say,

1. Elizabeth, married to Archibald Dundass of Fingask, Esquire;.

CRAWFURD.
Page 156. col. 2. line 14. for 1381, read, 1383.

Page 159. col. 2. after line 42. add, In prejudice of.

Page 163. line 7. for his lifetime, read, His father's lifetime.

Ibidem, col. 2. line 3. after John Wemyss, Esquire; an officer in the army, add,
Now lieutenant governor of the castle of Edinburgh.

DALHOUSIE.
Page 169. title, for Dalhotsie, read Dalhousie.

Page 175. col. 2. after line 2. add, but died unmarried in January 1764, and
was succeeded in his estate and honors by his brother George, who is now
eighth earl of Dalhousie.

DOUGLAS.
Page 185. col. 2. line 36. for one daughter, read two, and add,

2. Lady Eleanor, married to sir William Fraser of Philorth, ancestor of lord
Salton.

DUFFUS.
Page 197. col. 2. line 46. instead of Mary, daughter of William lord Forbes,
read, Helen, eldest daughter of William Duff of Dipple, Esquire; and sister of
William, late earl Fife; but he died without issue about the year 1750.

DUMFRIES.
Page 199. line 47. for two daughters, read three, and add,

3. Christian, married to Thomas lord Erskine.

Page 201. at the end of the family of Dumfries, dele the words, and is still
unmarried, and add,

He married, 2dly, Anne, daughter of William Duff of Crombie, Esquire; advocate.

DUNDEE.
Page 210. col. 2. line 21. after 1468, instead of, he married Isabel, etc.
read,

He married, 1st, a daughter of sir William Oliphant of Aberdalgie, by whom he
had no issue: then read, He married, 2dly, Isabel, etc.

DUNFERMLINE.
Page 222. col. 2. at the end of the family of Dunfermline, after he married
Susan, daughter of James Murra^ of Abercairny, Esquire add, by whom he has a son,
James, -- and a daughter, Susan.

DUNMORE.
Page 224. col. 2. line 17. after he has issue, add a son,

George, lord Fincastle, etc.

EGLINGTON.
Page 228. col. 2. line 54. for one son, read two, and add,

2. Robert Montgomery of Gissin, of whom the Montgomeries of Magbyhill, etc.
are descended.

ELGIN.
Page 239. col. 2. line 43. after lady Christian, add, married to James Erskine
junior of Carnuck, Esquire;

Page 240. line 3. add a son,

--, lord Bruce of Kinloss, born January 1764.

ELPHINGSTON.
Page 244. col. 2. line 40. for John lord Erskine, read, Robert, etc.

Page 246. col. 2. line 22. after the word Quebec, add, He married Anne,
daughter of James lord Ruthven, by whom he has a daughter,

Anne.

ERROL.
Page 251. col. 2. line 17. for two daughters, read three, and add,

3. Lady Isabel, married to Laurence lord Oliphant

Page 254. col. 2. line 8. after he had a son, add, and a daughter,

Anne, married, 1st, to Sir William Murray of Abercairny; 2dly, to James
Drummond of Machany, ancestor of lord Strathallan.

Page 255. at the end of the family of Errol, add, He married, 2dly, miss Carr,
daughter and co-heiress of William Carr of Etal, Esquire; in the county of
Northumberland, by whom he has a daughter,

Lady Charlotte.

FINLATER.
Page 261. line 41. for Alexander earl of Huntly read George.

Ibidem, col. 2. lines 39. and 40. dele the words, above James, who is there
designed; for it was really lord Airly who was engaged in the sen^^^e, in
resentment of his cousin Sir James of Cardel's quarrel.

Page 263. line 36. instead of whose ancestor got these lands, say, who got
these lands, and dele whose ancestor.

FORFAR ASTON.
Page 270. col. 2. line 7. after lord Aston of Forfar, add, who died without
issue in March 1763, and is succeeded by his cousin and heir-male, Walter
Aston, Esquire; son of the late -- Aston, undertaker in Wilt-street, Lincoln's
Innfields, London, who is now seventh lord Aston of Forfar.

N. B. This name should be always (...) Aston, not Ashton.

FORRESTER.
Page 271. col. 2. line 48, add, and a daughter.

Mariotte Forrester, married to Sir James Sandilands of Calder.

Page 272. after line 9. add, He had also a daughter,

Elizabeth, married to Mr. David MacGill of Rankeillor, ancestor of viscount
Oxenford.

Ibidem, line 42. instead of no issue, say, no issue-male.

But as there is lately come to our hands, a more exact account of the
succession to the peerage of Forrester, than we had when the history of that
family was printed off, we here insert it as follows, viz.

Page 272. of the Peerage, after line 30. read,

VIII. GEORGE, first lord Forrester, (the eighth generation of that family)
married Christian, daughter to Sir William Livingston of Kilsyth, by whom he
had five daughters.

1. Helen, married to William lord Ross.

2. Margaret, married to John Schaw of Sornbeg.

3. --, married to -- Hamilton of Grange.

4. Jean Forrester, married to James, eldest son of lieutenant general William
Baillie of Torwood-head.

5. Lilias Forrester, married to William, second son of the said
lieutenant general William Baillie, who carried on the line of this family, as
will be shown hereafter.

On occasion of these two last marriages, this George, lord Forrester, having
no male-issue, he, and the said lieutenant general William Baillie, made a
joint settlement of their respective estates of Corstorphine, etc. and
Torwood-head, etc. in favors of the said James Baillie, and the issue-male of
his marriage with the said Jean Forrester; "which failing, to the said William
Baillie, and the issuemale of his marriage with the said Lilias Forrester;
which failing, to their respective heirs whatsomever, or heirs-general, etc.
etc."

In consequence of this settlement, the said George, lord Forrester, made a
resignation of his peerage into the king's hands; upon which he obtained a new
patent, exactly in terms of the above settlement, in these words, viz. " in
favorem dicti Jacobi Baillie, et haeredum de dicto matrimonio procreand. inter
illum and praefatam Joannam Forrester; quibus desicien. in favorem dicti
Willielmi Baillie, and haeredum indicto contractumatrimoniali expressorum, etc.
etc. reservato, dicto domino Georgio, suo vitali redditu ejusdem, pro toto sue
vite tempore, etc. etc." the said James being therein designed master of
Forrester; and he and his successors are obliged to carry the name and arms of
lord Forrester, etc. This patent is dated 13th August 1650, and documented by a
charter in the public register, and records of parliament.

George lord Forrester dying soon thereafter, was accordingly succeeded by his
son-in-law,

IX. JAMES BAILLIE, who having, in terms of the patent, assumed the name and
arms of this family, was second lord Forrester.

After the death of the said Jean Forrester his first wife, he married, 2dly,
lady Jean Ruthven, daughter of Patrick earl of Forth and Brentford; but dying
without issue by either, the estate and honors, according to the
last-mentioned patent, devolved upon his brother and heir,

IX. WILLIAM, third lord Forrester, who, by the said Lilias, daughter of the
first lord, left issue a son and successor,

X. WILLIAM, fourth lord Forrester, grandson of the first lord, who married a
daughter of Sir Andrew Birnie of Saline, one of the senators of the college of
justice, by whom he had four sons and two daughters.

1. George, his heir.

2. Andrew Forrester, who was major to the third troop of horse-guards, but
died unmarried.

3. James, who was a lieutenant of a ship of war, but died also unmarried.

4. John, captain of a ship of war, who married Elizabeth Tyrrel, sister of sir
Charles Tyrrel of the county of Southampton, by whom he had a son, William, who
succeeded to the honors, as will be shown hereafter.

1st daughter, Lilias Forrester, married to William Stirling of Herbert-shire,
Esquire; without issue.

2. Margaret, married to Patrick Haldane, Esquire; advocate, to whom she had a son,
brigadier general George Haldane, who died governor of Jamaica, and a daughter,
Margaret Haldane.

This lord died anno 1705, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. GEORGE, fifth lord Forrester, who having gone into the army, served some
years in Flanders under the duke of Marlborough, and rose to the rank of a
lieutenant colonel.

He signalized himself in the government's service at Preston in Lancashire,
anno 1715. He received a dangerous wound at the attack of that place, but
happily recovered, and was soon thereafter advanced to be colonel of one of the
troops of horse-grenadier-guards, and was afterward made colonel of the fourth
troop of horse-guards.

He married Charlotte, daughter and co-heiress of Anthony Row of the county of
Oxford, Esquire; by whom he had one son,

George, his heir, -- and two daughters,

1. Caroline Forrester, of whom more hereafter.

2. Harriot, married to Edward Walter of Salt-bridge, Esquire; member of parliament
for the burgh of Milbornport, Somersetshire, to whom she has one daughter.

He was succeeded by his only son,

XII. GEORGE, sixth lord Forrester, who, betaking himself to the maritime
service, was a captain in the royal navy; but dying unmarried in the year 1748,
was succeeded in the peerage by his cousin-german and heir-male, William, son
of his uncle John beforementioned, to whom we now return.

XII. WILLIAM, only son of captain John Forrester, fourth son of William the
fourth lord, succeeded to the honors as above, and was seventh lord Forrester.

This William was also a lieutenant in the royal navy; but dying unmarried in
November 1763, in him ended the whole male line of the said James and William,
the two brothers named in the substitution of the patent 1650, as before
observed: yet the peerage does not appear to be extinct; for both the patent in
1633, and that in 1650, are to heirs-general, failing heirs-male, etc. The
representation, therefore, of this noble family, undoubtedly devolves upon.

XII. CAROLINE FORRESTER beforementioned, who is eldest daughter of George the
fifth, and sister of George the sixth, lord Forrester.

She married George Cockburn of Ormiston, Esquire; lately comptroller, and now one
of the commissioners of the royal navy.

FORTH and BRENTFORD.
Page 273. col. 2. line 21. for one daughter, read two, and add,

2. Lady Patricia Ruthven, married to sir Thomas Ogilvie, second son of James
eighth lord Ogilvie of Airly, but died without issue-male, etc.

FIFE.
Page 275. line 36. after second Duncan, add, who married Alicia, daughter of
Walter Corbet of Mackerston, whose son Malcolm, etc.

Ibidem, col. 2. line 31. add, and a daughter,

Lady Marian, married to Patrick ninth earl of March.

Ibidem, line 47. add, and a daughter,

Lady Isabel, married to sir Alexander Seton, ancestor of the earls of Winton.

GALLOWAY.
Page 278. after line 25. read,

4. James, ancestor of the earls of Athole.

Ibidem, line 26. instead of fourth James, read, fifth sir John of Jedburgh,
etc.

Line 30. instead of 5. sir James, etc. read 6. Hugh, and 7. Robert: line 31.
and a daughter, as printed.

Ibidem, col. 2. line 37. for fourth son, read fifth.

GLENCAIRN.
Page 291. col. 2. line 50. after he had issue four sons, add, and one daughter,

Lady Elizabeth, married to Andrew MacFarlane of that ilk, Esquire; and had issue.

GORDON.
Page 301. col. 2. dele the last word, died, at the foot of that page; also the
first word, and, in the beginning of the next, whereby that sentence will read,
but was burnt in the house of Frendraught, etc.

Page 302. line 48. after lord Henry Gordon, add, who during Cromwell's
usurpation, was, with many other loyalists, obliged to leave his country, and
having a military genius, went into the service of the crown of Poland, where,
for his bravery and conduct, he acquired great honor. He afterward returned
to Scotland, and died without issue.

Ibidem, line 55. after lady Mary, add, married to -- Irvine of Drum.

Ibidem, Line 56. after lady Catharine, dele, died unmarried, and add, She went
abroad with her brother lord Henry, and was married to Count Morstain high
treasurer of Poland, of which marriage, prince Czartorinski, one of the present
candidates for the crown of Poland, with many other families of distinction in
that country, are descended.

GOWRIE.
Page 304. col. 2. line 8. for Scotland, read England.

Ibidem, line 30. add, and one daughter,

Margaret Ruthven, married to sir Walter Drummond of Cargill.

Page 305. col. 2. lines 4. and 5. for John lord Crichton of Strathurd, read,
John Crichton dominus de Strathurd.

GRAY.
Page 317. col. 2. line 22. after his daughter Jean, add, married to Francis
lord Down, eldest son and apparent heir of James earl of Murray.

HALIBURTON.
Page 322. at the end of lord Haliburton, add the arms of the family, viz.

Quarterly; 1st or, on a bend azure 3 mascles of the first for Haliburton; 2d
or, three bars gules for Cameron; 3d argent a bend gules for Vauss lord
Dirleton; and 4th as the first.

CREST; A moor's head banded, argent.

SUPPORTERS; two naked moors, banded about the head and middle argent.

MOTTO; Watch well.

HALKERTON.
Page 325. col. 2. at the end of the family of Halkerton, add, He died without
issue in November 1762, and was succeeded in his estate and honors by his
brother William, who is now sixth lord Halkerton.

HARRIES.
Page 339. line 8. for three daughters, read four, and add,

4. Sarah, married to John earl of Wigton.

HOLYROODHOUSE.
Page 341. after line 21. add, He married Margaret, daughter of captain William
Preston of Gorton, by whom he had one daughter,

Margaret Bothwell, married to doctor Colin Drummond physician in Edinburgh, to
whom she has two sons, Archibald and George, and one daughter, Margaret.

HOPETON.
Page 350. col. 2. at the end of the family of Hopeton, add, He married, 2 dly,
Jean, daughter of Robert Oliphant of Rossie, Esquire; by whom he has a daughter,

Lady Anne.

JEDBURGH.
Page 355. col. 2. at the foot, in the arms of Jedburgh, for moles, read
mullets.

IRVINE.
Page 356. col. 2. line 18. of Irvine, for three read two,

Page 357. col. 2. lines 21. 22. and 23. dele he was elected member of
parliament for Horsham, and continued in the parliament till his death; then
add, he died anno 1748, etc.

Ibidem, lines 26. 27. and 28. dele, who upon his father's death was elected
member of parliament for Horsham, anno 1748, and has continued in parliament
for the same place ever since, etc. for being a Scotch peer, he could not sit
in the house of commons.

ISLES.
Page 363. col. 2. line 17. for Margaret, daughter of sir Kenneth, read, Mary,
daughter of sir Colin.

KELLY.
Page 366. col. 2. line 9. for lady Anne, read, Lady Jean; and add, married to
John Scot of Harden, Esquire; to whom she had two daughters. 1. Anne, married to
Thomas Sharp of Houstoun, Esquire; and has issue. 2. Mary.

Ibidem, line 16. the countess of Kelly's christian name is Janet.

Ibidem, line 19. for Alexander, read, Thomas-Alexander; and the same in line
28.

Ibidem, line 26. to third daughter, lady Janet, add, married to sir Robert
Anstruther of Balcaskie, baronet.

Ibidem, col. 1. line 26. for lord Salton, read, master of Salton.

KILSYTH.
Page 378. line 6. from the foot, for one son, read two; and add,

2. James Livingston of Inches, ancestor of viscount Teviot.

Ibidem, col. 2. line 19. from the foot, for three sons, read two, and dele
second, Alexander Livingston of Inches, line 17. from the foot.

KINNAIRD.
Page 381. col. 2. after the last word of the page, add,

He married, Elizabeth, daughter of sir John Drummond of Stobhall, by whom, etc.

Ibidem, line 15. for in mentioned, read, is mentioned.

LOTHIAN.
Page 418. line 37. after 1519, add, And married sir Walter Kerr of Cessford,
ancestor of the duke of Roxburgh.

Page 422. col. 2. line 15. after the word Ireland, add, by whom he has issue
a son,

William, master of Newbottle.

Ibidem, line 17. after Richmond, add, by whom he has a son, and two daughters.

MADERTY.
Page 436. col. 2. line 38. for lord Oliphant, read, master of Oliphant.

MARCH.
Page 441. line 21. for three daughters, read four, and add,

4. Lady Mabella, married to John sixth earl of Sutherland, and had issue.

Ibidem, col. 2. line 42. for sir William, read sir Alexander.

MARCHMONT.
Page 448. after line 14. add, Upon the death of his grace James duke of
Athole, Hugh third earl of Marchmont was constituted lord keeper of the great
seal for Scotland, anno 1764.

Ibidem, line 20. after the earl's second daughter lady Margaret, add, is
married to colonel James Stewart, son of Archibald Stewart of Torrence, Esquire;.

MARISHAL.
Page 453. col. 2. line 5. for two sons, read three, and add,

3. John, of whom Robert Keith, Esquire etc. and dele line 10.

Page 454. line 1. read lady Elizabeth, married, 1st, to William lord Sinclair;
2dly, to Laurence master of Oliphant.

Ibidem, line 9. for Fraser of Philorth, read Fraser younger of Philorth.

MELVILE.
Page 471. col. 2. line 17. for leaving issue one son, read two; and add,

2. Mr. Thomas Melvile of Murdo-Cairny, who got a charter from his nephew,
George fourth lord Melvile, of the lands of Auchmore, in the county of Fife,
which we have seen, and is dated 20th October 1656, of whom major John Melvile,
now of Murdo-Cairny, is the representative in a direct male-line.

MENTEITH. [GRAHAM.]
Page 474. col. 2. line 6. from the foot, for three sons read four, and

N. B. Gilbert the third son did not die without issue, but married, and had
issue; then add the other son,

4. Walter of Gartartan, who died without issue, and was succeeded by his
brother Gilbert.

Page 476. after line 18. add.

N. B. But in case there are any male descendents of Gilbert third son of the
third earl still subsisting, they are the nearest male representatives of this
family of Menteith.

MIDDLETON.
Page 479. line 2. for two daughters, read three, and add,

3. Lady Catharine Middleton, married to Michael count de Roth,
lieutenant general in the French service. She died at Paris, anno 1763, in the
78th year of her age.

MONTROSE.
Page 481. after two sons, line 39. add, and one daughter,

--, married to sir Malcolm Drummond, ancestor of the family of Perth, and had
issue.

Page 483. col. 2. lines 23. and 25. for third Mungo, and fourth William, read
third William, and fourth Mungo, for William was the eldest.

Page 486. col. 2. line 22. for Dunbarton, read Stirling, and for at
Hanover-square, read in Hanover-square.

MORTON.
Page 497. line 19. dele and.

MURRAY.
Page 501. line 47. dele lawful; line 55 for was obliged, read was outlawed and
obliged, etc.

Ibidem, line 30. col. 2. after the word purposes, add, If the marriage was
sufficiently proven.

Page 504. col. 2. line 33. after Francis lord Down, add, He married Jean,
daughter of John 12th lord Gray.

NAIRN.
Page 507. after lord Nairn's arms, add,

SUPPORTERS; two ratch-hounds proper.

CREST; a sphere, and above it for motto, Plus ultra, and on a compartment
below, Le esperance me comfort.

OCHILTREE.
Page 523. col. 2. line 35. for two daughters, read three, and add,

3. Margaret, who was second wife to Patrick Smith of Braco, ancestor of David
Smith of Methven, Esquire; Of this marriage the Smiths of Huip, Barnhill, and
Atherny, are descended.

ROLLO.
Page 574, col. 2. at the end of Rollo, add, His lady died anno 1763.

ROSS.
Page 582. col. 2. after line 7. add, and a daughtor.

Margaret, married to sir Alexander Murray of Balvaird.

Ibidem, line 22. for one daughter, read two, and add,

2. Jean, married to sir James Sandilands of Calder.

Page 583. col. 2. line 9. from the foot, for one son, read two sons and three
daughters, then dele the next three lines, and read,

1. William, his heir.

2. Charles Ross of Balnagowan, Esquire; who was an officer in the army, and a
member of the British parliament, but died before his father, without issue*

1st daughter, Jean,

2. Elizabeth,

3. Mary, as printed, then add.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIX. WILLIAM, 13th lord Ross, who survived his father only a few months, and
died without issue.

ROTHES.
Page 589. line. 41. add, and two daughters,

1 Lady Margaret, married first to Alexander lord Balgony; 2dly, to Francis
earl of Baccleugh; 3dly, to David earl of Wemyss, and heired all their estates.

2. Lady Christian, married to Hugh earl of Eglington.

At the end of the family of Rothes, Page 590, add,

The earl, in 1763, married 2dly, miss Loyd, daughter of the present countess
of Haddington's first marriage.

ROTHSAY.
Page 591, at the end of Rothsay, add, And since the union of the two crowns,
the eldest son of the king of Great Britain is prince of Wales in England, and
duke of Rothsay in Scotland.

ROXBURGH.
Page 595. col. 2 line 6. read,

4. Lady Sophia, died unmarried.

Ibidem, col. 2. line 38. for two sons, read four, and add,

3. Henry.

4. William, who lived to be men, but both died without issue.

Page 596 col. 2. line 8. 9. and 10. should be read thus, He married his
consin-german, Essex, eldest daughter of sir Roger Mostyn of Flintshire, Bart.
etc.

Line 35. chief seats, etc. for Floors, read Fleurs, and for Bray in the
country of Bucks, read Beaumont-lodge in Berkshire.

RUTHVEN.
Page 602. col. 2. James lord Ruthven's eldest daughter Anne, is married to the
honorable captain John Elp^^ngston, eldest son and apparent heir of Charles
lord Elphingston, and has issue a daughter, Anne.

Elizabeth his 4. daughter, is married to Robert Lawrie, Esquire; son and apparent
heir of sir Robert Lawrie of Maxwelton, Bart.

N. B. Ibidem, lord Ruthven's supporters, as matriculate in the Lyon-office,
are two goats proper, and the crest a goat's head cupee, though this lord's
bearing is as blazoned and engraved in this work.

SALTON.
Page 603, after line 7. add, This sir Laurence had no male issue, but several
daughters, who succeeded to their father's estate which was very considerable.
This appears from an original charter in the custody of doctor
Abernethy-Drummond of Hathornden; wherein Helen, one of the daughters and
co-heiresses of Sir Laurence Abernethy, had for her portion, the estates of
Hathornden, Butel, and Leat-Bernard and several others; all which she disponed
to sir William Douglas of Strabroke, her nephew, confirmed to him by king
Robert II. anno 1378.

Page 605. col. 2. line 9. add,

George, his successor, and a daughter,

Elizabeth, married to John lord Glammis, chancellor of Scotland.

SOMERVILLE.
Page 625. line 45. for Duncan, read Donald.

Page 628. lines 13. and 14. instead of his second son Archibald, read his
brother sir Colin.

Page 629. line 13. for Marjory, read Agnes.

Page 631. after line 20. add, He married in November 1763, miss Elizabeth
Lithbridge of Lydcard, in Somersetshire, a young lady, possessed of every amiable
quality, and a large fortune.

Ibidem, col. 2. line 1. for one daughter, read two.

STIRLING.
Page 642. col. 2. line 54. after 1630, add, and had issue.

STORMONT.
Page 647. col. 2. line 22. for No. II. read III.

Page 649. col. 2. line 54. for one daughter, read two, and add,

2. Henrietta-Anne.

STRATHALLAN.
Page 651. col. 2. line 8. for one son, read two, and add,

2. Andrew Drummond, Esquire; an eminent banker in London, who has issue.

TEVIOT.
Page 668. col. 2. line 37. for succeeded by the title, read was succeeded in
the title of baronet, etc.

WEMYSS.
Page 687. line 53. for sir John of Inchmartin, read sir Patrick.

WIGTON.
Page 696. near the foot, the paragraph there inserted from Fordun, ought to
have been more fully narrated.

WINTON.
Page 708. line 14. for, he has issue one son, read two,

1. John.

2. Robert, who both reside with their father in London.

FINIS.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX.
A.
Page Earl of Abercorn, (Hamilton) 1 Lord Abercrombie, (Sandilands) 5 Earl of
Aberdeen, (Gordon) 6 Lord Abernethy, 9 Earl of Aboyne, (Gordon) 11 Earl of
Airly, (Ogilvie) ibid. Duke of Albany, (Stewart) 16 Lord Altree, (Keith) 17
Earl of Ancrum, (Ker) 18 Earl of Angus, ibid. Earl of Angus, (Umfravile) 19
Earl of Angus, (Stewart) 21 Earl of Annandale, (Murray) 22 Marquis of
Annandale, (Johnston) 25 Lord Arbuthnot, 29 Duke of Argyle, (Campbell) 34 Earl
of Athole, 45 Earl of Athole, (Campbell) 47 Earl of Athole, (Douglas) ibid.
Earl of Athole, Strathearn, and Caithness, 48 Earl of Athole, (Stewart) ibid.
Duke of Athole, (Murray) 51
B.
Lord Badenoch, (Cummin) 57 Earl of Balearras, (Lindsay) 59 Lord Ballenden, 63
Lord Balmerino, (Elphingston) 64 Lord Banff, (Ogilvie) 67 Lord Bargeny,
(Hamilton) 69 Viscount Belhaven, (Douglas) 70 Lord Belhaven, (Hamilton) 71 Lord
Bewlie, Earl of Carlyle, (Hay) 73 Lord Blantyre, (Stewart) 74 Lord Borthwick,
76 Lord Bothwell, (Murray) 80 Lord Bothwell, (Ramsay) 83 Earl of Bothwell,
(He^burn) ibid. Earl of Bothwell, (Stewart) 86 Lord Brechin, ibid. Lord
Brechin, (Barclay) 87 Earl of Breadalbane, (Campbell) 88 Lord Burntisland,
(Wem^s^) 91 Earl of Buchan, (Cummin) 92 Earl of Buchan, (Stewart) 93 Earl of
Buchan, (Stewart) 94 Earl of Buchan, (Douglas) 95 Earl of Buchan, (Erskine) 96
Earl of Buchan and Lord Car^^oss, (Erskine) 97 Duke of Buck^^ugh ^, (Scot) 99
Lord Burleigh, ((...)) 105 Earl of B^te, (Stewart) 108
C.
Earl of Caithness, 111 Earl of Caithness, ((...)) 112 Earl of Caithness,
((...)) ibid. Earl of Calendar, ((...)) 115 Lord Cameron, (Fairfax) 116 Lord
Carlyle, 119 Lord Carlyle, ((...)) 122 Earl of Carnwath, (Dalziel) 123 Earl of
Carrick, 12^ Earl of Carrick, (Bru^^) ibid. Earl of Carrick, (Stewart) 132 Earl
of Cassilis, (Kennedy) 133 Lord Cath^ar^^ 139 Lord Colvile of (...) 143 Lord
Colvile of (...), 147 Lord Cou^^^, ((...)) 148 Lord Cram^^d, (Richardson) ibid.
Lord Cranston, ibid. Lord Craw^urd, 152 Earl of Crawfurd, (Lindsay) 153 Earl of
Crawfurd and Lindsay (Lindsay) 160 Lord Crichton, Viscount Frendraught,
(Crichton) 164 Earl of Cromartie, (MacKenzie) 167
D.
Earl of Dalhousie, (Ramsay) 169 Earl of Delorain, (Scot) 175 Lord Denniston,
ibid. Lord Dingwall, (Keith) 176 Lord Dingwall, (Preston) 177 Earl of Dirleton,
(Maxwell) 180 Duke of Douglas, ibid. Lord Duffus, (Sutherland) 196 Earl of
Dumfries and Stair, (Crichton) 198 Earl of Dunbar, (Home) 202 Viscount Dunbar,
(Constable) 203 Earl of Dunbarton, (Douglas) 206 Viscount Dunblain, (Osborn)
207 Earl of Dundee, (Scrymgeour) 209 Viscount Dundee, (Graham) 213 Earl of
Dundonald, (Cochran) 215 Earl of Dunfermline, (Seaton) 220 Lord Dunkeld,
(Galloway) 222 Earl of Dunmore, (Murray) 223 Earl of Dysart, (Talmash) 224
E.
Earl of Eglington, (Montgomery) 226 Earl of Elgin, (Bruce) 233 Earl of Elgin
and Kincardine, (Bruce) 238 Lord Elibank, (Murray 240 Lord Elphingston, 242
Earl of Errol, (Hay) 247 Lord Eymouth, (Churchill) 255 Lord Eythen, (King) 257
F.
Viscount Falkland, (Carey) 254 Earl of Finlater, (Ogilvie) 2^0 Lord Forbes,
263 Lord Forfar, (Ashton) 268 Earl of Forfar, (Douglas) 270 Lord Forrester, 271
Earl of Forth and Brentford, (Ruthven) 273 Lord Fraser, ibid. Earl of Fife,
(MacDuff) 274
G.
Lord Galloway, 276 Earl of Galloway, (Stewart) 277 Viscount of Garnock,
(Crawfurd) 282 Lord Glasford, (Abercrombie) 286 Earl of Glasgow, (Boil) ibid.
Earl of Glencairn, (Cunninghame) 289 Duke of Gordon, 295 Earl of Gowrie,
(Ruthven) 303 Lord Gray, 308
H.
Viscount Haddington, (Ramsay) 317 Earl of Haddington, (Hamilton) 318 Lord
Haliburton, 3^0 Lord Hal^^rto^n, (Falconer) 322 Duke of Hamilton, 326 Lord
Harries, 337 Lord Holyroodhouse, (Bothwell) 339 Earl of Home, 341 Earl of
Hopeton, (Hope) 348 Earl of Hyndford, (Carmichael) 351
I.
Lord Jedburgh, (Ker) 355 Earl of Irvine, (Campbell) 356 Viscount Irvine,
(Ingram) ibid. Earl of Islay. (Campbell) 357 Lord of the Isles, (MacDonald)
ibid.
K.
Earl of Kelly, (Erskine) 365 Viscount of Kenmure, (Gordon) 366 Earl of
Kilmarnock, (Boyd) 373 Viscount Kilsyth, (Livingston) 378 Earl of Kincardine,
(Bruce) 238 and 380 Viscount Kingston, (Seaton) 380 Lord Kinnaird, 381 Earl of
Kinnoul, (Hay) 384 Earl of Kintore, (Keith) 387 Lord Kirkcudbright, (MacLellan)
388
L.
Earl of Lauderdale, (Maitland) 391 Old Earls of Lennox, 398 Duke of Lennox,
(Stewart) 399 Duke of Lennox, 404 Earl of Leven, (Lesly) 405 Lord Lindores,
(Lesly) 408 Earl of Lithgow, (Livingston) 409 Lord Lorn and Innermeath,
(Stewart) 415 Marquis of Lothian, (Ker) 416 Earl of Loudoun, (Campbell) 422
Lord Lovat, (Fraser) 427 Lord Lyle, 432
M.
Lord MacDonald, 435 Lord Made^ty, (Drummond) 436 Earl of March, (Dunbar) 437
Earl of March, (Stewart) 442 Earl of March, (Douglas) 443 Earl of Marchmont,
(Hume) 444 Earl Marishal, (Keith) 448 Earl of Mar, 457 Earl of Mar, (Erskine)
462 Earl of Melfort, (Drummond) 468 Earl of Melvile, 469 Earl of Menteith, 472
Earl of Menteith, (Graham) 474 Lord Methven, (Stewart) 476 Earl of Middleton,
477 Duke of Montrose, (Graham) 480 Lord Monypenny, 486 Lord Mordington,
(Douglas) 487 Earl of Morton, (Douglas) 488 Earl of Murray, (Randolph) 498 Earl
of Murray, (Dunbar) 499 Earl of Murray, (Stewart) 500
N.
Lord Nairn, 505 Lord Napier, 507 Lord Newburgh, (Banet) 512 Earl of Newburgh,
(Livingston) 513 Lord Newark, (Lesly) 511 Viscount Newhaven, (Cheyne) 514 Earl
of N^thsdale, (Maxwell) ibid. Earl of Nor^hesk, (Ca^negie) 520
O.
Lord Ochiltree, (Stewart) 522 Lord Oliphant, 524 Earl of Orkney, (Sinclair)
529 Duke of Orkney, (He^bu^n) 5^3 Earl of Orkney, (Stewart) ibid. Earl of
Orkney, (Hamilton) ibid. Lord Oxenford, (Mac^ill) 534
P.
Lord Panmure, (Valoniis) 537 Earl of Panmure, (Maule) 539 Earl of Perth,
(Drummond) 547 Lord Pitsligo, (Forbes) 556 Lord Pittenweem, (Stewart) 558 Earl
of Portmore, (Collier) 559 Viscount Preston, (Graham) 560 Viscount Primrose,
561
Q.
Duke of Queensberry, (Douglas) 561
R.
Lord Rae, (MacKay) 568 Lord Rollo, 571 Earl of Roseberry, (Primrose) 574 Earl
of Ross, 578 Lord Ross, 580 Earl of Rothes, (Lesly) 584 Duke of Rothsay,
(Stewart) 591 Duke of Roxburgh, (Kerr) ibid. Earl of Ruglane, (Hamilton) 596
Lord Rutherford, 597 Lord Ruthven, 601
S.
Lord Salton, (Abernethy) 603 Lord Salton, (Fraser) 606 Earl of Seaforth,
(MacKenzie) 610 Earl of Selkirk, (Douglas) 614 Lord Semple, 616 Lord Sinclair,
621 Lord Somerville, 623 Earl of Southesk, (Carnegie) 631 Lord Spynzie,
(Lindsay) 635 Lord St. Colme, (Stewart) 636 Earl of Stair, (Dalrymple) 636 Earl
of Stirling, (Alexander) 640 Viscount Stormont, (Murray) 644 Viscount
Strathallan, (Drummond) 650 Earl of Strathearn, 652 Earl of Strathearn,
(Stewart) 654 Earl of Strathmore, (Lion) 655 Earl of Sutherland, 660
T.
Earl of Tarras, (Scot) 667 Earl of Teviot, (Rutherford) 667 Viscount T^viot,
(Spencer) 667 Viscount Teviot, (Livingston) 667 Lord Torphichen, (Sandilands)
668 Earl of Traquair, (Stewart) 672 Earl of Tullibardine, (Murray) 677 Marquis
of Tweeddale, (Hay) 667
W.
Earl of Wemyss, 684 Earl of W^gton, (Fleming) 693 Earl of Winton, (Seaton) 701
Y.
Lord Yester, (Giffard) 708
SUBSCRIBERS omitted in the LIST.
Alexander Bisset of Lessendrum, Esquire; James Burnet of Barns, Esquire; Robert Bruce
of Kennet Esquire; The Right Hon. George Earl of Crawfurd. John Campbell, Esquire; Lion
King at Arms. Sir Robert Dalziel of Binns, Bart. John Drummond of Logie, Esquire;.
James Durham of Largo, Esquire; The Right Hon. Robert Lord Rollo. Hugh Seaton of
Touch, Esquire;.
ERRATA,
Page 6th, for Sandilandi on the margin four times, read Sandilands. P. 8. col
2. line 17. for Farmantine read Formartine. P. 13. col. 2. line 14 for John
Forbes read Alexander Forbes. P. 27. line 15. for Neist read Neise. Ibid. col
2. line 20. and 21. for Samwelton read Samuelston. P. 28. col. 2. line 23 for
7th July read 17th. P. 29. line 17 for 1721, read 1741. P. 32. col. 2. line 29.
for excis^ read customs. P. 39. line 16. for of quality read of his quality. P.
47. line 39. for Londonia read Lo^donia. P. 54, col. 2. on the margin, for 1686
read 1626. P. 77. line 46. for duke of Lenox read earl of Lenox P. 95. line 37.
for earl read lord. P. 97. line 10 for 13 read 14. P. 105 col 2. line 27. for
Serves read Selves. P. 113 col. 2. line 55. for And read He. P. 134. line 8.
for and probably read and was probably Ibid line 9. dele Duncan. Ibid line 10.
for Duncan was, read Duncan who was. P. 141. line 38. for lady Margaret
Hepburn, read lady Margaret Stewart. Ibid col. 2. line 33. for next read then P
159 line 17. to th add e, and col 2 line 17. before military dele s. P. 164
line 21. for Kelly read Kello. P. 167 line 8. for 1441 read 1641. P. 175 line
21. add s to letter P. 193. col 2. line 27. for Fuchel read Fachel. P. 262 line
45. for 1664 read July 1663 P 267 line 14. for Alexander earl of Huntly read
George. P. 285. col. 2 line 26. for Kelly read Kello. P. 305. line 10. for
Livingston read Livington. P. 325, in the arms, line 2. for Falcone read
Falconer. P. 327. line 28. dele and heiress P 332. col 2 line 1. and 2. for
eleventh duke read second duke. P. 396. line 48. for compositum read
composition. P. 414. line 38. for Sinclair read Sutherland. P. 418. line 35.
for Janet read Isabel. P. 434. col. 2. line 2 for Helen read Agnes. P. 436 line
23. for sixteenth read eighteenth. P. 445 line 27 for George read Archibald. P.
472. col. 2. line 18. from the foot, for William read Walter. P. 476 line 6.
from the foot, for second lord Evandale read third lord. P. 485. line 14. dele
tried. P 528. line 42. for Lindsay read Lundy P. 558. col. 2. line 25. for
Auchincross read Auchiores. P. 606. line 1. for Natardale, read Netherdale P.
614. last line, for kin. James I. read king Charles I. P. 642. col. 2. line 8.
for John Graham read Robert. P. 652. col. 2. line 5. from the foot, for domino
read domini. P. 664. col. 2. line 21. for esteemed read repealed. P. 703. col.
2. line 44. for tenth earl read twelfth earl. P. 707. line 45. add lady before
Isabel. P. 708. line 20. for Mary, read Barbara.

The Bookbinder is desired to take Notice, that by the reprinting the Accounts
of some Families, there are several cancelled Leaves in the Book; and that
those to be insert in the Room of the cancelled ones, are marked in the
Signatures with Crotchets thus []: For Example, the first Leaf cancelled is E,
which accordingly is signatured [E].


