THE HISTORY OF ENGLISH POETRY, FROM THE CLOSE of the ELEVENTH TO THE
COMMENCEMENT of the EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. TO WHICH ARE PREFIXED, TWO
DISSERTATIONS. I. ON THE ORIGIN OF ROMANTIC FICTION IN EUROPE. II. ON THE
INTRODUCTION OF LEARNING INTO ENGLAND.

VOLUME THE FIRST.

By THOMAS WARTON, B. D. FELLOW of TRINITY COLLEGE OXFORD, and of the SOCIETY
of ANTIQUARIES.

LONDON: Printed for, and sold by J. DODSLEY, Pall Mall; J. WALTER, Charing
Cross; T. BECKET, Strand; J. ROBSON, New Bond-Street; G. ROBINSON, and J. BEW,
Paternoster Row; and Messrs. FLETCHER, at Oxford. M. DCC. LXXIV.

TO HIS GRACE GEORGE DUKE OF MARLBOROUGH, MARQUIS OF BLANDFORD, KNIGHT OF THE
MOST NOBLE ORDER of the GARTER, A JUDGE AND A PATRON OF THE POLITE ARTS, THIS
WORK IS MOST HUMBLY INSCRIBED

By his Grace's most obliged, And most obedient Servant, THOMAS WARTON.

PREFACE.
IN an age advanced to the highest degree of refinement, that species of
curiosity commences, which is busied in contemplating the progress of social
life, in displaying the gradations of science, and in tracing the transitions
from barbarism to civility.

That these speculations should become the favorite pursuits, and the
fashionable topics, of such a period, is extremely natural. We look back on the
savage condition of our ancestors with the triumph of superiority; we are
pleased to mark the steps by which we have been raised from rudeness to
elegance: and our reflections on this subject are accompanied with a conscious
pride, arising in great measure from a tacit comparison of the infinite
disproportion between the feeble efforts of remote ages, and our present
improvements in knowledge.

In the mean time, the manners, monuments, customs, practices, and opinions of
antiquity, by forming so strong a contrast with those of our own times, and by
exhibiting human nature and human inventions in new lights, in in unexpected
appearances, and in various forms, are objects which forcibly strike a feeling
imagination.

Nor does this spectacle afford nothing more than a fruitless gratification to
the fancy. It teaches us to set a just estimation on our own acquisitions; and
encourages us to cherish that cultivation, which is so closely connected with
the existence and the exercise of every social virtue.

On these principles, to develop the dawnings of genius, and to pursue the
progress of our national poetry, from a rude origin and obscure beginnings, to
its perfection in a polished age, must prove an interesting and instructive
investigation. But a history of poetry, for another reason, yet on the same
principles, must be more especially productive of entertainment and utility. I
mean, as it is an art, whose object is human society: as it has the peculiar
merit, in its operations on that object, of faithfully recording the features
of the times, and of preserving the most picturesque and expressive
representations of manners: and, because the first monuments of composition in
every nation are those of the poet, as it possesses the additional advantage of
transmitting to posterity genuine delineations of life in its simplest stages.
Let me add, that anecdotes of the rudiments of a favorite art will always be
particularly pleasing. The more early specimens of poetry must ever amuse, in
proportion to the pleasure which we receive from its finished productions.

Much however depends on the execution of such a design, and my readers are to
decide in what degree I have done justice to so specious and promising a
disquisition. Yet a few more words will not be perhaps improper, in
vindication, or rather in explanation, of the manner in which my work has been
conducted. I am sure I do not mean, nor can I pretend, to apologize for its
defects.

I have chose to exhibit the history of our poetry in a chronological series:
not distributing my matter into detached articles, of periodical divisions, or
of general heads. Yet I have not always adhered so scrupulously to the
regularity of annals, but that I have often deviated into incidental
digressions; and have sometimes stopped in the course of my career, for the
sake of recapitulation, for the purpose of collecting scattered notices into a
single and uniform point of view, for the more exact inspection of a topic
which required a separate consideration, or for a comparative survey of the
poetry of other nations.

A few years ago, Mr. MASON, with that liberality which ever accompanies true
genius, gave me an authentic copy of Mr. POPE'S scheme of a History of English
Poetry, in which our poets were classed under their supposed respective
schools. The late lamented Mr. GRAY had also projected a work of this kind, and
translated some Runic odes for its illustration, now published: but soon
relinquishing the prosecution of a design, which would have detained him from
his own noble inventions, he most obligingly condescended to favor me with the
substance of his plan, which I found to be that of Mr. POPE, considerably
enlarged, extended, and improved.

It is vanity in me to have mentioned these communications. But I am
apprehensive my vanity will justly be thought much greater, when it shall
appear, that in giving the history of English poetry, I have rejected the ideas
of men who are its most distinguished ornaments. To confess the real truth,
upon examination and experiment, I soon discovered their mode of treating my
subject, plausible as it is, and brilliant in theory, to be attended with
difficulties and inconveniences, and productive of embarassment both to the
reader and the writer. Like other ingenious systems, it sacrificed much useful
intelligence to the observance of arrangement; and in the place of that
satisfaction which results from a clearness and a fullness of information,
seemed only to substitute the merit of disposition, and the praise of
contrivance. The constraint imposed by a mechanical attention to this
distribution, appeared to me to destroy that free exertion of research with
which such a history ought to be executed, and not easily reconcilable with
that complication, variety, and extent of materials, which it ought to
comprehend.

The method I have pursued, on one account at least, seems preferable to all
others. My performance, in its present form, exhibits without transposition the
gradual improvements of our poetry, at the same time that it uniformly
represents the progression of our language.

Some perhaps will be of opinion, that these annals ought to have commenced
with a view of the Saxon poetry. But besides that a legitimate illustration of
that jejune and intricate subject would have almost doubled my labor, that the
Saxon language is familiar only to a few learned antiquaries, that our Saxon
poems are for the most part little more than religious rhapsodies, and that
scarce any compositions remain marked with the native images of that people in
their pagan state, every reader that reflects but for a moment on our political
establishment must perceive, that the Saxon poetry has no connection with the
nature and purpose of my present undertaking. Before the Norman accession,
which succeeded to the Saxon government, we were an unformed and an unsettled
race. That mighty revolution obliterated almost all relation to the former
inhabitants of this island; and produced that signal change in our policy,
constitution, and public manners, the effects of which have reached modern
times. The beginning of these annals seems therefore to be most properly dated
from that era, when our national character began to dawn.

It was recommended to me, by a person eminent in the republic of letters,
totally to exclude from these volumes any mention of the English drama. I am
very sensible that a just history of our Stage is alone sufficient to form an
entire and extensive work; and this argument, which is by no means precluded by
the attempt here offered to the public, still remains separately to be
discussed, at large, and in form. But as it was professedly my intention to
comprise every species of English Poetry, this, among the rest, of course
claimed a place in these annals, and necessarily fell into my general design.
At the same time, as in this situation it could only become a subordinate
object, it was impossible I should examine it with that critical precision and
particularity, which so large, so curious, and so important an article of our
poetical literature demands and deserves. To have considered it in its full
extent, would have produced the unwieldy excrescence of a disproportionate
episode: not to have considered it at all, had been an omission, which must
detract from the integrity of my intended plan. I flatter myself however, that
from evidences hitherto unexplored, I have recovered hints which may facilitate
the labors of those, who shall hereafter be inclined to investigate the
ancient state of dramatic exhibition in this country, with due comprehension
and accuracy.

It will probably be remarked, that the citations in the first volume are
numerous, and sometimes very prolix. But it should be remembered, that most of
these are extracted from ancient manuscript poems never before printed, and
hitherto but little known. Nor was it easy to illustrate the darker and more
distant periods of our poetry, without producing ample specimens. In the mean
time, I hope to merit the thanks of the antiquarian, for enriching the stock of
our early literature by these new accessions: and I trust I shall gratify the
reader of taste, in having so frequently rescued from oblivion the rude
inventions and irregular beauties of the heroic tale, or the romantic legend.

The design of the DISSERTATIONS is to prepare the reader, by considering
apart, in a connected and comprehensive detail, some material points of a
general and preliminary nature, and which could not either with equal propriety
or convenience be introduced, at least not so formally discussed, in the body
of the book; to establish certain fundamental principles to which frequent
appeals might occasionally be made, and to clear the way for various
observations arising in the course of my future enquiries.

CONTENTS OF THE SECTIONS in the FIRST VOLUME.
SECTION I. STATE of Language. Prevalence of the French language before and
after the Norman conquest. Specimens of Norman-Saxon poems. Legends in verse.
Earliest love-song. Alexandrine verses. Satirical pieces. First English
metrical romance. SECTION II. Satirical ballad in the thirteenth century. The
king's poet. Robert of Gloucester. Ancient political ballads. Robert of Brunne.
The Brut of England. Le Roman le Rou. Gests and jestours. Erceldoune and
Kendale. Bishop Grosthead. Monks write for the Minstrels. Monastic libraries
full of romances. Minstrels admitted into the monasteries. Regnorum Chronica
and Mirabilia Mundi. Early European travelers into the east. Elegy on Edward
the first. SECTION III. Effects of the increase of tales of chivalry. Rise of
chivalry. Crusades. Rise and improvements of Romance. View of the rise of
metrical romances. Their currency about the end of the thirteenth century.
French minstrels in England. Provencial poets. Popular romances. Dares
Phrygius. Guido de Colonna. Fabulous histories of Alexander. Pilpay's Fables.
Roman d'Alexandre. Alexandrines. Communications between the French and English
minstrels. Use of the Provencial writers. Two sorts of troubadours. SECTION IV.
Examination and specimens of the metrical romance of Richard the First. Greek
fire. Military machines used in the crusades. Musical instruments of the
Saracen armies. Ignorance of geography in the dark ages. SECTION V. Specimens
of other popular metrical romances which appeared about the end of the
thirteenth century. Sir Guy. The Squier of Low Degree. Sir Degore. King Robert
of Sicily. The King of Tars. Ippomedon. La Mort Arthure. Subjects of ancient
tapestry. SECTION VI. Adam Davie flourished in the beginning of the fourteenth
century. Specimens of his poetry. His Life of Alexander. Robert Baston's
comedies. Anecdotes of the early periods of the English, French, and Italian,
drama. SECTION VII. Character of the reign of Edward the third. Hampole's
Prick of Conscience. SECTION VIII. Pierce Plowman's Visions. Ancient state and
original institution of fairs. Donat explained. Antichrist. SECTION IX. Pierce
the Plowman's Creed. Constitution and character of the four orders of mendicant
friars. Wickliffe. SECTION X. Various specimens of alliterative poetry. Ancient
alliterative hymn to the Virgin Mary. SECTION XI. John Barbour's History of
Robert Bruce, and Blind Harry's Sir William Wallace. Historical romances of
recent events commence about the close of the fourteenth century. Chiesly
composed by heralds. Character and business of ancient heralds. Narratives
written by them. Froissart's History. His life and character. Retrospective
view of manners. SECTION XII. General view of the character of Chaucer.
Boccacio's Teseide. A Greek poem on that subject. Tournaments at
Constantinople. Common practice of the Greek exiles to translate the popular
Italian poems. Specimens both of the Greek and Italian Theseid. Critical
examination of the Knight's Tale. SECTION XIII. The subject of Chaucer
continued. His Romaunt of the Rose. William of Lorris and John of Meun.
Specimens of the French Le Roman de la Rose. Improved by Chaucer. William of
Lorris excells in allegorical personages. Petrarch dislikes this poem. SECTION
XIV. Chaucer continued. His Troilus and Cresseide. Boccacio's Troilo.
Sentimental and pathetic strokes in Chaucer's poem. House of Fame. A Provencial
composition. Analyzed. Improperly imitated by Pope. SECTION XV. Chaucer
continued. The supposed occasion of his Canterbury Tales superior to that of
Boccacio's Decameron. Squire's Tale, Chaucer's capital poem. Origin of its
fictions. Story of Patient Grisilde. Its origin, popularity, and characteristic
excellence. How conducted by Chaucer. SECTION XVI. Chaucer continued. Tale of
the Nun's Priest. Its origin and allusions. January and May. Its imitations.
Licentiousness of Boccacio. Miller's Tale. Its singular humor and ridiculous
characters. Other Tales of the comic species. Their origin, allusions, and
respective merits. Rhyme of Sir Thopas. Its design and tendency. SECTION XVII.
Chaucer continued. General view of the Prologues to the Canterbury Tales. The
Prioresse. The Wife of Bath. The Frankelein. The Doctor of Physic. State of
medical erudition and practice. Medicine and astronomy blended. Chaucer's
physician's library. Learning of the Spanish jews. The Sompnour. The Pardonere.
The Monk. Qualifications of an abbot. The Friar. The Parsoune. The Squire.
English crusades into Lithuania. The Reeve. The Clarke of Oxenford. The
Serjeaunt of Law. The Host. Supplemental Tale, or History of Beryn. Analyzed
and examined. SECTION XVIII. Chaucer continued. State of French and Italian
poetry: and their influence on Chaucer. Rise of allegorical composition in the
dark ages. Love-courts, and Love-fraternities, in France. Tales of the
troubadours. Dolopathos. Boccacio, Dante, and Petrarch. Decline of Provencial
poetry. Succeeded in France by a new species. Froissart. The Flower and the
Leaf. Floral games in France. Allegorical beings.
OF THE ORIGIN OF ROMANTIC FICTION in EUROPE.
DISSERTATION I.
THAT peculiar and arbitrary species of Fiction which we commonly call
Romantic, was entirely unknown to the writers of Greece and Rome. It appears to
have been imported into Europe by a people, whose modes of thinking, and habits
of invention, are not natural to that country. It is generally supposed to have
been borrowed from the Arabians. But this origin has not been hitherto perhaps
examined or ascertained with a sufficient degree of accuracy. It is my present
design, by a more distinct and extended inquiry than has yet been applied to
the subject, to trace the manner and the period of its introduction into the
popular belief, the oral poetry, and the literature, of the Europeans.

It is an established maxim of modern criticism, that the fictions of Arabian
imagination were communicated to the western world by means of the crusades.
Undoubtedly those expeditions greatly contributed to propagate this mode of
fabling in Europe. But it is evident, although a circumstance which certainly
makes no material difference as to the principles here established, that these
fancies were introduced at a much earlier period. The Saracens, or Arabians,
having been for some time seated on the northern coasts of Africa, entered
Spain about the beginning of the eighth century See ALMAKIN, edit. Pocock. p.
72.
. Of this country they soon effected a complete conquest: and imposing their
religion, language, and customs, upon the inhabitants, erected a royal seat in
the capital city of Cordoua.

That by means of this establishment they first revived the sciences of Greece
in Europe, will be proved at large in another place See the second Dissertation.
: and it is obvious to conclude, that at the same time they disseminated those
extravagant inventions which were so peculiar to their romantic and creative
genius. A manuscript cited by Du Cange acquaints us, that the Spaniards, soon
after the irruption of the Saracens, entirely neglected the study of the Latin
language; and captivated with the novelty of the oriental books imported by
these strangers, suddenly adopted an unusual pomp of style, and an affected
elevation of diction "Arabico eloquio sublimati, etc. Du Cang. Gloss. Med. Inf.
Latinitat. tom. i. Praef. p. xxvii.. 31.
. The ideal tales of these eastern invaders, recommended by a brilliancy of
description, a variety of imagery, and an exuberance of invention, hitherto
unknown and unfamiliar to the cold and barren conceptions of a western climate,
were eagerly caught up, and universally diffused. From Spain, by the
communications of a constant commercial intercourse through the ports of Toulon
and Marseilles, they soon passed into France and Italy.

In France, no province, or district, seems to have given these fictions of the
Arabians a more welcome or a more early reception, than the inhabitants of
Armorica or Basse Bretagne, now Britany; for no part of France can boast so
great a number of ancient romances The reason on which this conclusion is
founded will appear hereafter.
. Many poems of high antiquity, composed by the Armorican bards, still remain
In the British Museum is a set of old French tales of chivalry in verse,
written, as it seems, by the bards of Bretagne. MSS. Harl. 978. 107.

"TRISTRAM a WALES" is mentioned, f. 171. b.

Tristram ki bien saveit HARPEIR. In the adventure of the knight ELIDUC. f.
172. b. En Bretaigne un chevalier
Pruz, e curteis, hardi, e fire.
Again, under the same champion, f. 173.

Il tient sun chemin tut avaunt
A la mer vient si est passez
En Toteneis est arrivez
Plusurs reis ot en la tere
Enter eus eurent e strif e guere
Verse Excestre en cil pais.
TOTENEIS is Totness in Devonshire. --

Under the knight MILUN. f. 166. Milun fu de Suthwales nez.
He is celebrated for his exploits in Ireland, Norway, Gothland, Lotharingia,
Albany, etc.

Under LAUNVAL, f. 154. b. En Bretains lapelent Launval.
Under GUIGEMAR. f. 141.

La chamber est peint tut entur
Venus de devesse damur
Futres bien en la paintur
Le traiz mustres e la nature
Coment hume deit amur tenir
E lealment e bien servir
Le livre Ovide ou il enseine, etc.
This description of a chamber painted with Venus and the three mysteries of
nature, and the allusion to Ovid, prove the tales before us to be of no very
high antiquity. But they are undoubtedly taken from others much older, of the
same country. At the end of ELIDUC'S tale we have these lines. f. 181.

Del aventure de ces trais
Li auntien BRITUN curteis
Firent le lai pour remember
Q'hum nel deust pas oublier.
And under the tale of FRESNE, f. 148. Li BRITUN enfirent un lai.
At the conclusion of most of the tales it is said that these LAIS were made by
the poets of Bretaigne. Another of the tales is thus closed. f. 146.

Que cest kunte ke oi avez
Fu Guigemar le LAI trouvez
Q hum fait en harp en rote
Bone est a oir la note.

, and are frequently cited by father Lobineau in his learned history of Basse
Bretagne HISTOIRE DE BRETAGNE, ii. tom. fol.
. This territory was as it were newly peopled in the fourth century by a colony
or army of the Welsh, who migrated thither under the conduct of Maximus a Roman
general in Britain Maximus appears to have set up a separate interest in
Britain, and to have engaged an army of the provincial Britons on his side,
against the Romans. Not succeeding in his designs, he was obliged to retire
with his British troops to the continent, as in the text. He had a considerable
interest in Wales, having married Ellena daughter of Eudda a powerful chieftain
of North Wales. She was born at Caernarvon, where her chapel is still shown.
Mon. Antiq. p. 166. seq.
, and Conan lord of Meiriadoc or Denbigh-land See Hist. de Bretagne, par
d'Argentre, p. 2. Powel's WALES, p. 1. 2. seq. and p. 6. edit. 1584. Lhuyd's
Etymol. p. 32. col. 3. And Galfrid. Mon. HIST. BRIT. Lib. v. c. 12. vii. 3. ix.
2. Compare Borlase, Antiq. Cornwall, B. i. chapter 10. p. 40.
. The Armoric language now spoken in Britany is a dialect of the Welsh: and so
strong a resemblance still subsists between the two languages, that in our late
conquest of Belleisle, such of our soldiers as were natives of Wales were
understood by the peasantry. Milton, whose imagination was much struck with the
old British story, more than once alludes to the Welsh colony planted in
Armorica by Maximus and the prince of Meiriadoc. Et tandem ARMORICOS Britonum
sub lege colonos MANSUS.
. And in the PARADISE LOST he mentions indiscriminately the knights of Wales
and Armorica as the customary retinue of king Arthur.

-- What resounds
In fable or romance, of Uther's son
Begirt with BRITISH and ARMORIC knights Parad. L. i. 579. Compare Pelloutier,
MEM. sur la Langue Celt. fol. tom. i. 19.
.
This migration of the Welsh into Britany or Armorica, which during the
distractions of the empire, in consequence of the numerous armies of barbarians
with which Rome was surrounded on every side, had thrown off its dependence on
the Romans, seems to have occasioned a close connection between the two
countries for many centuries This secession of the Welsh, at so critical a
period, was extremely natural, into a neighboring maritime country, with which
they had constantly trafficked, and which, like themselves, had disclaimed the
Roman yoke. It is not related in any Greek or Roman historian. But their
silence is by no means a sufficient warrant for us to reject the numerous
testimonies of the old British writers concerning this event. It is mentioned,
in particular, by Llywarchen, a famous bard, who lived only one hundred and
fifty years afterward. Many of his poems are still extant, in which he
celebrates his twenty-four sons who wore gold chains, and were all killed in
battles against the Saxons.
. Nor will it prove less necessary to our purpose to observe, that the Cornish
Britons, whose language was another dialect of the ancient British, from the
fourth or fifth century downwards, maintained a no less intimate correspondence
with the natives of Armorica: intermarrying with them, and perpetually
resorting thither for the education of their children, for advice, for
procuring troops against the Saxons, for the purposes of traffic, and various
other occasions. This connection was so strongly kept up, that an ingenious
French antiquary supposes, that the communications of the Armoricans with the
Cornish had chiefly contributed to give a roughness or rather hardness to the
romance or French language in some of the provinces, toward the eleventh
century, which was not before discernible M. l'Abbe Lebeuf. RECHERCHES, etc.
Mem. de Litt. tom. xvii. p. 718. edit. 4to. "Je pense que cela dura jusqu'a ce
que le commerce de ces provinces avec les peuples du Nord, et de l'Allemagne,
et SUR TOUT celui des HABITANS DE L'ARMORIQUE AVEC L'ANGLOIS, verse l'onzieme
siecle, etc."
. And this intercourse will appear more natural, if we consider, that not only
Armorica, a maritime province of Gaul, never much frequented by the Romans, and
now totally deserted by them, was still in some measure a Celtic nation; but
that also the inhabitants of Cornwall, together with those of Devonshire and of
the adjoining parts of Somersetshire, intermixing in a very slight degree with
the Romans, and having suffered fewer important alterations in their original
constitution and customs from the imperial laws and police than any other
province of this island, long preserved their genuine manners and British
character: and forming a sort of separate principality under the government of
a succession of powerful chieftains, usually denominated princes or dukes of
Cornwall, remained partly in a state of independence during the Saxon
heptarchy, and were not entirely reduced till the Norman conquest. Cornwall, in
particular, retained its old Celtic dialect till the reign of Elizabeth See
Camd. Brit. i. 44. edit. 1723. Lhuyd's Arch. p. 253.
.

And here I digress a moment to remark, that in the circumstance just mentioned
about Wales, of its connection with Armorica, we perceive the solution of a
difficulty which at first sight appears extremely problematical: I mean, not
only that Wales should have been so constantly made the theater of the old
British chivalry, but that so many of the favorite fictions which occur in the
early French romances, should also be literally found in the tales and
chronicles of the elder Welsh bards The story of LE COURT MANTEL, or the BOY
AND THE MANTLE, told by an old French troubadour cited by M. de Saint Palaye,
is recorded in many manuscript Welsh chronicles, as I learn from original
letters of Lhuyd in the Ashmolean Museum. See Mem. Anc. Chev. i. 119. And Obs.
Spenser, i.. ii. p. 54. 55. And from the same authority I am informed, that the
fiction of the giant's coat composed of the beards of the kings whom he had
conquered, is related in the legends of the bards of both countries. See Obs.
Spens. ut supr. p. 24. seq. But instances are innumerable.
. It was owing to the perpetual communication kept up between the Welsh, and
the people of Armorica who abounded in these fictions, and who naturally took
occasion to interweave them into the history of their friends and allies. Nor
are we now at a loss to give the reason why Cornwall, in the same French
romances, is made the scene and the subject of so many romantic adventures
Hence in the Armorican tales just quoted, mention is made of Totness and
Exeter, anciently included in Cornwall. In Chaucer's ROMAUNT OF THE ROSE we
have "Hornpipis of Cornewaile," among a great variety of musical instruments.
v. 4250. This is literally from the French original, v. 3991.
. In the meantime we may observe, what indeed has been already implied, that a
strict intercourse was upheld between Cornwall and Wales. Their languages,
customs, and alliances, as I have hinted, were the same; and they were
separated only by a strait of inconsiderable breadth. Cornwall is frequently
styled West-Wales by the British writers. At the invasion of the Saxons, both
countries became indiscriminately the receptacle of the fugitive Britons. We
find the Welsh and Cornish, as one people, often uniting themselves as in a
national cause against the Saxons. They were frequently subject to the same
prince Who was sometimes chosen from Wales and Cornwall, and sometimes from
ARMORICA. Borlase, ubi supr. p. 403. See also p. 375. 377. 393. And Council.
Spelman. tom. i. 9. 112. edit. 1639. fol. Stillingfleet's Orig. Brit. chapter 5. p.
344. seq. edit. 1688. fol. From CORNUWALLIA, used by the Latin monkish
historians, came the present name Cornwall. Borlase, ibid. p. 325.
, who sometimes resided in Wales, and sometimes in Cornwall; and the kings or
dukes of Cornwall were perpetually sung by the Welsh bards. Llygad Gwr, a Welsh
bard, in his sublime and spirited ode to Llwellyn, son of Grunfludd, the last
prince of Wales of the British line, has a wish, "May the prints of the hoofs
of my prince's steed be seen as far as CORNWALL Evans, p. 43.
. Traditions about king Arthur, to mention no more instances, are as popular in
Cornwall as in Wales: and most of the romantic castles, rocks, rivers, and
caves, of both nations, are alike at this day distinguished by some noble
achievement, at least by the name, of that celebrated champion. But to return.

About the year 1100, Gualter, archdeacon of Oxford, a learned man, and a
diligent collector of histories, traveling through France, procured in
Armorica an ancient chronicle written in the British or Armorican language,
entitled, BRUTY-BRENHINED, or THE HISTORY OF THE KINGS OF BRITAIN In the
curious library of the family of Davies at Llanerk in Denbighshire, there is a
copy of this chronicle in the handwriting of Guttyn Owen, a celebrated Welsh
bard and antiquarian about the year 1470, who ascribes it to Tyssilio a bishop,
and the son of Brockmael-Yscythroc prince of Powis. Tyssilio indeed wrote a
HISTORY OF BRITAIN; but that work, as we are assured by Lhuyd in the
ARCHAEOLOGIA, was entirely ecclesiastical, and has been long since lost.
. This book he brought into England, and communicated it to Geoffrey of
Monmouth, a Welsh Benedictine monk, an elegant writer of Latin, and admirably
skilled in the British tongue. Geoffrey, at the request and recommendation of
Gualter the archdeacon, translated this British chronicle into Latin See Galfr.
Mon. L. i. c. 1. xii. 1. 20. ix. 2. Bale, ii. 65. Thompson's Pref. to
Geoffrey's Hist. Transl. edit. Land. 1718. p. xxx. xvi.
, executing the translation with a tolerable degree of purity and great
fidelity, yet not without some interpolations Geoffrey confesses, that he took
some part of his account of king Arthur's achievements from the mouth of his
friend Gualter, the archdeacon; who probably related to the translator some of
the traditions on this subject which he had heard in Armorica, or which at that
time might have been popular in Wales. Hist. Brit. Galfr. Mon. lib. xi. c. i.
He also owns that Merlin's prophecies were not in the Armorican original. Ib.
vii. 2. Compare Thompson's Pref. ut supr. p. xxv. xxvii. The speeches and
letters were forged by Geoffrey; and in the description of battles, our
translator has not scrupled frequent variations and additions.

I am obliged to an ingenious antiquarian in British literature, Mr. Morris of
Penbryn, for the following curious remarks concerning Geoffrey's original and
his translation. "Geoffrey's SYLVIUS, in the British original, is SILIUS, which
in Latin would make JULIUS. This illustrates and confirms Lambarde's, BRUTUS
JULIUS. Peramb. Kent, p. 12. So also in the British bards. And hence Milton's
objection is removed. Hist. Engl. p. 12. There are no FLAMINES or ARCHFLAMINES
in the British book. See Usher's Primord. p. 57. Dubl. edit. There are very few
speeches in the original, and those very short. Geoffrey's FULGENIUS is in the
British copy SULIEN, which by analogy in Latin would be JULIANUS. See Milton's
Hist. Eng. p. 100. There is no LEIL in the British; that king's name was LLEON.
Geoffrey's CAERLISLE is in the British CAERLLEON, or West-Chester. In the
British, LLAW AP CYNFARCH, should have been translated LEO, which is now
rendered LOATH. This has brought much confusion into the old Scotch history. I
find no BELINUS in the British copy; the name is BELI, which should have been
in Latin BELIUS, or BELGIUS. Geoffrey's BRENNUS in the original is BRAN, a
common name among the Britons; as BRAN AP DYFNWAL, etc. See Suida's (...). It
appears by the original, that the British name of CARAUSIUS was CARAWN; hence
TREGARAUN, i. e. TREGARON, and the river CARAUN, which gives name to ABERCORN.
In the British there is no division into books and chapters, a mark of
antiquity. Those whom the translator calls CONSULS of Rome, when Brennus took
it, are in the original TWYSOGION, i. e. princes or generals. The Gwalenses,
GWALO, or GWALAS, are added by Geoffrey, B. xii. c. 19." To what is here
observed about SILIUS, I will add, that abbot Whethamsted, in his MS.
GRANARIUM, mentions SILOIUS the father of Brutus. "Quomodo Brutus SILOII filius
ad litora Angliae venit," etc. GRANAR. Part. i. Lit. A. MSS. Cotton. NERO, C.
vi. Brit. Mus. This gentleman has in his possession a very ancient manuscript
of the original, and has been many years preparing materials for giving an
accurate and faithful translation of it into English. The manuscript in Jesus
college library at Oxford, which Win pretends to be the same which Geoffrey
himself made use of, is evidently not older than the sixteenth century. Mr.
Price, the Bodleian librarian, to whose friendship this work is much indebted,
has two copies lately given him by Mr. Banks, much more ancient and perfect.
But there is reason to suspect, that most of the British manuscripts of this
history are translations from Geoffrey's Latin: for Britannia they have
BRYTTAEN, which in the original would have been PRYDAIN. Geoffrey's
translation, and for obvious reasons, is a very common manuscript. Compare
Lhuyd's Arch. p. 265.


. It was probably finished after the year 1138 Thompson says, 1128. ubi supr.
p. xxx. Geoffrey's age is ascertained beyond a doubt, even if other proofs were
wanting, from the cotemporaries whom he mentions. Such as Robert earl of
Gloucester, natural son of Henry the first, and Alexander bishop of Lincoln, his
patrons: he mentions also William of Malmesbury, and Henry of Huntingdon.
Wharton places Geoffrey's death in the year 1154. Episc. Assav. p. 306. Robert
de Monte, who continued Sigebert's chronicle down to the year 1183, in the
preface to that work expressly says, that he took some of the materials of his
supplement from the HISTORIA BRITONUM, lately translated out of British into
Latin. This was manifestly Geoffrey's book. Alfred of Beverly, who evidently
wrote his ANNALS, published by Hearne, between the years 1148 and 1150,
borrowed his account of the British kings from Geoffrey's HISTORIA, whose words
he sometimes literally transcribes. For instance, Alfred, in speaking of
Arthur's keeping Whitsuntide at Caerleon, says, that the HISTORIA BRITONUM
enumerated all the kings who came thither on Arthur's invitation: and then
adds, "Praeter hos non remansit princeps alicujus pretii citra Hispaniam qui ad
istud edictum non venerit." Alured. Bev. Annal. p. 63. edit. Hearne. These are
Geoffrey's own words; and so much his own, that they are one of his additions
to the British original. But the curious reader, who desires a complete and
critical discussion of this point, may consult an original letter of bishop
Lloyd, preserved among Tanner's manuscripts at Oxford, number. 94.
.

It is difficult to ascertain exactly the period at which our translator's
original romance may probably be supposed to have been compiled. Yet this is a
curious speculation, and will illustrate our argument. I am inclined to think
that the work consists of fables thrown out by different rhapsodists at
different times, which afterward were collected and digested into an entire
history, and perhaps with new decorations of fancy added by the compiler, who
most probably was one of the professed bards, or rather a poetical historian,
of Armorica or Basse Bretagne. In this state, and under this form, I suppose it
to have fallen into the hands of Geoffrey of Monmouth. If the hypothesis
hereafter advanced concerning the particular species of fiction on which this
narrative is founded, should be granted, it cannot, from what I have already
proved, be more ancient than the eighth century: and we may reasonably
conclude, that it was composed much later, as some considerable length of time
must have been necessary for the propagation and establishment of that species
of fiction. The simple subject of this chronicle, divested of its romantic
embellishments, is a deduction of the Welsh princes from the Trojan Brutus to
Cadwallader, who reigned in the seventh century This notion of their extraction
from the Trojans had so infatuated the Welsh, that even so late as the year
1284, archbishop Peckham, in his injunctions to the diocese of St. Asaph,
orders the people to abstain from giving credit to idle dreams and visions, a
superstition which they had contracted from their belief in thedream of their
founder Brutus, in the temple of Diana, concerning his arrival in Britain. The
archbishop very seriously advises them to boast no more of their relation to
the conquered and fugitive Trojans, but to glory in the victorious cross of
Christ. Council. Wilkins, tom. ii. p. 106. edit. 1737. fol.
. It must be acknowledged, that many European nations were anciently fond of
tracing their descent from Troy. Hunnibaldus Francus, in his Latin history of
France, written in the sixth century, beginning with the Trojan war, and ending
with Clovis the first, ascribes the origin of the French nation to Francio a
son of Priam It is among the SCRIPTORES RER. GERMAN. Sim. Schard. tom. i. p.
301. edit. Basil. 1574. fol. It consists of eighteen books.
. So universal was this humor, and carried to such an absurd excess of
extravagance, that under the reign of Justinian, even the Greeks were ambitious
of being thought to be descended from the Trojans, their ancient and notorious
enemies. Unless we adopt the idea of those antiquaries, who contend that Europe
was peopled from Phrygia, it will be hard to discover at what period, or from
what source, so strange and improbable a notion could take its rise, especially
among nations unacquainted with history, and overwhelmed in ignorance. The most
rational mode of accounting for it, is to suppose, that the revival of Virgil's
Eneid about the sixth or seventh century, which represented the Trojans as the
founders of Rome, the capital of the supreme pontiff, and a city on various
other accounts in the early ages of christianity highly reverenced and
distinguished, occasioned an emulation in many other European nations of
claiming an alliance to the same respectable original. The monks and other
ecclesiastics, the only readers and writers of the age, were likely to broach,
and were interested in propagating, such an opinion. As the more barbarous
countries of Europe began to be tinctured with literature, there was hardly one
of them but fell into the fashion of deducing its original from some of the
nations most celebrated in the ancient books. Those who did not aspire so high
as king Priam, or who found that claim preoccupied, boasted to be descended
from some of the generals of Alexander the Great, from Prusias king of
Bithynia, from the Greeks or the Egyptians. It it not in the mean time quite
improbable, that as most of the European nations were provincial to the Romans,
those who fancied themselves to be of Trojan extraction might have imbibed this
notion, at least have acquired a general knowledge of the Trojan story, from
their conquerors: more especially the Britons, who continued so long under the
yoke of Rome See infr. SECT. iii. p. 127, 128.
. But as to the story of Brutus in particular, Geoffrey's hero, it may be
presumed that his legend was not contrived, nor the history of his successors
invented, till after the ninth century: for Nennius, who lived about the middle
of that century, not only speaks of Brutus with great obscurity and
inconsistency, but seems totally uninformed as to every circumstance of the
British affairs which preceded Cesar's invasion. There are other proofs that
this piece could not have existed before the ninth century. Alfred's Saxon
translation of the Mercian law is mentioned L. iii. c. 13.
. Charlemagne's Twelve Peers, and by an anachronism not uncommon in romance,
are said to be present at king Arthur's magnificent coronation in the city of
Caerleon L. ix. c. 12.
. It were easy to produce instances, that this chronicle was undoubtedly framed
after the legend of saint Ursula, the acts of saint Lucius, and the historical
writings of the venerable Bede, had undergone some degree of circulation in the
world. At the same time it contains many passages which incline us to
determine, that some parts of it at least were written after or about the
eleventh century. I will not insist on that passage, in which the title of
legate of the apostolic see is attributed to Dubricius in the character of
primate of Britain; as it appears for obvious reasons to have been an artful
interpolation of the translator, who was an ecclesiastic. But I will select
other arguments. Canute's forest, or Cannock-wood in Staffordshire occurs; and
Canute died in the year 1036 L. vii. c. 4.
. At the ideal coronation of king Arthur, just mentioned, a tournament is
described as exhibited in its highest splendour. "Many knights, says our Armoric
fabler, famous for feats of chivalry, were present, with apparel and arms of
the same color and fashion. They formed a species of diversion, in imitation
of a fight on horseback, and the ladies being placed on the walls of the
castles, darted amorous glances on the combatants. None of these ladies
esteemed any knight worthy of her love, but such as had given proof of his
gallantry in three several encounters. Thus the valor of the men encouraged
chastity in the women, and the attention of the women proved an incentive to
the soldier's bravery L. ix. c. 12.
." Here is the practice of chivalry under the combined ideas of love and
military prowess, as they seem to have subsisted after the feudal constitution
had acquired greater degrees not only of stability but of splendour and
refinement Pitts mentions an anonymous writer under the name of EREMITA
BRITANNUS, who studied history and astronomy, and flourished about the year
720. He wrote, besides a book in an unknown language, entitled, Sanchem Graal,
De Rege Arthuro et rebus gestis ejus. Lib. i. De Mensa rotunda et STRENUIS
EQUITIBUS, lib. i. See Pits. p. 122. Bale, x. 21. Usser. Primord. p. 17. This
subject could not have been treated by so early a writer.
. And although a species of tournament was exhibited in France at the
reconciliation of the sons of Lewis the feeble, in the close of the ninth
century, and at the beginning of the tenth, the coronation of the emperor Henry
was solemnized with martial entertainments, in which many parties were
introduced fighting on horseback; yet it was long afterward that these games
were accompanied with the peculiar formalities, and ceremonious usages, here
described See infr. SECT. iii. p. 109. xii. p. 347, 348. I will here produce,
from that learned orientalist M. D'Herbelot, some curious traites of Arabian
knight-errantry, which the reader may apply to the principles of this
Dissertation as he pleases.

"BATTHALL. -- Une homme hardi et vaillant, qui cherche des avantures tells qu'
etoient les chevaliers errans de nos anciens Romans." He adds, that Batthall,
an Arabian, who lived about the year of Christ 740, was a warrior of this
class, concerning whom many mavelous feats of arms are reported: that his
life was written in a large volume, "mais qu'elle est toute remplie d'
exaggerations et de menteries." Bibl. Oriental. p. 193. a. b. In the royal
library at Paris, there is an Arabian book entitled, "Scirat al Mogiah-edir,"
i. e. "The Lives of the most valiant Champions. Number. 1079.


. In the mean time, we cannot answer for the innovations of a translator in
such a description. The burial of Hengist, the Saxon chief, who is said to have
been interred not after the pagan fashion, as Geoffrey renders the words of the
original, but after the manner of the SOLDANS, is partly an argument that our
romance was composed about the time of the crusades. It was not till those
memorable campaigns of mistaken devotion had infatuated the western world, that
the soldans or sultans of Babylon, of Egypt, of Iconium, and other eastern
kingdoms, became familiar in Europe. Not that the notion of this piece being
written so late as the crusades in the least invalidates the doctrine delivered
in this discourse. Not even if we suppose that Geoffrey of Monmouth was its
original composer. That notion rather tends to confirm and establish my system.
On the whole we may venture to affirm, that this chronicle, supposed to contain
the ideas of the Welsh bards, entirely consists of Arabian inventions. And, in
this view, no difference is made whether it was compiled about the tenth
century, at which time, if not before, the Arabians from their settlement in
Spain must have communicated their romantic fables to other parts of Europe,
especially to the French; or whether it first appeared in the eleventh century,
after the crusades had multiplied these fables to an excessive degree, and made
them universally popular. And although the general cast of the inventions
contained in this romance is alone sufficient to point out the source from
whence they were derived, yet I choose to prove to a demonstration what is here
advanced, by producing and examining some particular passages.

The books of the Arabians and Persians abound with extravagant traditions
about the giants Gog and Magog. These they call Jagiouge and Magiouge; and the
Caucasian wall, said to be built by Alexander the Great from the Caspian to the
Black Sea, in order to cover the frontiers of his dominion, and to prevent the
incursions of the Sythians Compare M. Petis de la Croix, Hist. Genghizcan, l.
iv. c. p.
, is called by the orientals the WALL of GOG and MAGOG Herbelot. Bibl.
Oriental. p. 157. 291. 318. 438. 470. 528. 795. 796. 811, etc. They call
Tartary the land of Gajiouge and Majiouge. This wall, some few fragments of
which still remain, they pretend to have been built with all sorts of metals.
See Abulfaraj Hist. Dynast. edit. Pococke, p. 62. A. D. 1673. It was an old
tradition among the Tartars, that the people of Jajgioue and Majiouge were
perpetually endeavoring to make a passage through this fortress; but that they
would not succeed in their attempt till the day of judgment. See Hist. Geneal.
des Tartars, d'Abulgazi Bahadut Khan. p. 43. About the year 808, the caliph Al
Amin having heard wonderful reports concerning this wall or barrier, sent his
interpreter Salam, with a guard of fifty men, to view it. After a dangerous
journey of near two months, Salam and his party arrived in a desolated country,
where they beheld the ruins of many cities destroyed by the people of Jajiouge
and Majiouge. In six days more they reached the castles near the mountain
Kokaiya or Caucasus. This mountain is inaccessibly steep, perpetually covered
with snows and thick clouds, and encompasses the country of Jagiouge and
Magiouge, which is full of cultivated fields and cities. At an opening of thi^
mountain the fortress appears: and trave ling forwards, at the distance of two
stages, they found another mountain, with a ditch cut through it one hundred
and fifty cubits wide; and within the aperture an iron gate fifty cubits high,
supported by vast buttresses, having an iron bulwark crowned with iron turrets,
reaching to the summit of the mountain itself, which is too high to be seen.
The valves, lintels, threshold, bolts, lock and key, are all represented of
proportionable magnitude. The governor of the castle abovementioned, once in
every week mounted on horseback with ten others on horseback, comes to this
gate, and striking it three times with a hammer weighing five pounds, and then
listening, hears a murmuring noise from within. This noise is supposed to
proceed from the Jagiouge and Magiouge confined there. Salam was told that they
often appeared on the battlements of the bulwark. He returned after passing
twentyeight months in this extraordinary expedition. See Mod. Univ. Hist. vol.
iv. B. i. 2. page 15. 16. 17. And Anc. vol. xx. page 23. Pliny, speaking of the
PORTAE CAUCASIAE, mentions, "ingens naturae opus, montibus interruptis repent,
ubi fores obditae ferratis trabibus," etc. Not. Hist. lib. vi. c. 2. Czar Peter
the first, in his expedition into Persia, had the curiosity to survey the ruins
of this wall: and some leagues within the mountain he found a skirt of it which
seemed entire, and was about fifteen feet high. In some other parts it is still
six or seven feet in height. It seems at first sight to be built of stone: but
it consists of petrified earth, sand, and shells, which compose a substance of
great solidity. It has been chiefly destroyed by the neighboring inhabitants,
for the sake of its materials: and most of the adjacent towns and villages are
built out of its ruins. Bentink's Notes on Abulgazi, p, 722. Eng. edit. See
Chardin's Travels. p. 176. And Struys's Voyage, B. iii. c. 20. p. 226.
Olearius's Travels of the Holstein Ambassad. B. vii. p. 403. Geograph. Nubiens.
vi. c. 9. And Act. Petropolit. vol. i. p. 405. By the way, this work probably
preceded the time of Alexander: it does not appear, from the course of his
victories, that he ever came near the Caspian gates. The first and fabulous
history of the eastern nations, will perhaps be found to begin with the
exploits of this Grecian hero.
. One of the most formidable giants, according to our Armorican romance, which
opposed the landing of Brutus in Britain, was Goemagot. He was twelve cubits
high, and would unroot an oak as easily as an hazel wand: but after a most
obstinate encounter with Corineus, he was tumbled into the sea from the summit
of a steep cliff on the rocky shores of Cornwall, and dashed in pieces against
the huge crags of the declivity. The place where he fell, adds our historian,
taking its name from the giant's fall, is called LAM-GOEMAGOT, or GOEMAGOT'S
LEAP, to this day Lib. i. c. 16.
. A no less monstrous giant, whom king Arthur slew on Saint Michael's Mount in
Cornwall, is said by this fabler to have come from Spain. Here the origin of
these stories is evidently betrayed L. x. c. 3.
. The Arabians, or Saracens, as I have hinted above, had conquered Spain, and
were settled there. Arthur having killed this redoubted giant, declares, that
he had combated with none of equal strength and prowess, since he overcame the
mighty giant Ritho, on the mountain Arabius, who had made himself a robe of the
beards of the kings whom he had killed. This tale is in Spenser's Faerie
Queen. A magician brought from Spain is called to the assistance of Edwin, a
prince of Northumberland The Cumbrian and Northumbrian Britons, as powerful
opponents of the Saxons, were strongly allied to the Welsh and Cornish.
, educated under Solomon king of the Armoricans Lib. xii. c. 1, 4, 5, 6.
. In the prophecy of Merlin, delivered to Vortigern after the battle of the
dragons, forged perhaps by the translator Geoffrey, yet apparently in the
spirit and manner of the rest, we have the Arabians named, and their situations
in Spain and Africa. "From Conau shall come forth a wild boar, whose tusks
shall destroy the oaks of the forests of France. The ARABIANS and AFRICANS
shall dread him; and he shall continue his rapid course into the most distant
parts of Spain Lib. vii. c. 3.
." This is king Arthur. In the same prophecy, mention is made of the "Woods of
Africa." In another place Gormund king of the Africans occurs Lib. xii. 2. xi.
8. 10.
. In a battle which Arthur fights against the Romans, some of the principal
leaders in the Roman army are Alifantinam king of Spain, Pandrasus king of
Egypt, Boccus king of the Medes, Evander king of Syria, Micipsa king of
Babylon, and a duke of Phrygia Lib. x. c. 5. 8. 10.
. It is obvious to suppose how these countries became so familiar to the bard
of our chronicle. The old fictions about Stonehenge were derived from the same
inexhaustible source of extravagant imagination. We are told in this romance,
that the giants conveyed the stones which compose this miraculous monument from
the farthest coasts of Africa. Every one of these stones is supposed to be
mystical, and to contain a medicinal virtue: an idea drawn from the medical
skill of the Arabians See infr. SECT. i. p. 10. And SECT. xiii. p. 378. infr.
, and more particularly from the Arabian doctrine of attributing healing
qualities, and other occult properties, to stones This chronicle was evidently
compiled to do honor to the Britons and their affairs, and especially in
opposition to the Saxons. Now the importance with which these romancers seem to
speak of Stonehenge, and the many beautiful fictions with which they have been
so studious to embellish its origin, and to aggrandise its history, appear to
me strongly to favor the hypothesis, that Stonehenge is a British monument;
and indeed to prove, that it was really erected in memory of the three hundred
British nobles massacred by the Saxon Hengist. See SECT. ii. infr. p. 52. No
DRUIDICAL monument, of which so many remains were common, engaged their
attention or interested them so much, as this NATIONAL memorial appears to have
done.
. Merlin's transformation of Uther into Gorlois, and of Ulfin into Bricel, by
the power of some medical preparation, is a species of Arabian magic, which
professed to work the most wonderful deceptions of this kind, and is mentioned
at large hereafter, in tracing the inventions of Chaucer's poetry. The
attribution of prophetical language to birds was common among the orientals:
and an eagle is supposed to speak at building the walls of the city of Paladur,
now Shaftesbury Lib. ii. c. 9. See SECT. inf. xv. p. 413.
. The Arabians cultivated the study of philosophy, particularly astronomy, with
amazing ardour See DISS. ii. And SECT. xv. inf. p. 402.
. Hence arose the tradition, reported by our historian, that in king Arthur's
reign, there subsisted at Caer-leon in Glamorganshire a college of two hundred
philosophers, who studied astronomy and other sciences; and who were
particularly employed in watching the courses of the stars, and predicting
events to the king from their observations Lib. ix. c. 12.
. Edwin's Spanish magician abovementioned, by his knowledge of the flight of
birds, and the courses of the stars, is said to foretell future disasters. In
the same strain Merlin, prognosticates Uther's success in battle by the
appearance of a comet L. viii. c. 15.
. The same enchanter's wonderful skill in mechanical powers, by which he
removes the giant's Dance, or Stonehenge, from Ireland into England, and the
notion that this stupendous structure was raised by a PROFOUND PHILOSOPHICAL
KNOWLEDGE OF THE MECHANICAL ARTS, are founded on the Arabic literature L. viii.
c. 10. See infr. SECT. xv. passim.
. To which we may add king Bladud's magical operations L. ii. 10.
. Dragons are a sure mark of orientalism. One of these in our romance is a
"terrible dragon flying from the west, breathing fire, and illuminating all the
country with the brightness of his eyes L. x. c. 2.
." In another place we have a giant mounted on a winged dragon: the dragon
erects his scaly tail, and wafts his rider to the clouds with great rapidity L.
vii. c. 4.
.

Arthur and Charlemagne are the first and original heroes of romance. And as
Geoffrey's history is the grand repository of the acts of Arthur, so a fabulous
history ascribed to Turpin is the ground work of all the chimerical legends
which have been related concerning the conquests of Charlemagne and his twelve
peers. Its subject is the expulsion of the Saracens from Spain: and it is
filled with fictions evidently cogenial with those which characterise
Geoffrey's history I will mention only one among many others. The christians
under Charlemagne are said to have found in Spain a golden idol, or image of
Mahomet, as high as a bird can fly. It was framed by Mahomet himself of the
purest metal, who by his knowledge in necromancy had sealed up within it a
legion of diabolical spirits. It held in its hand a prodigious club; and the
Saracens had a prophetic tradition, that this club should fall from the hand of
the image in that year when a certain king should be born in France, etc. J.
Turpini Hist. de Vit. Carol. Magn. et Rolandi. cap. iv. f. 2. a.
.

Some suppose, as I have hinted above, this romance to have been written by
Turpin, a monk of the eighth century; who, for his knowledge of the Latin
language, his sanctity, and gallant exploits against the Spanish Saracens, was
preferred to the archbishopric of Rheims by Charlemagne. Others believe it to
have been forged under archbishop Turpin's name about that time. Others very
soon afterward, in the reign of Charles the Bald See Hist. Acad. des Inscript.
etc. vii. 293. edit. 4to.
. That is, about the year 870 See Catel, Mem. de l'Hist. du Languedoc. page 545.
.

Voltaire, a writer of much deeper research than is imagined, and the first who
has displayed the literature and customs of the dark ages with any degree of
penetration and comprehension, speaking of the fictitious tales concerning
Charlemagne, has remarked, "Ces fables qu'un moine ecrivit au onzieme siecle,
sous le nom de l'archeveque Turpin "Hist. Genesis chapter viii. Oeuvr, tom. i. p. 84.
edit. Genev. 1756.
." And it might easily be shown that just before the commencement of the
thirteenth century, romantic stories about Charlemagne were more fashionable
than ever among the French minstrels. That is, on the recent publication of
this fabulous history of Charlemagne. Historical evidence concurs with numerous
internal arguments to prove, that it must have been compiled after the
crusades. In the twentieth chapter, a pretended pilgrimage of Charlemagne to
the holy sepulcher at Jerusalem is recorded: a forgery seemingly contrived with
a design to give an importance to those wild expeditions, and which would
easily be believed when thus authenticated by an archbishop See infr. SECT.
iii. p. 124.
.

There is another strong internal proof that this romance was written long
after the time of Charlemagne. Our historian is speaking of the numerous chiefs
and kings who came with their armies to assist his hero: among the rest he
mentions earl Oell, and adds, "Of this man there is a song commonly sung among
the minstrels even to this day "De hoc canitur in Cantilena ^sque ad hodiernum
diem." cap. xi. f. 4. b. edit. Schard. Francof. 1566. fol. Chronograph. Quat.
." Nor will I believe, that the European art of war, in the eighth century,
could bring into the field such a prodigious parade of battering rams and
wooden castles, as those with which Charlemagne is said to have besieged the
city Agennum Ibid. cap. ix. f. 3. b. The writer adds, "Caeterisque artificiis
ad capiendum, etc." See also cap. x. ibid. Compare SECT. iv. infr. p. 160. In
one of Charlemagne's battles, the Saracens advance with horrible visors bearded
and horned, and with drums or cymbals. "Tenentesque singuli TYMPAN^, quae
manibus fortiter percutiebant." The unusual spectacle and sound terrified the
horses of the christian army, and threw them into confusion. In a second
engagement, Charlemagne commanded the eyes of the horses to be covered, and
their ears to be stopped. Turpin. cap. xviii. f. 7. b. The latter expedient is
copied in the Romance of RICHARD THE FIRST, written about the eleventh century.
See SECT. iv. infr. p. 165. See also what is said of the Saracen drums. ibid.
p. 167.
: the crusades seem to have made these huge military machines common in the
European armies. However we may suspect it appeared before, yet not long
before, Geoffrey's romance; who mentions Charlemagne's TWELVE PEERS, so
lavishly celebrated in Turpin's book, as present at king Arthur's imaginary
coronation at Caer-leon. Although the twelve peers of France occur in
chronicles of the tenth century Flodoard of Rheims first mentions them, whose
chronicle comes down to 966.
; and they might besides have been suggested to Geoffrey's original author,
from popular traditions and songs of minstrels. We are sure it was extant
before the year 1122, for Calixtus the second in that year, by papal authority,
pronounced this history to be genuine Magn. Chron. Belgic. page 150. sub ann.
Compare J. Long. Bibl. Hist. Gall. number. 6671. And Lambec. ii. p. 333.
. Monsieur Allard affirms, that it was written, and in the eleventh century, at
Vienna by a monk of Saint Andrew's Bibl. de Dauphine. p. 224.
. This monk was probably nothing more than some Latin translator: but a learned
French antiquary is of opinion, that it was originally composed in Latin; and
moreover, that the most ancient romances, even those of the Round Table, were
originally written in that language See infr. SECT. viii. p. 464.
. Oienhart, and with the greatest probability, supposes it to be the work of a
Spaniard. He quotes an authentic manuscript to prove, that it was brought out
of Spain into France before the close of the twelfth century See infr. SECT.
iii. p. 135.
; and that the miraculous exploits performed in Spain by Charlemagne and earl
Roland, recorded in this romantic history, were unknown among the French before
that period: except only that some few of them were obscurely and imperfectly
sketched in the metrical tales of those who sung heroic adventures Arnoldi
Oienharti Notit. utriusque Vasconiae, edit. Paris. 1638. 4to. page 397. lib.
iii. c. 3. Such was Roland's song, sung at the battle of Hastings. But see this
romance, cap. xx. f. 8. b. Where Turpin seems to refer to some other fabulous
materials or history concerning Charlemagne. Particularly about Galafar and
Braiamant, which make such a figure in Boyardo and Ariosto.
. Oienhart's supposition that this history was compiled in Spain, the center of
oriental fabling in Europe, at once accounts for the nature and extravagance of
its fictions, and immediately points to their Arabian origin Innumerable
romantic stories, of Arabian growth, are to this day current among the common
people of Spain, which they call CUJENTOS DE VIEJAS. I will relate one from
that lively picture of the Spaniards, RELATION DU VOYAGE D'ESPAGNE, by
Mademoiselle Danois. Within the ancient castle of Toledo, they say, there was a
vast cavern whose entrance was strongly barricadoed. It was universally
believed, that if any person entered this cavern, the most fatal disasters
would happen to the Spaniards. Thus it remained closely shut and unentered for
many ages. At length king Roderigo, having less credulity but more courage and
curiosity than his ancestors, commanded this formidable recess to be opened. At
entering, he began to suspect the traditions of the people to be true: a
terrible tempest arose, and all the elements seemed united to embarrass him.
Nevertheless, he ventured forwards into the cave, where he discerned by the
light of his torches certain figures on statues of men, whose habiliments and
arms were strange and uncouth. One of them had a sword of shining brass, on
which it was written in Arabic characters, that the time approached when the
Spanish nation should be destroyed, and that it would not be long before the
warriors, whose images were placed there, should arrive in Spain. The writer
adds, "Je n'ai jamais ete en aucun endroit, ou l'on fasse PLUS DE CAS des
CONTES FABULEUX qu'en Espagne." Edit. a la Hay, 1691. tom. iii. p. 158. 159.
12mo. See infr. SECT. iii. p. 112. And the LIFE of CERVANTES, by Don Gregorio
Mayans.. 27.. 47.. 48.. 49.
. As to the French manuscript of this history, it is a translation from
Turpin's Latin, made by Michel de Harnes in the year 1207 See Du Chesne, tom.
v. p. 60. And Mem. Lit. xvii. 737. seq. It is in the roval library at Paris,
Number. 8190. Probably the French Turpin in the British Museum is the same, Cod.
MSS. Harl. 273. 23. f. 86. See infr. SECT. iii. p. 135. See instances of the
English translating prose Latin books into English, and sometimes French,
verse. SECT. ii. infr. passim.

In the king's library at Paris, there is a translation of Dares Phrygius into
French rhymes by Godfrey of Waterford an Irish Jacobin, a writer not mentioned
by Tanner, in the thirteenth century. Mem. Litt. tom. xvii. p. 736. Compare
SECT. iii. infr. p. 125. In the Notes.


. And, by the way, from the translator's declaration, that there was a great
impropriety in translating Latin prose into verse, we may conclude, that at the
commencement of the thirteenth century the French generally made their
translations into verse.

In these two fabulous chronicles the foundations of romance seem to be laid.
The principal characters, the leading subjects, and the fundamental fictions,
which have supplied such ample matter to this singular species of composition,
are here first displayed. And although the long continuance of the crusades
imported innumerable inventions of a similar complexion, and substituted the
achievements of new champions and the wonders of other countries, yet the
tales of Arthur and of Charlemagne, diversified indeed, or enlarged with
additional embellishments, still continued to prevail, and to be the favorite
topics: and this, partly from their early popularity, partly from the quantity
and the beauty of the fictions with which they were at first supported, and
especially because the design of the crusades had made those subjects so
fashionable in which christians fought with infidels. In a word, these volumes
are the first specimens extant in this mode of writing. No European history
before these has mentioned giants, enchanters, dragons, and the like monstrous
and arbitrary fictions. And the reason is obvious: they were written at a time
when a new and unnatural mode of thinking took place in Europe, introduced by
our communication with the east.

Hitherto I have considered the Saracens either at their immigration into Spain
about the ninth century, or at the time of the crusades, as the first authors
of romantic fabling among the Europeans. But a late ingenious critic has
advanced an hypothesis, which assigns a new source, and a much earlier date, to
these fictions. I will cite his opinion of this matter in his own words. "Our
old romances of chivalry may be derived in a LINEAL DESCENT from the ancient
historical songs of the Gothic bards and scalds. -- Many of those songs are
still preserved in the north, which exhibit all the seeds of chivalry before it
became a solemn institution. -- Even the common arbitrary fictions of romance
were most of them familiar to the ancient scalds of the north, long before the
time of the crusades. They believed the existence of giants and dwarfs, they
had some notion of fairies, they were strongly possessed with the belief of
spells and enchantment, and were fond of inventing combats with dragons and
monsters Percy, on, ANCIENT METR. ROMANS i. p. 3. 4. edit. 1767.
." Monsieur Mallet, a very able and elegant inquirer into the genius and
antiquities of the northern nations, mantains the same doctrine. He seems to
think, that many of the opinions and practices of the Goths, however obsolete,
still obscurely subsist. He adds, "May we not rank among these, for example,
that love and admiration for the profession of arms which prevailed among our
ancestors even to fanaticism, and as it were through system, and brave from a
point of honor? -- Can we not explain from the Gothic religion, how judiciary
combats, and proofs by the ordeal, to the astonishment of posterity, were
admitted by the legislature of all Europe For the judiciary combats, as also
for common athletic exercises, they formed an amphitheatrical circus of rude
stones. "Quaedam [saxa] CIRCOS claudebant, in quibus gigantes et pugiles DUELLO
strenue decertabant." Worm. p. 62. And again, "Nec mora, CIRCUATUR campus,
milite CIRCUS stipatur, concurrunt pugiles." p. 65. It is remarkable, that
circs of the same sort are still to be seen in Cornwall, so famous at this day
for the athletic art: in which also they sometimes exhibited their scriptural
interludes. See infr. SECT. vi. p. 237. Frotho the Great, king of Denmark, in
the first century, is said to have been the first who commanded all
controversies to be decided by the sword. Worm. p. 68. In favor of this
barbarous institution it ought to be remembered, that the practice of thus
marking out the place of battle must have prevented much bloodshed, and saved
many innocent lives: for if either combatant was by any accident forced out of
the circus, he was to lose his cause, or to pay three marks of pure silver as a
redemption for his life. Worm. p. 68, 69. In the year 987, the ordeal was
substituted in Denmark instead of the duel; a mode of decision, at least in a
political sense, less absurd, as it promoted military skill.
: and how, even to the present age, the people are still infatuated with a
belief of the power of magicians, witches, spirits, and genii, concealed under
the earth or in the waters? -- Do we not discover in these religious opinions,
that source of the mavelous with which our ancestors filled their romances;
in which we see dwarfs and giants, fairies and demons," etc Mallet,
Introduction a l' Histoire de Dannemarc, etc. tom. ii. p. 9.
. And in another place. "The fortresses of the Goths were only rude castles
situated on the summits of rocks, and rendered inaccessible by thick misshapen
walls. As these walls ran winding round the castles, they often called them by
a name which signified SERPENTS or DRAGONS; and in these they usually secured
the women and young virgins of distinction, who were seldom safe at a time when
so many enterprising heroes were rambling up and down in search of adventures.
It was this custom which gave occasion to ancient romancers, who knew not how
to describe any thing simply, to invent so many fables concerning princesses of
great beauty guarded by dragons, and afterward delivered by invincible
champions Ib. chapter ix. p. 243. tom. ii.
.

I do not mean entirely to reject this hypothesis: but I will endeavor to show
how far I think it is true, and in what manner or degree it may be reconciled
with the system delivered above.

A few years before the birth of Christ, soon after Mithridates had been
overthrown by Pompey, a nation of Asiatic Goths, who possessed that region of
Asia which is now called Georgia, and is connected on the south with Persia,
alarmed at the progressive encroachments of the Roman armies, retired in vast
multitudes under the conduct of their leader Odin, or Woden, into the northern
parts of Europe, not subject to the Roman government, and settled in Denmark,
Norway, Sweden, and other districts of the Scandinavian territory "Unicam
gentium Asiaticarum Immigrationem, in orbem Arctoum factam, nostrae
antiquitates commemorant. Sed eam tamen non primam. Verum circa annum tandem
vicesimum quartum ante natum Christum, Romany exercitibus auspiciis Pompeii
Magni in Asiae part, Phrygia Minore, grassantibus. Illa enim epoch ad hanc
rem chronologi nostri utuntur. In cujus (GYLVI SU^CIAE regis) tempora incidit
Odinus, Asiaticae immigrationis, sactae anno 24 ante natum Christum,
antesignanus." Crymogaea, Arngrim. Jon. lib. i. cap. 4. p. 30. 31. edit.
Hamburg. 1609. See also Bartholin. Antiquitat. Dan. Lib. ii. cap. 8. p. 407.
iii. c. 2. p. 652. edit. 1689. Lazius, de Gent. Migrat. L. x. fol. 573. 30.
edit. fol. 1600. Compare Ol. Rudbeck. cap. v. sect. 2. p. 95. xiv. sect. 2. p.
67. There is a memoir on this subject lately published in the Petersburgh
Transactions, but I choose to refer to original authorities. See tom v. p. 297.
edit. 1738. 4to.
. As they brought with them many useful arts, particularly the knowledge of
letters, which Odin is said to have invented "Odino etiam et aliis, qui ex Asia
huc devenere, tribuunt multi antiquitatum Islandicarum periti; unde et Odinus
RUNHOFDI seu Runarum (i. e. Literarum) auctor vocatur." Ol. Worm. Liter. Runic.
cap. 20. edit. Hafn. 1651. Some writers refer the origin of the Grecian
language, sciences, and religion to the Scythians, who were connected toward
the south with Odin's Goths. I cannot bring a greater authority than that of
Salmasius, "Satis certum ex his colligi potest linguam, ut gentem, HELLENICAM,
a septentrione et SCYTHIA originem traxisse, non a meridie. Inde LITERAE
GRAECORUM, inde MUSAE PIERIDES, inde sacrorum initia." Salmas. de Hellenist. p.
400. As a further proof I shall observe, that the ancient poet Thamyris was so
much esteemed by the Scythians, on account of his poetry, (...), that they
chose him their king. Conon. Narrat. Poet. cap. vii. edit. Gal. But Thamyris
was a Thracian: and a late ingenious antiquarian endeavors to prove, that the
Goths were descended from the Thracians, and that the Greeks and Thracians were
only different clans of the same people. Clarke's Connection, etc. chapter ii. p. 65.
, they were hospitably received by the natives, and by degrees acquired a safe
and peaceable establishment in the new country, which seems to have adopted
their language, laws, and religion. Odin is said to have been styled a god by
the Scandinavians; an appellation which the superior address and specious
abilities of this Asiatic chief easily extorted from a more savage and
uncivilised people.

This migration is confirmed by the concurrent testimonies of various
historians: but there is no better evidence of it, than that conspicuous
similarity subsisting at this day between several customs of the Georgians, as
described by Chardin, and those of certain cantons of Norway and Sweden, which
have preserved their ancient manners in the purest degree See Po^toppidan. Not.
Hist. Norway, tom. ii. c. 10.. 1. 2. 3.
. Not that other striking implicit and internal proofs, which often carry more
conviction than direct historical assertions, are wanting to point out this
migration. The ancient inhabitants of Denmark and Norway inscribed the exploits
of their kings and heroes on rocks, in characters called Runic; and of this
practice many marks are said still to remain in those countries See Saxo
Grammat. Praef. ad Hist. Dan. And Hist. lib. vii. See also Ol. Worm. Monum.
Dan. lib. iii.
. This art or custom of writing on rocks is Asiatic Paulus Jovius, a writer
indeed not of the best credit, says, that Annibal engraved characters on the
Alpine rocks, as a testimony of his passage over them, and that they were
remaining there two centuries ago. Hist. lib. xv. p. 163.
. Modern travelers report, that there are Runic inscriptions now existing in
the deserts of Tartary See Voyage par Strahlemberg, etc. A Description of the
northern and eastern Parts of Europe and Asia. Schroder says, from Olaus
Rudbeckius, that RUNES, or letters, were invented by Magog the Scythian, and
communicated to Tuisco the celebrated German chieftain, in the year of the
world 1799. Praef. ad Lexicon Latino-Scandic.
. The WRITTEN MOUNTAINS of the Jews are an instance that this fashion was
oriental. Anciently, when one of these northern chiefs fell honorably in
battle, his weapons, his war-horse, and his wife, were consumed with himself on
the same funeral pile See Keysler, p. 147. Two funeral ceremonies, one of
BURNING, the other of BURYING their dead, at different times prevailed in the
north; and have distinguished two eras in the old northern history. The first
was called the AGE OF FIRE, the second the AGE of HILLS.
. I need not remind my readers how religiously this horrible ceremony of
sacrificing the wife to the dead husband is at present observed in the east.
There is a very remarkable correspondence, in numberless important and
fundamental points, between the Druidical and the Persian superstitions: and
notwithstanding the evidence of Caesar, who speaks only from popular report, and
without precision, on a subject which he cared little about, it is the opinion
of the learned Banier, that the Druids were formed on the model of the Magi
Mytholog. Expliq. ii. p. 628. 4to.
. In this hypothesis he is seconded by a modern antiquary; who further
supposes, that Odin's followers imported this establishment into Scandinavia,
from the confines of Persia M. Mallet. Hist. Dannem. i. p. 56. See also
Keysler, p. 152.
. The Scandinavians attributed divine virtue to misletoe; it is mentioned in
their EDDA, or system of religious doctrines, where it is said to grow on the
west side of Val-hall, or Odin's elysium EDD. ISL. fab. xxviii. Compare
Key^ler, Antiquit. Sell. Sept. p. 304. seq. The Germans, a Teutonic tribe, call
it to this day "the Branch of Specter." But see Dr. Percy's ingenious note on
this passage in the EDDA. NORTHERN ANTIQUITIES, vol. ii. p. 143.
. That Druidical rites existed among the Scandinavians we are informed from
many ancient Erse poems, which say that the British Druids, in the extremity of
their affairs, solicited and obtained aid from Scandinavia Ossian's Works.
CATHLIN, ii, p. 216. Not. edit. 1765. vol. ii. They add, that among the
auxiliaries came many magicians.
. The Gothic hell exactly resembles that which we find in the religious systems
of the Persians, the most abounding in superstition of all the eastern nations.
One of the circumstances is, and an oriental idea, that it is full of scorpions
and serpents See Hyde, Relig. Vet. Pers. p. 399. 404. But compare what is said
of the EDDA, toward the close of this Discourse.
. The doctrines of Zeno, who borrowed most of his opinions from the Persian
philosophers, are not uncommon in the EDDA. Lok, the evil deity of the Goths,
is probably the Arimanius of the Persians. In some of the most ancient Islandic
chronicles, the Turks are mentioned as belonging to the jurisdiction of the
Scandinavians. Mahomet, not so great an inventor as is imagined, adopted into
his religion many favorite notions and superstitions from the bordering
nations which were the offspring of the Scythians, and especially from the
Turks. Accordingly, we find the Alcoran agreeing with the Runic theology in
various instances. I will mention only one. It is one of the beatitudes of the
Mohammedan paradise, that blooming virgins shall administer the most luscious
wines. Thus in Odin's Val-hall, or the Gothic elysium, the departed heroes
received cups of the strongest mead and ale from the hands of the
virgin-goddesses called Valkyres Odin only, drank wine in Valhall. EDD. Myth.
xxxiv. See Keysler, p. 152.
. Alfred, in his Saxon account of the northern seas, taken from the mouth of
Ohther, a Norwegian, who had been sent by that monarch to discover a north-east
passage into the Indies, constantly calls these nations the ORIENTALS See
Preface to Alfred's Saxon Orosius, published by Spelman. VIT. AELFREDI. Spelm.
Append. vi.
. And as these eastern tribes brought with them into the north a certain degree
of refinement, of luxury and splendour, which appeared singular and prodigious
among barbarians; one of their early historians describes a person better
dressed than usual, by saying, "he was so well clothed, that you might have
taken him for one of the Asiatics LANDNAMA-SAGA. See Mallet. Hist. Dannem. c.
ii.
." Wormius mentions a Runic incantation, in which an Asiatic inchantress is
invoked Lit. Run. p. 209, edit. 1651. The Goths came from the neighborhood of
Colchis, the region of Witchcraft, and the country of Medea, famous for her
incantations. The eastern pagans from the very carliest ages, have had their
enchanters. Now the magicians of Egypt, they also did in like manner with their
enchantments. Exodus vii. 11. See also vii. 18, 19. ix. 11, etc. When the people
of Israel had overrun the country of Balak, he invites Baalam a neighboring
prince to curse them, or destroy them by magic, which he seems to have
professed. And the elders of Moab departed with the rewards of DIVINATION in
their hand. Number. xxii. 7. Surely there is no ENCHANTMENT against Israel. xxiii.
23. And he went out, as at other times, to seek for ENCHANTMENTS. xxiv. 1. etc.
Odin himself was not only a warrior, but a magician, and his Asiatics were
called Incantationum auctores. Chron. Norweg. apud Bartholin. L. iii. c. 2. p.
657. Crymog. Arngrim. L. i. cap. vii. p. 511. From this source, those who adopt
the principles just mentioned in this discourse, may be inclined to think, that
the notion of spells got into the ritual of chivalry. In all legal single
combats, each champion attested upon oath, that he did not carry about him any
herb, SPELL, or ENCHANTMENT. Dugdal. Orig. Juridic. p. 82. See Hickes's account
of the silver Dano-Saxon shield, dug up in the isle of Ely, having a magical
Runic inscription, supposed to render those who bore it in battle invulnerable.
Apud Hickes. Thesaur. Dissertat. Epistol. p. 187.
. Various other instances might here be added, some of which will occasionally
arise in the future course of our inquiries.

It is notorious, that many traces of oriental usages are found amongst all the
European nations during their pagan state; and this phenomenon is rationally
resolved, on the supposition that all Europe was originally peopled from the
east. But as the resemblance which the pagan Scandinavians bore to the eastern
nations in manners, monuments, opinions, and practices, is so very perceptible
and apparent, an inference arises, that their migration from the east must have
happened at a period by many ages more recent, and therefore most probably
about the time specified by their historians. In the mean time we must
remember, that a distinction is to be made between this expedition of Odin's
Goths, who formed a settlement in Scandinavia, and those innumerable armies of
barbarous adventurers, who some centuries afterward, distinguished by the same
name, at different periods overwhelmed Europe, and at length extinguished the
Roman empire.

When we consider the rapid conquests of the nations which may be comprehended
under the common name of Scythians, and not only those conducted by Odin, but
by Attila, Theodoric, and Genseric, we cannot ascribe such successes to brutal
courage only. To say that some of these irresistible conquerors made war on a
luxurious, effeminate, and enervated people, is a plausible and easy mode of
accounting for their conquests: but this reason will not operate with equal
force in the histories of Genghizcan and Tamerlane, who destroyed mighty
empires founded on arms and military discipline, and who baffled the efforts of
the ablest leaders. Their science and genius in war, such as it then was,
cannot therefore be doubted: that they were not deficient in the arts of peace,
I have already hinted, and now proceed to produce more particular proofs.
Innumerable and very fundamental errors have crept into our reasonings and
systems about savage life, resulting merely from those strong and
undistinguishing notions of barbarism, which our prejudices have hastily formed
concerning the character of all rude nations See this argument pursued in the
following DISSERTATION.
.

Among other arts which Odin's Goths planted in Scandinavia, their skill in
poetry, to which they were addicted in a peculiar manner, and which they
cultivated with a wonderful enthusiasm, seems to be most worthy our regard, and
especially in our present inquiry.

As the principal heroes of their expedition into the north were honorably
distinguished from the Europeans, or original Scandinavians, under the name of
Asae, or Asiatics, so the verses, or language, of this people, were denominated
ASAMAL, or ASIATIC speech "Linguam Danicam antiquam, cujus in rythmis usus
fuit, veteres appellarunt ASAMAL, id est Asiaticam, vel ASARUM SERMONEM; quod
eum ex Asia Odinus secum in Daniam, Norwegiam, Sueciam, aliasque regiones
septentrionales, invexerit." Steph. Stephan. Praefat. ad Saxon. Grammat. Hist.
. Their poetry contained not only the praises of their heroes, but their
popular traditions and their religious rites; and was filled with those
fictions which the most exaggerated pagan superstition would naturally implant
in the wild imaginations of an Asiatic people. And from this principle alone, I
mean of their Asiatic origin, some critics would at once account for a certain
capricious spirit of extravagance, and those bold eccentric conceptions, which
so strongly distinguish the old northern poetry A most ingenious critic
observes, that "what we have been long accustomed to call the ORIENTAL VEIN of
poetry, because some of the EARLIEST poetical productions have come to us from
the east, is probably no more ORIENTAL than OCCIDENTAL." Blair's Crit. Diss. on
Ossian. vol. ii. p. 317. But all the LATER oriental writers through all ages
have been particularly distinguished for this VEIN. Hence it is here
characteristical of a country not of an age. I will allow, on this writer's
very just and penetrating principles, that an early northern ode shall be as
sublime as an eastern one. Yet the sublimity of the latter shall have a
different character; it will be more inflated and gigantic.
. Nor is this fantastic imagery, the only mark of Asiaticism which appears in
the Runic odes. They have a certain sublime and figurative cast of diction,
which is indeed one of their predominant characteristics Thus, a Rainbow is
called, the bridge of the gods. Poetry, the mead of Odin. The earth, the vessel
that floats on ages. A ship, the horse of the waves. Ice, the vast bridge.
Herbs, the fleece of the earth. A Battle, a bath of blood, the hail of Odin,
the shock of bucklers. A Tongue, the sword of words. Night, the veil of cares.
Rocks, the bones of the earth. Arrows, the hailst^nes of ^elmets, etc. etc.
. I am very sensible that all rude nations are naturally apt to cloth their
sentiments in this style. A propensity to this mode of expression is
necessarily occasioned by the poverty of their language, which obliges them
frequently to substitute similitudes and circumlocutions: it arises in great
measure from feelings undisguised and unrestrained by custom or art, and from
the genuine efforts of nature working more at large in uncultivated minds. In
the infancy of society, the passions and the imagination are alike
uncontrouled. But another cause seems to have concurred in producing the effect
here mentioned. When obvious terms and phrases evidently occurred, the Runic
poets are fond of departing from the common and established diction. They
appear to use circumlocution and comparisons not as a matter of necessity, but
of choice and skill: nor are these metaphorical colorings so much the result
of want of words, as of warmth of fancy In a strict geographical sense, the
original country of these Asiatic Goths might not be so situated as physically
to have produced these effects. Yet it is to be observed, that intercourse and
vicinity are in this case sometimes equivalent to climate. The Persian
traditions and superstitions were current even in the northern parts of
Tartary. Georgia, however, may be fairly considered as a part of Persia. It is
equal in fertility to any of the eastern Turkish provinces in Asia. It affords
the richest wines, and other luxuries of life, in the greatest abundance. The
most beautiful virgins for the seraglio are fetched from this province. In the
mean time, thus much at least may be said of a warm climate, exclusive of its
supposed immediate physical influence on the human mind and temperament. It
exhibits all the productions of nature in their highest perfection and beauty:
while the excessive heat of the sun, and the fewer incitements to labor and
industry, dispose the inhabitants to indolence, and to living much abroad in
scenes of nature. These circumstances are favorable to the operations of fancy.
.

Their warmth of fancy, however, if supposed to have proceeded from the
principles above suggested, in a few generations after this migration into
Scandinavia, must have lost much of its natural heat and genuine force. Yet
ideas and sentiments, especially of this sort, once imbibed, are long
remembered and retained, in savage life. Their religion, among other causes,
might have contributed to keep this spirit alive; and to preserve their
original stock of images, and native mode of expression, unchanged and unabated
by climate or country. In the mean time we may suppose, that the new situation
of these people in Scandinavia, might have added a darker shade and a more
savage complexion to their former fictions and superstitions; and that the
formidable objects of nature to which they became familiarised in those
northern solitudes, the piny precipices, the frozen mountains, and the gloomy
forests, acted on their imaginations, and gave a tincture of horror to their
imagery.

A skill in poetry seems in some measure to have been a national science among
the Scandinavians, and to have been familiar to almost every order and degree.
Their kings and warriors partook of this epidemic enthusiasm, and on frequent
occasions are represented as breaking forth into spontaneous songs and verses
Harold Hardraade, king of Norway, composed sixteen songs of his expedition into
Africa. Asbiorn Pruda, a Danish champion, described his past life in nine
strophes, while his enemy Bruce, a giant, was tearing out his bowels. "i. Tell
my mother Suanhita in Denmark, that she will not this summer comb the hair of
her son. I had promised her to return, but now my side shall feel the edge of
the sword. ii. It was far otherwise, when we sat at home in mirth, chearing
ourselves with the drink of ale; and coming from Hordeland passed the gulf in
our ships; when we quaffed mead, and conversed of liberty. Now I alone am
fallen into the narrow prisons of the giants. iii. It was far otherwise, etc."
Every stanza is introduced with the same choral burden. Bartholin. Antiquit.
Danic. L. i. cap. 10. p. 158. edit. 1689. The noble epicedium of Regner Lodbrog
is more commonly known. The champion Orvarodd, after his expeditions into
various countries, sung, on his deathbed, the most memorable events of his
life in meter. Hallmund, being mortally wounded, commanded his daughter to
listen to a poem which he was about to deliver, containing histories of his
victories, and to engrave it on tablets of wood. Bartholin. ibid. p. 162. Saxo
Grammaticus gives us a regular ode, uttered by the son of a king of Norway, who
by mistake had been buried alive, and was discovered and awakened by a party of
soldiers digging for treasure. Sax. Grammat. L. 5. p. 50. There are instances
recorded of their speaking in meter on the most common occurrences.
. But the exercise of the poetical talent was properly confined to a stated
profession: and with their poetry the Goths imported into Europe a species of
poets or singers, whom they called SCALDS or POLISHERS of LANGUAGE. This order
of men, as we shall see more distinctly below, was held in the highest honor
and veneration: they received the most liberal rewards for their verses,
attended the festivals of heroic chiefs, accompanied them in battle, and
celebrated their victories The Sogdians were a people who lived eastward of the
Caspian sea, not far from the country of Odin's Goths. Quintus Curtius relates,
that when some of that people were condemned to death by Alexander on account
of a revolt, they rejoiced greatly, and testified their joy by SINGING VERSES
and dancing. When the king enquired the reason of their joy, they answered,
"that being soon to be RESTORED TO THEIR ANCESTORS by so great a conqueror,
they could not help celebrating so honorable a death, which was the WISH of
all brave men, in their own ACCUSTOMED SONGS." Lib. vii. c. 8. I am obliged to
doctor Percy for pointing out this passage. From the correspondence of manners
and principles it holds forth between the Scandinavians and the Sogdians, it
contains a striking proof of Odin's migration from the east to the north:
first, in the spontaneous exercise of the poetical talent; and secondly, in the
opinion, that a glorious or warlike death, which admitted them to the company
of their friends and parents in another world, was to be embraced with the most
eager alacrity, and the highest sensations of pleasure. This is the doctrine of
the Edda. In the same spirit, RIDENS MORIAR is the triumphant close of Regner
Lodbrog's dying ode. [See Keysler, ubi infr. p. 127.] I cannot help adding here
another stroke from this ode, which seems also to be founded on eastern
manners. He speaks with great rapture of drinking, "ex concavis crateribus
craniorum." The inhabitants of the island of Ceylon to this day carouse at
their feasts, from cups or bowls made of the sculls of their deceased
ancestors. Ives's VOYAGE TO INDIA, chapter 5. p. 62. Land. 1773. 4to. This practice
these islanders undoubtedly received from the neighboring continent. Compare
Keysler, Antiquitat. Sell. Septentrional. p. 362. seq.
.

These Scandinavian bards appear to have been esteemed and entertained in other
countries besides their own, and by that means to have probably communicated
their fictions to various parts of Europe. I will give my reasons for this
supposition.

In the early ages of Europe, before many regular governments took place,
revolutions, emigrations, and invasions, were frequent and almost universal.
Nations were alternately destroyed or formed; and the want of political
security exposed the inhabitants of every country to a state of eternal
fluctuation. That Britain was originally peopled from Gaul, a nation of the
Celts, is allowed: but that many colonies from the northern parts of Europe
were afterward successively planted in Britain and the neighboring islands,
is an hypothesis equally rational, and not altogether destitute of historical
evidence. Nor was any nation more likely than the Scandinavian Goths, I mean in
their early periods, to make descents on Britain. They possessed the spirit of
adventure in an eminent degree. They were habituated to dangerous enterprises.
They were acquainted with distant coasts, exercised in navigation, and fond of
making expeditions, in hopes of conquest, and in search of new acquisitions. As
to Scotland and Ireland, there is the highest probability, that the Scutes, who
conquered both those countries, and possessed them under the names of Albin
Scutes and Irin Scutes, were a people of Norway. The Caledonians are expressly
called by many judicious antiquaries a Scandinavian colony. The names of places
and persons, over all that part of Scotland which the Picts inhabited, are of
Scandinavian extraction. A simple catalogue of them only, would immediately
convince us, that they are not of Celtic, or British, origin. Flaherty reports
it as a received opinion, and a general doctrine, that the Picts migrated into
Britain and Ireland from Scandinavia It is conjectured by Wormius, that Ireland
is derived from the Runic Yr, a bow, for the use of which the Irish were once
famous. Lit. Run. c. xvii. p. 101. The Asiatics near the lake Maeotis, from
which Odin led his colony in Europe, were celebrated archers. Hence Hercules in
Theocritus, Idyll. xiii. 56. -- (...).
Compare Salmas. de Hellen. p. 369. And Flahert. Ogyg. Part. iii. cap. xviii.
p. 188. edit. 1685. Stillingfleet's Orig. Brit. Praef. p. xxxviii.


. I forbear to accumulate a pedantic parade of authorities on this occasion:
nor can it be expected that I should enter into a formal and exact examination
of this obscure and complicated subject in its full extent, which is here only
introduced incidentally. I will only add, that Scotland and Ireland, as being
situated more to the north, and probably less difficult of access than Britain,
might have been objects on which our northern adventurers were invited to try
some of their earliest excursions: and that the Orkney-islands remained long
under the jurisdiction of the Norwegian potentates.

In these expeditions, the northern emigrants, as we shall prove more
particularly below, were undoubtedly attended by their scalds or poets. Yet
even in times of peace, and without the supposition of conquest or invasion,
the Scandinavian scalds might have been well known in the British islands.
Possessed of a specious and pleasing talent, they frequented the courts of the
British, Scottish, and Irish chieftains. They were itinerants by their
institution, and made voyages, out of curiosity, or in quest of rewards, to
those islands or coasts which lay within the circle of their maritime
knowledge. By these means, they established an interest, rendered their
profession popular, propagated their art, and circulated their fictions, in
other countries, and at a distance from home. Torfaeus asserts positively, that
various Islandic odes now remain, which were sung by the Scandinavian bards
before the kings of England and Ireland, and for which they received liberal
gratuities Torf. Hist. Orcad. in Praefat.
. They were more especially caressed and rewarded at the courts of those
princes, who were distinguished for their warlike character, and their passion
for military glory.

Olaus Wormius informs us, that great numbers of the northern scalds constantly
resided in the courts of the kings of Sweden, Denmark, and England Lit. Dan. p.
195. ed. 4to.
. Hence the tradition in an ancient Islandic Saga, or poetical history, may be
explained; which says, that Odin's language was originally used, not only in
Denmark, Sweden and Norway, but even in England Bartholin. iii. 2. p. 651. It
was a constant old British tradition, that king Arthur conquered Ireland,
Gothland, Denmark, and Norway. See Galfrid. Monum. ix. 11. Rob. of Glouc. ed.
Hearne, p. 180. 182. What is said in the text must have greatly facilitated the
Saxon and Danish conquests in England. The works of the genuine Caedmon are
written in the language of the ancient Angles, who were nearly connected with
the Jutes. Hence that language resembled the ancient Danish, as appears from
passages of Caedmon cited by Wanley. Hence also it happened, that the later
Dano-Saxonic dialect, in which Junius's POETICAL PARAPHRASE OF GENESIS was
written, is likewise so very similar to the language of the ancient Angles, who
settled in the more northern parts of England. And in this dialect, which
indeed prevailed in some degree almost over all England, many other poems are
composed, mentioned likewise in Wanley's Catalogue. It is the constant doctrine
of the Danish historians, that the Danes and Angles, whose successors gave the
name to this island, had the same origin.
. Indeed it may be naturally concluded from these suggestions, that the
Scandinavian tongue became familiar in the British islands by the songs of the
scalds: unless it be rather presumed, that a previous knowledge of that tongue
in Britain was the means of facilitating the admission of those poets, and
preparing the way for their reception.

And here it will be much to our present argument to observe, that some of the
old Gothic and Scandinavian superstitions are to this day retained in the
English language. MARA, from whence our Nightmare is derived, was in the Runic
theology a spirit or spectre of the night, which seized men in their sleep, and
suddenly deprived them of speech and motion See Keysler, Antiquitat. Sell.
Septentrional. p. 497. edit. 1720.
. NICKA was the Gothic demon who inhabited the element of water, and who
strangled persons that were drowning See Keysler, ut supr. p. 261. And in
ADDEND. ibid. p. 588.
. BOH was one of the most fierce and formidable of the Gothic generals See
Keysler, ibid. p. 105. p. 130.
, and the son of Odin: the mention of whose name only was sufficient to spread
an immediate panic among his enemies See Temple's Essays, part 4. page 346. See
also instances of conformity between English and Gothic superstitions in
Bartholinus, L. ii. cap. 2. p. 262. 266. It may be urged, that these
superstitions might be introduced by the Danes; of whom I shall speak below.
But this brings us to just the same point. The learned Hickes was of opinion,
from a multitude of instances, that our trials by a jury of Twelve, was an
early Scandinavian institution, and that it was brought from thence into
England. Yet he supposes, at a period later than is necessary, the Norman
invasion. See Wootton's Conspectus of Hickes's Thesaur. page 46. Land. 1708.
And Hickes. Thesaur. Dissertat. Epistol. vol. i. p. 38. seq. The number TWELVE
was sacred among the Septentrional tribes. Odin's Judges are TWELVE, and have
TWELVE seats in Gladheim. EDD. ISL. fab. vii. The God of the Edda has TWELVE
names, ibid. fab. i. An Aristocracy of TWELVE is a well known ancient
establishment in the north. In the Dialogue between Hervor and Angantyr, the
latter promises to give Hervor TWELVE MEN'S DEATHS. Hervarer-Saga, apud Ol.
Verel. cap. vii. p. 91. The Druidical circular monuments of separate stones
erect, are more frequently of the number TWELVE, than of any other number. See
Borlase, ANTIQUIT. Cornw. B. iii. chapter vii. edit. 1769. fol. And Toland, Hist.
Druid. p. 89. 158. 160. Se also Martin's Hebrid. p. 9. In Zealand and Sweden,
many ancient circular monuments, consisting each of twelve rude stones, still
remain, which were the places of judicature. My late very learned, ingenious,
and respected friend, doctor Borlase, pointed out to me monuments of the same
sort in Cornwall. Compare Keysler, p. 93. And it will illustrate remarks
already made, and the principles insinuated in this Dissertation, to observe,
that these monuments are found in Persia near Tanris. Geoffrey of Monmouth
affords instances in his British History. The knights sent into Wales by
Fitzhammon, in 1091, were TWELVE. Powel, p. 124. sub anno. See also an instance
in Du Carell, Anglo-Norman ANTIQ. p. 9. It is probable that Charlemagne formed
his TWELVE PEERS on this principle. From whom Spenser evidently took his TWELVE
KNIGHTS.
.

The fictions of Odin and of his Scandinavians, must have taken still deeper
root in the British islands, at least in England, from the Saxon and Danish
invasions.

That the tales of the Scandinavian scalds flourished among the Saxons, who
succeeded to the Britons, and became possessors of England in the sixth
century, may be justly presumed "Ex vetustioribus poetis Cimbrorum, nempe
Scaldis et Theotiscae gentis versificatoribus, plane multa, ut par est credere,
sumpsere." Hickes. Thesaur. i. p. 101. See p. 117.
. The Saxons were originally seated in the Cimbric Chersonese, or those
territories which have been since called Jutland, Angelen, and Holstein; and
were fond of tracing the descent of their princes from Odin See Gibson's Chron.
Saxon. p. 12. seq. Historians mention WODEN'S BEORTH, i. e. Woden's hill, in
Wiltshire. See Milton, Hist. Engl. An. 588.
. They were therefore a part of the Scandinavian tribes. They imported with
them into England the old Runic language and letters. This appears from
inscriptions on coins See Sir A. Fountaine's Pref. Saxon Money. OFFA. REX. SC.
BOTRED MONETARIUS, etc. See also Serenii Diction. Anglo-Suecico-Latin. Praef.
page 21.
, stones See Hickes's Thesaur. BAPTISTERIUM BRIDEKIRKENSE. Par. iii. p. 4. Tab.
ii^^ SAXUM REVELLENSE apud Scotos. Ibid. Tab. iv. page 5. -- CRUX LAPIDEA apud
Beaucastle. Wanley Catal. MSS. Anglo-Sax. page 248. ad calc. Hickes. Thesaur.
ANNULUS AUREUS. Drake's York, Append. p. 102. Tab. N. 26. And Gordon's Itin.
Septentr. p. 168.
, and other monuments; and from some of their manuscripts See Hickes's Thesaur.
Par. i. page 135. 136. 148. Par. iii. Tab. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. It may be
conjectured, that these characters were introduced by the Danes. It is certain
that they never grew into common use. They were at least inconvenient, as
consisting of capitals. We have no remains of Saxon writing so old as the sixth
century. Nor are there any of the seventh, except a very few charters. [Bibl.
Bodl. NE. D. 11. 19. seq.] See Hickes's Thesaur. Par. i. page 169. See also
CHARTA ODILREDI AD MONASTERIUM DE BERKING. Tab. i. Casley's Cat. Bibl. Reg. In
the British Museum.
. It is well known that Runic inscriptions have been discovered in Cumberland
and Scotland: and that there is even extant a coin of king Offa, with a Runic
legend See ARCHAEOL. vol. ii. p. 131. A. D. 1773. 4to.
. But the conversion of the Saxons to christianity, which happened before the
seventh century, entirely banished the common use of those characters But see
Hickes, ubi supr. i. p. 140.
, which were esteemed unhallowed and necromantic; and with their ancient
superstitions, which yet prevailed for some time in the popular belief,
abolished in some measure their native and original vein of poetic fabling It
has been suggested to me by an ingenious friend, that GUY and sir BEVIS, the
first of which lived in the reign of Athelstan, and the latter, as some
suppose, in that of Edgar, both christian champions against the pagan Danes,
were originally subjects of the genuine Saxon bards. But I rather think, they
begun to be celebrated in or after the crusades; the nature of which
expeditions dictated to the romance-writers, and brought into vogue, stories of
christians fighting with infidel heroes. The cause was the same, and the
circumstances partly parallel; and this being once the fashion, they consulted
their own histories for heroes, and combats were feigned with Danish giants, as
well as with the Saracen. See infr. SECT. iii. p. 142. 143. 145. There is the
story of BEVIS in British, YSTORI BOUN O HAMTUN. Lhuyd's Arch. Brit. p. 264.
. They suddenly became a mild and polished people, addicted to the arts of
peace, and the exercise of devotion; and the poems they have left us are
chiefly moral rhapsodies, scriptural histories, or religious invocations Except
an ode on Athelstan, translated below. See SECT. i. p. z. See also the
description of the city of Durham. Hickes, p. 179. It has nothing of the wild
strain of poetry. The saints and relics of Durham church seem to have struck
the poet most, in describing that city. I cannot discern the supposed sublimity
of those mysterious dithyrambics, which close the Saxon MENOLOGE, or poetic
calendar, written about the tenth century, printed by Hickes, Gramm. Anglo-Sax.
p. 207. They seem to be prophesies and proverbs; or rather, splendid fragments
from different poems, thrown together without connection.
. Yet even in these pieces they have frequent allusions to the old scaldic
fables and heroes. Thus, in an Anglo-Saxon poem on Judith, Holofernes is called
BALDER, or leader and prince of warriors. And in a poetical paraphrase on
Genesis, Abimelech has the same appellation See Hickes. Thesaur. i. p. 10. Who
adds many more instances.
. This Balder was a famous chieftain of the Asiatic Goths, the son of Odin, and
supposed to inhabit a magnificent hall in the future place of rewards. The same
Anglo-Saxon paraphrast, in his prosopopea of Satan addressing his companions
plunged in the infernal abyss, adopts many images and expressions used in the
very sublime description of the Eddic hell Fab. xlix. See Hickes, ubi supr. p.
116.
: Henry of Huntingdon complains of certain extraneous words and uncommon
figures of speech, in a Saxon ode on a victory of king Athelstan Who has
greatly misrepresented the sense by a bad Latin translation. Hist. Lib. v. p.
203.
. These were all scaldic expressions or allusions. But I will give a literal
English translation of this poem, which cannot be well understood without
premising its occasion. In the year 938, Anlaff, a pagan king of the Hybernians
and the adjacent isles, invited by Constantine king of the Scots, entered the
river Abi or Humber with a strong fleet. Our Saxon king Athelstan, and his
brother Eadmund Clito, met them with a numerous army, near a place called
Brunenburgh; and after a most obstinate and bloody resistance, drove them back
to their ships. The battle lasted from daybreak till the evening. On the side
of Anlaff were slain six petty kings, and seven chiefs or generals. "King
Adelstan, the glory of leaders, the giver of gold chains to his nobles, and his
brother Eadmund, both shining with the brightness of a long train of ancestors,
struck [the adversary] in war; at Brunenburgh, with the edge of the sword, they
clove the wall of shields. The high banners fell. The earls of the departed
Edward fell; for it was born within them, even from the loins of their kindred,
to defend the treasures and the houses of their country, and their gifts,
against the hatred of strangers. The nation of the Scots, and the fatal
inhabitants of ships, fell. The hills resounded, and the armed men were covered
with sweat. From the time the sun, the king of stars, the torch of the eternal
one, rose cheerful above the hills, till he returned to his habitation. There
lay many of the northern men, pierced with lances; they lay wounded, with their
shields pierced through: and also the Scots, the hateful harvest of battle. The
chosen bands of the West Saxons, going out to battle, pressed on the steps of
the detested nations, and slew their flying rear with sharp and bloody swords.
The soft effeminate men yielded up their spears. The Mercians did not fear or
fly the rough game of the hand. There was no safety to them, who sought the
land with Anlaff in the bosom of the ship, to die in fight. Five youthful kings
fell in the place of fight, slain with swords; and seven captains of Anlaff,
with the innumerable army of Scottish mariners: there the lord of the Normans
[Northern-men] was chased; and their army, now made small, was driven to the
prow of the ship. The ship sounded with the waves; and the king, marching into
the yellow sea, escaped alive. And so it was, the wise northern king
Constantine, a veteran chief, returning by flight to his own army, bowed down
in the camp, left his own son worn out with wounds in the place of slaughter;
in vain did he lament his earls, in vain his lost friends. Nor less did Anlaff,
the yellowhaired leader, the battle-ax of slaughter, a youth in war, but an old
man in understanding, boast himself a conqueror in fight, when the darts flew
against Edward's earls, and their banners met. Then those northern soldiers,
covered with shame, the sad refuse of darts in the resounding whirlpool of
Humber, departed in their ships with rudders, to seek through the deep the
Irish city and their own land. While both the brothers, the king and Clito,
lamenting even their own victory, together returned home; leaving behind them
the flesh-devouring raven, the dark-blue toad greedy of slaughter, the black
crow with horny bill, and the hoarse toad, the eagle a companion of battles
with the devouring kite, and that brindled savage beast the wolf of the wood,
to be glutted with the white food of the slain. Never was so great a slaughter
in this island, since the Angles and Saxons, the fierce beginners of war,
coming hither from the east, and seeking Britain through the wide sea, overcame
the Britons excelling in honor, and gained possession of their land The
original was first printed by Wheloc in the Saxon Chronicle, p. 555. Cant.
1644. See Hickes. These. Praefat. p xiv. And ibid. Gramm. Anglo-Sax. p. 181.
."

This piece, and many other Saxon odes and songs now remaining, are written in
a meter much resembling that of the scaldic dialogue at the tomb of Angantyr,
which has been beautifully translated into English, in the true spirit of the
original, and in a genuine strain of poetry, by Gray. The extemporaneous
effusions of the glowing bard seem naturally to have fallen into this measure,
and it was probably more easily suited to the voice or harp. Their
versification for the most part seems to have been that of the Runic poetry.

As literature, the certain attendant, as it is the parent, of true religion
and civility, gained ground among the Saxons, poetry no longer remained a
separate science, and the profession of bard seems gradually to have declined
among them: I mean the bard under those appropriated characteristics, and that
peculiar appointment, which he sustained among the Scandinavian pagans. Yet
their national love of verse and music still so strongly predominated, that in
the place of their old scalders a new rank of poets arose, called GLEEMEN or
Harpers GLEEMAN answers to the Latin JOCULATOR. Fabyan, speaking of Blagebride,
an ancient British king, famous for his skill in poetry and music, calls him "a
conynge musicyan, called of the Britons god of GLEEMEN. CHRON. f. xxxii. ed.
1533. This, Fabyan translated from Geoffrey of Monmouth's account of the same
British king, "ut DEUS JOCULATORUM videretur." Hist. Brit. lib. i. cap. 22.
Itappears from the injunctions given to the British church in the year 680,
that female harpers were not then uncommon. It is decreed that no bishop, or
any ecclesiastic, shall keep or have CITHARAEDAS, and it is added QUAECUMQUE
SYMPHONIACA; nor permit plays or sports, LUDOS VEL JOCOS, undoubtedly mimical
and gesticulatory entertainments, to be exhibited in his presence. Malmesb.
Gest. Pontif. lib. iii. p. 263. edit. vet. And Council. Spelman. tom. i. p. 159.
edit. 1639. fol.


. These probably gave rise to the order of English Minstrels, who flourished
till the sixteenth century.

And here I stop to point out one of the principal reasons, why the
Scandinavian bards have transmitted to modern times so much more of their
native poetry, than the rest of their southern neighbors. It is true, that the
inhabitants of Sweden, Denmark, and Norway, whether or no from their Asiatic
origin, from their poverty which compelled them to seek fortunes at foreign
courts by the exercise of a popular art, from the success of their bards, the
nature of their republican government, or their habits of unsettled life, were
more given to verse than any other Gothic, or even Celtic, tribe. But this is
not all: they remained pagans, and retained their original manners, much longer
than any of their Gothic kindred. They were not completely converted to
christianity till the tenth century See bishop Lloyd's Hist. Account of Church
Government in Great Britain, etc. chap. i.. 11. page 4to. Land. 1684. And
Crymog. Arngrim. L. i. cap. 10. p. 104.
. Hence, under the concurrence however of some of the causes just mentioned,
their scaldic profession acquired greater degrees of strength and of maturity:
and from an uninterrupted possession through many ages of the most romantic
religious superstitions, and the preservation of those rough manners which are
so favorable to the poetical spirit, was enabled to produce, not only more
genuine, but more numerous, compositions. True religion would have checked the
impetuosity of their passions, suppressed their wild exertions of fancy, and
banished that striking train of imagery, which their poetry derived from a
barbarous theology. This circumstance also suggests to our consideration, those
superior advantages and opportunities arising from leisure and length of time,
which they enjoyed above others, of circulating their poetry far and wide, of
giving a general currency to their mode of fabling, of rendering their skill in
versification more universally and familiarly known, and a more conspicuous and
popular object of admiration or imitation to the neighboring countries. Hence
too it has happened, that modern times have not only attained much fuller
information concerning their historical transactions, but are so intimately
acquainted with the peculiarities of their character.

It is probable, that the Danish invasions produced a considerable alteration
in the manners of our Anglo-Saxon ancestors. Although their connections with
England were transient and interrupted, and on the whole scarcely lasted two
hundred years, yet many of the Danish customs began to prevail among the
inhabitants, which seem to have given a new turn to their temper and genius.
The Danish fashion of excessive drinking, for instance, a vice almost natural
to the northern nations, became so general among the Anglo-Saxons, that it was
found necessary to restrain so pernicious and contagious a practice by a
particular statute See Lambarde's Archaionom. And Bartholin. ii. c. xii. p. 542.
. Hence it seems likely, that so popular an entertainment as their poetry
gained ground; especially if we consider, that in their expeditions against
England they were of course attended by many northern scalds, who constantly
made a part of their military retinue, and whose language was understood by the
Saxons. Rogwald, lord of the Orcades, who was also himself a poet, going on an
expedition into Palestine, carried with him two Islandic bards g Ol. Worm. Lit.
Run. p. 195. edit. 1636.
. The noble ode, called in the northern chronicles the ELOGIUM OF HACON In this
ode are these very sublime imageries and prosopopeas.

"The goddesses who preside over battles come, sent forth by Odin. They go to
choose among the princes of the illustrious race of Yngvon a man who is to
perish, and to go to dwell in the palace of the gods."

"Gondola leaned on the end of her lance, and thus bespoke her companions. The
assembly of the gods is going to be increased: the gods invite Hacon, with his
numerous host, to enter the palace of Odin."

"Thus spoke these glorious nymphs of war: who were seated on their horses, who
were covered with their shields and helmets, and appeared full of some great
thought."

"Hacon heard their discourse. Why, said he, why have thou thus disposed of the
battle? Were we not worthy to have obtained of the gods a more perfect victory?
It is we, she replied, who have given it thee. It is we who have put thine
enemies to flight."

"Now, added she, let us push forward our steeds across those green worlds,
which are the residence of the god^. Let us go tell Odin that the king is
coming to visit him in his palace."

"When Odin heard this news, he said, Hermode and Brago, my sons, go to meet
the king: a king, admired by all men for his valor, approaches to our hall."

"At length king Hacon approaches; and arriving from the battle is still all
besprinkled and running down with blood. At the sight of Odin he cries out, Ah!
how severe and terrible does this god appear to me!"

"The hero Brago replies, Come, thou that wast the terror of the bravest
warriors: Come hither, and rejoin thine eight brothers: the heroes who reside
here shall live with thee in peace: Go, drink Ale in the circle of heroes."

"But this valiant king exclaims, I will still keep my arms: a warrior ought
carefully to preserve his mail and helmet: it is dangerous to be a moment
without the spear in one's hand." --

"The wolf Fenris shall burst his chain^ and dart with rage upon his enemies,
before so brave a king shall again appear upon earth, etc."

Snorron. Hist. Reg. Sept. i. p. 163. This ode was written so early as the year
960. There is a great variety and boldness in the transitions. An action is
carried on by a set of the most aweful ideal personages, finely imagined. The
goddesses of battle, Odin, his sons Hermode and Brago, and the spectre of the
deceased king, are all introduced, speaking and acting as in a drama. The
panegyric is nobly conducted, and arises out of the sublimity of the fiction.


, king of Norway, was composed on a battle in which that prince, with eight of
his brothers fell, by the scald Eyvynd; who for his superior skill in poetry
was called the CROSS of POETS, and fought in the battle which he celebrated.
Hacon earl of Norway was accompanied by five celebrated bards in the battle of
Jomsburgh: and we are told, that each of them sung an ode to animate the
soldiers before the engagement began Bartholin. p. 172.
. They appear to have been regularly brought into action. Olave, a king of
Norway, when his army was prepared for the onset, placed three scalds about
him, and exclaimed aloud, "You shall not only record in your verses what you
have HEARD, but what you have SEEN." They each delivered an ode on the spot
Olaf. Sag. apud Verel. ad HERV. SAG. p. 178. Bartholin. p. 172.
. These northern chiefs appear to have so frequently hazarded their lives with
such amazing intrepidity, merely in expectation of meriting a panegyric from
their poets, the judges, and the spectators of their gallant behavior. That
scalds were common in the Danish armies when they invaded England, appears from
a stratagem of Alfred; who, availing himself of his skill in oral poetry and
playing on the harp, entered the Danish camp habited in that character, and
procured a hospitable reception. This was in the year 878 Ingulph: Hist. p.
869. Malmesb. ii. c. 4. p. 43.
. Anlaff, a Danish king, used the same disguise for reconnoitring the camp of
our Saxon monarch Athelstan: taking his station near Athelstan's pavilion, he
entertained the king and his chiefs with his verses and music, and was
dismissed with an honorable reward Malmesb. ii. 6. I am aware, that the truth
of both these anecdotes respecting Alfred and Anlaff has been controverted. But
no sufficient argument has yet been offered for pronouncing them spurious, or
even suspicious. See an ingenious Dissertation in the ARCHAEOLOGIA, vol. ii. p.
100. seq. A. D. 1773. 4to.
. As Anlaff's dialect must have discovered him to have been a Dane; here is a
proof, of what I shall bring more, that the Saxons, even in the midst of mutual
hostilities, treated the Danish scalds with favor and respect. That the
Islandic bards were common in England during the Danish invasions, there are
numerous proofs. Egill, a celebrated Islandic poet, having murdered the son
and many of the friends of Eric Blodoxe, king of Denmark or Norway, then
residing in Northumberland, and which he had just conquered, procured a pardon
by singing before the king, at the command of his queen Gunhilde, an
extemporaneous ode See Crymogr. Angrim. Jon. Lib. ii. page 125 edit. 1609.
. Egill compliments the king, who probably was his patron, with the appellation
of the English chief. "I offer my freight to the king. I owe a poem for my
ransom. I present to the ENGLISH CHIEF the mead of Odin See Ol. Worm. Lit. Run.
p. 227. 195. All the chiefs of Eric were also present at the recital of this
ode, which is in a noble strain.
." Afterward he calls this Danish conqueror the commander of the Scottish
fleet. "The commander of the Scottish fleet fattened the ravenous birds. The
sister of Nera [Death] trampled on the foe: she trampled on the evening food of
the eagle." The Scots usually joined the Danish or Norwegian invaders in their
attempts on the northern parts of Britain See the Saxon epinicion in praise of
king Athelstan. supr. citat. Hen. Hunting. L. v. p. 203. 204.
: and from this circumstance a new argument arises, to show the close
communication and alliance which must have subsisted between Scotland and
Scandinavia. Egill, although of the enemy's party, was a singular favorite of
king Athelstan. Athelstan once asked Egill how he escaped due punishment from
Eric Blodoxe, the king of Northumberland, for the very capital and enormous
crime which I have just mentioned. On which Egill immediately related the whole
of that transaction to the Saxon king, in a sublime ode still extant Torfaeus
Hist. Orcad. Praefat. "Rei statim ordinem metro nunc satis obscuro exposuit."
Torfaeus adds, which is much to our purpose, "nequaquam ita narraturus NON
INTELLIGENTI."
. On another occasion Athelstan presented Egill with two rings, and two large
cabinets filled with silver; promising at the same time, to grant him any gift
or favor which he should choose to request. Egill, struck with gratitude,
immediately composed a panegyrical poem in the Norwegian language, then common
to both nations, on the virtues of Athelstan, which the latter as generously
requited with two marcs of pure gold Crymog. Arn. Jon. p. 129. ut supr.
. Here is likewise another argument that the Saxons had no small esteem for the
scaldic poetry. It is highly reasonable to conjecture, that our Danish king
Canute; a potentate of most extensive jurisdiction, and not only king of
England, but of Denmark, Sweden, and Norway, was not without the customary
retinue of the northern courts, in which the scalds held so distinguished and
important a station. Human nature, in a savage state, aspires to some species
of merit; and in every stage of society is alike susceptible of flattery, when
addressed to the reigning passion. The sole object of these northern princes
was military glory. It is certain that Canute delighted in this mode of
entertainment, which he patronised and liberally rewarded. It is related in
KNYTLINGA-SAGA, or Canute's History, that he commanded the scald Loftunga to be
put to death, for daring to comprehend his achievements in too concise a poem.
"Nemo, said he, ante te, ausus est de me BREVES CANTILENAS componere." A
curious picture of the tyrant, the patron, and the barbarian, united! But the
bard extorted a speedy pardon, and with much address, by producing the next day
before the king at dinner an ode of more than thirty strophes, for which Canute
gave him fifty marcs of purified silver Bartholin. Antiquit. Danic. Lib. i.
cap. 10. p. 169. 170. See KNYTLINGA SAGA, in Catal. Codd. MSS. Bibl. Holm.
Hickes. Thesaur. ii. 312.
. In the mean time, the Danish language began to grow perfectly familiar in
England. It was eagerly learned by the Saxon clergy and nobility, from a
principle of ingratiating themselves with Canute: and there are many
manuscripts now remaining, by which it will appear, that the Danish runes were
much studied among our Saxon ancestors, under the reign of that monarch Hickes,
ubi supr. i. 134. 136.
.

The songs of the Irish bards are by some conceived to be strongly marked with
the traces of scaldic imagination; and these traces, which will be
reconsidered, are believed still to survive among a species of poetical
historians, whom they call TALE-TELLERS, supposed to be the descendants of the
original Irish bards We are informed by the Irish historians, that saint
Patrick, when he converted Ireland to the Christian faith, destroyed three
hundred volumes of the songs of the Irish bards. Such was their dignity in this
country, that they were permitted to wear a robe of the same color with that
of the royal family. They were constantly summoned to a triennial festival: and
the most approved songs delivered at this assembly were ordered to be preserved
in the custody of the king's historian or antiquary. Many of these compositions
are referred to by Keating, as the foundation of his history of Ireland. Ample
estates were appropriated to them, that they might live in a condition of
independence and ease. The profession was hereditary: but when a bard died, his
estate devolved not to his eldest son, but to such of his family as discovered
the most distinguished talents for poetry and music. Every principal bard
retained thirty of inferior note, as his attendants; and a bard of the
secondary class was followed by a retinue of fifteen. They seem to have been at
their height in the year 558. See Keating's History of Ireland, p. 127. 132.
370. 380. And Pref. p. 23. None of their poems have been translated.

There is an article in the LAWS of Keneth king of Scotland, promulged in the
year 850, which places the bards of Scotland, who certainly were held in equal
esteem with those of the neighboring countries, in the lowest station.
"Fugitivos, BARDOS, otio addictos, s^urras et hujusmodi hominum genus, loris et
flagris caedunto." Apud Hector. Boeth. Lib. x. p. 201. edit. 1574. But
Salmasius very justly observes, that for BARDOS we should read VARGOS, or
VERGOS, i. e. Vagabonds..


. A writer of equal elegance and veracity city relates, "that a gentleman of
the north of Ireland has often told me of his own experience, that in his
wolfhuntings there, when he used to be abroad in the mountains three or four
days together, and laid very ill in the night, so as he could not well sleep,
they would bring him one of these TALE-TELLERS, that when he lay down would
begin a story of a KING, or a GIANT, a DWARF, and a DAMSEL Sir W. Temple's
Essays, part iv. p. 349.
." These are topics in which the Runic poetry is said to have been greatly
conversant.

Nor is it improbable that the Welsh bards The bards of Britain were originally
a constitutional appendage of the druidical hierarchy. In the parish of
Llanidan in the isle of Anglesey, there are still to be seen the ruins of an
arch-druid's mansion, which they call TRER DREW, that is the DRUID'S MANSION.
Near it are marks of the habitations of the separate conventual societies,
which were under his immediate orders and inspection. Among these is TRER
BEIRD, or, as they call it to this day, the HAMLET OF THE BARDS. Rowlands's
MONA, p. 83. 88. But so strong was the attachment of the Celtic nations, among
which we reckon Britain, to poetry, that, amidst all the changes of government
and manners, even long after the order of Druids was extinct, and the national
religion altered, the bards, acquiring a sort of civil capacity, and a new
establishment, still continued to flourish. And with regard to Britain, the
bards flourished most in those parts of it, which most strongly retained their
native Celtic character. The Britons living in those countries that were
between the Trent or Humber and the Thames, by far the greatest portion of this
island, in the midst of the Roman garrisons and colonies, had been so long
inured to the customs of the Romans, that they preserved very little of the
British; and from this long and habitual intercourse, before the fifth century,
they seem to have lost their original language. We cannot discover the
slightest trace, in the poems of the bards, the LIVES of the British saints, or
any other ancient monument, that they held any correspondence with the Welsh,
the Cornish, the Cumbrian, or the Strathcluyd Britons. Among other British
institutions grown obsolete among them, they seem to have lost the use of
Bards; at least there are no memorials of any they had, nor any of their songs
remaining: nor do the Welsh or Cumbrian poets ever touch upon any transactions
that passed in those countries, after they were relinquished by the Romans.

And here we see the reason why the Welsh bards flourished so much and so long.
But moreover the Welsh, kept in awe as they were by the Romans, harrassed by
the Saxons, and eternally jealous of the attacks, the encroachments, and the
neighborhood of aliens, were on this account attached to their Celtic manners:
this situation, and these circumstances, inspired them with a pride and an
obstinacy for mantaining a national distinction, and for preserving their
ancient usages, among which the bardic profession is so eminent.


might have been acquainted with the Scandinavian scalds. I mean before their
communications with Armorica, mentioned at large above. The prosody of the
Welsh bards depended much on alliteration See infr. SECT. x. p. 32.
. Hence they seem to have paid an attention to the scaldic versification. The
Islandic poets are said to have carried alliteration to the highest pitch of
exactness in their earliest periods: whereas the Welsh bards of the sixth
century used it but sparingly, and in a very imperfect degree. In this
circumstance a proof of imitation, at least of emulation, is implied I am
however informed by a very intelligent antiquary in British literature, that
there are manifest marks of alliteration in some druidical fragments still
remaining, undoubtedly composed before the Britons could have possibly mixed in
the smallest degree with any Gothic nation. Rhyme is likewise found in the
British poetry at the earliest period, in those druidical triplets called
ENGLYN MILWR, or the WARRIOR'S SONG, in which every verse is closed with a
consonant syllable. See a metrical Druid oracle in Borlase's Antiquit.
Cornwall. B. iii. chapter 5. p. 185. edit. 1769.
. There are moreover, strong instances of conformity between the manners of the
two nations; which, however, may be accounted for on general principles arising
from our comparative observations on rude life. Yet it is remarkable that mead,
the northern nectar, or favorite liquor of the Goths And of the ancient
Franks. Gregory of Tours mentions a Frank drinking this liquor; and adds, that
he acquired this habit from the BARBAROUS or Frankish nations. Hist. Franc.
lib. viii. c. 33. p. 404. ed. 1699. Paris. fol.
, who seem to have stamped it with the character of a poetical drink, was no
less celebrated among the Welsh See infr. SECT. xvi. p. 430.
. The songs of both nations abound with its praises: and it seems in both to
have been alike the delight of the warrior and the bard. Taliessin, as Lhuyd
informs us, wrote a panegyrical ode on this inspring beverage of the be; or,
as he translates it, De Mulsorum HYDROMELI Tanner Bibl. p. 706.
. In Hoel Dha's Welsh laws, translated by Wootton, we have, "In omni convivio
in quo MULSUM bibitur LEG. WALL. L. i. cap. xxiv. p. 45.
." From which passage, it seems to have been served up only at high festivals.
By the same constitutions, at every feast in the king's castlehall, the prefect
or marshal of the hall is to receive from the queen, by the hands of the
steward, a HORN OF MEAD. It is also ordered, among the privileges annexed to
the office of prefect of the royal hall, that the king's bard shall sing to him
as often as he pleases Ibid. L. i. cap. xii. p. 17.
. One of the stated officers of the king's household is CONFECTOR MULSI: and
this officer, together with the master of the horse When the king makes a
present of a horse, this officer is to receive a fee; but not when the present
is made to a bishop, the master of the hawks, or to the Mimus. The latter is
exempt, on account of the entertainment he afforded the court at being
presented with a horse by the king: the horse is to be led out of the hall with
capistrum testiculis alligatum. Ibid. L. i. cap. xvii. p. 31. MIMUS seems here
to be a MIMIC, or a gesticulator. Carpentier mentions a "JOCULATOR qui sciebat
TOMBARE, to tumble." Cang. Lat. Gloss. Suppl. V. TOMBARE. In the Saxon canons
given by king Edgar, about the year 960, it is ordered, that no priest shall be
a POET, or exercise the MIMICAL or histrionical art in any degree, either in
public or private. Can. 58. Council. Spelman, tom. i. p. 455. edit. 1639. fol.
In Edgar's Oration to Dunstan, the MIMI, Minstrels, are said both to sing and
dance. Ibid. p. 477. Much the same injunction occurs in the Saxon Laws of the
NORTHUMBRIAN PRIESTS, given in 988. Cap. xli. ibid. p. 498. MIMUS seems
sometimes to have signified THE FOOL. As in Gregory of Tours, speaking of the
MIMUS of Miro a king of Gallicia. "Erat enim MIMUS REGIS, qui ei per VERBA
JOCULARIA LAETITIAM crat solitus EXCITARE. Sed non cum adjuvit aliquis
CACHINNUS, neque praestigiis artis suae, etc." Gregor. Turonens. MIRACUL. S.
Martin. lib. iv. cap. vii. p. 1119. Opp. Paris. 1699. fol. edit. Ruinart.
, the master of the hawks, the smith of the palace He is to work free: except
for making the king's cauldron, the iron bands, and other furniture for his
castle-gate, and the iron-work for his mills. LEG. WALL. L. i. cap. xliv. p. 67.
, the royal bard By these constitutions, given about the year 940, the bard of
the Welsh kings is a domestic officer. The king is to allow him a horse and a
woollen robe; and the queen a linen garment. The prefect of the palace, or
governor of the castle, is privileged to sit next him in the hall, on the three
principal feast days, and to put the harp into his hand. On the three feast
days he is to have the steward's robe for a fee. He is to attend, if the queen
desires a song in her chamber. An ox or cow is to be given out of the booty or
prey (chiefly consisting of cattle) taken from the English by the king's
domestics: and while the prey is dividing, he is to sing the praises of the
BRITISH KINGS or KINGDOM. If, when the king's domestics go out to make
depredations, he sings or plays before them, he is to receive the best bullock.
When the king's army is in array, he is to sing the Song of the BRITISH KINGS.
When invested with his office, the king is to give him a harp, (other
constitutions say a chess-board,) and the queen a ring of gold: nor is he to
give away the harp on any account. When he goes out of the palace to sing with
other bards, he is to receive a double portion of the largess or gratuity. If
he ask a gift or favor of the king, he is to be fined by singing an ode or
poem: if of a nobleman or chief, three; if of a vassal, he is to sing him to
sleep. LEG. WALL. L. i. cap. xix. p. 35. Mention is made of the bard who gains
the CHAIR in the hall. Ibid. ARTIC. 5. After a contest of bards in the hall,
the bard who gains the chair, is to give the JUDGE OF THE HALL, another
officer, a horn, (cornu bubalinum) a ring, and the cushion of his chair. Ibid.
L. i. cap. xvi. p. 26. When the king rides out of his castle, five bards are to
accompany him. Ibid. L. i. cap. viii. p. 11. The Cornu Bubalinum may be
explained from a passage in a poem, composed about the year 1160, by Owain
Cyveiliog prince of Powis, which he entitled HIRLAS, from a large drinking horn
so called, used at feasts in his castle-hall. "Pour out, o cup bearer, sweet
and pleasant mead (the spear is red in the time of need) from the horns of wild
oxen, covered with gold, to the souls of those departed heroes." Evans, p. 12.

By these laws the king's harp is to be worth one hundred and twenty pence: but
that of a gentleman, or one not a vassal, sixty pence. The king's chess-board
is valued at the same price: and the instrument for fixing or tuning the
strings of the king's harp, at twenty-four pence. His drinking-horn, at one
pound. Ibid. L. iii. cap. vii. p. 265.


, the first musician There are two muficians: the Musicus PRIMARIUS, who
probably was a teacher, and certainly a superintendant over the rest; and the
HALL-MUSICIAN. LEG. ut supr. L. i. cap. xlv. p. 68.
, with some others, have a right to be "Jus cathedrae." Ibid. L. i. cap. x. p.
13.
seated in the hall. We have already seen, that the Scandinavian scalds were
well known in Ireland: and there is sufficient evidence to prove, that the
Welsh bards were early connected with the Irish. Even so late as the eleventh
century, the practice continued among the Welsh bards, of receiving
instructions in the bardic profession from Ireland. The Welsh bards were
reformed and regulated by Gryffyth ap Conan, king of Wales, in the year 1078.
At the same time he brought over with him from Ireland many Irish bards, for
the information and improvement of the Welsh See Seldom, Drayt. POLYOLB. S. ix.
page 156. S. iv. page 67. edit. 1613. fol.
. Powell acquaints us, that this prince "brought over with him from Ireland
diverse cunning musicians into Wales, who devised in a manner all the
instrumental music that is now there used: as appears, as well by the books
written of the same, as also by the names of the tunes and measures used among
them to this day Hist. of Cambr. p. 191. edit. 1584.
." In Ireland, to kill a bard was highly criminal: and to seize his estate,
even for the public service and in time of national distress, was deemed an act
of sacrilege Keating's Hist. Ireland, page 132.
. Thus in the old Welsh laws, whoever even slightly injured a bard, was to be
fined six cows and one hundred and twenty pence. The murderer of a bard was to
be fined one hundred and twenty-six cows LEG. WALL. ut supr. L. i. cap. xix.
page 35. seq. See also cap. xlv. p. 68. We find the same respect paid to the
bard in other constitutions. "QUI HARPATOREM, etc. whoever shall strike a
HARPER who can harp in a public assembly, shall compound with him by a
composition of four times more, than for any other man of the same condition."
Leg. Ripuariorum et Wesinorum. Lindenbroch. Cod. LL. Antiq. Wisigoth. etc. A.
D. 1613. Tit. 5.. ult.

The caliphs, and other eastern potentates, had their bards: whom they treated
with equal respect. Sir John Maundeville, who traveled in 1340, says, that
when the emperor of Cathay, or great Cham of Tartary, is seated at dinner in
high pomp with his lords, "no man is so hardi to speak to him except it be
MUSICIANS to solace the emperor." chap. lxvii. p. 100. Here is another proof
of the correspondence between the eastern and northern customs: and this
instance might be brought as an argument of the bardic institution being
fetched from the east. Leo Afer mentions the Poetae curiae of the Caliph's
court at Bagdad, about the year 990. De Med. et Philos. Arab. cap. iv. Those
poets were in most repute among the Arabians, who could speak extemporaneous
verses to the Caliph. Eusebius. Renaudot. apud Fabric. Bibl. Gr. xiii. p. 249.
Thomson, in the CASTLE of INDOLENCE, mentions the BARD IN WAITING being
introduced to lull the Caliph asleep. And Maundeville mentions MINSTRELLES as
established officers in the court of the emperor of Cathay.


. Nor must I pass over, what reflects much light on this reasoning, that the
establishment of the household of the old Irish chiefs, exactly resembles that
of the Welsh kings. For, besides the bard, the musician, and the smith, they
have both a physician, a huntsman, and other corresponding officers See Temple,
ubi supr. p. 346.
. We must also remember, that an intercourse was necessarily produced between
the Welsh and Scandinavians, from the piratical irruptions of the latter: their
scalds, as I have already remarked, were respected and patronised in the courts
of those princes, whose territories were the principal objects of the Danish
invasions. Torfaeus expressly affirms this of the Anglo-Saxon and Irish kings;
and it is at least probable, that they were entertained with equal regard by
the Welsh princes, who so frequently concurred with the Danes in distressing
the English. It may be added, that the Welsh, although living in a separate and
detached situation, and so strongly prejudiced in favor of their own usages,
yet from neighborhood, and unavoidable communications of various kinds, might
have imbibed the ideas of the Scandinavian bards from the Saxons and Danes,
after those nations had occupied and overspread all the other parts of our
island.

Many pieces of the Scottish bards are still remaining in the high-lands of
Scotland. Of these a curious specimen, and which considered in a more extensive
and general respect, is a valuable monument of the poetry of a rude period, has
lately been given to the world, under the title of the WORKS OF OSSIAN. It is
indeed very remarkable, that in these poems, the terrible graces, which so
naturally characterise, and so generally constitute, the early poetry of a
barbarous people, should so frequently give place to a gentler set of manners,
to the social sensibilities of polished life, and a more civilized and elegant
species of imagination. Nor is this circumstance, which disarranges all our
established ideas concerning the savage stages of society, easily to be
accounted for, unless we suppose, that the Celtic tribes, who were so strongly
addicted to poetical composition, and who made it so much their study from the
earliest times, might by degrees have attained a higher vein of poetical
refinement, than could at first sight or on common principles be expected among
nations, whom we are accustomed to call barbarous; that some few instances of
an elevated strain of friendship, of love, and other sentimental feelings,
existing in such nations, might lay the foundation for introducing a set of
manners among the bards, more refined and exalted than the real manners of the
country: and that panegyrics on those virtues, transmitted with improvements
from bard to bard, must at length have formed characters of ideal excellence,
which might propagate among the people real manners bordering on the poetical.
These poems, however, notwithstanding the difference between the Gothic and the
Celtic rituals, contain many visible vestiges of Scandinavian superstition. The
allusions in the songs of Ossian to spirits, who preside over the different
parts and direct the various operations of nature, who send storms over the
deep, and rejoice in the shrieks of the shipwrecked mariner, who call down
lightning to blast the forest or cleave the rock, and diffuse irresistible
pestilence among the people, beautifully conducted indeed, and heightened,
under the skilful hand of a master bard, entirely correspond with the Runic
system, and breathe the spirit of its poetry. One fiction in particular, the
most EXTRAVAGANT in all Ossian's poems, is founded on an essential article of
the Runic belief. It is where Fingal fights with the spirit of Loda. Nothing
could aggrandise Fingal's heroism more highly than this mavelous encounter.
It was esteemed among the ancient Danes the most daring act of courage to
engage with a ghost Bartholin. De Contemptu Mortis apud Dan. L. ii. c. 2. p.
258. And ibid. p. 260. There are many other marks of Gothic customs and
superstitions in Ossian. The fashion of marking the sepulchers of their chiefs
with circles of stones, corresponds with what Olaus Wormius relates of the
Danes. Monum. Danic. Hafn. 1634. p. 38. See also Ol. Magn. Hist. xvi. 2. In the
HERVARER SAGA, the sword of Suarfulama is forged by the dwarfs, and called
Tirsing. Hickes, vol. i. p. 193. So Fingal's sword was made by an enchanter,
and was called the SON of LUNO. And, what is more, this Luno was the Vulcan of
the north, lived in Juteland, and made complete suits of armor for many of the
Scandinavian heroes. See TEMORA, B. vii. p. 159. OSSIAN, vol. ii. edit. 1765.
Hence the bards of both countries made him a celebrated enchanter. By the way,
the names of sword-smiths were thought worthy to be recorded in history.
Hoveden says, that when Geoffrey of Plantagenet was knighted, they brought him
a sword from the royal treasure, where it had been laid up from old times,
"being the workmanship of GALAN, the most excellent of all sword-smiths."
Hoved. f. 444. ii. SECT. 50. The mere mechanic, who is only mentioned as a
skilful artist in history, becomes a magician or a preternatural being in
romance.
. Had Ossian found it convenient, to have introduced religion into his
compositions This perplexing and extraordinary circumstance, I mean the absence
of all religious ideas from the poems of Ossian, is accounted for by Mr.
Macpherson with much address. See DISSERTATION prefixed, vol. i. p. viii. ix.
edit. 1765. See also the elegant CRITICAL DISSERTATION of the very judicious
Dr. Blair, vol. ii. p. 379.
, not only a new source had been opened to the sublime, in describing the rites
of sacrifice, the horrors of incantation, the solemn evocations of infernal
beings, and the like dreadful superstitions, but probably many stronger and
more characteristical evidences would have appeared, of his knowledge of the
imagery of the Scandinavian poets.

Nor must we forget, that the Scandinavians had conquered many countries
bordering upon France in the fourth century Hickes. These. i. part ii. p. 4.
. Hence the Franks must have been in some measure used to their language, well
acquainted with their manners, and conversant in their poetry. Charlemagne is
said to have delighted in repeating the most ancient and barbarous odes, which
celebrated the battles of ancient kings Eginhart. cap. viii. n. 34. Bartholin.
i. c. 10. p. 154. Diodorus Siculus says, that the Gauls, who were Celts,
delivered the spoils won in battle, yet reeking with blood, to their
attendants: these were carried in triumph, while an epinicial song was chanted,
(...). Lib. 5. p. 352. See also p. 308. "The Celts, says Aelian, I hear, are
the most enterprising of men: they make those warriors who die bravely in fight
the subject of songs, (...)." Var. Hist. Lib. xxii. c. 23. Posidonius gives us
a specimen of the manner of a Celtic bard. He reports, that Lu^rnius, a Celtic
chief, was accustomed, out of a desire of popularity, to gather crowds of his
people together, and to throw them gold and silver from his chariot. Once he
was attended at a sumptuous banquet by one of their bards, who received in
reward for his song a purse of gold. On this the bard renewed his song, adding,
to express his patron's excessive generosity, this hyperbolical panegyric, "The
earth over which his chariot-wheels pass, instantly brings forth gold and
precious gifts to enrich mankind." Athen. vi. 184.

Tacitus says, that Arminius, the conqueror of Varus, "is yet sung among the
barbarous nations." That is, probably among the original Germans. A^nal. ii.
And Mor. Germ. ii. 3. Joannes Aventinus, a Bavarian, who wrote about the year
1520, has a curious passage, "A great number of verses in praise of the virtues
of Attila, are still extant among us, patrio sermon more majorum perscripta."
Annal. Boior. L. ii. p. 130. edit. 1627. He immediately adds, "Nam et adhuc
VULGO CANITUR, et est popularibus nostris, etsi LITERARUM RUDIBUS, notissimus."
Again, speaking of Alexander the Great, he says, "Boios eidem bellum indixisse
ANTIQUIS CANITUR CARMINIBUS." ibid. Lib. i. p. 25. Concerning king Brennus,
says the same historian, "Carmina vernacul^ sermon facta legi in
bibliothecis." ibid. Lib. i. p. 16. and p. 26. And again, of Ingeram,
Adalogerion, and others of their ancient heroes, "Ingerami et Adalogerionis
nomina frequentissime in fastis referuntur; ipsos, more majorum, antiquis
proavi celebrarunt carminibus, quae in bibliothecis extant. Subsequuntur, quos
patrio sermon adhuc canimus, Laertes atque Ulysses." ibid. Lib. i. p. 15. The
same historian also relates, that his countrymen had a poetical history called
the BOOK of HEROES, containing the achievements of the German warriors. ibid.
Lib. i. p. 18. See also ibid. Lib. vii. p. 432. Lib. i. p. 9. And many other
passages to this purpose. Suffridus Petrus cites some old Frisian rhymes, De
Orig. Frisior. l. iii. c. 2. Compare Robertson's Hist. Charles V. vol. i. p.
235. edit. 1772. From Trithemius a German abbot and historian, who wrote about
1490, we learn, that among the ancient Franks and Germans, it was an exercise
in the education of youth, for them to learn to repeat and to sing verses of
the achievements of their heroes. Compend. Annal. L. i. p. 11. edit. Francof.
1601. Probably these were the poems which Charlemagne is said to have committed
to memory.

The most ancient Theotisc or Teutonic ode I know, is an Epinicion published by
Schilter, in the second volume of his THESAURUS ANTIQUITATUM TEUTONICARUM,
written in the year 883. He entitles it EI^INIKION rythmo Teutonico Ludovico
regi acclamatum cum Nortbmannos anno DCCCCXXXIII vicisset. It is in rhyme, and
in the four-lined stanza. It was transcribed by Mabillon from a manuscript in
the monastery of Saint Amand in Holland. I will give a specimen from Schilter's
Latin interpretation, but not on account of the merit of the poetry. "The king
seized his shield and lance, galloping hastily. He truly wished to revenge
himself on his adversaries. Nor was there a long delay: he found the Normans.
He said, thanks be to God, at seeing what he desired. The king rushed on
boldly, he first begun the customary song Kyrie eleison, in which they all
joined. The song was sung, the battle begun. The blood appeared in the cheeks
of the impatient Franks. Every soldier took his revenge, but none like Louis.
Impetuous, bold, etc." As to the military chorus Kyrie eleison, it appears to
have been used by the christian emperors before an engagement. See Bona, Rer.
Liturg. ii. c. 4. Vossius, Theolog. Gentil. i. c. 2. 3. Matthew. Brouerius de
Niedek, De Populor. vet. et recent. Adorationibus, p. 31. And, among the
ancient Norvegians, Erlingus Scacchius before he attacked carl Sigund,
commanded his army to pronounce this formulary aloud, and to strike their
shields. See Dolmerus ad HIRD-SKRAAN, sive Jus Aulicum antiq. Norvegic. p. 51.
p. 413. edit. Hafn. 1673. Engelhusius, in describing a battle with the Huns in
the year 934, relates, that the christians at the onset cried. Kyrie eleison,
but on the other side, diabolica vox hiu, hiu, hiu, auditur. Chronic. p. 1073.
in tom. ii. Scriptor. Bruns. Leibnit. Compare Bed. Hist. Eccles. Anglican. lib.
ii. c. 20. And Schilterus, ubi supr. p. 17. And Sarbiev. Od. 1. 24. The Greek
church appears to have had a set of military hymns, probably for the use of the
soldiers, either in battle or in the camp. In a Catalogue of the manuscripts of
the library of Berne, there is "Sylloge Tacticorum Leonis Imperatoris cui operi
^inem imponunt HYMNI MILITARES quibus iste titulus, (...), etc." Catal. Cod,
etc. p. 600. See Meursius's edit. of Leo's TACTICS, c. xii. p. 155. Lugd. Bat.
1612. 4to. But to return to the main subject of this tedious note. Wagenseil,
in a letter to Cuperus, mentions a trearise written by one Ernest Casimir
Wassenback, I suppose a German, with this title, "De Bardis ac Barditu, five
antiquis Carminibus ac Cantilenis veterum Germanorum Dissertatio, cui junctus
est de S. Annone Coloniensi archiepiscopo vetustissimus omnium Germanorum
rhythmus et monumentum." See Polen. Supplem. Thesaur. Gronov. et Graev. tom.
iv. p. 24. I do not think it was ever published. See Joach. Swabius, de
Semnotheis veterum Germanorum philosophis. p. 8. And SECT. i. infr. p. 7 8.
Pelloutier, sur la Lang. Celt. part i. tom. i. chapter xii. p. 20.

We must be careful to distinguish between the poetry of the Scandinavians, the
Teutonics, and the Celts. As most of the Celtic and Teutonic nations were early
converted to christianity, it is hard to find any of their native songs. But I
must except the poems of Ossian, which are noble and genuine remains of the
Celtic poetry.


. But we are not informed whether these were Scandinavian, Celtic, or Teutonic
poems.

About the beginning of the tenth century, France was invaded by the Normans,
or NORTHERN-MEN, an army of adventurers from Norway, Denmark, and Sweden. And
although the conquerors, especially when their success does not solely depend
on superiority of numbers, usually assume the manners of the conquered, yet
these strangers must have still further familiarised in France many of their
northern fictions.

From this general circulation in these and other countries, and from that
popularity which it is natural to suppose they must have acquired, the scaldic
inventions might have taken deep root in Europe Of the long continuance of the
Celtic superstitions in the popular belief, see what is said in the most
elegant and judicious piece of criticism which the present age has produced,
Mrs. Montague's ESSAY ON SHAKESPEARE. p. 145. edit. 1772.
. At least they seem to have prepared the way for the more easy admission of
the Arabian fabling about the ninth century, by which they were, however, in
great measure, superseded. The Arabian fictions were of a more splendid nature,
and better adapted to the increasing civility of the times. Less horrible and
gross, they had a novelty, a variety, and a magnificence, which carried with
them the charm of fascination. Yet it is probable, that many of the scaldic
imaginations might have been blended with the Arabian. In the mean time, there
is great reason to believe, that the Gothic scalds enriched their vein of
fabling from this new and fruitful source of fiction, opened by the Arabians in
Spain, and afterward propagated by the crusades. It was in many respects
cogenial with their own Besides the general wildness of the imagery in both,
among other particular circumstances of coincidence which might be mentioned
here, the practice of giving names to swords, which we find in the scaldic
poems, occurs also among the Arabians. In the HERVARER SAGA, the sword of
Suar^ulama is called TIRFING. Hickes. These. i. p. 193. The names of swords of
many of the old northern chiefs are given us by Olaus Wormius, Lit Run. cap.
xix. p. 110. 4to. ed. Thus, Herbelot recites a long catalogue of the names of
the swords of the most famous Arabian and Persic warriors. V. SAIF. p. 736. b.
Mahomet had nine swords, all which are named. As were also his bows, quivers,
cuirasses, helmets, and lances. His swords were called The Piercing, Ruin,
Death, etc. Mod. Univ. Hist. i. p. 253. This is common in the romance-writers
and Ariosto. Mahomet's horses had also pompous or heroic appellations. Such as
the Swift, The Thunderer, Shaking the earth with his hoof, The Red, etc. As
likewise his mules, asses, and camels. Horses were named in this manner among
the Runic heroes. See Ol. Worm. ut supr. p. 110. Odin's horse was called
SLEIPNER. See EDDA Island. fab. xxi. I could give other proofs. But we have
already wandered too far, in what Spenser calls, this delightful land of
Faerie. Yet I must add, that from one, or both, of these sources, king Arthur's
sword is named in Geoffrey of Monmouth, Lib. ix. cap. 11. Ron is also the name
of his lance. ibid. cap. 4. And Turpin calls Charlemagne's sword Gaudiosa. See
Obs. Spens. i.. vi. p. 214. By the way, from these correspondencies, an
argument might be drawn, to prove the oriental origin of the Goths. And some
perhaps may think them proofs of the doctrine just now suggested in the text,
that the scalds borrowed from the Arabians.
: and the northern bards, who visited the countries where these new fancies
were spreading, must have been naturally struck with such wonders, and were
certainly fond of picking up fresh embellishments, and new strokes of the
mavelous, for augmenting and improving their stock of poetry. The earliest
scald now on record is not before the year 750. From which time the scalds
flourished in the northern countries, till below the year 1157 Ol. Worm. Lit.
Run. p. 241.
. The celebrated ode of Regner Lodbrog was composed about the end of the ninth
century Id. Ibid. p. 196.
.

And that this hypothesis is partly true, may be concluded from the subjects of
some of the old Scandic romances, manuscripts of which now remain in the royal
library at Stockholm. The titles of a few shall serve for a specimen; which I
will make no apology for giving at large. "SAGAN AF HIALMTER OC OLWER. The
History of Hialmter king of Sweden, son of a Syrian princess, and of Olver
Jarl. Containing their expeditions into Hunland, and Arabia, with their
numerous encounters with the Vikings and the giants. Also their leagues with
Alsola, daughter of Ringer king of Arabia, afterward married to Hervor king of
Hunland, etc. -- SAGAN AF SIOD. The History of Siod, son of Ridgare king of
England; who first was made king of England, afterward of Babylon and Niniveh.
Comprehending various occurrences in Saxland, Babylon, Greece, Africa, and
especially in Eirice In the Latin EIRICAEA REGIONE. f. Erse or Irish land.
the region of the giants. -- SAGAN AF ALEFLECK. The History of Alefleck, a
king of England, and of his expeditions into India and Tartary. -- SAGAN AF
ERIK WIDFORLA. The History of Eric the traveller, who, with his companion Eric,
a Danish prince, undertook a wonderful journey to Odin's Hall, or Oden's Aker,
near the river Pison in India Wanley, apud Hickes, iii. p. 314. seq.
." Here we see the circle of the Islandic poetry enlarged; and the names of
countries and cities belonging to another quarter of the globe, Arabia, India,
Tartary, Syria, Greece, Babylon, and Niniveh, intermixed with those of Hunland,
Sweden, and England, and adopted into the northern romantic narratives. Even
Charlemagne and Arthur, whose histories, as we have already seen, had been so
lavishly decorated by the Arabian fablers, did not escape the Scandinavian
scalds It is amazing how early and how universally this fable was spread. G. de
la Flamma says, that in the year 1339, an ancient tomb of a king of the
Lombards was broke up in Italy. On his sword was written, "C'el est l'espee de
Meser Tristant, un qui occist l'Amoroyt d'Yrlant." -- i. e. "This is the sword
of sir Tristram, who killed Amoroyt of Ireland." SCRIPT. ITAL. tom. xii. 1028.
The Germans are said to have some very ancient narrative songs on our old
British heroes, Tristram, Gawain, and the rest of the knights Von der
Tafel-ronde. See Goldast. Not. Vit. Carol. Magn. p. 207. edit. 1711.
. Accordingly we find these subjects among their Sagas. "SAGAN AF ERIK
EINGLANDS KAPPE. The History of Eric, son of king Hiac, king Arthur's chief
wrestler. -- HISTORICAL RHYMES of king Arthur, containing his league with
Charlemagne. -- SAGAN AF IVENT. The History of Ivent, king Arthur's principal
champion, containing his battles with the giants They have also, "BRETOMANNA
SAGA, The History of the Britons, from Eneas the Trojan to the emperor
Constantius." Wanl. ibid. There are many others, perhaps of later date,
relating to English history, particularly the history of William the Bastard
and other christians, in their expedition into the holy land. The history of
the destruction of the monasteries in England, by William Rufus. Wanl. ibid.

In the history of the library at Upsal, I find the following articles, which
are left to the conjectures of the curious enquirer. Historia Biblioth.
Upsaliens. per Celsium. Ups. 1745. 8vo. -- page 88. Artic. vii. Variae
Britannorum fabulae, quas in carmine conversas olim, atque in conviviis ad
citharam decantari solitas fuisse, perhibent. Sunt autem relationes de GUIAMARO
equite Britanniae meridionalis Aeskeliod Britannis veteribus dictae. De
Nobilium duorum conjugibus gemellos enixis; et id genus alia. -- page 87.
Artic. v. Drama (...), fol. in membran. Res continet amatorias, olim, ad jocum
concitandum Islandica lingua scriptum. -- ibid. Artic. vii. The history of Duke
Julianus, son of S. Giles. Containing many things of Earl William and Rosamund.
In the ancient Islandic. See OBSERVATIONS ON THE FAIRY QUEEN, i. page 203.
204.. vi.


. -- SAGAN AF KARLAMAGNUSE OF HOPPUM HANS. The History of Charlemagne, of his
champions, and captains. Containing all his actions in several parts. 1. Of his
birth and coronation: and the combat of Carvetus king of Babylon, with Oddegir
the Dane Mabillon thinks, that Turpin first called this hero a Dane. But this
notion is refuted by Bartholinus, Antiq. Danic. ii. 13. p. 578. His old Gothic
sword, SPATHA, and iron shield, are still preserved and shown in a monastery of
the north. Bartholin. ibid. p. 579.
. 2. Of Aglandus king of Africa, and of his son Jatmund, and their wars in
Spain with Charlemagne. 3. Of Roland, and his combat with Villaline king of
Spain. 4. Of Ottuel's conversion to christianity, and his marriage with
Charlemagne's daughter. 5. Of Hugh king of Constantinople, and the memorable
exploits of his champions. 6. Of the wars of Ferracute king of Spain. 7. Of
Charlemagne's achievements in Rouncevalles, and of his death Wanley, ut supr.
p. 314.
." In another of the Sagas, Jarl, a magician of Saxland, exhibits his feats of
necromancy before Charlemagne. We learn from Olaus Magnus, that Roland's
magical horn, of which archbishop Turpin relates such wonders, and among others
that it might be heard at the distance of twenty miles, was frequently
celebrated in the songs of the Islandic bards See infr. SECT. iii. p. 132.
. It is not likely that these pieces, to say no more, were composed till the
Scandinavian tribes had been converted to christianity; that is, as I have
before observed, about the close of the tenth century. These barbarians had an
infinite and a national contempt for the christians, whose religion inculcated
a spirit of peace, gentleness, and civility; qualities so dissimilar to those
of their own ferocious and warlike disposition, and which they naturally
interpreted to be the marks of cowardice and pusillanimity Regner Lodbrog, in
his DYING ODE, speaking of a battle fought against the christians, says, in
ridicule of the eucharist, "There we celebrated a MASS [Missu, Island.] of
weapons."
. It has, however, been urged, that as the irruption of the Normans into
France, under their leader Rollo, did not take place till toward the beginning
of the tenth century, at which period the scaldic art was arrived to the
highest perfection in Rollo's native country, we can easily trace the descent
of the French and English romances of chivalry from the Northern Sagas. It is
supposed, that Rollo carried with him many scalds from the north, who
transmitted their skill to their children and successors: and that these,
adopting the religion, opinions, and language, of the new country, substituted
the heroes of christendom, instead of those of their pagan ancestors, and began
to celebrate the feats of Charlemagne, Roland, and Oliver, whose true history
they set off and embellished with the scaldic figments of dwarfs, giants,
dragons, and enchantments Percy's Ess. Metr. Romans p. viii.
. There is, however, some reason to believe, that these fictions were current
among the French long before; and, if the principles advanced in the former
part of this dissertation be true, the fables adhering to Charlemagne's real
history must be referred to another source.

Let me add, that the enchantments of the Runic poetry are very different from
those in our romances of chivalry. The former chiefly deal in spells and
charms, such as would preserve from poison, blunt the weapons of an enemy,
procure victory, allay a tempest, cure bodily diseases, or call the dead from
their tombs: in uttering a form of mysterious words, or inscribing Runic
characters. The magicians of romance are chiefly employed in forming and
conducting a train of deceptions. There is an air of barbaric horror in the
incantations of the scaldic fablers: the magicians of romance often present
visions of pleasure and delight; and, although not without their alarming
terrors, sometimes lead us through flowery forests, and raise up palaces
glittering with gold and precious stones. The Runic magic is more like that of
Canidia in Horace, the romantic resembles that of Armida in Tasso. The
operations of the one are frequently but mere tricks, in comparison of that
sublime solemnity of necromantic machinery which the other so awefully displays.

It is also remarkable, that in the earlier scaldic odes, we find but few
dragons, giants, and fairies. These were introduced afterward, and are the
progeny of Arabian fancy. Nor indeed do these imaginary beings often occur in
any of the compositions which preceded the introduction of that species of
fabling. On this reasoning, the Irish tale-teller mentioned above, could not be
a lineal descendant of the elder Irish bards. The absence of giants and
dragons, and, let me add, of many other traces of that fantastic and brilliant
imagery which composes the system of Arabian imagination, from the poems of
Ossian, are a striking proof of their antiquity. It has already been suggested,
at what period, and from what origin, those fancies got footing in the Welsh
poetry: we do not find them in the odes of Taliessin or Aneurin Who flourished
about the year 570. He has left a long spirited poem called GODODIN, often
alluded to by the later Welsh bards, which celebrates a battle fought against
the Saxons near Cattraeth, under the conduct of Mynnydawe Eiddin, in which all
the Britons, three only excepted, among which was the bard Aneurin himself,
were slain. I will give a specimen. "The men whose drink was mead, comely in
shape, hastened to Cattraeth. These impetuous warriors in ranks, armed with red
spears, long and bending, began the battle. Might I speak my revenge against
the people of the Deiri, I would overwhelm them, like a deluge, in one
slaughter: for unheeding I have lost a friend, who was brave in resisting his
enemies. I drank of the wine and metheglin of Mordai, whose spear was of huge
size. In the shock of the battle, he prepared food for the eagle. When Cydwal
hastened forward, a shout arose: before the yellow morning, when he gave the
signal, he broke the shield into small splinters. The men hastened to
Cattraeth, noble in birth: their drink was wine and mead, out of golden cups.
There were three hundred and sixty three adorned with chains of gold; but of
those, who filled with wine, rushed on to the fight, only three escaped, who
hewed their way with the sword, the warrior of Acron, Conan Dacarawd, and I the
bard Aneurin, red with blood, otherwise I should not have survived to compose
this song. When Caradoc hastened to the war, he was the son of a wild boar, in
hewing down the Saxons; a bull in the conflict of fight, he twisted the wood
[spear] from their hands. Gurien saw not his father after he had lifted the
glistening mead in his hand. I praise all the warriors who thus met in the
battle, and attacked the foe with one mind. Their life was short, but they have
left a long regret to their friends. Yet of the Saxons they slew more than
seven..... There was many a mother shedding tears. The song is due to thee who
have attained the highest glory: thou who wast like fire, thunder and storm: O
Rudd Fedell, warlike champion, excellent in might, you still think of the war.
The noble chiefs deserve to be celebrated in verse, who after the fight made
the rivers to overflow their banks with blood. Their hands glutted the throats
of the darkbrown eagles, and skilfully prepared food for the ravenous birds. Of
all the chiefs who went to Cattraeth with golden chains," etc. This poem is
extremely difficult to be understood, being written, if not in the Pictish
language, at least in a dialect of the Britons very different from the modern
Welsh. See the learned and ingenious Mr. Evans's DISSERTATIO DE BARDIS, p. 68.
-- 75.
. This reasoning explains an observation of an ingenious critic in this species
of literature, and who has studied the works of the Welsh bards with much
attention. "There are not such extravagant FLIGHTS in any poetic compositions,
except it be in the EASTERN; to which, as far as I can judge by the few
translated specimens I have seen, they bear a near resemblance Evans, ubi supr.
Pref. p. iv.
." I will venture to say he does not meet with these flights in the elder Welsh
bards. The beautiful romantic fiction, that king Arthur, after being wounded in
the fatal battle of Camlan, was conveyed by an Elfin princess into the land of
Faery, or spirits, to be healed of his wounds, that he reigns there still as a
mighty potentate in all his pristine splendor, and will one day return to
resume his throne in Britain, and restore the solemnities of his champions,
often occurs in the ancient Welsh bards The Arabians call the Fairies Ginn, and
the Persians Peri. The former calls Fairy-land Ginnistian, many beautiful
cities of which they have described in their fabulous histories. See Herbelot.
Bibl. Orient. GIAN. p. 306. a. GENN. p. 375. a. PERI. p. 701. b. They pretend
that the fairies built the city of Esthekar, or Persepolis. Id. in. V. p. 327.
a. One of the most eminent of the oriental fairies was MERGIAN PERI, or Mergian
the Fairy. Herbel. ut supr. V. PERI. p. 702. a. THAHAMURATH, p. 1017. a. This
was a good fairy, and imprisoned for ages in a cavern by the giant Demrusch,
from which she was delivered by Thahamurath, whom she afterward assisted in
conquering another giant, his enemy. Id. ibid. And this is the fairy or elfin
queen, called in the French romances MORGAIN LE FAY, Morgain the fairy, who
preserved king Arthur. See Obs. on Spenser's Fairy Queen, i. 63. 65.. ii.
. But not in the most ancient. It is found in the compositions of the Welsh
bards only, who flourished after the native vein of British fabling had been
tinctured by these FAIRY TALES, which the Arabians had propagated in Armorica,
and which the Welsh had received from their connection with that province of
Gaul. Such a fiction as this is entirely different from the cast and
complexion of the ideas of the original Welsh poets. It is easy to collect
from the Welsh odes, written after the tenth century, many signatures of this
EXOTIC imagery. Such as, "Their assault was like strong lions. He is valourous
as a lion, who can resist his lance? The dragon of Mona's sons were so brave in
fight, that there was horrible consternation, and upon Tal Moelvre a thousand
banners. Our lion has brought to Trallwng three armies. A dragon he was from
the beginning, unterrified in battle. A dragon of Ovain. Thou art a prince firm
in battle, like an elephant. Their assault was as of strong lions. The lion of
Cemais fierce in the onset, when the army rusheth to be covered with red. He
saw Llewellyn like a burning dragon in the strife of Arson. He is furious in
fight like an outrageous dragon. Like the roaring of a furious lion, in the
search of prey, is thy thirst of praise." Instead of producing more proofs from
the multitude that might be mentioned, for the sake of illustration of our
argument, I will contrast these with some of their natural unadulterated
thoughts. "Fetch the drinking horn, whose gloss is like the wave of the sea.
Tudor is like a wolf rushing on his prey. They were all covered with blood when
they returned, and the high hills and the dales enjoyed the sun equally The
high mountains in Merionethshire.
. O thou virgin, that shinest like the snow on the brows of Aran A beautiful
periphrasis for noon day, and extremely natural in so mountainous a country as
Wales. This circumstance of time added to the merit of the action.
: like the fine spiders webs on the grass on a summer's day. The army at Offa's
dike panted for glory, the soldiers of Venedotia, and the men of London, were
as the alternate motion of the waves on the seashore, where the sea-mew
screams. The hovering crows were numberless: the ravens croaked, they were
ready to suck the prostrate carcases. His enemies are scattered as leaves on
the side of hills driven by hurricanes. He is a warrior, like a surge on the
beach that covers the wild salmons. Her eye was piercing like that of the hawk
See infr. SECT. xiii. p. 380.
: her face shone like the pearly dew on Eryri Mountains of snow, from Eiry,
snow.
. Llewellyn is a hero who sets castles on fire. I have watched all night on
the beach, where the sea-gulls, whose plumes glitter, sport on the bed of
billows; and where the herbage, growing in a solitary place, is of a deep green
See Evans, ubi supr. p. 8. 10. 11. 15. 16. 21. 22. 23. 26. 28. 34. 37. 39. 40.
41. 42. And his Diss. de Bard. p. 84. Compare Aneurin's ode, cited above.
." These images are all drawn from their own country, from their situation and
circumstances; and, although highly poetical, are in general of a more sober
and temperate coloring. In a word, not only that elevation of allusion, which
many suppose to be peculiar to the poetry of Wales, but that fertility of
fiction, and those mavelous fables recorded in Geoffrey of Monmouth, which
the generality of readers, who do not sufficiently attend to the origin of that
historian's romantic materials, believe to be the genuine offspring of the
Welsh poets, are of foreign growth. And, to return to the ground of this
argument, there is the strongest reason to suspect, that even the Gothic EDDA,
or system of poetic mythology of the northern nations, is enriched with those
higher strokes of oriental imagination, which the Arabians had communicated to
the Europeans. Into this extravagant tissue of unmeaning allegory, false
philosophy, and false theology, it was easy to incorporate their most wild and
romantic conceptions Huet is of opinion, that the EDDA is entirely the
production of Snorro's fancy. But this is saying too much. See Orig. Roman. p.
116. The first Edda was compiled, undoubtedly with many additions and
interpolations, from fictions and traditions in the old Runic poems, by Soemund
Sigfusson, surnamed the Learned, about the year 1057. He seems to have made it
his business to select or digest into one body such of these pieces as were
best calculated to furnish a collection of poetic phrases and figures. He
studied in Germany, and chiefly at Cologne. This first Edda, being not only
prolix, but perplexed and obscure, a second, which is that now extant, was
compiled by Snorro Sturleson, born in the year 1179.

It is certain, and very observable, that in the EDDA we find much more of
giants, dragons, and other imaginary beings, undoubtedly belonging to Arabian
romance, then in the earlier Scaldic odes. By the way, there are many strokes
in both the EDDAS taken from the REVEL ATIONS of Saint John, which must come
from the compilers who were Christ ians.


.

It must be confessed, that the ideas of chivalry, the appendage and the
subject of romance, subsisted among the Goths. But this must be understood
under certain limitations. There is no peculiarity which more strongly
discriminates the manners of the Greeks and Romans from those of modern times,
than that small degree of attention and respect with which those nations
treated the fair sex, and that inconsiderable share which they were permitted
to take in conversation, and the general commerce of life. For the truth of
this observation, we need only appeal to the classic writers: in which their
women appear to have been devoted to a state of seclusion and obscurity. One is
surprised that barbarians should be greater masters of complaisance than the
most polished people that ever existed. No sooner was the Roman empire
overthrown, and the Goths had overpowered Europe, than we find the female
character assuming an unusual importance and authority, and distinguished with
new privileges, in all the European governments established by the northern
conquerors. Even amidst the confusions of savage war, and among the almost
incredible enormities committed by the Goths at their invasion of the empire,
they forbore to offer any violence to the women. This perhaps is one of the
most striking features in the new state of manners, which took place about the
seventh century: and it is to this period, and to this people, that we must
refer the origin of gallantry in Europe. The Romans never introduced these
sentiments into their European provinces.

The Goths believed some divine and prophetic quality to be inherent in their
women; they admitted them into their councils, and consulted them on the public
business of the state. They were suffered to conduct the great events which
they predicted. Ganna, a prophetic virgin of the Marcomanni, a German or
Gaulish tribe, was sent by her nation to Rome, and admitted into the presence
of Domitian, to treat concerning terms of peace Dio. lib. lxvii. p. 761.
. Tacitus relates, that Velleda, another German prophetess, held frequent
conferences with the Roman generals; and that on some occasions, on account of
the sacredness of her person, she was placed at a great distance on a high
tower, from whence, like an oracular divinity, she conveyed her answers by some
chosen messenger Hist. lib. iv. p. 953. edit. D'Orlean. fol.
. She appears to have preserved the supreme rule over her own people and the
neighboring tribes He says just before, "ea virgo late imperitabat." Ibid. p.
951. He saw her in the reign of Vespasian. De Morib. German. p. 972. Where he
likewise mentions Aurinia.
. And there are other instances, that the government among the ancient Germans
was sometimes vested in the women See Tacit. Hist. lib. v. p. 969. ut supr.
. This practice also prevailed among the Sitones or Norwegians De Morib.
German. p. 983. ut supr.
. The Cimbri, a Scandinavian tribe, were accompanied at their assemblies by
venerable and hoary-headed prophetesses, apparelled in long linen vestments of
a splendid white Strab. Geograph. lib. viii. p. 205. edit. Is. Cas. 158^. fol.
Compare Keysler, Antiquit. Sell. Septentrional. p. 371. viz. DISSERTATIO de
Mulieribus Fatidicis veterum Celtarum gentiumque Septentrionalium. See also
Cluverius's GERMANIA ANTIQUA, lib. i. cap. xxiv. page 165. edit. fol. Lugd.
Bat. 1631. It were easy to trace the WEIRD sisters, and our modern witches, to
this source.
. Their matrons and daughters acquired a reverence from their skill in studying
simples, and their knowledge of healing wounds, arts reputed mysterious. The
wives frequently attended their husbands in the most perilous expeditions, and
fought with great intrepidity in the most bloody engagements See SECT. vii.
infr. p. 254. Diodorus Siculus says, that among the Scythians the women are
trained to war as well as the men, to whom they are not inferior in strength
and courage. L. ii. p. 90.
. These nations dreaded captivity, more on the account of their women, than on
their own: and the Romans, availing themselves of this apprehension, often
demanded their noblest virgins for hostages Tacit. de Morib. Germ. page 972. ut
supr.
. From these circumstances, the women even claimed a sort of precedence, at
least an equality subsisted between the sexes, in the Gothic constitutions.

But the deference paid to the fair sex, which produced the spirit of
gallantry, is chiefly to be sought for in those strong and exaggerated ideas of
female chastity which prevailed among the northern nations. Hence the lover's
devotion to his mistress was increased, his attentions to her service
multiplied, his affection heightened, and his solicitude aggravated, in
proportion as the difficulty of obtaining her was enhanced: and the passion of
love acquired a degree of delicacy, when controlled by the principles of honor
and purity. The highest excellence of character then known was a superiority in
arms; and that rival was most likely to gain his lady's regard, who was the
bravest champion. Here we see valor inspired by love. In the mean time, the
same heroic spirit which was the surest claim to the favor of the ladies, was
often exerted in their protection: a protection much wanted in an age of
rapine, of plunder, and piracy; when the weakness of the softer sex was exposed
to continual dangers and unexpected attacks See instances of this sort of
violence in the ancient HISTORY of HIALMAR, a Runic romance, p. 135. 136. 140.
Diss. Epist. Ad calc. Hickes. Thesaur. vol. i. Where also is a challenge
between two champions for king Hialmar's daughter. But the king composes the
quarrel by giving to one of them, named Ulfo, among other rich presents, an
inestimable horn, on which were inlaid in gold the images of Odin, Thor, and
Freya: and to the other, named Hramur, the lady herself, and a drum, embossed
with golden imagery, which foretold future events. This piece, which is in
Runic capital characters, was written before the year 1000. Many stories of
this kind might be produced from the northern chronicles.
. It is easy to suppose the officious emulation and ardour of many a gallant
young warrior, pressing forward to be foremost in this honorable service,
which flattered the most agreeable of all passions, and which gratified every
enthusiasm of the times, especially the fashionable fondness for a wandering
and military life. In the mean time, we may conceive the lady thus won, or thus
defended, conscious of her own importance, affecting an air of stateliness: it
was her pride to have preserved her chastity inviolate, she could perceive no
merit but that of invincible bravery, and could only be approached in terms of
respect and submission.

Among the Scandinavians, a people so fond of clothing adventures in verse,
these gallantries must naturally become the subject of poetry, with its
fictitious embellishments. Accordingly, we find their chivalry displayed in
their odes; pieces, which at the same time greatly confirm these observations.
The famous ode of Regner Lodbrog, affords a striking instance; in which, being
imprisoned in a loathsome dungeon, and condemned to be destroyed by venomous
serpents, he solaces his desperate situation by recollecting and reciting the
glorious exploits of his past life. One of these, and the first which he
commemorates, was an achievement of chivalry. It was the delivery of a
beautiful Swedish princess from an impregnable fortress, in which she was
forcibly detained by one of her father's captains. Her father issued a
proclamation, promising that whoever would rescue the lady, should have her in
marriage. Regner succeeded in the attempt, and married the fair captive. This
was about the year 860 See Torf. Hist. Norw. tom. i. lib. 10. Saxo Grammat. p.
152. And Ol. Worm. Lit. Romans p. 221. edit. 4. I suspect that the romantic amor
between Regner and Aslauga is the forgery of a much later age See REGNARA
LODBROG'S Saga. C. 5. apud Biorneri Histor. Reg. Her. et Pugil. Res. praeclar.
gest. Stockholm. 1737.
. There are other strokes in Regner's ode, which, although not belonging to
this particular story, deserve to be pointed out here, as illustrative of our
argument. Such as, "It was like being placed near a beautiful virgin on a
couch. -- It was like kissing a young widow in the first seat at a feast. I
made to struggle in the twilight that golden-haired chief, who passed his
mornings among the young maidens, and loved to converse with widows. -- He who
aspires to the love of young virgins, ought always to be foremost in the din of
arms St.. 13. 14. 19. 23.
." It is worthy of remark, that these sentiments occur to Regner while he is in
the midst of his tortures, and at the point of death. Thus many of the heroes
in Froissart, in the greatest extremities of danger, recollect their amors,
and die thinking of their mistresses. And by the way, in the same strain, Boh,
a Danish champion, having lost his chin, and one of his cheeks, by a single
stroke from Thurstain Midlang, only reflected how he should be received, when
thus maimed and disfigured, by the Danish girls. He instantly exclaimed in a
tone of savage gallantry, "The Danish virgins will not now willingly or easily
give me kisses, if I should perhaps return home Chron. Norveg. p. 136.
." But there is an ode, in the KNYTLINGA-SAGA, written by Harald the VALIANT,
which is professedly a song of chivalry; and which; exclusive of its wild
spirit of adventure, and its images of savage life, has the romantic air of a
set of stanzas, composed by a Provencial troubadour. Harald, appears to have
been one of the most eminent adventurers of his age. He had killed the king of
Drontheim in a bloody engagement. He had traversed all the seas, and visited
all the coasts, of the north; and had carried his piratical enterprises even as
far as the Mediterranean, and the shores of Africa. He was at length taken
prisoner, and detained for some time at Constantinople. He complains in this
ode, that the reputation he had acquired by so many hazardous exploits, by his
skill in single combat, riding, swimming, gliding along the ice, darting,
rowing, and guiding a ship through the rocks, had not been able to make any
impression on Elissiff, or Elisabeth, the beautiful daughter of Jarilas, king
of Russia Bartholin. p. 54.
.

Here, however, chivalry subsisted but in its rudiments. Under the feudal
establishments, which were soon afterward erected in Europe, it received new
vigor, and was invested with the formalities of a regular institution. The
nature and circumstances of that peculiar model of government, were highly
favorable to this strange spirit of fantastic heroism; which, however
unmeaning and ridiculous it may seem, had the most serious and salutary
consequences in assisting the general growth of refinement, and the progression
of civilisation, in forming the manners of Europe, in inculcating the
principles of honor, and in teaching modes of decorum. The genius of the
feudal policy was perfectly martial. A numerous nobility, formed into separate
principalities, affecting independence, and mutually jealous of their
privileges and honors, necessarily lived in a state of hostility. This
situation rendered personal strength and courage the most requisite and
essential accomplishments. And hence, even in time of peace, they had no
conception of any diversions or public ceremonies, but such as were of the
military kind. Yet, as the courts of these petty princes were thronged with
ladies of the most eminent distinction and quality, the ruling passion for war
was tempered with courtesy. The prize of contending champions was adjudged by
the ladies; who did not think it inconsistent to be present or to preside at
the bloody spectacles of the times; and who, themselves, seem to have
contracted an unnatural and unbecoming ferocity, while they softened the
manners of those valorous knights who fought for their approbation. The high
notions of a noble descent, which arose from the condition of the feudal
constitution, and the ambition of forming an alliance with powerful and opulent
families, cherished this romantic system. It was hard to obtain the fair
feudatary, who was the object of universal adoration. Not only the splendour of
birth, but the magnificent castle surrounded with embattelled walls, guarded
with massy towers, and crowned with lofty pinnacles, served to inflame the
imagination, and to create an attachment to some illustrious heiress, whose
point of honor it was to be chaste and inaccessible. And the difficulty of
success on these occasions, seems in great measure to have given rise to that
sentimental love of romance, which acquiesced in a distant respectful
admiration, and did not aspire to possession. The want of an uniform
administration of justice, the general disorder, and state of universal
anarchy, which naturally sprung from the principles of the feudal policy,
presented perpetual opportunities of checking the oppressions of arbitrary
lords, of delivering captives injuriously detained in the baronial castles, of
punishing robbers, of succouring the distressed, and of avenging the impotent
and the unarmed, who were every moment exposed to the most licentious insults
and injuries. The violence and injustice of the times gave birth to valor and
humanity. These acts conferred a luster and an importance on the character of
men professing arms, who made force the substitute of law. In the mean time,
the crusades, so pregnant with enterprise, heightened the habits of this
warlike fanaticism. And when these foreign expeditions were ended, in which the
hermits and pilgrims of Palestine had been defended, nothing remained to employ
the activity of adventurers but the protection of innocence at home. Chivalry
by degrees was consecrated by religion, whose authority tinctured every
passion, and was engrafted into every institution, of the superstitious ages;
and at length composed that singular picture of manners, in which the love of a
god and of the ladies were reconciled, the saint and the hero were blended, and
charity and revenge, zeal and gallantry, devotion and valor, were united.

Those who think that chivalry started late, from the nature of the feudal
constitution, confound an improved effect with a simple cause. Not having
distinctly considered all the particularities belonging to the genius, manners,
and usages of the Gothic tribes, and accustomed to contemplate nations under
the general idea of barbarians, they cannot look for the seeds of elegance
amongst men, distinguished only for their ignorance and their inhumanity. The
rude origin of this heroic gallantry was quickly overwhelmed and extinguished,
by the superior pomp which it necessarily adopted from the gradual diffusion of
opulence and civility, and that blaze of splendour with which it was surrounded,
amid the magnificence of the feudal solemnities. But above all, it was lost and
forgotten in that higher degree of embellishment, which at length it began to
receive from the representations of romance.

From the foregoing observations taken together, the following general and
comprehensive conclusion seems to result.

Amid the gloom of superstition, in an age of the grossest ignorance and
credulity, a taste for the wonders of oriental fiction was introduced by the
Arabians into Europe, many countries of which were already seasoned to a
reception of its extravagancies, by means of the poetry of the Gothic s^alds,
who perhaps originally derived their ideas from the fame fruitful region of
invention. These fictions, coinciding with the reigning manners, and
perpetually kept up and improved in the tales of troubadours and minstrels,
seem to have centered about the eleventh century in the ideal histories of
Turpin and Geoffrey of Monmouth, which record the supposititious achievements
of Charlemagne and king Arthur, where they formed the groundwork of that
species of fabulous narrative called romance. And from these beginnings or
causes, afterward enlarged and enriched by kindred fancies fetched from the
crusades, that singular and capricious mode of imagination arose, which at
length composed the mavelous machineries of the more sublime Italian poets,
and of their disciple Spenser.

ON THE INTRODUCTION OF LEARNING into ENGLAND.
DISSERTATION II.
THE irruption of the northern nations into the western empire, about the
beginning of the fourth century, forms one of the most interesting and
important periods of modern history. Europe, on this great event, suffered the
most memorable revolutions in its government and manners; and from the most
flourishing state of peace and civility, became on a sudden, and for the space
of two centuries, the theater of the most deplorable devastation and disorder.
But among the disasters introduced by these irresistible barbarians, the most
calamitous seems to have been the destruction of those arts which the Romans
still continued so successfully to cultivate in their capital, and which they
had universally communicated to their conquered provinces. Toward the close of
the fifth century, very few traces of the Roman policy, jurisprudence,
sciences, and literature, remained. Some faint sparks of knowledge were kept
alive in the monasteries; and letters and the liberal arts were happily
preserved from a total extinction during the confusions of the Gothic invaders,
by that slender degree of culture and protection which they received from the
prelates of the church, and the religious communities.

But notwithstanding the famous academy of Rome Theodosius the younger, in the
year 425, founded an academy at Constantinople, which he furnished with able
professors of every science, intending it as a rival institution to that at
Rome. Gianon. Hist. Napl, ii. chapter vi. sect. 1. A noble library had been
established at Constantinople by Constantius and Valens before the year 380,
the custody of which was committed to four Greek and three Latin antiquaries or
curators. It contained sixty thousand volumes. Zonaras relates, that among
other treasures in this library, there was a roll one hundred feet long, made
of a dragon's gutt or intestine, on which Homer's Iliad and Odyssey were
written in golden letters. See Bibl. Histor. Literar. Select. etc. Ienae, 1754:
p. 164. seq. Literature flourished in the eastern empire, while the western was
depopulated by the Goths; and for many centuries afterward. The Turks
destroyed one hundred and twenty thousand volumes, I suppose in the imperial
library, when they sacked Constantinople in the year 1454. HOD. DE GRAEC.
ILLUSTR. ii. 1. p. 192.
with other literary seminaries had been destroyed by Alaric in the fourth
century; yet Theodoric the second, king of the Ostrogoths, a pious and humane
prince, restored in some degree the study of letters in that city, and
encouraged the pursuits of those scholars who survived this great and general
desolation of learning He died A. D. 526. See Cassiodor. Epist. lib. i. 39. See
also Func. de inerti et decrep. Latin. Linguae Senectut. cap. ii. p. 81.
. He adopted into his service Boethius, the most learned and almost only Latin
philosopher of that period. Cassiodorus, another eminent Roman scholar, was
Theodoric's grand secretary: who retiring into a monastery in Calabria, passed
his old age in collecting books, and practicing mechanical experiments Func. ut
supr. xiii. p. 471. xi. p. 595.
. He was the author of many valuable pieces which still remain Cave. Saecul.
Eutych. Hist Lit. p. 391.
. He wrote with little elegance, but he was the first that ever digested a
series of royal charts or instruments; a monument of singular utility to the
historian, and which has served to throw the most authentic illustration on the
public transactions and legal constitutions of those times. Theodoric's
patronage of learning is applauded by Claudian, and Sidonius Apollinaris. Many
other Gothic kings were equally attached to the works of peace; and are not
less conspicuous for their justice, prudence, and temperance, than for their
fortitude and magnanimity. Some of them were diligent in collecting the
scattered remains of the Roman institutes, and constructing a regular code of
jurisprudence Gianon. Hist. Nap. iii. c. 1
. It is highly probable, that those Goths who became masters of Rome, sooner
acquired ideas of civility, from the opportunity which that city above all
others afforded them of seeing the felicities of polished life, of observing
the conveniences arising from political economy, of mixing with characters
respectable for prudence and learning, and of employing in their counsels men
of superior wisdom, whose instruction and advice they found it their interest
to follow. But perhaps these northern adventurers, at least their princes and
leaders, were not even at their first migrations into the south, so totally
savage and uncivilised as we are commonly apt to suppose. Their enemies have
been their historians, who naturally painted these violent disturbers of the
general repose in the warmest colors. It is not easy to conceive, that the
success of their amazing enterprises was merely the effect of numbers and
tumultuary depredation: nor can I be persuaded, that the lasting and
flourishing governments which they established in various parts of Europe,
could have been framed by brutal force alone, and the blind efforts of
unreflecting savages. Superior strength and courage must have contributed in a
considerable degree to their rapid and extensive conquests; but at the same
time, such mighty achievements could not have been planned and executed
without some extraordinary vigor of mind, uniform principles of conduct, and
no common talents of political sagacity.

Although these commotions must have been particularly unfavourable to the more
elegant literature, yet Latin poetry, from a concurrence of causes, had for
some time begun to relapse into barbarism. From the growing increase of
christianity, it was deprived of its old fabulous embellishments, and chiefly
employed in composing ecclesiastical hymns. Amid these impediments however, and
the necessary degeneration of taste and style, a few poets supported the
character of the Roman muse with tolerable dignity, during the decline of the
Roman empire. These were Ausonius, Paulinus, Sidonius, Sedulius, Arator,
Juvencus, Prosper, and Fortunatus. With the last, who flourished at the
beginning of the sixth century, and was bishop of Poitiers, the Roman poetry is
supposed to have expired.

In the sixth century Europe began to recover some degree of tranquillity. Many
barbarous countries during this period, particularly the inhabitants of
Germany, of Friesland, and other northern nations, were converted to the
christian faith Cave. Saecul. Monoth. p. 440.
. The religious controversies which at this time divided the Greek and Latin
churches, roused the minds of men to literary enquiries. These disputes in some
measure called forth abilities which otherwise would have been unknown and
unemployed; and, together with the subtleties of argumentation, insensibly
taught the graces of style, and the habits of composition. Many of the popes
were persons of distinguished talents, and promoted useful knowledge no less by
example than authority. Political union was by degrees established; and regular
systems of government, which alone can ensure personal security, arose in the
various provinces of Europe occupied by the Gothic tribes. The Saxons had taken
possession of Britain, the Franks became masters of Gaul, the Huns of Pannonia,
the Goths of Spain, and the Lombards of Italy. Hence leisure and repose
diffused a mildness of manners, and introduced the arts of peace; and,
awakening the human mind to a consciousness of its powers, directed its
faculties to their proper objects.

In the mean time, no small obstruction to the propagation or rather revival of
letters, was the paucity of valuable books. The libraries, particularly those
of Italy, which abounded in numerous and inestimable treasures of literature,
were every where destroyed by the precipitate rage and undistinguishing
violence of the northern armies. Toward the close of the seventh century, even
in the papal library at Rome, the number of books was so inconsiderable, that
pope Saint Martin requested Sanctamand bishop of Maestricht, if possible to
supply this defect from the remotest parts of Germany Council. Tom. xv. page
285. edit. Paris, 1641.
. In the year 855, Lupus, abbot of Ferrieres in France, sent two of his monks
to pope Benedict the third, to beg a copy of CICERO DE ORATORE, and
QUINTILIAN'S INSTITUTES There are very early manuscripts of Quintilian's
Institutes, as we shall see below; and he appears to have been a favorite
author with some writers of the middle ages. He is quoted by John of Salisbury,
a writer of the eleventh century. Polycrat. vii. 14. iii. 7. x. 1. etc. And by
Vincent of Beauvais, a writer of the thirteenth. Specul. Hist. x. 11. ix. 125.
His declamations are said to have been abridged by our countryman Adelardus
Bathoniensis, and dedicated to the bishop of Bayeux, about the year 1130. See
Catal. Bibl. Leidens. p. 381. A. D. 1716. Poggius Florentinus, an eminent
restorer of classical literature, says, that in the year 1446, he found a much
more correct copy of Quintilian's Institutes than had been yet seen in Italy,
almost perishing, at the bottom of a dark neglected tower of the monastery of
saint Gall, in France, together with the three first books, and half the fourth
of Valerius Flaccus's Argonautics, and Asconius Pedianus's comment on eight
orations of Tully. See Poggii Op. p. 309. Amst. 1720. 8vo. The very copy of
Quintilian, found by Poggius, is said to have been in lord Sunderland's noble
library now at Blenheim. Poggius, in his Dialogue De Infelicitate Principum,
says of himself, that he traveled all over Germany in search of books. It is
certain that by his means Quintilian, Tertullian, Asconius Pedianus, Lucretius,
Sallust, Silius Italicus, Columella, Manilius, Tully's Orations, Ammianus
Marcellinus, Valerius Flaccus, and some of the Latin grammarians, and other
ancient authors, were recovered from oblivion, and brought into general notice
by being printed in the fifteenth century. Fr. Babarus Venetus, Collaudat. ad
Pogg. dat. Venet. 1417. 7 Jul. See also Giornale de Letterati d' Italia, tom.
ix. p. 178. x. p. 417. And Leonard. Aretin. Epist. lib. iv. p. 160. Chaucer
mentions the Argonautics of Valerius Flaccus, as I have observed, SECT. iii. p.
126. infr. Colomesius affirms, that Silius Italicus, is one of the classics
discovered by Poggius in the tower of the monastery of Saint Gaul. Ad Gyrald.
de Poet. Dial. iv. p. 240. But Philippo Rosso, in his Rit^rato di Roma antica,
mentions a very ancient manuscript of this poet brought from Spain into the
Vatican, having a picture of Hannibal, il quale boggi si ritrova nella pr^ditta
libraria, p. 83.
, and some other books: "for, says the abbot, although we have part of th^se
books, yet there is no whole or complete copy of them in all France Murator.
Antiq. Ital. iii. p. 8^5. And Lup. Ep. ad Baron. ad an. 856. n. 8, 9, 10.
". Albert abbot of Gemblours, who with incredible labor and immense expense
had collected an hundred volumes on theological and fifty on profane subjects,
imagined he had formed a splendid library Fleury. Hist. Eccl. l. lviii. c. 52.
. About the year 790, Charlemagne granted an unlimited right of hunting to the
abbot and monks of Sithiu, for making their gloves and girdles of the skins of
the deer they killed, and covers for their books Mabillon. De Re Dipl. p. 611.
. We may imagine that these religious were more fond of hunting than reading.
It is certain that they were obliged to hunt before they could read: and at
least it is probable, that under these circumstances, and of such materials,
they did not manufacture many volumes. At the beginning of the tenth century
books were so scarce in Spain, that one and the same copy of the bible, Saint
Jerome's Epistles, and some volumes of ecclesiastical offices and martyrologies,
often served several different monasteries Fleury, ubi supr. l. live. c. 54. See
other instances in Hist. Lit. Fr. par Rel. Benedict. vii. 3.
. Among the constitutions given to the monks of England by archbishop Lanfranc,
in the year 1072, the following injunction occurs. At the beginning of Lent,
the librarian is ordered to deliver a book to each of the religious: a whole
year was allowed for the perusal of this book: and at the returning Lent, those
monks who had neglected to read the books they had respectively received, are
commanded to prostrate themselves before the abbot, and to supplicate his
indulgence "Unusquisque reddat librum qui ad legendum sibi alio anno fuerat
commendatus: et qui cognoverat se non legisse librum, quem recepit, prostratus
culpam dicat, et indulgentiam petat. Iterum librorum custos unicuique fratrum
alium librum tribuat ad legendum." Wilkins. Council. i. 332. See also the order
of the Provincial chapter, De occupatione monacharum. Reyner, Append. p. 129.
. This regulation was partly occasioned by the low state of literature which
Lanfranc found in the English monasteries. But at the same time it was a matter
of necessity, and is in great measure to be referred to the scarcity of copies
of useful and suitable authors. In an inventory of the goods of John de
Pontissara, bishop of Winchester, contained in his capital palace of Wulvesey,
all the books which appear are nothing more than "Septendecem pecie librorum de
diversis Scienciis Registr. Pontissar. f. 126. MS.
." This was in the year 1294. The same prelate, in the year 1299, borrows of
his cathedral convent of St. Swithin at Winchester, BIBLIAM BEEN GLOSSATAM,
that is, the Bible, with marginal Annotations, in two large folio volumes: but
gives a bond for due return of the loan, drawn up with great solemnity "Omnibus
Christi fidelibus presents literas visuris vel inspecturis, Johannes dei
gracia Wynton episcopus, salutem in domino. Noveritis nos ex commodato
recepisse a dilectis filiis nostris Priore et conventu ecclesie nostre Wynton,
unam Bibliam in duobus voluminibus been glosatam, que aliquando fuit bone
memory domini Nicolai Wynton episcopi predecessoris nostri, termino perpetuo,
seu quamdiu nobis placuerit, inspiciendam, tenendam, et habendam. Ad cujus
Restitutionem eisdem fideliter et sine dolo faciendam, obligamus nos per
presents: quam si in vita nostra non restituerimus eisdem, obligamus
executores nostros, et omnia bona nostra mobilia et immobilia, ecclesiastica et
mundana, cohercioni et districtioni cujuscunque judicis ecclesiastici et
secularis quem predictus Prior et conventus duxerit eligendum, quod possint
eosdem executores per omnimodam districtionem compellere, quousque dicta Biblia
dictis filiis et fratribus sit restituta. In cujusrei testimonium, sigillum,
etc. Dat. apud Wulveseye, vi. Kal. Maii, anno 1299." Registr. Pontissar. ut
supr. f. 193.
. This Bible had been bequeathed to the convent the same year by Pontissara's
predecessor, bishop Nicholas de Ely: and in consideration of so important a
bequest, that is, "pro bona Biblia dicti episcopi been glosata," and one
hundred marks in money, the monks founded a daily mass for the soul of the
donor Ibid. f. 19.
. When a single book was bequeathed to a friend or relation, it was seldom
without many restrictions and stipulations As thus: "Do Henrico Morie scolari
meo, si contingat eum presbyterari: aliter erit liber domini Johannis Sorry, sic
quod non vendatur, sed transeat inter cognatos meos, si fuerint aliqui inventi:
sin autem, ab uno presbytero ad alium." Written at the end of Latin Homelies on
the Canticles, MSS. Reg. 5. C. iii. 24. Brit. Mus.
. If any person gave a book to a religious house, he believed that so valuable
a donation merited eternal salvation, and he offered it on the altar with great
ceremony. The most formidable anathemas were peremptorily denounced against
those who should dare to alienate a book presented to the cloister or library
of a religious house. The prior and convent of Rochester declare, that they
will every year pronounce the irrevocable sentence of damnation on him who
shall purloin or conceal a Latin translation of Aristotle's PHYSICS, or even
obliterate the title MSS. Reg. 12 G. ii.
. Sometimes a book was given to a monastery on condition that the donor should
have the use of it during his life: and sometimes to a private person, with the
reservation that he who receives it should pray for the soul of his benefactor.
The gift of a book to Lincoln cathedral, by bishop Repingdon, in the year 1422,
occurs in this form and under these curious circumstances. The memorial is
written in Latin, with the bishop's own hand, which I will give in English, at
the beginning of Peter's BREVIARY OF THE BIBLE. "I Philip of Repyndon, late
bishop of Lincoln, give this book called Peter de Aureolis to the new library
to be built within the church of Lincoln: reserving the use and possession of
it to Richard Trysely, clerk, canon and prebendary of Miltoun, in fee, and to
the term of his life: and afterward to be given up and restored to the said
library, or the keepers of the same, for the time being, faithfully and without
delay. Written with my own hand, A. D. 1422 MSS. Reg. 8 G. fol. iii. Brit. Mus.
." When a book was bought, the affair was of so much importance, that it was
customary to assemble persons of consequence and character, and to make a
formal record that they were present on this occasion. Among the royal
manuscripts, in the book of the SENTENCES of Peter Lombard, an archdeacon of
Lincoln has left this entry It is in Latin.
. "This book of the SENTENCES belongs to master Robert, archdeacon of Lincoln,
which he bought of Geoffrey the chaplain, brother of Henry vicar of
Northelkington, in the presence of master Robert de Lee, master John of
Lirling, Richard of Luda, clerk, Richard the almoner, the said Henry the vicar
and his clerk, and others: and the said archdeacon gave the said book to God
and saint Oswald, and to Peter abbot of Barton, and the convent of Barden 9 B.
ix. 1.
." The disputed property of a book often occasioned the most violent
altercations. Many claims appear to have been made to a manuscript of Matthew
Paris, belonging to the last-mentioned library: in which John Russell, bishop
of Lincoln, thus conditionally defends or explains his right of possession. "If
this book can be proved to be or to have been the property of the exempt
monastery of saint Alban in the diocese of Lincoln, I declare this to be my
mind, that, in that case, I use it at present as a loan under favor of those
monks who belong to the said monastery. Otherwise, according to the condition
under which this book came into my possession, I will that it shall belong to
the college of the blessed Winchester Mary at Oxford, of the foundation of
William Wykham. Written with my own hand at Bukdane, 1 Jan. A. D. 1488. Jo.
LINCOLN. Whoever shall obliterate or destroy this writing, let him be anathema
Written in Latin. Cod. MSS. Reg. 14 C. viii. 2. fol. In this manuscript is
written by Matthew Paris in his own hand, Hunc Librum dedit frater Matthaeus
Parisiensis -- Perhaps, deo et ecclesiae S. Albani, since erased.
." About the year 1225, Roger de Insula, dean of York, gave several Latin
bibles to the university of Oxford, with a condition that the students who
perused them should deposit a cautionary pledge Wood, Hist. Antiq. Univ. Oxon.
ii. 48. col. 1. It was common to lend money on the deposit of a book. There
were public chests in the universities, and perhaps some other places, for
receiving the books so deposited; many of which still remain, with an insertion
in the blank pages, containing the conditions of the pledge. I will throw
together a few instances in this note. In Peter Comestor's SCHOLASTICAL
HISTORY, "Cautio Thomae Wybaurn excepta in Cista de Chichele, A. D. 1468, 20
die men's. Augusti. Et est liber M. Petri, etc. Et jacet pro xxvi s. viii d."
Mus. Brit. MSS. Reg. 2 C. fol. i. In a PSALTER cum glossa, "A. D. 1326, ^ste
Liber impignoratur Mag. Jacobo de ^spania canonico S. Pauli London, per fratrem
Willielmum de Rokesle de ordine et conventu Praedicatorum Londonie, pro xx ^.
quem idem frater Willielmus recepit mutuo de predicto Jacobo ad opus predicti
conventus, solvendos in quindena S. Michaelis proxime ventura. Condonatur quia
pauper." Ibid. 3 E vii. fol. In Bernard's HOMELIES ON THE CANTICLES, "Cautio
Thome Myllyng imposita ciste de Rodbury, 10 die December. A. D. 1491. Et jacet
pro xx s." Ibid. 6 C. ix. These pledges, among other particulars, show the
prices of books in the middle ages, a topic which I shall touch upon below.
. The library of that university, before the year 1300, consisted only of a few
tracts, chained or kept in chests in the choir of St. Mary's church Registr.
Univ. Oxon. C. 64. a.
. In the year 1327, the scholars and citizens of Oxford assaulted and entirely
pillaged the opulent Benedictine abbey of the neighboring town of Abingdon.
Among the books they found there, were one hundred psalters, as many grayles,
and forty missals, which undoubtedly belonged to the choir of the church: but
besides these, there were only twentytwo CODICES, which I interpret books on
common subjects Wood, Hist. ut supr. i. 163. col. 1. Leland mentions this
library, but it is just before the dissolution of the monastery. "Cum excu^erem
pulverem et blattas Abbandunensis bibliothecae." Script. Brit. p. 238. See also
J. Twyne, Comm. de Reb. Albionic. lib. ii. p. 130. edit. Land. 1590. I have
mentioned the libraries of many monasteries below. See also what is said of the
libraries of the Mendicant Friars, SECT. ix. p. 292. infr. That of Gray Friars
in London was filled with books at the cost of five hundred and fifty-six
pounds in the year 1432. Leland. Coll. i. 109. In the year 1482, the library of
the abbey of Leicester contained eight large stalls which were filled with
books. Gul. Charity, Registr. Libr. et Jocal. omnium in monast. S. Mar. de
pratis prope Lecestriam. MSS. Bibl. Bodl. Laud. l. 75. fol. membr. See f. 139.
There is an account of the library of Dover priory, MSS. Bibl. Bodl. Arch. B.
24. Leland says, that the library of Norwich priory was "bonis refertissima
libris." Script. Brit. p. 247. See also Leland's account of St. Austin's
library at Canterbury, ibid. p. 299. Concerning which, compare Liber Thomae
Sprotti de libraria S. Augustini Cantuaria^, MSS. C. C. C. Oxon. 125. And Bibl
Cotton. Brit. Mus. JUL. C. vi. 4. And Leland, Coll. iii. 10. 120. Leland who
was librarian to Henry the eighth, removed a large quantity of valuable
manuscripts from St. Austin's Canterbury and from other monasteries at the
dissolution, to that king's library at Westminster. See Script. Brit.
ETHELSTANUS. And MSS. Reg. 1 A. xviii. For the sake of connection I will
observe, that among our cathedral libraries of secular canons, that of the
church of Wells was most magnificent: it was built about the year 1420, and
contained twentyfive windows on either side. Leland, Coll. i. p. 109. In which
state, I believe, it continues at present. Nor is it quite foreign to the
subject of this note to add, that king Henry the sixth intended a library at
Eton college, fifty-two feet long, and twenty-four broad: and another at King's
college in Cambridge of the same breadth, but one hundred and two feet in
length. Ex Testam. dat. xii. Mar. 1447.
. And although the invention of paper, at the close of the eleventh century,
contributed to multiply manuscripts, and consequently to facilitate knowledge,
yet even so late as the reign of our Henry the sixth, I have discovered the
following remarkable instance of the inconveniences and impediments to study,
which must have been produced by a scarcity of books. It is in the statutes of
St. Mary's college at Oxford, founded as a seminary to Oseney abbey in the year
1446. "Let no scholar occupy a book in the library above one hour, or two hours
at most; so that others shall be hindered from the use of the same "Nullus
occupet unum librum, vel occupari faciat, ultra unam horam et duas ad majus:
sic quod caeteri retrahantur a visu et studio ejusdem." Statut. Coll. S. Mariae
pro Oseney. DE LIBRARIA. f. 21. MSS. Rawlins. Bibl. Bodl. Oxon.
". The famous library established in the university of Oxford, by that
munificent patron of literature Humphrey duke of Gloucester, contained only six
hundred volumes Wood, ubi supr. ii. 49. col. ii. It was not opened till the
year 1480. Ibid. p. 50. col. 1.
. About the commencement of the fourteenth century, there were only four
classics in the royal library at Paris. These were one copy of Cicero, Ovid,
Lucan, and Boethius. The rest were chiefly books of devotion, which included
but few of the fathers: many treatises of astrology, geomancy, chiromancy, and
medicine, originally written in Arabic, and translated into Latin or French:
pandects, chronicles, and romances. This collection was principally made by
Charles the fifth, who began his reign in 1365. This monarch was passionately
fond of reading, and it was the fashion to send him presents of books from
every part of the kingdom of France. These he ordered to be elegantly
transcribed, and richly illuminated; and he placed them in a tower of the
Louvre, from thence called, la toure de la libraire. The whole consisted of
nine hundred volumes. They were deposited in three chambers; which, on this
occasion, were wainscotted with Irish oak, and cieled with cypress curiously
carved. The windows were of painted glass, fenced with iron bars and copper
wire. The English became masters of Paris in the year 1425. On which event the
duke of Bedford, regent of France, sent this whole library, then consisting of
only eight hundred and fifty-three volumes, and valued at two thousand two
hundred and twentythree livres, into England; where perhaps they became the
groundwork of duke Humphrey's library just mentioned See M. Boivin, Mem. Lit.
ii. p. 747. 4to. Who says, that the regent presented to his brother in law
Humphrey duke of Gloucester a rich copy of a translation of Livy into French,
which had been presented to the king of France.
. Even so late as the year 1471, when Louis the eleventh of France borrowed the
works of the Arabian physician Rhasis, from the faculty of medicine at Paris,
he not only deposited by way of pledge a quantity of valuable plate, but was
obliged to procure a nobleman to join with him as surety in a deed See Bury's
PHILOBIBLON, mentioned at large below, De modo communicandi studentibus libros
nostros. cap. xix.
, by which he bound himself to return it under a considerable forfeiture
Robertson's Hist. Charles V. vol. i. p. 281. edit. 8vo.
. The excessive prices of books in the middle ages, afford numerous and curious
proofs. I will mention a few only. In the year 1174, Walter prior of St.
Swithin's at Winchester, afterward elected abbot of Westminster, a writer in
Latin of the lives of the bishops who were his patrons William Giffard and
Henry de Blois, bishops of Winchester.
, purchased of the monks of Dorchester in Oxfordshire, Bede's Homilies, and
saint Austin's Psalter, for twelve measures of barley, and a pall on which was
embroidered in silver the history of saint Birinus converting a Saxon king
Registr. Priorat. S. Swithin. Winton. ut supr. MS. quatern... "Pro duodecim
men's. (or mod.) ordei, et una palla brusdata in argento cum historia sancti
Birini convertentis ad fidem Kynegylsum regem Gewyseorum: necnon Oswaldi regis
Northumbranorum suscipientis de font Kynegylsum." Gewyseorum is the West
Saxons. This history, with others of saint Birinus, is represented on the
ancient font of Norman workmanship in Winchester cathedral: on the windows of
the abbey-church of Dorchester near Oxford: and in the western front and
windows of Lincoln cathedral. With all which churches Birinus was connected. He
was buried in that of Dorchester, Whart. Angl. Sacr. i. 190. And in Bever's
manuscript Chronicle, or his Continuator, cited below, it is said, that a
marble cenotaph of mavelous sculpture was constructed over his grave in
Dorchester church about the year 1320. I find no mention of this monument in
any other writer. Bever. Chron. MSS. Coll. Trin. Oxon. Number. x. f. 66.
. Among the royal manuscripts in the British museum there is COMESTOR'S
SCHOLASTIC HISTORY in French; which, as it is recorded in a blank page at the
beginning, was taken from the king of France at the battle of Poitiers; and
being purchased by William Montague earl of Salisbury for one hundred mars, was
ordered to be sold by the last will of his countess Elizabeth for forty livres
MSS. 19 D ii. LA BIBLE HYSTORIAUS, ou LES HISTORIES ESCOLASTRES. The transcript
is of the fourteenth century. This is the entry, "Cest livre fust pris oue le
roy de France a la bataille de Peyters: et le bon count de Saresbirs William
Montagu la achata pur cent mars, et le dona a sa compaigne Elizabeth la bone
countess, que dieux assoile. -- Le quele lyvre le dite countess assigna a ses
executours de le render pur xl. livres."
. About the year 1400, a copy of John of Meun's ROMAN DE LA ROSE, was sold
before the palacegate at Paris for forty crowns or thirty-three pounds six and
sixpence It belonged to the late Mr. Ames, author of the TYPOGRAPHICAL
ANTIQUITIES. In a blank leaf was written, "Cest lyvir cost a palas du Paris
quarante corones d' or sans mentyr." I have observed in another place, that in
the year 1430, Nicholas de Lyra was transcribed at the expense of one hundred
marcs. SECT. ix. p. 292. infr. I add here the valuation of books bequeathed to
Merton college at Oxford, before the year 1300. A Scholastical History, 20 s. A
Concordantia, 10 s. The four greater Prophets, with glosses, 5 s. Liber Anselmi
cum quaestionibus Thomae de Malo, 12 s. Quodlibetae H. Gandavensis et S. Thomae
Aquinatis, 10 s.- A Psalter with glosses, 10 s. Saint Austin on Genesis, 10 s.
MS. HIST. of MERTON COLLEGE, by A. Wood. Bibl. Bodl. Cod. Rawlins. I could add
a variety of other instances. The curious reader who seeks further information
on this small yet not unentertaining branch of literary history, is referred to
Gabr. Naud. Addit. a l' Hist. de Louys xi. par Comines. edit. Fresn. tom. iv.
281, etc.
. But in pursuit of these anecdotes, I am imperceptibly seduced into later
periods, or rather am deviating from my subject.

After the calamities which the state of literature sustained in consequence of
the incursions of the northern nations, the first restorers of the ancient
philosophical sciences in Europe, the study of which, by opening the faculties
and extending the views of mankind, gradually led the way to other parts of
learning, were the Arabians. In the beginning of the eighth century, this
wonderful people, equally famous for their conquests and their love of letters,
in ravaging the Asiatic provinces, found many Greek books, which they read with
infinite avidity: and such was the gratification they received from this
fortunate acquisition, and so powerfully their curiosity was excited to make
further discoveries in this new field of knowledge, that they requested their
caliphs to procure from the emperor at Constantinople the best Greek writers.
These they carefully translated into Arabic See Abulfarag. per Pocock, Dynast.
p. 160. Greek was a familiar language to the Arabians. The accounts of the
caliph's treasury were always written in Greek till the year of Christ 715.
They were then ordered to be drawn in Arabic. Many proofs of this might be
mentioned. Greek was a familiar language in Mahomet's household. Zaid, one of
Mahomet's secretaries, to whom he dictated the Koran, was a perfect master of
Greek. Sale's Prelim. Disc. p. 144, 145. The Arabic gold coins were always
inscribed with Greek legends till about the year 700.
. But every part of the Grecian literature did not equally gratify their taste.
The Greek poetry they rejected, because it inculcated polytheism and idolatry,
which were inconsistent with their religion. Or perhaps it was too cold and too
correct for their extravagant and romantic conceptions Yet it appears from many
of their fictions, that some of the Greek poets were not unfamiliar among them,
perhaps long before the period assigned in the text. Theophilus Edessenus, a
Maronite, by profession an astronomer, translated Homer into Syriac about the
year 770. Theophan. Chronogr. p. 376. Abulfarag. ut supr. p. 217. Reinesius, in
his very curious account of the manuscript collection of Greek chemists in the
library of Saxe-Gotha, relates, that soon after the year 750, the Arabians
translated Homer and Pindar, amongst other Greek books. Ernest. Salom. Cyprian.
Catal. Codd. MSS. Bibl. Gothan. p. 71. 87. Apud Fabric. Bibl. Gr. xii. p. 753.
It is however certain, that the Greek philosophers were their objects. Compare
Eusebius. Renaudot. de Barb. Aristotel. Versionib. apud Fabric. Bibl. Gr. xii. p.
252. 258.
. Of the Greek history they made no use, because it recorded events which
preceded their prophet Mahomet. Accustomed to a despotic empire, they neglected
the political systems of the Greeks, which taught republican freedom. For the
same reasons they despised the eloquence of the Athenian orators. The Greek
ethics were super^eded by their Alcoran, and on this account they did not study
the works of Plato Yet Reinesius says, that about the year 750, they translated
Plato into Arabic: together with the works of S. Austin, Ambrose, Jerome, Leo,
and Gregory the Great. Ubi supr. p. 260. Leo Africanus mentions, among the
works of Averroes, EXPOSITIONES REIPUBLICAE PLATONIS. But he died so late as
the year 1206. De Med. et Philosoph. Arab. cap. xx.
. Therefore no other Greek books engaged their attention but those which
treated of mathematical, metaphysical, and physical knowledge. Mathematics
coincided with their natural turn to astronomy and arithmetic. Metaphysics, or
logic, suited their speculative genius, their love of tracing intricate and
abstracted truths, and their ambition of being admired for difficult and remote
researches. Physics, in which I include medicine, assisted the chemical
experiments to which they were so much addicted The earliest Arab chemist,
whose writings are now extant, was Jeber. He is about the seventh century. His
book, called by Golius his Latin translator, Lapis Philosophorum, was written
first in Greek, and af^erwards translated by its author into Arabic. For Jeber
was originally a Greek and a christian, and afterward went into Asia, and
embraced Mohammedism. See L^o African. lib. iii. c. 106. The learned Boerhaave
asserts, that many of Jeber's experiments are verified by present practice, and
that several of them have been revived as modern discoveries. Boerhaave adds,
that, except the fancies about the philosopher's stone, the exactness of
Jeber's operations is suprising. Hist. Chemistr. p. 14. 15. Land. 1727.
: and medicine, while it was connected with chemistry and botany, was a
practical art of immediate utility Their learning, but especially their medical
knowledge, flourished most in Salerno, a city of Italy, where it formed the
famous Schola Salernitana. The little book of medical precepts in leonine
heroics, which bears the name of that school, is well known. This system was
composed at the desire of Robert duke of Normandy, William the Conqueror's
brother: who returning from Jerusalem in one of the crusades, and having heard
of the fame of those Salernitan physicians, applied to them for the cure of a
wound made by a poisoned arrow. It was written not only in verse, but in
rhyming verse, that the prince might more easily retain the rules in his
memory. It was published 1100. The author's name is Giovanni di Milano, a
celebrated Salernitan physician. The monks of Cassino, hereafter mentioned,
much improved this study. See Chron. Cassin. 1. iii. c. 35. Medicine was at
first practiced by the monks or the clergy, who adopted it with the rest of the
Arabian learning. See P. Diac. De Vir. illustr. cap. xiii. et ibid. Not. Mar.
See also Ab. De Nuce ad Chron. Cassin. 1. i. c. 9 And Leon. Ostiens. Chron. 1.
iii. c. 7. See SECT. xvii. p. 442. infr.
. Hence they studied Aristotle, Galen, and Hippocrates, with unremitted ardour
and assiduity: they translated their writings into the Arabic tongue Compare
Renaudot. ubi supr. p. 258.
, and by degrees illustrated them with voluminous commentaries Their caliph
Al-manun, was a singular encourager of these translations. He was a great
master of the speculative sciences; and for his better information in them,
invited learned men from all parts of the world to Bagdat. He favored the
learned of every religion: and in return they made him presents of their works,
collected from the choicest pieces of eastern literature, whether of Indians,
Jews, Magians, or oriental christians. He expended immense sums in purchasing
valuable books written in Hebrew, Syriac, and Greek, that they might be
translated into Arabic. Many Greek treatises of medicine were translated into
that language by his orders. He hired the most learned persons from all
quarters of his vast dominions to make these translations. Many celebrated
astronomers flourished in his reign: and he was himself famed for his skill in
astronomy. This was about the year of Christ 820. See Leo African. de Med. et
Phil. Arab. cap. i. Al-Makin, p. 139, 140. Eutych. p. 434, 435.

A curious circumstance of the envy with which the Greeks at Constantinople
treated this growing philosophy of the Arabians, is mentioned by Cedrenus.
Al-Manun hearing of one Leo, an excellent inathematician at Constantinople,
wrote to the emperor, requesting that Leo might be permitted to settle in his
dominions, with a most ample salary, as a teacher in that science. The emperor
by this means being made acquainted with Leo's merit, established a school, in
which he appointed Leo a professor, for the sake of a specious excuse. The
caliph sent a second time to the emperor, entreating that Leo might reside with
him for a short time only; offering likewise a large sum of money, and terms of
lasting peace and alliance. On which the emperor immediately created Leo bishop
of Thessalonica. Cedren. Hist. Comp. 548. seq. Herbelot also relates, that the
same caliph, so universal was his search after Greek books, procured a copy of
Apollonius Pergaeus; the mathematician. But this copy contained only seven
books. In the mean time, finding by the Introduction that the whole consisted
of eight books, and that the eighth book was the foundation of the rest, and
being informed that there was a complete copy in the emperor's library at
Constantinople, he applied to him for a transcript. But the Greeks, merely from
a principle of jealousy, would not suffer the application to reach the ^mperor,
and it did not take effect. Biblioth. Oriental. p. 978. col. a.


. These Arabic translations of the Greek philosophers produced new treatises of
their own, particularly in medicine and metaphysics. They continued to extend
their conquests, and their frequent incursions into Europe before and after the
ninth century, and their absolute establishment in Spain, imported the
rudiments of useful knowledge into nations involved in the grossest ignorance,
and unpossessed of the means of instruction. They founded universities in many
cities of Spain and Africa See Hotting. Hist. Eccl. Saec. ix. sect. ii. lit. G
g. According to the best writers of oriental history, the Arabians had made
great advances on the coasts communicating with Spain, I mean in Africa, about
the year of Christ 692. And they became actually masters of Spain itself in the
year 712. See Mod. Univ. Hist. vol. ii. p. 168. 179. edit. 1759. It may be
observed, that Sicily became part of the dominion of the Saracens, within sixty
years after Mahomet's death, and in the seventh century, together with almost
all Asia and Africa. Only part of Greece and the lesser Asia then remained to
the Gre^ian empire at Constantinople Conring. De Script. etc. Comment. p. 101.
edit. Wratisl. 1727. See also, Univ. Hist. ut supr.
. They brought with them their books, which Charlemagne, emperor of France and
Germany, commanded to be translated from Arabic into Latin Cuspinian. de
Caesarib. p. 419.
: and which, by the care and encouragement of that liberal prince, being
quickly disseminated over his extensive dominions, soon became familiar to the
western world. Hence it is, that we find our early Latin authors of the dark
ages chiefly employed in writing systems of the most abstruse sciences: and
from these beginnings the Aristotelic philosophy acquired such establishment
and authority, that from long prescription it remains to this day the sacred
and uncontroverted doctrine of our schools Yet it must not be forgot, that S.
Austin had translated part of Aristotle's logic from the original Greek into
Latin before the fifth century; and that the peripatetic philosophy must have
been partly known to the western scholars from the writings and translations of
Boethius, who flourished about the year 520. Alcuine, Charlemagne's master,
commends S. Austin's book De Praedicamentis, which he calls, DECEMBER NATURAE
VERBA. Rog. Bacon, de Util. Scient. cap. xiv. See also Op. Maj. An ingenious
and learned writer, already quoted, a^^ir^s, that in the age of Charlemagne
there were many Greek scholars who made translations of Aristotle, which were
in use below the year 1100. I will not believe that any Europeans, properly so
called, were competently skilled in Greek for this purpose in the time of
Charlemagne: nor, if they were, is it likely that of themselves they should
have turned their thoughts to Aristotle's philosophy. Unless, by viri Graece
d^^^i, this writer means the learned Arabs of Spain, which does not appear from
his context. See Eusebius. Renaudot. ut supr. p. 247.
. From this fountain the infatuations of astrology took possession of the
middle ages, and were continued even to modern times. To the peculiar genius of
this people it is owing, that chemistry became blended with so many
extravagancies, obscured with unintelligible jargon, and filled with fantastic
notions, mysterious pretensions, and superstitious operations. And it is easy
to conceive, that among these visionary philosophers, so fertile in
speculation, logic, and metaphysics, contracted much of that refinement and
perplexity, which for so many centuries exercised the genius of profound
reasoners and captious disputants, and so long obstructed the progress of true
knowledge. It may perhaps be regretted, in the mean time, that this
predilection of the Arabian scholars for philosophic enquiries, prevented them
from importing into Europe a literature of another kind. But rude and barbarous
nations would not have been polished by the history, poetry, and oratory of the
Greeks. Although capable of comprehending the solid truths of many parts of
science, they are unprepared to be impressed with ideas of elegance, and to
relish works of taste. Men must be instructed before they can be refined; and,
in the gradations of knowledge, polite literature does not take place till some
progress has first been made in philosophy. Yet it is at the same time
probable, that the Arabians, among their literary stores, brought into Spain
and Italy many Greek authors not of the scientific species It must not be
forgot, that they translated Aristotle's POETICS. There is extant "Averroys
Summa in Aristotelis poetriam ex Arabico sermon in Latinum traducta ab Hermano
Alemanno; Praemittitur determinatio Ibinrosdin in poetria Aristotelis. Venet.
1515." There is a translation of the POETICS into Arabic by Abou Muschar Metta,
entitled, ABOTIKA. See Herbel. Bibl. Oriental. p. 18. col. a. p. 971. b. p. 40.
col. 2. p. 337. col. 2. Farabi, who studied at Bagdad about the year 930, one
of the translator's of Aristotle's ANALYTICS, wrote sixty books on that
philosopher's Rhetoric; declaring that he had read it over two hundred times,
and yet was equally defirous of reading it again. Fabric. Bibl. Gr. xiii. 265.
Herbelot mentions Aristotle's MORALS, translated by Honain. Bibl. Oriental. p.
963. a. See also p. 971. a. 973. p. 974. b. Compare Mosheim. Hist. chapter i. p.
217. 288. Note C, p. 2. chapter 1. Averroys also paraphrased Aristotle's RHETORIC.
There are also translations into Arabic of Aristotle's ANALYTICS, and his
treatise of INTERPRETATION. The first they called ANALUTHICA, and the second,
BARI ARMENIAS. But Aristotle's logic, metaphysics, and physics pleased them
most; particularly the eight books of his physics, which exhibit a general view
of that science. Some of our countrymen were translators of these Arabic books
into Latin. Athelard, a monk of Bath, translated the Arabic Euclid into Latin,
about 1000. Leland. Script. Brit. p. 200. There are some manuscripts of it in
the Bodleian library, and elsewhere. But the most beautiful and elegant copy I
have seen is on vellum, in Trinity college library at Oxford. Cod. MSS. Number. 10.
: and that the migration of this people into the western world, while it proved
the fortunate instrument of introducing into Europe some of the Greek classics
at a very early period, was moreover a means of preserving those genuine models
of composition, and of transmitting them to the present generation See what I
have said concerning the destruction of many Greek classics at Constantinople,
in the Preface to Theocritus, Oxon. 1770. tom. i. Prefat. p. xiv. xv. To which
I will add, that so early as the fourth century, the christian priests did no
small injury to ancient literature, by prohibiting and discouraging the study
of the old pagan philosophers. Hence the story, that Jerome dreamed he was
whipped by the devil for reading Cicero. Compare what is said of Livy below.
. It is certain, that about the close of the ninth century, polite letters,
together with the sciences, began in some degree to be studied in Italy,
France, and Germany. Charlemagne, whose munificence and activity in propagating
the Arabian literature has already been mentioned, founded the universities of
Bononia, Pavia, Paris, and Osnaburgh. Charles the Bald seconded the salutary
endeavors of Charlemagne. Lothaire, the brother of the latter, erected schools
in the eight principal cities of Italy A. D. 823. See Murator. Scriptor. Rer.
Italic^r. i. p. 151.
. The number of monasteries and collegiate churches in those countries was
daily increasing Cave mentions, "Coenobia Italica, Cassinense, Ferrariense:
Germanica, Fuldense, Sangellense, Augiense, Lobiense: Gallica, Corbiense,
Rhemense, Orbacense, Floriacense," etc. Hist. Lit. Saec. Photian. p. 503. edit.
1688. Charlemagne also founded two archbishopricks and nine bishoprics in the
most considerable towns of Germany. Aub. Miraei Op. Diplomat. i. p. 16.
Charlemagne seems to have founded libraries. See J. David. Koe^er, Diss. De
Bibliotheca Caroli Mag. Al^org. 1727. And Act. Erudit. et curios. Francon. P.
x. p. 716. seq. 60. And Hist. Lit. Franc. tom. iv. 4to. p. 223. Compare Laun.
c. iv. p. 30. Eginhart mentions his private library. Vit. Car. Mag. p. 41. a.
edit. 1565. He even founded a library at Jerusalem, for the use of those
western pilgrims who visited the holy sepulcher. Hist. Lit. ut supr. p. 373.
His successor also, Charles the Bald, erected many libraries. Two of his
librarians, Holduin and Ebbo, occur under that title in subscriptions. Bibl.
Hist. Liter. Struvii et Jugl. cap. ii. sect. xvii. p. 172. This monarch, before
his last expedition into Italy about the year 870, in case of his decease,
orders his large library to be divided into three parts, and disposed of
accordingly. Hist. Lit. ut supr. tom. v. p. 514. Launoy justly remarks, that
many noble public institutions of Charles the Bald, were referred, by
succeeding historians, to their more favorite hero Charlemagne. Ubi supr. p.
53. edit. Fabric. Their immediate successors, at least of the German race, were
not such conspicuous patrons of literature.
: in which the youth, as a preparation to the study of the sacred scriptures,
were exercised in reading profane authors, together with the ancient doctors of
the church, and habituated to a Latin style. The monks of Cassino in Italy were
distinguished before the year 1000, not only for their knowledge of the
sciences, but their attention to polite learning, and an acquaintance with the
classics. Their learned abbot Desiderius collected the best of the Greek and
Roman writers. This fraternity not only composed learned treatises in music,
logic, aftronomy, and the Vitruvian architecture, but likewise employed a
portion of their time in transcribing Tacitus Lipsius says, that Leo the tenth
gave five hundred pieces of gold for the five first books of Tacitus's Annals,
to the monks of a convent in Saxony. This Lipsius calls the resurrection of
Tacitus to life. Ad Annal. Tacit. lib. ii. c. 9. At the end of the edition of
Tacitus, published under Leo's patronage by Beroaldus in 1515, this edict is
printed, "Nomine Leonis X. proposita sunt praemia non mediocria his qui ad eum
libros veteres neque hactenus editos adtul^rint."
, Jornandes, Josephus, Ovid's Fasti, Cicero, Seneca, Donatus the grammarian,
Virgil, Theocritus, and Homer Chron. Cassin. Monast. lib. iii. c. 35. Poggius
Florentinus found a STRATAGEMATA of Frontinus, about the year 1420, in this
monastery. Mabillon. Mus. Ital. tom. i. p. 133. Manuscripts of the following
classics now in the Harleian collection, appear to have been written between
the eighth and tenth centuries inclusively. Two copies of Terence, Brit. Mus.
MSS. Harl. 2670. 2750. Cicero's Paradoxa Stoicorum, the first book De Natura
D^orum, Orations against Cataline, De Oratore, De Inventione Rhetorica, Ad
Herennium, n. 2622. 2716. 2623. And the Epistles, with others of his works, n.
2682. A fragment of the Aeneid, n. 2772. Livy, n. 2672. Lucius Florus, n. 2620.
Ovid's Metamorphoses and Fasti, n. 2737. Quintilian, n. 2664. Horace, the Odes
excepted, n. 2725. Many of the same and other classic authors occur in the
British Museum, written in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. See n. 5443.
2656. 2475. 2624. 2591. 2668. 2533. 2770. 2492. 2^09 2655. 2654. 2664. 2728.
5534. 2609. 2724. 5412. 2643. 5304. 2633. There are four copies of Statius, one
of the twelfth century, n. 2720. And three others of the thirteenth, n. 2608.
2636. 2665. Plautus's Comedies are among the royal manuscripts, written in the
tenth, 15 C. xi. 4. And some parts of Tully in the same, ibid. 1. Suetonius,
15^ C. iv. 1. Horace's Art of Poetry, Epistles, and Satires, with Eutropius, in
the same, 15 B. vii. 1. 2. 3. xvi. 1. etc. Willibold, one of the learned Saxons
whose literature will be mentioned in its proper place, having visited Rome and
Jerusalem, retired for some time to this monastery, about the year 730. Vit.
Williboldi, Cani^. Antiq. Lect. xv. 695. And Pantal. de Vir. Illustr. par. ii.
p. 263. And Birinus, who came into England from Rome about the year 630, with a
design of converting the Saxons, brought with him one Benedict, a monk of
Cassino, whom he placed over the monks or church of Winchester. Wharton, Angl.
Sacr. i. 190.
.

In the mean time England shared these improvements in knowledge: and
literature, chiefly derived from the same sources, was communicated to our
Saxon ancestors about the beginning of the eighth century Cave, Saecul. Eutych.
p. 382.
. The Anglo-Saxons were converted to christianity about the year 570. In
consequence of this event, they soon acquired civility and learning. Hence they
necessarily established a communication with Rome, and acquired a familiarity
with the Latin language. During this period, it was the prevailing practice
among the Saxons, not only of the clergy but of the better sort of laity, to
make a voyage to Rome "Hiis temporibus multi Anglorum gentis nobiles et
ignobiles viri et foeminae, duces et privati, divini numinis instinctu, Romam
venire consueverant." etc. Bid, DE TEMP. Apud Leland, Script. Brit. CEOLFRIDUS.
. It is natural to imagine with what ardour the new converts visited the holy
see, which at the same time was fortunately the capital of literature. While
they gratified their devotion, undesignedly and imperceptibly they became
acquainted with useful science.

In return, Rome sent her emissaries into Britain. Theodore, a monk of Rome,
originally a Greek priest, a native of Tarsus in Cilicia, was consecrated
archbishop of Canterbury, and sent into England by pope Vitellian, in the year
688 Birchington, apud Wharton, Angl. Sacr. i. 2. Cave, Hist. Lit. p. 464.
Parker, Antiquitat. Brit. p. 53.
. He was skilled in the metrical art, astronomy, arithmetic, church-music, and
the Greek and Latin languages Bed. Hist. Ecclesiast. Gent. Angl. iv. 2. Bid
says of Theodore and of Adrian mentioned below, "Usque hodie supersunt de eorum
discipulis, qui Latinam Graecamque linguam, aeque ut propriam in qua nati sunt,
norunt." See also ibid. c. 1.
. The new prelate brought with him a large library, as it was called and
esteemed, consisting of numerous Greek and Latin authors; among which were
Homer in a large volume, written on paper with most exquisite elegance, the
homilies of saint Chrysostom on parchment, the psalter, and Josephus's
Hypomnesticon, all in Greek Parker, ut supr. p. 80. See also Lambarde's Peramb.
Kent, p. 233. A transcript of the Josephus 500 years old was given to the
public library at Cambridge, by the archbishop. See Fabric. Bibl. Gr. x. 109.
. Theodore was accompanied into England by Adrian, a Neapolitan monk, and a
native of Africa, who was equally skilled in sacred and profane learning, and
at the same time appointed by the pope to the abbacy of saint Austin's at
Canterbury. Bid informs us, that Adrian requested pope Vitellian to confer the
archbishopric on Theodore, and that the pope consented on condition that
Adrian, "who had been twice in France, and on that account was better
acquainted with the nature and difficulties of so long a journey," would
conduct Theodore into Britain Bed. Hist. Eccl. iv. 1. "Et ob id majorem
notitiam hujus itineris, etc."
. They were both escorted to the city of Canterbury by Benedict Biscop, a
native of Northumberland, and a monk, who had formerly been acquainted with
them in a visit which he made to Rome See Math. Westmon. sub. an. 703. Lel.
Script. Brit. p. 109.
. Benedict seems at this time to have been one of the most distinguished of the
Saxon ecclesiastics: availing himself of the arrival of these two learned
strangers, under their direction and assistance, he procured workmen from
France, and built the monastery of Weremouth in Northumberland. The church he
constructed of stone, after the manner of the Roman architecture; and adorned
its walls and roof with pictures, which he purchased at Rome, representing
among other sacred subjects the Virgin Mary, the twelve apostles, the
evangelical history, and the visions of the Apocalypse See Bid, Hist. Abbat.
Wiremuth. p. 295. 297. edit. Cantab. In one of his expeditions to Rome, he
brought over John, arch-chantor of St. Peter's at Rome, who introduced the
Roman method of singing mass. Bed. ibid. p. 295. He taught the monks of
Benedict's abbey; and all the singers of the monasteries of that province came
from various parts to hear him sing. Bed. Hist. Eccl. iv. 18. He likewise
brought over from Rome two silken palls of exquisite workmanship, with which he
afterward purchased of king Aldfrid, successor of Elfrid, two pieces of land
for his monastery. Bed. Vit. Abb^ ut supr. p. 297. Bale censures Benedict for
being the first who introduced into England painters, glasiers, et id genus
alios AD VOLUPTATEM artifices. Cent. i. 82. This is the language of a PURITAN
in LIFE, as well as in Religion.
. The windows were glazed by artists brought from France. But I mention this
foundation to introduce an anecdote much to our purpose. Benedict added to his
monastery an ample library, which he stored with Greek and Latin volumes,
imported by himself from Italy Lel. ubi supr. 110.
. Bid has thought it a matter worthy to be recorded, that Ceolfrid, his
successor in the government of Weremouth-abbey, augmented this collection with
three volumes of pandects, and a book of cosmography wonderfully enriched with
curious workmanship, and bought at Rome Bid, Hist. Abbat. Wiremuth. p. 299.
Op. Bed. edit. Cantab.
. The example of the pious Benedict was immediately followed by Acca bishop of
Hexham in the same province: who having finished his cathedral church by the
help of architects, masons, and glasiers hired in Italy, adorned it, according
to Leland, with a valuable library of Greek and Latin authors Lel. ibid p. 105.
. But Bid, Acca's cotemporary, relates, that this library was entirely
composed of the histories of those apostles and martyrs to whose relics he had
dedicated several altars in his church, and other ecclesiastical treatises,
which he had collected with infinite labor Bed. Hist. v. 21.
. Bid however calls it a most copious and noble library Hist. v. c. 20.
. Nor is it foreign to our purpose to add, that Acca invited from Kent into
Northumberland, and retained in his service during the space of twelve years, a
celebrated chantor named Maban: by the assistance of whose instructions and
superintendance he not only regulated the church music of his diocese, but
introduced the use of many Latin hymns hitherto unknown in the northern
churches of England Bed. Hist. Eccl. v. c. 21. Maban had been taught to sing in
Kent by the succes^ors of the disciples of saint Gregory. Compare Bed. iv. 2.
If we may believe William of Malmesbury, who wrote about the year 1120, they
had organs in the Saxon churches before the conquest. He says that archbishop
Dunstan, in king Edgar's reign, gave an organ to the abbeychurch of Malmesbury;
which he describe^ to have been like those in use at present. "Organa, ubi per
aereas fistulas musicis mensuris elaboratas, dudum conceptas follis vomit
anxius auras." William, who was a monk of this abbey, adds, that this
benefaction of Dunstan was inscribed in a Latin distich, which he quotes, on
the organ pipes. Vit. Aldhelm. Whart. Ang. Sacr. ii. p. 33. See what is said of
Dunstan below. And Osb. Vit. S. Dunst. Wharton, Angl. Sacr. ii. 93.
. It appears that before the arrival of Theodore and Adrian, celebrated schools
for educating youth in the sciences had been long established in Kent See Bed.
Op. per Smith, p. 724. ^^q. Append.
. Literature, however, seems at this period to have flourished with equal
reputation at the other extremity of the island, and even in our most northern
provinces. Ecbert bishop of York, founded a library in his cathedral, which,
like some of those already mentioned, is said to have been replenished with a
variety of Latin and Greek books ^el. p. 114.
. Alcuine, whom Ecbert appointed his first librarian, hints at this library in
a Latin epistle to Charlemagne. "Send me from France some learned treatises, of
equal excellence with those which I preserve here in England under my custody,
collected by the industry of my master Ecbert: and I will send to you some of
my youths, who shall carry with them the flowers of Britain into France. So
that there shall not only be an enclosed garden at York, but also at Tours some
sprouts of Paradise ^al^, ii. 15.
," etc. William of Malmesbury judged this library to be of sufficient
importance not only to be mentioned in his history, but to be styled, "Omnium
liberalium artium armarium, nobilissimam bibliothecam De Reg. i. 1.
." This repository remained till the reign of king Stephen, when it was
destroyed by fire, with great part of the city of York Pits, p. 154.
. Its founder Ecbert died in the year 767 Cave, Hist. Lit. p. 486.
. Before the end of the eighth century, the monasteries of Westminster, Saint
Alban's, Worcester, Malmesbury, Glastonbury, with some others, were founded,
and opulently endowed. That of Saint Alban's was filled with one hundred monks
by king Offa A. D. 793. See Dudg. Mon. i. p. 177.
. Many new bishoprics were also established in England: all which
institutions, by multiplying the number of ecclesiastics, turned the attention
of many persons to letters.

The best writers among the Saxons flourished about the eighth century. These
were Aldhelm, bishop of Shirburn, Ceolfrid, Alcuine, and Bid; with whom I must
also join king Alfred. But in an enquiry of this nature, Alfred deserves
particular notice, not only as a writer, but as the illustrious rival of
Charlemagne, in protecting and assisting the restoration of literature. He is
said to have founded the university of Oxford; and it is highly probable, that
in imitation of Charlemagne's similar institutions, he appointed learned
persons to give public and gratuitous instructions in theology, but principally
in the fashionable sciences of logic, astronomy, arithmetic, and geometry, at
that place, which was then a considerable town, and conveniently situated in
the neighborhood of those royal seats at which Alfred chiefly resided. He
suffered no priest that was illiterate to be advanced to any ecclesiastical
dignity MS. Bever. MSS. Coll. Trin. Oxon. Codd. xlvii. f. 82.
. He invited his nobility to educate their sons in learning, and requested
those lords of his court who had no children, to send to school such of their
younger servants as discovered a promising capacity, and to breed them to the
clerical profession Bever, ibid.
. Alfred, while a boy, had himself experienced the inconveniences arising from
a want of scholars, and even of common instructors, in his dominions: for he
was twelve years of age, before he could procure in the western kingdom a
master properly qualified to teach him the alphabet. But, while yet unable to
read, he could repeat from memory a great variety of Saxon songs Flor. Vigorn.
sub ann. 871. Brompton, Chron. in ALFR. p. 814. And MS. Bever, ut supr. It is
curious to observe the simplicity of this age, in the method by which Alfred
computed time. He caused six wax tapers to be made, each twelve inches long,
and of as many ounces in weight: on these tapers he ordered the inches to be
regularly marked; and having found that one of them burned just four hours, he
committed the care of them to the keepers of his chapel, who from time to time
gave due notice how the hours went. But as in windy weather the candles were
more wasted; to remedy this inconvenience he invented lanthorns, there being
then no glass to be met with in his dominions. Asser. Menev. Vit. Alfr. p. 68.
edit. Wi^e. In the mean time, and during this very period, the Persians
imported into Europe a machine, which presented the first rudiments of a
striking clock. It was brought as a present to Charlemagne, from Abdella king
of Persia, by two monks of Jerusalem, in the year 800. Among other presents,
says Eginhart, was an horologe of brass, wonderfully constructed by some
mechanical artifice, in which the course of the twelve hours ad ^^eps^dram
vertebatur, with as many little brazen balls, which at the close of each hour
dropped down on a sort of bells underneath, and sounded the end of the hour.
There were also twelve figures of ho^semen, who, when the twelve hours were
completed, issued out at twelve windows, which till then stood open, and
returning again, shut the windows after them. He adds, that there were many
other curiosities in this instrument, which it would be tedious to recount.
Eginhart, Kar. Magn. p. 108. It is to be remembered, that Eginhart was an
eyewitness of what is here described; and that he was an abbot, a skilful
architect, and very learned in the sciences.
. He was fond of cultivating his native tongue: and with a view of inviting the
people in general to a love of reading, and to a knowledge of books which they
could not otherwise have understood, he translated many Latin authors into
Saxon. These, among others, were Boethius OF THE CONSOLATION OF PHILOSOPHY, a
manuscript of which of Alfred's age still remains MSS. Cott. OATH. A. 6. 8vo.
membr.
, Orosius's HISTORY OF THE PAGANS, saint Gregory's PASTORAL CARE, the venerable
Bede's ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY, and the SOLILOQUIES of saint Austin. Probably
saint Austin was selected by Alfred, because he was the favorite author of
Charlemagne He was particularly fond of Austin's book DE CIVITATE DEI.
Eginhart. Vit. Car. Magn. p. 29.
. Alfred died in the year 900, and was buried at Hyde abbey, in the suburbs of
Winchester, under a sumptuous monument of porphyry Asser. Menev. p. 72. ed.
Wise.
.

Aldhelm, nephew of Ina king of the West Saxons, frequently visited France and
Italy. While a monk of Malmesbury in Wiltshire, he went from his monastery to
Canterbury, in order to learn logic, rhetoric, and the Greek language, of
archbishop Theodore, and of Albin abbot of saint Austin's Bid says, that
Theodore and Adrian taught Tobias bishop of Rochester the Greek and Latin
tongues so perfectly, that he could speak them as fluently as his native Saxon.
Hist. Eccl. v. 23.
, the pupil of Adrian Lel. p. 97. Thorn says, that Albin learned Greek of
Adrian. Chron. Dec. Script. p. 1771.
. But he had before acquired some knowledge of Greek and Latin under Maidulf,
an Hibernian or Scot, who had erected a small monastery or school at Malmesbury
W. Malmsb. ubi infr. p. 3.
. Camden affirms, that Aldhelm was the first of the Saxons who wrote in Latin,
and that he taught his countrymen the art of Latin versification Wiltsh. p.
116. But this Aldhelm affirms of himself in his treatise on Meter. See W.
Malmsb. apud. Wharton, Angl. Sacr. ii. 4. seq.
. But a very intelligent antiquarian in this sort of literature, mentions an
anonymous Latin poet, who wrote the life of Charlemagne in verse; and adds,
that he was the first of the Saxons that attempted to write Latin verse
Conringius, Script. Comment. p. 108. This poem was printed by R^^neccius at
Helmstadt many years ago, with a large commentary. Compare Voss. Hist. Lat.
iii. 4.
. It is however certain, that Aldhelm's Latin compositions, whether in verse or
prose, as novelties were deemed extraordinary performances, and excited the
attention and admiration of scholars in other countries. A learned cotemporary,
who lived in a remote province of a Frankish territory, in an epistle to
Aldhelm has this remarkable expression, "VESTRAE LATINITATIS PANEGYRICUS RUMOR
has reached us even at this distance W. Malms^. ut. sup^. p. 4.
, etc." In reward of these uncommon merits he was made bishop of Shirburn in
Dorsetshire in the year 705 Cave, p. 466.
. His writings are chiefly theological: but he has likewise left in Latin verse
a book of AENIGMATA, copied from a work of the same title under the name of
Symposius See Fabric. Bibl. Med. Lat. iv. p. 693. And Bibl. Lat. i. p. 681.
And. W. Malm^ ubi supr. p. 7. Among the manuscripts of Exeter cathedral is a
book of AENIGMATA in Saxon, some of which are written in Runic characters, 11.
fol. 98.
, a poem de VIRGINITATE hereafter cited, and treatises on arithmetic,
astrologv, rhetoric, and meter. The last treatise is a proof that the ornaments
of composition now began to be studied. Leland mentions his CANTIONES
SAXONICAE, one of which continued to be commonly sung in William of
Malmesbury's time: and, as it was artfully interspersed with many allusions to
passages of Scripture, was often sung by Aldhelm himself to the populace in the
streets, with a design of alluring the ignorant and idle, by so specious a mode
of instruction, to a sense of duty, and a knowledge of religious subjects
Malms^. ubi supr. p. 4.
. Malmesbury observes, that Aldhelm might be justly deemed "ex acumine Graecum,
ex nitore Romanum, et ex pompa Anglum Ubi supr. p. 4.
." It is evident, that Malmesbury, while he here characterises the Greeks by
their acuteness, took his idea of them from their scientifical literature,
which was then only known. After the revival of the Greek philosophy by the
Saracens, Aristotle and Euclid were familiar in Europe long before Homer and
Pindar. The character of Aldhelm is thus drawn by an ancient chronicler, "He
was an excellent harper, a most eloquent Saxon and Latin poet, a most expert
chantor or singer, a DOCTOR EGREGIUS, and admirably versed in the scriptures
and the liberal sciences Chron. Anon. Leland. Collectan. ii. 278. To be skilled
in singing is often mentioned as an accomplishment of the ancient Saxon
ecclesiastics. Bid says, that Edda a monk of Canterbury, and a learned writer,
was "primus cantandi magister." Hist. lib. iv. cap. 2. Wolstan, a learned monk
of Winchester, of the same age, was a celebrated singer, and even wrote a
treatise de TONORUM HARMONIA, cited by William of Malmesbury, De Reg. lib. ii.
c. 39. Lel. Script. Brit. p. 165. Their skill in playing on the harp is also
frequently mentioned. Of saint Dunstan, archbishop of Canterbury, about the
year 988, it is said, that among his sacred studies, he cultivated the arts of
writing, harping, and painting. Vit. S. Dunstan. MSS. Cott. Brit. Mus. FAUSTIN.
B. 13. Hickes has engraved a figure of our Savior drawn by saint Dunstan, with
a specimen of his writing, both remaining in the Bodleian library. Gram. Saxon.
p. 104. cap. xxii. The writing and many of the pictures and illuminations in
our Saxon manuscripts were executed by the priests. A book of the gospel,
preserved in the Cotton library, is a fine specimen of the Saxon calligraphy
and d^corations. It is written by Eadfrid bishop of Durham, in the most
exquisite manner. Ethelwold his successor did the illuminations, the capital
letters, the picture of the cross, and the evangelists, with infinite labor
and elegance: and Bilfrid, the anachoret^ covered the book, th^s written and
adorned, with gold and silver plates and precious stones. All this is related
by Aidred, the Saxon glossator, at the end of St. John's gospel. The work was
finished about the year 720. MSS. Cott. Brit. Mus. NERO. D. 4. Cod. membr. fol.
quadrat. Aelfsin, a monk, is the elegant scribe of many Saxon pieces chiefly
historical and scriptural in the same library, and perhaps the painter of the
figures, probably soon after the year 978. Ibid. TITUS. D. 26. Cod. membr. 8vo.
The Saxon copy of the four evangelists, which king Athelstan gave to Durham
church, remains in the same library. It has the painted images of S. Cuthbert,
radiated and crowned, blessing king Athelstan, and of the four evangelists.
This is undoubtedly the work of the monks; but Wanley believed it to have been
done in France. OTHO. B. 9. Cod. membran. fol. At Trinity college in Cambridge
is a Psalter in Latin and Saxon, admirably written, and illuminated with
letters in gold, silver, miniated, etc. It is full of a variety of historical
pictures. At the end is the figure of the writer Eadwin, supposed to be a monk
of Canterbury, holding a pen of metal, undoubtedly used in such sort of
writing; with an inscription importing his name, and excellence in the
calligraphic art. It appears to be performed about the reign of king Stephen.
Cod. membr. fol. post Class. a dextr. Ser. Med^ 5. [among the Single Codices.]
Eadwin was a famous and frequent writer of books for the library of
Christ-church at Canterbury, as appears by a catalogue of their books taken A.
D. 1315. In Bibl. Cott. GALB. E 4. The eight historical pictures richly
illuminated with gold of the Anunciation, the Meeting of Mary and Elizabeth,
etc. in a manuscript of the gospel, are also thought to be of the reign of king
Stephen, yet perhaps from the same kind of artists. The Saxon clergy were
ingenious artificers in many other respects. S. Dunstan abovementioned, made
two of the bells of Abingdon abbey with his own hands. Mona^t. Anglic. tom. i.
p. 104. John of Glastonbury, who wrote about the year 1400, relates, that there
remained in the abbey at Glastonbury, in his time, crosses, incense-vessels,
and vestments, made by Dunstan while a monk there. cap. 161. He adds, that
Dunstan also handled, "scalpellum ut sculperet." It is said, that he could
model any image in brass, iron, gold, or silver. Osb. Vit. S. Dunstan. apud
Whart. ii^ 94. Ervene, one of the teachers of Wolstan bishop of Worcester,
perhaps a monk of Bury, was famous for calligr^phy, and skill in colors. To
invite his pupils to read, he made use of a Psalter and Sacramentary, whose
capital letters he had richly illuminated with gold. This was about the year
980. Will. Malmesb. Vit. W^lst. Wharton, Angl. Sacr. p. 244. William of
Malmesbury says, that Elfric, a Saxon abbot of Malmesbury, was a skilful
architect, a^dificandi g^arus. Vit. Aldhelm. Wharton, Angl. Sacr. ii. p. 33.
Herman, one of the Norman bishops of Salisbury, about 1080, condescended to
write, bind, and illuminate books, Monast. Angl. tom. iii. p. 375.

In some of these instances I have wandered below the Saxon times. It is indeed
evident from various proofs which I could give, that the religious practiced
these arts long afterward. But the object of this note was the existence of
them among the the Saxon clergy.


."

Alcuine, bishop Ecbert's librarian at York, was a cotemporary pupil with
Aldhelm under Theodore and Adrian at Canterbury Dedicat. Hist. Eccl. Bed.
. During the present period, there seems to have been a close correspondence
and intercourse between the French and Anglo-Saxons in matters of literature.
Alcuine was invited from England into France, to superintend the studies of
Charlemagne, whom he instructed in logic, rhetoric, and astronomy Eginhart.
Vit. Kar. Magn. p. 30. ed. 1565. 4to.
. He was also the master of Rabanus Maurus, who became afterward the governor
and preceptor of the great abbey of Fulda in Germany, one of the most
flourishing seminaries in Europe, founded by Charlemagne, and inhabited by two
hundred and seventy monks Rabanus instructed them not only in the scriptures,
but in profane literature. A great number of other scholars frequented these
lectures. He was the first founder of a library in this monastery. Cave, Hist.
Lit. p. 540. Saec. Phot. His leisure hours being entirely taken up in reading
or transcribing; he was accused by some of the idle monks of attending so much
to his studies, that he neglected the public duties of his station, and the
care of the revenues of the abbey. They therefore removed him, yet afterward
in vain attempted to ^^call him. Serrar. Rer. Mogunt. lib. iv. p. 625.
. Alcuine was likewise employed by Charlemagne to regulate the lectures and
discipline of the universities John Mailros, a Scot, one of Bede's scholars, is
said to have been employed by Charlemagne in founding the university of Pavia.
Dempst. xii. 904.
, which that prudent and magnificent potentate had newly constituted See Op.
Alcuin. Paris. 1617. fol. Praesat. Andr. Quercetan. Mabillon says, that Alcuine
pointed the homilies, and St. Au^tin's ^pistles, at the instance of
Charlemagne. CARL. MAGN. R. Diplomat. p. 52. a. Charlemagne was most fond of
a^tronomy. He learned also arithmetic. In his treasury he had three tables of
silver, and a fourth of gold, of great weight and size. One of these, which was
square, had a picture or representation of Constantinople: another, a round
one, a map of Rome: a third, which was of the most exquisite workmanship, and
greatest weight, consisting of three orbs, contained a map of the world.
Eginhart, ubi supr. p. 29. 31. 41.
. He is said to have joined to the Greek and Latin, an acquaintance with the
Hebrew tongue, which perhaps in some degree was known sooner than we may
suspect; for at Trinity college in Cambridge there is an Hebrew Psalter, with a
Normanno-Gallic interlinear version of great antiquity MSS. Cod. Coll. S. S.
Trin. Cant. Class. a dextr. Ser. Med. 5. membran. 4to. Bid says, that he
compiled part of his CHRONICON, EX HEBRAICA VERITATE, that is from S. Jerome's
Latin translation of the bible; for he adds, "nos qui per beati interpretis
Hieronymi industriam puro HEBRAICAE VERITATIS font potamur," etc. And again,
"Ex Hebraica veritate, quae ad nos per memoratum interpretem pure pervenisse,"
etc. He mentions on this occasion the Greek Septuagint translation of the
bible, but not as if he had ever seen or consulted it. Bed. CHRON. p. 34. edit.
Cant. ^p. Bed.
. Homilies, lives of saints, commentaries on the bible, with the usual systems
of logic, astronomy, rhetoric, and grammar, compose the formidable catalogue of
Alcuine's numerous writings. Yet in his books of the sciences, he sometimes
ventured to break through the pedantic formalities of a systematical teacher:
he has thrown one of his treatises in logic, and I think, another in grammar,
into a dialogue between the author and Charlemagne. He first advised Bid to
write his ecclesiastical history of England; and was greatly instrumental in
furnishing materials for that early and authentic record of our antiquities
Dedicat. Hist. Eccl. Bed. To king Ceolwulphus, p. 37. 38. edit. Op. Cant.
.

In the mean time we must not form too magnificent ideas of these celebrated
masters of science, who were thus invited into foreign countries to conduct the
education of mighty monarchs, and to plan the rudiments of the most illustrious
academies. Their merits are in great measure relative. Their circle of reading
was contracted, their systems of philosophy jejune; and their lectures rather
served to stop the growth of ignorance, than to produce any positive or
important improvements in knowledge. They were unable to make ^xcursions from
their circumscribed paths of scientific instruction, into the spacious and
fruitful regions of liberal and manly study. Those of their hearers, who had
passed through the course of the sciences with applause, and aspired to higher
acquisitions, were exhorted to read Cassiodorus and Boethius; whose writings
they placed at the summit of profane literature, and which they believed to be
the great boundaries of human erudition.

I have already mentioned Ceolfrid's presents of books to Benedict's library at
Weremouth abbey. He wrote an account of his travels into France and Italy. But
his principal work, and I believe the only one preserved, is his diss^rtation
concerning the clerical tonsure, and the rites of celebrating Easter Bed, Hist.
Eccl. v. 22. And Council. Genesis vi. p. 1423.
. This was written at the desire of Naiton, a Pictish king, who dispatched
ambassadors to Ceolfrid for information concerning these important articles;
requesting Ceolfrid at the same time to send him some skilful architects, who
could build in his country a church of stone, after the fashion of the Romans
Bed. Hist. Eccl. ib. c. 21. iv. 18.
. Ceolfrid died on a journey to Rome, and was buried in a monastery of Navarre,
in the year 706 Bed. Hist. Abb. p. 300.
.

But Bid, whose name is so nearly and necessarily connected with every part of
the literature of this period, and which has therefore been often already
mentioned, emphatically styled the Venerable by his cotemporaries, was by far
the most learned of the Saxon writers. He was of the northern school, if it may
be so called; and was educated in the monastery of saint Peter at Weremouth,
under the care of the abbots Ceolfrid and Biscop Bed. Hist. Eccl. v. 24.
. Bale affirms, that Bid learned physics and mathematics from the purest
sources, the original Greek and Roman writers on these subjects ii. 94.
. But this hasty assertion, in part at least, may justly be doubted. His
knowledge, if we consider his age, was extensive and profound: and it is
amazing, in so rude a period, and during a life of no considerable length, he
should have made so successful a progress, and such rapid improvements, in
scientifical and philological studies, and have composed so many elaborate
treatises on different subjects "Libros septuaginta octo edidit, quos ad finem
HISTORIAE suae ANGLICANAE edidit. [See Op. edit. Cant. p. ^22. 223. lib. v. c.
24.] Hic succumbit ing^uium, deficit ^loquium, sufficienter admirari hominem a
scholastico exercitio tam procul amotum, tam sobrio sermon tanta elabora^^^
volumina," etc. Chron. Praef. Bever. MSS. Coll. Trin. Oxon. ut supr. f. 65.
[Bever was a monk of Westminster circ. A. D. 1400.] For a full and exact list
of Bede's works, the curious reader i^ referred to Mabillon, Saec. iii. p. i.
p. 539. Or Cave, Hi^t. Lit. ii. p. ^^2.
. It is diverting to see the French critics censuring Bid for credulity: they
might as well have accused him of superstition It is true, that Bid has
introduced many miracles and visions into his history. Yet some of these are
pleasing to the imagination: they are ^inctured with the gloom of the cloist^r,
operating on the extravagancies of oriental inv^ntion. I will give an instance
or two. A monk of Northumberland di^d, and was brought again to life. In this
interval of death, a young man in shining apparel came and led him, without
speaking, to a valley of infinite depth, length, and breadth: one side was
formed by a prodigious sheet of fire, and the opposite side filled with hail
and ice. Both sides were swarming with souls o^ departed men; who were for ever
in search of rest, alternately shifting their situation to these extremes of
heat and cold. The monk supposing this place to be hell, was told hy his guide
that he was mistaken. The guide then led him, greatly terrified with this
spectacle, to a more distant place, where he says, "I saw on a sudden a
darkness come on, and every thing was obscured. When I entered this place I
could discern no object, on account of the increasing darkness, except the
countenance and glittering garments of my conductor. As we went forward I
beheld vast torrents of flame spouting upwards from the ground, as from a large
well, and falling down into it again. As we came near it my guide suddenly
vanished, and left me alone in the midst of darkness and this horrible vision.
Deformed and uncouth spirits arose from this blazing chasm, and attempted to
draw me in with fiery forks." But his guide here returned, and they all retired
at his appearance. Heaven is then described with great strength of fancy. I
have seen an old ballad, called the Dead Man's Song, on this story. And
Milton's hell may perhaps be taken from this idea. Bed. Hist. Eccl. v. 13. Our
historian in the next chapter relates, that two most beautiful youths came to a
person lying sick on his deathbed, and offered him a book to read, richly
ornamented, in which his good actions were recorded. Immediately after this,
the house was surrounded and filled with an army of spirits of most horrible
aspect. One of them, who by the gloom of his darksome countenance appeared to
be their leader, produced a book, codic^m horr^ndae visionis, et magnitudinis
enormis et pond^ris paene importabilis, and ordered some of his attendant
demons to bring it to the sick man. In this were contained all his sins, etc.
ib. cap. 14.
. There is much perspicuity and facility in his Latin style. But it is void of
elegance, and often of purity; it shows with what grace and propriety he would
have written, had his mind been formed on better models. Whoever looks for
digestion of materials, disposition of parts, and accuracy of narration, in
this writer's historical works, expects what could not exist at that time. He
has recorded but few civil transactions: but besides that his history
professedly considers ecclesiastical affairs, we should remember, that the
building of a church, the preferment of an abbot, the canonisation of a martyr,
and the importation into England of the shin-bone of an apostle, were
necessarily matters of much more importance in Bede's conceptions than
victories or revolutions. He is fond of minute description; but particularities
are the fault and often the merit of early historians An ingenious author, who
writes under the name of M. de Vigneul Marville, observes, that Bid, "when he
speaks of the Magi who went to worship our Savior, is very particular in the
account of their names, age, and respective offerings. He says, that Melchior
was old, and had gray hair, with a long beard; and that it was he who offered
gold to Christ, in acknowledgment of his sovereignty. That Gaspar, the second
of the magi, was young, and had no beard, and that it was he who offered
frankincense, in recognition of our Lord's divinity: and that Balthazar the
third, was of a dark complexion, had a large beard, and offered myrrh to our
Savior's humanity." He is likewise very circumstantial in the description of
their dresses. Melanges d' l'Hist. et de Lit. Paris, 1725. 12mo. tom. iii. p.
283, etc. What was more natural than this in such a writer and on such a
subject? In the mean time it may be remarked, that this description of Bid,
taken perhaps from constant tradition, is now to be seen in the old pictures
and popular representations of the Wi^e Men's Off^ring.
. Bid wrote many pieces of Latin poetry. The following verses from his
MEDITATIO DE DIE JUDICII, a translation of which into Saxon verse is now
preserved in the library of Bennet college at Cambridge Cod. MSS. lxxix. P. 161.
, are at least well turned and harmonious. Inter florigeras foecundi cespitis
herbas,
Flamine ventorum resonantibus undique ramis Malmsb. apud Whart. ut supr. p. 8.
.
Some of Aldhelm's verses are exactly in this cast, written on the Dedication
of the abbey-church at Malmesbury to saint Peter and saint Paul.

Hic celebranda rudis Recent. Newly built.
florescit gloria templi,
Limpida quae sacri celebrat vexilla triumphi.
Hic Petrus et Paulus, tenebrosi lumina mundi,
Praecipui patres populi qui frena gubernant,
Carminibus crebris alma celebrantur in aula.
Claviger o caeli, portam qui pandis in aethra,
Candida qui meritis recludis limina caeli,
Exaudi clemens populorum vota tuorum,
Marcida qui riguis humectant fletibus ora W. Malmsb. ut supr. Apud Whart. p. 8.
.
The strict and superabundant attention of these Latin poets to prosodic rules,
on which it was become fashionable to write didactic systems, made them
accurate to excess in the metrical conformation of their hexameters, and
produced a faultless and flowing monotony. Bid died in the monastery of
Weremouth, which he never had once quitted, in the year 735 Cave, ubi supr. p.
473. Saec. Eiconocl.
.

I have already observed, and from good authorities, that many of these Saxon
scholars were skilled in Greek. Yet scarce any considerable monuments have
descended to modern times, to prove their familiarity with that language. I
will, however, mention such as have occurred to me. Archbishop Parker, or
rather his learned scribe Jocelin, affirms, that the copy of Homer, and of some
of the other books imported into England by archbishop Theodore, as I have
above related, remained in his time Antiquitat. ^rit. p. 80.
. There is however no allusion to Homer, nor any mention made of his name, in
the writings of the Saxons now existing See SECT. iii. p. 124. infr. Where it
is observed, that Homer is cited by Geoffrey of Monmouth. But he is not
mentioned in Geoffrey's Armoric original.
. In the Bodleian library are some extracts from the books of the Prophets in
Greek and Latin: the Latin is in Saxon, and the Greek in Latino-greek capital
characters. A Latino-greek alphabet is prefixed. In the same manuscript is a
chapter of Deuteronomy, Greek and Latin, but both are in Saxon characters NE.
D. 19. MSS. membr. 8vo. fol. 24. 19.
. In the curious and very valuable library of Bennet college in Cambridge, is a
very ancient copy of Aldhelm DE LAUD VIRGINITATIS. In it is inserted a
specimen of Saxon poetry full of Latin and Greek words, and at the end of the
manuscript some Runic letters occur Cod. MSS. K 12.
. I suspect that their Grecian literature was a matter of ostentation rather
than use. William of Malmesbury, in his life of Aldhelm, censures an
affectation in the writers of this age; that they were fond of introducing in
their Latin compositions a difficult and abstruse word latinised from the Greek
Ubi supr. p. 7^
. There are many instances of this pedantry in the early charters of Dugdale's
Monasticon. But it is no where more visible than in the LIFE of Saint WILFRID,
archbishop of Canterbury, written by Fridegode a monk of Canterbury, in Latin
heroics, about the year 960 Printed by Mabillon, Saec. Benedictin. iii. p. 1.
P. 169.
. Malmesbury observes of this author's style, "Latinitatem perosus, Graecitatem
amat, Graecula verba frequentat Gest. Pontific. i. f. 114.
." Probably to be able to read Greek at this time was esteemed a knowledge of
that language. Eginhart relates, that Charlemagne could speak Latin as fluently
as his native Frankish: but slightly passes over his accomplishment in Greek,
by artfully saying, that he understood it better than he could pronounce it
Vit. Kar. Magn. p. 30.
. Nor, by the way, was Charlemagne's boasted facility in the Latin so
remarkable a prodigy. The Latin language was familiar to the Gauls when they
were conquered by the Franks; for they were a province of the Roman empire till
the year 485. It was the language of their religious offices, their laws, and
public transactions. The Franks who conquered the Gauls at the period just
mentioned, still continued this usage, imagining there was a superior dignity
in the language of imperial Rome: although this incorporation of the Franks
with the Gauls greatly corrupted the latinity of the latter, and had given it a
strong tincture of barbarity before the reign of Charlemagne. But while we are
bringing proofs which tend to extenuate the notion that Greek was now much
known or cultivated, it must not be dissembled, that John Erigena, a native of
Air in Scotland, and one of king Alfred's first lecturers at Oxford Wood Hist.
Antiquit. Univ. Oxon. i. 15.
, translated into Latin from the Greek original four large treatises of
Dionysius the Areopagite, about the year 860 This translation, with dedications
in verse and prose to Charles the Bald, occurs twice in the Bodleian library,
viz. MSS. Mus. 148. And Hyper. Bodl. 148. p. 4. seq. See also Laud. ^. 59. And
in Saint John's college Oxford, A. xi. 2. 3. William of Malmesbury says, that
he wrote a book entitled, PERIPHISMERISMUS, (that is (...)) and adds, that in
this piece "a Latinorum tramite deviavit, dum in Graecos acriter oculos
intendit." Vit. Aldhelm. p. 28. Wharton. Angl. Sacr. ii. It was printed at
Oxford by Gale. Erigena, in one of the dedications abovementioned, says, that
he had translated into Latin ten of Dionysius's Epistles. Hoveden and Matthew
Paris have literally transcribed the words of Malmesbury just cited, and much
more, Hov. fol. 234. And M. Paris, p. 253. It is doubtful whether the VERSIO
MORALIUM ARISTOTELIS is from the Greek: it might be from the Arabic. Or whether
our author's. See Praefat. Op. nonnull. Oxon. edit. per Gale, cum Not. 1681.
fol.
. This translation, which is dedicated to Charles the Bald, abounds with Greek
phraseology and is hardly intelligible to a mere Latin reader. He also
translated into Latin the Scholia of saint Maximus on the difficult passages of
Gregory Nazianzen Printed at Oxford as above. Erigena died at Malmesbury, where
he had opened a school in the year 883. Cave, His^. Lit. Saec. Phot. p. 548.
549. William of Malmesbury says, that Erigena was one of the wits of Charles
the Bald's table, and his constant companion. Ubi supr. p. 27.
. He frequently visited his munificent patron Charles the Bald, and is said to
have taken a long journey to Athens, and to have spent many years in studying
not only the Greek but the Arabic and Chaldee languages Spelm. Vit. Aelfred.
Bale xiv. 3^. Pits. p. 168.
.

As to classic authors, it appears that not many of them were known or studied
by our Saxon ancestors. Those with which they were most acquainted, either in
prose or verse, seem to have been of the lower empire; writers who, in the
declension of taste, had superseded the purer and more anti^nt Roman models,
and had been therefore more recen^ly and frequently transcribed. I have
mentioned Alfred's translations of Boethius and Orosius. Prudentius was also
perhaps one of their favorites. In the British Museum there is a manuscript
copy of that poet's PSYCOMACHIA. It is illustrated with drawings of historical
figures, each of which have an explanatory legend in Latin and Saxon letters;
the Latin in large red characters, and the Saxon in black, of great antiquity
MSS. Cott. CLEOPATR. C. 8. membr. 8vo.
. Prudentius is likewise in Bennet college library at Cambridge, transcribed in
the time of Charles the Bald, with several Saxon words written into the text
Miscellan. MSS. M. membran.
. Sedulius's hymns are in the same repository in Saxon characters, in a volume
containing other Saxon manuscripts MSS. S. 11. Cod. membran.
. Bid says, that Aldhelm wrote his book DE VIRGINITATE, which is both prose
and verse, in imitation of the manner of Sedulius Eccl. Hist. 19.
. We learn from Gregory of Tours, what is not foreign to our purpose to remark,
that king Chilperic, who began to reign in 562, wrote two books of Latin verses
in imitation of Sedulius. But it was without any idea of the common quantities
Gregor. Turonens. l. vi. c. 46.
. A manuscript of this poet in the British Museum is bound up with Nennius and
Felix's MIRACLES OF SAINT GUTHLAC, dedicated to Alfwold king of the East
Angles, and written both in Latin and Saxon MSS. Cotton. VESP. D. xxi. 8vo.
. But these classics were most of them read as books of religion and morality.
Yet Aldhelm, in his tract de METRORUM GENERIBUS, quotes two verses from the
third book of Virgil's Georgics W. Malmesb. Vit. Aldhelm. Wharton. Angl. Sacr.
ii. 4.
: and in the Bodleian library we find a manuscript of the first book of Ovid's
Art of Love, in very ancient Saxon characters, accompanied with a British gloss
NE D. 19. membr. 8vo. ^ol. 37.
. And the venerable Bede, having first invoked the Trinity, thus begins a Latin
panegyrical hymn on the miraculous virginity of Ethildryde. "Let Virgil sing of
wars, I celebrate the gifts of peace. My verses are of chastity, not of the
rape of the adulteress Helen. I will chant heavenly blessings, not the battles
of miserable Troy Bed. Eccl. Hist. iv. 20.
." These however are rare instances. It was the most abominable heresy to have
any concern with the pagan fictions. The graces of composition were not their
objects, and elegance found no place amidst their severer pursuits in
philosophy and theology u Medicine was one of their favorite sciences, being a
part of the Arabian learning. We have now remaining Saxon manuscript
translations of Apuleius de VIRIBUS HERBARUM. They have also left a larg^
system of medicine in Saxon, often cited by Somner in his Lexicon, under the
title of LIBER MEDICINALIS. It appears by this tract, that they were well
acquainted with the Latin physicians and naturalists, Marcellus, Scribonius
Largu^, Pliny^ Caelius Aurelianus, Theodore, Priscus, etc. MSS. Bibl. Reg.
Brit. Mus. Cod. membr.... It is probable that this manuscript is of the age of
king Alfred. Among Hatton's books in the Bodleian library, is a Saxon
manuscript which has been entitled by Junius MEDICINA EX QUADRUPEDIBUS. It is
pretended to be taken from Idpart, a fabulous king of Egypt. It is followed by
two epistles in La^in of Evax king of the Arabians to Tiberius Caesar,
concerning the names and virtu^s of oriental precious stones used in medicine.
Cod. Hatton. 100. membr. fol. It is believed to be a manuscript before the
conquest. These ideas of a king of Egypt, and another of Arabia, and of the use
of oriental precious stones in the medical art, evidently betray their origin.
Apuleius's HERBARIUM occurs in the Briti^h Museum in Latin and Saxon, "quod
accepit ab ESCULAPIO et a CHIRONE CENTAURO MAGISTRO ACHILLIS." Together with
the MEDICINA EX QUADRUPEDIBUS abovementioned. MSS. Cot. VITEL. C. iii. Cod.
membr. fol. iii. p. 19. iv. p. 75. It is remarkable that the Arabians attribute
the invention of SIMIA, one of their magical sciences, to KIRUN or CARUN, that
is Chiron the centaur, the master of Achilles. See Herbelot. Dict. Orient.
Artic. SIMIA. p. 1005.

The Greeks reputed Chiron the inventor of medicine. His medical books are
mentioned by many ancient writers, particularly by Apuleius Celsus, De Herbis:
and Kircher observes, that Chiron's treatise of MULO^^DICINA was familiar to
the Arabians. Oedip. Egypt. tom. iii. p. 68. Lambeccius describes a very
curious and ancient manuscript of Dioscorides: among the beautiful
illuminations with which it was enriched, was a square picture with a gold
ground, on which were represented the seven ancient physician^, Machaon^
CHIRON, Niger, Her^ulides^ Mantias, Xenocrates, and Pamphilus. P. Lambecc. de
Bibl. Vindob. lib. ii. p. 525. seq. I have mentioned above, MEDICINA ^X
QUADRUPEDIBUS. A Greek poem or fragment called MEDICINA EX PISCI^US has been
attributed to Chiron. It was written by Marcellus Sidetas of Pamphylia, a
physician under Marcus Antoninus, and is printed by Fabricius. Bibl. Gr. i. p.
16. seq. And see xiii. p. 317. The MEDICINA EX QUADRUPEDIBUS seems to be the
treatise entitled, MEDICINA EX ANIMALIBUS, under the name of Sextu^ Platonicus,
and printed in Stephens's ^^DICAE ARTIS PRINCIPES, p. 684. This was a favorite
medical system of the dark ages. See Fabric. ibid. xiii. 395^ xii. 613.


.

It is certain that literature was at its height among our Saxon ancestors
about the eighth century. These happy beginnings were almost entirely owing to
the attention of king Alfred, who encouraged learning by his own example, by
founding ^eminaries of instruction, and by rewarding the labors of scholars.
But the efforts of this pious monarch were soon blasted by the supineness of
his successors, the incursions of the Danes, and the distraction of national
affairs. Bid, from the establishment of learned bishops in every diocese, and
the universal tranquillity which reigned over all the provinces of England,
when he finished his ecclesiastical history, flatters his imagination in
anticipating the most advantageous consequences, and triumphantly closes his
narrative with this pleasing presentiment. The Picts, at this period, were at
peace with the Saxons or English, and converted to christianity. The Scots
lived contented within their own boundary. The Britons or Welsh, from a natural
enmity, and a dislike to the catholic institution of keeping Easter, sometimes
attempted to disturb the national repose; but they were in some measure
subservient to the Saxons. Among the Northumbrians, both the nobility and
private persons rather chose their children should receive the monastic
tonsure, than be trained to arms Bid, Eccl. Hist. v. 23.
.

But a long night of confusion and gross ignorance succeeded. The principal
productions of the most eminent monasteries for three centuries, were
incredible legends which discovered no marks of invention, unedifying homilies,
and trite expositions of the scriptures. Many bishops and abbots began to
consider learning as pernicious to true piety, and confounded illiberal
igno^ance with christian simplicity. Leland frequently laments the loss of
libraries destroyed in the Danish invasions See Malmesb. apud Lel. Coll. 1. p.
140. edit. n^p.
. Some slight attempts were made for restoring literary pursuits, but with
little success. In the tenth century, Oswald archbishop of Canterbury, finding
the monasteries of his province extremely ignorant not only in the common
elements of grammar, but even in the canonical rules of their respective
orders, was obliged to send into France for competent masters, who might remedy
these evils Wharton. Angl. Sacr. ii. 201. Many ^vid^n^^s of the ignorance which
prevailed in other countries during the tenth century have been collected by
Muratori, Antiquit. Ital. Med. aev. iii. 831. ii. 141. And Boulay, Hist. Acad.
Paris. i. 288.
. In the mean time, from perpetual commotions, the manners of the people had
degenerated from that mildness which a short interval of peace and letters had
introduced, and the national character had contracted an air of rudenes^ and
ferocity.

England at length, in the beginning of the eleventh century, received from the
Normans the rudiments of that cultivation which it has preserved to the present
times. The Normans were a people who had acquired ideas of splendour and
refinement from their residence in France; and the gallantries of their f^udal
system introduced new magnificence and elegance among our rough unpolished
ancestors. The conqueror's army was composed of the flower of the Norman
nobility; who sharing allotments of land in different parts of the new
territory, diffused a general knowledge of various improvements entirely
unknown in the most flourishing eras of the Saxon government, and gave a more
liberal turn to the manners even of the provincial inahbitants. That they
brought with them the arts, may yet be seen by the castles and churches which
they built on a more extensive and stately plan This point will be further
illustrated in a work now preparing for the press, entitled, OBSERVATIONS
CRITICAL AND HISTORICAL, ON CASTLES, CHURCHES, MONASTERIES, and other MONUM^NTS
O^ ANTIQUITY IN VARIOUS P^RTS OF ENGLAND. To which will be prefixed, THE
HISTORY OF ARCHITECTURE IN ENGLAND.
. Literature, in particular, the chief object of our present research, which
had long been reduced to the most abject condition, appeared with new luster in
consequence of this important revolution.

Toward the close of the tenth century, an event took place, which gave a new
and very fortunate turn to the state of letters in France and Italy. A little
before that time, there were no schools in Europe but those which belonged to
the monasteries or episcopal churches; and the monks were almost the only
masters employed to educate the youth in the principles of sacred and profane
erudition. But at the commencement of the eleventh century, many learned
persons of the laity, as well as of the clergy, undertook in the most capital
cities of France and Italy this important charge. The Latin versions of the
Greek philosophers from the Arabic, had now become so frequent and common, as
to fall into the hands of the people; and many of these new preceptors having
traveled into Spain with a design of studying in the Arabic schools This
fashion continued for a long time. Among many who might here be mentioned was
Daniel Merlac, an Englishman, who, in the year 1185, went to Toledo to learn
mathematics, and brought back with him into England several books of the
Arabian philosophy. Wood Antiq. Univ. Oxon. i. p. 56. col. i.
, and comprehending in their course of institution, more numerous and useful
branches of science than the monastic teachers were acquainted with,
communicated their knowledge in a better method, and taught in a much more
full, perspicuous, solid, and rational manner. These and other beneficial
effects, arising from this practice of admitting others besides ecclesiastics
to the profession of letters, and the education of youth, were imported into
England by means of the Norman conquest.

The conqueror himself patronised and loved letters. He filled the bishoprics
and abbacies of England with the most learned of his countrymen, who had been
educated at the university of Paris, at that time the most flourishing school
in Europe. He placed Lanfranc, abbot of the monastery of Saint Stephen at Caen,
in the sea of Canterbury; an eminent master of logic, the subtleties of which
he employed with great dexterity in a famous controversy concerning the real
presence. Anselm, an acute metaphysician and theologist, his immediate
successor in the same see, was called from the government of the abbey of Bec
in Normandy. Herman, a Norman bishop of Salisbury, founded a noble library in
the ancient cathedral of that see "Nobilem bibliothecam, comparatis in hoc
optimis juxta ac antiquissimis illustrium autorum monumentis, Severiae posuit."
Leland. Script. Brit. p. 174. He died 1099. He was so fond of letters, that he
did not disdain to bind and illuminate books. Mon. Angl. iii. p. 375. Vid.
supr. The old church of Salisbury stood within the area of that noble ancient
military work, called Old-castle. Leland says, that he finished the church
which his i predecessor Herman had begun, and filled its chapter with eminent
scholars.
. Many of the Norman prelates preferred in England by the conqueror, were
polite scholars. Godfrey, prior of Saint Swithin's at Winchester, a native of
Cambray, was an elegant Latin epigrammatist, and wrote with the smartness and
ease of Martial Camden has cited several of his ^pigrams. Remains, p. 421.
edit. 1674. I have read all his pieces now remaining. The chief of them are,
"PROVERBIA, ET EPIGRAMMATA SATYRICA." -- "CARMINA HISTORICA, DE REGE CANUTO,
REGINA EMMA," etc. Among these last, none of which were ever printed, is an
eulogy on Walkelin bishop of Winchester, and a Norman, who built great part of
his stately cathedral, as it now stands, and was bishop there during Godfrey's
priorate, viz. Consilium, virtutis amor, facundia comis,
WALCHELINE pater, fixa fuere tibi.
Corrector juvenum, ^enibus documenta ministrans,
Exemplo vitae pastor utrosque regis.
Pes ^ueras claudis, caecis imitabile lumen,
Portans invalidos, qui cecidere levans.
Divitiis dominus, facilis largitor earum,
Dum resicis multo^, de^icis ipse tibi, etc.
Among the Epigram^, the following is not cited by Camden. Pauca Titus pretiosa
dabat, sed vilia plura:
Ut meliora habeam, pauca det, or^, Titus.
These pieces are in the Bodleian library, MSS. Digb. 65. ut. 112. The whole
collection is certainly worthy of publication. I do not mean merely as a
curiosity. Leland mentions his epistles "familiari illo et DULCI stylo editae."
Script. Brit. p. 159. Godfrey died 1107. He was made prior of Winchester A. D.
1082. Wharton. Angl. Sacr. i. 324. He was interred in the old chapter house,
whose area now makes part of the dean's garden.
. A circumstance, which by the way shows that the literature of the monks at
this period was of a more liberal cast than that which we commonly annex to
their character and profession. Geoffrey, a learned Norman, was invited from
the university of Paris to superintend the direction of the school of the abbey
of Dunstable; where he composed a play called the Play of SAINT CATHARINE See
infr. SECT. vi. p. 236.
, which was acted by his scholars. This was perhaps the first spectacle of the
kind that was ever attempted, and the first trace of theatrical representation
which appeared, in England. Matthew Paris, who first records this anecdote,
says, that Geoffrey borrowed copes from the sacrist of the neighboring abbey
of saint Alban's to dress his characters. He was afterward elected abbot of
that opulent monastery Vit. Abbat. ad calc Hi^t. p. 56. edit. 1639. See also.
Bull. Hist. Acad. Paris. ii. 225.
.

The king himself gave no small countenance to the clergy, in sending his son
Henry Beauclerc to the abbey of Abingdon, where he was initiated in the
sciences under the care of the abbot Grymbald, and Fa^ice a physician of
Oxford. Robert d'Oilly, constable of Oxford castle, was ordered to pay for the
board of the young prince in the convent, which the king himself frequently
visited Hist. Anti^. Univ. Oxon. i. 46.
. Nor was William wanting in giving ample revenues to learning: he founded the
magnificent abbeys of Battle and Selby, wit^ other smaller convents. His nobles
and their successors cooperated with this liberal spirit in erecting many
monasteries. Herbert de Losinga, a monk of Normandy, bishop of Thetford in
Norfolk, instituted and endowed with large possessions a Benedictine abbey at
Norwich, consisting of sixty monks. To mention no more instances, such great
institutions of persons dedicated to religious and literary leisure, while they
diffused an air of civility, and softened the manners of the people in their
respective circles, must have afforded powerful invitations to studious
pursuits, and have consequently added no small degree of stability to the
interests of learning.

By these observations, and others which have occurred in the course of our
enquiries, concerning the utility of monasteries, I certainly do not mean to
defend the monastic system. We are apt to pass a general and undistinguishing
censure on the monks, and to suppose their foundations to have been the
retreats of illiterate indolence at every period of time. B^t it should be
remembered, that our universities about the time of the Norman conquest, were
in a low condition: while the monasteries contained ample endowments and
accommodations, and were the only respectable seminaries of literature. A few
centuries afterward, as our universities began to flourish, in consequence of
the distinctions and ^onours which they conferred on scholars, the
establishment of colleges, the introduction of new systems of science, the
universal ardour which prevailed of breeding almost all persons to letters, and
the abolition of that exclusive right of teaching which the ecclesiastics had
so long claimed; the monasteries of course grew inattentive to studies, which
were more strongly encouraged, more commodiously pursued, and more successfully
cultivated, in other places: they gradually became contemptible and
unfashionable as nurseries of learning, and their fraternities degenerated into
sloth and ignorance. The most eminent scholars which England produced, both in
philosophy and humanity, before and even below the twelfth century, were
educated in our religious houses. The encouragement given in the English
monasteries for transcribing books, the scarcity of which in the middle ages we
have before remarked, was very considerable. In every great abbey there was an
apartment called the SCRIPTORIUM: where many writers were constantly busied in
transcribing not only the service-books for the choir, but books for the
library This was also a practice in the monasteries abroad; in which the boys
and novices were chiefly employed. But the missals and bibles were ordered to
be written by monks of mature age and discretion. Du Fresne, Gloss. Lat. Med.
V. SCRIPTORIUM. And Praefat. f. vi. edit. prim. See also Monast. Anglic. ii.
726. And references in the windows of the library of saint Alban's abbey. Ibid.
183. At the foundation of Winchester college, one or more transcribers were
hired and employed by the founder to make books for the library. They
transcribed and took their commons within the college, as appears by
computations of expenses on their account now remaining.
. The Scriptorium of Saint Alban's abbey was built by abbot Paulin, a Norman,
who ordered many volumes to be written there, about the year 1080. Archbishop
Lanfranc furnished the copies Mat. Paris, p. 1003. See Lelan^. Script. Brit. p.
166.
. Estates were often granted for the support of the Scriptorium. That at
Saintedmonsbury was endowed with two mills Registr. Nigr. S. Edmund. Abbat.
fol. 228.
. The tithes of a rectory were appropriated to the cathedral convent of saint
Swithin at Winchester, ad libros transcribendos, in the year 1171 Registr. Joh.
Pontissar. episcop. Wint. f. 164. MS.

See Mon. Angl. i. 131. Heming. Chartul. per Hearne, p. 265. Compare also
Godwin. de Praesul. p. 121. edit. 1616.


. Many instances of this species of benefaction occur from the tenth century.
Nigel, in the year 1160, gave the monks of Ely two churches, ad libros
faciendos Wharton, Angl. Sacr. i. p. 619. See also, p. 634, and 278. Hearne has
published a grant from R. De Paston to Bromholm abbey in Norfolk, of 12 d. per
annum, a rentcharge on his lands, to keep their books in repair, ad
emendacionem librorum. Ad. Domerham. Number. iii.
. This employment appears to have been diligently practiced at Croyland; for
Ingulphus relates, that when the library of that convent was burnt in the year
1091, seven hundred volumes were consumed Hist. Croyland. Dec. Script. p 98.
. Fifty-eight volumes were transcribed at Glastonbury, during the government of
one abbot, about the year 1300 Tanner, Not. Mon. edit. 8vo. Pref.
. And in the library of this monastery, the richest in England, there were
upwards of four hundred volumes in the year 1248 See Joann. Glafton. ut infr.
And Leland, Script. Brit. p. 131.
. More than eighty books were thus transcribed for saint Alban's abbey, by
abbot Wethamstede, who died about 1440 Weaver, Fun. Mon. p. 566.
. Some of these instances are rather below our period; but they illustrate the
subject, and are properly connected with those of more ancient date. I find
some of the classics written in the English monasteries very early. Henry, a
Benedictine monk of Hyde-abbey near Winchester, transcribed in the year 1178,
Terence, Boethius It is observable, that Boethius in his metres constantly
follows Seneca's tragedies. I believe there is not one form of verse in
Boethius but what is taken from Seneca.
, Suetonius Suetonius is frequently cited by the writers of the middle ages,
particularly by Vincentius Bellovacensis. Specul. Hist. lib. x. c. 67. And
Rabanus Maurus, Art. Gram. Op. tom. i. p. 46. Lupus, abbot of Ferrieres, about
the year 838, a learned philosophical writer, educated under Rabanus Maurus,
desires abbot Marquard to send him Suetonius, On the Caesar's, "in duos nec
magnos codices divisum." Epistol. Lup. Ferrariens. xcix. Apud Andr. Du Chesne,
Script. Rer. Franc. tom. ii. p. 726. Isidorus Hispalensis, a bishop of the
seventh century, gives the origin of Poetry from Suetonius, Origin. viii. 7.
Chaucer's tale of Nero in the MONKE'S TALE, is taken from Suetonius, "as
tellith us Suetonius." v. 491. p. 164. edit. Urr.
, and Claudian. Of these he formed one book, illuminating the initials, and
forming the brazen bosses of the covers with his own hands "Suis manibus apices
literarum artificiose pinxit et illuminavit, necnon aereos umbones in
tegminibus appinxit." MS. Registr. Priorat. S. Swithin, Winton. Quatern... In
archiv. Wulves. Many of the monks were skilful illuminators. They were also
taught to bind books. In the year 1277, these constitutions were given to the
Benedictine monasteries of the province of Cante^bury. "Abbates monachos suos
claustrales, loco operis manualis, secundum suam habilitatem caeteris
occupationibus deputent: in studendo, libros scribendo, corrigendo,
illuminando, ligando." Capit. Genesis Ord. Benedictin. Provinc. Cant. 1277. apud
MSS. Br. Twyne, 8 p. 272. archiv. Oxon.
. But this abbot had more devotion than taste: for he exchanged this manuscript
a few years afterward for four missals, the Legend of saint Christopher, and
saint Gregory's PASTORAL CARE, with the prior of the neighboring cathedral
convent Ibid.
. Benedict, abbot of Peterborough, author of the Latin chronicle of king Henry
the second, amongst a great variety of scholastic and theological treatises,
transcribed Seneca's epistles and tragedies Nicholas Antonius says, that
Nicholas Franeth, a Dominican, illustrated Seneca's tragedies with a gloss,
soon after the year 1300. Bibl. Vet. Hispan. apud Fabric. Bibl. Lat. lib. ii.
c. 9. He means Nicholas Trivet, an English Dominican, author of the ANNALS
published by Hearne.
, Terence, Martial John of Salisbury calls Martial COCUS, Policrat. vi. 3. As
do several writers of the middle ages. Martial is cited by Jerome of Padua, a
Latin poet and physician, who flourished about the year 1300. See Christian.
Daumii Not. ad Catonis Distich. p. 140. One of the two famous manuscripts of
Terence in the Vatican, is said to have been written in the time, perhaps under
the encouragement, of Charlemage; and to have been compared with the more
ancient copies by Calliopius Scholasticus. Fontanin. Vindic. Antiquit.
Diplomat. p. 37. S^hola^^icus means a master in the ecclesiastical schools.
Engelbert, abbot of Tr^voux, a writer of the tenth century, mentions Terentius
Poeta, but in such a manner as shows h^ had but little or no knowledge of him.
He confounds this poet with Terentius the Roman senator, whom Scipio delivered
from prison at Carthage, and brought to Rome. Bibl. Patr. tom. xxv. edit. Lugd.
p. 370.
, and Claudian, to which I will add GESTA ALEXANDRI See SECT. iii. infr. p. 128.
, about the year 1180 Swaffham, Hist. Caenob. Burg. ii. p. 97. per Jos. Spark.
"Epistolae Senecae cum aliis Senecis in uno volumine, Martialis totus et
Terentius in uno volumine," etc. Sub. Tit. De Libris ejus. He died in 1193. In
the library of Peterborough abbey, at the dissolution, there were one thousand
and seven hundred books in manuscript. Gunton's Peterb. p. 173.
. In a catalogue of the Sea Chron. Joh. Glaston. edit. Hearne, Oxon. 1726. viz.
Num^rus Librorum Glastoniensis ecclesiae qui fuerunt de LIBRARIA anno gracia^,
M. CC. XL. VII. p. 423. Leland, who visited all the monasteries just before
their dissolution, seems to have been struck with the venerable air and
amplitude of this room. Script. Brit. p. 196. See what is said of the monastery
libraries above.
books of the library of Glastonbury we find Livy It is pretended, that Gregory
the Great, in the year 580, ordered all the manuscripts of Livy to be burnt
which could be found, as a writer who enforced the doctrine of prodigies. By
the way, Livy himself often in^inuates his disbelief of those superstitions. He
studies to relate the most ridiculous portents; and he only meant, when it came
in his way, to record the credulity of the people, not to propagate a belief of
such absurdities. It was the superstition of ^he people, not of the historian.
Antonio Beccatelli is said to have purchased of Poggius a beautiful manuscript
of Livy, for which he gave the latt^r a large field, in the year 1455. Gallaes.
De Bibliothecis, p. 186. Se^ Liron, Singularites Hist. et ^itt. tom i. p. 166.
, Sallust Fabricius mentions two manuscripts of Sallust, one written in the
year 1178, and and the other in the year 900. Bibl. Lat. L. i. c. 9. Sallust is
cited by a Byzantine writer, Joannes Antiochenus, of an early century. Excerpt.
Peiresc. p 393. Mr. Hume says, that Sallust's larger history is cited by Fitz
Stephens, in his d^scription of London. Hist. Engl. ii. 440. 4to. edit.
, Seneca, Tully DE SENECTUTE and AMICITIA Paulus Jovius says, that Poggius,
about the year 1420, first brought T^lly's books De Fini^us and De Legibus into
Italy, trans^ribed by himself from other manuscript^. Vo^^. Hist. Lat. p. 550.
About the same time BRUTUS de Claris Oratoribus, and some of the Rhetorical
pieces, with a complete copy of De Oratore, were discovered and circulated by
Flavius Blondus, and his friends. Flav. Blond. Ital. Illustrat. p. 346. Leland
says, that William Selling, a monk of Canterbury, about 1480, brought with him
from Italy Cicero's book De Republica, but that it was burnt with other
manuscripts. Script. Brit. CELLINGUS.
, Virgil, Persius, and Claudian, in the year 1248. Among the royal manuscripts
of the British Museum, is one of the twelve books of Statius's Thebaid,
supposed to have been written in the tenth century, which once belonged to the
cathedral convent of Rochester 15 C. x. 1.
. And another of Virgil's Eneid, written in the thirteenth, which came from the
library of saint Austin's at Canterbur^ 15 B vi.
. Wallingford, abbot of saint Alban's, gave or sold from the library of that
monastery to Richard of Bury, bishop of Durham, author of the PHILOBIBLON, and
a great collector of books, Terence, Virgil, Quintilian, and Jerome against
Rufinus, together with thirty-two other volumes valued at fifty pounds of
silver Vit. Abbat. S. Albani. Brit. Mus. MSS. Cotton. Claud. E. iv. In the
royal manuscripts in John of Salisbury's ENTENTICUS, there is written, "Hunc
librum fecit dominus Simon abbas S. Albani: quem postea venditum domino RICARDO
DE BURY, episcopo Dunelmensi emit Michael abbas S. Albani ab executoribus
praedicti episcopi, A. D. 1345." MSS. 13 D. iv. 3. Richard de Bury, otherwise
called Richard Aungervylle, is said to have alone possessed more books than all
the bishops of England together. Besides the fixed libraries which he had
formed in his several palaces, the floor of his common apartment was so covered
with books, that those who entered could not with due reverence approach his
presence. Gul. Chamber, Contin. Hist. Dunelm. apud Whart. Angl. Sacr. i. 765.
He kept binders, illuminators, and writers in his palaces. "Antiquariorum,
scriptorum, correctorum, colligatorum, illuminatorum, etc." Philobibl. cap.
viii. p. 34. edit. 1599. Petrarch says, that he had once a conversation with
Aungervylle, concerning the island called by the ancients Thule, whom he calls
Virum ardentis i^genii. Pe^^arch, Epist. i. 3. His book entitled PHILOBIBLON,
or De Amore librorum ^t institutione Bibliothecae, supposed to be really
written by Robert Holcott a Dominican friar, was finished in his manor of
Aulkland, A. D. 1343. He fo^nded a libr^ry at Oxford: and it is remarkable,
that in the book abovementioned, he apologise^ for admitting the poets into his
collection. "Quare non negleximus FABULAS POETARUM." Cap. xiii. p. 43. xviii.
p. 57. xix. 58. But he is more complaisant to the prejudices of his age, wh^re
he says, that the laity are unworthy to be admitted to any commerce with books.
"Laici omnium librorum communione sunt indigni." Cap. xvii. p. 55. He prefers
books of the liberal arts to treatises in law. Cap. xi. p. 41. He laments that
good literature had entirely ceased in the university of Paris. Cap. ix. p. 38.
He admits Pa^^letos exiguos into his library. Cap. viii. 30. He employed
Sta^ionari^s and Librarios, not only in England, but in France, Italy, and
Germany. Cap. x. p. 34. He regrets the total ignorance of the Greek language;
but adds, that he has provided for the students of his library both Greek and
Hebrew grammars. Ibid. p. 40. He calls Paris the paradise of the world, and
says, that he purchased there a variety of invaluable volumes in all sciences,
which yet were neglected and perishing. Cap. viii. p. 31. While chancellor and
treasurer of England, instead of the usual presents and new year's gifts
appendant to his office, he chose to receive those perquisites in books. By the
favor of Edward the third he gained access to the libraries of the most
capital monasteries; where he shook off the dust from volumes preserved in
chests and presses which had not been opened for many ages. Ibid. 29, 30.
. The scarcity of parchment undoubtedly prevented the transcription of many
other books in these societies. About the year 1120, one master Hugh, being
appointed by the convent of Saintedmondsbury in Suffolk to write and illuminate
a grand copy of the bible for their library, could procure no parchment for
this purpose in England Monast. Angl. i. p. 200. In the great revenue-roll of
one year of John Gerveys, bishop of Winchester, I find expended "in
parcheamento empto ad rotulos, v s." This was a considerable sum for such a
commodity in the year 1266. But as the quantity or number of the rolls is not
specified, no precise conclusion can be drawn. Comp. MS. membran. in archiv.
Wulves. Winton. Compare Anderson, Comm. i. 153. sub ann. 131^.
.

In consequence of the taste for letters and liberal studies introduced by the
Normans, many of the monks became almost as good critics as catholics; and not
only in France but in England, a great variety of Latin writers, who studied
the elegancies of style, and the arts of classical composition, appeared soon
after the Norman conquest. A view of the writers of this class who flourished
in England for the two subsequent centuries, till the restless spirit of
novelty brought on an attention to other studies, necessarily follows from what
has been advanced, and naturally forms the conclusion of our present
investigation.

Soon after the accession of the conqueror, John commonly called Joannes
Grammaticus, having studied polite literature at Paris, which not only from the
Norman connection, but from the credit of its professors, became the
fashionable university of our countrymen, was employed in educating the sons of
the Norman and English nobility See Bale, iv. 40.
. He wrote an explanation of Ovid's Metamorphoses Integumenta super Ovidii
Metamorphoses. MSS. Bibl. Bodl. sup. A 1. Art. 86. Where it is given to
Johannes Guallensis, a Franciscan friar of Oxford, and afterward a student at
Paris. It is also MSS. Dig^. 104. fol. 323. The same piece is extant under the
name of this latter John, entitled, Expositiones ^ive moralitates in Lib. 1.
Metamorphoseos ^ive Fabularum, etc. Printed at Paris 1599. But this Johannes
Guallensis seems to have been chiefly a philosopher and theologist. He
flourished about A. D. 1250. Alexander Necham wrote in Metamorphosin Ovidii.
Tann. Bibl. p. 540^
, and a treatise on the art of meter or versification Another title of this
piece is, Poetria magna Johannis Anglici, etc. Cantabr. MSS. More, 121. It is
both in prose and verse. He begins with this panegyric on the university of
Paris. "Parisiana jubar diffundit gloria clerus." He likewise wrote Compendium
Grammatices.
. Among the manuscripts of the library of New College in Oxford, I have seen a
book of Latin poetry, and many pieces in Greek, attributed to this writer MSS.
Bibl. Coll. Nov. Oxon. 236. 237. But these are said to belong to Joannes
Philoponus. See Phot. Bibl. Cod. lxxv. Cave, p 441. edit. 1.
. He flourished about the year 1070. In the reign of Henry the first, Laurence,
prior of the church of Durham, wrote nine books of Latin elegies. But Leland,
who had read all his works, prefers his compositions in oratory; and adds, that
for an improvement in rhetoric and eloquence, he frequently exercised his
talents in framing Latin defenses on dubious cases which occurred among his
friends. He likewise, amongst a variety of other elaborate pieces on saints,
confessors, and holy virgins, in which he humoured the times and his
profession, composed a critical treatise on the method of writing Epistles,
which appears to have been a favorite subject See what is said of John Hanvill
below.
. He died in 1154 Lel. Script. Brit^ p. 204. 205.
. About the same time Robert Dunstable, a monk of Saint Alban's, wrote an
elegant Latin poem in elegiac verse, containing two books It is a long poem,
containing thirte^n hundred and sixty lines.
, on the life of saint Alban In the British Museum, MSS. Cott. JU^. D. iii. 2.
CLAUD. E. 4^ There are more of his Latin poems on sacred ^ubjects in the
British Museum. But most of them are of an inferior composition, and, as I
suppose, of another hand.
. The first book is opened thus: Albani celebrem caelo terrisque triumphum
Ruminat inculto carmine Clio rudis.
We are not to expect Leonine rhymes in these writers, which became fashionable
some years afterward Leonine verses are said to have been invented and first
used by a French monk of Saint Victor at Marseilles, named Leoninus, or
Leonine, about the year 1135. Pasquier, Recherch. de la France, vii. 2. p. 596.
3. p. 600. It is however certain, that rhymed Latin verses were in use much
earlier. I have before observed, that the Schola Salernitana was published
1100. See Massieu, Hist. Fr. Poes. p. 77. Fauchett, Rec. p. 52. 76. seq. And I
have seen a Latin poem of four hundred lines, "Moysis Mutii Bergomatis de rebus
Bergomensibus, Justiniani hujus nominis secundi Byzantii Imperato^is jussu
conscrip^um, anno a salute nostra 707." The author was the emperor's scribe or
secretary. It begins thus: Alme Deus, rector qui mundi regna gubernas,
Nec sinis absque modo seeds fluitare supernas.
It is at the end of "Achillis Mutii theatrum. Bergomi, typis Comini Venturac,
1596." Pelloutier has given a very early specim^n of Latin Rhymes. Mem. sur la
Lang. Celt. part i. vol. i. chapter xii. p. 20. He quotes the writer of the life of
S. Faron, who relates, that Clotarius the second, having conquered the Saxons
in the beginning of the sevent^ century, commanded a Latin panegyrical song to
be composed on that occasion, which was sung all over France. It is somewhat in
the measure of their vernacular poetry^ at that time made to be sung to the
harp^ and begins with this stanza.

De Clotario est c^nere rege Francoru^
Qui ivit pug^are cum gente Saxonum
Quam graviter provenisset mi^^is Saxo nu^
Si non fuisset inclitu^ Faro de gente Burgundionum.
Latin rhymes seem to have been first used in the church-hymns. But Leonine
verse^ are properly the Roman hexamet^rs or pe^tameters rhymed. And it is not
improbab^e that they took their name from the monk abovementioned, who was the
most popular and almost only Latin poet of his time in France. He wrote many
Latin pie^es not in rhyme, and in a good style of Latin ver^ification.
Particularly a Latin heroi^ poem in twelve books, containing the history of the
bible from the creation of the world to the story of Ruth. Also some elegies^
which have a tolerable degree of classic purity. Some suppose, that pope Leo
the second, about the year 680, a great reformer of the chants and hymns of the
church, invented this sort of verse.

It is remarkable, that Bid who lived in the eigh^h century, in his book ^E
ART^ M^TRICA, does not see^ to have know^ that rhyme was a common ornament of
the church hymns of his time, many of which he quotes. See Opp. tom. i. 34^
cap. penult. But this chapter, I think, is all taken from Marius Victorinus, a
much older writer. The hymns which Bid quotes are extremely barbarous,
consisting of a modulated structure, or a certain number of fee^ without
quantity; like the odes of the minstrels or scalds of that age. "Ut sunt, he
says, carmina VULGARIUM POETARUM." In the mean time we must not forget, that
the early French troubadours mention a sort of rhyme in their vernacular poetry
partly distinguished from the common species, which they call Leonine or
Leonime. Thus Gualtier Arbalestrier de Belle-perche, in the beginning of his
romance of Judas Maccabeus, written before the year 1280.

Je ne di pas k' aucun biau dit
Ni met par fair la ryme
Ou conson^nte ou leonime.
But enough has been said on a subject of so little importance.


^ Their verses are of a higher cast, and have a classical turn. The following
line, which begins the second book, is remarkably flowing and harmonious, and
much in the manner of Claudian.

Pieridum studiis claustri laxare rigorem.
Smoothness of versification was an excellence which, like their Saxon
predecessors, they studied to a fault. Henry of Huntingdon, commonly known and
celebrated as an historian, was likewise a terse and polite Latin poet of this
period. He was educated under Alcuine of Anjou, a canon of Lincoln cathedral.
His principal patrons were Aldwin and Reginald, both Normans, and abbots of
Ramsey. His turn for poetry did not hinder his arriving to the dignity of an
archdeacon. Leland mentions eight books of his epigrams, amatorial verses See
Wharton, Angl. Sacr. ii. 29.
, and poems on philosophical subjects Lel. Script. Brit. p. 197.
. The proem to his book DE HERBIS, has this elegant invocation.

Vatum magne parens, herbarum Phoebe repertor,
Vosque, quibus resonant Tempe jocosa, deae!
Si mihi serta prius hedera florente parastis,
Ecce meos flores, serta parate, fero.
But Leland appears to have been most pleased with Henry's poetical epistle to
Elfleda, the daughter of Alfred Ut supr.
. In the Bodleian library, is a manuscript Latin poem of this writer, on the
death of king Stephen, and the arrival of Henry the second in England, which is
by no means contemptible MSS. Digb. 65. fol. 27. His writings are numerous, and
of various kinds. In Trinity college library at Oxford there is a fine copy of
his book De imagine Mundi. MSS. Cod. 64. pergamen. This is a very common
manuscript.
. He occurs as a witness to the charter of the monastery of Sautree in the year
1147 Wharton, Ang. Sacr. ii. 872.
. Geoffrey of Monmouth was bishop of Saint Asaph in the year 1152 Wharton,
Eccles. Assav. p. 306.
. He was indefatigable in his enquiries after British antiquity; and was
patronised and assisted in this pursuit by Walter, archdeacon of Oxford, a
diligent antiquarian, and Alexander, bishop of Lincoln Wharton, Eccles. Assav.
p. 306.
. His credulity as an historian has been deservedly censured: but fabulous
histories were then the fashion, and he well knew the recommendation his work
would receive from comprehending all the popular traditions Leland, Script.
Brit. p. 190.
. His latinity rises far above mediocrity, and his Latin poem on Merlin is much
applauded by Leland See SECT. iii. infr. p. 124.
.

We must not judge of the general state of society by the more ingenious and
dignified churchmen of this period; who seem to have surpassed by the most
disproportionate degrees in point of knowledge, all other members of the
community. Thomas of Becket, who belongs to the twelfth century, and his
friends, in their epistles, distinguish each other by the appellation of
philosophers, in the course of their correspondence In the British Museum, MSS.
Cot^ TIT. A. xix. VESPAS. E. iv.
. By the present diffusion of literature, even those who are illiterate are yet
so intelligent as to stand more on a level with men of professed science and
knowledge; but the learned ecclesiastics of those times, as is evident See
Quadrilog. Vit. T. Becket, Bruxell. 1682. 4to. And Council. Mag. Brit. et Hib.
tom. i. p. 441. Many of these epistle^ are still in manuscript.
from many passages in their writings, appear, and not without reason, to have
considered the rest of the world as totally immersed in ignorance and
barbarity. A most distinguished ornament of this age was John of Salisbury
"Studuit in Italia omnium bonarum artium facile post Graeciam parente." Leland.
Script. Brit. p. 207. But he likewise spent some time at Oxford. Policrat.
viii. 22.
. His style has a remarkable elegance and energy. His POLICRATICON is an
extremely pleasant miscellany; replete with erudition, and a judgment of men
and things, which properly belongs to a more sensible and reflecting period,
His familiar acquaintance with the classics, appears not only from the happy
facility of his language, but from the many citations of the purest Roman
authors, with which his works are perpetually interspersed. Montfaucon asserts,
that some parts of the supplement to Petronius, published as a genuine and
valuable discovery a few years ago, but since supposed to be spurious, are
quoted in the POLICRATICON Bibl. MSS. There is an allusion to the Policraticon
in the ROMAN DE LAROSE.

Et verras en POLICRATIQUE.
v. 7056.
. He was an illustrious rival of Peter of Blois, and the friend of many learned
foreigners Lel. ibid.
. I have not seen any specimens of his Latin poetry Except the fable of the
belly and members in long and short. Fabric. Med. Aev. iv. p. 877.
; but an able judge has pronounced, that nothing can be more easy, finished,
and flowing than his verses Lel. ut supr. p. 207.
. He was promoted to high stations in the church by Henry the second, whose
court was crowded with scholars, and almost equalled that of his cotemporary
William king of Sicily, in the splendour which it derived from encouraging
erudition, and assembling the learned of various countries See Leland, Script.
Brit. p. 210. Henry the second sent Gualterus, styled ANGLICUS, his chaplain,
into Sicily, to instruct William king of Sicily in literature. William was so
pleased with his master, that he made him archbishop of Palermo. Bale, xiii.
73. He died in 1177. Peter of Blois was Gualter's coadjutor; and he tells us,
that he taught William the rudiments "versificatoriae artis et literatoriae."
Epist. Petr. Blesens. ad Gualt. Pitt^ mentions a piece of Gualterus De lingu^e
Latinae rudimentis, p. 141. There is a William of Blois, cotemporary with Peter
and his brother, there, whom I mention here, as he appears to have written what
were called Com^edi^e ^t Trag^ediae, and to have been preferred to an abbacy in
Sicily. [See SECT. vi. inf. p. 234.] Peter mentions this William in his
epistles, "Illud nobile ingenium fratris mei magistri Gulielmi, quandoque in
scribendis Comoediis et Tragoediis quadam occupatione servili degenerans, etc."
Epist. lxxvi. And again to the said William, "Nomen vestrum diuturniore memoria
quam quatuor abbatiae commendabile reddent Tragoedia vestra de FLAURA et MARCO,
versus de PULICE ET MUSCA, Comoedia vestra DE ALDA, etc." Epist. xciii.
. Eadmer was a monk of Canterbury, and endeared by the brilliancy of his
genius, and the variety of his literature, to Anselm, archbishop of that see
Leland, Script. Brit. p. 178. There is a poem DE LAUDIBUS ANSELMI, and an
epicedion on that prelate, commonly ascribed to Eadmer. See Fabric. Bibl. Med.
Lat. ii. p. 210. seq. Leland doubts whether these piece^ belong to him or to
William of Chester, a learned monk, patronised by Anselm. Script. Brit. p. 185.
. He was an elegant writer of history, but exceeded in the artifices of
composition, and the choice of matter, by his cotemporary William of
Malmesbury. The latter was a monk of Malmesbury, and it reflects no small
honor on his fraternity that they elected him their librarian Lel. p. 195. But
see Wharton, Angl. Sacr. ii. Praef. p. xii.
. His merits as an historian have been justly displayed and recommended by lord
Lyttelton In his History of Henry the second.
. But his abilities were not confined to prose. He wrote many pieces of Latin
poetry; and it is remarkable, that almost all the professed writers in prose of
this age made experiments in verse. His patron was Robert earl of Gloucester;
who, amidst the violent civil commotions which disquieted the reign of king
Stephen, found leisure and opportunity to protect and promote literary merit
See Cave, Hist. Lit. p. 661.
. Till Malmesbury's works appeared, Bid had been the chief and principal
writer of English history. But a general spirit of writing history, owing to
that curiosity which more polished manners introduce, to an acquaintance with
the ancient historians, and to the improved knowledge of a language in which
facts could be recorded with grace and dignity, was now prevailing. Besides
those I have mentioned, Simeon of Durham, Roger Hoveden, and Benedict abbot of
Peterborough, are historians whose narratives have a liberal cast, and whose
details rise far above the dull uninteresting precision of patient annalists
and regular chronologers. John Hanvill, a monk of Saint Alban's, about the year
1190, studied rhetoric at Paris, and was distinguished for his taste even among
the numerous and polite scholars of that flourishing seminary Lel. p. 259.
. His ARCHITRENIUS is a learned, ingenious, and very entertaining performance.
It is a long Latin poem in nine books, dedicated to Walter bishop of Rouen. The
design of the work may be partly conjectured from its affected Greek title: but
it is, on the whole, a mixture of satire and panegyric on public vice and
virtue, with some historical digressions. In the exordium is the following
nervous and spirited address.

Tu Cyrrhae latices nostrae, deus, implue menti;
Eloquii rorem siccis infunde lab^llis:
Distillaque favos, quos nondum pallidus auro
Scit Tagus, aut sitiens admotis Tantalus undis:
Dirige quae timide suscepit dextera, dextram
Audacem pavidamque juva: Tu mentis habenas
Fervoremque rege, etc.
In the fifth book the poet has the following allusions to the fables of
Corineus, Brutus, king Arthur, and the population of Britain from Troy. He
seems to have copied these traditions from Geoffrey of Monmouth See Hist.
Galfrid. Mon. i. xi. xvi. xvii. etc.
.

-- Tamen Architrenius instat,
Et genus et gentem quaerit studiosius: illi
Tros genus, et gentem tribuit Lodonesia, nutrix
Praebuit irriguam morum Cornubia mammam,
Post odium fati, Phrygiis inventa: Smaraudus
Hanc domitor mundi Tyrinthius, alter Achilles,
Atridaeque timor Corinaeus, serra gygantum,
Clavaque monstrifera, sociae delegit alumnam
Omnigenam Trojae, pluvioque fluviflua lacte
Filius exilio fessae dedit ubera matri.
A quo dicta prius Corineia, dicitur aucto
Tempore corrupt Cornubia nominis haeres.
Ille gygantaeos attritis ossibus artus
Implicuit letho, Tyrrheni littoris hospes,
Indomita virtute gygas; non corpore mole
Ad medium pressa, nec membris densior aequo,
Sarcina terrifica tumuit Titania mente.
Ad Ligeris ripas Aquitanos fudit, et amnes
Francorum potuit lacrymis, et caede vadoque
Sanguinis ense ruens, satiavit rura, togaque
Punicea vestivit agros, populique verendi
Grandiloquos fregit animosa cuspide fastus.
Integra, nec dubio bellorum naufraga fluctu,
Nec vice suspecta titubanti saucia fato,
Indilata dedit subitam victoria laurum.
Inde dato cursu, Bruto comitatus Achate,
Gallorum spolio cumulatus, navibus aequor
Exarat, et superis auraque faventibus utens,
Litora felices intrat Tolonesia portus:
Promissumque soli gremium monstrante Diana,
Incolumi census loculum ferit Albion alno.
Haec eadem Bruto regnante Britannia nomen
Traxit in hoc tempus: solis Titanibus illa,
Sed paucis, habitata domus; quibus uda ferarum
Terga dabant vestes, cruor haustus pocula, trunci
Antra lares, dumeta toros, caenacula rupes,
Praeda cibos, raptus venerem, spectacula caedes,
Imperium vires, animum furor, impetus arma,
Mortem pugna, sepulchra rubus: monstrisque gemebat
Monticolis tellus: sed eorum plurima tractus
Pars erat occidui terror; majorque premebat
Te furor extremum zephyri, Cornubia, limen.
Hos avidum belli Corinaei robur Averno
Praecipites misit; cubitis ter quatuor altum
Gogmagog Herculea suspendit in aer^ lucta,
Anthaeumque suum scopulo demisit in aequor^
Potavitque dato Thetis ebria sanguine fluctus,
Divisumque tulit mare corpus, Cerberus umbram.
Nobilis a Phrygiae tanto Cornubia gentem
Sanguine derivat, successio cujus Iulus
In generis partem recipit complexa Pelasgam
Anchisaeque domum: ramos hinc Pandrasus, inde
Sylvius extendit, socioque a sidere sidus
Before effundit triplicatae lampadis ignes.
Hoc trifido sola Corinaei postera mundum
Praeradiat pubes, quartique puerpera Phoebi
Pullulat Arthurum, facie dum falsus adulter
Tintagel irrumpit, nec amoris Pendragon aestu
Vincit, et omnificas Merlini consulit arts,
Mentiturque ducis habitus, et rege latente
Induit absentis praesentia Gorlois ora Milton appears to have been much ^truck
with this part of the ancient British History, and to have designed it for the
subject of an epic poem. EPITAPH. DAMONIS, v. 162.

Ipse ego Dardanias Rutupina per aequora puppes
Dicam, et Pandrasidos regnum vetus Inogeniae,
Brennumque Arviragumque duces, priscumque Belinum,
Et tandem Armoricos Britonum sub lege colonos:
Tum gravidam Arturo, fatali fraud, Iogernen,
Mendaces vultus, assumptaque Gorlois arma,
Merlini dolus. --
See also Milton's MANSUS, v. 80.
.
There is a false glare of expression, and no great justness of sentiment, in
these verses; but they are animated, and flow in a strain of poetry. They are
pompous and sonorous; but these faults have been reckoned beauties even in
polished ages. In the same book our author thus characterises the different
merits of the satires of Horace and Persius.

Persius in Flacci pelago decurrit, et audet
Mendicasse stylum satyrae, serraque cruentus
Rodit, et ignorant polientem pectora limam Juvenal is also cited by John of
Salisbury, Peter of Blois, Vincentius Bellovacensis, Geoffrey of Monmouth, and
other writers of the middle ages. They often call him ETHICUS. See particularly
Petr. Bles. Epist. lxxvii. Some lines from Juvenal ^re cited by Honorius
Augustodunus, a priest of Burgundy, who wrote about 1300, in his De Philosophia
Mundi, Prae^at. ^d lib. iv. The tenth satire of Juvenal is quoted by Chaucer in
TROILUS and CRESSEID^, b. iv. v. 197. page 307. edit. Urr. There is an old
Italian metaphrase of Juvenal done in 1475, and published soon afterward, by
Georgio Summaripa, of Verona. Giornale de Letterati d'Italia, tom. viii. p. 41.
Juvenal was printed at Rome as early as 1474.
.
In the third book he describes the happy parsimony of the Cistercian monks.

O sancta, o felix, albis galeata cucullis,
Libera paupertas! Nudo jejunia pastu
Tracta diu solvens, nec corruptura palatum
Mollitie mensae. Bacchus convivia nullo
Murmr conturbat, nec sacra cubilia mentis
Inquinat adventu. Stomacho languente ministrat
Solennes epulas ventris gravis hospita Thetis,
Et paleis armata Ceres. Si tertia mensae
Copia succedat, truncantur oluscula, quorum
Offendit macies oculos, pacemque meretur,
Deterretque famem pallenti sobria cultu There are two manuscripts of this
poem^ from which I transcribe, in the Bodleian library. MSS. Digb. 64. and 157.
One of these has a gloss, but not that of Hugo Legatus, mentioned by Baillet.
J^g^m^ Sav. iv. p. 257. edit. 4to. This poem is said to have been printed at
P^^is 1517, 4to. Bibl. Thuan. tom. ii. p. 286. This edition I have never seen,
and believe it to be an extremely scarce book.
.
Among Digby's manuscripts in the Bodleian library, are Hanvill's Latin
epigrams, epistles, and smaller poems, many of which have considerable merit
Cod. Digb. 64. ut supr.
. They are followed by a metrical tract, entitled DE EPISTOLARUM COMPOSITIONE.
But this piece is written in rhyme, and seems to be posterio^ to the age, at
least inferior to the genius, of Hanvill. He was buried in the abbey church of
saint Alban's, soon after the year 1200 Bale. iii. 49.
. Gyraldus Cambrensis deserves particular regard for the universality of his
works, many of which are written with some degree of elegance. He abounds with
quotations of the best Latin poets. He was an historian, an antiquary, a
topographer, a divine, a philosopher, and a poet. His love of science was so
great, that he refused two bishoprics; and from the midst of public business,
with which his political talents gave him a considerable connection in the
court of Richard the first, he retired to Lincoln for seven years, with a
design of pursuing theological studies Wharton. Angl. Sacr. ii. 374.
. He recited his book on the topography of Ireland in public at Oxford, for
three days successively. On the first day of this recital he entertained all
the poor of the city; on the second, all the doctors in the several faculties,
and scholars of better note; and on the third, the whole body of students, with
the citizens and soldiers of the garrison Wood. Hist. Antiq. Univ. Oxon. i. 56.
. It is probable that this was a ceremony practiced on the like occasion in the
university of Paris But W^^d insinuates, that this sumptuous entertainment was
partly given by Gyr^ldus, as an inceptor in the arts. Ubi ^upr. p. 25. col. 1.
Which practice I have mentioned, S^CT. ix. p. 290. in^^. And I will here add
other instances, especially as they are proofs of the estimation in which
letters, at least literary honors, were held. In ^he year 1268, the inceptors
in civil law at Oxford were so nume^ous, and attended by such a number of
g^ests, ^^at the academical houses or hostels were no^ sufficient for their
accommodation: and the company filled not only these, but even the re^ec^ory,
clois^e^s, and many apartmen^^ o^ Oseney abbey, near the suburbs of Oxford. At
which time many Italians studying at Oxford were admitted in that faculty.
Wood, ubi supr. p. 25. col. 1. It appears that the mayor and citizens of Oxford
were constantly invited to these solemnities. In the year 1400, two monks of
the priory of Christ Church in Canterbury were severally admitted to the degree
of doctor in divinity and civil law at Oxford. The expenses were paid by their
monastery, and amounted to 118 l. 3 s. 8 d. Regis^r. Priorat. pergamen. MSS.
Tanner, Oxon. Number. 165. ^ol. 212. ^. Among other articles there is, "In
solutione facta HISTRIONIBUS." ^ol. 213. a. [See SECT. ii. p. 91. in^r.] At
length these scholastic banquets grew to such excess, that it was ordered in
the year 1434^ that no inceptor in arts should expend more than "3000 grossos
Turonenses." Vet. Stat. Se^ Leland, Coll. P. ii. tom. i. p. 296, 297. edit.
1770. But the limitation was a considerable sum. Each is somewhat less than an
English groat. Notwithstanding, Neville, afterward archbishop of York, on his
admission to the degree of master of a^ts in 1452, ^easted the academics and
many strangers for two successive days, at two entertainments, consisting of
nine hundred costly dishes. Wood. ibid. 219. col. 1. 2. Nor was this reverence
to learning, and attention to its institutions, confined to the circle of our
universities. Such was the pedantry of the times, that in the year 1503,
archbishop Wareham, chancellor of Oxford, at his feast of inthronisation,
ordered to be introduced in the first course a curious dish, in which were
exhibited the eight towers of the university. In every tower s^ood ^ bedell;
and under the towers were figures of the king, to whom the ch^ncellor Wareham,
encircled with many doctors properly habited, presented four Latin verses,
which were answered by his majesty. The eight towers were those of Merton,
Magdalene, and New College, and of the monasteries of Oseney, Rewley, the
Dominican, Augustine, and Franciscan friars, which five last are now utterly
destroyed. Wood, ubi supr. lib. i. p. 239. col. 1. Compare Robinson's Charles
V. i. 323. seq.
; where Giraldus had studied for twenty years, and where he had been elected
professor of canon law in the year 1189 Wharton, ibid.
. His account of Wales was written in consequence of the observations he made
on that country, then almost unknown to the English, during his attendance on
an archiepiscopal visitation. I cannot resist the pleasure of transcribing from
this book his picture of the romantic situation of the abbey of Lantony in
Monmouthshire. I will give it in English, as my meaning is merely to show how
great a master the author was of that selection of circumstances which forms an
agreeable description, and which could only flow from a cultivated mind. "In
the deep vale of Ewias, which is about a bowshot over, and enclosed on all
sides with high mountains, stands the abbey church of saint John, a structure
covered with lead, and not unhandsomely built for so lonesome a situation: on
the very spot, where formerly stood a small chapel dedicated to saint David,
which had no other ornaments than green moss and ivy. It is a situation fit for
the exercise of religion; and a religious edifice was first founded in this
sequestered retreat to the honor of a solitary life, by two hermits, remote
from the noise of the world, upon the banks of the river Hondy, which winds
through the midst of the valley. -- The rains which mountainous countries
usually produce, are here very frequent, the winds exceedingly tempestuous, and
the winters almost continually dark. Yet the air of the valley is so happily
tempered, as scarcely to be the cause of any diseases. The monks sitting in the
cloisters of the abbey, when they choose for a momentary refreshment to cast
their eyes abroad, have on every side a pleasing prospect of mountains
ascending to an immense height, with numerous herds of wild deer feeding aloft
on the highest extremity of this lofty horizon. The body of the sun is not
visible above the hills till after the meridian hour, even when the air is most
clear." Giraldus adds, that Roger bishop of Salisbury, prime minister to Henry
the first, having visited this place, on his return to court told the king,
that all the treasure of his majesty's kingdom would not suffice to build such
another cloister. The bishop explained himself by saying, that he meant the
circular ridge of mountains with which the vale of Ewias was enclosed Girald.
Cambrens. ITIN. CAMB^. Lib. i. c. 3. p. 89. seq. Land. 1585. 12mo.
. Alexander Neckham was the friend, the associate, and the correspondent of
Peter of Blois already mentioned. He received the first part of his education
in the abbey of saint Alban's, which he afterward completed at Paris L^l.
Script. Brit. p. 240. seq.
. His compositions are various, and crowd the department of manuscripts in our
public libraries. He has left n^merous treatises of divinity, philosophy, and
morality: but he was likewise a poet, a philologist, and a grammarian. He wrote
a tract on the mythology of the ancient poets, Esopian fables, and a system of
grammar and rhetoric. I have seen his elegiac poem on the monastic life Bibl.
Bodl. MSS. Digb. 65. f. 18.
, which contains some finished lines. But his capital piece of Latin poetry is
On the Praise of DIVINE WISDOM, which consists of seven books. In the
introduction h^ commemorates the innocent and unreturning pleasures of his
early days, which he passed among the learned monks of saint Alban's, in these
perspicuous and unaffected elegiacs.

-- Claustrum
Martyris Albani sit tibi tuta quies.
Hic locus aetatis nostrae primordia novit,
Annos felices, laetitiaeque dies.
Hic locus ingenuis pueriles imbuit annos
Artibus, et nostrae laudis origo fuit.
Hic locus insignes magnosque creavit alumnos,
Felix eximio martyr, gente, situ.
Militat hic Christo, noctuque dieque labori
Indulget sancto religiosa cohors Apud Lel. Script. Brit. p. 240.
.
Neckham died abbot of Cirencester in the year 1217 Willis, Mitr. Abb. i. 61,
62.
. He was much attached to the studious repose of the monastic profession, yet
he frequently travell^d into Italy Lel. ibid.
. Walter Mapes, archdeacon of Oxford, has been very happily styled the Anacreon
of the eleventh century Lord Lyttelton's Hist. Hen. II. Not. B. ii. p. 133. 4to.
. He studied at Paris See infr. SECT. ii. p 63.
. His vein was chiefly festive and satirical Tanner, Bibl. p. 507.
: and as his wit was frequently levelled against the corruptions of the clergy,
his poems often appeared under fictitious names, or have been ascribed to
others Cave, Hist. Lit. p. 706. Compare Tanner, Bibl. 351. 507. In return, many
pieces went under the name of our author. As, for instance, De Thetide ^t de
Ly^^o, which is a ridiculous pi^ce of scurrility. MSS. Bibl. Bodl. Digb. 166.
f. 104.
. The celebrated drinking ode See Camd. Rem. p. 436. RYTHMI.
of this genial archdeacon has the regular returns of the monkish rhyme: but
they are here applied with a characteristical propriety, are so happily
invented, and so humourously introduced, that they not only suit the genius but
heighten the spirit of the piece In Bibl. Bodl. a piece De Nugis Curialium is
given to Mapes. MSS. Arch. B. 52. It was written A. D. 1182. As appears from
Distin^t. iv. cap. 1. It is in five books. Many Latin poems in this manuscript
are given to Mapes. One in particular, written in a flowing style, in short
lines, preserving no fixed metrical rule, which seems to have been intended for
singing. In another manuscript I find various pieces of Latin poe^ry, by some
attributed to Mapes, Bibl. Bodl. NE. F. iii. Some of these are in a good taste.
Camden has printed his Disputatio inter Cor ^t Oculum. Rem. p. 439. It is
written in a sort of Anacreontic verse, and has some humor. It is in MSS.
Bibl. Bodl. Digb. ut supr. 166. See also Camd. ibid. p. 437.
. He boasts that good wine inspires him to sing verses equal to those of Ovid.
In another Latin ode of the same kind, he attacks with great liveliness the new
injunction of pope Innocent, concerning the celibacy of the clergy; and hopes
that every married priest with his bride, will say a pater noster for the soul
of one who had thus hazarded his salvation in their defense.

Ecce jam pro clericis multum allegavi,
Necnon pro presbyteris plura comprobavi:
PATER NOSTER nunc pro me, quoniam peccavi,
Dicat quisque Presbyter, cum sua Suavi Camd. Rem. ut supr.
.
But a miracle of this age in classical composition was Joseph of Exeter,
commonly called Josephus Iscanus. He wrote two epic poems in Latin heroics. The
first is on the Trojan War; it is in six books, and dedicated to Baldwin
archbishop of Canterbury See lib. i. 32. It was first printed at Basil, but
very corruptly, in the year 1541. 3vo. Under the name of Cornelius Nepo^. The
existence and name of this poem seem to have been utterly unknown in England
when Leland wrote. He first met with a manuscript copy of it by mere accident
in Magdalene college library at Oxford. He never had even heard of it before.
He afterward ^ound two more copies at Paris. But these were all imperfect, and
without the name o^ the author, except a marginal hint. At length he discovered
a complete copy of it in the library of Thorney abbey in Cambridgeshire, which
seems to have ascertained the author's name, but not his country. Script. Brit.
p. 238. The neglect of this poem among our ancestors, I mean in the ages which
followed Iscanus, appears from the few manuscripts of (...) now remaining in
England. Leland^ who searched all our libraries, could find only two. There is
at present one in the church of Westminster. Another in Bibl. Bodl. Digb. 157.
That in Magdalen college is MSS. Cod. 50. The best edition is at the end of
"Dictys Cretensis et Dares Phrygius, in u^. Sereni^^. Delph. cum Interpret. A.
Daceriae, etc. Amstael. 1702." 4to. But all the printed copies have omitted
passages which I find in the Digby manuscript. Particularly they omit, in the
address to Baldwin, four lines after v. 32. lib. i. Thirteen lines, in which
the poet alludes to his intended ANTIOCHEIS, are omitted before v. 962. lib.
vi. Nor have they the verses in which he compliments Henry the second, said by
Leland to be at the end of the fourth book, Script. Brit. p. 238. The truth is,
these passages would have betrayed their first editor's pretense of this poem
being written by Cornelius Nepos. As it is, he was obliged in the address to
Baldwin, to change Cantia, KENT, into Tantia; for which he substitutes Pontia
in the margin, as an ingenious conjecture.
. The second is entitled ANTIOCHEIS, the War of Antioch, or the Crusade; in
which his patron the archbishop was an actor Leland, p. 224, 225.
. The poem of the Trojan war is founded on Dares Phrygius, a favorite fabulous
historian of that time The manuscript at Magdalen college, mentioned by Leland^
is entitled, Dares Phrygius de bello Trojano. Lel. p. 236. As also MSS. Digb.
supr. citat. But see SECT. iii. p. 135. infr.
. The diction of this poem is generally pure, the periods round, and the
numbers harmonious: and on the whole, the structure of the versification
approaches nearly to that of polished Latin poetry. The writer appears to have
possessed no common command of poetical phraseology, and wanted nothing but a
knowledge of the Virgilian chastity. His style is a mixture of Ovid, Statius,
and Claudian, who seem then to have been the popular patterns Statius is cited
in the epistles of Stephen of To^rnay, a writer of the twelfth century.
"Divinam ejus responsionem, ut Thebais Aeneida, long sequor, et
vestigia-semp^r adoro." He died in 1200. EPISTOLAE, Paris. 1611. 4to. Epist. v.
p. 535. On account of the variety of his matter, and the facility of his
manner, none of the ancient poets are more frequently cited in the writers of
the dark ages than Ovid. His FASTI seems to have been their favorite: a work
thus admirably characterised by an ingenious French writer. "Les Fastes d'
Ovide renferment plus d' erudition qu' aucun autre ouvrage de l' antiquite.
C'est le chef d' oeuvre de ce poet, et une espece de devotion paienne."
Vigneul Marville, Misc. Hist. et Lit. tom. ii. p. 306. A writer of the
thirteenth century, DE MIRABILIBUS ROMAE, published by Montfaucon, calls this
work MARTILOGIUM Ovidii in Fastis. Montf. Diar. Italic. c. xx. p. 293.
. But a few specimens will best illustrate this criticism. He thus, in a strain
of much spirit and dignity, addresses king Henry the second, who was going to
the holy war Voltaire has expressed his admiration of the happy choice of
subject which Tasso made. We here see a poet of an age much earlier than Tasso
celebrating the same sort of expedition.
, the intended subject of his ANTIOCHEIS.

-- Tuque, oro, tuo da, maxim, vati
Ire iter inceptum, Trojamque aperire jacentem:
Te sacrae assument acies, divinaque bella,
Tunc dignum majore tuba; tunc pectore toto
Nitar, et immensum mecum spargere per orbem Lib. 1. 47.
,
The tomb or mausoleum of Teuthras is feigned with a brilliancy of imagination
and expression; and our poet's classical ideas seem here to have been tinctured
with the description of some magnificent oriental palace, which he had seen in
the romances of his age.

Regia conspicuis moles inscripta figuris
Exceptura ducem, senis affulta columnis,
Tollitur: electro vernat basis, arduus auro
Ardet apex, radioque stylus candescit eburno.
-- Gemmae quas littoris Indi
Dives arena tegit, aurum quod parturit Hermus,
In varias vivunt species, ditique decorum
Materie contendit opus: quod nobile ductor
Quod clarum gessit, ars explicat, ardua pandit
Moles, et totum reserat sculptura tyrannum Lib. iv. 451.
.
He thus describes Penthesilea and Pyrrhus.

Eminet, horrificas rapiens post terga secures,
Virginei regina chori: non provida cultus
Cura trahit, non forma juvat, frons aspera, vestis
Discolor, insertumque armis irascitur aurum.
Si visum, si verba notes, si lumina pendas,
Nil leve, nil fractum: latet omni foemina facto.
Obvius ultrices accendit in arma cohortes,
Myrmidonasque suos, curru praevectus anhelo,
Pyrrhus, etc.
-- Meritosque offensus in hosts
Arma patris, nunc ultor, habet: sed tanta recusant
Pondera crescentes humeri, majoraque cassis
Colla petit, breviorque manus vix colligit hastam Lib. vi. p. 589.
.
Afterward a Grecian leader, whose character is invective, insults
Penthesilea, and her troop of heroines, with these reproaches.

Tunc sic increpitans, Pudeat, Mars inclyte, dixit:
En!, tua signa gerit, quin nostra effoeminat arma
Staminibus vix apta manus. Nunc stabitis hercle
Perjurae turres; calathos et pensa puellae
Plena rotant, sparguntque colos. Hoc milite Troja,
His fidit telis. At non patiemur Achivi:
Etsi turpe viris timidas calcare puellas,
Ibo tamen contra. Sic ille: At virgo l^quacem
Tarda sequi sexum, velox ad praelia, solo
Respondet jaculo Lib. vi. 609.
, etc. --
I will add one of his comparisons. The poet is speaking of the reluctant
advances of the Trojans under their new leader Memnon, after the fall of Hector.

Qualiter Hyblaei mellita pericula reges,
Si signis iniere datis, labente tyranno
Alterutro, viduos dant agmina stridula questus;
Et, subitum vix nacta ducem, metuentia vibrant
Spicula, et imbelli remeant in praelia rostro Lib. vi. 19.
.
His ANTIOCHEIS was written in same strain, and had equal merit. All that
remains of it is the following fragment Camd. Rem. p. 410. POEMS. See also
Camd. Brit. Leland having learned from the B^llum Trojanum that Josephus had
likewise written a poem on the crusade, searched for it in many places, but
without success. At length he found a pi^ce of it in the library of Abingdon
abbey in Berkshire. "Cum excuterem pulverem et tineas Abbandunensis
bibliothecae." Ut supr. p. 238. Here he discovered that Josephus was a native
of Exeter, which city was highly celebrated in that fragment.
, in which the poet celebrates the heroes of Britain, and particularly king
Arthur.

-- Inclyta fulsit
Posteritas ducibus tantis, tot dives alumnis,
Tot foecunda viris, premerent qui viribus orbem
Et fama veteres. Hinc Constantinus adeptus
Imperium, Roman tenuit, Byzantion auxit.
Hinc, Senonum ductor, captiva Brennius urbe f. "Captiva Brennus in."

Romuleas domuit flammis victricibus arces.
Hinc et Scaeva satus, pars non obscura tumultus
Civilis, Magnum solus qui mole soluta
Obsedit, meliorque stetit pro Caesare murus.
Hinc, celebri fato, felici floruit ortu,
Flos regum Arthurus From this circumstance, Pits absurdly recites the title of
this poem thus. Antiocheis in Regem Arthurum. JOS. ISC.
, cujus tamen acta stupori
Non micuere minus: totus quod in aure voluptas,
Et populo plaudente favor The text seems to be corrupt in this sentence. Or
perhaps somewhat is wanting. I have changed favus, which is in Camden, into
favor.
. Quaecunque f. Quemcunque.
priorum
Inspice: Pellaeum commendat fama tyrannum,
Pagina Caesareos loquitur Romana triumphos:
Alciden domitis attollit gloria monstris;
Sed nec pinetum coryli, nec sydera solemn
Aequant. Annals Graios Latiosque revolve,
Prisca parem nescit, aequalem postera nullum
Exhibitura dies. Reges supereminet omnes:
Solus praeteritis melior, majorque futuris.
Camden asserts, that Joseph accompanied king Richard the first to the holy
land Rem. ut supr. p. 407.
, and was an eyewitness of that heroic monarch's exploits among the Saracens,
which afterward he celebrated in the ANTIOCHEIS. Leland mentions his
love-verses and epigrams, which are long since perished Leland, ut supr. p.
239. Our biographers mention Panegyricum in Henricum. But the notion of this
poem seems to have taken rise from the verses on Henry the second, quoted by
Leland from the Bellum Trojanum. He is likewise said to have written in Latin
verse De Institutione Cyri.
. He Italy had at that time produced no writer comparable to Iscanus.
flourished in the year 1210 Bale, iii. 60. Compare Dresenius ad Lectorem.
Prefixed to the DE BELLO TROJANO. Fancof. 1620. 4to. Mr. Wise the late
Radcliffe librarian, told me, that a manuscript of the ANTIOCHEIS was in the
library of the duke of Chandois at Canons.
.

There seems to have been a rival spirit of writing Latin heroic poems about
this period. In France, Guillaume le Breton, or William of Bretagny, about the
year 1230, wrote a Latin heroic poem on Philip Augustus king of France, about
the commencement of the thirteenth century, in twelve books, entitled PHILIPPIS
He wrote it at fifty-five years of age. PHILIPP. lib. iii. v. 381. It was first
printed in Pithou's Eleven Historians of France, Francof. 1536. fol. Next in D^
Chesne, SCRIPT. FRANC. tom. v. p. 93. Paris. 1694. fol. But the best edition is
with Barthius's notes, Cygn. 1657. 4to. Brito says in the PHILIPPIS, that he
wrote a poem called KARLOTTIS, in praise of Petri Carlotti sui, then not
fifteen years old. PHILIPP. lib. i. v. 10. This poem was never printed, and is
hardly known.
. Barthius gives a prodigious character of this poem: and affirms that the
author, a few gallicisms excepted, has expressed the facility of Ovid with
singular happiness In Not. p. 7. See also Adversar. xliii. 7. He prefers it to
the ALEXANDREIS mentioned below, in Not. p. 528. See Mem. Lit. viii. 536. edit.
4to.
. The versification much resembles that of Joseph Iscanus. He appears to have
drawn a great part of his materials from Roger Hoveden's annals. But I am of
opinion, that the PHILIPPID is greatly exceeded by the ALEXANDREID of Philip
Gualtier de Chatillon, who flourished likewise in France, and was provost of
the canons of Tournay, about the year 1200 It was first printed, Argent. 1513.
8vo. And two or three times since.
. This poem celebrates the actions of Alexander the Great, is founded on
Quintus Curtius See infr. SECT. iii. p. 139. And Barth. Advers. lii. 16.
, consists of ten books, and is dedicated to Guillerm archbishop of Rheims. To
give the reader an opportunity of comparing Gualtier's style and manner with
those of our countryman Josephus, I will transcribe a few specimens from a
beautiful and ancient manuscript of the ALEXANDREID in the Bodleian library
MSS. Digb. 52. 4to.
. This is the exordium.

Gesta ducis Macedum totum vulgata per orbem,
Quam late dispersit opes, quo milite Porum
Vicerit et Darium; quo principe Graecia victrix
Risit, et a Persis rediere tributa Corinthum,
Musa, refer fol. 1. a.^
.
A beautiful rural scene is thus described.

-- Patulis ubi frondea ramis
Laurus odoriferas celabat crinibus herbas:
Saepe sub hac memorat carmen sylvestre canentes
Nympharum vidisse choros, Satyrosque procaces.
Fons cadit a laeva, quem cespite gramen obumbrat
Purpureo, verisque latens sub vest locatur.
Rivulus at lento lavat inferiora meatu
Garrulus, et strepitu facit obsurdescere montes.
Hic matter Cybele Zephyrum tibi, Flora, maritans,
Pullulat, et vallem foecundat gratia fontis^
Qualiter Alpinis spumoso vortice saxis
Descendit Rhodanus, ubi Maximianus Eoos
Extinxit cuneos, dum sanguinis unda meatum
Fluminis adjuvit. fol. xiii. a.
. --
He excells in similies. Alexander, when a stripling, is thus compared to a
young lion.

Qualiter Hyrcanis cum forte leunculis arvis
Cornibus elatos videt ire ad pabula cervos,
Cui nondum totos descendit robur in artus,
Nec been firmus adhuc, nec dentibus asper aduncis,
Palpitat, et vacuum ferit improba lingua palatum;
Effunditque prius animis quam dente cruorem fol. xxi. a.
.
The ALEXANDREID soon became so popular, that Henry of Gaunt, archdeacon of
Tournay, about the year 1330, complains that this poem was commonly taught in
the rhetorical schools, instead of Lucan Here, among many other proofs which
might be given, and which will occur hereafter, is a proof of the estimation in
which Lucan was held during the middle ages. He is quoted by Geoffrey of
Monmouth and John of Salisbury, writers of the eleventh century. Hist. Brit.
iv. 9. and Policrat. p. 215. edit. 1515. etc. etc. There is an anonymous
Italian translation of Lucan, as early as the year 1310. The Italians have also
Lucano in volgare, by cardinal Montichelli, at Milan 1492. It is in the octave
rhyme, and in ten books. But the translator has so much departed from the
original, as to form a sort of romance of his own. He was translated into
Spanish prose, Lucano poeta y historiador antiquo, by Martin Less de Orespe,
at Antwerp, 1585. Lucan was first printed in the year 1469. And before the year
1500, there were six other editions of this classic, whose declamatory manner
rendered him very popular. He was published at Paris in French in 1500. Labb.
Bibl. p. 339.
and Virgil See Hen. Gandav. Monastichon. c. 20. and Fabric. Bibl. Gr. ii. 218.
Alanus de Insulis, who died in 1202, in his poem called ANTI-CLAUDIANUS, a
Latin poem of nine books, much in the manner of Claudian, and written in
defense of divine providence against a passage in that poet's RUFINUS, thus
attacks the rising reputation of the ALEXANDREID.

Maevius in coelis ardens os ponere mutum,
GESTA DUCIS MACEDUM, tenebrosi carminis umbra,
Dicere dum tentat. --

. The learned Charpentier cites a passage from the manuscript statutes of the
university of Toulouse, dated 1328, in which the professors of grammar are
directed to read to their pupils "De Historiis Alexandri Suppl. Du Cang. Lat.
Gloss. tom. ii. p. 1255. V. METRIFICATURA. By which barbarous word they
signified the Art of Poetry, or rather the Art of writing Latin verses.
." Among which I include Gualtier's poem See SECT. iii. p. 128. infr.
. It is quoted as a familiar classic by Thomas Rodburn, a monkish chronicler,
who wrote about the year 1420 Hist. Maj. Winton. apud Wharton^ Angl. Sacr. i.
242.
. An anonymous Latin poet, seemingly of the thirteenth century, who has left a
poem on the life and miracles of saint Oswald, mentions Homer, Gualtier, and
Lucan, as the three capital heroic poets. Homer, he says, has celebrated
Hercules, Gualtier the son of Philip, and Lucan has sung the praises of Caesar.
But, adds he, these heroes much less deserve to be immortalised in verse, than
the deeds of the holy confessor Oswald.

In nova fert animus antiquas vertere prosas
Carmina, etc.
Alciden hyperbolice commendat HOMERUS,
GUALTERUS pingit torvo Philippida vultu,
Caesareas late lauds LUCANUS adauget:
TRES illi famam meruerunt, tresque poetas
Auctores habuere suos, multo magis autem
Oswaldi regis debent insignia dici I will add some of the exordial lines
almost immediately following, as they contain names, and other circumstances,
which perhaps may lead to point out the age if not the name of the author. They
were never before printed. Tu quoque digneris, precor, aspirare labori,
Flos cleri, MARTINE, meo; qui talis es inter
Abbates, qualis est patronus tuus inter
Pontifices: hic est primas, tu primus eorum, etc.
Hic per Aidanum sua munificentia munus
Illi promeruit, etc.
Tuque benign Prior, primas, et prime Priorum,
Qui cleri, ROGERE, rosam geris, annue vati, etc.
Tuque Sacrista, sacris instans, qui jure vocaris
SIMON, id ^st humilis, quo nemo benignior alter
Abbatis praecepta sui velocior audit,
Tardius obloquitur: qui tot mea carmina servas
Scripta voluminibus, nec plura requirere cessas.
Praeteritos laudas, praesentes dilige versus, etc.
The manuscript is Bibl. Bodl. A. 1. 2. B. (Langb. 5. p. 3.) This piece begins
at f. 57. Other pieces precede, in Latin poetry. As VITAE SANCTORUM. T. Becket.
f. 3. Qui moritur? Praesul. Cur? pro Grege, etc. Prol. pr. f. 23. Detineant
alios Parnassi culmina, Cyrrhae Plausus, Pieridum vox, Heliconis opes. D^ partu
Virginis. f. 28. b. Nectareum rorem terris, etc. S. Birinus, f. 42. Et pudet,
et fateor, etc. The author of the life of Birinus says, he was commanded to
write by Peter, probably Peter de Rupibus, bishop of Winchester. Perhaps he is
Michael Blaunpayne. Alexander Esseby wrote lives of saints in Latin verse. See
MSS. Harl. 1819. 531.
.
I do not cite this writer as a proof of the elegant versification which had
now become fashionable, but to show the popularity of the ALEXANDREID, at least
among scholars. About the year 1206, Gunther a German, and a Cistercian monk of
the diocese of Basil, wrote an heroic poem in Latin verse entitled, LIGURINUS,
which is scarce inferior to the PHILIPPID of Guillaum le Breton, or the
ALEXANDREID of Gualtier: but not so polished and classical as the TROJAN WAR of
our Josephus Iscanus. It is in ten books, and the subject is the war of the
emperor Frederick Barbarossa against the Milanese in Liguria First printed
August. Vindel. 1507. fol. And frequently since.
. He had before written a Latin poem on the expedition of the emperor Conrade
against the Saracens, and the recovery of the holy sepulcher at Jerusalem by
Godfrey of Bulloign, which he called SOLYMARIUM He mentions it in his LIGURIUM,
lib. i. v. 13. seq. v. 648. seq. See also Voss. Poet. Lat. c. vi. p. 73. It was
never printed. Gunther wrote a prose history of the sack of Constantinople by
Baldwin: The materials were taken from the mouth of abbot Martin, who was
present at the siege, in 1204. It was printed by Canisius, Antiqu. Lect. tom.
iv. P. ii p. 358. Ingolstad. 1604. 4to. Again, in a new edition of that
compilation, Amst. 1725. fol^ tom. iv. See also Pagi, ad A. D. 1519. ^. xiv.
. The subject is much like that of the ANTIOCHEIS; but which of the two pieces
was written first it is difficult to ascertain.

While this spirit of classical Latin poetry was universally prevailing, our
countryman Geoffrey de Vinesauf, an accomplished scholar, and educated not only
in the priory of saint Frideswide at Oxford, but in the universities of France
and Italy, published while at Rome a critical didactic poem entitled, DE NOVA
POETRIA It has been often printed. I think it is called in some manuscripts, De
Art dict^ndi, versificandi, et transferendi. See Seldom, Praefat. DEC.
SCRIPTOR. p. xxxix. And Seldom, Op. ii. 168. He is himself no contemptible
Latin poet, and is celebrated by Chaucer. See Urry's edit. ^. 468. 560. He
seems to have lived about 1200.
. This book is dedicated to pope Innocent the third: and its intention was to
recommend and illustrate the new and legitimate mode of versification which had
lately begun to flourish in Europe, in opposition to the Leonine or barbarous
species. This he compendiously styles, and by way of distinction, The NEW
Poetry. We must not be surprised to find Horace's Art of Poetry entitled
HORATII NOVA POETRIA, so late as the year 1389, in a catalogue of the library
of a monastery at Dover Ex Matricula monach. Monast. Dover. apud MSS. Br.
Twyne, notat. 8. p. 758. archiv. Oxon. Yet all Horace's writings were often
transcribed, and not unfamiliar, in the dark ages. His odes are quoted by
Fitz-Stephens in his DESCRIPTION of LONDON. Rabanus Maurus abovementioned
quotes two verses from the ART O^ POETRY. Op. tom. ii. p. 46^ edit. Colon.
1627. fol.
.

Even a knowledge of the Greek language imported from France, but chiefly from
Italy, was now beginning to be diffused in England. I am inclined to think,
that many Greek manuscripts found their way into Europe from Constantinople in
the time of the crusades: and we might observe that the Italians, who seem to
have been the most polished and intelligent people of Europe during the
barbarous ages, carried on communications with the Greek empire as early as the
reign of Charlemagne. Robert Grosthead, bishop of Lincoln, an universal
scholar, and no less conversant in polite letters than the most abstruse
sciences, cultivated and patronised the study of the Greek language. This
illustrious prelate, who is said to have composed almost two hundred books,
read lectures in the school of the Franciscan friars at Oxford about the year
1230 Kennet, Paroch. Antiq. p. 217.
. He translated Dionysius the Areopagite and Damascenus into Latin Leland,
Script. Brit. p. 283.
. He greatly facilitated the knowledge of Greek by a translation of Suidas's
Lexicon, a book in high repute among the lower Greeks, and at that time almost
a recent compilation Boston of Bury says, that he translated the book called
SUDA. Catal. Script. Eccles. ROBERT. LINCOLN. Boston lived in the year 1410.
Such was their ignorance at this time even of the name of this lexicographer.
. He promoted John of Basingstoke to the archdeaconry of Leicester; chiefly
because he was a Greek scholar, and possessed many Greek manuscripts, which he
is said to have brought from Athens into England Lel. Script. Brit. p. 266.
Matthew Paris asserts, that he introduced into England a knowledge of the Greek
numeral letters. That historian adds, "De quibus figuris HOC MAXIM ADMIRANDUM,
quod unica figura quilibet numerus repraesentatur: quod non est in Latino vel
in Algorismo." Hist. edit. Land. 1684. p. 721. He translated from Greek into
Latin a grammar which he called DONATUS GRAECORUM. See Pegge's Life of Roger de
Weseham, p. 46. 47. 51. And infr. p. 281. He seems to have flourished about the
year 1230. Bacon also wrote a Greek grammar, in which is the following curious
passage. "Episcopus consecrans ecclesiam, scribat Alphabetum Graecum in pulvere
cum cuspide baculi pastoralis: sed omnes episcopi QUI GRAECUM IGNORANT,
scribant tres notas num^rorum quae non sunt literae, etc." GR. GRAM. cap. ult.
p. iii. MSS. Apud MSS. Br. Twyne, 8. p. 649. archiv. Oxon. See what is said of
the new translations of Aristotle, from the original Greek into Latin, about
the twelfth century. SECT. ix. p. 292. infr. I believe the translators
understood very little Greek. Our countryman Michael Scotu^ was one of the
first of them; who was assisted by Andrew a Jew. Michael was astrologer to
Frederick emperor of Germany, and appears to have executed his translations at
Toledo in Spain, about the year 1220. These new versions were perhaps little
more than corrections from those of the early Arabians, made under the
inspection of the learned Spanish^ Saracens. To the want of a true knowledge of
the original language of the ancient Greek philosophers, Roger Bacon attributes
the ^low and imperfect advances of real science at this period. On this account
their improvements were very inconsiderable, notwithstanding the appearance of
erudition, and the ^ervour with which almost every branch of philosophy had
been now studied in various countries for near half a century. See Wood, Hist.
Antiq. Univ. Oxon. i. 120. seq. Dempster, xii^ 940. Baconi Op. Maj. per Jebb,
i. 15. ii. 8. Tanner, Bibl. p. 526. And MSS. Cotton. C. 5. fol. 138. Brit. Mus.

A learned writer affirms, that Aristotle's books in the original Greek were
brought out of the east into Europe about the ye^r 1200. He is also of opinion,
that during the crusades many Europeans, from their commerce with the Syrian
Palestines, got a knowledge of Arabic: and that importing into Europe Arabic
versions of some parts of Aristotle's works, which they found in the east, they
turned them into Latin. These were chiefly his Ethics and Politics. And these
NEW TRANSLATORS he further supposes were employed at their return into Europe
in revising the old translations of other parts of Aristotle, made from Arabic
into Latin. Eusebius. Renaudot. De Barba^. Aristot. Versionib. apu^ Fabric. Bibl.
Gr. xii p. 248. S^e also Murator. Antiq. It^^. Med. Aev. iii. 936^


. He entertained, as a domestic in his palace, Nicholas chaplain of the abbot
of saint Alban's, surnamed GRAECUS, from his uncommon proficiency in Greek; and
by his assistance he translated from Greek into Latin the testaments of the
twelve patriarchs See MSS. Reg. B^it. Mus. 4 D. vii. 4. Wood, Hist. Antiq.
Univ. O^on. i. 82. And M. Paris, sub anno. 1242.
. Grosthead had almost incurred the censure of excommunication for preferring a
complaint to the pope, that most of the opulent benefices in England were
occupied by Italians Godwin, Episc. p. 348. edit. 1616.
. But this practice, although notoriously founded on the monopolising and
arbitrary spirit of papal imposition, and a manifest act of injustice to the
English clergy, probably contributed to introduce many learned foreigners into
England, and to propagate philological literature.

Bishop Grosthead is also said to have been profoundly skilled in the Hebrew
language He is mentioned again, SECT. ii. p. 61. 78. infr.
. William the conqueror permitted great numbers of Jews to come over from
Rouen, and to settle in England about the year 1087 Hollingsh. Chron. sub ann.
p. 15. a.
. Their multitude soon increased, and they spread themselves in vast bodies
throughout most of the cities and capital towns in England, where they built
synagogues. There were fifteen hundred at York about the year 1189 Anders.
Comm. i. 93.
. At Bury in Suffolk is a very complete remain of a Jewish synagogue of stone
in the Norman style, large and magnificent. Hence it was that many of the
learned English ecclesiastics of these times became acquainted with their books
and language. In the reign of William Rufus, at Oxford the Jews were remarkably
numerous, and had acquired a considerable property; and some of their Rabbis
were permitted to open a school in the university, where they instructed not
only their own people, but many christian students, in the Hebrew literature,
about the year 1054 Angl. Judaic. p. 8.
. Within two hundred years after their admission or establishment by the
conqueror, they were banished the kingdom Hollingsh. ibid. sub. ann. 1289. p.
285. a. Matthew of Westminster says, that 16511 were banished. Flor. Hist. ad
an. 1290. Great numbers of Hebrew rolls and charts^ relating to their estates
in England, and escheated to the king, are now remaining in the Tower among the
royal records.
. This circumstance was highly favorable to the circulation of their learning
in England. The suddenness of their dismission obliged them for present
subsistence, and other reasons, to sell their moveable goods of all kinds,
among which were large quantities of Rabbinical books. The monks in various
parts availed themselves of the distribution of these treasures. At Huntingdon
and Stamford there was a prodigious sale of their effects, containing immense
stores of Hebrew manuscripts, which were immediately purchased by Gregory of
H^ntingdon, prior of the abbey of Ramsey. Gregory speedily became an adept in
the Hebrew, by means of these valuable acquisitions, which he bequeathed to his
monastery about the year 1250 Leland, Script. Brit. p. 321. And MSS. Bibl.
Lambet^. Wharton, L. p. 661. "Libri Prioris Gregorii de Ramesey. Prima pars
Bibliothecae Hebraicae," etc.
. Other members of the same convent, in consequence of these advantages, are
said to have been equal proficients in the same language, soon after the death
of prior Gregory: among which were Robert Dodford, librarian of Ramsey, and
Laurence Holbech, who compiled a Hebrew Lexicon Bale, iv. 41. ix. 9. Lel. ubi
supr. p. 452.
. At Oxford, great multitudes of their books fell into the hands of Roger
Bacon, or were bought by his brethren the Franciscan friars of that university
Wood, Hist. Antiq. Univ. Oxon. i. 77. 132. See also SECT. ix. p. 291. infr.
.

But, to return to the leading point of our enquiry, this promising dawn of
polite letters and rational knowledge was soon obscured. The temporary gleam of
light did not arrive to perfect day. The minds of scholars were diverted from
these liberal studies in the rapidity of their career; and the arts of
composition, and the ornaments of language were neglected, to make way for the
barbarous and barren subtleties of scholastic divinity. The first teachers of
this art, originally founded on that spirit of intricate and metaphysical
enquiry which the Arabians had communicated to philosophy, and which now became
almost absolutely necessary for defending the doctrines of Rome, were Peter
Lombard archbishop of Paris, and the celebrated Abelard: men whose consummate
abilities were rather qualified to reform the church, and to restore useful
science, than to corrupt both, by confounding the common sense of mankind with
frivolous speculation They both flourished about the year 1150.
. These visionary theologists never explained or illustrated any scriptural
topic: on the contrary, they perverted the simplest expressions of the sacred
text, and embarrassed the most evident truths of the gospel by labored
distinctions and unintelligible solutions. From the universities of France,
which were then filled with multitudes of English students, this admired
species of sophistry was adopted in England, and encouraged by Lanfranc and
Anselm, archbishops of Canterbury "Baccalaureus qui legit textum (sc. S.
Scripturae) succumbit lectori SENTENTIARUM Parisiis, etc." Rog. Bacon, ap^d A.
Wood, Hist. Antiq. Univ. Oxon. i. p. 53. Lombard was the author of the
Sentences.
. And so successful was its progress at Oxford, that before the reign of Edward
the second, no foreign university could boast so conspicuous a catalogue of
subtle and invincible doctors.

Nor was the profession of the civil and canonical laws a small impediment to
the propagation of those letters which humanise the mind, and cultivate the
manners. I do not mean to deny, that the accidental discovery of the imperial
code in the twelfth century, contributed in a considerable degree to civilize
Europe, by introducing, among other beneficial consequences, more legitimate
ideas concerning the nature of government and the administration of justice, by
creating a necessity of transferring judicial decrees from an illiterate
nobility to the cognizance of scholars, by lessening the attachment to the
military profession, and by giving honor and importance to civil employments:
but to suggest, that the mode in which this invaluable system of jurisprudence
was studied, proved injurious to polite literature. It was no sooner revived,
than it was received as a scholastic science, and taught by regular professors,
in most of the universities of Europe. To be skilled in the theology of the
schools was the chief and general ambition of scholars: but at the same time a
knowledge of both the laws was become an indispensable requisite, at least an
essential recommendation, for obtaining the most opulent ecclesiastical
dignities. Hence it was cultivated with universal avidity. It became so
considerable a branch of study in the plan of academical discipline, that
twenty scholars out of seventy were destined to the study of the civil and
canon laws, in one of the most ample colleges at Oxford, founded in the year
1385. And it is easy to conceive the pedantry with which it was pursued in
these seminaries during the middle ages. It was treated with the same spirit of
idle speculation which had been carried into philosophy and theology, it was
overwhelmed with endless commentaries which disclaimed all elegance of
language, and served only to exercise genius, as it afforded materials for
framing the flimsy labyrinths of casuistry.

It was not indeed probable, that these attempts in elegant literature which I
have mentioned should have any permanent effects. The change, like a sudden
revolution in government, was too rapid for duration. It was moreover
premature, and on that account not likely to be lasting. The habits of
superstition and ignorance were as yet too powerful for a reformation of this
kind to be effected by a few polite scholars. It was necessary that many
circumstances and events, yet in the womb of time, should take place, before
the minds of men could be so far enlightened as to receive these improvements.

But perhaps inventive poetry lost nothing by this relapse. Had classical taste
and judgment been now established, imagination would have suffered, and too
early a check would have been given to the beautiful extravagancies of romantic
fabling. In a word, truth and reason would have chased before their time those
specter of illusive fancy, so pleasing to the imagination, which delight to
hover in the gloom of ignorance and superstition, and which form so
considerable a part of the poetry of the succeeding centuries.

THE HISTORY OF ENGLISH POETRY.
SECT. I.
THE Saxon language spoken in England, is distinguished by three several
epochs, and may therefore be divided into three dialects. The first of these is
that which the Saxons used, from their entrance into this island, till the
irruption of the Danes, for the space of three hundred and thirty years The
Saxons came into England A. D. 450.
. This has been called the British Saxon: and no monument of it remains, except
a small metrical fragment of the genuine Caedmon, inserted in Alfred's version
of the Venerable Bede's ecclesiastical history Lib. iv. cap. 4. Some have
improperly referred to this dialect the HARMONY OF THE FOUR GOSPELS, in the
Cotton library; the style of which approaches in purity and antiquity to that
of the CODEX ARGENTEUS. It is Frankish. See Brit. Mus. MSS. Cotton. CALI^. A.
7. membran. octavo. This book is supposed to have belonged to king Canute.
Eight richly illuminated historical pictures are bound up with it, evidently
taken from another manuscript, but probably of the age of king Stephen.
. The second is the Danish Saxon, which prevailed from the Danish to the Norman
invasion A. D. 1066.
; and of which many considerable specimens, both in verse See Hickes. These.
Ling. Vett. Sept. P. i. cap. xxi. page 177. And Praefat. fol. xiv. The curious
reader is also referred to a Danish Saxon poem, celebrating the wars which
Beowulf, a noble Dane, descended from the royal stem of Scyldinge, waged
against the kings of Swedeland. MSS. Cotton. ut supr. VITELL. A. 15. Cod.
membran. ix. fol. 130. Compare, written in the style Caedmon, a fragment of an
ode in praise of the exploits of Brithnoth, Offa's ealdorman, or general, in a
battle fought against the Danes. Ibid. OATH. A. 12. Cod. membran. 4to. iii.
Brithnoth, the hero of this piece, a Northumbrian, died in the year 991.
and prose, are still preserved: particularly, two literal versions of the four
gospels MSS. Bibl. Bodl. Oxon. Cod. membran. in Pyxid. 4to grand. quadrat. And
MSS. Cotton. ut supr. OTHO. Nor. D. 4. Bot^ these manuscripts were written and
ornamented in the Saxon times, and are of the highest curiosity and antiquity.
, and the spurious Caedmon's beautiful poetical paraphrase of the Book of
Genesis Printed by Junius, Amst. 1655. The greatest part of the Bodleian
manuscript of this book, is believed to have been written about A. D. 1000. --
Cod. Jun. xi. membran. fol.
, and the prophet Daniel. The third may be properly styled the Norman Saxon;
which began about the time of the Norman accession, and continued beyond the
reign of Henry the second He died 1189.
.

The last of these three dialects, with which these Annals of English Poetry
commence, formed a language extremely barbarous, irregular, and intractable;
and consequently promises no very striking specimens in any species of
composition. Its substance was the Danish Saxon, adulterated with French. The
Saxon indeed, a language subsisting on uniform principles, and polished by
poets and theologists, however corrupted by the Danes, had much perspicuity,
strength, and harmony: but the French imported by the Conqueror and his people,
was a confused jargon of Teutonic, Gaulish, and vitiated Latin. In this
fluctuating state of our national speech, the French predominated. Even before
the conquest the Saxon language began to fall into contempt, and the French, or
Frankish, to be substituted in its stead: a circumstance, which at once
facilitated and foretold the Norman accession. In the year 652, it was the
common practice of the Anglo-Saxons, to send their youth to the monasteries of
France for education Dugd. Mon. i. 89.
: and not only the language, but the manners of the French, were esteemed the
most polite accomplishments Ingulph. Hist. p. 62. sub. ann. 1043.
. In the reign of Edward the Confessor, the resort of Normans to the English
court was so frequent, that the affectation of imitating the Frankish customs
became almost universal: and even the lower class of people were ambitious of
catching the Frankish idiom. It was no difficult task for the Norman lords to
banish that language, of which the natives began to be absurdly ashamed. The
new invaders commanded the laws to be administered in French But there is a
precept in Saxon from William the first, to the sheriff of Somersetshire.
Hickes. These. i. par. i. page 106. See also Praefat. ibid. p. xv.
. Many charters of monasteries were forged in Latin by the Saxon monks, for the
present security of their possessions, in consequence of that aversion which
the Normans professed to the Saxon tongue The Normans who practiced every
specious expedient to plunder the monks, demanded a sight of the written
evidences of their lands. The monks well knew, that it would have been useless
or impolitic to have produced these evidences, or charters, in the original
Saxon; as the Normans not only did not understand, but would have received with
contempt, instruments written in that language. Therefore the monks were
compelled to the pious fraud of forging them in Latin: and great numbers of
these forged Latin charters, till lately supposed original, are still extant.
See Spelman, in Not. ad Council. Anglic. p. 125. Stillingfl. Orig. Eccle^.
Britann. p. 14. Marsham, Praefat. ad D^gd. Monast. And Wharton, Angl. Sacr.
vol. ii. Praefat. p. ii. iii. iv. See also Ingulph. p. 512. Launoy and Mabillon
have treated this subject with great learning and penetration.
. Even children at school were forbidden to read in their native language, and
instructed in a knowledge of the Norman only Ingulph. p. 71. sub. ann. 1066.
. In the mean time we should have some regard to the general and political
state of the nation. The natives were so universally reduced to the lowest
condition of neglect and indigence, that the English name became a term of
reproach: and several generations elapsed, before one family of Saxon pedigree
was raised to any distinguished honors, or could so much as attain the rank of
baronage See Brompt. Ch^on. p. 1026. Abb^ Rieval. p. 339.
. Among other instances of that absolute and voluntary submission; with which
our Saxon ancestors received a foreign yoke, it appears that they suffered
their handwriting to fall into discredit and disuse Ingulph, p. 85.
; which by degrees became so difficult and obsolete, that few beside the oldest
men could understand the characters Ibid. p. 98. sub. ann. 1091.
. In the year 1095, Wolstan, bishop of Worcester, was deposed by the arbitra^y
Normans: it was objected against him, that he was "a superannuated English
idiot, who could not speak French Matt. Paris. sub. ann.
." It is true, that in some of the monasteries, particularly at Croyland and
Tavistocke, founded by Saxon princes, there were regular preceptors in the
Saxon language: but this institution was suffered to remain after the conquest,
as a matter only of interest and necessity. The religious could not otherwise
have understood their original charters. William's successor, Henry the first,
gave an instrument of confirmation to William archbishop of Canterbury, which
was written in the Saxon language and letters H. Wharton, Auctar. Histor.
Dogmat. p. 388. The learned Mabillon is mistaken in asserting, that the Saxon
way of writing was entirely abolished in England at the time of the Norman
conquest. See Mabillon. De Re Diplomat. p. 52. The French antiquaries are fond
of this notion. There are Saxon characters in Herbert Losinga's charter for
founding the church of Norwich. Temp. Will. Ruf. A. D. 1110. See Lambarde's
Diction. V. NORWICH. See also Hickes. Thesaur. i. Par. i. p. 149. See also
Praefat. p. xvi. An intermixture of the Saxon character is common in English
and Latin manuscripts, before the reign of Edward the third: but of a few types
only.
. Yet this is almost a single example. That monarch's motive was perhaps
political: and he seems to have practiced this expedient with a view of
obliging his queen, who was of Saxon lineage; or with a design of flattering
his English subjects, and of securing his title already strengthened by a Saxon
match, in consequence of so specious and popular an artifice. It was a common
and indeed a very natural practice, for the transcribers of Saxon books, to
change the Saxon orthography for the Norman, and to substitute in the place of
the original Saxon, Norman words and phrases. A remarkable instance of this
liberty, which sometimes perplexes and misleads the critics in Anglo-Saxon
literature, appears in a voluminous collection of Saxon homilies, preserved in
the Bodleian library, and written about the time of Henry the second MSS. Bodl.
NE. F. 4. 12. Cod. membran. fol.
. It was with the Saxon characters, as with the signature of the cross in
public deeds; which were changed into the Norman mode of seals and
subscriptions Yet some Norman charters have the cross.
. The Saxon was probably spoken in the country, yet not without various
adulterations from the French: the courtly language was French, yet perhaps
with some vestiges of the vernacular Saxon. But the nobles, in the reign of
Henry the second, constantly sent their children into France, le^t they should
contract habits of barbarism in their speech, which could not have been avoided
in an English education Gervas. Tilbur. de Otiis Imperial. MSS. Bibl. Bodl.
lib. iii. See du Chesne, iii. p. 363.
. Robert Holcot, a learned Dominican friar, confesses, that in the beginning of
the reign of Edward the third, there was no institution of children in the old
English: he complains, that they first learned the French, and from the French
the Latin language. This he observes to have been a practice introduced by the
Conqueror, and to have remained ever since Lect. in Libr. Sapient. Lect. ii.
Paris. 1518. 4to.
. There is a curious passage relating to this subject in Trevisa's translation
of Hygden's Polychronicon x Lib. i. cap. 59. MSS. Coll. S. Johan. Cantabr. But
I think it is printed by Caxton and Wynkyn de Word. Robert of Gloucester, who
wrote about 1280, says much the same, edit. Hearne, p. 364.
. "Children in scole, agenst the usage and manir of all other nations, beeth
compelled for to leve hire own langage, and for to construe her lessons and
hire things in French; and so they haveth sethe Normans came first into
Engelond. Also gentilmen children beeth taught to speak Frensche, from the time
that they bith rokked in here cradell, and kunneth speak and play with a
childs broche: and uplondissche Country.
men will likne himself to gentylmen, and fondeth Delights, tries.
with greet business for to speak Frensche to be told of. This manner was much
used to for first death Time.
, and is since ^ome dele changed. For John Cornewaile a master of grammar,
changed the lore in grammar scole, and construction of Frensche into Englische:
and Richard Pencriche lernede the manner techynge of him as other men of
Pencriche. So that now, the year of our Lord a thousand three hundred and four
score and five, and of the second King Richard after the conquest nine, and
[in] all the grammere scoles of Engelond children lereth Frensche and
construeth, and lerneth an Englische, etc." About the same time, or rather
before, the students of our universities, were ordered to converse in French or
Latin In the statutes of Oriel College in Oxford, it is ordered, that the
scholars, or fellows, "siqua inter se proferant, colloquio Latino, vel saltem
Gallico, perfruantur." See Hearne's Trokelowe, page 298. These statutes were
given 23 Maii, A. D. 1328. I find much the same injunction in the statutes of
Exeter College, Oxford, given about 1330. Where they are ordered to use,
"Romano aut Gallico saltem sermon." Hearne's MSS. Collect. number. 132. page 73.
Bibl. Bodl. But in Merton College statutes, mention is made of the Latin only.
In cap. x. They were given 1271. This was also common in the greater
monasteries. In the register of Wykeham, bishop of Winchester, the domicellus
of the Prior of S. Swythin's at Winchester, is ordered to address the bishop,
on a certain occasion, in French, A. D. 1398. Registr. Par. iii. fol. 177.
. The latter was much affected by the Normans. All the Norman accounts were in
Latin. The plan of the great royal revenue-rolls, now called the pipe-rolls,
were of their construction, and in that language. But from the declension of
the barons, and prevalence of the commons, most of whom were of English
ancestry, the native language of England gradually gained ground: till at
length the interest of the commons ^o far succeeded with Edward the third, that
an act of parliament was passed, appointing all pleas and proceedings of law to
be carried on in English But the French formularies and terms of law, and
particularly the French feudal phraseology, had taken too deep root to be thus
hastily abolished. Hence, long after the reign of Edward the third, many of our
lawyers composed their tracts in French. And reports and some statutes were
made in that language. See Fortescut. de Laud. Leg. Angl. cap. xlviii.
: although the same statute decrees, in the true Norman spirit, that all such
pleas and proceedings should be enrolled in Latin Pulton's Statut. 36. Edw.
iii. This was A. D. 1363. The first English instrument in Rymer is dated 1368.
Foed. vii. p. 526.
. Yet this change did not restore either the Saxon alphabet or language. It
abolished a token of subjection and disgrace: and in some degree, contributed
to prevent further French innovations in the language then used, which yet
remained in a compound state, and retained a considerable mixture of foreign
phraseology. In the mean time, it must be remembered, that this corruption of
the Saxon was not only owing to the admission of new words, occasioned by the
new alliance, but to changes of its own forms and terminations, arising from
reasons which we cannot investigate or explain This subject will be further
illustrated in the next section.
.

Among the manuscripts of Digby in the Bodleian library at Oxford, we find a
religious or moral Ode, consisting of one hundred and ninety-one stanzas, which
the learned Hickes places just after the conquest Ling. Vett. These. Part. i. p.
222. There is another copy not mentioned by Hickes, in Jesus College library at
Oxford, MSS. 85. infr. citat. This is entitled Tractatus guidam in Anglico. The
Digby manuscript has no title.
: but as it contains few Norman terms, I am inclined to think it of rather
higher antiquity. In deference however to so great an authority, I am obliged
to mention it here; and especially as it exhibits a regular lyric strophe of
four lines, the second and fourth of which rhyme together. Although these four
lines may be perhaps resolved into two Alexandrines; a measure concerning which
more will be said hereafter, and of which it will be sufficient to remark at
present, that it appears to have been used very early. For I cannot recollect
any strophes of this sort in the elder Runic or Saxon poetry; nor in any of the
old Frankish poems, particularly of Otfrid, a monk of Weissenburgh, who turned
the evangelical history into Frankish verse about the ninth century, and has
left several hymns in that language See Petr. Lambec. Comment. de Bibl. Caesar.
Vindebon. page 418. 457.
, of Stricker who celebrated the achievements of Charlemagne See Petr. Lambec.
ubi supr. lib. ii. cap. 5. There is a circumstance belonging to the ancient
Frankish versification, which, as it greatly illustrates the subject of
alliteration, deserves notice here. Otfrid's dedication of his Evangelical
history to Lewis the first, king of the oriental France, consists of four lined
stanzas in rhyming couplets: but the first and last line of every stanzas begin
and end with the same letter: and the letters of the title of the dedication
respectively, and the word of the last line of every tetrastic. Flaccus
Illyrius published this work of Otfrid at Basil, 1571. But I think it has been
since more correctly printed by Johannes Schilterus. It was written about the
year 880. Otfrid was the disciple of Rhabanus Maurus.
, and of the anonymous author of the metrical life of Anno, archbishop of
Cologn. The following stanza is a specimen St. xiv.
.

Send god biforen him man,
the hile he may to heuene;
For betere is on elmesse biforen
Danne ben after ^euene.
This is perhaps the true reading, from the Trinity manuscript at Cambridge,
written about the reign of Henry the second, or Richard the first. Cod.
membran. 8vo. Tractat. I. See Abr. Wheloc. Eccles. Hist. Bed. p. 25. 114.
Send God biforen him man
The while he may to hevene,
For betere is on elmesse biforen
Thanne ben after sevene MSS. Digb. A. 4. membran.
.
That is, "Let a man send his good works before him to heaven while he can: for
one almsgiving before death is of more value than seven afterward." The
verses perhaps might have been thus written as two Alexandrines. Send God
biforen him man the while he may to hevene,
For betere is on alms biforen, than ben after sevene As I recollect, the
whole poem is thus exhibited in the Trinity manuscript.
.
Yet alternate rhyming, applied without regularity, and as rhymes accidentally
presented themselves, was not uncommon in our early poetry, as will appear from
other examples.

Hickes has printed a satire on the monastic profession; which clearly
exemplifies the Saxon adulterated by the Norman, and was evidently written soon
after the conquest, at least before the reign of Henry the second. The poet
begins with describing the land of indolence or luxury.

Fur in see, by west Spaynge,
Is a land ihote Cokaygne:
There nis land under hevenriche Heaven. Sax.

Of well of godnis hit iliche.
Thoy paradis by miri Merry, cheerful. "Although Paradise is cheerful and
bright, Cokayne is a much more beautiful place."
and brigt
Cokaygn is of fairir sigt.
What is there in paradis
Bot grass, and flure, and greneris?
Thoy there be joy 101. Orig.
, and great dute Pleasure.
,
There nis met, bot fruit.
There nis halle, bure Butt^ry.
, no bench;
But watir manis thurst to quench, etc.
In the following lines there is a vein of satirical imagination and some
talent at description. The luxury of the monks is represented under the idea of
a monastery constructed of various kinds of delicious and costly viands.

There is a well fair abbei,
Of white monks and of grei,
There beth boures and halles:
All of pasteus beth the walls,
Of fleis of fisse, and a rich met,
The likefullist that man may et.
Fluren cakes beth the schingles Shingles. "The tiles, or covering of the
house, are of rich cakes."
all,
Of church, cloister, bours, and halle.
The pinnes The Pinnacles.
beth fat podinges
Rich met to princes and to kings. --
There is a cloister fair and ligt,
Brod and lang of sembli sigt.
The pilers of that cloister all
^eth iturned of cristale,
With harlas and capital
Of grene jaspe and red coral.
In the praer is a tree
Swithe likeful for to se,
The rote is gingeur and galingale,
The siouns beth al sed wale.
Try maces beth the flure,
The rind canel of sweet odure:
The fruit gilofre of good smakke,
Of cucubes there nis no lakke. --
There beth iiii willis Fountains.
in the abbei
Of tracle and halwei,
Of baume and eke piement This word will be explained at large hereafter.
,
Ever ernend Running. Sax.
to rigt rent Course. Sax.
;
Of thai stremis all the molde,
Stonis pretiuse The Arabian Philosophy imported into Europe, was full of the
doctrine of precious stones.
and gold,
There is saphir, and uniune,
Carbuncle and astiune,
Smaragde, lugre, and prassiune,
Beril, onyx, toposiune,
Amethiste and crisolite,
Calcedun and epetite Our old poets are never so happy as when they can get
into a catalogue of things or names. See Obser^at. on the Fairy Queen, i. p.
140.
.
There beth birddes mani and fale
Throstill, thruisse, and nigtingale,
Chalandre, and wodwale,
And other briddes without tale,
That stinteth never by her migt
Miri to sing dai and nigt.
[Nonnulla desunt.]
Yite I do you mo to wit,
The gees irostid on the spitte,
Fleey to that abbai, god hit wot,
And gredith Cries. Gallo-Franc.
, gees al hot al hot, etc.
Our author then makes a pertinent transition to a convent of nuns; which he
supposes to be very commodiously situated at no great distance, and in the same
fortunate region of indolence, ease, and affluence.

An other abbai is there by
For soth a great nunnerie;
Up a river of swet milk
Whar is plente great of silk.
When the summeris dai is hot,
The yung nuns takith a boat
And does ham forth in that river
Both with oris and with stere:
When hi beth fur from the abbei
Hi makith him nakid for to plei,
And leith dune in to the brimme
And does him sleilich for to swim:
The yung monks that hi sees
Hi does ham up and forth hi flees,
And comith to the nuns anon,
And euch monk him takith on,
And snellich Quick, quickly. Gallo-Franc.
berith forth har prei
To the mochill grei abbei "To the great Abbey of Gray Monks."
,
And techith the nonnes an oreisun
With jambleus Lascivious motions. Gambols. Fr. Gambiller.
up and dun Hickes. Thesaur. i. Part i. p. 231. seq.
.
This poem was designed to be sung at public festivals As appears from this
line. Lordinges good and hende, etc. It is in MSS. More, Cantabrig. 784. f. 1.


: a practice, of which many instances occur in this work; and concerning which
it may be sufficient to remark at present, that a JOCULATOR or bard, was an
officer belonging to the court of William the Conqueror His lands are cited in
Doomsday Book. "GLOUCESTERSCIRE. Berdic, Joculator Regis, habet iii. villas et
ibi v. car. nil redd." See Anstis, Ord. Gart. ii. 304.
.

Another Norman Saxon poem cited by the same industrious antiquary, is entitled
THE LIFE OF SAINT MARGARET. The structure of its versification considerably
differs from that in the last-mentioned piece, and is like the French
Alexandrines. But I am of opinion, that a pause, or division, was intended in
the middle of every verse: and in this respect, its versification resembles
also that of ALBION'S ENGLAND, or Drayton's POLYOLBION, which was a species
very common about the reign of queen Elisabeth It is worthy of remark, that we
find in the collection of ancient northern monuments, published by M. Biorner,
a poem of some length, said by that author to have been composed in the twelfth
or thirteenth century. This poem is professedly in rhyme, and the measure like
that of the heroic Alexandrine of the French poetry. See Mallet's Introd.
Dannem. etc. chapter xiii.
. The rhymes are also continued to every fourth line. It appears to have been
written about the time of the crusades. It begins thus.

Old ant And. Fr.
young I priet I direct. Fr. "I advise you, your, etc."
ou, our folies for to let,
Thinks on god that yef ou wite, our suns to beat.
Here I may tellen ou, wit words fair and sweet,
The vie Life. Fr.
of one maiden was hoten Called. Saxon.
Margarete.
Hire fader was a patriac, as ic ou tellen may,
In Auntioge wif eches Chose a wife. Sax. "He was married in Antioch."
I in the false lay,
Deve gods "Deaf gods, etc."
ant dombe, he servid nit and day,
So deden money othere that sings welaway.
Theodosius was is nome, on Criste ne levede he noutt,
He levede on the false gods, that weren with honden wroutt.
Tho that child sculde cristine ben it com well in thoutt,
Ebed wen In bed.
it were ibore, to death it were ibroutt, etc.
In the sequel, Olibrius, lord of Antioch, who is called a Saracen, falls in
love with Margaret: but she being a christian, and a candidate for
canonization, rejects his solicitations and is thrown into prison.

Meiden Margarete one nitt in prison lai
Ho com biforn Olibrius on that other dai.
Meiden Margarete, lef up upon my lay,
And Ihu that thou levest on, thou do him al awey.
Lef on me ant be my wife, full well the may speed.
Auntioge and Asie scaltou han to mede:
Ciculauton Checklaton. See Obs. Fair. Q. i. 194.
and purpel pall scaltou have to wede:
With all the metes of my land full vel I scal the Hickes. i. 225. The legend of
Scint^ Juliane in the Bodleian library is rather older, but of much the same
versification. MSS. Bibl. Bodl. NE. 3. xi. membran. 8vo. iii. fol. 36. This
manuscript I believe to be of the age of Henry the third or king John: the
composition much earlier. It was translated from the Latin. These are the five
last lines.

thhen d^ihtin o domesdei thindtheth his htheate,
And there eth thaet dusti chef to hellene heat,
the mote beon a corn i gods guldene edene,
De turde this of latin to Englische ledene
And he thaet he^ least onth^at stha as he cuthe. AMEN.
That is, "When the judge at doomsday winnows his wheat and drives the dusty
chaff into the heat of hell; may there be a corner in god's golden Eden for him
who turned this book into Latin, etc."


feed.
This piece was printed by Hickes from a manuscript in Trinity college library
at Cambridge. It seems to belong to the manuscript metrical LIVES OF THE SAINTS
The same that are mentioned by Hearne, from a manuscript of Ralph Sh^idon. See
Hearne's Petr. Langt. p. 542. 607. 608. 609. 611. 628. 670. Saint Winifred's
Life is printed from the same collection by bishop Fleetwood, in his Life and
Miracles of S. ^inifred, p. 125. ed. 1713.
, which form a very considerable volume, and were probably translated or
paraphrased from Latin or French prose into English rhyme before the year 1200
It is in fact a metrical history of the festivals of the whole year. The life
of the respective Saint is described under every Saints day, and the
institutions of some sundays, and feasts not taking their rise from saints, are
explained, on the plan of the Legenda Aurea, written by Jacobus de Voragine,
archbishop of Genoa, about the year 1290, from which Caxton, through the medium
of a French version entitled Legend Dore^, translated his Golden Legend. The
Festival, or Fe^^iall, printed by Wynkin de Word, is a book of the same sort,
yet with homilies intermixed. See MSS. Harl. 2247. fol. and 2371. 4to. and
2391. 4to. and 2402. 4to. and 2800. seq. Manuscript lives of Saints, detached,
and not belonging to this collection, are frequent in libraries. The Vitae
Patrum were originally drawn from S. Jerome and Johannes Cassianus. In Gresham
college library are metrical lives of ten Saints chiefly from the Golden
Legend, by Osberne Bokenham, an Augustine canon in the abbey of Stoke-clare in
Suffolk, transcribed by Thomas Burgh at Cambridge 1477. The Life of S.
Katharine appears to have been composed in 1445. MSS. Coll. Gresh. 315. The
French translation of the L^g^nda Aurea was made by Jehan de Vignay, a monk,
soon after 1300.
. We are sure that they were written after the year 1169, as they contain the
LIFE of Saint Thomas of Becket Ashmole cites this Life, Instit. Ord. Gart. p.
21. And he cites S. Brandon's Life, p. 507. Ashmole's manuscript was in the
hands of Silas Tailor. It is now in his Museum at Oxford. MSS. Ashm. 50. [7001.]
. In the Bodleian library are three manuscript copies of these LIVES OF THE
SAINTS MSS. Bodl. 779. -- Laud, L. 70. And they make a considerable part of a
prodigious folio volume, beautifully written on vellum, and elegantly
illuminated, where they have the following title, which also comprehends other
ancient English religious poems. "Here begynnen the tytles of the book that is
called in Latin tongue SALUS ANIME, and in Englysh tongue SOWLEHELE." It was given
to the Bodleian library by Edward Vernon esquire, soon after the civil war. I
shall cite it under the title of MS. Vernon. Although pieces not absolutely
religious are sometimes introduced, the scheme of the compiler or transcriber
seems to have been, to form a complete body of legendary and scriptural history
in verse, or rather to collect into one view all the religious poetry he could
find. Accordingly the Lives of the Saints, a distinct and large work of itself,
properly constituted a part of his plan. There is another copy of the Lives of
the Saints in the British Museum, MSS. Harl. 2277. And in Ashmole's Museum,
MSS. Ashm. ut supr. I think this manuscript is also in Ben^^^ college library.
The Lives seem to be placed according to their respective festivals in the
course of the year. The Bodleian copy (marked 779.) is a thick folio,
containing 310 leaves. The variations in these manuscripts seem chiefly owing
to the transcribers. The Life of Saint Margaret in MSS. Bodl. 779. begins much
like that of Trinity library at Cambridge. Old ant young I preye you your
folyis for to let, etc. I must add here, that in the Harleian library, a few
Lives, from the same collection of Lives of the Saints, occur, MSS. 2250. 23.
f. 72. b. seq. chart. fol. See also ib. 19. f. 48. These Lives are in French
rhymes, ib. 2253. f. 1.
, in which the LIFE of Saint Margaret constantly occurs; but it is not always
exactly the same with this printed by Hickes. And on the whole, the Bodleian
Lives seem inferior in point of antiquity. I will here give some extracts never
yet printed.

From the LIFE of Saint Swithin.

Thus in MSS. Harl. fol. 78.

Seint Swiththin the confessor was here of Engelonde
Biside Wynchestre hi was ibore as ic understand.

Seint Swythan the confessor was her of Engelonde,
Bisyde Wynchestre he was ibore, as ich undirstonde:
By the kings dei Egbert this good was ibore,
That tho was king of Engelonde, and somedele eke before;
The eihtethe he was that com aftur Kinewolfe the king,
That saint Berin dude to cristendome in Engelonde furst bring:
Saint Austen hedde before to cristendom i brouht
Athelbryt the good king as all the land nouht.
Al setthe Since.
hit was that saint Berin her by west wend,
And tornede the king Kinewolfe as vr lord grace send:
So that Egbert was king tho that Swythan was bore
The eighth was Kinewolfe that so long was before, etc.
Saint Swythan his bushopricke to al goodness drough
The town also of Wynchestre he amended enough,
Ffor he let the strong bruge without the town arere
And fond thereto lym and ston and the workmen that there were f. 93. MS. Vernon.
.
From the LIFE of Saint Wolstan.

Saint Wolston bysscop of Wirceter was then in Ingelonde,
Swithe holyman was all his life as ich onderstonde:
The while he was a young child good life hi ladde ynow,
Whenne other children orne play toward cherche hi drow.
Seint Edward was tho vr king, that now in hevene is,
And the bisscoppe of Wircester Brytthege is hette I wis, etc.
Bisscop him made the holy man saint Edward ure king
And undirfonge his dignite, and tok him cross and ringe.
His bushopreke he wu^t well, and eke his priorie,
And forcede him to serve well god and Seinte Marie.
Ffour er he hedde bisscop ibeo and not folliche fyve
Tho saint Edward the holy king went out of this lyve.
To great reuge to al Engelonde, so welaway the stounde,
Ffor strong men that come sithen and brought Engelonde to ground.
Harald was sithen king with tresun, allas!
The crown he bare of England which while hit was.
As William bastard that was tho duyk of Normaundye
Thouhte to win England thorusg strength and felonye:
He let him greith foulke inouh and great power with him nom,
With great strength in the sea he him dude and to Engelonde com:
He let ordain his ost well and his baner up arerede,
And destruyed all that he fond and that land sore aferde.
Harald hereof tell king of Engelonde
He let garke fast his oste again him for to stand:
His baronage of Engelonde redi was full sone
The king to help and ^k^ himself as riht was to done.
The war was then in Engelonde doleful and strong inouh
And heore either of othures men al to ground slouh:
The Normans and this Englisch men deiy of battle nom
There as the abbeye is of the battle a day togedre com,
To ground they smiit and slow also, as god yaf the cas,
William Bastard was above and Harald by n^othe was MS. Vernon. fol. 76. b.
.
From the LIFE of Saint Christopher.

MSS. Harl. ut supr. fol. 101. b.

Seint Cristofre was Sarazin in the land of Canaan
In no stead by his day ne fond me so strong a man
Four and tuenti ^et he was long and thiche and brod y-noug, etc.

Saint Cristofre was a Sarazin in the land of Canaan,
In no stud by him day mi fond non so strong a man:
Ffour and twenti feet he was long, and thikk and brod inouh,
Such a mon but he weore strong methinketh hit weore wouh:
A la cuntre where he was for him would fleo,
Therefore him ythoughte that no man against him sculde beo.
He seide he would with no man beo but with on that were,
Hext lord of all men and undir him non other were.
Afterward he is taken into the service of a king.

-- Cristofre him served long;
The king loved melodye much of fithele Fiddle.
and of song:
So that his jogeler on a dai biforen him gone to pleye fast,
And in a time he nemped in his song the devil at last:
Anon so the king that I herd he blesed him anon, etc. MS. Vernon, fol. 119.
^
From the LIFE of Saint Patrick^

Seyn Pateryk com thoru gods grace to preche in Irelonde
To teache men there ryt believe Jehu Christ to understonde:
So full of worms that land he found that no man ni might gone,
In some stead for worms that he nas wenemyd anon;
Saint Pateryk bade our lord Christ that the land delyvered were,
Of thilke foul wormis that none ne com there Bodl. MSS. 779. fol. 41. b.
.
From the LIFE of Saint Thomas of Becket.

There was Gilbert Thomas fadir name the true man and good
He loved God and holy cherche setthe he wit ondirstode MSS. Harl. fol. 195.
b. Gilbert was Thomas fader name that true was and god
And lovede god and holy church siththe he wit understod.
This Harleian manuscript is imperfect in many parts.
.
The cross to the holy cherche in his outhe he nom,
... myd on Rychard that was his mon to Jerlem com,
There hy deed here pylgrimage in holy stedes fa^te
So that among Sarazyns hy were nom at last, etc. MSS. Bodl. 779. f. 41. b.

This legend of Saint Thomas of Becket is exactly in the style of all the
others; and as Becket was martyred in the latter part of the reign of Henry the
second from historical evidence, and as, from various internal marks, the
language of these legends cannot be older than the twelfth century, I think we
may fairly pronounce the LIVES OF THE SAINTS to have been written about the
reign of Richard the first Who died 1199. In the Cotton library I find the
lives of Saint Josaphas and Saint Dorman: where the Norman seems to
predominate, although Saxon letters are used. Brit. Mus. MSS. Cott. CALIG. A.
ix. Cod. membran. 4to. ii. fol. 192.

Ici commence la vie de seint Iosaphaz.

Ri uout vout a null bien aentendre
Per essample poet mlt aprendre.
iii. fol. 213. b. Ici commence la vie de Seint Dormanz.

La virtue deu iur tut ius ^ dure
E tut iurz est certain epure.
Many legends and religious pieces in Norman rhyme were written about this
time. See MSS. Harl. 2253 f. 1. membr. fol. ^upr. citat. p. 14.


.

These metrical narratives of christian faith and perseverance seem to have
been chiefly composed for the pious amusement, and perhaps edification, of the
monks in their cloisters. The sumptuous volume of religious poems which I have
mentioned above Viz. MS. Vernon.
, was undoubtedly chained in the cloister, or church, of some capital
monastery. It is not improbable that the novices were exercised in reciting
portions from these pieces. In the British Museum MSS. Harl. 2391. 70. The
dialect is perfectly northern.
there is a set of legendary tales in rhyme, which appear to have been ^olemnly
pronounced by the priest to the people on sundays and holidays. This sort of
poetry That legends of Saints were sung to the harp at feasts, appears from The
Life of Saint Marine, MSS. Harl. 2253. fol. memb. f. 64. b.

Herketh hideward and beoth s^ille,
Y^ pray ou if hit be or will,
And e shule here of one virgin
That was ycleped saint Maryne.
And from various other instances.

Some of these religious poems contain the usual address of the minstrel to the
company. As in a poem of our Savior's descent into hell, and his discourse
there with Sathanas the porter, Adam, Eve, Abraham, etc. MSS. ibid. f. 57.

All herkeneth to me now,
A strif wolle ye tellen ou:
Of Jhesu and of Satan,
Tho Jhesu was to hell y-gan.
Other proofs will occur occasionally.


was also sung to the harp by the minstrels on sundays, instead of the romantic
subjects usual at public entertainments As I collect from the following poem,
MS. Vernon, fol. 229.

The Visions of Saint Poul won be was ra^t into Paradys.

Lusteneth lordynges leof and dear,
e that wolen of the Sunday here;
The Sunday a day hit is
That angels and archangels join i wis
More in that ilke day
Then any odur, etc.

.

In that part of Vernon's manuscript entitled SOULEHELE, we have a translation
of the Old and New Testament into verse; which I believe to have been made
before the year 1200. The reader will observe the fondness of our ancestors for
the Alexandrine: at least, I find the lines arranged in that measure.

Our ladi and h^re sustur stoden under the roode,
And seint John and Marie Magdaleyn with well sori mood:
Vr ladi by heold hire sweet son i brouht in great pyne,
Ffor monnes gultes nouthen her and nothing for mine.
Marie weop well sore and bitter teres leet,
The teres fullen upon the ston down at hire feet.
Alas, my son, for serwe well off seide heo
Nabbe iche bote the one that hongust on the treo;
So full icham of serwe, as any wommon may beo,
That ischal my deore child in all this pyne iseo:
How schal I sone deore, how have i yougt liven withouten the,
Nusti nevere of serwe naught sone, what seyst you me?
Then spoke Jhesus wordus good to his modur dear,
There he heng upon the roode here I the take a fere,
That trewliche schal serve ye, thin own cousin Jon,
The while that you alyve beo among all thy fon:
Ich the hot Jon, he seide, you wite hire both day and niht
That the Gywes hire fon ne don hire non un riht.
Seint John in the stude vr ladi in to the temple nom
God to serven he hire dude sone so he thider come,
Hole and seek heo duden good that hes founden thore
Heo hire serveden to hond and foot, the lass and eke the more.
The pore folk feire heo fed there, heo sege that hit was neode
And the seek heo brougte to bed and met and drink gone heom beode.
Wy at heore mihte young and old hire loveden both syke and fer
As hit was riht for all and sum to hire servise hedden mester.
Jon hire was a true feer, and nolde nougt from hire go,
He lokid hire as his ladi deore and what heo would hit was i do.
Now blowith this new fruit that lat by gone to spring,
That to his kuynd heritage monkunne schal bring,
This new fruit of whom I speak is ure cristendome,
That late was on earth isow and latir forth hit com,
So hard and luthur was the land of whom hit scholde spring
That well unnethe any rote men mougte thereon bring,
God hi was the gardener, MS. Vernon, fol. 8.
etc.
In the archiepiscopal library at Lambeth, among other Norman-Saxon homilies in
prose, there is a homily or exhortation on the Lord's prayer in verse: which,
as it was evidently transcribed rather before the reign of Richard the first,
we may place with some degree of certainty before the year 1185.

Ure feder that in hevene is
That is al sothfull I wis.
Weo moten to theos weordes iseon
That to live and to saul good beon.
That weo beon swa his sunes iborene
That he beo feder and we him icorene.
That we don all his ibeden
And his will for to reden, etc.
Lauerde God we bids thus
Mid edmode heorte gif hit us.
That ure soul beo to the icore
Noht for the flesce for lore.
Dole us to biwepen ure sun
That we ne sternen noht therunne
And gif us, lauerd, that like gift
Thet we hes ibeten thurh holy scrifte. AMEN Quart. minor. 185. Cod. membran.
vi. f. 21. b.
.
In the valuable library of Corpus Christi college in Cambridge, is a sort of
poetical biblical history, extracted from the books of Genesis and Exodus. It
was probably composed about the reign of Henry the second or Richard the first.
But I am chiefly induced to cite this piece, as it proves the excessive
attachment of our earliest poets to rhyme: they were fond of multiplying the
same final sound to the most tedious monotony; and without producing any effect
of ^legance, strength, or harmony. It begins thus:

Man og to luuen that rimes ren.
The wissed well the logede men.
Hu man may him well loken
Thog he ne be lered on no boken.
Luuen god and serven him ay
For he it hem well gelden may.
And to al cristenei men
Boren pais and luue by twem.
Than sal him almighti luuven.
Here by nethen and thund abuuven,
And given him bliss and souls r^ste.
That him sal eavermor lesten.
Ut of Latin this song is a dragen
On Engleis speech on soche sagen,
Cristene men ogen ben so fagen.
So fueles arn quan he it sen dagen.
Than man hem telled soche tale
Wid lands speech and words small
Of blisses dune, of sorwes dale,
Quhu Lucifer that devel dwale
And held him sperred in helles male,
Til god him frid in manliched
Deed mankind bote and red.
And unswered all the fendes sped
And halp thor he sag mikel ned
Biddi hie singen non other led.
Thog mad hic folgen idel head.
Fader good of al thing,
Almightin louerd, hegest king,
Thu give me seli timinge
To thau men this werdes bigininge.
The lauerd god to wurthinge
Quether so hic read or singe MSS. R. 11. Cod. membran. octavo. It seems to be
in the northern dialect.
.
We find this accumulation of identical rhymes in the Runic odes. Particularly
in the ode of Egill cited above, entitled EGILL'S RANSOM. In the Cotton library
a poem is preserved of the same age, on the subjects of death, judgment, and
hell torments, where the rhymes are singular, and deserve our attention.

Non may long lives wene
Ac often him lies the wrench.
Feir weither turns often into reine
And thunderliche hit makes his blench,
Tharfore mon thu the biwench
At schal falewi thy grene.
Weilawei! nis kin ne queen
That ne schal drink of deaths drench,
Mon er thu fall of thy bench
Thine sun thu aquench Bibl. Cotton, MSS. CALIG. A. ix. -- vi. f. 243.
.
To the same period of our poetry I refer a version of Saint Jerome's French
psalter, which occurs in the library of Corpus Christi college at Cambridge.
The hundredth psalm is thus translated.

Mirthes to god al earth that es
Serves to louerd in faines.
In go yhe ai in his ^iht,
In gladness that is so briht.
Whites that louerd god is he thus
He us made and our self noht us,
His folk and shep of his fode:
In gos his yhates that are good:
In schrift his worches believe,
In ympnes to him yhe schrive.
Heryhes his name for louerde is hende,
In all his merci do in strende and strande O. 6. Cod. membr. 4to.
.
In the Bodleian library there is a translation of the psalms, which much
resembles in style and measure this just mentioned. If not the same, it is of
equal antiquity. The handwriting is of the age of Edward the second: certainly
not later than his successor. It also contains the Nicene creed Hickes has
printed a metrical. version of the creed of St. Athanasius. To whom, to avoid
prolix and obselete specimens already printed, I refer the reader. Th^saur. P.
i. p. 233. I believe it to be of the age of Henry the second.
, and some church hymns, versified: but it is mutilated and imperfect. The
nineteenth psalm runs thus.

Hevenes tellen gods blis
And wolken shows hond werk his
Dai to dai word rise riht,
And wisdom shows niht to niht,
Of whilke that noht is herd thar steven.
In all the world out yhode thar cord
And in end of earth of tham the word.
... sun he set his telde to stand
And b. bridegroom a. he als of his lourd command.
He gladen als den to run the wai
Ffrem heighist heven hei outcoming ai,
And his gairenning tilheht sete,
Ne is qwilke may him from his hete.
Lagh of louerd unwenned isse,
Turnand saules in to bliss:
Witness of lourd is ever true
Wisdom servand to littell new:
Lourd's rihtwisnesse riht hertes famand,
But of lourd is liht eghen sighand,
Dread of lourde hit heli es
Domes of love full sori sothe are ai
Rihted in thamsalve ar thai,
More to be beyorned over gold
Or ston derwurthi that is hold:
Well swetter to man's womb
Ovir honi and to kombe MSS. Bodl. pergamen. fol. 425. f. 5.
.
This is the beginning of the eighteenth psalm.

I sal love the Lourd of ^lisse
And in mine Lourd festnes min esse,
And in fleming m^n als so
And in lesser out of woe Ibid. f. 4.
.
I will add another religious fragment on the crucifixion, in the shorter
measure, evidently coeval, and intended to be sung to the harp.

Vyen i o the rode se
Jesu nailed to the tree,
Jesu mi lefman, Sic.

Ibunder bloe and blodi,
An his mother stant him by,
Wepand, and Johan:
His bac wid scwrge iswungen,
His side deep istungen,
Ffor sin and louve of man,
Weil anti sin let
An nek wit teres wete
Thif i of love can MSS. Bibl. Bodl. B. 3. 18. Th. f. 101. b. (Langb. vi. 209.)
.
In the library of Jesus college at Oxford, I have seen a Norman-Saxon poem of
another cast, yet without much invention or poetry It is also in Bibl. Cotton.
MSS. CALIG. ix. A. 5. fol. 230.
. It is a contest between an owl and a nightingale, about superiority in voice
and singing; the decision of which is left to the judgment of one John de
Guldevord So it is said in Catal. MSS. Angl. p. 69. But by mistake. Our John de
Guldevorde is indeed the author of the poem which immediately precedes in the
manuscript, as appears by the following entry at the end of it, in the
handwriting of the very Iearned Edward Lwyhd. "On part of a broken leaf of
this MS. I find these verses written, whearby the author may be guest at.
Master Johan eu greteth of Guldworde tho,
And sends eu to seggen that sing he null he woe,
On thisse wise he will endy his song,
God louerde of hevene, beo us all among.
" The piece is entitled and begins thus;

Ici commence la Passyun Ihu Crist en engleys.
I hereth eu one lutele tale that ich eu will tell
As we vyndeth hit iwrite in the godspelle,
Nis hit nouht of Karlemeyne ne of the Duzpere
As of Cristes thruwynge, etc.
It seems to be of equal antiquity with that mentioned in the text. The whole
manuscript, consisting of many detached pieces both in verse and prose, was
perhaps written in the reign of Henry the sixth.
. It is not later than Richard the first. The rhymes are multiplied, and
remarkably interchanged.

Ich was in one sumere dale
In one snwe digele hale,
I herd ich hold great tale,
An hule Owl.
and one nightingale.
That plait was stif I stare and strong,
Sum wile soft I lud among.
Another again other sval
I let that wole mod ut al.
I either seide of otheres custe,
That alere worste that hi wuste
I hure and I hure of others song
Hi hold plaidung suthe strong MSS. Coll. Jes. Oxon. 86. membr.
.
The earliest love-song which I can discover in our language, is among the
Harleian manuscripts in the British Museum. I would place it before or about
the year 1200. It is full of alliteration, and has a burden or chorus.

Blow northern wynd, sent
Thou me my suetynge; blow
Northern wynd, blou, blou, blou.
Ich ot a burde in boure bryht
That fully semly is on syht,
Menskful maiden of myht,
Feire ant fre to fond.
In all this wurhliche won,
A burde of blod and of bon,
Never Yet.
ete y nuste Knew not.
non
Lussomore in Land. Blow, etc.
With lokkes Lively.
lefliche and long,
With front ant face feir to fond;
With murthes money mote heo monge
That brid so breme in boure;
With lossum eye great and good,
Weth browen blissfoll undirhode,
He that rest him on the rode
That leflych life honor. Blou, Sic.
etc.
Hire bire limbs liht,
Ase a lantern a nyht,
Her bleo blynkyth so bryht Blee. Complexion.
.
So feore heo is ant fyn,
A suetly suyre heo has to hold,
With arms, shuldre as mon would,
Ant fyngres feyre forte fold:
God would hue were mine.
Middel heo has menskfull ^mall,
Hire loveliche chere as cristal;
Theyes, legs, fit, and al,
Ywraught of the best;
A lussum ladi lasteless,
That sweting is and ever was;
A betere burde never was
Yheryed with the heste,
Heo is dear worth in day,
Graciouse, stout, and gaye,
Gentil, joly, so the jay,
Workliche when she waketh,
Maiden murgest Merriest.
of mouth
By est, by west, by north, by south,
That nis ficle ne troth,
That such murthes makes.
Heo is coral of godnesse,
Heo is rubie of rich fullness,
Heo is cristal of clarnesse,
Ant baner of bealtie,
Heo is lilie of largess,
Heo is parnenke pronesse,
Heo is salsecle of suetnesse,
Ant lady of lealtie,
To lou that leflich is in land
Ytolde as hi as ych understonde, etc MSS. Harl. 2253. fol. membran. f. 72. b.
.
From the same collection I have extracted a part of another amatorial ditty,
of equal antiquity; which exhibits a stanza of no inelegant or unpleasing
structure, and approaching to the octave rhyme. It is, like the last, formed on
alliteration.

In a fryhte as y con fare framede
Y found a wet feyr fenge to fere,
Heo glystenide ase gold when hit glemed,
Nes ner gom so gladly on gere,
Y would wit in world who hire kenede
This burde bryht, of hire will were,
Heo me bed go my gates, lest hire gremede,
Ne kept heo non henynge here MSS. ibid. f. 66. The pieces which I have cited
from this manuscript, appear to be of the handwriting of the reign of Edward
the first.
.
In the following lines a lover compliments his mistress named Alysoun.

Bytween Mershe and Averile when spray begins to spring,
The lutel fowl has hyre will on hyre lud to sing,
Ich libbem lonclonginge for semlokest of all thing.
He may me bliss bring icham in hire banndonn,
An hendy hap ichabbe yhent ichot from hevene it is me sent.
From all wymmen mi love is lent and lyht on Alisoun,
On hers here is fair ynoh, hire browe bronne, hire eye blake,
With lossum chere he on me lok with middel small and welymake,
Bote he me wolle to hire take, etc MSS. ibid. f. 63. b.
.
The following song, containing a description of the spring, displays
glimmerings of imagination, and exhibits some faint ideas of poetical
expression. It is, like the three preceding, of the Norman Saxon school, and
extracted from the same inexhaustible repository. I have transcribed the whole.

In May hit murgeth when hit dawes "It is merry at dawn."
^
In dounes with this dueres plawes Plays.
,
Ant lef is lyht on lynde;
Blosmes brideth on the bows,
All this wild whytes vows,
So well ych under-fynde.
The thresteleue Throstle. Thrush.
him threteth so,
Away is huere winter do,
When woderove syngeth ferly fere,
And blyleth on huere winter well,
That all the wode ryngeth;
The rose rayleth her rode,
The leves on the lyhte wode
Waxen all with will:
The moon mandeth hire bleo
The lilie is lossum to scho;
The fengle and the fille
Wowes this wild drakes,
Miles huere makes.
As streme that still
Mody month so does mo.
Ichott ycham on of tho
For love that likes ille,
The moon mandeth hire liht,
When briddes syngeth breme,
Deawes donneth the donnes
Deores with huere derne ronnes,
Domes forte deem,
Worms woweth under cloud,
Wymmen waxith wondir proud,
So well hit wol him seem
Yef me shall wont will of on
This weal is wole forgon
Ant whyt in wode be fleme.
The following hexastic on a similar subject, is the product of the same rude
period, although the context is rather more intelligible: but it otherwise
deserves a recital, as it presents an early sketch of a favorite and
fashionable stanza.

Lenten is come with love to tonne,
With blosmen and with briddes run,
That all this bliss brings:
Days ezes in this dales
Notes suete of nightingales,
Vch foul song sings MSS. ibid. f. 71. b.
.
This specimen will not be improperly succeeded by the following elegant lines,
which a cotemporary poet appears to have made in a morning walk from
Peterborough on the blessed Virgin: but whose genius seems better adapted to
descriptive than religious subjects.

Now skruketh rose and lylie flour,
That whilen ber that suete savor
In somer, that suete tide;
Ne is no queen so stark ne stour,
Ne no luedy so bryht in bour
That ded ne shall by glyde:
W^oso wol fleshye lust for-gon and hevene-blisse abide
On Jhesu be is thoht anon, that tharled was is side Ibid. f. 80.
.
To which we may add a song, probably written by the same author, on the five
joys of the blessed Virgin.

MSS. ibid. ut supr. f. 71. b.
Ase y me rod this ender day,
By grene wode, to seche play;
Mid heart y thohte al on a May.
Sueteste of al thing:
Lithe, and ich on tell may al of that suete thing MSS. ibid. f. 81. b.
.
In the same pastoral vein, a lover, perhaps of the reign of king John, thus
addresses his mistress, whom he supposes to be the most beautiful girl,
"Bituene Lyncolne and Lyndeseye, Northampton and Lounde London.
.".

When the nytenhale singes the wodes waxen grene,
Lef, gras, and blosme, springes in Avril y wene.
Ant love is to mine heart gone with one spear so kene
Nyht and day my blod hit drynkes mine heart death me tene Ibid. f. 80. b.
.
Nor are these verses unpleasing, in somewhat the same measure.

My death y love, my life ich hate for a levedy shene,
Heo is brith so days liht, that is on me well seen.
Al y falewe so does the lef in somir when hit is grene,
of mi thoht helps me noht to whom schal I me mean?
Ich have loved at this year that y may love na more,
Ich have siked moni syh, lemon, for thin ore,
... my love never the ner and that me reweth sore;
Suete lemon, thenck on me ich have loved the sore,
Suete lemon, I preye the, of love one speech,
While y lyve in world so wide other nill I seche Ibid. f. 80. b.
.
Another, in the following little poem, enigmatically compares his mistress,
whose name seems to be Joan, to various gems and flowers. The writer is happy
in his alliteration, and his verses are tolerably harmonious.

Ic hot a burde in a bour, ase beryl so bright,
Ase saphyr in selver semely on syht,
Ase jaspe Jasper.
the gentil that lemeth Streams, shines.
with lyht,
Ase gernet Garnet.
in gold and rubye well ryht,
Ase onycle Onyx.
he is on y holden on hyht;
Ase diamand the dear in day when he is dyht:
He is coral yend with Cayser and knight,
Ase emeraude a morewen this may haveth myht.
The myht of the margaryte haveth this may mere,
Ffor charbocele iche hire chase by chyn and by chere,
Hire read is as rose that red is on rise Branch.
,
With lilye white leves lossum he is,
The primros he passes, the penenke of prys,
With alisaundre thareto ache and anys:
Quaint.
Coynte as columbine such hire White complexion.
cande is,
Glad under gore in gro and in grys
Heo is blosme upon bleo brihtest under bis
With celydone ant sange as thou thy self sys,
From Weye he is wisist into Wyrhale,
Hire nome is in a note of the nyhtegale;
In a note is hire nome nempneth hit non
Who so ryht redeth run to Johon MSS. ibid. f. 63.
.
The curious Harleian volume, to which we are so largely indebted, has
preserved a moral tale, a Comparison between age and youth, where the stanza is
remarkably constructed. The various sorts of versification which we have
already seen, evidently prove, that much poetry had been written, and that the
art had been greatly cultivated, before this period.

Herkne to my ron,
As ich ou tell con,
Of elde al hou yt ges.
Of a mody mon,
Hihte Maximion,
Soth without les.
Clerc he was full god,
So moni mon undirstod.
Nou herkne hou it was Ibid. f. 82.
.
For the same reason, a sort of elegy on our Savior's crucifixion should not
be omitted. It begins thus:

I syke when y singe for sorewe that y se
When y with wypinge bihold upon the tree,
Ant se Jhesu the suete
Is heart blod for-lete,
For the love of me;
Is wounds waxen wete,
They wepen, still and mete,
Marie reweth me Ibid. f. 80.
.
Nor an alliterative ode on heaven, death, judgment, etc.

Middel-erd for mon was mad,
Un-mihti aren is meste mede,
This hedy has on hand yhad,
That hevene hem is haste to head.
Ich erde a bliss budel us bade,
The dreri domesdai to dread,
Of sinful sauhting sone be sad,
That derne does this derne deed,
This wrakefall works under wede,
In soul soteleth sone Ibid. f. 62. b.
.
That he ben derne done.
Many of these measures were adopted from the French chansons See MSS. Harl. ut
supr. f. 49. 76.
. I will add one or two more specimens.

On our Savior's Passion and Death.

Jesu for thy muchele might
Thou of us of thy grace,
That we mow day and nyht
Thenken of thy face.
In mine heart it does me god,
When y thenke on Jhesu blod,
That ran down by is side;
From is heart down to is foot,
For ous he spradde is heart blod^
His wondes were so wide Ibid. f. 79. Probably this song has been somewhat
modernised by transcribers.
.
On the same subject.

Lutel wot hit any mon
Hou love him haveth y bound,
That for us o the rode ron,
Ant boht us with is wonde;
The love of him us haveth ymaked ^ound,
And y cast the grimly ghost to ground:
Ever and oo, nyht and day, he haveth us in his thohte,
He null nout leose that he so deore boht Ibid. f. 128. These lines afterward
occur, burlesqued and parodied, by a writer of the same age.
.
The following are on love and gallantry. The poet, named Richard, professes
himself to have been a great writer of lovesongs.

Weping haveth mine wonges wet,
For wilked work ant wone of wit,
Unblithe y be til y ha bet,
Bruches broken ase bok byt:
Of levedis love that y ha let,
That lemeth al with luefly lyt,
Often in song y have hem set,
That is unsemly there hit sit.
Hit sit and semethe noht,
There hit is seid in song
That y have of them wroht,
Y wis hit is all wrong Ibid. f. 66.
.
It was customary with the early scribes, when stanzas consisted of short
lines, to throw them together like prose. As thus:

"A wayle whiyt as whalles bon a grein in gold that godly shon a tortle that
min heart is on in tonnes true Hire gladship nes never gone while y may glewe Ut
supr. f. 67.
." Sometimes they wrote three or four verses together as one line.

With longing y am lad on molde y wax mad a maid marreth me,
Y grede y groan un glad for ^elden y am ^ad that semly for te see.
Levedi thou rewe me to routhe thou havest me rad be bote of that y bad my life
is long on the Ibid. 63. b.
.
Again,

Most i rydden by rybbes dale widle wymmen for te wale ant welde wreek ich
would:
Found were the feirest on that ever was mad of blod ant bon in boure best
with bold Ibid. f. 66.
.
This mode of writing is not uncommon in ancient manuscripts of French poetry.
And some critics may be inclined to suspect, that the verses which we call
Alexandrine, accidentally assumed their form merely from the practice of absurd
transcribers, who frugally chose to fill their pages to the extremity, and
violated the metrical structure for the sake of saving their vellum. It is
certain, that the common stanza of four short lines may be reduced into two
Alexandrines, and on the contrary. I have before observed, that the Saxon poem
cited by Hickes, consisting of one hundred and ninety one stanzas, is written
in stanzas in the Bodleian, and in Alexandrines in the Trinity manuscript at
Cambridge. How it came originally from the poet I will not pretend to determine.

Our early poetry often appears in satirical pieces on the established and
eminent professions. And the writers, as we have already seen, succeeded not
amiss when they clothed their satire in allegory. But nothing can be conceived
more scurrilous and illiberal than their satires when they descend to mere
invective. In the British Museum, among other examples which I could mention,
we have a satirical ballad on the lawyers MSS. ut sup^. f. 70. b.
, and another on the clergy, or rather some particular bishop. The latter
begins thus:

Hyrd-men hatieth ant vch mones hyne,
For ever uch a parosshe heo polketh in pyne
Ant clastreth wife heore celle:
Nou wol vch fol clerc that is fayly
Wend to the bishop ant bugge bailey,
Nys no wit in is nolle Ibid. f. 71.
.
The elder French poetry abounds in allegorical satire: and I doubt not that
the author of the satire on the monastic profession, cited above, copied some
French satire on the subject. Satire was one species of the poetry of the
Provencial troubadours. Anselm Fayditt a troubadour of the eleventh century,
who will again be mentioned, wrote a sort of satirical drama called the HERESY
of the FATHERS, HEREGIA DEL PREYRES, a ridicule on the council which condemned
the Albigenses. The papal legates often fell under the lash of these poets;
whose favor they were obliged to court, but in vain, by the promise of ample
gratuities Fontenelle, Hist. Theatr. Fr. p. 18. ^dit 1742.
. Hugues de Bercy, a French monk, wrote in the twelfth century a very lively
and severe satire; in which no person, not even himself, was spared, and which
he called the BIBLE, as containing nothing but truth See Fauchett, Rec. p. 151.
.

In the Harleian manuscripts I find an ancient French poem, yet respecting
England, which is a humorous panegyric on a new religious order called LE ORDER
DE BELL EYSE. This is the exordium.

Qui vodra a moi entendre
Oyr purra e aprendre
L'estoyre de un ORDER NOVEL
Qe mout est delitous bell.
The poet ingeniously feigns, that his new monastic order consists of the most
eminent nobility and gentry of both sexes, who inhabit the monasteries assigned
to it promiscuously; and that no person is excluded from this establishment who
can support the rank of a gentleman. They are bound by their statutes to live
in perpetual idleness and luxury: and the satyrist refers them for a pattern or
rule of practice in these important articles, to the monasteries of Sempringham
in Lincolnshire, Beverley in Yorkshire, the Knights Hospitalers, and many other
religious orders then flourishing in England MSS. ibid. f. 121.
.

When we consider the feudal manners, and the magnificence of our Norman
ancestors, their love of military glory, the enthusiasm with which they engaged
in the crusades, and the wonders to which they must have been familiarised from
those eastern enterprises, we naturally suppose, what will hereafter be more
particularly proved, that their retinues abounded with minstrels and harpers,
and that their chief entertainment was to listen to the recital of romantic and
martial adventures. But I have been much disappointed in my searches after the
metrical tales which must have prevailed in their times. Most of those old
heroic songs are perished, together with the stately castles in whose halls
they were sung. Yet they are not so totally lost as we may be apt to imagine.
Many of them still partly exist in the old English metrical romances, which
will be mentioned in their proper places; yet divested of their original form,
polished in their style, adorned with new incidents, successively modernised by
repeated transcription and recitation, and retaining little more than the
outlines of the original composition. This has not been the case of the
legendary and other religious poems written soon after the conquest,
manuscripts of which abound in our libraries. From the nature of their subject
they were less popular and common; and being less frequently recited, became
less liable to perpetual innovation or alteration.

The most ancient English metrical romance which I can discover, is entitled
the GESTE OF KING HORN. It was evidently written after the crusades had begun,
is mentioned by Chaucer Rim. Thop. 3402. Urr.
, and probably still remains in its original state. I will first give the
substance of the story, and afterward add some specimens of the composition.
But I must premise, that this story occurs in very old French meter in the
manuscripts of the British Museum MSS. Harl. 527. b. f. 59. Cod. membr.
, so that probably it is a translation: a circumstance which will throw light
on an argument pursued hereafter, proving that most of our metrical romances
are translated from the French.

Mury, king of the Saracens, lands in the kingdom of Suddene, where he kills
the king named Allof. The queen, Godylt, escapes; but Mury seizes on her son
Horn, a beautiful youth aged fi^teen years, and puts him into a galley, with
two of his play-fellows, Achulph and Fykenyld: the vessel being driven on the
coast of the kingdom of Westnesse, the young prince is found by Aylmar king of
that country, brought to court, and delivered to Athelbrus his steward, to be
educated in hawking, harping, tilting, and other courtly accomplishments. Here
the princess Rymenild falls in love with him, declares her passion, and is
betrothed. Horn, in consequence of this engagement, leaves the princess for
seven years; to demonstrate, according to the ritual of chivalry, that by
seeking and accomplishing dangerous enterprises he deserved her affection. He
proves a most valorous and invincible knight: and at the end of seven years,
having killed king Mury, recovered his father's kingdom, and achieved many
signal exploits, recovers the princess Rymenild from the hands of his
treacherous knight and companion Fykenyld; carries her in triumph to his own
country, and there reigns with her in great splendour and prosperity. The poem
itself begins and proceeds thus:

All heo ben blythe, that to my song ylythe Listen.
:
A song yet ulle ou singe of Alloff the god king,
King he was by weste the whiles hit y lest;
And Godylt his good queen, no feyrore myhte been,
Ant huere sone hihte Horn, feyrore child ne myhte be borne:
For reyne ne myhte by ryne ne son myhte shine
Feyror child than he was, bryht so ever any glass,
So white so any lilye flower, so rose red was his color;
He was feyre ant eke bold, and of fyfteene winter old,
This non his yliche in none kings rich.
Tueye feren Companions.
he had, that he with him ladde,
Al rychemenne son, and al suyth feyre gromes,
Weth hem forte pley anuste Alike.
he loved tueye,
That on was hoten Achulph child, and that other Ffykenild,
Aculph was the best, and Ffykenyld the werste,
Yt was upon a somersday also, as ich one tell may,
Allof the good king rode upon his pleying,
By the se side, there he was woned to ride;
With him ne ride bot tuo, at to field hue were tho:
He fond by the stronde, aryved on is land,
Shipes systene of Sarazins kene:
He asked what hue sohten other on his land brohten.
But I hasten to that part of the story where prince Horn appears at the court
of the king of Westnesse.

The king com into hall, among his knights all,
Forth he cleped Athelbrus, his steward, him seyde thus:
"Steward tal thou here my fundling for to lere,
"Of some mystere of wood and of ryvere So Robert de Brunne of king Marian.
Hearne's Rob. Gloc. p. 622.

-- Marian fair in chere
He couthe of wod and ryvere
In all manner of venrie, etc.

,
"And toggen oath harp with is nails sharp In another part of the poem he is
introduced playing on his harp. Horn set hi abenche, his harp he began clenche,
He made Rymenild a lay ant he seide weilaway, etc.
In the chamber of a bishop of Winchester at Merdon castle, now ruined, we find
mention made of benches only. Comp. MS. J. Gerveys, Episcop. Winton, 1266.
"Iidem red. comp. de ii. mensis in aula ad m^gnum descum. Et de iii. mensis, ex
una part, et ii. mensis ex altera part c^m tressellis in aula. Et de i. mensa
cum tressellis in camera dom. episcopi. Etv. ^ormis in eadem camera." Descus,
in old English dees, is properly a canopy over the high table. See a curious
account of the goods in the palace of the bishop of Nivernois in France, in the
year 1287, in Montf. Cat. MSS. ii. p. 984. col. 2.
,
"And teache at the listes that thou ever wistes,
"Before me to kerven, and of my course to serven According to the rules of
chivalry, every knight before his creation passed through two offices. He was
first a page: and at fourteen years of age he was formally admitted an esquire.
The esquires were divided into several departments; that of the body, of the
chamber, of the stable, and the carving esquire. The latter stood in the hall
at dinner, where he carved the different dishes with proper skill and address,
and directed the distribution of them among the guests. The inferior offices
had also their respective esquires. Mem. anc. Cheval. i^ 16. seq.
,
"Ant his feren devyse without other surmise;
"Horne-childe, thou understond, teache him of harp and song."
Athelbrus gone leren Horn and hyse feren;
Horn mid heart laghte all that mon him taghte,
Within court and without, and overall about,
Lovede men Horne-child, and most him loved Ymenild
The kings own dothter, for he was in hire thohte,
Hire loved him in hire mod, for he was fair and eke good,
And that tyne ne dorste at word and myd hem spek ner a word,
Ne in the halle, among the knyhtes all,
Hyre sorewe and hire pain nolde never feign,
By day ne by nyhte for here speak ne myhte,
With Horn that was so feir and fre, tho hue ne myhte with him be;
In heart hue had care and woe, and thus hire bihote hire tho:
Hue send hyre sonde Athelbrus to hand,
That he come here to, and also child Horn do,
In to hire boure, for hue bigon to loure,
And the sond Messenger.
said, that seek was the maid,
And bed him quyke for hue nis non blyke.
The steward was in huerte woe, for he wist whit he should do^
That Rymenyld bysohte great wonder him thohte;
About Horn he yinge to boure forte bring,
He thohte en his mode hit nes for none good;
He took with him another, Athulph Horne's brother Companion, friend.
,
"Athulph, quoth he, ryht anon thou shall with me to boure gone,
"To speak with Rymenyld stille, and to wit hire will,
"Thou art Horne's yliche, thou shall hire by suyke,
"Sore me adrede that hire will Horn mys read."
Athelbrus and Athulf tho to hire boure both ygo,
Upon Athulf child Rymenilde con wox wild,
Hue wend Horn it were, that hue had there;
Hue setten adown stille, and seyden hire will,
In her arms tweye Athulf she con leye,
"Horn, quoth heo, wellong I have lovede thee strong,
"Thou shall thy truth plyht in mine hand with ryht,
"Me to spouse welde and iche the loverde to held."
"So stille so hit were, Achulf seide in her ere,
"Ne tell thou no more speech may y the byseche
"Thy tale -- thou linne, for Horn his nout his ynne, etc."
At length the princess finds she has been deceived, the steward is severely
reprimanded, and prince Horn is brought to her chamber; when, says the poet,
Of is fair syhte all that boure began lyhte MSS. ibid. f. 83. Where the title is
written, "th geste of king Horn." There is a copy, much altered and
modernised, in the Advocates library at Edinburgh, W. 4. i. Numb. xxxiv. The
title Horn-childe and Maiden Rinivel. The beginning, Mi leve friend dear,
Harken and ye shall here.



.


It is the force of the story in these pieces that chiefly engages our
attention. The minstrels had no idea of conducting and describing a delicate
situation. The general manners were gross, and the arts of writing unknown. Yet
this simplicity sometimes pleases more than the most artificial touches. In the
mean time, the pictures of ancient manners presented by these early writers,
strongly interest the imagination: especially as having the same uncommon merit
with the pictures of manners in Homer, that of being founded in truth and
reality, and actually painted from the life. To talk of the grossness and
absurdity of such manners is little to the purpose; the poet is only concerned
in the justness and faithfulness of the representation.

SECT. II.
HITHERTO we have been engaged in examining the state of our poetry from the
conquest to the year 1200, or rather afterward. It will appear to have made no
very rapid improvement from that period. Yet as we proceed, we shall find the
language losing much of its ancient barbarism and obscurity, and approaching
more nearly to the dialect of modern times.

In the latter end of the reign of Henry the third, a poem occurs, the date of
which may be determined with some degree of certainty. It is a satirical song,
or ballad, written by one of the adherents of Simon de Montfort earl of
Leicester, a powerful baron, soon after the battle of Jews, which was fought
in the year 1264, and proved very fatal to the interests of the king. In this
decisive action, Richard king of the Romans, his brother Henry the third, and
prince Edward, with many others of the royal party, were taken prisoners.

I.
Sits all stille, ant herkeneth to me:
The king of Alemaigne The king of the Romans.
, by mi leaute Loyalty.
,
Thritti thousent pound askede he
For te make the pees Peace.
in the country The barons made this offer of thirty thousand pounds to Richard.
,
And so so he dude more.
Richard, thah Though.
thou be ever tricchard Treacherous.
,
Tricthen shall thou never more.
II.
Richard of Alemaigne, whil that he was kying,
He spend al is tresour opon swyvyng,
Haveth he nout of Walingford oferlyng Overlyng. i. e. superior. But perhaps
the word is o^terlyng, for esterlyng, a French piece of money. Wallingford was
one of the honors conferred on Richard, at his marriage with Sanchia daughter
of the count of Provence.
,
Let him habbe, ase he brew, bale to dryng "Let him have, as he brews, poison
to drink."
,
Maugre Wyndesore Windsor-castle was one of the king's chief fortresses.
.
Richard, thah thou, etc,
III.
The king of Alemaigne wend do full well "Thought to do full well."
,
He saisede the mulne for a castle Some old chronicles relate, that at the
battle of Jews Richard was taken in a windmill. Hearne MSS. Coll. vol. 106. p.
82. Robert of Gloucester mentions the same circumstance, edit. Hearne, p. 547.
The king of Alemaigne was in a windmulle inome. Richard and prince Edward took
shelter in the Grey-friars at Jews, but were afterward imprisoned in the
castle of Wallingford. See Hearne's Langtoft, Glo^^. p. 616. And Rob. Glouc. p.
548. Robert de Brunne, a poet of whom I shall speak at large in his proper
place, translates the onset of this battle with some spirit, edit. Hearne, p.
217.

Simon com to the field, and put up his banere,
The king schewed forth his schelde, his dragon full austere:
The king said on hie, Simon ieo vous defy, etc.

,
With hare Their.
sharp ^werdes he ground the stel,
He wend that the sails were mangonel Battering-rams.
^
To help Wyndesore.
Richard, thah thou, etc.
IV.
The king of Alemaigne gederede Gathered.
is ost,
Makede him a castle of a mulne post Mill-post.
,
Wend with is prude Pride.
, ant is muckele bost,
Brohte from Almayne money sori ghost He brought with him many foreigners, when
he returned to England, from taking possession of his dignity of king of the
Romans. This gave great offense to the barons. It is here insinuated, that he
intended to garrison Windsor-castle with these ^oreigners. The barons obliged
him to dismiss most of them soon after he landed in England.

To store Wyndesore.
Richard, thah thou, etc.
V.
By god that is aboven ous he dude much sin,
That let passen over see the erl of Warynne The earl of Warren and Surry, and
Hugh le Bigot the king's justiciary, mentioned in the seventh stanza, had fled
into France.
:
He has robbed Engelond, the mores, ant the fenne,
The gold, ant the selver, and y-boren hen,
For love of Wyndesore.
Richard, thah thou, etc.
VI.
Sire Simonde de Mountfort has suore by is chyn,
Hevede Had.
he nou here the earl of Waryn,
Should he never more come to is in Habitation, home.
,
Ne with shield, ne with spear, ne with other gyn Engine, Weapon.
,
To help of Wyndesore:
Richard, thah thou, etc.
VII.
Sire Simond de Montfort has swore by is fot,
Hevede he nou here Sire Hue of de Bigot,
Al he should grante hen twelfemonth scot Year's tax. I had transcribed this
ballad from the British Museum, and written these few cursory explanations,
before I knew that it was printed in the second ^dition of doctor Percy's
Ballads, ii. 1. See MSS. Harl. ut supr. f. 58. b.
^
Should he never more with his sot pot,
To help Wyndesore.
Richard thah thou, etc^
These popular rhymes had probably no small influence in encouraging
Leicester's partisans, and diffusing his fction. There is some humor in
imagining that Richard supposed the windmill to which he retreated, to be a
fortification; and that he believed the sails of it to be military engines. In
the manuscript from which this specimen is transcribed, immediately follows a
song in French, seemingly written by the same poet, on the battle of Evesham
fought the following year; in which Leicester was killed, and his rebellious
barons defeated f. 59. It begins,

Chaunter mestoit mon ever le voit en un dure langage,
Tut en pluraunt fust fet le chaunt de noitre duz Baronage, etc.

. Our poet looks upon his hero as a martyr: and particularly laments the loss
of Henry his son, and Hugh le Despenser justici^ry of England. He concludes
with an English stanza, much in the style and spirit of those just quoted.

A learned and ingenious writer, in a work which places the study of the law in
a new light, and proves it to be an entertaining history of manners, has
observed, that this ballad on Richard of Alemaigne probably occasioned a
statute against libels in the year 1275, under the title, "Against slanderous
reports, or tales to cause discord betwixt king and people OBSERVATIONS UPON
THE STATUTES, CHIEFLY THE MORE ANCIENT, etc. edit. 1766. p. 71.
." That this spirit was growing to an extravagance which deserved to be
checked, we shall have occasion to bring further proofs.

I must not pass over the reign of Henry the third, who died in the year 1272,
without observing, that this monarch entertained in his court a poet with a
certain salary, whose name was Henry de Avranches See Carew's Surv. Cornw. p.
58. edit. 1602.
. And although this poet was a Frenchman, and most probably wrote in French,
yet this first instance of an officer who was afterward, yet with sufficient
impropriety, denominated a poet laureate in the English court, deservedly
claims particular notice in the course of these annals. He is called Master
Henry the Versifier Henry of Huntingdon says, that Walo Versificator wrote a
panegyric on Henry the first. And that the same Walo Versificator wrote a poem
on the park which that king made at Woodstock. Apud Leland's Collectan. vol.
ii. 303. i. 197. edit. 1770. Perhaps he was in the department of Henry
mentioned in the text. One Gualo, a Latin poet, who flourished about this time,
is mentioned by Bale, iii. 5. and Pitts, p. 233. He is commended in the
POLICRATICON. A copy of his Latin hexametrical satire on the monks is printed
by Mathias Flacius, among miscellaneous Latin poems De corrupto Ecclesiae
statu, p. 489. Basil. 1557. oct.
: which appellation perhaps implies a different character from the royal
Minstrel or Joculator. The king's treasurers are ordered to pay this Master
Henry one hundred shillings, which I suppose to have been a year's stipend, in
the year 1251 "Magistro Henrico Versificatori." See Madox, Hist. Excheq. p. 268.
. And again the same precept occurs under the year 1249 Ibid. p. 674. In MSS.
Digb. Bibl. Bodl. I find, in John of Hoveden's Salutationes quinquaginta
Mariae, "Mag. Henricus, VERSIFICATOR MAGNUS, de B. Virgin, etc."
. Our master Henry, it seems, had in some of his verses reflected on the
rusticity of the Cornish men. This insult was resented in a Latin satire now
remaining, written by Michael Blaunpayne, a native of Cornwall, and recited by
the author in the presence of Hugh abbot of Westminster, Hugh de Mortimer
o^^icial of the archbishop of Canterbury, the bishop elect of Winchester, and
the bishop of Rochester MSS. Bibl. Bodl. Arch. Bodl. 29. in pergam. 4to. viz.
"Versus magistri Michaelis Cornubi^nsis contra Mag. Henricum Abricensem coram
dom. Hugone abba^e Westmon. et aliis." fol. 81. b. Pri^^. "ARCHIPOETA vide quod
non sit cura tibi de." See also fol. 83. b. Again, fol. 85.

Pendo po^ta prius ^e diximus ARCHIPOETAM,
Quam pro postico nunc dicimus esse poetam,
Imo poeticulum, etc.
Archipoeta means here the king's chief poet.

In another place our Cornish satirist thus attacks master Henry's person.

Est tibi gamba capri, crus passeris, et latus apri;
Os leporis, catuli nasus, dens et gena muli:
Frons vetulae, tauri caput, et color undique mauri.
In a blank page of the Bodleian manuscript, from which these extracts are
made, is written, "Iste liber constat ffratri Johanni de Wallis monacho
Rameseye." The name is elegantly enriched, with a device. This manuscript
contains, among other things, Planctus de Excidio Trojae, by Hugo Prior de
Montacuto, in rhyming hexameters and pentameters, viz. fol. 89. Camden cites
other Latin verses of Michael Blaunpain, whom he calls "Merry Michael the
Cornish poet." Rem. p. 10. See also p. 489. edit. 1674. He wrote many other
Latin pieces, both in prose and verse.


. While we are speaking of the Versifier of Henry the third, it will not be
foreign to add, that in the thirty-sixth year of the same king, forty shillings
and one pipe of wine were given to Richard the king's harper, and one pipe of
wine to Beatrice his wife Rot. Pip. an. 36. Henr. iii. "Et in uno dolio vini
empto et dato magistro Ricardo Citharistae regis, xl. sol. per Br. Reg. Et in
uno dolio empto et dato Beatrici uxori ejusdem Ricardi."
. But why this gratuity of a pipe of wine should also be made to the wife, as
well as to the husband, who from his profession was a genial character, appears
problematical according to our present ideas.

The first poet whose name occurs in the reign of Edward the first, and indeed
in these annals, is Robert of Gloucester, a monk of the abbey of Gloucester. He
has left a poem o^ considerable length, which is a history of England in verse,
from Brutus to the reign of Edward the first. It was evidently written after
the year 1278, as the poet mentions king Arthur's sumptuous tomb, erected in
that year before the high altar of Glastenbury church Page 224. edit. Hearne.
Oxon. 1724.
: and he declares himself a living witness of the rema^kably dismal weather
which distinguished the day on which the battle of Evesham abovementioned was
fought, in the year 1265 Page 560.
. From these and other circumstances this piece appears to have been composed
about the year 1280. It is exhibited in the manuscripts, is cited by many
antiquaries, and printed by Hearne, in the Alexandrine measure: but with equal
probability might have been written in four-lined stanzas. This rhyming
chronicle is totally destitute of art or imagination. The author has clothed
the fables of Geoffrey of Monmouth in rhyme, which have often a more poetical
air in Geoffrey's prose. The language is not much more easy or intelligible
than that of many of the Norman Saxon poems quoted in the preceding section: it
is full of Saxonisms, which indeed abound, more or less, in every writer before
Gower and Chaucer. But this obscurity is perhaps owing to the western dialect,
in which our monk of Gloucester was educated. Provincial barbarisms are
naturally the growth of extreme counties, and of such as are situated at a
distance from the metropolis: and it is probable, that the Saxon heptarchy,
which consisted of a cluster of seven independent states, contributed to
produce as many different provincial dialects. In the mean time it is to be
considered, that writers of all ages and languages have their affectations and
singularities, which occasion in each a peculiar phraseology.

Robert of Gloucester thus describes the sports and solemnities which followed
king Arthur's coronation.

The king was to is paleys, tho the servyse was y do "When the service in the
church was finished."
,
Ylad with his menye, and the queen to hire also.
Vor hii hulde the old usages, that men with men were
By them sulve, and wymmen by hem sulve also there "They kept the ancient
custom at festivals, of placing the men and women separate. Kay, king of Anjou,
brought a thousand noble knights clothed in ermine of one suit, or secta."
.
Tho hii were echone ysett, as yt to her stat bycom,
Kay, king of Aungeo, a thousand knytes nome
Of noble men, yclothed in ermyne echone
Of on sywete, and servede at this noble fest anon.
Bedwer the botyler, king of Normandye,
Nom also in is half a vayr company
Of one sywyte "Brought also, on his part, a fair company clothed uniformly."
worto servy of the botelerye.
Byvore the queen yt was also of al such cortesye,
Vorto tell all the noblye thet there was ydo,
They my tongue were of stel, me ssolde noght dure thereto.
Wymmen ne kept of no kyngt as in druery Modesty, decorum.
,
Bote he were in armies well yproved, and at lest thrye Thrice.
.
That made, lo, the wymmen the chastore life led,
And the kyngtes the stalwordore More brave.
, and the betere in her deed.
Sone after this noble mete "Soon after this noble feast, which was proper at
such an occasion, the knights accoutred themselves."
, as right was of such tide,
The kynghts atyled hem about in each side,
In feldys and in medys to prove her bachelerye Chivalry, courage, or youth.
.
Sum with lance, some with suerd, without vylenye,
With pleyinge at tables, other at chekere Chess. It is remarkable, that
among the nine exercises, or accomplishments, mentioned by Kolson, an ancient
northern chief, one is Playing at chess. Bartholin. ii. c. 8. p. 420. This game
was familiarised to the Europeans after the crusades. The romances which
followed those expeditions are full of it. Kolson, abovementioned, had made a
pilgrimage into the holy land. But from the principles advanced in the first
INTRODUCTORY DISSERTATION, this game might have been known in the North before.
In the mean time, it is probable that the Saracens introduced it into Spain
before the crusades. It is mentioned by G. of Monmouth, and in the Alexiad of
Anna Commena. See Mem. Acad. Lit. v. 232.
,
With casting, other with ssettinge Different ways of playing at chess. "The
ladies stood on the walks made within the battlements of the castle."
, other in some ogyrt manner.
And wuch so of any game add the maystrye,
The king hem of is gyfteth did large cortysye.
Upe the alurs of the castles the laydes thanne stood,
And byhulde this noble game, and wyche kyngts were god.
All the three hexte dawes "All the three high, or chief days. In hills and
fields, of feasting, and turneying, etc."
ylaste this nobleye
In halles and in veldes, of mete and eke of pleye.
This men com the verthe Fourth.
day byvore the king there,
And he gef hem large gyftys, evere as hii werthe were.
Bisshopryches and cherches clerks he gef sum,
And castles and towns kyngtes that were ycome Page 191. 192.
.
Many of these lines are literally translated from Geoffry of Monmouth. In king
Arthur's battle with the giant at Barbesfleet, there are no marks of Gothic
painting. But there is an effort at poetry in the description of the giant's
fall.

Tho grislych yal the ssrewe tho, that grislych was his bear,
He vel doung as a great ok, that bynethe ycorve were,
That it thogte that al hul myd the vallynge ssok Page 208.
.
That is, "This cruel giant yelled so horribly, and so vehement was his fall,
that he fell down like an oak cut through at the bottom, and all the hill shook
while he fell." But this stroke is copied from Geoffry of Monmouth; who tells
the same miraculous story, and in all the pomp with which it was perhaps
dressed up by his favorite fablers. "Exclamavit vero invisus ille; et velut
quercus ventorum viribus eradicata, cum maximo sonitu corruit." It is difficult
to determine which is most blameable, the poetical historian, or the prosaic
poet.

It was a tradition invented by the old fablers, that giants brought the stones
of Stonehenge from the most sequestered deserts of Africa, and placed them in
Ireland; that every stone was washed with juices of herbs, and contained a
medical power; and that Merlin the magician, at the request of king Arthur,
transported them from Ireland, and erected them in circles on the plain of
Amesbury, as a sepulchral monument for the Britons treacherously slain by
Hengist. This fable is thus delivered, without decoration, by Robert of
Gloucester.

"Sire king, quoth Merlin tho, such things y wis
"Ne bethe for to schewe nogt, but wen great need is,
"For gef iche seid in bismare, other bute it ned were,
"Sone from me he would wend the ghost, that does me lere If I should say any
thing out of wantoness or vanity, the spirit, or demon, which teaches me, would
immediately leave me. "Nam si ea in derisionem, sive vanitatem, proferrem,
taceret Spiritus qui me docet, et, cum opus superveniret, rec^deret." Galfrid.
Mon. viii. 10.
:
The king, tho non other nas, bod him some quoyntise
Bithinke about thilk cors that so noble were and wise "Bade him use his
cunning, for the sake of the bodies of those noble and wise Britons."
.
"Sire king, quoth Merlin tho, gef thou wolt here cast
"In the honor of men, a work that ever schal ylaste "If you would build, to
their honor, a lasting monument."
,
"To the hul of Kylar "To the hill of Kildare."
send in to Yrlond,
"Aftur the noble stones that there habbet Have.
lenge ystonde;
"That was the treche of giandes "The dance of giants." The name of this
wonderful assembly of immense stones.
, for a quoynte work there is
"Of stones al with art ymad, in the world such non is.
"Ne there nys nothing that me scholde myd strength adoune cast.
"Stood heo here, as heo does there ever a would last "Grandes sunt lapides,
nec est aliquis cujus virtuti cedant. Quod si eo modo, quo ibi positi sunt,
circa plateam locabuntur, stabunt in aeternum." Galfrid. Mon. viii. x. 11.
."
The king somdele to lyghe "Somewhat laughed."
, tho he herd this tale,
"How mygte, he seyde, such stones so great and so fale "So great and so many."
,
"Be ybrogt of so fer land? And get mist of were,
"Me would wene, that in this land no ston to wonke nere,"
"Sire king, quoth Merlyn, ne make noght an ydel such lyghyng.
"For yt nys an ydel noght that ich tell this tythyng Tyding.
.
"For in the farreste stude of Affric giands while fette "Giants once brought
them from the farthest part of Africa, etc."

"Thike stones for medycyne and in Yrlond hem set,
"While heo wonenden in Yrlond to make here bathes there,
"There undir forto bathi wen they syk were.
"For heo wuld the stones wasch and there enne bathe ywis.
"For is no ston there among that of great virtue nys "Lavabant namque lapides et
infra balnea diffundebant, unde aegroti curabantur. Miscebant etiam cum
herbarum con^ectionibus, unde vuln^rati sanabantur. Non est ibi lapis qui
medica mento careat." Galfrid. Mon. ibid.
."
The king and is conseil radde Rode.
the stones forto fette,
And with great power of batail gef any more hem let
Uter the kings brother, that Ambrose hett also,
In another name ychose was thereto,
And fifteen thousant men this deed for to do
And Merlyn for his quointise thider went also Page 145. 146. 147. That
Stonehenge is a British monument, erected in memory of Hengist's ma^^acre,
rests, I believe, on the sole evidence of Geoffry of Monmouth, who had it from
the British bards. But why should not the testimony of the British bards be
allowed on this occasion? For they did not invent facts, so much as fables. In
the present case, Hengist's massacre in an allowed event. Remove all the
apparent ^iction, and the bards only say, that an immense pile of stones was
raised on the plain of Ambresbury in memory of that event. They lived too near
the time to forge this origin of Stonehenge. The whole story was recent, and
from the immensity of the work itself, must have been still more notorious.
Therefore their forgery would have been too glaring. It may be objected, that
they were fond of referring every thing stupendous to their favorite hero
Arthur. This I grant: but not when known authenticated facts stood in their
way, and while the real cause was remembered. Even to this day, the massacre of
Hengist, as I have partly hinted, is an undisputed piece of history. Why should
not the other part of the story be equally true? Besides the silence of
Nennius, I am aware, that this hypothesis is still attended with many
difficulties and improbabilities. And so are all the systems and conjectures
ever yet framed about this amazing monument. It appears to me, to be the work
of a rude people who had some ideas of art: such as we may suppose the Romans
left behind them among the Britons. In the mean time I do not remember, that in
the very controverted etymology of the word Stone^enge the name of HENGIST has
been properly or sufficiently considered.
.
If any thing engages our attention in this passage, it is the wildness of the
fiction; in which however the poet had no share.

I will here add Arthur's intrigue with Ygerne.

At the fest of Estre tho king send is sonde,
That heo comen all to London the hey men of this land,
And the levedys al so god, to is noble fest wide,
For he schulde crown here, for the hye tide.
All the noble men of this land to the noble fest come,
And heore wyves and heore dogtren with hem money nome,
This fest was noble ynow, and nobliche y do;
For money was the fair ledy, that y come was thereto.
Ygerne, Gorloys wife, was fairest of echon,
That was contasse of Cornewail, for so fair nas there non.
The king by huld hire fast y now, and is heart on hire cast,
And thogte, they heo were wife, to do folly at last.
He made hire semblant fair y now, to non other so great.
The erl nas not there with y paid, tho he yt under get.
Aftur mete he nom is wife myd stordy med y now,
And, with out leve of the king, to is contrei drow.
The king send to him tho, to by leve al nygt,
For he most of great consel habbe some insygt.
That was for nogt. Would he nogt the king send get is sonde.
That he by levede at is parlemente, for need of the land.
The king was, tho he nolde nogt, anguyssous and wroth.
For despyte he would a wreke be he swor is oath,
Bute he come to amendment. Is power at last
He garkede, and wend forth to Cornewail fast.
Gorloys is casteles a store al a boute.
In a strong castle he dude is wife, for of hire was al is doubt.
In another him self he was, for he nolde nogt,
Gef cas come, that heo were both to death y brogt.
The castle, that the erl inn was, the king by segede fast,
For he mygte is gynnes for schame to the oter cast.
Tho he was there seen nygt, and he spedde nogt,
Igerne the contesse so much was in is thogt,
That he nuste nen other wit, ne he ne mygte for schame
Tell yt bute a pryve knygt, Ulfyn was is name,
That he trust mest to. And tho the knygt herd this,
"Sire, he seide, y ne can wit, wat red here of is,
"For the castle is so strong, that the lady is inn,
"For ich wene all the land ne schulde yt myd strength win.
"For the se geth al about, but enter on there nys,
"And that is up on hard rocks, and so narw wei it is,
"That there may go bote on and on, that three men with inn
"Mygte sle all the land, er heo com there inn.
"And nogt for than, gef Merlyn at thy conseil were,
"Gef any mygte, he couthe the best red the lere."
Merlyn was sone of send, pleid yt was him sone,
That he schulde the best red segge, wat were to done.
Merlyn was sorry ynow for the kynge's folly,
And natheles, "Sire king, he seide, there mot to maistrie,
"The erl has twey men him nert, Brygthoel and Jordan.
"Ich wol make thy self gef thou wolt, thoru art that y can,
"Habbe al tho form of the erl, as thou were rygt he,
"And Olfyn as Jordan, and as Brithoel me."
This art was al clean y do, that al changet he were,
Heo three in the otheres form, the selve at yt were.
Ageyn even he wend forth, nuste nomon that cas,
To the castle heo come rygt as yt evene was.
The porter y se is lord come, and is most privey twei,
With god heart he let is lord in, and is men beye.
The contas was glad y now, tho hire lord to hire com
And either other in here arms myd great joye nom.
Tho heo to bed com, that so long a two were,
With hem was so great delyt, that bitwene hem there
By get was the best body, that ever was in this land,
King Arthure the noble mon, that ever worth understonde.
Tho the kynge's men nuste amorwe, were he was by come,
Heo ferde as wodemen, and wend he were ynome.
Heo a saileden the castle, as yt schulde a down anon,
Heo that with inn were, garkede hem echon,
And smite out in a fool will, and fogte myd here fon:
So that the erl was y slave, and of is men money on,
And the castle was y nome, and the folk to sprad there,
Get, tho they had al ydo, heo ne fond not the king there.
The tything to the contas sone was y come,
That hi^e lord was y slawe, and the castle y nome.
Ac tho the messinger him sey the erl, as him thogte,
That he had so foul plow, full sore him of thogte,
The contasse made some del deol, for no sothnesse heo nuste.
The king, for to glade here, by clupte hire and cust.
"Dame, he seide, no sixth thou well, that les yt is all this:
"Ne wost thou well ich am olyue. Ich wole the segge how it is.
"Out of the castle stille^iche ych wend al in privete,
"That none of mine men yt nuste, for to speak with the.
"And tho heo miste me to day, and nuste were ich was,
"Heo ferden rigt as gydie men, myd wam no red nas,
"And fogte with the folk with out, and habbeth in this manner
"Y lore the castle and hem s^lue, ac well thou wost y am here.
"Ac for my castle, that is ylore, sorry ich am y now,
"And for mine men, that the king and is power slog.
"Ac my power is now to lute, there fore y dread sore,
"Lest the king us nyme here, and sorwe that we were more.
"There fore ich wole, how so yt be, wend again the king,
"And make my pays with him, ar he us to schame bring."
Forth he wend, and het is men that gef the king come,
That hei schulde him the castle gelde, ar he with strength it nome.
So he come to^ard is men, is own form he nom,
And levede the erle's form, and the king Uter by com.
Sore him of thogte the erle's death, ac in other half he fond
Joye in his heart, for the contasse of spoushed was unbonde,
Tho he had that he would, and paysed with is son,
To the contasse he wend again, me let him in a non.
Wat halt it to talle long: bute heo were seth at on,
In great love long y now, wan yt nolde other gone;
And had to gedere this noble sone, that in the world is pere nas,
The king Arture, and a dogter, Anne hire name was Chron. p. 156.
.
In the latter end of the reign of Edward the first, many officers of the
French king having extorted large sums of money from the citizens of Bruges in
Flanders, were murdered: and an engagement succeeding, the French army,
commanded by the count du Saint Pol, was defeated; upon which the king of
France, who was Philip the Fair, sent a strong body of troops, under the
conduct of the count de Artois, against the Flemings: he was killed, and the
French were almost all cut to pieces. On this occasion the following ballad was
made in the year 1301 The last battle was fought that year, Jul. 7.
.

Lusteneth, lordinges, both onge and old,
Of the Freynshe men that were so proud ante bold,
How the Flemmyshe men bohten hem ante sold,
Upon a Wednesday,
Betere hem were at home in huere land,
Than force seche Flemishe by the sea stronde
Whare rouch moni Frensh wife wryngeth hire hand,
And syngeth welaway.
The king of Ffrance made statutes new,
In the land of Flaundres among false ant true,
That the communs of Bruges full sore can arewe,
And seiden among hem,
Gedere we us to gedere hardilyche at ene,
Take we the bailifs by twenty and by tene,
Clappe we of the hevedes an oven o the grene,
Ant cast we in the fen.
The webbes ant the fullaris assembled hem all,
And makeden huere counsel in huere commune halle,
Token Peter conyng huere king to call
Ant be huere cheveteyne, etc MSS. Harl. 2253. f. 73. b.
.
These verses show the familiarity with which the affairs of France were known
in England, and display the disposition of the English toward the French, at
this period. It It appears from this and previous instances, that political
ballads, I mean such as were the vehicles of political satire, prevailed much
among our early ancestors. About the present era, we meet with a ballad
complaining of the exhorbitant fees extorted, and the numerous taxes levied, by
the king's officers Ibid. f. 64. There is a song half Latin and half French,
much on the same subject. Ibid. f. 137. b.
. There is a libel remaining, written indeed in French Alexandrines, on the
commission of trayl-baston See Spelman and Dufresne in Voc. And Rob. Brunne's
Chron. ed. Hearne, p. 328.
, or the justices so denominated by Edward the first, during his absence in the
French and Scotch wars, about the year 1306. The author names some of the
justices or commissioners, now not easily discoverable: and says, that he
served the king both in peace and war in Flanders, Gascony, and Scotland MSS.
Harl. ibid. f. 113. b.
. There is likewise a ballad against the Scots, traitors to Edward the first,
and taken prisoners at the battles of Dunbar and Kykenclef, in 1305, and 1306
Ibid. f. 59.
. The licentiousness of their rude manners was perpetually breaking out in
these popular pasquins, although this species of petulance usually belongs to
more polished times.

Nor were they less dexterous than daring in publishing their satires to
advantage, although they did not enjoy the many conveniences which modern
improvements have afforded for the circulation of public abuse. In the reign of
Henry the sixth, to pursue the topic a little lower, we find a ballad of this
species stuck on the gates of the royal palace, severely reflecting on the king
and his counselors then sitting in parliament. This piece is preserved in the
Ashmolean museum, with the following Latin title prefixed. "Copia scedul^e
valvis domini regis existentis in parliamento suo tento apud Westmonasterium
mense marcii anno regni Henrici sexti vicesimo octavo." But the ancient ballad
was often applied to better purposes: and it appears from a valuable collection
of these little pieces, lately published by my ingenious friend and
fellow laborer doctor Percy, in how much more ingenuous a strain they have
transmitted to posterity the praises of knightly heroism, the marvels of
romantic fiction, and the complaints of love.

At the close of the reign of Edward the first, and in the year 1303, a poet
occurs named Robert Mannyng, but more commonly called Robert de Brunne. He was
a Gilbertine monk in the monastery of Brunne, or Bourne, near Depyng in
Lincolnshire: but he had been before professed in the priory of Sixhille, a
house of the same order, and in the same county. He was merely a translator. He
translated into English meter, or rather paraphrased, a French book, written by
Grosthead bishop of Lincoln, entitled, MANUEL PECHE, or MANUEL de PECHE, that
is, the MANUAL OF SINS. This translation was never printed MSS. Bibl. Bodl. N.
415. membr. fol. Cont. 80. page Pr. "Fadyr and sone and holy ghost." And MSS.
Harl. 1701.
. It is a long work, and treats of the decalogue, and the seven deadly sins,
which are illustrated with many legendary stories. This is the title of the
translator. "Here bygynneth the book that men clepyn in Frenshe MANUEL PECHE,
the which book made in Frenshe Robert Groosteste bishop of Lyncoln." From the
Prologue, among other circumstances, it appears that Robert de Brunne designed
this performance to be sung to the harp at public entertainments, and that it
was written or begun in the year 1303 Fol. 1. a.
.

For lewed Laymen, illiterate.
men I undyrtoke,
In English tongue to make this book:
For many beyn of such manner
That talys and rymys wyle blethly x Gladly.
here,
In gamys and festys at the ale So in the Vision of P. Plowman, fol. xxvi. b.
edit. 1550.

I am occupied every day, holy day and other,
With idle tales at the Al^, etc.
Again, fol. 1. b.

-- Foughten at the Al^
In glotony, godwote, etc.
Chaucer mentions an Alestake, Prol. v. 669. Perhaps, a May Pole. And in the
Plowman's Tale, p. 185. Urr. edit. v. 2110.

And the chief chantours at the nal^.

Love men to lestene trotonale Truth and all.
:
To all crystyn men undir sun,
And to good men of Brunne;
And specialli al by name
The felaushipe of Symprynghame The name of his order.
,
Roberd of Brunne greteth you,
In all godenesse that may to prow Profit.
.
Of Brymwake in Kestevene A part of Lincolnshire. Chron. Br. p. 311. At Lincoln
the parliament was in Lyndesay and Kestevene. Lyndesay is Lincolnshire, ibid. p.
248. See a story of three monks of Lyndesay, ibid. p. 80.

Six mile beside Sympryngham evene,
Y dwelled in the priorye
Fyftene year in cumpanye,
In the time of good Dane Jone
Of Camelton that now is gone;
In his time was I there ten years
And knew and herd of his maneres;
Sythyn with Dan Jon of Clyntone
Fyve wyntyr with him began I wone,
Dan Felyp was maystyr in that time
That I began this Englyssh ryme,
The years of grace fyd Fell.
than to be
A thousand and three hundred and three.
In that time turned y this
In Englysh tongue out of Frankys.
From the work itself I am chiefly induced to give the following specimen; as
it contains an anecdote relating to bishop Grosthead his author, who will again
be mentioned, and on that account.

Y shall you tell as I have herd
Of the bishop saint Roberd,
His toname Surname. See Rob. Br. Chron. p. 168. "They called hi this toname,
etc." Fr. "Est surnomez, etc."
is Grosteste
Of Lyncolne, so seyth the geste.
He lovede much to here the harp,
For man's wit yt makyth sharp.
Next his chamber, beside his study,
His harper's chamber was fast the by.
Many times, by nights and days,
He hadd solace of notes and lays,
One askede hem the resun why
He had delight in mynstrelsy?
He answerde him on this manner
Why he held the harp so dear.
"The virtu of the harp, through skyle and right,
"Will destrye the fendys Fiend's. The Devil's.
might;
"And to the cross by good skeyl
"Is the harp lykened weyl. --
"Thirefore, good men, ye shall lere,
"When ye any gleman Harper. Minstrel.
here,
"To worshepe god at your power,
"And Davyd in the sauter Psalter.
.
"In harp and tabour and symphan gle Chaucer R. Sir Thop. v. 3321. Urr. edit.
p. 135.

Here wonnith the queen of Fairie,
With harp, and pipe, and Simphoni^.


"Worship God in trumpes ant sautre:
"In cords, in organes, and bells ringyng,
"In all these worship the hevene king, etc Fol. 30. b. There is an old Latin
song in Burton's Melancholy, which I find in this MS. poem. Burton's Mel. Part
iii. 2. Memb. iii. page 423.
."
But Robert de Brunne's largest work is a metrical chronicle of England The
second part was printed by Hearne at Oxford, which he calls PETER LANGTOFT'S
CHRONICLE, 1725. Of the First part Hearne has given us the Prologue, Pref. p.
96. An Extract, ibid. p. 188. And a few other passages in his Glossary to
Robert of Gloucester. But the First Part was never printed entire. Hearne says
this Chronicle was not finished till the ^ear 1338. Rob. Gloucest. Pref. p. 59.
It appears that our author was educated and graduated at Cambridge, from Chron.
p. 337.
. The former part, from Aeneas to the death of Cadwallader, is translated from
an old French poet called MASTER WACE or GASSE, who manifestly copied Geoffry
of Monmouth In the British Museum there is a fragment of a poem in very old
French verse, a romantic history of England, drawn from Geoffry of Monmouth,
perhaps before the year 1200. MSS. Harl. 1605. 1. f. 1. Cod. membran. 4to. In
the manuscript library of doctor N. Johnson of Pontefract, now perhaps
dispersed, there was a manuscript on vellum, containing a history in old
English verse from Brute to the eighteenth year of Edward the second. And in
that of Basil lord Denbigh, a metrical history in English from the same period,
to Henry ^he third. Wanly supposed it to have been of the handwriting of the
time of Edward the fourth.
, in a poem commonly entitled ROMAN DE ROIS D'ANGLETERRE. It is esteemed one of
the oldest of the French romances; and begun to be written by Eustace,
sometimes called Eustache, Wistace, or Huistace, who finished his part under
the title of BRUT D'ANGLETERRE, in the year 1155. Hence Robert de Brunne,
somewhat inaccurately, calls it simply the BRUT The BRUT OF ENGLAND, a prose
Chronicle of England, sometimes continued as low as Henry the sixth, is a
common manuscript. It was at first translated from a French Chronicle [MSS.
Harl. 200. 4to.] written in the beginning of the reign of Edward the third. I
think it is printed by Caxton under the title of Fructus Temporum. The French
have a famous ancient prose romance called BRUT, which includes the history of
the Sangreal. I know not whether it is exactly the same. In an old metrical
romance, The story of ROLLO, there is this passage. MS. Vernon, Bibl. Bodl. f.
123. Lordus gif ye will lesten to me,
Of Croteye the nobile city
As written i find in his story
Of BRUIT the chronicle, etc.
In the British Museum we have Le petit Bruit, compiled by Meistre Raufe de
Boun, and ending with the death of Edward the first. MSS. Harl. 902. f. 1. Cod.
chart. fol. It is an abridgement of the grand BRUT. In the same library I find
Liber de BRUTO et de gestis Anglorum metrificatus. That is, turned into rude
Latin hexameters. It is continued to the death of Richard the second. Many
prose annotations are intermixed. MSS. ibid. 1808. 24. f. 31. Cod. membran.
4to. In another copy of this piece, one Peckward is said to be the versifier.
MSS. i^. 2386. 23. f. 35. In another manuscript the grand BRUT is said to be
translated from the French by "John Maundeule parson of Brunham Thorpe." MSS.
ibid. 2279. 3.
. This romance was soon afterward continued to William Rufus, by Robert Wace
or Vace, Gasse or Gace, a native of Jersey, educated at Caen, canon of Bayeux,
and chaplain to Henry the second, under the title of LE ROMAN LE ROU ET LES
VIES DES DUCS DE NORMANDY, yet sometimes preserving its original one, in the
year 1160 See Lenglet, Biblioth. des Romans, ii. p. 226. 227. And Lacombe,
Diction. de vieux Lang. Fr. pref. p. xviii. Paris. 1767. 8vo. And compare
Montfauc. Catal. Manuscr. ii. p. 1669. See also M. Galland, Mem. Lit. iii. p.
426. 8vo.
. Thus both parts were blended, and became one work. Among the royal
manuscripts in the British Museum it is thus entitled: "LE BRUT, ke maistre
Wace translata de Latin en Franceis de tutt les Reis de Brittaigne 3 A. xxi. 3.
It occurs again, 4 C. xi. "Histoire d'Angleterre en verse, par Maistre Wace." I
cannot help correcting a mistake into which both Wanley and bishop Nicholson
have fallen, with regard to this Wace. In the Cotton library, a Saxo-norman
manuscript occurs twice, which seems to be a translation of Geoffry's History,
or very like it. Calig. A. ix. And Otho. C. 13. 4to. In vellum. The translator
is one Lazamon, a priest, born at Ernly on Severn. He says, that he had his
original from the book of a French clergyman, named Wa^e; which book Wate the
author, had presented to Eleanor, queen of Henry the second. So Lazamon in the
preface. "Bot he nom the thridde, leide there amidden: tha makede a frenchis
clerc: Wate [Wa^e] was ihoten, etc." Now because Geoffry of Monmouth in one of
his prefaces, cap. i. b. 1. says, that he received his original from the hands
of Walter Mapes, archdeacon of Oxford; both Wanly and Nicholson suppose that
the Wate mentioned by Lazamon is Walter Mapes. Whereas Lazamon undoubtedly
means Wace, perhaps written or called Wate, author of LE ROMAN LE ROU
abovementioned. Nor is the Saxon t [t] perfectly distinguishable from c. See
Wanley's Catal. Hickes's Thesaur. ii. p. 228. And Nicholson Hist. Libr. i. 3.
And compare Leland's Coll. vol. i. P. ii. p. 509. edit. 1770.
." That is, from the Latin prose history of Geoffry of Monmouth. And that
master Wace aimed only at the merit of a translator, appears from his exordial
verses. Maistre Gasse l' a translate
Que en conte le verite.
Otherwise we might have suspected that the authors drew their materials from
the old fabulous Armoric manuscript, which is said to have been Geoffry's
original.

Al^hough this romance, in its ancient and early manuscripts, has constantly
passed under the name of its finisher, Wace; yet the accurate Fauchett cites it
by the name of its first author Eustace Rec. p. 82. edit. 1581.
. And at the same time it is extraordinary, that Robert de Brunne, in his
Prologue, should not once mention the name of Eustace, as having any concern in
it: so soon was the name of the beginner superseded by that of the continuator.
An ingenious French antiquary very justly supposes, that Wace took many of his
descriptions from that invaluable and singular monument the Tapestry of the
Norman conquest, preserved in the treasury of the cathedral of Bayeux Mons.
Lancelot, Mem. Lit. viii. 602. 4to. And see Hist. Acad. Inscript. xiii. 41. 4to.
, and lately engraved and explained in the learned doctor Du Carell's
Anglo-Norman ANTIQUITIES. Lord Lyttleton has quoted this romance, and shown
that important facts and curious illustrations of history may be drawn from
such obsolete but authentic resources Hist. Henr. II. vol. iii. p. 180.
.

The measure used by Robert de Brunne, in his translation of the former part of
our French chronicle or romance, is exactly like that of his original. Thus the
Prologue.

Lordynges that be now here,
If ye will listene and lere,
All the story of Inglande,
Als Robert Mannyng written it fand,
And on Inglysch has it schewed,
Not for the lered but for the lewed;
For tho that on this land wonn
That the Latin ne Frankys conn,
For to half solace and gamen
In felauschip when tha sit samen
And it is wisdom forto wytten
The state of the land, and hef it written,
What manner of folk first it wan,
And of what kind it first began.
And good it is for many things,
For to here the dedis of kings,
Whilk were foles, and whilk were wise,
And whilk of tham couth most quantyse;
And whylk did wrong, and whilk right,
And whilk mayntened pes and fight.
Of their deeds sall be mi saw,
In what time, and of what law,
I sholl you from gre to gre,
Sen the time of Sir Noe:
From Noe unto Eneas,
And what betwixt tham was,
And fro Eneas till Brutus time,
That kind he tells in this ryme.
For Brutus to Cadweladres,
The last Briton that this land lees.
All that kind and all the fruit
That come of Brutus that is the Brute;
And the right Brute is told no more
Than the Brytons time wore.
After the Bretons the Inglis camen,
The lordschip of this land thai namen;
South, and north, west, and east,
That call men now the Inglis gest.
When thai first among the Bretons,
That now ere Inglis than were Saxons,
Saxons Inglis hight all oliche.
Thai aryved up at Sandwyche,
In the kings since Vortogerne
That the land would tham not werne, etc.
One master WACE the Frankes tells
The Brute all that the Latin spelles,
Fro Eneas to Cadwaladre, etc.
And right as master Wace says,
I tell mine Inglis the same ways, etc Hearne's edit. Pref. p. 98.
.
The second part of Robert de Brunne's CHRONICLE, beginning from Cadwallader,
and ending with Edward the first, is translated, in great measure, from the
second part of a French metrical chronicle, written in five books, by Peter
Langtoft, an Augustine canon of the monastery of Bridlington in Yorkshire, who
wrote not many years before his translator. This is mentioned in the Prologue
preceding the second part.

Frankis spech is called romance The Latin tongue ceased to be spoken in France
about the ninth century; and was succeeded by what was called the ROMANCE
tongue, a mixture of Frankish and bad Latin. Hence the first poems in that
language are called ROMANS or ROMANTS. Essay on POPE, p. 281. In the following
passages of this Chronicle, where Robert de Brunne mentions ROMANCE, he
sometimes means Langto^t's French book, from which he translated. viz. Chron.
p. 205. This that I have said it is Pers saw
Als he in Romance laid thereafter began I draw.
See Chauc. Romans R. v. 2170. Also Balades, p. 554. v. 508. Urr. And Crescembin.
Istor. della Volg. Poes. vol. i. L. v. p. 316. seq.
,
So sais clerks and men of France.
Pers of Langtoft, a chanon
Schaven in the house of Bridlyngton
On Frankis style this story he wrote
Of Inglis kings, etc Hearne's edit. Pref. p. 106.
.
As Langtoft had written his French poem in Alexandrines Some are printed by
Hollinsh. Hist. iii. 469. Others by Hearne, Chron. Langt. Pref. p. 58. And in
the margin of the pages of the Chronicle.
, the translator, Robert de Brunne, has followed him, the Prologue excepted, in
using the double distich for one line, after the manner of Robert of
Gloucester. As in the first part he copied the meter of his author Wace. But I
will exhibit a specimen from both parts. In the first, he gives us this
dialogue between Merlin's mother and king Vortigern, from Master Wace.

Dame, said the king, welcome be thou:
Nedeli at the I met wit how "I must by all means know of you."

Who than gate Begott.
thy sone Merlyn
And on what manner was he thin?
His mother stood a throw Awhile.
and thought
Are scho Ever she.
to the king ansuerd ouht:
When scho had standen a litelle wight White, while.
,
Scho said, by Jhesu in Mari light,
That I ne saugh him never ne knew
That this knave Child.
on me sewe Begott.
.
Ne I wist, ne I herd,
What manner schap with me so ferd Lay.
.
But this thing am I wole ograunt Assured.
,
That I was of elde avenaunt "I was then young and beautiful."
:
One com to my bed I wist,
With force he me haised Embraced.
and kissed:
Als As.
a man I him felt,
Als a man he me welte Wielded, moved.
;
Als a man he spoke to me.
Bot what he was, might I not se Apud Hearne's Gl. Rob. Glouc. p.
.
The following, extracted from the same part, is the speech of the Romans to
the Britons, after the former had built a wall against the Picts, and were
leaving Britain.

We haf closed there most need was;
And if ye defend well that pas
With archers Not Bowmen, but apertures in the wall for shooting arrows. Viz.
In the repairs of Taunton castle, 1266. Comp. J. Gerneys, Episc. Wint.
"TANTONIA. Expense domorum. In mercede Cementarii pro muro erigendo juxta
turrim ex part orientali cum Kernellis et Archeriis faciendis, xvi. s. vi. d."
In Archiv. Wolves. apud Wint. Kernells mentioned here, and in the next verse,
were much the same thing: or perhaps Battlements. In repairs of the great hall
at Wolvesey-palace I find, "In kyrnillis emptis ad idem, xii. d." Ibid. There
is a patent granted to the monks of Abingdon, in Berkshire, in the reign of
Edward the third, Pro kernellatione monasterii. Pat. an. 4. par. 1.
and with magnels Cotgrave has absurdly interpreted this word, an old-fashioned
s^ing. V. MANGONEAU. It is a catapult, or battering-ram. Viz. Rot. Pip. An. 4.
Hen. iii. [A. D. 1219.] "NORDHANT. Et in expensis regis in obsidione castri de
Rockingham, 100 l. per Br. Reg. Etcustodibus ingeniorum [engines] regis ad ea
carianda usque Bisham, ad castrum illud obsidendum, 13 s. 10 d. per id. Br.
Reg. Et pro duobus coriis, emptis apud Northampton ad fundas petrariarum et
mangonellorum regis faciciendas, 5 s. 6 d. per. id. Br. Reg." -- Rot. Pip. 9.
Hen. iii. [A. D. 1225.] "SURR. Comp. de Cnareburc. Et pro vii. cablis emptis ad
petrarias et mangonellos in eodem castro, 7 s. 11 d." Rot. Pip. 5. Hen. iii.
[A. D. 1220.] "DEVONS. Et in custo posito in 1. petraria et 11. mangonellis
cariatis a Nottingham usque Bisham, et in eisdem reductis a Bisham usque
Nottingham, 7 l. 4 s." Chaucer mentions both Mangon^ls and Kyrnils, in a castle
in the Romaunt of the Rose, v. 4195. 6279. Also archers, i. e. archeriae, v.
4191. So in the French R^man de la Rose, v. 3945.

Vous puissiez bien les Mango^^^aul^,
Veoir la par-dessus les Creneaulx.
Et aux archieres de la Tour
Sont arbalestres tout entour.
Archieres occur often in this poem. Chaucer, in translating the above passage,
has introduced guns, which were not known when the original was written, v.
4191.

I am of opinion, that some of the great military battering engines, so
frequently mentioned in the histories and other writers of the dark ages, were
fetched from the crusades. See a species of the catapult, used by the Syrian
army in the siege of Mecca, about the year 680. Mod. Univ. Hist. B. i. c. 2.
tom. ii. p. 117. These expeditions into the east undoubtedly much improved the
European art of war. Tasso's warlike machines, which seem to be the poet's
invention, are formed on descriptions of such wonderful machines which he had
read in the crusade historians, particularly Wilhelmus Tyrensis.


,
And keep well the kyrnels;
There may ye both schote and cast
Waxes bold and fend you fast.
Thinks your faders wan franchise,
Be ye no more in other servise:
Bot freely life to your lyves end:
We fro you for ever wend Gloss. Rob. Glouc. p. 664.
.
Vortigern king of the Britons, is thus described meeting the beautiful
princess Rouwen, daughter of Hengist, the Rosamond of the Saxon ages, at a
feast of wassaile. It is a curious picture of the gallantry of the times.

Hengest that day did his might,
That all were glad, king and knight,
And as they were best in glading,
And Sending about the cups apace. Carousing briskly.
well cop schotin knight and king,
Of chambir Rouewen so gent,
Be fore the king in halle scho went.
A coupe with wine sche had in hand,
And her Attire.
hatire was well Very rich.
farand.
Be fore the king on kne set,
And on her langage scho him grett.
"Lauerid Lord.
king, Wassaille," seid sche.
The king asked, what should be.
On that langage the king Was not skilled.
ne couthe.
A knight The.
there langage Learned.
lerid in youth.
Breg Was called.
hiht that knight born Bretoun,
That lerid the langage of Saxons.
Sessoun.
This Breg was the For Latiner, or Latinier, an Interpreter. Thus, in the
Romance of KING RICHARD, hereafter cited at large, Saladin's Latimer at the
siege of Babylon proclaims a truce to the christian army from the walls of the
city. Signat. M. i. The LATEMERE tho turned his eye
To that other side of the town,
And cried trues with great soune.
In which sense the French word occurs in the Roman de GARIN. MSS. Bibl. Reg.
Paris. Number. 7542. LATIMER fu si sot parler Roman,
Englois, Gallois, et Breton, et Norman.
And again, Un LATINI^R vieil ferant et henu
Molt sot de plet, et molt entresnie su.
And in the manuscript Roman de ROU, which will again be mentioned. L'
archevesque Franches a Jumeges ala,
A Rou, et a sa gent par LATINIER parla.
We find it in Froissart, tom. iv. c. 87. And in other ancient French writers.
In the old Norman poem on the subject of king Dermod's expulsion from his
kingdom of Ireland, in the Lambeth library, it seems more properly to signify,
in a limited sense, the king's domestic SECRETARY. Par son demein^ LATINIER
Que moi conta de luy l' histoire, etc.
See lord Lyttelton's Hist. Hen ii. vol. iv. App. p. 270. We might here render
it literally his Latinist, an officer retained by the king to draw up the
public instruments in Latin. As in DOMESDAI-BOOK. "Godwinus accipitrarius, Hugo
LATINARIUS, Milo portarius." MS. Excerpt. penes me. But in both the last
instances the word may bear its more general and extensive signification.
Camden explains LATIMER by interpreter. Rem. p. 158. See also p. 151. edit.
1674.
latimer.
What scho said told Vortager.
"Sir, Breg seid, Rowen you gretis,
"And king callis and lord you Esteems.
letis.
"This es there custom and there gest,
"When they are at the ale or fest.
"Ilk man that louis quare him think,
"Salle say Wosseille, and to him drink.
"He that bidis salle say, Wassaille,
"The the other salle say again, Drinkhaille.
"That sais Wosseille drinkis of the cop,
"Kissand Kissing.
his felaw he gives it up.
"Drinkheille, he sais, and drink there of,
"Kissand him in bourd and Sport, joke.
skof."
The king said, as the knight began To signify.
ken,
Drinkheille, smil^nd on Rouewen.
Rouwen drank as hire list,
And gave the king, Since, afterward.
sine him kissed.
There was the first wassaille in deed,
And that first of fame Went.
gede.
Of that wassaille men told great tale,
And wassaille when they were at ale.
And drinkheille to tham that drank,
Thus was wassaille Taken.
taken to thank.
Feel Many times.
sithes that maidin Young.
ying,
Wassailed and kissed the king.
Of bodi sche was right Handsome, gracefully shaped, etc.
avenant,
Of fair color, with sweet Countenance.
semblaunt.
Her Attire.
hatire fulle well it seemed,
Mervelik Marvellously.
the king sche Pleased.
quemid.
Out of messure was he glad,
For of that maidin he were all mad.
Drunkenes the feend wroght,
Of that Pagan, heathen.
paen was al his thought.
A meschaunche that time him led.
He asked that paen for to wed.
Hengist Would not fly off a bit.
wild not draw a lite,
Bot granted him all so tite.
And Horse his brother consentid sone.
Her frendis said, it were to done.
They asked the king to gife her Kent,
In douary to take of rent.
O pon that maidin his heart so cast,
That they askid the king made fast.
I wene the king took her that day,
And wedded hire In pagans law. According to the heathenish custom.
on paiens lay.
Of pressed was there no Benediction, blessing.
benison
No mes songen, no orison.
In seisine he had her that night.
Of Kent he gave Hengist the right.
The erelle that time, that Kent all held,
Sir Goragon, that had the scheld,
Of that gift no thing Knew not.
ne wist
To Till.
he was cast out By.
with Hengist Hearne's Gl. Rob. Glo. p. 695.
.
In the second part, copied from Peter Langtoft, the attack of Richard the
first, on a castle held by the Saracens, is thus described.

The dikes were fulle wide that closed the castle about,
And deep on ilka side, with bankis hie without.
Was there non enter that to the castelle began ligge Lying.
,
Bot a streiht kauce Causey.
; at the end a drauht brigge.
With great duble cheynes drauhen over the gate,
And fifti armed suyenes S^^ain^, young men, soldiers.
porters at that yate.
With slenges and magneles Mangonels. vid. supr.
they kast Cast.
to king Rychard
Our christian by parcelles kasted ageynward In Langtoft's French, "Dis seriauntz
des plus feres e de melz vanez,
Devaunt le cors le Reis sa targe ount portez."

.
Ten sergeauns of the best his targe began him bear
That egre were and pressed to covere him and to were Ward, defend.
.
Himself as a geaunt the cheynes in tuo hew,
The targe was his warant Guard, defense.
, that non tille him threw.
Right unto the gate with the targe they yede
Fightand on a gate, undir him the slouh his stead,
Therefore ne wild he sesse "He could not cease."
, alone into the castele
Thorgh tham all wild press on foot faught he fulle well.
And when he was withinne, and fauht as a wild leon,
He fondred the Sarazins otuynne "He formed the Saracens into two parties."
, and fauht as a dragon,
Without the christian began cry, allas! Richard is taken,
Tho Normans were sorry, of contenance began blaken,
To slo down and to stroye never wild they stint
They left for deed no noye Annoy.
, ne for no wound no dynt,
That in went all their pres, maugre the Sarazins all,
And fond Richard on des fightand, and won the halle Chron. p. 182. 183.
.
From these passages it appears, that Robert of Brunne has scarcely more poetry
than Robert of Gloucester. He has however taken care to acquaint his readers,
that he avoided high description, and that sort of phraseology which was then
used by the minstrels and harpers: that he rather aimed to give information
than pleasure, and that he was more studious of truth than ornament. As he
intended his chronicle to be sung, at least by parts, at public festivals, he
found it expedient to apologize for these deficiencies in the prologue; as he
had partly done before in his prologue to the MANUAL OF SINS.

I mad noght for no disours Tale-tellers, Narratores, Lat. Con^eours, Fr.
Seggers in the next line perhaps means the same thing, i. e. Sayers. The
writers either of metrical or of prose romances. See Antholog. Fran. p. 17.
1765. 8vo. Or Disours may signify Discourse, i. ^. adventures in prose. We have
the "Devil's disours," in P. Plowman, fol. xxxi. b. edit. 1550. Disour
precisely signifies a tale-teller at a feast in Gower, Conf. Amant. Lib. vii.
fol. 155. a. edit. Berthel. 1554. He is speaking of the coronation festival of
a Roman Emperor. When he was gladest at his mete,
And every minstrell had plaide
And every DISSOUR had said
Which most was pleasant to his ere.
Du Cange says, that Diseurs were judges of the turney. Diss. Joinv. p. 179.

Ne for seggers no harpours,
Bot for the luf of simple men,
That strange Inglis cannot ken Know.
:
For many it ere It ere, There are.
that strange Inglis
In ryme wate Knew.
never what it is.
I made it not for to be praised,
Bot at the lewed men were aysed Eased.
.
He next mentions several sorts of verse, or prosody; which were then
fashionable among the minstrels, and have been long since unknown. If it were
made in ryme couwce,
Or in strangere or enterlace, etc.
He adds, that the old stories of chivalry had been so disguised by foreign
terms, by additions and alterations, that they were now become unintelligible
to a common audience: and particularly, that the tale of SIR TRISTRAM, the
noblest of all, was much changed from the original composition of its first
author THOMAS.

I see in ^ong in sedgeying tale "Among the romances that are sung, etc."

Of Erceldoune, and Kendale,
Non tham says as thai tham wroght "None recite them as they were first
written."
,
And "As They tell them."
in there saying it semes noght,
That may thou here in Sir Tristram "This you may see, etc."
;
Over gestes Hearne says that Gests were opposed to Romance. Chron. Langt.
Pref. p. 37. But this is a mistake. Thus we have the Geste of king Horn, a
very old metrical Romance. MSS. Harl. 2253. p. 70. Also in the Prologue of
Rychard Cuer de Lion. King Richard is the b^st
That is found in any jeste.
And the passage in the text is a proof against his assertion. Chaucer, in the
following passage, by JESTOURS, does not mean Jesters in modern signification,
but writers of adventures. House of Fame, v. 108. And JESTOURS that tellen tales
Both of weeping and of game.
In the House of Fame he also places those who wrote "old Gestes." v. 425. It
is however obvious to observe from whence the present term Jest arose. See
Fauchet, Rec. p. 73. In P. Plowman, we have Job's Jestes. fol. xlv. b. Job the
gentyl in his jestes, greatly witnesses.That is, "Job in the account of his
Life." In the same page we have, And japers and judgelers, and jangelers of
jestes. That is, Minstrels, Reciters of tales. Other illustrations of this word
will occur in the course of the work. Ch^nsons de gestes were common in France
in the thirteenth century among the troubadours. See Mem. concernant les
principaux monumens de l' histoire de France, Mem. Lit. xv. p. 582. By the very
learned and ingenious M. de la Curne de Saint Palaye. I add the two first
lines of a manuscript entitled, Art de K^l^nd^r par Rauf, who lived 1256. Bibl.
Bodl. J. b. 2. Th. [Langb. MSS. 5. 439.] De geste ne voil pas chanter,
Ne veilles estoires el canter.
There is even Gesta Pass^onis et Resurrectionis Christi, in many manuscript
libraries.
it has the steem Esteem.
,
Over all that is or was,
If men yt said as made Thomas. --
Thai said in so quaynte Inglis
That manyone Many a one.
wate not what it is. --
And forsooth I couth naught
So strange Inglis as thai wroght.
On this account, he says, he was persuaded by his friends to write his
chronicle in a more popular and easy style, that would be better understood.

And men besought me many a time,
To turn it bot in light ryme.
Thai said if I in strange it turn
To here it manyon would skurne Scorn.
,
For it are names fulle selcouthe Strange.

That ere not used now in mouth. --
In the house of Sixille I was a throw A little while.

Danz Robert of Meltone, "Sir Robert of Malton." It appears from hence that he
was born at Malton in Lincolnshire.
that ye know,
Did it write for felawes sake,
When thai wild solace make Pref. Rob. Glouc. p. 57. 58.
.
Erceldoune and Kendale are mentioned, in some of these lines of Brunne, as old
romances or popular tales. Of the latter I can discover no traces in our
ancient literature. As to the former, Thomas Erceldoun, or Ashelington, is said
to have written Prophecies, like those of Merlin. Leland, from the Scalae
Chronicon An ancient French history or Chronicle of England never printed,
which Leland says was translated out of French rhyme into French prose. Coll.
vol. i. P. ii. page 59. edit. 1770. It was probably written or reduced by
Thomas Gray into prose. Londinens. Antiquitat. Cant. lib. i. p. 38. Others
affirm it to have been the work of John Gray, an eminent churchman, about the
year 1212. It begins, in the usual form, with the creation of the world, passes
on to Brutus, and closes with Edward the third.
, says, that "William Banastre One Gilbert Banestre was a poet and musician.
The Prophesies of Banister o^ England are not uncommon among manuscripts. In
the Scotch Prophesies, printed at Edinburgh, 1680, Banaster is mentioned as the
author of some of them. "As Berlington's books and Banester tell us." p. 2.
Again, "Beid has briev^d in his book and Banester also." p. 18. H^ seems to be
confounded with William Banister, a writer of the reign of Edward the third.
Berlington is probably John Bridlington, an augustine canon of Bridlington, who
wrote three books of Carmina Vaticinalia, in which he pretends to foretell many
accidents that should happen to England. MSS. Digb. Bibl. Bodl. 89. And 186.
There are also Versus Vaticinales under his name, MSS. Bodl. NE. E. ii. 17. f.
21. He died, aged sixty, in 1379. He was canonised. There are many other
Prophetiae, which seem to have been fashionable at this time, bound up with
Bridlington in MSS. Digb. 186.
, and Thomas Erceldoune, spoke words in figure as were the prophecies of Merlin
Ub supr. p. 510.
." In the library of Lincoln cathedral, there is a metrical romance entitled,
THOMAS OF ERSELDOWN, which begins with the usual address, Lordynges both great
and small. In the Bodleian library, among the theological works of John Lawern,
monk of Worcester, and student in theology at Oxford, about the year 1448,
written with his own hand, a fragment of an English poem occurs, which begins
thus: Joly chepert [sheperd] of Askeldowne MSS. Bodl. 692. fol.
.
In the British Museum a manuscript English poem occurs, with this French title
prefixed, "La Countess de Dunbar, demanda a Thomas Essedoune quant la guere d'
Escoce prendret fyn MSS. Harl. 2253. f. 127. It begins thus, When man as mad a
kingge of a capped man
When mon is lever other monnes thing then is owen.

." This was probably our prophesier Thomas of Erceldown. One of his predictions
is mentioned in an ancient Scots poem entitled, A NEW YEAR'S GIFT, written in
the year 1562, by Alexander Scott Ancient Scots poems, Edinb. 1770. 12mo. p.
194. See the ingenious editor's notes, p. 312.
. One Thomas Leirmouth, or Rymer, was also a prophetic bard, and lived at
Erslingtoun, sometimes perhaps pronounced Erseldoun. This is therefore probably
the same person. One who personates him, says, In ERSLINGTOUN I dwell at hame,
THOMAS RYMER men call me.
He has left vaticinal rhymes, in which he predicted the union of Scotland with
England, about the year 1279 Se^ Scotch Prophesies, ut supr. p. 19. 11. 13. 18.
36. viz. The Prophesy of Thomas Rymer. Pr. "Stille on my ways as I went."
. Fordun mentions several of his prophecies concerning the future state of
Scotland Lib. x. cap. 43. 44. I think he is also mentioned by Spotswood. See
Dempst. xi. 810.
.

Our author, Robert de Brunne, also translated into English rhymes the treatise
of cardinal Bonaventura, his cotemporary He died 1272. Many of Bonaventure's
tracts were at this time translated into English. In the ^arleian manuscripts
we have, "The Treatis that is kallid Prickynge of Love, made by a Friar menour
Bonaventure, that was Cardinal of the court of Rome." 2254. 1. f. 1. This
book belonged to Dame Alys Braintwat "the worchypfull prioras of Dartforde."
This is not an uncommon manuscript.
, De coena et passione domini et poenis S. Mariae Virginis, with the following
title. "Medytaciuns of the Soper of our Lord Jhesu, and also of his Passyun,
and eke of the Peynes of his sweet Modyr maiden Marye, the which made in Latin
Bonaventure Cardynall MSS. Harl. 1701. f. 84. The first line is, Almighti god
in trinite. It was never printed.
." But I forbear to give further extracts from this writer, who appears to have
possessed much more industry than genius, and cannot at present be read with
much pleasure. Yet it should be remembered, that even such a writer as Robert
de Brunne, uncouth and unpleasing as he naturally seems, and chiefly employed
in turning the theology of his age into rhyme, contributed to form a style, to
teach expression, and to polish his native tongue. In the infancy of language
and composition, nothing is wanted but writers: at that period even the most
artless have their use.

Robert Grosthead, bishop of Lincoln See DISS. ii. -- The author and translator
are often thus confounded in manuscripts. To an old English religious poem on
the holy Virgin, we find the following title. Incipit quid^m cantus quem
compo^uit frater Thom^s de Hales de ordine fratrum minorum, etc. MSS. Coll.
Jes. Oxon. 85. supr. citat. But this is the title of our friar's original, a
Latin hymn de B. MARIA VIRGIN, improperly adopted in the translation. Thomas
de Hales was a Franciscan friar, a doctor of the Sorbonne, and ^^ourished about
the year 1340. We shall see other proofs of this.
, who died in 1253, is said in some verses of Robert de Brunne, quoted above,
to have been fond of the meter and music of the minstrels. He was most attached
to the French minstrels, in whose language he has left a poem, never printed,
of some length. This was probably translated into English rhyme about the reign
of Edward the first. Nor is it quite improbable, if the translation was made at
this period, that the translator was Robert de Brunne; especially as he
translated another of Grosthead's pieces. It is called by Leland Chateau
d'Amour Script. Brit. p. 285.
. But in one of the Bodleian manuscripts of this book we have the following
title, Romance par Mestre Robert Grosseteste MSS. Bodl. NE. D. 69.
. In another it is called, Ce est la vie de D. Jhu de sa humanite fet a ordine
de Saint Robert Grosseteste ke fut eveque de Nichole F. 16. Laud. fol. membran.
The word Nicole is perfectly French, for Lincoln. See likewise MSS. Bodl. E. 4.
14.
. And in this copy, a very curious apology to the clergy is prefixed to the
poem, for the language in which it is written In the handwriting of the poem
itself, which is very ancient.
. "Et quamvis lingua romana [romance] coram CLERICIS SAPOREM SUAVITATIS non
habeat, tamen pro laicis qui minus intelligunt opusculum illud aptum est f. 1.
So also in M^S. C. C. C. Oxon. 232. In MSS. Harl. 1121. 5. "De Roberd
Grosseteste le evesque de Nichole un tretis en Franceis, del commencement du
monde, etc." f. 156. Cod. membran.
." This piece professes to treat of the creation, the redemption, the day of
judgment, the joys of heaven, and the torments of hell: but the whole is a
religious allegory, and under the ideas of chivalry the fundamental articles of
christian belief are represented. It has the air of a system of divinity
written by a troubadour. The poet, in describing the advent of Christ, supposes
that he entered into a magnificent castle, which is the body of the immaculate
virgin. The structure of this castle is conceived with some imagination, and
drawn with the pencil of romance. The poem begins with these lines.

Ki pense ben, ben peut dire:
Sanz penser ne poet suffice:
De null bon our commencer
Deu nos don't de li penser
De ki par ki, en ki, sont
Tos les biens ki font en el mond.
But I hasten to the translation, which is more immediately connected with our
present subject, and has this title. "Her bygenet a tretys that is yclept
CASTLE OF LOVE that biscop Grosteyzt made ywis for lewd men's byhove Bibl.
Bodl. MS. Vernon, f. 292. This translation was never printed: and is, I
believe, a rare manuscript.
." Then follows the prologue or introduction.

That good thinks good may do,
And God wol help him thar to:
Ffor nas never good work wrougt
With out biginninge of good thougt.
Ne never was wrougt non vuel Well, good.
thing
That vuel thougt nas the biginnyng.
God ffuder, and sone and holigoste
That all thing on eorthe sixth F. hext. highest.
and wost,
That one God art and thrillihod Trinity.
,
And threo persons in one hod Unity.
,
Withouten end and by ginninge,
To whom we ougten over all thing,
Worschepe him with true love,
That kineworthe king art us above,
In whom, of whom, thorw whom beoth,
All the good schipes that we hire i seoth,
He leve us thenche and worchen so,
That he us schylde from ure fo,
All we habbeth to help neode
That we ne beth all of one theode,
Ne i boren in one land,
Ne one speech undirstonde,
Ne mow we al Latin wite Understand.

Ne Ebreu ne Gru Greek. In John Trevisas's dialogue concerning the translation
of the Polychronicon, MSS. Harl. 1900. b. f. 42. "Aristotile's books, etc. were
translated out of grue into Latin. Also with praying of king Charles [the
Bald], Johan Scott translated Denis books out of gru into Latin."
that beth i write,
Ne Ffrench, ne this other spechen,
That me mihte in world sechen.
To herie god our derworthi drihte "To bless God our beloved lord."
,
As vch mon ougte with all his mihte;
Loft song syngen to god erne Earnestly.
,
With such speech as he con learn:
Ne monnes mouth ne be i dut
Ne his ledene Language.
i hud,
To serven his god that him wrougte,
And maade all the world of nougte.
Of Englische I shall nir resun schowen
Ffor hem that can not i known,
Nouther French ne Latin
On Englisch I chulle tullen him.
Wherefor the world was i wroht,
There after how he was by tauht,
Adam ure ffader to ben his,
With all the merthe o^ paradys
To wonen and welden to such end
Til that he scholde to hevene wend,
And hou sone he hit fu les
And seththen hou for bouht was,
Thurw the he kings sone
That here in eorthe would come,
Ffor his sustren that were to boren,
And ffor a prison thas was for loren
And hou he made as e schal heren
That heo i cust and sauht weren
And to wruche a castle he alihte, etc.
But the following are the most poetical passages of this poem.

God nolde a lihte in none manner,
But in feir stude Place.
and in clear,
In feir and clean siker hit was,
There god almihti his in ches "Chose his habitation."
^
In a CASTLE well comeliche,
Much Great.
and ffeire, and loveliche,
That is the castle of all flower,
Of solas and of socour,
In the mere he stont by twene two,
Ne has he forlak for no fo:
For the tour La tur est si bien en clos. Fr. Orig.
is so well with outen,
So deep i diched al abouten,
That non kunnes asayling,
Ne may him derven fer no thing;
He stont on hei rock and sound,
And is y planed to the ground,
That there may won non vuel Vile.
thing,
Ne derve ne gynnes castyng;
And thaug he be so lovliche,
He is so dredful and hatcliche,
To all thulke that been his fon,
That heo flen him everichon;
Ffor small toures that beth abouten,
To witen the heige toure withouten,
Sethe Tres bailes en tour. Fr. Orig.
beoth three bayles withalle Moreover there are three, etc.
,
So feir i diht with strunge wall,
As heo beth here after I write,
Ne may no man the Beauty.
feirschipe i wite,
Ne may no tongue ne may hit tell,
Ne thougt think, ne mouth spelle:
On trusti rock heo stondeth fast,
And with deep diches bethe by cast,
And the carnels Kernels. -- Kerneaus bien poli. Fr. Orig.
so stondeth upright,
Well I planed, and feir i dight:
Seven barbicanes there beth i wrouht
With great ginne al by thouht Pur bon engine ^ait. Fr. Orig.
,
And evrichon has gat and toure,
There never fails ne socoure.
Never schal fo him stand with
That thider would flen to sechen grith Counsel.
.
This castle is siker fair abouten,
And is al depeynted withouten,
With threo heowes that well beth seen La chastel est a bell bon
De horse de peint a en virun
De treis culurs diversement.
Fr. Orig.
;
So is the foundement al grene,
That to the rock fast lith.
Well is that there murthe i since,
Ffor the greneschip lasts evere,
And his heuh ne leoseth nevere,
Sethen abouten that other heug
So is ynde so is blu Si est ynde si est blu. Fr. Orig.
.
That the midel heug we clepeth ariht
And schyneth so fair and so briht.
The thridde heug an ovemast
Over wrigeth al and so is i cast
That withinnen and withouten,
The castle lihteth al abouten,
And is raddore than any rose schal
That shunneth as hit barnd Burned, on fire.
were Plus est vermail ke nest rose
E piert un ardant chose.
Fr. Orig.
.
Withinne the castle is whit schinynge
So As.
the snows that is snewynge,
And casts that liht so wide,
After long the tour and be side,
That never comes there woe ne woug,
As swetnesse there is ever i noug.
Amydde In mi la tur plus hautein^
Est surdant une funtayne
Dunt issent quater ruissell.
Ki bruinet par le gravel, etc.
F^. Orig.
the heige toure is springynge
A well that ever is eorninge Running.

With four stremes that strikes well,
And erneth upon the gravel,
And fulleth the duches about the wall,
Much bliss there is over al,
Ne dar he seek non other leche
That may riht of this water eleche.
In En cele bell tur a bone
A de yvoire un trone
Ke plusa ei^^i blanchor
Ci en mi este la beau jur
Par engine e^t compassez, etc.
Fr. Orig.
thulke derworthi fair toure
There stont a trone with much honor,
Of whit yvori and feirore of liht
Than the someres day when heis briht,
With cumpas i thrown and with gin al i do
Seven steps there beoth thereto, etc.
The ffoure small toures abouten,
That with the heige tour withouten,
Ffour had thewes that about hire i seoth,
Ffoure vertus cardinals beoth, etc.
And Les treis bailles du chastel
Ki sunt overt au kernel
Qui a compass sunt en virun
E defendent le dungun.
Fr. Orig.
which beoth threo bayles get,
That with the carnels ben so well i set,
And i cast with cumpas and walled abouten
That wileth the heihe tour with outen:
Bote the inmost bail i wot
Bitokeneth hire holy maydenhode, etc.
The middle bail that wite ge,
Bitokeneth hire holy chastity
And sethen the overmast bail
Bitokeneth hire holy sposaile, etc.
The seven kernels abouten,
That with greot gin beon y wrought withouten,
And witeth this castle so well,
With arwe and with quarrel Les barbicanes ^eet
Kis horse de bailles sunt fait,
Ki bien gardent le chastel,
E de seete e de quarrel.
Fr. Orig.
,
That beoth the seven virtues with wunne
To overcum the seven deadly sin, etc. Afterward the fountain is explained
to be God's grace: Charity is constable of the cast^e, etc. etc.

It was undoubtedly a great impediment to the cultivation and progressive
improvement of the English language at these early periods, that the best
authors chose to write in French. Many of Robert Grosthead's pieces are indeed
in Latin; yet where the subject was popular, and not immediately addressed to
learned readers, he adopted the Romance or French language, in preference to
his native English. Of this, as we have already seen, his MANUEL PECHE, and his
CHATEAU D' AMOR, are sufficient proofs, both in prose and verse: and his
example and authority must have had considerable influence in encouraging this
practice. Peter Langtoft, our Augustine canon of Bridlington, not only compiled
the large chronicle of England, above recited, in French; but even translated
Herbert Boscam's Latin Life of Thomas of Beckett into French rhymes Pits. p.
890. Append. Who with great probability supposes him to have been an Englishman.
. John Hoveden, a native of London, doctor of divinity, and chaplain to queen
Eleanor mother of Edward the first, wrote in French rhymes a book entitled,
Rosarium de Nativitate, Passione, Ascensione, Jhesu Christi MSS. Bibl. C. C. C.
Cant. G. 16. where it is also called the Nightingale. Pr. "Alme fesse lit de
peresse." Our author, John Hoveden, was also skilled in sacred music, and a
great writer of Latin hymns. He died, and was buried, at Hoveden, 1275. Pits.
p. 356. Bale, v. 79.

There is an old French metrical life of Tobiah, which the author, most
probably an Englishman, says he undertook at the request of William, Prior of
Kenilworth in Warwickshire. MSS. Jes. Coll. Oxon. 85. supr. citat.

Le prior Gwilleyme me pry
De l' eglyse seynte Marie
De Kenelworth an Ardenne,
Ki port le plus haute pain
De charity, ke null eglyse
Del reaume a devyse
Ke jeo liz en romaunz le vie
De k^lui ki ont nun Tobie, etc.

. Various other proofs have before occurred. Lord Lyttelton quotes from the
Lambeth library a manuscript poem in French or Norman verse on the subject of
king Dermod's expulsion from Ireland, and the recovery of his kingdom Hist.
Hen. ii. vol. iv. p. 270. Notes. It was translated into prose by Sir George
Carew in Q. Elisabeth's time: this translation was printed by Harris in his
HIBERNIA. It was probably written about 1190. See Ware, p. 56. And compare
Walpole's Anecd. Paint. 1. 28. Notes. The Lambeth manuscript seems to be but a
fragment. viz. MSS. Bibl. Lamb. Hib. A. See supr. p. 70.
. I could mention many others. Anonymous French pieces both in prose and verse,
and written about this time, are innumerable in our manuscript repositories I
have before hinted that it was sometimes customary to intermix Latin with
French. As thus. MSS. Harl. 2253. f. 137. b.

Di^u roy de Mageste,
Ob personas trinas,
Nostre roy e sa meyne
Ne perire sinas, etc.
Again, ibid^ f. 76. Where a lover, an Englishman, addresses his mistress who
was of Paris.

Dum ludis floribus velut lacinia,
Le dieu d' amor moi tient en tiel Angustia, etc.
Sometimes their poetry was half French and half English. As in a song to the
holy virgin on our Savior's passion. Ibid. f. 83.

Maiden mother mild, oyez cel oreysoun,
From shome thou me shilde, e de ly mal feloun:
For love of thine child me menez de tresoun,
Ich was wod and wild, ore su en prisoun, etc.
In the same manuscript I find a French poem probably written by an Englishman,
and in the year 1300, containing the adventures of Gilote and Johanne, two
ladies of gallantry, in various parts of England and Ireland; particularly at
Winchester and Pontefract. f. 66. b. The curious reader is also referred to a
French poem, in which the poet supposes that a minstrel, jugleour, traveling
from London, clothed in a rich tabard, met the king and his retinue. The king
asks him many questions; particularly his lord's name, and the price of his
horse. The minstrel evades all the king's questions by impertinent answers; and
at last presumes to give his majesty advice. Ibid. f. 107. b.


. Yet this fashion proceeded rather from necessity and a principle of
convenience, than from affectation. The vernacular English, as I have before
remarked, was rough and unpolished: and although these writers possessed but
few ideas of taste and elegance, they embraced a foreign tongue, almost equally
familiar, and in which they could convey their sentiments with greater ease,
grace, and propriety. It should also be considered, that our most eminent
scholars received a part of their education at the university of Paris.
Another, and a very material circ^mstance, concurred to countenance this
fashionable practice of composing in French. It procured them readers of rank
and distinction. The English court, for more than two hundred years after the
conquest, was totally French: and our kings, either from birth, kindred, or
marriage, and from a perpetual intercourse, seem to have been more closely
connected with France than with England. It was however fortunate that these
French pieces were written, as some of them met with their translators: who
perhaps unable to aspire to the praise of original writers, at least by this
means contributed to adorn their native tongue: and who very probably would not
have written at all, had not original writers, I mean their cotemporaries who
wrote in French, furnished them with models and materials.

Hearne, to whose diligence even the poetical antiquarian is much obliged, but
whose conjectures are generally wrong, imagines, that the old English metrical
romance, called RICHARD CUER DE LION, was written by Robert de Brunne. It is
at least probable, that the leisure of monastic life produced many rhymers.
From proofs here given we may fairly conclude, that the monks often wrote for
the minstrels: and although our Gilbertine brother of Brunne chose to relate
true stories in plain language, yet it is reasonable to suppose, that many of
our ancient tales in verse containing fictitious adventures, were written,
although not invented, in the religious houses. The romantic history of Guy
earl of Warwick, is expressly said, on good authority, to have been written by
Walter of Exeter, a Franciscan Friar of Carocus in Cornwall, about the year
1292 Carew's Surv. Cornw. p. 59. edit. ut supr. I suppose Carew means the
metrical Romance of GUY. But Bale says that Walter wrote Vitam Guidonis, which
seems to imply a prose history. x. 78. Giraldus Cambrensis also wrote Guy's
history. Hearne has printed an Historia Guidonis de Warwik, Append. ad Annal.
Dunstaple, number. xi. It was extracted from Girald. Cambrens. hist. Reg.
West-Sax. capit. xi. by Girardus Cornubiensis. Lydgate's life of Guy, never
printed, is translated from this Girardus; as Lydgate himself informs us at the
end. MSS. Bibl. Bodl. Laud. D. 31. f. 64. Tit. Her^ gyuneth the liff of Guy of
Warwyk. Out of the Latin made by the Chronycler
Called of old GIRARD CORNUBYENCE:
Which wrote the dedis, with great diligence,
Of them that were in We^tsex crowned kings, etc.
See Wharton, Angl. Sacr. i. p. 89. Some have thought, that Girardus
Cornubiensis and Giraldus Cambrensis were the same persons. This passage of
Lydgate may perhaps show the contrary. We have also in the same Bodleian
manuscript, a poem on Guy and Colbrand, viz. MSS. Laud. D. 31. f. 87. More will
be said on this subject.
. The libraries of the monasteries were full of romances. Bevis of Southampton,
in French, was in the library of the abbey of Leicester See Registrum Librorum
omnium et Jocalium in monasteri^ S. Maria^ de Pratis prope Leycestriam. fol.
132. b. In MSS. Bibl. Bodl. Laud. I. 75. This catalogue was written by Will.
Charity one of the monks, A. D. 1517. fol. 139.
. In that of the abbey of Glastonbury, we find Liber de Excidio Trojae, Gesta
Ricardi Regis, and Gesta Alexandri Regis, in the year 1247 Hearne's Joann.
Glaston. Catal. Bibl. Glaston. p. 435. One of the books on Troy is called bonus
et magnus. There is also "Liber de Captione Antiochiae, Gallice. legibilis."
ibid.
. These were some of the most favorite subjects of romance, as I shall show
hereafter. In a catalogue of the library of the abbey of Peterborough are
recited, Amys and Amelion The same Romance is in MSS. Harl. Brit. Mus. 2386..
42. See Du Cang. Gloss. Lat. i. Ind. Auctor. p. 193. There is an old manuscript
French MORALITY on this subject, Comment Amille tue ses deux enfans pour guerir
Amiss son compagnon, etc. Beauchamps, Rech. Theatr. Fr. p. 109. There is a
Fr^nch metrical romance Histoire d'Amys et Amilion, Brit. Mus. MSS. Reg. 12. C.
xii. 9.
, Sir Tristram, Guy de Burgoyne, and Gesta Osuelis There is a Romance called
OTUEL, MSS. Bibl. Adv. Edingb. W. 4. 1. xxviii. I think he is mentioned in
Charlemagne's story. He is converted to christianity, and marries Charlemagne's
daughter.
, all in French: together with Merlin's Prophecies, Turpin's Charlemagne, and
the Destruction of Troy Gunton's Peterb. p. 108. seq. -- I will give some of
the titles as they stand in the catalogue. Dares Phrygius de Excidio Trojae,
bis. p. 180. Prophetiae Merlini versifice. p. 182. Gesta Caroli secundum
Turpinum. p. 187. Gesta Aeneae post destructionem Trojae. p. 198. Bellum contra
Runcivallum, p. 202. There are also the two following articles, viz. "Certamen
inter regem Johannem et Barons, versi^ice. Per H. de Davenech." p. 188. This I
have never seen, nor know any thing of the author. "Versus de ludo scaccorum."
p. 195.
. Among the books given to Winchester college by the founder William of
Wykeham, a prelate of high rank, about the year 1387, we have Chronicon Trojae
Ex archivis Coll. Wint.
. In the library of Windsor college, in the reign of Henry the eighth, were
discovered in the midst of missals, psalters, and homilies, Duo libri Gallici
de Romances, de quibus unus liber de ROSE, et alius difficilis materiae Dugd.
Mon. iii. Eccles. Collegiat. p. 80.
. This is the language of the king's commissioners, who searched the archives
of the college: the first of these two French romances is perhaps John de
Meun's Roman de la Rose. A friar, in Pierce Plowman's Visions, is said to be
much better acquainted with the Rimes of Robin Hood, and Randal of Chester,
than with his Paternoster Fol. xxvi. b. edit. 1550.
. The monks, who very naturally sought all opportunities of amusement in their
retired and confined situations, were fond of admitting the minstrels to their
festivals; and were hence familiarised to romantic stories. Seventy shillings
were expended on minstrels, who accompanied their songs with the harp, at the
feast of the installation of Ralph abbot of Saint Augustin's at Canterbury, in
the year 1309. At this magnificent solemnity, six thousand guests were present
in and about the hall of the abbey Dec. Script. p. 2011.
. It was not deemed an occurrence unworthy to be recorded, that when Adam de
Orleton, bishop of Winchester, visited his cathedral priory of Saint Swithin in
that city, a minstrel named Herbert was introduced, who sung the Song of
Colbrond a Danish giant, and the tale of Queen Emma delivered from the
plough-shares, in the hall of the prior Alexander de Herriard, in the year
1338. I will give this very curious article, as it appears in an ancient
register of the priory. "Et cantabat Joculator quidam nomine Herebertus
CANTICUM Colbrondi, necnon Gestum Emme regine a judicio ignis liberate, in aula
prioris Registr. Priorat. S. Swithini Winton. MSS. pergamen. in Archiv. de
Wolvesey Wint. These were local stories. Guy fought and conquered Colbrond a
Danish champion, just without the northern walls of the city of Winchester, in
a meadow to this day called Danemarch: and Colbrond's battle-ax was kept in the
treasury of S. Swithin's priory till the dissolution. Th. Rudb. apud Wharton,
Angl. Sacr. i. 211. This history remained in rude painting against the walls of
the north transept of the cathedral till within my memory. Queen Emma was a
patroness of this church, in which she underwent the trial of walking blindfold
over nine red hot ploughshares. Colbrond is mentioned in the old romanc^ of the
Squyr of Low Degree. Sign^t. a. iii. Or else so doughty of my hand
As was the gyaunte sir Colbronde.
See what is said above of Guy earl of Warwick, who will again be mentioned.
." In an annual accompt-roll of the Augustine priory of Bicester in
Oxfordshire, for the year 1431, the following entries relating to this subject
occur, which I choose to exhibit in the words of the original. " DONA PRIORIS.
Et in datis cuidam citharizatori in die sancti Jeronimi, viii. d. -- Et in
datis alt^ri citharizatori in ffesto Apostolorum Simonis et Jude cognomine
Hendy, xii d. -- Et in datis cuidam minstrallo domini le Talbot infra natale
domini, xii. d. -- Et in datis ministrallis domini le Strange in die
Epiphanie, xx. d. -- Et in datis duobus ministrallis domini Lovell in crastino
S. Marci evangeliste, xvi. d. -- Et in datis ministrallis ducis Glo^estrie in
ffesto nativitatis beat Marie, iii s. iv d." I must add, as it likewise paints
the manners of the monks, "Et in datis cuidam Ursario, iiii d. Ex. Orig. in
Rotul. pergamen. Tit. "Compotus dni Ricardi Parentyn Prioris, et fratris Ric.
Albon canonici, bursarii ibid^m, de omnibus bonis per ^osdem receptis et
liberatis a crastino Michaelis anno Henrici Sexti post conquestum octavo usque
in idem crastinum anno R. Henrici praedicti nono." In Thesauriar. Coll. SS.
Trin. Oxon. Bishop Kennet has printed a Computus of the same monastery under
the same reign, in which three or four entries of the same sort occur. Paroch.
Antiq. p. 578.
" In the prior's accounts of the Augustine canons of Maxtoke in Warwickshire,
of various years in the reign of Henry the sixth, one of the styles, or general
heads, is DE JOCULATORIBUS ET MIMIS. I will, without apology, produce some of
the particular articles; not distinguishing between Mimi, Joculatores,
Jocatores, Lusores, and Citharistae: who all seem alternately, and at different
times, to have exercised the same arts of popular entertainment. "Joculatori in
septimana S. Michaelis, iv d. -- Cithariste tempore natalis domini et aliis
jocatoribus, iv d. -- Mimis de Solihull, vi d. -- Mimis de Coventry, xx d. --
Mimo domini Ferrers, vi d. -- Lusoribus de Eton, viii d. -- Lusoribus de
Coventry, viii d. -- Lusoribus de Daventry, xii d. -- Mimis de Coventry, xii d.
-- Mimis domini de Asteley, xii d. -- Item iiii. mimis domini de Warewyck, x d.
-- Mimo ceco, ii d. -- Sex mimis domini de Clynton. -- Duobus Mimis de Rugeby,
x d. -- Cuidam cithariste, vi d. -- Mimis domini de Asteley, xx d. -- Cuidam
cithariste, vi d. -- Cithariste de Coventry, vi. d. -- Duobus citharistis de
Coventry, viii d. -- Mimis de Rugeby, viii d. -- Mimis domini de Buckeridge, xx
d. -- Mimis domini de Stafford, ii s. -- Lusoribus de Coleshille, viii d. Ex
orig. penes me.
" Here we may observe, that the minstrels of the nobility, in whose families
they were constantly retained, traveled about the county to the neighboring
monasteries; and that they generally received better gratuities for these
occasional performances than the others. Solihull, Rugby, Coleshill, Eton, or
Nun-Eton, and Coventry, are all towns situated at no great distance from the
priory In the ancient annual rolls of account of Winchester college, there are
many articles of this sort. The few following, extracted from a great number,
may serve as a specimen. They are chiefly in the reign of Edward iv. viz. In
the year 1481. "Et in sol. ministrallis dom. Regis venientibus ad collegium xv.
die Aprilis, cum 12 d. solut. ministrallis dom. Episcopi Wynton venientibus ad
collegium primo die junii, iiii s. iiii d. -- Et in dat. ministrallis dom.
Arundell ven. ad Coll. cum viii d. dat. ministrallis dom. de Lawarr, ii s. iiii
d." -- In the year 1483. "Sol. ministrallis dom. Regis ven. ad Coll. iii s.
iiii d." In the year 1472. "Et in dat. ministrallis dom. Regis cum viii d. dat.
duobus Berewardis ducis Clarentie, xx d. -- Et in dat. Johanni Stulto quondam
dom. de Warewyco, cum iiii d. dat. Thome Nevyle taborario. -- Et in datis
duobus ministrallis ducis Glocestrie, cum iiii d. dat. uni ministrallo ducis de
Northumberlond, viii d. -- Et in datis duobus citharatoribus ad vices venient.
ad collegium viii d." -- In the year 1479. "Et in datis satrapis Wynton
venientibus ad coll. festo Epiphanie, cum xii d. dat. ministrallis dom.
episcopi venient. ad coll. infra octavas epiphanie, iii s." -- In the year
1477. "Et in dat. ministrallis dom. Principis venient. ad coll. festo
Ascensionis Domini, cum xx d. dat. ministrallis dom. Regis, v s." -- In the
year 1464. "Et in dat. ministrallis comitis Kancie venient. ad Coll. in mense
julii, iiii s. iiii d." -- In the year 1467. "Et in datis quatuor mimis dom. de
Arundell venient. ad Coll. xiii. die ffebr. ex curialitate dom. Custodis, ii
s." -- In the year 1466. "Et in dat. satrapis, [ut supr.] cum ii s. dat. iiii.
interludentibus et J. Meke citharistae codem ffesto, iiii s." -- In the year
1484. "Et in dat. uni ministrallo dom. principis, et in aliis ministrallis
ducis Glocestrie v. die julii, xx d." -- The minstrels of the bishop, of lord
Arundel, and the duke of Gloucester, occur very frequently. In domo muniment.
coll. praedict. in cista ex orientali latere.

In rolls of the reign of Henry the sixth, the countess of Westmoreland, sister
of cardinal Beaufort, is mentioned as being entertained in the college; and in
her retinue were the minstrels of her household, who received gratuities. Ex
Rot. Comp. orig.

In these rolls there is an entry, which seems to prove that the Lusores were a
sort of actors in dumb show or masquerade. Rot. ann. 1467. "Dat lusoribus de
civitate Winton venientibus ad collegium in apparatu suo men's. julii, v s. viii
d." This is a large reward. I will add from the same rolls, ann. 1479. "In dat.
Joh. Pontisbery and socio ludentibus in aula in die circumcisionis, ii s."


. Nor must I omit that two minstrels from Coventry made part of the festivity
at the consecration of John, prior of this convent, in the year 1432, viz. "
Dat. duobus mimis de Coventry in die consecrationis prioris, xii d. Ibid. It
appears that the Coventry-men were in high repute for their performances of
this sort. In the entertainment presented to queen Elisabeth at Killingworth
castle, in the year 1575, The Coventrymen exhibited "their old storiall sheaw."
Laneham's Narrative, etc. p. 32. Minstrels were hired from Coventry to perform
at Holy Cross feast at Abingdon, Berks, 1422. Hearne's Lib. Nig Scacc. ii. p.
598. See an account of their play on Corpus Christi day, in Stevens's
Monasticon, i. p. 138. And Hearne's Fordun, p. 1450. sub. an. 1492.
" Nor is it improbable, that some of our greater monasteries kept minstrels of
their own in regular pay. So early as the year 1180, in the reign of Henry the
second, Jeffrey the harper received a corrody, or annuity, from the Benedictine
abbey of Hide near Winchester Madox, Hist. Exchequer, p. 251. Where he is
styled, "Galfridus citharoedus."
; undoubtedly on condition that he should serve the monks in the profession of
a harper on public occasions. The abbeys of Conway and Stratflur in Wales
respectively maintained a bard Powel's CAMBRIA. To the Reader. page 1. edit.
1581.
: and the Welsh monasteries in general were the grand repositories of the
poetry of the British bards Evans's Diss. de Bardis. Specimens of Welsh poetry.
p. 92. Wood relates a story of two itinerant priests coming, toward night, to
a cell of Benedictines near Oxford, where, on a supposition of their being
mimes or minstrels, they gained admittance. But the cellarer, sacrist, and
others of the brethren, hoping to have been entertained with their
gesticulatoriis ludicrisque artibus, and finding them to be nothing more than
two indigent ecclesiastics who could only administer spiritual consolation, and
being consequently disappointed of their mirth, beat them and turned them out
of the monastery. Hist. Antiq. Univ. Oxon. i. 67. Under the year 1224.
.

In the statutes of New-college at Oxford, given about the year 1380, the
founder bishop William of Wykeham orders his scholars, for their recreation on
festival days in the hall after dinner and supper, to entertain themselves with
songs, and other diversions consistent with decency: and to recite poems,
chronicles of kingdoms, the wonders of the world, together with the like
compositions, not misbecoming the clerical character. I will transcribe his
words. "Quando ob dei reverentiam aut sue matris, vel alterius fancti
cujuscunque, tempore yemali, ignis in aula sociis ministratur; tunc scolaribus
et sociis post tempus prandii aut cene, liceat gracia recreationis, in aula, in
Cantilenis et aliis solaciis honestis, moram facere condecentem; et Poemata,
regnorum Chronicas, et mundi hujus Mirabilia, ac cetera que statum clericalem
condecorant, seriosius pertractare Rubric. xviii. The same thing is enjoined in
the statutes of Winchester college, Rubr. xv. I do not remember any such
passage in the statutes of preceding colleges in either university. But this
injunction is afterward adopted in the statutes of Magdalene college; and from
thence, if I recollect right, was copied into those of Corpus Christi, Oxford.
." The latter part of this injunction seems to be an explication of the former:
and on the whole it appears, that the Cantilenae which the scholars should sing
on these occasions, were a sort of Poemata, or poetical Chronicles, containing
general histories of kingdoms Hearne thus understood the passage. "The wise
founder of New college permitted them [metrical chronicles] to be sung by the
fellows and scholars upon extraordinary days." Heming. Cartul. ii. APPEND.
Numb. ix. vi. p. 662.
. It is natural to conclude, that they preferred pieces of English history: and
among Hearne's manuscripts I have discovered some fragments on vellum Given to
him by Mr. Murray. See Heming. Chartul. ii. p. 654. And Rob. Glouc. ii. p. 731.
Nunc MSS. Bibl. Bodl. Oxon. RAWLINS. Cod. 4to. [E. Pr. 87.]
, containing metrical chronicles of our kings; which, from the nature of the
composition seem to have been used for this purpose, and answer our idea of
these general Chronicae regnorum. Hearne supposed them to have been written
about the time of Richard the first Ubi supr.
: but I rather assign them to the reign of Edward the first, who died in the
year 1307. But the reader shall judge. The following fragment begins abruptly
with some rich presents which king Athelstan received from Charles the third,
king of France: a nail which pierced our Savior's feet on the cross, a spear
with which Charlemagne fought against the Saracens and which some supposed to
be the spear which pierced our Savior's side, a part of the holy cross
enclosed in crystal, three of the thorns from the crown on our Savior's head,
and a crown formed entirely of precious stones, which were endued with a
mystical power of reconciling enemies.

There in was closyd a nail great
That went thorw our lordis fete.
Gyt Yet. Moreover.
he presentyd him the spear
That Charles was wont to bear
Agens the Sarasyns in battle;
Many swore and said saunfayle Without doubt. Fr.
,
That with that spear smerte Sharp, strong. So in the Lives of the Saints, MSS.
supr. citat. In the Life of S. ^dmund.

For Saint Edmund had a smerte erde, etc.

i. e. "He had a strong rod in his hand, etc."



Our lord was stungen to the heart.
And a party Part. Piece.
of the holy cross
In crystal done in a cloos.
And three of the thorns kene
That was in Cristes head seen,
And a rich crown of gold
Non rycher king were y scholde,
Y made within and withowt
With pretius stonys all a bowte,
Of each manir virtue thry Three.

The stonys had the maystry
To make friends that evere were fone,
Such a crown was never none,
To none erthelyche mon y wrogth
Sith God made the world of nogth.
King Athelstune was glad and blythe,
And thankud the king of Ffraunce swythe,
Of gyfts nobul and rich
In crystiante was no him leche.
In his time, I understonde,
Was Guy of Warwyk in Inglonde,
And ffor England deed battle
With a mygti gyande, without fail;
His name was hot Colbrond^
Gwy him slough with his hond.
Seven year king Athelston
Held this his kingdom
In Inglond that is so mury,
He dyedde and lythe at Malmesbury To which monastery he gave the fragment of
the holy cross given him by the king of France. Rob. Glouc. p. 276. King
Athelston lovede much Malmesbury y wis,
He gef of the holy cross some, that there gut is.
It is extraordinary that Peter Langto^t should not know where Athelstan was
buried: and as strange that his translator Rob. de Brunne should supply this
defect by mentioning a report that his body was lately found at Hexham in
Northumberland. Chron. p. 32.
.
After him reigned his brother Edmond
And was king of Ingelond,
And he ne reigned here,
But unneth nine year,
Since hit be fall at a feste
At Caunterbury Rob. of Gloucester says that this happened at Pucklechurch near
Bristol. p. 277. But Rob. de Brunne at Canterbury, whither the king went to
hold the feast of S. Austin. p. 33.
a cas unwrest A wicked mischance.
,
As the king at the mete sat
He beheld and under that
Of a thief that was desgyse
Among his knights god and wise;
The king was hesty and sterte uppe
And hent the thief by the top Head.
^
And cast him down on a ston:
The thief brayde out a knyfe a non
And the king to the heart threste,
Or any of his knights weste Perceived.
:
The baronys sterte up anon,
And slough the thief swythe sone,
But arst Arest. First.
he wounded many one,
Through the fflesh and through the bone:
To Glastenbury they bare the king,
And there made his buryinge At Gloucester, says Rob. de Brunne, p. 33. But Rob.
of Gloucester says his body was brought from Pucklechurch, and interred at
Glastonbury: and that hence the town of Pucklechurch became part of the
possessions of Glanstonbury abbey. p. 278.
.
After that Edmund was ded,
Reyned his brother Edred;
Edred reyned here
But unnethe three year, etc.
After him reyned saint Edgare,
A wise king and a war:
Thilke night that he was bore,
Saint Dunstan was glad there fore;
Ffor herd that sweet stevene
Of the angels of hevene:
In the song they song by ryme,
"Y blessed be that ylke time
"That Edgare y bore y was,
"Ffor in his time schal be pas,
"Ever more in his kingdom This song is in Rob. Gl. Chron. p. 281.
."
The while he lives and saint Dunston,
There was so meche great foyson Provision.
,
Of all good in every tonne;
All wyle that last his lyve,
Ne lored he never fight ne stryve.
* * *

The knights of Wales, all and some
Han to swery and oaths hold,
And true to be as y told,
To bring trynge him trewage Ready.
year,
CCC. wolves each ere;
And so they did trewliche
Three year pleyneverlyche,
The ferthe year might they find non
So clean they were all a gone,
* * *

And the king hit hem forgot
For he nolde hem greve,
Edgare was an holy man
That our lord, etc.
Although we have taken our leave of Robert de Brunne, yet as the subject is
remarkable, and affords a striking portraiture of ancient manners, I am tempted
to transcribe that chronicler's description of the presents received by king
Athelstane from the king of France; especially as it contains some new
circumstances, and supplies the defects of our fragment. It is from his version
of Peter Langtoft's chronicle abovementioned.

At the feste of our lady the A^^umpcion,
Went the king fro London to Abindon.
Thider out of France, fro Charles king of fame,
Com the of Boloyn, Adulphus was his name,
And the duke of Burgoyn Edmonde son Reynere.
The brouht king Athelston present withouten pere:
Fro Charles king sanz fail they brouht a gonfaynoun Banner.

That saint Morice in battle before the legioun;
And scharp lance that thrilled Jhesu side;
And a suerd of gold, in the hilte did men hide
Tuo of tho nails that war thorh Jhesu f^te;
Tached Tacked. Fastened.
on the croys, the blood they out let;
And some of the thorns that don were on his heved,
And a fair piece that of the croys leved Remained.
,
That saint Heleyn son at the battle won
Of the soudan of Askalone his name was Madan.
Than blewe the trumpets full loud and full schille,
The king com in to the halle that hardy was of will:
Than spak Reyner Edmunde son, for he was messengere,
"Athelstan, my lord the gretes, Charles that has no pere;
"He sends the this present, and sais, he will him bind
"To the thorh "Thee through."
Ilde thy sistere, and tille all thy kind."
Before the messengers was the maiden brouht,
Of body so gentill was non in earth wrouht;
No non so fair of face, of spech so lusty,
Scho granted before tham all to Charles her body:
And so did the king, and all the baronage,
Mikelle was the richesse they purveied in her passage Chron. p. 29. 30.
Afterward follows the combat of Guy with "a hog [huge] geant, high
Colibrant." As in our fragment. p. 31. See Will. Malms. Gest. Angl. ii. 6. The
lance of Charlemagne is to this day shown among the reli^s of St. Dennis's in
France. Carpentier, Suppl. Gloss. Lat. Du-cang. tom. ii. p. 994. edit. 1766.
.
Another of these fragments, evidently of the same composition, seems to have
been an introduction to the whole. It begins with the martyrdom of saint Alban,
and passes on to the introduction of Wassail, and to the names and division of
England.

And now he is all so hole y fond,
As when he was y leyde on ground.
And gyf ge will not Believe.
trow me,
Goth to Westmynstere, and ye mow se.
In that time Saint Albon,
For Goddys love Suffered.
tholed martyrdom,
And xl. year with schame and Confusion.
schonde
Was Driven, drawn.
drowen out of England.
In that time Know ye.
weteth well,
Came ferst Wassayle and drynkehayl
In to this land, with owte Doubt.
wene,
Thurghe a maid Bright.
brygh and Fair.
schene.
Sche was Called.
cleput maid Ynge.
For hur many does read and sing
Lordyngys Gentle.
gent and free.
This land has y had namys three.
Ferest hit was cleput Albion,
And sith From, because of.
for Brut Bretayne a non,
And now Ynglond cleput hit is,
Aftir maid Ynge y wysse.
Thilke Ynge fro Saxone was come,
And with here many a mother son.
For great hungure y understonde
Ynge went out of hure land.
And through leave of our king
In this land sche had restyng.
As meche land of the king sche Requested, desired.
bade,
As with a hole hyde Men might.
me mygth sprede.
The king Granted her request.
grant he bonne.
A strong castle sche made sone,
And when the castle was al made,
The king to the mete sche Bid.
bade.
The king granted here a none.
He wist not what they would done.
* * *

And said to Then.
ham in this manner,
"The king to morrow schal ete here.
"He and all his men,
"Ever Every.
one of us and one of them,
"To geder schal sit at the mete.
"And when they have al most y ete,
"I wole say wassayle to the king,
"And sle him with out any Lie.
leyng.
"And look that ye in this manner
"Each of gow sle his Companion.
fere."
And so sche deed then,
Slow the king and all his men.
And thus, thorowgh here Stratagem.
queyntyse,
This land was won in this wise.
Sith After.
a non sone an Very.
swythe
Was England Divide^.
deled on fyve,
To fyve kynggys trewelyche,
That were nobyl and swythe rich.
That one had all the land of Kente,
That is free and swythe gente.
And in his land bysshopus tweye.
Worthy men Were.
where theye.
The archebysshop of Caunturbery,
And of Rochestore that is merry.
The king of Essex o Renown.
renon
He had to his portion
Westschire, Barkschire,
Soussex, Southamptshire.
And there to Dorsetshyre,
All Cornewalle and Devenshire.
All this were of his Empire.
anpyre.
The king had on his hond
Five bysshopes stark and strong,
Of Salussbury was that on.
As to the Mirabilia Mundi, mentioned in the statutes of New College at Oxford,
in conjunction with these Poemata and Regnorum Chronicae, the immigrations of
the Arabians into Europe and the crusades produced numberless accounts, partly
true and partly fabulous, of the wonders seen in the eastern countries; which
falling into the hands of the monks, grew into various treatises, under the
title of Mirabilia Mundi. There were also some professed travelers into the
East in the dark ages, who surprised the western world with their mavelous
narratives, which could they have been contradicted would have been believed
The first European traveller who went far Eastward, is Benjamin a Jew of Tudela
in Navarre. He penetrated from Constantinople through Alexandria in Egypt and
Persia to the frontiers of Tzin, now China. His travels end in 1173. He
mentions the immense wealth of Constantinople; and says that its port swarmed
with ships from all countries. He exaggerates in speaking of the prodigious
number of Jews in that city. He is full of mavelous and romantic stories.
William de Rubruquis, a monk, was sent into Per^ic Tartary, and by the command
of S. Louis king of France, about the year 1245. As was also Carpini, by Pope
Innocent the fourth. Their books abound with improbabilities. Marco Polo a
Venetian nobleman traveled eastward into Syria and Persia to the country
constantly called in the dark ages Cathay, which proves to be the northern part
of China. This was about the year 1260. His book is entitled De R^gionibus
Ori^ntis. He mentions the immense and opulent city of Cambalu, undoubtedly
Pekin. Hakluyt cites a friar; named Oderick, who traveled to Cambalu in
Cathay, and whose description of that city corresponds exactly with Pekin.
Friar Bacon about 1280, from these travels formed his geography of this part of
the globe, as may be collected from what he relates of the Tartars. See Purchase
Pilgr. iii. 52. And Bac. Op. Maj. 228. 235.
. At the court of the grand Khan, persons of all nations and religions, if they
discovered any distinguished degree of abilities, were kindly entertained and
often preferred..

In the Bodleian library we have a superb vellum manuscript, decorated with
ancient descriptive paintings and illuminations, entitled, Histoire de Grant
Kaan et des MERVEILLES DU MONDE MSS. Bodl. F. 10. fol. praegrand. ad calc. Cod.
The handwriting is about the reign of Edward the third. I am not sure whether
it is not Mandeville's book.
. The same work is among the royal manuscripts Brit. Mus. MSS. Bibl. Reg. 19 D.
i. 3.
. A Latin epistle, said to be translated from the Greek by Cornelius Nepos, is
an extremely common manuscript, entitled, De situ et Mirabilibus Indiae It was
first printed a Jacobo Catalanensi without date or place. Afterward at Venice
1499. The Epistle is inscribed: Alexander Magnus Aristo^eli praeceptori s^o
salutem dicit. It was never extant in Gree^.
. It is from Alexander the Great to his preceptor Aristotle: and the Greek
original was most probably drawn from some of the fabulous authors of
Alexander's story.

There is a manuscript, containing La Chartre que Prestre Jehan maunda a
Fredewik l' Empereur DE MERVAILLES DE SA TERRE Ibid. MSS. Reg. 20 A. xii. 3.
And in Bibl. Bodl. MSS. Bodl. E. 4. 3. "Literae Joannis Presbiteri ad
Fredericum Imperatorem, etc."
. This was Frederick Barbarossa, emperor of Germany, or his successor; both of
whom were celebrated for their many successful enterprises in the holy land,
before the year 1230. Prester John, a christian, was emperor of India. I find
another tract, DE MIRABILIBUS Terrae Sanctae MSS. Reg. 14 C. xiii. 3.
. A book of Sir John Mandeville, a famous traveller into the East about the
year 1340, is under the title of Mirabilia Mundi MSS. C. C. C. Cant. A. iv. 69.
We find De Mirabilibus Mundi Liber, MSS. Reg. ut supr. 13. E. ix. 5. And again,
De Mirabilibus Mundi et Viris illustribus Tractatus 14. C. vi. 3.
. His Itinerary might indeed have the same title His book is supposed to have
been interpolated by the monks. Leland observes, that Asia and Africa were
parts of the world at this time, "Anglis de sola fere nominis umbra cognitas."
Script. Br. p. 366. He wrote his Itinerary in French, English, and Latin. It
extends to Cathay, or China, before mentioned. Leland says, that he gave to
Beckett's shrine in Canterbury cathedral a glass globe enclosing an apple,
which he probably brought from the east. Leland saw this curiosity, in which
the apple remained fresh and undecayed. Ubi supr. Maundeville, on returning
from his travels, gave to the high altar of S. Alban's abbey church a sort of
Patera brought from Egypt, now in the hands of an ingenious antiquary in
London. He was a native of the town of S. Alban's, and a physician. He says
that he left many MERVAYLES unwritten; and refers the curious reader to his
MAPPA MUNDI, chap. cviii. cix. A history of the Tartars became popular in
Europe about the year 1310, written or dictated by Aiton a king of Armenia, who
having traversed the most remarkable countries of the east, turned monk at
Cyprus, and published his travels; which, on account of the rank of the author,
and his amazing adventures, gained great ^ste^m.
. An English title in the Cotton library is, "The Voyage and Travailes of Sir
John Maundevile knight, which treats of the way to Hierusaleme and of the
MARVEYLES of Inde with other islands and countries." In the Cotton library there
is a piece with the title, Sanctorum Loca, MIRABILIA MUNDI, etc Galb. A. xxi. 3.
. Afterward the wonders of other countries were added: and when this sort of
reading began to grow fashionable, Gyraldus Cambrensis composed his book De
MIRABILIBUS Hiberniae It is printed among the Scriptores Hist. Angl. Francof.
1602. fol. 692. Written about the year 1200. It was so favorite a title that
we have even De MIRABILIBUS Veteris et Novi Testamenti. MSS. Coll. Aen. Nas.
Oxon. Cod. 12. f. 190. a.
. There is also another De MIRABILIBUS Angliae Bibl. Bodl. MSS. C. 6.
. At length the superstitious curiosity of the times was gratified with
compilations under the comprehensive title of MIRABILIA Hiberniae, Angliae, et
Orientalis As in MSS. Reg. 13 D. i. 11. I must not forget that the Polyhistor
of Julius Solinus appears in many manuscripts under the title of Solinus de
Mirabilibus Mundi. This was so favorite a book, as to be translated into
hexameters by some monk in the twelfth century, according to Voss. Hist. Latin.
iii. p. 721.
. But enough has been said of these infatuations. Yet the history of human
credulity is a necessary speculation to those who trace the gradations of human
knowledge. Let me add, that a spirit of rational enquiry into the topographical
state of foreign countries, the parent of commerce and of a thousand
improvements, took its rise from these visions.

I close this section with an elegy on the death of king Edward the first, who
died in the year 1307.

I.
All that beoth of huert true "Be of true heart."

A stounde herkneth to my song A little while.
,
Of duel that Death has dihte us new.
That makes me seek and sorewe among:
Of a knyht that was so strong
Of whom god has done is will;
Methuncheth Methinks.
that Death has don us wrong
That he The king.
so sone shall ligge stille.
II.
Al England ahte Ought for to.
forte know:
Of whom that song is that ysynge,
Of Edward king that is so bold,
Gent Through. Sax. gent. Yent.
all this world is nome con spring:
Trewest mon of al thing,
Ant in werre ware and wise;
For him we ahte our honden Hands.
wrynge,
Of cristendome he bare the pris.
III.
Before that our king was ded
He speak as mon that was in care
"Clerks, knyhts, barrons, he sed
"Ycharge ou You.
by our swear Oath.

"That ye be to England true,
"Y dee De^e. DEYE, die.
y ne may lyven na more;
"Helps mi sone, ant crowns him new,
"For he is "Next, to be chosen."
nest to buen y-core.
IV.
"Iche biqueth mine hirte aryht,
"That hit be write at mi devys,
"Over the sea that Hue One of his Officers.
be diht,
"With fourscore knights al of pris,
"In werre that buen war aut wys,
"Agein the hethene for te fyhte,
"To win the croize that low lys,
"Myself ycholde gef thet y myhte.
V.
King of France! thou hevedest sun Sin.
,
That thou the counsel would fond,
To latte Let, hinder.
the will of king Edward,
To wend to the holy land;
Thet our king head take on hand,
All Engelond to geme, protect.
eme and wysse Govern.
,
To wenden in to the holy land
To wynnen us heveriche Every.
bliss.
VI.
The messager to the pope com
And seyede that our king was deed He died in Scotland, Jul. 7, 1307. The
chroniclers pretend, that the Pope knew of his death the next day by a vision
or some miraculous information. So Robert of Brunne, who recommends this
tragical ev^nt to those who "Singe and say in romance and ryme." Chron. p. 340.
edit. ut supr. The Pope the the other day wist it in the court of Rome.
The Pope on the morn bifor the clergi came
And told tham biforn, the flower of cristendam
Was ded and lay on bear, Edward of Ingeland.
He said with hevy chere, in spirit he it fond.
He adds, that the Pope granted five years of pardon to those who would pray
for his soul.
,
Is In his.
own hand the lettre he nom Took.
,
Ywis his heart was full great:
The pope himself the lettre read,
And spec a word of great honor.
"Alas! he seid, is Edward ded?
"Of cristendome he ber the flour!"
VII.
The pope is to chaumbre wend
For dole ne mihte he speak na more;
Ant aftur cardinales he send
That much couthen of Cristes lore.
Both the less Le^s.
ant eke the more
Bed hem both red ant sing:
Great deol me Men.
myhte se thore There.
,
Many mon is hand wrynge.
VIII.
The pope of Peyters stod at is mass
With full great solempnete,
There me con Began.
the soul bliss:
"King Edward, honored thou be:
"God love thy sone come after the,
"Bring to ^nde that thou have bygonne,
"The holy crois ymade of tree
"So fain thou would hit have ywonne.
IX.
"Jerusalem, thou have ilore
"The flower of al chivalrie,
"Now king Edward lives na more,
"Alas, that he yet should deye!
"He would ha rered up full heyge
"Our baners that bueth broht to ground:
"Well long we may clepe Call.
and cry,
"Er we such a king have yfounde!"
X.
Now is Edward of Carnarvan Edward the second born in Carnarvon castle.
,
King of Engelond al aplyht Completely.
;
God let hem ner be worse man
Then his fader ne less of myht,
To holden is poor man to ryht
And understende good counsel,
All England for to wysse and dyht
Of good knights darh Thar, there.
him nout fail.
XI.
Thah mi tongue were mad of stel
Ant min heart yzote of bras
The godness myht y never tell
That with king Edward was.
King as thou art cleped conqueror
In vch battle thou heedest prys,
Good bring thy soul to the honeur
That ever was and ever is MSS. Harl. 2253. f. 73. In a Miscellany called the
Muses Library, compiled, as I have been informed, by an ingenious lady of the
name of Cooper, there is an elegy on the death of Henry the first, "wrote
immediately after his death, the author unknown." p. 4. Land. Pr. for T.
Davies, 1738. octavo. But this piece, which has great merit, could not have
been written till some centuries afterward. From the classical allusions and
general color of the phraseology, to say nothing more, it with greater
probability belongs to Henry the eighth. It escaped me till just before this
work went to press, that Dr. Percy had printed this elegy, Ball. ii. 9.
.
That the pope should here pronounce the funeral panegyric of Edward the first,
is by no means surprising, if we consider the predominant ideas of the age. And
in the true spirit of these ideas, the poet makes this illustrious monarch's
achievements in the holy land, his principal and leading topic. But there is a
particular circumstance alluded to in these stanzas, relating to the crusading
character of Edward, together with its consequences, which needs explanation.
Edward, in the decline of life, had vowed a second expedition to Jerusalem: but
finding his end approach, in his last moments he devoted the prodigious sum of
thirty thousand pounds to provide one hundred and forty knights The poet says
eighty.
, who should carry his heart into Palestine. But this appointment of the dying
king was never executed. Our elegist, and the chroniclers, impute the crime of
witholding so pious a legacy to the advice of the king of France, whose
daughter Isabel was married to the succeeding king. But it is more probable to
suppose, that Edward the second, and his profligate minion Piers Gaveston,
dissipated the money in their luxurious and expensive pleasures.

SECT. III.
WE have seen, in the preceding section, that the character of our poetical
composition began to be changed about the reign of the first Edward: that
either fictitious adventures were substituted by the minstrels in the place of
historical and traditionary facts, or reality disguised by the
misrepresentations of invention; and that a taste for ornamental and even
exotic expression gradually prevailed over the rude simplicity of the native
English phraseology. This change, which with our language affected our poetry,
had been growing for some time; and among other causes was occasioned by the
introduction and increase of the tales of chivalry.

The ideas of chivalry, in an imperfect degree, had been of old established
among the Gothic tribes. The fashion of challenging to single combat, the pride
of se^king dangerous adventures, and the spirit of avenging and protecting the
fair sex, seem to have been peculiar to the northern nations in the most
uncultivated state of Europe. All these customs were afterward encouraged and
confirmed by corresponding circumstances in the feudal constitution. At length
the crusades excited a new spirit of enterprise, and introduced into the courts
and ceremonies of European princes a higher degree of splendour and parade,
caught from the riches and magnificence of eastern cities I cannot help
transcribing here a curious passage from old Fauchett. He is speaking of Louis
the young, king of France about the year 1150. "Le quel fut le premier roy de
sa maison, qui monstra dehors ses richesses allant en Jerusalem. Aussi la
France commenca de son temps a s'embellir de bastimens plus magni^iques:
prendre plaisir a pierrieres, et autres delicatesses goustus en L^vant par luy,
ou les seigneurs qui avoient ja fait ce voyage. De sort qu'on peut dire qu'il
a este le premier tenant Cour de grand Roy: estant si magnifique, que sa femme
dedaignant la simplicite de ses predecesseurs, luy fit elever une sepulture
d'argent, au lieu de pierre." RECUEIL de la Lang. et Poes. Fr. chapter viii. p. 76.
edit. 1581. He adds, that a great number of French romances were composed about
this period.
. These oriental expeditions established a taste for hyperbolical description,
and propagated an infinity of mavelous tales, which men returning from
distant countries easily imposed on credulous and ignorant minds. The
unparalleled emulation with which the nations of christendom universally
embraced this holy cause, the pride with which emperors, kings, barons, earls,
bishops, and knights strove to excel each other on this interesting occasion,
not only in prowess and heroism, but in sumptuous equipages, gorgeous banners,
armorial cognisances, splendid pavilions, and other expensive articles of a
similar nature, diffused a love of war, and a fondness for military pomp. Hence
their very diversions became warlike, and the martial enthusiasm of the times
appeared in tilts and tournaments. These practices and opinions co-operated
with the kindred superstitions of dragons See Kircher's Mund. Subterran. viii.
4. He mentions a knight of Rhodes made grand master of the order for killing a
dragon, 1345.
, dwarfs, fairies, giants, and enchanters, which the traditions of the Gothic
scalders had already planted; and produced that extraordinary species of
composition which has been called ROMANCE.

Before these expeditions into the east became fashionable, the principal and
leading subjects of the old fablers were the achievements of king Arthur with
his knights of the round table, and of Charlemagne with his twelve peers. But
in the romances written after the holy war, a new set of champions, of
conquests and of countries, were introduced. Trebizonde took place of
Rouncevalles, and Godfrey of Bulloigne, Solomon, Nouraddin, the caliphs, the
souldans, and the cities of Egypt and Syria, became the favorite topics. The
troubadours of Provence, an idle and unsettled race of men, took up arms, and
followed their barons in prodigious multitudes to the conquest of Jerusalem.
They made a considerable part of the household of the nobility of France. Louis
the seventh, king of France, not only entertained them at his court very
liberally, but commanded a considerable company of them into his retinue, when
he took ship for Palestine, that they might solace him with their songs during
the dangers and inconveniences of so long a voyage Velley, Hist. Fr. sub. an.
1178.
. The ancient chronicles of France mention Legions de poets as embarking in
this wonderful enterprise Massieu, Hist. Poes. Fr. p. 105. Many of the
troubadours, whose works now exist, and whose names are recorded, accompanied
their lords to the holy war. Some of the French nobility of the first rank were
troubadours about the eleventh century: and the French critics with much
triumph observe, that it is the GLORY of the French poetry to number counts and
dukes, that is sovereigns, among its professors, from its commencement. What a
glory! The worshipful company of Merchant-taylors in London, if I recollect
right, boast the names of many dukes, earls, and princes, enrolled in their
community. This is indeed an honor to that otherwise respectable society. But
poets can derive no luster from counts, and dukes, or even princes, who have
been enrolled in their lists; only in proportion as they have adorned the art
by the excellence of their compositions.
. Here a new and more copious source of fabling was opened: in these
expeditions they picked up numberless extravagant stories, and at their return
enriched romance with an infinite variety of oriental scenes and fictions. Thus
these later wonders, in some measure, supplanted the former: they had the
recommendation of novelty, and gained still more attention, as they came from a
greater distance The old French historian Mezeray goes so far as to derive the
origin of the French poetry and romances from the crusades. Hist. p. 416, 417.
.

In the mean time we should recollect, that the Saracens or Arabians, the same
people which were the object of the crusades, had acquired an establishm^nt in
Spain about the ninth century: and that by means of this earlier intercourse,
many of their fictions and fables, together with their literature, must have
been known in Europe before the christian armies invaded Asia. It is for this
reason the elder Spanish romances have professedly more Arabian allusions than
any other. Cervantes makes the imagined writer of Don Quixote's history an
Arabian. Yet exclusive of their domestic and more immediate connection with
this eastern people, the Spaniards from temper and constitution were
extravagantly fond of chivalrous exercises. Some critics have supposed, that
Spain having learned the art or fashion of romance-writing, from their
naturalised guests the Arabians, communicated it, at an early period, to the
rest of Europ^ Hu^t in some measure adopts this opinion. But that learned man
was a very incompetent judge of these matters. Under the common term Romance,
he confounds romanc^s of chivalry, romances of gallantry, and all the fables of
the Provencial poets. What can we think of a writer, who having touched upon
the gothic romances, at whose ^ictions and barbarisms he is much shocked, talks
of the co^summate d^gr^^ of art and elegance to which the French are at present
arrived in romances? He adds, that the superior refinem^nt and politess^ of the
French gallantry has happily given them an advantage of shining in thi^ species
of composition. Hist. Romans p. 138. But the sophistry and ignorance of Huet's
Treatise has been already detected and exposed by a critic of another cast, in
the SUPPLEMENT TO JARVIS'S PREFACE, prefixed to the Translation of Don Quixot^.
.

It has been imagined that the first romances were composed in meter, and sung
to the harp by the poets of Provence at f^stival solemnities: but an ingenious
Frenchman, who has made deep researches into this sort of literature, attempts
to prove, that this mode of reciting romantic adventures was in high reputation
among the natives of Normandy, above a century before the troubadours of
Provence, who are generally supposed to have led the way to the poets of Italy,
Spain, and France, commenced about the year 1162 Mons. L' Eveque de la
Ravalerie, in his Revolutions de Langue Francoise, a la suite des POESIES DU
ROI DE NAVARRE.
. If the critic means to insinuate, that the French troubadours acquired their
art of versifying from these Norman bards, this reasoning will favor the
system of those, who contend that metrical romances lineally took their rise
from the historical odes of the Scandinavian scalds: for the Normans were a
branch of the Scandinavian stock. But Fauchett, at the same time that he allows
the Normans to have been fond of chanting the praises of their heroes in verse,
expressly "Ce que les Normans avoyent pris des Francois." Rec. live. i. p. 70.
edit. 1581.
pronounces that they borrowed this practice from the Franks or French.

It is not my business, nor is it of much consequence, to discuss this obscure
point, which properly belongs to the French antiquaries. I therefore proceed to
observe, that our Richard the first, who began his reign in the year 1189, a
distinguished hero of the crusades, a most magnificent patron of chivalry, and
a Provencial poet See Observations on Spenser, i. i. p. 28. 29. And Mr.
Walpole's Royal and Noble authors, i. 5. See also Rymer's Short View of
Tragedy, chapter vii. p. 73. edit. 1693. Savarie de Mauleon, an English gentleman
who lived in the service of Saint Louis king of France, and one of the
Provencial poets, said of Richard, Coblas a teira fair adroitement
Pou voz oillez enten dompna gentiltz.
"He could make stanzas on the eyes of gentle ladies." Rymer, ibid. p. 74.
There is a curious story recorded by the French chroniclers, concerning
Richard's ^kill in the minstrel art, which I will here relate. -- Richard, in
his return from the crusade, was taken prisoner about the year 1193. A whole
year elapsed before the English knew where their monarch was imprisoned.
Blondell de Nesle, Richard's favorite ^instrel, resolved to find out his lord;
and after traveling many days without success, at last came to a castle where
Richard was detained in custody. Here he found that the castle belonged to the
duke of Austria, and that a king was there imprisoned. Suspecting that the
prisoner was his master, he found means to place himself directly before a
window of the chamber where the king was kept; and in this situation began to
sing a French chanson, which Richard and Blondell had formerly written
together. When the king heard the song, he knew it was Blondell who sung it;
and when Blondell paused after the first half of the song, the king began the
other half and completed it. On this, Blondell returned home to England, and
acquainted Richard's barons with the place of his imprisonment, from which he
was soon afterward released. See also Fauchett, Rec. p. 93. Richard lived long
in Provence, where he acquired a taste for their poetry. The only relic of his
sonnets is a small fragment in old French accurately cited by Mr. Walpole, and
written during his captivity; in which he remonstrates to his men and barons of
England, Normandy, Poictiers, and Gascony, that they suffered him to remain so
long a prisoner. Catal. Roy. and Nob. Auth. i. 5. Nostradamus's account of
Richard is full of false facts and anachronisms. Poet. Provenc. artic. RICHARD.
, invited to his court many minstrels or troubadours from France, whom he
loaded with honors and rewards "De regno Francorum cantores et joculatores
muneribus allexerat." Rog. Hoved. Ric. i. p. 340. These gratuities were chiefly
arms, clothes, horses, and sometimes money.
. These poets imported into England a great multitude of their tales and songs;
which before or about the reign of Edward the second became familiar and
popular among our ancestors, who were sufficiently acquainted with the French
language. The most early notice of a professed book of chivalry in England, as
it should seem, appears under the reign of Henry the third; and is a curious
and evident proof of the reputation and esteem in which this sort of
composition was held at that period. In the revenue-roll of the twenty-first
year of that king, there is an entry of the expense of silver clasps and studs
for the king's great book of romances. This was in the year 1237. But I will
give the article in its original dress. "Et in firmaculis hapsis et clavis
argenteis ad magnum librum ROMANCIS regis Rot. Pip. an. 21. Henr. iii.
." That this superb volume was in French, may be partly collected from the
title which they gave it: and it is highly probable, that it contained the
Romance of Richard the first, on which I shall enlarge below. At least the
victorious achievements of that monarch were so famous in the reign of Henry
the second, as to be made the subject of a picture in the royal palace of
Clarendon near Salisbury. A circumstance which likewise appears from the same
ancient record, under the year 1246. "Et in camera regis subtus capellam regis
apud Clarendon lambruscanda, et muro ex transverso illius camerae amovendo et
hystoria Antiochiae in eadem depingenda cum DUELLO REGIS RICARDI Rot. Pip. an.
36. Henr. iii. Richard the first performed great feats at the siege of Antioch
in the crusade. The Duellum was another of his exploits among the Saracens.
Compare Walpole's Anecd. Paint. i. 10. Who mentions a certain great book
^orrowed for the queen, written in French containing GESTA ANTIOCHIAE et reg^m
aliorum, etc. This was in the year 1249. He adds, that there was a chamber in
the old palace of Westminster painted with this history, ^n the reign of Henry
the third, and therefore called the ANTIOCH-CHAMBER: and another in the Tower.
." To these anecdotes we may add, that in the royal library at Paris there is,
"Lancelot du Lac mis en Francois par Robert de Borron, du commandment d' Henri
roi de Angleterre avec figures Cod. 6783. fol. max. See Mont^auc. Catal. MSS.
p. 785. a.
." And the same manuscript occurs twice again in that library in three volumes,
and in four volumes of the largest folio See Montf. ibid.
. Which of our Henrys it was who thus commanded the romance of LANCELOT DU LAC
to be translated into French, is indeed uncertain: but most probably it was
Henry the third just mentioned, as the translator Robert Borron is placed soon
after the year 1200 Among the infinite number of old manuscript French romances
on this subject in the same noble repository, the learned Montfaucon recites,
"Le Roman de Tristan et Iseult traduit de Latin en Francois par Lucas chevalier
sieur du chastel du Gast pres de Salisberi, Anglois, avec figures." Cod. 6776.
fol. max. And again, "Livres de Tristan mis en Francois par Lucas chevalier
sieur de chateau du Gat." Cod. 6956. seq. fol. max. In another article, this
translator the chevali^r Lucas, of whom I can give no account, is called Hu^ or
Hue. Cod. 6976. seq. Nor do I know of any castle, or place, of this name near
Salisbury. See also Cod. 7174
.

But not only the pieces of the French minstrels, written in French, were
circulated in England about this time; but translations of these pieces were
made into English, which containing much of the French idiom, together with a
sort of poetical phraseology before unknown, produced various innovations in
our style. These translations, it is probable, were enlarged with additions, or
improved with alterations of the story. Hence it was that Robert de Brunne, as
we have already seen, complained of strange and quaint English, of the changes
made in the story of SIR TRISTRAM, and of the liberties assumed by his
cotemporary minstrels in altering facts and coining new phrases. Yet these
circumstances enriched our tongue, and extended the circle of our poetry. And
for what reason these fables were so much admired and encouraged, in preference
to the languid poetical chronicles of Robert of Gloucester and Robert of
Brunne, it is obvious to conjecture. The gallantries of chivalry were exhibited
with new splendor, and the times were growing more refined. The Norman
fashions were adopted even in Wales. In the year 1176, a splendid carousal,
after the manner of the Normans, was given by a Welsh prince. This was Rhees ap
Gryffyth king of South Wales, who at Christmas made a great feast in the castle
of Cardigan, then called Aberteivi, which he ordered to be proclaimed
throughout all Britain; and to "which came many strangers, who were honorably
received and worthily entertained, so that no man departed discontented. And
among deeds of arms and other shows, Rhees caused all the poets of Wales In
illustration of the argument pursued in the text we may observe, that about
this time the English minstrels flourished with new honors and rewards. At the
magnificent marriage of the countess of Holland, daughter of Edward the first,
every king minstrel received xl. shillings. See Anstis Ord. Gart. ii. p. 303.
And Dugd. Mon. i. 355. In the same reign a multitude of minstrels attended the
ceremony of knighting prince Edward on the feast of Pentecost. They entered the
hall, while the king was sitting at dinner surrounded with the new knights.
Nic. Trivet. Annal. p. 342. edit. Oxon. The whole number knighted was two
hundred and sixty-seven. Dugd. Bar. i. 80. b. Robert de Brunne says, this was
the greatest royal feast since king Arthur's at Carleon: concerning which he
adds, "thereof yet men rhyme." p. 332. In the wardrobe-roll of the same prince,
under the year 1306, we have this ^ntry. "Will. Fox et Cradoco socio suo
CANTATORIBUS cantantibus coram Principe et aliis magnatibus in comitiva sua
existente apud London, etc. xx s." Again, "Willo Ffox et Cradoco ^ocio suo
cantantibus in praesentia principis et al. Magnatum apud London de dono ejusdem
dni p^r manus Johis de Ringwode, etc. 8. di^ jan. xx s." Afterward, in the
same roll, four shillings are given, "Ministr^llo comitissa^ Marshall.
facienti menestral^iam suam coram principe, etc. in comi^iva sua exist^nt. apud
Penreth." Comp. Garderob. Edw. Princip. Wall. ann. 35. Edw. i. This I chiefly
cite to show the greatness of the gratuity. Minstrel^ were part of the
establishment of the household of our nobility before the year 1307. Thomas earl
of Lancaster allows at Christmas, cloth, or vestis liberata, to his
housholdminstrels at a great expense, in the year 1314. Stowe's Surv. Land. p.
134. edit. 1618. See supr. p. 91. Soon afterward the minstrels claimed such
privileges that it was thought necessary to reform them by an edict, in 1315.
See Hearne's Append. Leland. Collectan. vi. 36. Yet, as I have formerly
remarked in OBSERVATIONS ON Spenser's FAIERIE QUEEN, we find a person in the
character of a minstrel entering Westminster Hall on horseback while Edward the
second was solemnizing the feast of P^ntecost as above, and presenting a letter
to the king. See Walsing. Hist^ Angl. Franc. p. 109.
to come thither: and provided chairs for them to be set in his hall, where
they should dispute together to try their cunning and gift in their several
faculties, where great rewards and rich gifts were appointed for the
overcomers Powell's Wales, 237. edit. 1584. Who adds, that the bards of
"Northwales won the prize, and among the musicians Rees's own household men
were counted best." Rhees was one of the Welsh princes who, the preceding year,
attended the parliament at Oxford, and were magnificently entertained in the
castle of th^^ city by Henry the second. Lord Lyttelton's Hist. Hen. ii. edit.
iii. p. 302. It may not be foreign to our present purpose to mention here, that
Henry the second, in the year 1179, was entertained by Welsh bards at Pembroke
castle in Wales in his passage into Ireland. Powell, ut supr. p. 238. The
subject o^ their songs was the history of king Arthur. See Seldom on POLYOLB.
s. iii. p. 53.
." Tilts and tournaments, after a long disuse^ were revived with superior
luster in the reign of Edward the first. Roger earl of Mortimer, a magnificent
baron of that reign, erected in his stately castle of Kenelwo^th a Round Table,
at which he restored the rites of king Arthur. He entertained in this castle
the constant retinue of one hundred knights, and as many ladies; and invited
thither adventurers in chivalry from every part of christendom Drayton's
Heroic. Epist. MORT. ISABEL^ ^. 53. And Notes ibid. from Walsingham.
. These fables were therefore an image of the manners, customs, mode of life,
and favorite amusements, which now prevailed, not only in France but in
England, accompanied with all the decorations which fancy could invent, and
recommended by the graces of romantic fiction. They complimented the ruling
passion of the times, and cherished in a high degree the fashionable sentiments
of ideal honor, and fantastic fortitude.

Among Richard's French minstrels, the names only of three are recorded. I have
already m^ntioned Blondell de Nesle. Fouqu^t of Marseilles, and Ans^lme
Fayditt, many of whose compositions still remain, were also among the poets
patronised and entertained in England by Richard. They are both celebrated and
sometimes imitated by Dante and Petrarch. Fayditt, a native of Avignon, united
the professions of music and verse; and the Provencials used to call his poetry
de bon mots e de bon son. Petrarch is supposed to have copied, in his TRIUMFO
DI AMORE, many strokes of high imagination, from a poem written by Fayditt on a
similar subject: particularly in his description of the Palace of Love. But
Petrarch has not left Fayditt without his due panegyric: he says that Fayditt's
tongue was shield, helmet, sword, and spear Triunf. Am. c. iv.
. He is likewise in Dante's Paradise. Fayditt was extremely profuse and
voluptuous. On the death of king Richard, he traveled on foot for near twenty
years, seeking his fortune; and during this long pilgrimage he married a nun of
Aix in Provence, who was young and lively, and could accompany her husband's
tales and sonnets with her voice. Fouquett de Marseilles had a beautiful
person, a ready wit, and a talent for singing: these popular accomplishments
recommended him to the courts of king Richard, Raymond count of Toulouse, and
Beral de Baulx; where, as the French would say, il fit les delices de cour. He
fell in love with Adelasia the wife of Beral, whom he celebrated in his songs.
One of his poems is entitled, Las complanchas de Beral. On the death of all his
lords, he received absolution for his sin of poetry, turned monk, and at length
was made archbishop of Toulouse See Beauchamps, Recherch. Theatr. Fr. Paris,
1735. p. 7. 9. It was Jeffrey, Richard's brother, who patronised Jeffrey
Rudell, a famous troubadour of Provence, who is also celebrated by Petrarch.
This poet had heard, from the adventurers in the crusades, the beauty of a
countess of Tripoly highly extolled. He became enamoured from imagination:
embarked for Tripoly, fell ^ick in the voyage through the fever of expectation,
and was brought on shore at Tripoly half expiring. The countess, having
received the news of the arrival of this gallant stranger, hastened to the
shore and took him by the hand. He opened his eyes; and at once overpowered by
his disease and her kindness, had just time to say inarticulately, that having
seen her he died satisfied. The countess made him a most splendid funeral, and
erected to his memory a tomb of porphyry, inscribed with an epitaph in Arabian
verse. She commanded his sonnets to be richly copied and illuminated with
letters of gold; was seized with a pro^ound melancholy, and turned nun. I will
endeavor to translate one of the sonnets which he made on his voyage. Yrat ^t
dolent m'en partray, etc. It has some pathos and sentiment, "I should depart
pensive, but for this love of mine so far away; for I know not what
difficulties I have to encounter, my native land being so far away. Thou who
have made all things, and who formed this love of mine so far away, give me
strength of body, and then I may hope to see this love of mine so far away.
Surely my love must be founded on true merit, as I love one so far away! If I
am easy for a moment, yet I fe^l a thousand pains for her who is so far away.
No other love ever touched my heart than this for her so far away. A fairer
than she never touched any heart, either near, or far away." Every fourth line
ends with du luench. See Nostradamus, etc.
. But among the many French minstrels invited into England by Richard, it is
natural to suppose, that some of them made their magnificent and heroic patron
a principal subject of their compositions Fayditt is said to have written a
Chant sunebre on his death. Beauchamps, ib. p. 10.
. And this subject, by means of the constant communication between both
nations, probably became no less fashionable in France: especially if we take
into the account the general popularity of Richard's character, his love of
chivalry, his gallantry in the crusades, and the favors which he so liberally
conferred on the minstrels of that country. We have a romance now remaining in
English rhyme, which celebrates the achievements of this illustrious monarch.
It is entitled RICHARD CUER DU LION, and was probably translated from the
French about the period abovementioned. That it was, at least, translated from
the French, appears from the Prologue. In France these rymes were wroht,
Every English ne knew it not.
From which also we may gather the popularity of his story, in these lines.
King Richard is the best This agrees with what Hoveden says, ubi supr.
"Dicebatur ubique quod non erat talis in orb."

That is found in any geste Impr. for W. C. 4to. It contains Sign. A. 1. -- Q.
iii. There is another edition impr. W. de Word, 4to. 1528. There is a
manuscript copy of it in Caius College at Cambridge, A. 9.
.
That this romance, either in French or English, existed before the year 1300,
is evident from its being cited by Robert of Gloucester, in his relation of
Richard's reign. In Romance of him imade me it may find iwrite Chron. p. 487.
. This tale is also mentioned as a romance of some antiquity among other famous
romances, in the prologue of a voluminous metrical translation of Guido de
Colonna, attributed to Lidgate Many speken of men that romaunces read, etc.

Of Bevys, Gy, and Gawayne,
Of KING RYCHARD, and Owayne,
Of Tristram, and Percyvayle,
Of Rowl^^d ris, and Aglavaule,
Of Archeroun, and of Octavian,
Of Charles, and of Cassibedlan,
Of Keveloke, Horn, and of Wade,
In romances that of hem by made
That gestours dos of him gestes
At mangeres and at great festes,
Here d^dis ben in remembrance,
In many sair romaunce.
But of the worthiest wight in wede,
That ever bystrod any strede
Spek^s no man, ne in romaunce redes,
Off his battle ne of his d^des;
Off that battle spekes no man,
There all prowes of knights began,
Thet was forsothe of the battle
Thet at TROY was saunfayle,
Of swythe a fight as there was one, etc. --
Ffor there were in thet on side,
Sixti kings and dukes of pride. --
And there was the best bodi in deed
Thet ever yet wered wed^,
Sithen the world was made so far,
That was ECTOR in each werre, etc.
Laud K. 76. f. 1. fol. MSS. Bibl. Bodl. Cod. membr. Whether this poem was
written by Lidgate, I shall not enquire at present. I shall only say here, that
it is totally different from eith^r of Lidgate's two poems on the THEBAN and
TROJAN WARS; and that the manuscript, which is beautifully written, appears to
be of the age of Henry the sixth.
. It is likewise frequently quoted by Robert de Brunne, who wrote much about
the same time with Robert of Gloucester.

When Philip tille Acres came litelle was his deed,
The ROMANCE sais great sham who so that pas PASSUS. Compare Percy's Ball. ii.
66. 398. edit. 1767.
will read.
The ROMANCER it sais Richard did make a pele p. 157.
. --
The ROMANCE of Richard sais he wan the town Ibid.
. --
He tellis in the ROMANCE sen Acres wonnen was
How God gaf him fair chance at the bataile of Caifas P. 175.
. --
Sithen at Japhet was slain fanuelle his stead
The ROMANS tellis great pas of his douhty deed P. 175.
. --
Soudan so curteys never drank no wine,
The same the ROMANS sais that is of Richardyn P. 188.
.
In prisoun was he bounden, as the ROMANCE sais,
In cheynes and led wonden that hevy was of peis p. 198.
. --
I am not indeed quite certain, whether or no in some of these instances,
Robert de Brunne may not mean his French original Peter Langtoft. But in the
following lines he mani^estly refers to our romance of RICHARD, between which
and Langtoft's chronicle he expressly makes a distinction. And in the
conclusion of the reign,

I know no more to ryme of deeds of king Richard:
Who so will his deeds all the sothe se,
The romance that men reden there is propirte.
This that I have said it is Pers saw "The words of my original Peter
Langtoft."
.
Als he in romance In French.
lad there after began I draw p. 205. Du Cange recites an old French manuscript
prose romance, entitled Histoire de la Mort de Richard Roy d'Angleterre. Gloss.
Lat. IND. AUCT. i. p. cxci. There was one, perhaps the same, among the
manuscripts of the late Mr. Martin of Palgrave in Suffolk.
.
It is not improbable that both these rhyming chroniclers cite from the English
translation: if so, we may fairly suppose that this romance was translated in
the reign of Edward the first, or his predecessor Henry the third. Perhaps
earlier. This circumstance throws the French original to a still higher period.

In the royal library at Paris, there is "Histoire de Richard Roi d'Angleterre
et de Maquemore d'Irlande en rhyme Number. 7532.
." Richard is the last of our monarchs whose achievements were adorned with
fiction and fable. If not a superstitious belief of the times, it was an
hyperbolical invention started by the minstrels, which soon grew into a
tradition, and is gravely recorded by the chroniclers, that Richard carried
with him to the crusades king Arthur's celebrated sword CALIBURN, and that he
presented it as a gift, or relic, of inestimable value to Tancred king of
Sicily, in the year 1191 In return for several vessels of gold and silver,
horses, bales of silk, four great ships, and fifteen galleys, given by Tancred.
Benedict. Abb. p. 642. edit. Hearne.
. Robert of Brunne calls this sword a jewel Jocale. In the general and true
sense of the word. Robert de Brunne, in another place, calls a rich pavilion a
jowelle. p. 152.
. And Richard at that time gaf him a fair juelle,
The good swerd CALIBURNE which Arthur luffed so well Chron. p. 153.
.
Indeed the Arabian writer of the life of the sultan Saladin, mentions some
exploits of Richard almost incredible. But, as lord Lyttelton justly observes,
this historian is highly valuable on account of the knowledge he had of the
facts which he relates. It is from this writer we learn, in the most authentic
manner, the actions and negotiations of Richard in the course of the enterprise
for the recovery of the holy land, and all the particulars of that memorable
war See Hist. of Hen. ii. vol. iv. p. 361. App.
.

But before I produce a specimen of Richard's English romance, I stand still to
give some more extracts from its Prologues, which contain matter much to our
present purpose: as they have very fortunately preserved the subjects of many
romances, perhaps metrical, then fashionable both in France and England. And on
these therefore, and their origin, I shall take this opportunity of offering
some remarks.

Many romans men make new
Of good knights and of true:
Of there deeds men make romauns,
Both in England and in France;
Of Rowland and of Olyvere,
And of every Dosepere Charlemagne's Tw^lve peers. Douze Pairs. Fr.
,
Of Alysaundre and Charlemayne,
Of king Arthur and of Gawayne;
How they were knights good and courtoys,
Of Turpin and of Oger the Danois.
Of Troy men read in ryme,
Of Hector and of Achilles,
What folk they slew in pres, etc Fol. 1. a.
.
And again in a second Prologue, after a pause has been made by the minstrel in
the course of singing the poem.

Herkene now how my tale gothe
Though I swear to you no oath
I will you read romans none
Ne of Perhaps Parthenope, or Parthenopeus.
Pertonape, ne of Ypomedon,
Ne of Alisaunder, ne of Charlemayne,
Ne of Arthur, ne of Gawayne,
Ne of Lancelot du Lake,
Ne of Bevis, ne of Guy of Sydrake Read, "ne of Guy ne of Sydrake."
^
Ne of Ury, ne of Octavian,
Ne of Hector the strong man,
Ne of Jason, neither of Achilles,
Ne of Eneas, neither Hercules Signat. P. iii. To some of these romances the
author of the manuscript LIVES OF THE SAINTS, written about the year 1200, and
cited above at large, alludes in a sort of prologue. See SECT. i. p. 14. supr.

Well auht we loug cristendom that is so dear y bougt,
With our lorde's heart blood that the spear has y sougt.
Men wilnethe more yhere of battle of kyngis,
And of knygtis hardy, that mochel is l^syngis.
Of Roulond and of Olyvere, and Gy of Warwyk,
Of Waway^n and Tristram that ne foundde her^ y like.
Who so loves to here tales of such thing,
Here he may y here thing that nys no lesynge,
Of postoles and marteres that hardi knygttes were,
And steadfast were in bataile and fled nogt for no fere, etc.
The anonymous author of an ancient manuscript poem, called "The book of
Stories, called CURSOR MUNDI," translated from the French, seems to have been
of the same opinion. His work consists of religious legends: but in the
prologue he takes occasion to mention many tales of another kind, which were
more agreeable to the generality of readers. MSS. Laud, K. 53. f. 117. Bibl.
Bodl.

Men lykyn Jestis for to here
And romans read in diverse manner
Of Alexandre the conqueror,
Of Julius Caesar the emperor,
Of Gr^ece and Troy the strong stryf,
There many a man lost his life:
Of Brut that baron bold of hand
The first conqueror of England,
Of king Art^ur that was so rich,
Was non in his time so ilyche:
Of wonders that among his knyghts ^elle,
And auntyrs dedyn as men her tell,
As Gaweyn and other full abylle
Which that kept the round tabyll,
How king Charles and Rowland fawght
With Sarazins, nold they be cawght;
Of Trystram and Ys^ude the sweet,
How they with love first began mete.
Of king John and of Isenbras
Of Ydoyne and Amadas.
Stories of diverse things
Of princes, prelates, and kings,
Many songs of diverse ryme
As English, French, and Latyne, etc.
This ylke book is translate
Into English tongue to read
For the love of English led
Ffor common folk of England, etc.
Syldyn yt is for any chance
English tongue preched is in France, etc.
See Montf. Par. MSS. 7540. And p. 119. supr.
.
Here, among others, some of the most capital and favorite stories of romance
are mentioned, Arthur, Charlemagne, the Siege of Troy with its appendages, and
Alexander the Great: and there are four authors of high esteem in the dark
ages, Geoffry of Monmouth, Turpin, Guido of Colonna, and Callisthenes, whose
books were the grand repositories of these subjects, and contained most of the
traditionary fictions, whether of Arabian or classical origin, which constantly
supplied materials to the writers of romance. I shall speak of these authors,
with their subjects, distinctly.

But I do not mean to repeat here what has been already observed See Diss. i.
concerning the writings of Geoffry of Monmouth and Turpin. It will be
sufficient to say at present, that these two fabulous historians recorded the
achievements of Charlemagne and of Arthur: and that Turpin's history was
artfully forged under the name of that archbishop about the year 1110, with a
design of giving countenance to the crusades from the example of so high an
authority as Charlemagne, whose pretended visit to the holy sepulcher is
described in the twentieth chapter.

As to the Siege of Troy, it appears that both Homer's poems were unknown, at
least not understood in Europe, from the abolition of literature by the Goths
in the fourth century, to the fourteenth. Geoffry of Monmouth indeed, who wrote
about the year 1160, a man of learning for that age, produces Homer in
attestation of a fact asserted in his history: but in such a manner, as shows
that he knew little more than Homer's name, and was but imperfectly acquainted
with Homer's subject. Geoffry says, that Brutus having ravaged the province of
Acquitain with fire and sword, came to a place where the city of Tours now
stands, as Homer testifies L. i. chapter 14.
. But the Trojan story was still kept alive in two Latin pieces, which passed
under the names of Dares Phrygius and Dictys Cretensis. Dares's history of the
destruction of Troy, as it was called, pretended to have been translated from
the Greek of Dares Phrygius into Latin prose by Cornelius Nepos, is a wretched
performance, and forged under those specious names in the decline of Latin
literature In the Epistle prefixed, the pretended translator Nepos says, that
he found this work at Athens, in the handwriting of Dares. He adds, speaking
of the controverted authenticity of Homer, De ^a re At^enis JUDICIUM ^uit, cum
pro insano Homerus haberetur quod deos cum hominibus belligerasse descrip^it.
In which words he does not refer to any public decree of the Athenian judges,
but to Plato's opinion in his REPUBLIC. Dares, with Dictys Cretensis next
mentioned in the text, was first printed at Milan in 1477. Mabillon says, that
a manuscript of the Pseudo-Dares occurs in the Laurentian library at Florence,
upwards of eight hundred years old. Mus. Ital. i. p. 169. This work was
abridged by Vincentius Bellovacensis, a friar of Burgundy, about the year 1244.
See his Specul. Histor. lib. iii. 63.
. Dictys Cretensis is a prose Latin history of the Trojan war, in six books,
paraphrased about the reign of Dioclesian or Constantine by one Septimius, from
some Grecian history on the same subject, said to be discovered under a
sepulcher by means of an earthquake in the city of Cnossus, about the time of
Nero, and to have been composed by Dictys, a Cretan, and a soldier in the
Trojan war. The fraud of discovering copies of books in this extraordinary
manner, in order to infer from thence their high and indubitable antiquity, so
frequently practiced, betrays itself. But that the present Latin Dictys had a
Greek original, now lost, appears from the numerous grecisms with which it
abounds: and from the literal correspondence of many passages with the Greek
fragments of one Dictys cited by ancient authors. The Greek original was very
probably forged under the name of Dictys, a traditionary writer on the subject,
in the reign of Nero, who is said to have been fond of the Trojan story See
Perizon. Dissertat. de Dict. Cretens. sect. xxix. Constantinus Lascaris, a
learned monk of Constantinople, one of the restorers of Grecian literature in
Europe near four hundred years ago, says that Dictys Cretensis in Greek was
lost. This writer is not once mentioned by Eustathius, who lived about the year
1170, in his elaborate and extensive commentary on Homer.
. On the whole, the work appears to have been an arbitrary metaphrase of Homer,
with many fabulous interpolations. At length Guido de Colonna, a native of
Messina in Sicily, a learned civilian, and no contemptible Italian poet, about
the year 1260, engrafting on Dares and Dictys many new romantic inventions,
which the taste of his age dictated, and which the connection between Grecian
and Gothic fiction easily admitted; at the same time comprehending in his plan
the Theban and Argonautic stories from Ovid, Statius, and Valerius Flaccus The
Argonautics of Valerius Flaccus are cited in Chaucer's Hypsipile and Medea.
"Let him read the book Argonauticon." v. 90. But Guido is afterward cited as
a writer on that subject, ibid. 97. Valerius Flaccus is a common manuscript.
See page 133. infr.
, compiled a grand prose romance in Latin, containing fifteen books, and
entitled in most manuscripts Historia de Bello Trojano It was first printed
Argentorat, 1486. and ibid. 1489. fol. The work was finished, as appears by a
note at the end, in 1287. It was translated into Italian by Philip or
Christopher Ceffio, a Florentine, and this translation was first printed at
Venice in 1481. 4to. It has also been translated into German. See Lambec. ii.
948. The purity of our author's Italian style has been much commended. For his
Italian poetry, see Mongitor, ubi supr. p. 167. Compare also, Diar. Eruditor.
Ital. xiii. 258. Montfaucon mentions, in the royal library at Paris, Le ROMAN
de Ti^bes qui futracine de Troy^ la grande. Catal. MSS. ii. p. 923 -- 198.
. It was written at the request of Mattheo de Porta, archbishop of Salerno.
Dares Phrygius and Dictys Cretensis seem to have been in some measure
superseded by this improved and comprehensive history of the Grecian heroes:
and from this period Achilles, Jason, and Hercules, were adopted into romance,
and celebrated in common with Lancelot, Rowland, Gawain, Oliver, and other
christian champions, whom they so nearly resembled in the extravagance of their
adventures Bale says, that Edward the first, having met with our author in
Sicily, in returning from Asia, invited him into England, xiii. 36. This prince
was interested in the Trojan story, as we shall see below. Our historians
relate, that he wintered in Sicily in the year 1270. Chron. Rob. Brun. p. 227.
A writer quoted by Hearne, supposed to be John Stowe the chronicler, says, that
"Guido de Columpna arriving in England at the commandment of king Edward the
first, made scholies and annotations upon Dictys Cretensis and Dares Phrigius.
Besides these, he writ at large the Battle of Troy." Heming. Cartul. ii.
649. Among his works is recited Historia de Regibus Rebusque Angliae. It is
quoted by many writers under the title of Chronicum Britannorum. He is said
also to have written Chronicum Magnum libris xxxvi. See Mongitor. Bibl. Sic. i.
265.
. This work abounds with oriental imagery, of which the subject was extremely
susceptible. It has also some traites of Arabian literature. The Trojan horse
is a horse of brass; and Hercules is taught astronomy, and the seven liberal
sciences. But I forbear to enter at present into a more particular examination
of this history, as it must often occasionally be cited hereafter. I shall here
only further observe in general, that this work is the chief source from which
Chaucer derived his ideas about the Trojan story; that it was professedly
paraphrased by Lydgate, in the year 1420, into a prolix English poem, called
the Book of Troy Who mentions it in a French as well as Latin. edit. 1555.
Signat. B. i. page 2.

As in the latin and the frenshe yt is. It occurs in French, MSS. Bibl. Reg.
Brit. Mus. 16 F. ix. This manuscript was probably written not long after the
year 1300.


, at the command of king Henry the fifth; that it became the groundwork of a
new compilation in French, on the same subject, written by Raoul le Feure
chaplain to the duke of Burgundy, in the year 1464, and partly translated into
English prose in the year 1471, by Caxton, under the title of the Recuyel of
the histories of Troy, at the request of Margaret duchess of Burgundy: and
that from Caxton's book afterward modernised, Shakespeare borrowed his drama
of Troilus and Cressida The western nations, in early times, have been fond of
deducing their origin from Troy. This tradition seems to be couched under
Odin's original emigration from that part of Asia which is connected with
Phrygia. Asgard, or Asia's ^ortr^ss, was the city from which Odin led his
colony; and by some it is called Troy. To this place also they supposed Odin to
return after his death, where he was to receive those who died in battle, in a
hall roofed with glittering shields. See Bartholin. L. ii. cap. 8. p. 402, 403.
seq. This hall, says the Edda, is in the city of Asgard, which is called the
Fi^ld of Ida. Bartholin. ibid. In the very sublime ode on the Dissolution of
the World, cited by Bartholine, it is said, that after the twilight of the gods
should be ended, and the new world appear, the Asae shall meet in the field of
Ida, and tell of the destroyed habitations. Barthol. L. ii. cap. 14. p. 597.
Compare Arngrim. Jon. Crymog, l. i. c. 4. p. 45, 46. See also Edda, ^ab. 5. In
the proem to Resenius's Edda, it is said, "Odin appointed twelve judges or
princes, at Sigtune in Scandinavia, as at TROY; and established there all the
laws of TROY, and the customs of the TROJANS." See Hickes. Thesaur. i.
Dissertat. Epist. p. 39. See also Mallett's Hist. Dannem. ii. p. 34.
Bartholinus thinks, that the compiler of the Eddic mythology, who lived A. D.
1070, finding that the Britons and Francs drew their descent from Troy, was
ambitious of assigning the same boasted origin to Odin. But this tradition
appears to have been older than the Edda. And it is more probable, that the
Britons and Francs borrowed it from the Scandinavian Goths, and adapted it to
themselves; unless we suppose that these nations, I mean the former, were
branches of the Gothic stem, which gave them a sort of inherent right to the
claim. This reasoning may perhaps account for the early existence and
extraordinary popularity of the Trojan story among nations ignorant and
illiterate, who could only have received it by tradition. Geoffry of Monmouth
took this descent of the Britons from Troy, from the Welsh or Armoric bards,
and they perhaps had it in common with the Scandinavian scalders. There is not
a syllable of it in the authentic historians of England, who wrote before him;
particularly those ancient ones, Bid, Gildas, and the uninterpolated Nennius.
Henry of Huntingdon began his history from Caesar; and it was only on further
information that he added Brute. But this information was from a manuscript
found by him in his way to Rome in the abbey of Bec in Normandy, probably
Geoffry's original. H. Hunt. Epistol. ad Warin. MSS. Cantabr. Bibl. publ. cod.
251. I have mentioned in another place, that Witlaf, a king of the West Saxons,
grants in his charter, dated A. D. 833, among other things, to Croyland-abbey,
his robe of tissue, on which was embroidered The Destruction of Troy. Obs. on
Spenser's Fairy Queen, i. sect. v. p. 176. This proves the story to have been
in high veneration even long before that period: and it should at the same time
be remembered, that the Saxons came from Scandinavia.

This fable of the descent of the Britons from the Trojans was solemnly
alleged as an authentic and undeniable proof in a controversy of great
national importance, by Edward the first and his nobility, without the least
objection from the opposite party. It was in the famous dispute concerning the
subjection of the crown of England to that of Scotland, about the year 1301.
The allegations are in a letter to pope Bonifa^^, signed and sealed by the king
and his lords. Ypodigm. Neustr. apud Camd. Angl. Norman. p. 492. Here is a
curious instance of the implicit faith with which this tradition continued to
be believed, even in a more enlightened age^ and an evidence that it was
equally credited in Scotland.


.

Proofs have been given, in the two prologues just cited, of the general
popularity of Alexander's story, another branch of Grecian history famous in
the dark ages. To these we may add the evidence of Chaucer.

Alisaundres story is so commune,
That every wight that has discrecioune
Has herd somewhat of or al of his fortune V. 656. p. 165. Urr. ed.
.
And in the House of Fame, Alexander is placed with Hercules V. 323.
. I have already remarked, that he was celebrated in a Latin poem by Gualtier
de Chatillon, in the year 1212 See Second Dissertation.
. Other proofs will occur in their proper places In the reign of Henry the
first, the sheriff of Nottinghamshire is ordered to procure the queen's chamber
at Nottingham to be painted with the HISTORY of ALEXANDER. Madox, Hist. Exch.
p. 249 -- 259. "Depingi facias HISTORIAM ALEXANDRI undiquaque." In the Romance
of Richard, the minstrell says of an army assembled at a siege in the holy
land, Sign. Q. iii.

Covered is both mount and plain,
King ALYSAUNDER and Charlemayne
He never had half the route
As is the city now about.
By the way, this is much like a passage in Milton, Par. Reg. iii. 337.

Such forces met not, nor so wide a camp,
When Agrican, etc.

. The truth is, Alexander was the most eminent knight errant of Grecian
antiquity. He could not therefore be long without his romance. Callisthenes, an
Olinthian, educated under Aristotle with Alexander, wrote an authentic life of
Alexander See Recherch. sur la Vie et les ouvrages de Callisthene. Par M.
l'Abbe Sevin. Mem. de Lit. viii. p. 126. 4to. But many very ancient Greek
writers had corrupted Alexander's history with fabulous narratives, such as
Orthagoras, Onesicritus, etc.
. This history, which is frequently referred to by ancient writers, has been
long since lost. But a Greek life of this hero, under the adopted name of
Callisthenes, at present exists, and is no uncommon manuscript in good
libraries Particularly Bibl. Bodl. Oxon. MSS. Barocc. Cod. xvii. And Bibl. Reg.
Paris. Cod. 2064. See Montfauc. Catal. MSS. p. 733. See passages cited from
this manuscript, in Steph. Byzant. Abr. Berckel. V. (...). Caesar Bulenger de
Circo, c. xiii. 30, etc. And Fabric. Bibl. Gr. xiv. 148. 149. 150. It is
adduced by Du Cange, Glossar. Gr. ubi vid. Tom. ii. Catal. Scriptor. p. 24.
. It is entitled, (...). That is, The Life and Actions of Alexander the
Macedonian Undoubtedly many smaller histories, now in our libraries were formed
from this greater work.
. This piece was written in Greek, being a translation from the Persic, by
Simeon Seth, styled Magister, and protovestiary or wardrobe keeper of the
palace of Antiochus at Constantinople (...), Protovestiarius. See du Cange,
Constantinop. Christ. lib. ii. 16. n. 5. Et and Zonar. p. 46.
, about the year 1070, under the emperor Michael Ducas Allat. de Simeonibus. p.
181. And Labb. Bibl. nov. MSS. p. 115. Sim^on Seth translated many Persic and
Arabic books into Greek. Allat. ubi supr. p. 182. seq. Among them he translated
from Arabic into Greek, about the year 1100, for the use or at the request of
the emperor Alexius Commenus, the celebrated Indian Fables now commonly called
the Fables of Pilpay. This work he entitled, (...), and divided it into fifteen
books. It was printed at Berlin, by ^eb. Godfr. Starchius, A. D. 1697. 8vo.
Under the title, (...). These are the names of two African or Asiatic animals,
called in Latin Thoes, a sort of fox, the principal interlocutors in the
fable^. Sect. i. ii. This curious monument of a species of instruction peculiar
to the orientals, is upwards of two thousand years old. It has passed under a
great vari^ty of names. Khosru a king of Persia, in whose reign Mahomet was
born, sent his physician named Burzvisch into India, on purpose to obtain this
book, which was carefully preserved among the treasures of the kings of India:
and commanded it to be translated out of the Indian language into the ancient
Persic. H^^belot. Dict. Oriental. p. 456. It was soon afterward turned into
Syriac, under the title C^laileg and Damnag. Fabric. Bibl. Gr. vi. p. 461.
About the year of Christ 750, one of the caliphs ordered it to be translated
from the ancient Persic into Arabic, under the name Kalila ve Damna. Herbel.
ubi supr. In the year 920, the Sultan Ahmed, of the dynasty of the Samanides,
procured a translation into more modern Persic: which was soon afterward put
into verse by a celebrated Persian poet named Roudeki. Herbel. ibid. Fabric.
ibid. p. 462. About the year 1130, the Sultan Bahram, not satisfied with this
Persian version, ordered another to be executed by Nasrallah, the most eloquent
man of his age, from the Arabic text of Mocanna: and this Persian version is
what is now extant under the title Kalila ve Damna. Herbel. ibid. See also
Herbel. p. 118. But as even this last-mentioned version had too many Arabic
idioms and obsolete phrases, in the reign of Sultan Hosein Mirza, it was thrown
into a more modern and intelligible style, under the name of Anuar So^eli.
Fraser's Hist. And. Shaw. Catal. MSS. p. 19. 20. Nor must it be forgotten, that
about the year 1100, the Emir Sohail, general of the armies of Hussain, Sultan
of Khorassan of the posterity of Timer, caused a new translation to be made by
the doctor Hussien Vaez, which exceeded all others in elegance and perspicuity.
It was named Anwair So^aili, SPLENDOUR Can^pi, from the Emir who was called
after the name of that star. Herbel. p. 118. 245. It would be tedious to
mention every new title and improvement which it has passed through among the
eastern people. It has been translated into the Turkish language both in prose
and verse: particularly for the use of Bajazet the second and Solomon the
second. Herbel. p. 118. It has been also translated into Hebrew, by Rabbi Joel:
and into Latin, under the title Directorium Vitae humanae, by Johannes of
Capua. [fol. sine ann.] From thence it got into Spanish, or Castilian: and from
the Spanish was made an Italian version, printed at Ferrara, A. D. 1583. oct.
viz. Lelo Damno [for Calilah u Damna^] del Governo de regni, sotto morali, etc.
A second edition appeared at Ferrara in 1610. oct. viz. Philosophia moral^ del
doni, etc. But I have a notion there was an Italian edition at Venice, under
the last-mentioned title, with old rude cuts, 1552. 4to. From the Latin version
it was translated into German, by the command of Eberhard first duke of
Wirtenberg: and this translation was printed at Ulm, 1583. fol. At Strasburgh,
1525. fol. Without name of place, 1548. 4to. At Francfourt on the Main, 1565.
oct. A French translation by Gilb. Gaulmin from the Persic of Nasrallah
abovementioned appeared at Paris, School. But this is rather a paraphrase, and
was reprinted in Holland. See Starchius, ubi supr. praef.. 19. 20. 22. Fabric
^bi supr. p. 463. seq. Another translation was printed at Paris, viz. "Contes
et Fables Indiennes de Bidpai et De Lokman traduits d'Ali Tchelchi-Bengalek
auteur Turc, par M. Galland, 1714." ii vol. Again, Paris, 1724. ii vol.
Fabricius says, that Mons. Galland had procured a Turkish copy of this book
four times larger than the printed copies, being a version from the original
Persic, and entitled Humagoun Nameh, that is, The royal or imperial book, so
called by the orientals, who are of opinion that it contains the whole art of
government. See Fabric. ubi supr. p. 465. Herbel. p. 456. A Translation into
English from the French of the four first books was printed at London in 1747,
under the title of PILPAY'S FABLES. -- As to the name of the author of this
book, Herbelot says that Bidpai was an Indian philosopher, and that his name
signifies the mer^iful physician. See Herbelot. p. 206 456. And Bibl. Lugdun.
Catal. p. 301. Others relate, that it was composed by the Bramins of India,
under the title Kurtuk D^mnik. Fraser, ubi supr. p. 19. It is also said to have
been written by Isame fifth king of the Indians, and translated into Arabic
from the Indian tongue three hundred years before Alexander the Macedonian.
Abraham Ecchelens. Not. ad Catal. Ebed Jesu, p. 87. -- The Indians reckon this
book among the three things in which they surpass all other nations. viz.
"Liber CULILA et DIMNA, ludus Shatangri, et novem figurae numerariae." Saphad.
Comment. ad Carm. Tograi. apud Hyde, prolegom. ad lib. de lud. Oriental. d. 3.
Hyde intended an edition of the Arabic version. Praefat. ad lib. de lud.
Oriental. vol. ii. 1767. edit. ad calc. I cannot forsake this subject without
remarking, that the Persians have another book, which they esteem older than
any writings of Zoroaster, entitled Javidan Chrad, that is, aeterna Sapientia.
Hyde Praefat. Relig. Vet. Persarum. This has been also one of the titles of
Pilpay's Fables.
. It was most probably very soon afterward translated from the Greek into
Latin, and at length from thence into French, Italian, and German Casaub.
Epist. ad Jos. Scaliger. 402. 413. Scalig. Epist. ad Casaubon. 113. 115. Who
mentions also a translation of this work from the Latin into H^brew, by one who
adopted the name of Jos. Gorionides, called Pseudo-Gorionides. This Latin
history was translated into German by John Hartlieb Moller, a German physician,
at the command of Albert duke of Bavaria, and published August. Vindel. A. D.
1478. fol. See Lambecc. lib. ii. de Bibl. Vindobon. p. 949. Labbe mentions a
fabulous history of Alexander; written, as he says, in 1217, and transcribed in
1455. Undoubtedly this in the text. Londinensis quotes "pervetustum quendam
librum manuscriptum de actibus Alexandri." Hearne's T. Caius ut infr. p. 82.
See also p. 86. 258.
. The Latin translation was printed Colon. Argentorat. A. D. 1489 Lenglet
mentions Historia fabulosa incerti authoris de Alexandri Magni praeliis. fol.
1494. He adds, that it is prin^ed in the last edition of Caesar's Commentaries
by Graevius in octavo. Bibl. des Romans, ii. p. 228. 229. edit. Amst. Compare
Vogt's Catalogus librorum rarior, page 24. edit. 1753. Montfaucon says this
history of Callisthenes occurs often in the royal library at Paris, both in
Greek and Latin: but that he never saw either of them printed. Cat. MSS. ii.
page 733. -- 2543. I think a life of Alexander is subjoined to an edition of
Quintus Curtius in 1584, by Joannes Monachus.
. Perhaps before. For among Hearne's books in the Bodleian library, there is an
edition in quarto, without date, supposed to have been printed at Oxford by
Frederick Corsellis, about the year 1468. It is said to have been made by one
Aesopus, or by Julius Valerius Du Cange Glossar. Gr. v. (...). Jurat. ad
Symmach. iv. 33. Barth. Adversar. ii. 10. v. 14.
: supposititious names, which seem to have been forged by the artifice, or
introduced through the ignorance, of scribes and librarians. This Latin
translation, however, is of high antiquity in the middle age of learning: for
it is quoted by Gyraldus Cambrensis, who flourished about the year 1190 Hearne,
T. Caii Vindic. Antiquit. Acad. Oxon. tom. ii. NOT. p. 802. Who thinks it a
work of the monks. "Nec dubium quin monachus quispiam Latin, ut potuit,
scripserit. Eo modo, quo et alios id genus foetus parturiebant scriptores
aliquot monastici, c fabulis quas vulgo admodum placere sciebant." ibid.
. About the year 1236, the substance of it was thrown into a long Latin poem,
written in elegiac verse A Greek poem on this subject will be mentioned below,
wr^tten in politic verses, entitled (...).
, by Aretinus Quilichinus Labb. Bibl. Nov. MSS. p. 68. Ol. Borrich. Dissertat.
de Poet. p. 89.
. This fabulous narrative of Alexander's life and achievements, is full of
prodigies and extravagancies The writer relates, that Alexander, enclosed in a
vessel of glass, dived to the bottom of the ocean for the sake of getting a
knowledge of fishes and sea monsters. He is also represented as soaring in the
air by the help of gryphons. At the end, the opinions of di^ferent philosophers
are recited concerning the sepulcher of Alexander. Nectabanos, a magician and
astrologer, king of Egypt, is a very significant character in this romance. He
transforms himself into a dragon, etc. Compare Herbelot. Bibl. Oriental. p.
319. b. seq. In some of the manuscripts of this piece which I have seen, there
is an account of Alexander's visit to the trees of the sun and moon: but I do
not recollect this in the printed copies. Undoubtedly the original has had both
interpolations and omissions. Pseudo-Gorionides abovementioned seems to hint
at the groundwork of this history of Alexander in the following passage.
"Caeteras autem res ab Alexandro gestas, et egregia ejus facinora ac quaecunque
demum perpetravit, ea in libris Medorum et Persarum, atque apud Nicolaum,
Titum, et Strabonem; et in libris nativitatis Alexandri, rerumque ab ipso
gestarum, quos Magi ac Aegyptii eo anno quo Alexander decessit, composuerunt,
scripta reperies." Lib. ii. c. 12. -- 22. [Lat. Verse.] p. 152. edit. Jo. Frid.
Briethaupt.
. But we should remember its origin. The Arabian books abound with the most
incredible fictions and traditions concerning Alexander the Great, which they
probably borrowed and improved from the Persians. They call him Escander. If I
recollect right, one of the miracles of this romance is our hero's horn. It is
said, that Alexander gave the signal to his whole army by a wonderful horn of
immense magnitude, which might be heard at the distance of sixty miles, and
that it was blown or sounded by sixty men at once It is also in a manuscript
entitled Secretum Secretorum Aristotelis, Lib. 5. MSS. Bodl. D. 1. 5. This
treatise, ascribed to Aristotle, was anciently in high repute. It is pretended
to have been translated out of Greek into Arabic or Chaldee by one John a
Spaniard; from thence into Latin by Philip a Frenchman; at length into English
verse by Lidgate: under whom more will be said of it. I think the Latin is
dedicated to Theophina, a queen of Spain.
. This is the horn which Orlando won from the giant Jatmund, and which, as
Turpin and the Islandic bards report, was endued with magical power, and might
be heard at the distance of twenty miles. Cervantes says, that it was bigger
than a massy beam See Observat. Fair. Qu. i. v. p. 202.
. Boyardo, Berni, and Ariosto have all such a horn: and the fiction is here
traced to its original source. But in speaking of the books which furnished the
story of Alexander, I must not forget that Quintus Curtius was an admired
historian of the romantic ages. He is quoted in the POLICRATICON of John of
Salisbury, who died in the year 1181 viii. 18.
. Eneas Sylvius relates, that Alphonsus the ninth, king of Spain, in the
thirteenth century, a great astronomer, endeavored to relieve himself from a
tedious malady by reading the bible over fourteen times, with all the glosses;
but not meeting with the expected success, he was cured by the consolation he
received from once reading Quintus Curtius Op. p. 476.
. Peter Blesensis, archdeacon of London, a student at Paris about the year
1150, mentioning the books most common in the schools, declares that he
profited much by frequently looking into this author Epist. 101. Frequenter
inspicere historias Q. Curtii, etc.
. Vincentius Bellovacensis, cited above, a writer of the thirteenth century,
often quotes Curtius in his Speculum Historiale iv. 61, etc. Montfaucon, I
think, mentions a manuscript of Q. Curtius in the Colbertine library at Paris
eight hundred years old. See Barth. ad Claudian. p. 1165. Alexander Bened^ctus,
in his history of Venice, transcribes whole pages from this historian. I could
give other proofs.
. He was also early translated into French. Among the royal manuscripts in the
British Museum, there is a fine copy of a French translation of this classic,
adorned with elegant old paintings and illuminations, entitled, Quinte Curse
Ruf, des faiz d' Alexandre, ix live. translate par Vasque de Lucene Portugalois.
Escript par la main de Jehan du Chesne, a Lille 17 F. i. Brit. Mus. And again,
20 C. iii. And 15 D. iv.
. It was made in 1468. But I believe the Latin translations of Simeon Seth's
romance on this subject, were best known and most esteemed for some centuries.

The French, to resume the main tenor of our argument, had written metrical
romances on most of these subjects, before or about the year 1200. Some of
these seem to have been formed from prose histories, enlarged and improved with
new adventures and embellishments from earlier and more simple tales in verse
on the same subject. Chrestien of Troys wrote Le Romans du Graal, or the
adventures of the Sangrale, which included the deeds of king Arthur, Sir
Tristram, Lancelot du Lake, and the rest of the knights of the round table,
before 1191. There is a passage in a coeval romance, relating to Chrestien,
which proves what I have just advanced, that some of these histories previously
existed in prose.

Christians qui intent et pain
A rimoyer le meillor conte,
Par le commandment le Conte,
Qu'il soit contez in cort royal
Ce est li contes del Graal
Don't li quens li bailla le livre Apud Fauchett, Rec. p. 99. Who adds, "Je croy
bien que Romans que nous avons ajourdhuy imprimez, tells que Lancelot du Lac,
Tristan, et autres, sont refondus sus les vielles proses et rymes et puis
refraichis de language." Rec. live. ii. x. The oldest manuscripts of romances on
these subjects which I have seen are the following. They are in the royal
manuscripts of the British Museum. Le Romanz de Tristran, 20 D. ii. This was
probably transcribed not long after the year 1200. -- Hist^ire du Lancelot ou
S. Graal, ibid. iii. Perhaps older than the year 1200. -- Again, Hist^ire du S.
Graal, ou Lancelot, 20 C. vi. 1. Transcribed soon after 1200. This is imperfect
at the beginning. The subject of Joseph of Arimathea bringing a vessel of the
Sanguis realis, or Sangral, that is our Savior's blood, into England, is of
high antiquity. It is thus mentioned in Morte Arthur. "And then the old man had
an harp, and he sung an old song how Joseph of Arimathy came into this
land." B. iii. c. 5.
.
Chrestien also wrote the romance of Sir Percival, which belongs to the same
history Fauchett, p. 103. This story was also written in very old rhyme by one
Menessier, not mentioned in Fauchett, from whence it was reduced into prose
1530. ^ol. Paris. PERCAVAL LE GALOIS, le quel acheva les avantures du Saint
Graal, avec aucun faits du chevalier Gavain, translatee du rhyme de l'ancien
aut^ur MESSENIER, etc. In the royal library at Paris is LE ROMAN DE PERSEVAL le
Galois, par CRESTIEN DE TROYES. In verse. fol. Mons. Galland thinks there is
another romance under this title, Mem. de Lit. iii. p. 427. seq. 433. 8vo. The
author of which he supposes may be Rauol de Biavais, mentioned by Fauchet, p.
142. Compare Lenglet, Bibl. Romans p. 250. The author of this last-mentioned
Percevall, in the exordium, says that he wrote among others, the romances of
Eneas, Roy Marc, and Uselt le Blonde: and that he translated into French,
Ovid's Art of Love.
. Godfrey de Leigni, a cotemporary, finished a romance begun by Chrestien,
entitled La Charette, containing the adventures of Lancelot. Fauchett affirms,
that Chrestien abounds with beautiful inventions P. 105. ibid.
. But no story is so common among the earliest French poets as Charlemagne and
his Twelve peers. In the British Museum we have an old French manuscript
containing the history of Charlemagne, translated into prose from Turpin's
Latin. The writer declares, that he preferred a sober prose translation of this
authentic historian, as histories in rhyme, undoubtedly very numerous on this
subject, looked so much like lies There is a curious passage to this purpose in
an old French prose romance of Charlemagne, written before the year 1200.
"Baudouin Comte de Hainau trouva a sens en Bourgongne le VIE de Charlemagne: et
mourant la donna a sa sour Yolond Comtesse de S. Paul qui m'a pry que je la
met en Roman sans ryme. Parce que tell se delitera el Roman qui del Latin
n'ent cure; et par le Roman sera mielx gardee. Maintes gens en ont ouy conter
et chanter, mais n'est ce mensonge non ce qu'ils en disent et chantent cil
conteour n^ cil jugleor. NUZ CONTES RYMEZ N'EN EST VRAIS: TOT MENSONGE CE
QU'ILS DIENT." Live. quatr.
. His title is extremely curious. "Ci comence l' Estoire que Turpin le
Ercevesque de Reins fit del bon roy Charlemayne, coment il conquist Espaigne, e
delivera des Paens. Et pur ceo qe Estoire rimee semble mensunge, est ceste mis
in prose, solun le Latin qe Turpin mesmes fist, tut ensi cume il le vist et
vist MSS. Harl. 273. 23. Cod. membr. f. 86. There is a very old metrical
romance on this subject, ibid. MSS. Harl. 527. 1. f. 1. Cod. membr. 4to.
."

Oddegir the Dane makes a part of Charlemagne's history; and, I believe, is
mentioned by archbishop Turpin. But his exploits have been recorded in verse by
Adenez, an old French poet, not mentioned by Fauchett, author of the two
metrical romances of Berlin and Cleomades, under the name of Ogier le Danois,
in the year 1270. This author was master of the musicians, or, as others say,
herald at arms, to the duke of Brabant. Among the royal manuscripts in the
Museum, we have a poem, Le Livre de Ogeir de Dannemarche 15 E. vi. 4.
. The French have likewise illustrated this champion in Leonine rhyme. And I
cannot help mentioning, that they have in verse Visions of Oddegir the Dane in
the kingdom of Fairy, "Visions d' Ogeir le Danois au Royaume de Faerie en verse
Francois," printed at Paris in 1548 8vo. There is also L'Histoire du preux
Meurvin fills D'OGIER le DANOIS. Paris. 1359. 4to. And 1540. 8vo.
.

On the Trojan story, the French have an ancient poem, at least not posterior
to the thirteenth century, entitled Roman de Troy, written by Benoit de Saint
More. As this author appears not to have been known to the accurate Fauchett,
nor la Croix du Maine; I will cite the exordium, especially as it records his
name; and implies that the piece translated from the Latin, and that the
subject was not then common in French.

Cette estoire n'est pas usee,
N'en gaires livres n'est trouvee:
La retraite ne fut encore
Mais Beneoit de saint More,
L' a translate, et fait et dit,
Et a sa main les mots ecrit.
He mentions his own name again in the body of the work, and at the end.

Je n'en fait plus ne plus en dit;
Beneoit qui c'est Roman fit See M. Galland ut supr. p. 425.
.
Du Cange enumerates a metrical manuscript romance on this subject by Jaques
Millet, entitled De la Destruction de Troie Gloss. Lat. IND. AUT. p. cxciii.
. Montfaucon, whose extensive enquiries nothing could escape, mentions Dares
Phrigius translated into French verse, at Milan, about the twelfth century
Monum. Fr. i. 374.
. We find also, among the royal manuscripts at Paris, Dictys Cretensis,
t^anslated into French verse See Mont^. Catal. MSS. ii. p. 1669.
. To this subject, although almost equally belonging to that of Charlemagne, we
may also refer a French romance in verse, written by Philipes Mousques, canon
and chancellor of the church of Tournay. It is in fact, a chronicle of France:
but the author, who does not choose to begin quite so high as Adam and Eve, nor
yet later than the Trojan war, opens his history with the rape of Helen, passes
on to an ample description of the siege of Troy; and, through an exact detail
of all the great events which succeeded, conducts his reader to the year 1240.
This work comprehends all the fictions of Turpin's Charlemagne, with a variety
of other extravagant stories dispersed in many professed romances. But it
preserves numberless curious particulars, which throw considerable light on
historical facts. Du Cange has collected from it all that concerns the French
emperors of Constantinople, which he has printed at the end of his entertaining
history of that city.

It was indeed the fashion for the historians of these times, to form such a
general plan as would admit all the absurdities of popular tradition.
Connection of parts, and uniformity of subject, were as little studied as
truth. Ages of ignorance and superstition are more affected by the mavelous
than by plain facts; and believe what they find written, without discernment or
examination. No man before the sixteenth century presumed to doubt that the
Francs derived their o^igin from Francus, a son of Hector; that the Spaniards
were descended from Japhet, the Britons from Brutus, and the Scotch from
Fergus. Vincent de Beauvais, who lived under Louis the ninth of France, and
who, on account of his extraordinary erudition, was appointed preceptor to that
king's sons, very gravely classes archbishop Turpin's Charlemagne among the
real histories, and places it on a level with Suetonius and Caesar. He was
himself an historian, and has left a large history of the world, fraught with a
variety of reading, and of high repute in the middle ages; but edifying and
entertaining as this work might have been to his cotemporaries, at present it
serves only to record their prejudices, and to characterise their credulity He
flourished about 1260.
.

Hercules and Jason, as I have before hinted, were involved in the Trojan story
by Guido de Colonna, and hence became familiar to the romance writers The
TROJOMANNA SAGA, a Scandic manuscript at Stockholm, seems to be posteriour to
Guido's publication. It begins with Jason and Hercules, and their ^oyage to
Colchos: proceeds to the rape of Helen, and ends with the siege and destruction
of Troy. It celebrates all the Grecian and Asiatic heroes concerned in that
war. Wanl. Antiquit. Septentr. p. 315. col. 1.
. The Hercules, the Theseus, and the Amazons of Boccacio, hereafter more
particularly mentioned, came from this source. I do not at present recollect
any old French metrical romances on these subjects, but presume that there are
many. Jason seems to have vied with Arthur and Charlemagne; and so popular was
his expedition to Colchos, or rather so firmly believed, that in honor of so
respectable an adventure, a duke of Burgundy instituted the order of the Golden
Fleece, in the year 1468. At the same time his chaplain Raoul le Feure
illustrated the story which gave rise to this magnificent institution, in a
prolix and elaborate history, afterward translated by Caxton See Observat. on
Spenser's Fairy Queen, i. v. P. 176. seq. Montfaucon mentions M^d^ae et Ja^onis
Hi^loria a Guidone de Columna. Catal. MSS. Bibl. Coislin. ii. p. 1109. -- 818.
. But I must not forget, that among the royal manuscripts in the Museum, the
French romance of Hercules occurs in two books, enriched with numerous ancient
paintings 17 E. ii.
. Pertonape and Ypomedon, in our Prologue, seem to be Parthenopeus and
Hippomedon, belonging to the Theban story, and mentioned, I think, in Statius.
An English romance in verse, called Child Ippomedone, will be cited hereafter,
most probably translated from the French.

The conquests of Alexander the great were celebrated by one Simon, in old
Pictavian or Limosin, about the twelfth century. This piece thus begins:
Chanson voil dis per ryme et per Leoin
Del fill Filippe lo roy de Macedoin Fauch. p. 77.
.
An Italian poem on Alexander, called Trionfo Magno, was presented to Leo the
tenth, by Dominicho Falugi Anciseno, in the year 1521. Crescimbeni says it was
copied from a Provencial romance Istor. Volg. Poes. i. iv. p. 332. In the royal
manuscripts there is a French poem entitled La Vengeance du grant Alexandre.
19 D. i. 2. Brit. Mus. I am not sure whether or no it is not a portion of the
French Alexander, mentioned below, written by Jehan li Nivelois.
. But one of the most valuable pieces of the old French poetry is on the
subject of this victorious monarch, entitled, Roman d' Alexandre. It has been
called the second poem now remaining in the French language, and was written
about the year 1200. It was confessedly translated from the Latin; but it bears
a nearer resemblance to Simeon Seth's romance, than to Quintus Curtius. It was
the confederated performance of four writers, who, as Fauchett expresses
himself, were associez en leur JONGLERIE Fauchett, Rec. p. 83.
. Lambert li Cors, a learned civilian, began the poem; and it was continued and
completed by Alexander de Paris, John le Nivelois, and Peter de Saint Clost
Fauchett, ibid. Mons. Galland mentions a French romance in verse, unknown to
Fauchett, and entitled Roman ^'At^^s et de Prophylias, written by one
Alexander, whom he supposes to be this Alexander of Paris. Mem. Lit. iii. p.
429. edit. Amst. It is often cited by Carpentier, Suppl. Cang.
. The poem is closed with Alexander's will. This is no imagination of any of
out three poets, although one of them was a civil lawyer. Alexander's will, in
which he nominates successors to his provinces and kingdom, was a tradition
commonly received, and is mentioned by Diodorus Siculus, and Ammianus
Marcellinus. See Fabric. Bibl. Gr. c. iii. l. viii. p. 205.
. I know not whether this work was ever printed. It is voluminous; and in the
Bodleian library at Oxford is a vast folio manuscript of it on vellum, which is
of great antiquity, richly decorated, and in high preservation MSS. Bodl B.
264. fol.
. The margins and initials exhibit, not only fantastic ornaments and
illuminations exquisitely finished, but also pictures executed with singular
elegance, expressing the incidents of the story, and displaying the fashion of
buildings, armor, dress, musical instruments The most frequent of these are
organs, h^gpipes, lutes, and trumpets.
, and other particulars appropriated to the times. At the end we read this
hexameter, which points out the name of the scribe.

Nomen scriptoris est THOMAS PLENUS AMORIS. Then follows the date of the year
in which the transcript was completed, viz. 1338. Afterward there is the name
and date of the illuminator, in the following colophon, written in golden
letters. "Che livre fu perfais de la enluminiere an xviiio. jour davryl par
Jehan de grise l' an de grace m. ccc. xliii. The bishop of Gloucester has a
most beautiful French manuscript on vellum of Mort d'Arthur, ornamented in the
same manner. It was a present from Virtue the engraver.
" Hence it may be concluded, that the illuminations and paintings of this
superb manuscript, which were most probably begun as soon as the scribe had
finished his part, took up six years: no long time, if we consider the
attention of an artist to ornaments so numerous, so various, so minute, and so
laboriously touched. It has been supposed, that before the appearance of this
poem, the Romans, or those pieces which celebrated GESTS, were constantly
composed in short verses of six or eight syllables: and that in this Roman d'
Alexandre verses of twelve syllables were first used. It has therefore been
imagined, that the verses called ALEXANDRINES, the present French heroic
measure, took their rise from this poem; Alexander being the hero, and
Alexander the chief of the four poets concerned in the work. That the name,
some centuries afterward, might take place in honor of this celebrated and
early effort of French poetry, I think is very probable; but that verses of
twelve syllables made their first appearance in this poem, is a doctrine which,
to say no more, from examples already produced and examined, is at least
ambiguous See Pref. Le Roman de la Rose, par Mons. L'Abbe Lenglet, i. p. xxxvi.
. In this poem Gadifer, hereafter mentioned, of Arabian lineage, is a very
conspicuous champion.

Gadifer fu moult preus, d'un Arrabi lignage. A rubric or title of one of the
chapters is, "Comment Alexander fuit mys en un vesal de vooire pour veoir le
merveiles, etc." This is a passage already quoted from Simeon Seth's romance,
relating Alexander's expedition to the bottom of the ocean, in a vessel of
glass, for the purpose of inspecting fishes and sea monsters. In another place,
from the same romance, he turns astronomer, and soars to the moon by the help
of four gryphons. The caliph is frequently mentioned in this piece; and
Alexander, like Charlemagne, has his twelve peers.

These were the four reigning stories of romance. On which perhaps English
pieces, translated from the French, existed before or about the year 1300. But
there are some other English romances mentioned in the prologue of RICHARD
CUEUR DE LION, which we likewise probably received from the French in that
period, and on which I shall here also enlarge.

BEUVES de Hanton, or Sir Beavis of Southampton, is a French romance of
considerable antiquity, although the hero is not older than the Norman
conquest. It is alluded to in our English romance on this story, which will
again be cited, and at large.

Forth they yode so says the book Sign. P. ii.
. And again more expressly, Under the bridge were sixty belles,
Right as the Romans tells Signat. E. iv.
.
The Romans is the French original. It is called the Romance of Beuves de
Hanton, by Pere Labbe Nov. Bibl. p. 334. edit. 1652.
. The very ingenious Monsieur de la Curne de saint Palaye mentions an ancient
French romance in prose, entitled Beufres de Hanton Mem. Lit. xv. 582. 4to.
. Chaucer mentions BEVIS, with other famous romanc^s, but whether in French or
English is uncertain Rim. Thop.
. Beuves of Hantonne was printed at Paris in 1502 4to. Percy's Ball. iii. 217.
. Ascapart was one of his giants, a character Selden's Drayton. Polyolb. s.
iii. p. 37.
in very old French romances. Bevis was a Saxon chieftain, who seems to have
extended his dominion along the southern coasts of England, which he is said to
have defended against the Norman invaders. He lived at Downton in Wiltshire.
Near Southampton is an artificial hill called Bevis Mount, on which was
probably a fortress It is now enclosed in the beautiful gardens of General Sir
John Mordaunt, and gives name to his seat.
. It is pretended that he was earl of Southampton. His sword is shown in
Arundel castle. This piece was evidently written after the crusades; as Bevis
is knighted by the king of Armenia, and is one of the generals at the siege of
Damascus.

GUY EARL OF WARWICK is recited as a French romance by Labbe Ubi supr.
. In the British Museum a metrical history in very old French appears, in which
Felicia, or Felice, is called the daughter of an earl of Warwick, and Guido, or
Guy of Warwick, is the son of Seguart the earl's steward. The manuscript is at
present imperfect MSS. Harl. 3775. 2.
. Montfaucon mentions among the royal manuscripts at Paris, Roman de Guy et
Beuves de Hanton. The latter is the romance last mentioned. Again, Le Livre de
Guy de Warwick et de Harold d' Ardenne Catal. MSS. p. 792.
. This Harold d'Arden is a distinguished warrior of Guy's history, and
therefore his achievements sometimes form a separate romance: as in the royal
manuscripts of the British Museum, where we find Le Romant de Herolt Dardenne
15 E. vi. 8. fol.
. In the English romance of Guy, mentioned at large in its proper place, this
champion is called Sir Heraude of Arderne Sign. L. ii. verse.
. At length this favorite subject formed a large prose romance, entitled Guy
de Warwick Chevalier d'Angleterre et de la belle fille Felix samie, and printed
at Paris in 1525 Fol. And again, ib. 1526. 4to.
. Chaucer mentions Guy's story among the Romaunces of Pris Rim. Thop.
: and it is alluded to in the Spanish romance of Tirante il Blanco, or Tirante
the White, supposed to have been written not long after the year 1430 Percy's
Ball. iii. 100.
. This romance was composed, or perhaps enlarged, after the crusades; as we
find, that Guy's redoubted encounters with Colbrond the Danish giant, with the
monster of Dunsmore heath, and the dragon of Northumberland, are by no means
equal to some of his achievements in the holy land, and the trophies which he
won from the sultan under the command of the emperor Frederick.

The romance of SIDRAC, often entitled, Le Livere Sydrac le philosophe le quel
hom appele le livere de le funtane de totes Sciences, appears to have been very
popular, from the present frequency of its manuscripts. But it is rather a
romance of Arabian philosophy than of chivalry. It is a system of natural
knowledge, and particularly treats of the virtues of plants. Sidrac, the
philosopher of this system, was astronomer to an eastern king. He lived eight
hundred and fortyseven years after Noah, of whose book of astronomy he was
possessed. He converts Bocchus, an idolatrous king of India, to the christian
faith, by whom he is invited to build a mighty tower against the invasions of a
rival king of India. But the history, no less than the subject of this piece,
displays the state, nature, and migrations of literature in the dark ages.
After the death of Bocchus, Sidrac's book fell into the hands of a Chaldean
renowned for piety. It then successively becomes the property of king Madian,
Namaan the Assyrian, and Grypho archbishop of Samaria. The latter had a priest
named Demetrius, who brought it into Spain, and here it was translated from the
Greek into Latin. This translation is said to be made at Toledo, by Roger de
Palermo, a minorite friar, in the thirteenth century. A king of Spain then
commanded it to be translated from Latin into Arabic, and sent it as a most
valuable present to Emir Elmomenim, lord of Tunis. It was next given to
Frederick the Second, emperor of Germany, famous in the crusades. This work,
which is of considerable length, was translated into English verse, and will be
mentioned on that account again. Sidrac is recited as an eminent philosopher,
with Seneca and king Solomon, in the Marchaunt's Second tale, ascribed to
Chaucer Urr. p. 616. v. 1932. There is an old translation of SIDRAC into Dutch,
MSS. Marshall, Bibl. Bodl. 31. fol.
.

It is natural to conclude, that most of these French romances were current in
England, either in the French originals, which were well understood at least by
the more polite readers, or else by translation or imitation, as I have before
hinted, when the romance of Richard Cuer de Lion, in whose prologue they are
recited, was translated into English. That the latter was the case as to some
of them, at least, we shall soon produce actual proofs. A writer, who has
considered these matters with much penetration and judgment, observes, that
probably from the reign of our Richard the first, we are to date that
remarkable intercommunication and mutual exchange of compositions which we
discover to have taken place at some early period between the French and
English minstrels. The same set of phrases, the same species of characters,
incidents, and adventures, and often the identical stories, being found in the
metrical romances of both nations Percy's Ess. on Anc. Engl. Minstr. p. 12.
. From close connection and constant intercourse, the traditions and the
champions of one kingdom were equally known in the other: and although Bevis
and Guy were English heroes, yet on these principles this circumstance by no
means destroys the supposition, that their achievements, although perhaps
already celebrated in rude English songs, might be first wrought into romance
by the French Dugdale relates, that in the reign of Henry the fourth, about the
year 1410, a lord Beauchamp, traveling into the east, was hospitably received
at Jerusalem by the Soldan's lieutenant: "Who hearing that he was descended
from the famous Guy of Warwick, whose story they had in books of their own
language, invited him to his palace; and royally feasting him, presented him
with three precious stones of great value, besides diverse clothes of silk and
gold given to his servants." Baron. i. p. 243. col. 1. This story is delivered
on the credit of John Rouse, the traveller's cotemporary. Yet it is not so very
improbable that Guy's history should be a book among the Saracens, if we
consider, that Constantinople was not only a central and connecting point
between the eastern and western world, but that the French in the thirteenth
century had acquired an establishment there under Baldwin earl of Flanders:
that the French language must have been known in Sicily, Jerusalem, Cyprus, and
Antioch, in consequence of the conquests of Robert Guiscard, Hugo le Grand, and
Godfrey of ^ulloigne: and that pilgrimages into the holy land were excessively
frequent. It is hence easy to suppose, that the French imported many of their
stories or books of this sort into the east; which being thus understood there,
and suiting the genius of the orientals, were at length translated into their
language. It is remarkable, that the Greeks at Constantinople, in the twelfth
century, and since, called all the Europeans by the name of Franks; as the
Turks do to this day. See Seld. Polyolb.. viii. p. 130.
. And it seems probable, that we continued for some time this practice of
borrowing from our neighbors. Even the titles of our oldest romances, such as
Sir Blandamoure, Sir Triamoure, Sir Eglamoure, of Artoys In our English SIR
EGLAMOUR OF ARTOYS, there is this reference to the French from which it was
translated. Sign. E. i. His own mother there he wedde,
In ROMAUNCE as we read.
Again, fol. ult. In ROMAUNCE this cronycle is.
The authors of these pieces often refer to their original. Just as Arios^o
mentions Turpin for his voucher.
, La Mort d^ Arthur, with many more, betray their French extraction. It is
likewise a presumptive argument in favor of this assertion, that we find no
prose romances in our language, before Caxton translated from the French the
History of Troy, the Life of Charlemagne, the Histories of Jason, Paris, and
Vyenne But I must not omit here that Du Cange recites a metrical French romance
in manuscript, Le Roman de Girard de Vienne, written by Bertrand le Clerc.
Gloss. Lat. i. IND. AUCT. p. ^xciii. Madox has printed the names of several
French romances found in the reign of Edward the third, among which one on this
subject occurs. Formul. Anglic. p. 12. Compare Observations on Sp^nser's Fairy
Qu^^n, vol. ii.. viii. p. 43. Among the royal manuscripts, in the British
Museum, ther^ is in verse Histoir^ de G^ra^t ^e Vianne et de ses freres. 20 D.
xi. 2. This manuscript was perhaps written before the year 1300.
, the Death of King Arthur, and other prose pieces of chivalry: by which, as
the profession of minstrelsy decayed and gradually gave way to a change of
manners and customs, romances in meter were at length imperceptibly superseded,
or at least grew less in use as a mode of entertainment at public festivities.

Various causes concurred, in the mean time, to multiply books of chivalry
among the French, and to give them a superiority over the English, not only in
the number but in the excellence of those compositions. Their barons lived in
greater magnificence. Their feudal system flourished on a more sumptuous,
extensive, and lasting establishment. Schools were instituted in their castles
for initiating the young nobility in the rules and practice of chivalry. Their
tilts and tournaments were celebrated with a higher degree of pomp; and their
ideas of honor and gallantry were more exaggerated and refined.

We may add, what indeed has been before incidentally remarked, that their
troubadours were the first writers of metrical romances. But by what has been
here advanced, I do not mean to insinuate without any restrictions, that the
French entirely led the way in these compositions. Undoubtedly the Provencial
bards contributed much to the progress of Italian literature. Raimond the
fourth of Arragon, count of Provence, about the year 1220, a lover and a judge
of letters, invited to his court the most celebrated of the songsters who
professed to polish and adorn the Provencial language by various sorts of
poetry Giovan. Villani, Istor. ^. vi. c. 92.
. Charles the first, his son-in-law, and the inheritor of his virtues and
dignities, conquered Naples, and carried into Italy a taste for the Provencial
literature. At Florence especially this taste prevailed, where he reigned many
years with great splendor, and where his successors resided. Soon afterward
the Roman court was removed to Provence Villani acquaints us, that Brunetto
Latini, Dante's master, was the first who attempted to polish the Florentines
by improving their taste and style; which he did by writing his grand work the
TESORO in Provencial. He died in 1294. See Villan. ibid. ^. ix. c. 135.
. Hitherto the Latin language had only been in use. The Provencial writers
established a common dialect: and their examples convinced other nations, that
the modern languages were no less adapted to composition than those of
antiquity Dante designed at first that his Inferno, and Treatise on monarchy,
should appear in Latin. But finding that he could not so effectually in that
language impress his satirical strokes and political maxims on the laity, or
illiterate, he altered his mind, and published those pieces in ^talian. Had
Petrarch written his Africa, his Eclogues, and his prose compositions in
Italian, the literature of his country would much sooner have arrived at
perfection.
. They introduced a love of reading, and diffused a general and popular taste
for poetry, by writing in a language intelligible to the ladies and the people.
Their verses being conveyed in a familiar tongue, became the chief amusement of
princes and feudal lords, whose courts had now begun to assume an air of
greater brilliancy: a circumstance which necessarily gave great encouragement
to their profession, and by rendering these arts of ingenious entertainment
universally fashionable, imperceptibly laid the foundation of polite
literature. From these beginnings it were easy to trace the progress of poetry
to its perfection, through John de Meun in France, Dante in Italy, and Chaucer
in England.

This praise must undoubtedly be granted to the Provencial poets. But in the
mean time, to recur to our original argument, we should be cautious of
asserting in general and indiscriminating terms, that the Provencial poets were
the first writers of metrical romance: at least we should ascertain, with
rather more precision than has been commonly used on this subject, how far they
may claim this merit. I am of opinion that there were two sorts of French
troubadours, who have not hitherto been sufficiently distinguished. If we
diligently examine their history, we shall find that the poetry of the first
troubadours consisted in satires, moral fables, allegories, and sentimental
sonnets. So early as the year 1180, a tribunal called the Court of Love, was
instituted both in Provence and Picardy, at which questions in gallantry were
decided. This institution furnished eternal matter for the poets, who threw the
claims and arguments of the different parties into verse, in a style that
afterward led the way to the spiritual conversations of Cyrus and Clelia This
part of their character will be insisted upon more at large when we come to
speak of Chaucer.
. Fontenelle does not scruple to acknowledge, that gallantry was the parent of
French poetry Theatr. Fr. p. 13.
. But to sing romantic and chivalrous adventures was a very different task, and
required very different talents. The troubadours therefore who composed
metrical romances form a different species, and ought always to be considered
separately. And this latter class seems to have commenced at a later period,
not till after the crusades had effected a great change in the manners and
ideas of the western world. In the mean time, I hazard a conjecture. Cinthio
Giraldi supposes, that the art of the troubadours, commonly called the Gay
Science, was first communicated from France to the Italians, and afterward to
the Spaniards Apud Huet, Orig. Romans p. 108.
. This perhaps may be true: but at the same time it is highly probable, as the
Spaniards had their JUGLARES or convivial bards very early, as from long
connection they were immediately and intimately acquainted with the fictions of
the Ara^ians, and as they were naturally fond of chivalry, that the troubadours
of Provence in great measure caught this turn of fabling from Spain. The
communication, to mention no other obvious means of intercourse in an affair of
this nature, was easy through the ports of Toulon and Marseilles, by which the
two nations carried on from early times a constant commerce. Even the French
critics themselves universally allow, that the Spaniards, having learned rhyme
from the Arabians, through this very channel conveyed it to Provence. Tasso
preferred Amadis de Gaul, a romance originally written in Spain, by Vasco
Lobeyra, before the year 1300 Nic. Antonius, Bibl. Hispan. Vet. tom. ii. l.
viii. c. 7. number. 291.
, to the most celebrated pieces of the Provencial poets Disc. del Poem. Eroic.
l. ii. p. 45. 46.
. But this is a subject which will perhaps receive illustration from a writer
of great taste, talents, and industry, Monsieur de la Curne de Saint Palaye,
who will soon oblige the world with an ample history of Provencial poetry; and
whose researches into a kindred subject, already published, have opened a new
and extensive field of information concerning the manners, institutions, and
literature of the feudal ages See Memoires sur l'ancienne Chevalerie, etc.
Paris, 1759. ii. tom. 12mo.
.

SECT. IV.
VARIOUS matters suggested by the Prologue of RICHARD CUEUR DE LION, cited in
the last section, have betrayed us into a long digression, and interrupted the
regularity of our annals. But I could not neglect so fair an opportunity of
preparing the reader for those metrical tales, which having acquired a new cast
of fiction from the crusades and a magnificence of manners from the increase of
chivalry, now began to be greatly multiplied, and as it were professedly to
form a separate species of poetry. I now therefore resume the series, and
proceed to give some specimens of the English metrical romances which appeared
before or about the reign of Edward the second: and although most of these
pieces continued to be sung by the minstrels in the halls of our magnificent
ancestors for some centuries afterward, yet as their first appearance may most
probably be dated at this period, they properly coincide in this place with the
tenor of our history. In the mean time, it is natural to suppose, that by
frequent repetition and successive changes of language during many generations,
their original simplicity must have been in some degree corrupted. Yet some of
the specimens are extracted from manuscripts written in the reign of Edward the
third. Others indeed from printed copies, where the editors took great
liberties in accommodating the language to the times. However in such as may be
supposed to have suffered most from depravations of this sort, the substance of
the ancient style still remains, and at least the structure of the story. On
the whole, we mean to give the reader an idea of those popular heroic tales in
verse, professedly written for the harp, which began to be multiplied among us
about the beginning of the fourteenth century. We will begin with the romance
of RICHARD CUEUR DE LION, already mentioned.

The poem opens with the marriage of Richard's father, Henry the second, with
the daughter of Carbarryne, a king of Antioch. But this is only a lady of
romance. Henry married Eleanor the divorced queen of Louis of France. The
minstrels could not conceive any thing less than an eastern princess to be the
mother of this magnanimous hero.

-- His barons him read Advised.

That they granted hem a wife to wedde,
Hastily he sent his sonde
Into many a diverse land
The fairest woman that was on lyve
They should bring him to wyve.
The messengers or ambassadors, in their voyage, meet a ship adorned like
Cleopatra's galley.

Such ne saw they never none,
For it was so gay begone
Every nail with gold ygrave
Of pure gold was his sklave Rudder. Clavus.
,
Her mast was of yvory,
Of samyte her sail wytly,
Her ropes al of white sylke,
As white as ever was any milk.
The noble ship was without
With clothes of gold spread about,
And her loft Deck.
and her wyndlace Windlass.

Al of gold depaynted was:
In the ship there were dyght
Knights and lords of might,
And a lady therein was
Bright as son through the glass.
Her men abroad gone stand
And becked them with her hand,
And prayed them for to dwell
And their aventures to tell. --
"To dyverse lands do we wend
"For king Harry has us send
"For to seche him a queen,
"The fairest that might on ^rthe been."
Up arose a king of chair
With that word, and spoke fair,
The chair was of carbunkell stone,
Such saw they never none,
And other dukes him beside,
Noble men of much pride,
And welcomed the messengers every chone,
Into the ship they began gone. --
Clothes of sylke were sprad on board,
The king then anon badde,
As it is in ryme radde i. e. The French original.
,
That his daughter were forth fet
And in a chair by him set,
Trompettes bigan to blow,
She was set in a throw Immediately.

With xx knygtes her about
And double so many of ladies stout. --
When they had done their mete
Of adventures they bygyn to speak.
The king them told in his reason,
How it came him in a vysyon,
In his land that he came fro
In to Engelond for to go
And his daughter that was him der^
For to wend with him in fere Company.
,
And in this manner we by dyght
Unto your land to wend right.
Then answerede a messengere,
His name was cleped Barnagere,
"Ferther we will seek naught
"To my lord she shall be brought."
They soon arrive in England, and the lady is lodged in the tower of London,
one of the royal castles.

The messengers the king have told
Of that lady fair and bold
There she lay in the toure
The lady that was whyt as flower;
King Harry began him dyght
With earls, barons, and many a knight,
Against that lady for to wend,
For he was courteys and hende:
The damsel to land was ladde
Clothes of gold before her spradde,
The messengers on each a side,
And mynystrells of much pride.
King Harry liked her seeing
That fair lady, and her fader the king. --
To Westminstir they went in fere
Lords, ladies, that there were,
Trompettes bigan for to blow
To mete To dinner.
they went in a throw, etc Sign. A. ii. -- A. iiii.
.
The first of our hero's achievements in chivalry is at a splendid tournament
held at Salisbury. Clarendon near Salisbury was one of the king's palaces In
the pipe-rolls of this king's reign, I find the following articles relating to
this ancient palace, which has been already mentioned incidentally. Rot. Pip.
1. Ric. i. "WILTES. Et in cariagio vini Regis a Clarendon usque Woodestoke, 34
s. 4 d. per Br. Reg. Et pro du^endis 200 m. [marcis] a Saresburia usque
Bristow, 7 s. 4 d. p^r Br. Reg. Et pro ducendis 2500 libris a Saresburia usque
Glocestriam, 26 s. 10 d. per Br. Reg. Et pro tonellis et clavis ad eosdem
denarios. Et in cariagio de 4000 marcis a Sarum usque Suthanton, et pro
tonellis et aliis necessariis, 8 s. et 1 d. per Br. Reg." And again in the
reign of Henry the third. Rot. Pip. 30. Hen. iii. "WILTESCIRE. Et in una
marcelsia ad opus regis et reginae apud Clarendon cum duobus interclusoriis, et
duabus cameris privatis, hos^io veteris aulae amovendo in porticu, et de eadem
aula camera facienda cum camino et fenestris, et camera privata, et quadam
magna coquina quadrata, et aliis operationibus, contentis in Brevi, inceptis
per eundem Nicolaum et non perfectis, 526. l. 16 s. 5 d. ob. per Br. Reg."
Again, Rot. Pip. 39. H^n. iii. "SUDHAMT. Comp. Novae forestae. Et in triginta
miliaribus scindularum [shingles] faciend. in eadem foresta et cariand. easdem
usque Clarendon ad domum regis ibidem cooperiandam, 6 l. et 1 marc. per Br.
Reg. Et in 30 mill. scindularum faciend. in eadem, et cariand. usque Clarendon,
11 l. 10 s." And again, in the same reign the canons of Ivy church receive
pensions for celebrating in the royal chapel there. Rot. Pip. 7. Hen. iii.
"WILTES. Et canonicis de monasterio ederoso ministrantibus in Capella de
Clarendon. 35 l. 7 d. ob." Stukeley is mistaken in saying this palace was built
by king John.
.

King Rychard began him dysguyse
In a full strong queyntyse See Du Cange, Gl. Lat. COINTISE.
:
He came out of a valaye
For to se of their play,
As a knight avanturous
His atyre was orgulous Proud, pompous.
,
Al together cole black
Was his horse without lack,
Upon his crest a raven stood
That yaned Yawned.
as he were wode. --
He bare a shafte that was great and strong
It was fourtene foot long,
And it was great and stout,
One or two inches about:
The first knight that he there met
Full egerly he him grette,
With a dint amyd the shield
His horse he bare down in the feld, etc Ib.
.
A battle-ax which Richard carried with him from England into the holy land is
thus described.

King Richard I understonde
Or he went out of Engelonde
Let him make an axe Richard's battle-ax is also mentioned by Brunne, and on
this occasion, Chron. p. 159.
for the nones
To brake therewith the Sarasyns q The crusades imported the phrase Jeu
Sarrazionois, for any sharp engagement, into the old French romances. -- Thus
in the ROMAN of ALEXANDER, MSS. Bibl. Bodl. ut supr. P. i.

Tholom^r le regrette et le plaint en Grijois,
Et did que s'il cussent o culz telz vingt et trois,
Il nous eussent fet un JEU SARRAZIONOIS.

bones.
The heed was wroght right well
Therein was twenti bound F. pound^.
of stele:
And when he com into Cyprys land
The axe took he in his hand
All that he hytte he all to frapped
The gryffons The Byzantine Greeks are often called Griffones by the historians
of the middle ages. See Du Cange Gloss. Ville-Hard. p. 363. See also Rob. Brun.
Chron. p. 151. 157. 159. 160. 165. 171. 173. Wanley supposes that the Griffin
in heraldry was intended to signify a Greek, or Saracen, whom they thus
represented under the figure of an imaginary eastern monster, which never
existed but as an armorial badge.
away fast rapped.
And the prison when he came to
With his axe he smote right tho
Doors, bars, and iron chains, etc. Sign. G. i.

This formidable axe is again mentioned at the si^ge of Acon, or Acre, the
ancient Ptolemais.

King Richard after anon right
Toward Acrys began him dyght,
And as he sailed toward Surrye Syria.
,
He was warned of a spy,
How the folk of the hethen law,
A great chain they had i draw
Over the haven of Acres ^ers
Was fastened to two pyllers
That no ship should in win So Fabyan of Rosamond's bower, "that no
creature, man or woman, might win to her." i. e. go in, by contraction, Win.
Chron. vol. i. p. 320. col. i. edit. 1533.
. --
Therefore seven yers and more
All christian kings lay thore
And with hongre suffer pain
For lettyng of that same chain.
When king Richard herd that tydinge
For joye his heart bigan to spring,
A swyfte strong galey he took.
Trenchemere Rob. Brun. Chron. p. 170.

The kynge's own galeie he called it Trencthemere.
, so says the book. --
The galey yede as swift
As any foul by the lift A bird on wing.
,
And king Richard that was so good,
With his axe before the ship stood
And when he came to the chain,
With his axe he smote it a twain In two. Thus R. de Brunne says, "he fondred
the Sarazyns otuynne." p. 574. He forced the Saracens into two parties.
,
That all the barons verament
Said it was a noble dent,
And for joye of that deed
The cups fast about yede Went.
,
With good wine, pyment and clare,
And sailed toward Acrys city.
King Richard out of his galye
Let cast wild fire into the sky.
His trompettes yede in his galye
Men might here it to the sky,
Trompettes, horn, and shalmys Shawms.
,
The sea burnt al of fire grekys Sign. G. iii.
.
This fire grekys, or Grecian fire, seems to be a composition belonging to the
Arabian chemistry. It is frequently mentioned by the Byzantine historians, and
was very much used in the wars of the middle ages, both by sea and land. It was
a sort of wildfire, said to be inextinguishable by water, and chiefly used for
burning ships, against which it was thrown in pots or phials by the hand. In
land engagements it seems to have been discharged by machines constructed on
purpose. The oriental Greeks pretended that this artificial fire was invented
by Callinicus, an architect of Heliopolis, under Constantine; and that
Constantine prohibited them from communicating the manner of making it to any
foreign people. It was however in common use among the nations confederated
with the Byzantines: and Anna Commena has given an account of its ingredients
See Du Cange, Not. ad Joinvil. p. 71. And Gl. Lat. V. IGNIS GRAECUS.
, which were bitumen, sulphur, and naptha. It is called feu gregois in the
French chronicles and romances. Our minstrell, I believe, is singular in saying
that Richard scattered this fire on Saladin's ships: many monkish historians of
the holy war, in describing the siege of Acon, relate that it was employed on
that occasion, and many others, by the Saracens against the Christians See more
particularly Chron. Rob. Brun. p. 170. And Benedict. Abb. p. 652. And Joinv.
Hist. L. p. 39. 46. 52. 53. 62. 70.
. Procopius, in his history of the Goths, calls it MEDEA'S OIL, as if it had
been a preparation used in the sorceries of that enchantress iv. 11.
.

The quantity of huge battering rams and other military engines, now unknown,
which Richard is said to have transported into the holy land, was prodigious.
The names of some of them are given in another part of this romance Twenty
great gynnes for the nones
King Richard sent for to cast stones,
etc. Among these were the Mategri^^on and the Robynet. Sign. N. iii. The
^ormer of these is thus described. Sign. E. iiii. I have a castle I understond^
Is made of tembre of England
With six stages full of toure^les
Well flourysshed with cornelles,
etc. See Du Cange Not. Joinv. p. 68. MATEGRYFFON is the Terror or plague of the
Greeks. Du Cange, in his Gallo-Byzantine history, mentions a castle of this
name in Peloponnesus. Benedict says, that Richard erected a strong castle,
which he called Mat^-gryff^n, on the brow of a steep mountain without the walls
of the city of Messina in Sicily. Benedict. Abb. p. 621. ed. Hearn. sub ann.
1190. Robert de Brunne mentions this engine from our romance. Chron. p. 157.
The romancer it sais Richard did make a pele,
On kastelle wise allwais wrought of tree full well. --
In schip he ded it led, etc. --
His pele from that dai forward he called it Mate-griffon.
P^le is a house. Archbishop Turpin mentions Charlemagne's wooden castles at
the siege of a city in France. cap. ix.
. It is an historical fact, that Richard was killed by the French from the shot
of an arcubalist, a machine which he often worked skillfully with his own
hands: and Guillaume le Briton, a Frenchman, in his Latin ^poem called
Philippeis, introduces Atropos making a decree, that Richard should die by no
other means than by a wound from this destructive instrument; the use of which,
after it had been interdicted by the pope in the year 1139, he revived, and is
supposed to have shown the French in the crusades See Carpentier's Suppl. Du
Cange, Lat. Gl. tom. i. p. 434. And Du Cange ad Ann. Alex. p. 357.
.

Gynnes Engines.
he had of wonder wise,
Mangenelles See supr. p. 157. It is observable, that MANGANUM, Mangonell, was
not known among the Roman military machines, but existed first in Byzantine
Greek (...), a circumstance which seems to point out its inventors, at least to
show that it belonged to the oriental art of war. It occurs often in the
Byzantine Tactics, although at the same time it was perhaps derived from the
Latin Machina: yet the Romans do not appear to have used in their wars so
formidable and complicated an engine, as this is described to have been in the
writers of the dark ages. It was the capital machine of the wars of those ages.
Du Cange in his CONSTANTINOPOLIS CHRISTIANA mentions a vast edifice at
Constantinople in which the machines of war were kept. p. 155.
of great quyentyse See supr. p. 154.
,
Arblast bow made with gynne
The holy land therewith to win;
Over all other utterly
He had a mile Mill.
of great maystry,
In the mids of a ship to stand
Such ne saw they never in no land,
Four sails were thereto all new
Yelowe and grene read and blewe,
With canvas i laid all about
Full costly within and without,
And all within full of fire
Of torches made of wexe clear,
Overth wart and endlonge,
With spryngelles Espringalles, Fr. engines. See Du Cange, Gl. Lat. SPINGARDA,
QUADRELLUS. And Not. Joinv. p. 78. Perhaps he means pellets of tow dipped in
the Grecian fire, which sometimes were thrown from a sort of mortar. Joinville
says, that the Greek fire thrown from a mortar looked like a huge dragon flying
through the air, and that at midnight the flashes of it illuminated the
christian camp, as if it had been broad day. When Louis's army was encamped on
the banks of the Thanis in Egypt, says the same curious historian, about the
year 1249, they erected two chats chateil^, or covered galleries, to shelter
their workmen, and at the end of them two b^frois, or vast moveable wooden
towers, full of cross-bow men who kept a continual discharge on the opposite
shore. Besides eighteen other new-invented engines for throwing stones and
bolts. But in one night, the deluge of Greek fire ejected from the Saracen camp
utterly destroyed these enormous machines. This was a common disaster; but
Joinville says, that his pious monarch sometimes averted the danger, by
prostrating himself on the ground, and invoking our Savior with the
appellation of Beau Sire. p. 37. 39.
of fire they did hand,
Ground they neither corn ne good,
But robbed as they were wood;
Out of their eyes came read blood This device is thus related by Robert of
Brunne, chron. p. 175. 176. Richard als suithe did raise his engyns
The Inglis were than blythe, Normans and Petevyns:
In bargeis and galeis he set mylnes to go,
The sails, as men sais, some were blak and blo,
Some were read and grene, the wind about them blewe. --
The stones were of Rynes, the noise dreadful and great
It affraied the Sarazins, as leven the fire out schete.
The noise was unride, etc.
Rynes is the river Rhine, whose shores or bottom supplied the stones shot from
their military engines. The Normans, a barbarous people, appear to have used
machines of immense and very artificial construction at the siege of Paris in
885. See the last note. And Vit. Saladin. per Schultens, p. 135. 141. 167, etc.
:
Before the trough one there stood
That all in blood was begone
Such another was never none
And horns he had upon his head
The Sarasyns of him had great dread Sign. ut supr.
.
The last circumstance recalls a fiend-like appearance drawn by Shakespeare; in
which, exclusive of the application, he has converted ideas of deformity into
the true sublime, and rendered an image terrible, which in other hands would
have probably been ridiculous.

-- Methought his eyes
Were two full moons, he had a thousand noses,
Horns whelk'd and waved like the enridged sea.
It was some fiend King Lear, iv. vi.
--.
At the touch of this powerful magician, to speak in Milton's language, "The
griesly terrror grows tenfold more dreadful and deform."

The moving castles described by our minstrell, which seem to be so many
fabrics of romance, but are founded in real history, afforded suitable
materials for poets who deal in the mavelous. Accordingly they could not
escape the fabling genius of Tasso, who has made them instruments of
enchantment, and accommodated them, with great propriety, to the operations of
infernal spirits.

At the siege of Babylon, the sultan Saladin sends king Richard a ^orse. The
messenger says,

"Thou say thy God is full of might:
"Will thou grant with spear and shield,
"To detryve the right in the field,
"With helm, hauberke, and brondes bright,
"On strong stedes good and light,
"Whether ben of more power,
"Thy God almight or Jupiter?
"And he sent me to say this
"If thou wylt have an horse of his,
"In all the lands that thou have gone
"Such ne thou saw never none:
"Favell of Sypres, ne Lyard of Prys Horses belonging to Richard, "Favel of
Cyprus and Lyard of Paris." Robert de Brunne mentions one of these horses,
which he calls PHANUEL. Chron. p. 175.

Sithen at Japhet was slain PHANUEL his stead,
The Romans tells great pas there of his douhty deed.
This is our romance, viz. Sign. Q. iii.

To him gadered every chone
And slew FAVELL under him,
Tho was Richard wroth and grym.
This was at the siege of Jasse, as it is h^r^ called. Favell of Cyprus is
again mentioned, Sign. O. ii. FAVELL of Cyprus is forth ^et
And in the sadell he him set.
Robert of Brunne says that Saladin's brother sent king Richard a horse. Chron.
p. 194.

He sent to king Richard a stead for curteisie
On of the best reward that was in p^emic.

,
"Ben not at ned as he is;
"And if thou will, this same day,
"He shall be brought the to assaye."
Richard answered, "thou say well
"Such an horse, by saint Myghell,
"I would have to ride upon. --
"Bydde him send that horse to me,
"And I shall assaye what they be,
"If he be trusti, without fail,
"I keep none other to me in battle."
The messengers tho home went,
And told the sowdan in present,
That Richard in the field would come him unto:
The rich sowdan bade to com him unto
A noble clerk that could well conjoure,
That was a master nygromansoure Necromancer.
:
He commanded, as I you tell,
Thorugh the fende's might of hell,
Two strong fendes of the air
In lykenes of two stedes fair
Both like in hew and here,
As men said that there were:
No man saw never none syche
That was one was a mare iliche,
That other a colte, a noble stead,
Where that he were in any mede,
(Were the knight His Rider.
never so bold,)
When the mare nigh Neigh.
would,
(That him should hold against his will,)
But soon he would go her tylle Go to her.
,
And kneel down and souke Suck.
his dame,
Therewhyle the sowdan with shame
Should king Rychard quelle,
All this an angel began him tell,
That to him came about mydnyght,
"Awake, he said, goddis knight:
"My lord God.
does the to onderstonde
"That the shall com on horse to land,
"Fair it is, of body ipyght,
"To betray the if the sowdan might;
"On him to ride have thou no dread
"For he the help shall at need."
The angel then gives king Richard several directions about managing this
infernal horse, and a general engagement ensuing, between the Christian and
Saracen armies, In which the Saracen line extended tw^lve miles in length, and
The ground might unnethe be seen
For bright armure and speres kene.
Again, Like as snow lies on the mountains
So were fulsylled hills and playnes
With hauberkes bright and harneys clear
Of tromp^ttes, and tabourere.



He lepte on horse when it was light;
Or he in his sadel did lepe
Of many things he took keep. --
His men brought hem that he ba^,
A square tree of forty fete,
Before his sadell anon he it sete
Fast that they should it brase, etc.
Himself was richely begone,
From the creste right to the tone From head to foot.
,
He was covered wondersly well
All with splentes of good stele,
And there above an hauberke.
A shafte he had of trusty work,
Upon his shoulders a shield of stele,
With the lybardes Leopards.
painted well;
And helm he had of rich entayle,
Trusty and true was his ventayle:
Upon his creste a dove white
Sygnyfycaune of the holy sprite,
Upon a cross the dove stood
Of gold iwroght rich and good,
God Our Savior.
himself Mary and Johon
As he was done the rode upon "As he died upon the cross." So in an old
fragment cited by Hearne, Glo^^. Rob. Br. p. 634.

Pyned under Ponce Pilat,
Don on the rod after that.

,
In sygnyfycaunce for whom he faught,
The spear h^d forgot he nauht,
Upon his shaft he would it have
Goddis name thereon was grave,
Now harken what oath he swear,
Or they to the battle went there:
"If it were so, that Richard might
"Slay the sowdan in field with fight,
"At our will everychone
"He and his should gone
"In to the cite of Babylone;
"And the king of Masydoyne
"He should have under his hand;
"And if the ^owdan of that land
"Might slay Richard in the field
"With sword or spear under shield,
"That Christian men should go
"Out of that land for ever mo,
"And the Sarasyns their will in would."
Quod king Richard, "Thereto I hold,
"Thereto my glove, as I am knight."
They be armyd and ready dyght:
King Richard to his sadell did lepe,
Certes, who that would take keep
To se that fight it were fair;
There stedes ran with great air Ire.
,
Al so hard as they might dyre Dare.
,
After their fete sprange out fire:
Tabours and trompettes began blow:
There men might se in a throw
How king Richard that noble man
Encountered with the sowdan,
The chief was told of Damas I do not understand this. He seems to mean the
Sultan of Damas, or Damascus. See Du Cange, Joinv. p. 87.

His trust upon his mare was,
And tharfor, as the book us tells The French romance.
,
His crouper henge full of belles Anciently no person seems to have been
gallantly equipped on horseback, unless the horse's bridle or some other part
of the furniture, was stuck full of small bells. Vincent of Beauvais, who wrote
about 1264, censures this piece of pride in the knights templar^. They have, he
says, bridles embroidered, or gilded, or adorned with silver, "Atque in
pectoralibus CAMPANULAS INFIXAS MAGNUM emittentes SONITUM, ad gloriam eorum et
decorem." Hist. lib. xxx. cap. 85. Wicliffe, in his TRIALOGE, inveighs against
the priests for their "fair horse, and jolly and gay sadeles, and bridles
ringing by the way, etc." Lewis's WICKLIFFE, p. 121. And hence Chaucer may be
illustrated, who thus describes the state of a monk on horseback. Prol. Cant.
v. 170. And when he rode, men might his bridell here
GINGLING in a whistling wind as clear,
And eke as loud, as does the chapel bell.
That is, because his horse's bridle or trappings were strung with bells.
,
And his peytrell The breast plate, or breast-band of a horse. Poitral, Fr.
Pectorale, Lat. Thus Chaucer of the Chanon YEMAN'S horse.

Chan. Yon. Prol. v. 575. Urr.

About the PAYNTRELL stood the foam full hie.
and his arsowne The saddle-bow. " Arcenarium extencellatum cum argento,"
occurs in the wardrobe rolls, ab an. 21 ad an. 23 Edw. iii. Membr. xi. This
word is not in Du Cange or his supplement.

Three mile men might here the sown.
His mare nyghed, his belles did ring,
For great pride, without lesynge,
A faucon broad F. bird.
in hand he bare,
For he thought he would their
Have slain Richard with treasowne
When his colte should knele down
As a colte should souk his dame,
And he was ware of that shame,
His eres Ears.
with wax were stopped fast,
Therefore Richard was not agaste,
He stroke the stead that under him went,
And gave the Sowdan his death with a dente:
In his shield verament
Was painted a serpent,
With the spear that Richard held
He bare him thorugh under his shield,
Non of his armure might him last,
Brydell and peytrell al to braste,
His gyrthes and his steropes also
His mare to ground went tho;
Maugre her heed, he made her seche
The ground, without more speech,
His feet toward the fyrmament,
Bihynde him the spear outwent
There he fell deed on the grene,
Richard smote the fend with spores Spurs.
kene,
And in the name of the holy ghost
He dryveth ynto the hethen host,
And as soon as he was come,
Asonder he brake the sheltron Schiltron. I believe soldiers drawn up in a
circle. Rob. de Brunne uses it in describing the battle of Fowkirke, Chron. p.
305. Thar SCHELTRON sone was shad with Inglis that were good. Shad is separated.
,
And all that ever before him stood,
Horse and man to the ground yode,
Twenti foot on either side, etc.
When the king of France and his men wyste
That the mastry had the Christian,
They waxed bold, and good heart took
Stedes bestrode, and shaftes shoke Signat. M. ii.
.
Richard arming himself is a curious Gothic picture. It is certainly a genuine
picture, and drawn with some spirit; as is the shock of the two necromantic
steeds, and other parts of this description. The combat of Richard and the
Sultan, on the event of which the christian army got possession of the city of
Babylon, is probably the DUEL OF KING RICHARD, painted on the walls of a
chamber in the royal palace of Clarendon See supr. p. 114.
. The sultan is represented as meeting Richard with a hawk on his fist, to show
indifference, or a contempt of his adversary; and that he came rather prepared
for the chase, than the combat. Indeed in the feudal times, and long
afterward, no gentleman appeared on horseback, unless going to battle, without
a hawk on his fist. In the Tapestry of the Norman conquest, Harold is exhibited
on horseback, with a hawk on his fist, and his dogs running before him, going
on an embassy from king Edward the Confessor to William Duke of Normandy The
hawk on the fist was a mark of great nobility. We frequently find it, upon
antique seals and miniatures, attributed to persons of both sexes. So sacred
was this bird esteemed, that it was forbidden in a code of Charlemagne's laws,
for any one to give his hawk or his sword as part of his ransom. "In
compositionem Wirigildi volumus ut ea dentur quae in lege continentur excepto
accipitre et spatha." Lindebrog. Cod. Leg. Antiq. p. 895. In the year 1337, the
bishop of Ely excommunicated certain persons for stealing a hawk, sitting on
her perch, in the cloisters of the abbey of Bermondsey in Southwark. This piece
of sacrilege, indeed, was committed during service-time in the choir: and the
hawk was the property of the bishop. Registr. Adami Orleton, Episc. Winton.
fol. 56. b. In Archiv. Winton. In DOMESDEI-BOOK, a Hawk's Airy, Aira
Accipitris, is sometim^s returned among the most valuable articles of property.
^ Tabour, a drum, a common accompanyment of war, is mentioned as one of the
instruments of martial music in this battle with characteristical propriety. It
was imported into the European armies from the Saracens in the holy war. The
word is constantly written tabour, not tambour, in Joinville's HISTORY OF SAINT
LOUIS, and all the elder French romances. Joinville describes a superb bark or
galley belonging to a Saracen chief, which he says was filled with cymbals,
tabours, and Saracen horns Histoir. de S. Loys, p. 30. The original has "Cors
Sarazinois." See also p. 52. 56. And Du Cange's Notes, p. 61.
. Jean d'Orronville, an old French chronicler of the life of Louis duke of
Bourbon, relates, that the king of France, the king of Thrasimere, and the king
of Bugie landed in Africa, according to their custom, with cymbals, kettle
drums, tabours I cannot find Glais, the word that follows, in the French
dictionaries. But perhaps it answers to our old English Gl^^. See Du Cange, Gl.
Lat. V. CLASSICUM..
, and whistles Cap. 76. Nacaires, is here the word for kettle-drums. See Du
Cange, ubi supr. p. 59. Who also from an old roll d^ la chamber des COMPTES de
Paris recites, among the household musicians of a French nobleman, "Menestrel du
Cor Sarazin^i^," ib. p. 60. This instrument is not uncommon in the French
romances.
. Babylon, here said to be besieged by king Richard, and so frequently
mentioned by the romance writers and the chroniclers of the crusades, is Cairo
or Bagdat. Cairo and Bagdat, ci^ies of recent foundation, were perpetually
confounded with Babylon, which had been destroyed many centuries before, and
was situated at a considerable distance from either. Not the least enquiry was
made in the dark ages concerning the true situation of places, or the
disposition of the country in Palestine, although the theater of so important a
war; and to this neglect were owing, in a great measure, the signal defeats and
calamitous distresses of the christian adventurers, whose numerous armies,
destitute of information, and cut off from every resource, perished amidst
unknown mountains, and impracticable wastes. Geography at this time had been
but little cultivated. It had been studied only from the ancients: as if the
face of the earth, and the political state of nations, had not, since the time
of those writers, undergone any changes or revolutions.

So formidable a champion was king Richard against the infidels, and so
terrible the remembrance of his valor in the holy war, that the Saracens and
Turks used to quiet their froward children only by repeating his name.
Joinville is the only writer who records this anecdote. He adds another of the
same sort. When the Saracens were riding, and their horses started at any
unusal object, "ils disoient a leurs chevaulx en les picquent de l'esperon, ^t
cuides tu que ce soit le ROY RICHART Hist. de S. Loyis, p. 16. 104. Who had it
from a French manuscript chronicle of the holy war. See Du Cange's Notes, p. 45.
?" It is extraordinary, that these circumstances should have escaped
Malmesbury, Matthew Paris, Benedict, Langtoft, and the rest of our old
historians, who have exaggerated the character of this redoubted hero, by
relating many particulars more likely to be fabulous, and certainly less
expressive of his prowess.

SECT. V.
THE romance of SIR GUY, which is enumerated by Chaucer among the "Romances of
pris," affords the following fiction, not uncommon indeed in pieces of this
sort, conc^rning the redemption of a knight from a long captivity, whose prison
was inaccessible, unknown, and enchanted The Romance of Sir Guy is a
considerable volume in quarto. My edition is without date, "Imprinted at London
in Lothburye by Wyllyam Copland." with rude wooden cuts. It runs to Sign. S.
ii. It seems to be older than the S^uyr of low degree, in which it is quoted.
Sign. ^. iii. Or else so bold in chivalrie
As was sir Gawayne or sir GIE.
The two best manuscripts of this romance are at Cambridge, MS^. Bibl. Publ.
Mor. 690. 33. And MSS. Coll. Caii, A. 8.
. His name is Amiss of the Mountain.

Here beside an Elfish knyhte In Chaucer's Tale of the Chano^ Yeman, chemistry
is termed an ELFISH art, that is, taught or conducted by Spirits. This is an
Arabian idea. Chan. Y^m. T. p. 122. v. 772. Urry's edit. When we be there as we
shall exercise
Our ELVISHE craft. --
Again, ibid. v. 863. Though he sit at his book both day and night,
In lerning of this ELVISH nice lore.


Has taken my lord in fight,
And has him led with him away
In the Fayry "Into the land of Fairy, into the region of Spirits."
, Sir, permafay.
Was Amiss, quoth Heraude, your husbond?
A doughtyer knygte was none in land.
Then told Heraude to Raynborne,
How he loved his father Guyon:
Then said Raynburne, for thy sake,
To morrow I shall the way take,
And nevermore come again,
Till I bring Amys of the Mountain.
Raynborne rose on the morrow erly,
And armed him full richely. --
Raynborne rode till it was noone,
Till he came to a rock of stone;
There he found a strong gate,
He blissed him, and rode in thereat^
He rode half a mile the way,
He saw no light that came of day,
Then came he to a watir broad,
Never man ovir such a one rode.
Within he saw a place green
Such one had he never erst seen.
Within that place there was a pallaice,
Closed with walls of heathenesse "Walls built by the Pagans or Saracens.
Walls built by magic." Chaucer, in a verse taken from Sir Bevys, [Sign. a. ii.]
says that his knight had traveled,

As well in Christendom as in HETHNESS. Prol. p. 2. v. 49. And in Sir Eglamour
of Artoys, Sign. E. ii. Eglamour said to him yeys,
I am come out of HETHENES.
Sir Bevys of Hamptoun. Sign. b. iii. They found ships more and less
Of panimes and of hethen^sse.
Also, Sign. C. i.

The first deed withouten less
That Bevys did in hethen^sse.

:
The walls thereof were of cristall,
And the summers of coral.
Raynborne had great dout to pass,
The watir so deep and broad was:
And at the last his steed leepe
Into the broad watir deep.
Thyrty fadom he sanke adowne,
Then cleped Called.
he to god Raynborne.
God him help, his steed was good,
And bure him ovir that hydious floode.
To the pallaice he yode Went.
anon,
And lyghted down of his steed full soon.
Through many a chamber yede Raynborne,
A knight he found in dongeon.
Raynborne great him as a knight courtoise,
Who owes, he said, this fair Pallaice?
That knight answered him, yt is noght,
He owes it that me hither brought.
Thou art, quod Raynburne, in feeble plight,
Tell me thy name, he said, sir knight:
That knight said to him again,
My name is Amys of the Mountain.
The lord is an Elvish man
That me into this prison wan.
Art thou Amys, than said Raynborne,
Of the Mountains the bold barrone?
In great peril I have gone,
To seek thee in this rock of stone.
But blissed be God now have I thee
Thou shall go home with me.
Let be, said Amys of the Mountain,
Great wonder I have of thee certain;
How that thou hythur wan:
For sith this world first began
No man hither come ne might,
Without leave of the Elvish knight.
Me with thee thou may not led, etc. Sign. K k. iii. seq.

Afterward, the knight of the mountain directs Raynburne to find a wonderful
sword which hung in the hall of the palace. With this weapon Raynburne attacks
and conquers the Elvish knight; who buys his life, on condition of conducting
his conqueror over the perilous ford, or lake, above described, and of
delivering all the captives confined in his secret and impregnable dungeon.

Guyon's expedition into the Souldan's camp, an idea furnished by the crusades,
is drawn with great strength and simplicity.

Guy asked his arms anon,
Hosen of iron Guy did upon:
In his hawberke Guy him clad,
He drad no stroke while he it had.
Upon his head his helm he cast,
And hasted him to ride full fast.
A syrcle Circle.
of gold thereon stood,
The emperarour had none so good;
About the syrcle for the nones
Were set many precious stones.
Above he had a coat armor wide;
His sword he took by his side:
And lept upon his stead anon,
Styrrope with foot touched he none.
Guy rode forth without boste,
Alone to the Soudan's host:
Guy saw all that country
Full of tents and pavylyons be:
On the pavylyon of the Soudone
Stood a carbuncle-stone:
Guy wist therebie it was the Soudones
And drew him thither for the nones,
Alt the meet At dinner.
he found the Soudone,
And his barrons everychone,
And ten kings about him,
All they were stout and grymme:
Guy rode forth, and spoke no word,
Till he came to the Soudan's board Table. Chaucer, Squ. T. 105. And up he
rides to the hi^ board.
Chaucer says that his knight had often "beg^n the board abovin all nations."
Prol. 52. The term of chivalry, to begin the board, is to be placed in the
uppermost seat of the hall. Anstis, Ord. Gart. i. App. p. xv. "The earl of
Surry began the board in presence: the earl of Arundel washed with him, and
satt both at the first mess.... Began the board at the chamber's end." i. e.
sat at the head of that table which was at the end of the chamber. This was at
Windsor, A. D. 1519. In Sir Eglamour of Artoys, we have to begin the d^s^,
which is the same thing. Lords in halle were set
And waytes blewe to the mete. --
The two knights the dese began.
Sign D iii. See Chaucer, Squ. T. 99. And Kn. T. 2002. In a celebration of the
feast of Christmas at Greenwich, in the year 1488, we have, "The duc of
Bedeford ^ega^ne the table on the right side of the hall, and next untoo him
was the lord Dawbeney^, etc." That is, He sat at the head of the ^abl^.
Leland. Coll. iii. 237. edit. 1770. To begin the bourd is to begin the
tournam^nt. Lydgate, Chron. Troy, B. ii. chapter 14. The great justes, bordes, or
tournay. I will here take occasion to correct Hearne's explanation of the word
Bourder in Brunne's Chron. p. 204. A knygt a BOURDOUR king Richard hade
A douty man in stoure his name was Markade.
BOURDOUR, says Hearne, is boarder, pensioner. But the true meaning is, a Wag,
an arch fellow, for he is h^re introduced putting a joke on the king of France.
BOURDE is j^st, trick, from the French. See above, p. 70. Chau^. Gam. 1974. and
Non. Urr. 2294. Knyghton, mentions a favorite in the court of England who
could procure any grant from the king burdando. Du Cange Not. Joinv. p. 116.
Who adds, "De la vient le mot de Bourdeurs qui estoient ces farceurs ou
plaisantins qui divertissoient les princes par le recit des fables et des
histoires des Romans. -- Aucuns estiment que ce mot vient des behourds qui
estoit une espece des Tournois." See also Diss. Joinv. p. 174.
;
He ne rought Cared, valued. Chaucer, Romans R. 1873.

I ne rought of death ne of life.
with whom he met,
But on this wise the Soudan he grette.
"God's curse have thou and thine
"And tho that leve Those who believe.
on Apoline."
Than said the Soudan, "What art thou
"That thus prowdlie speak now?
"Yet found I never man certain
"That such words durst me said."
Guy said, "So God me save from hell,
"My right nam I shall the tell,
"Guy of Warwick my name is."
Than said the Sowdan ywis,
"Art thou the bold knight Guyon,
"That art here in my pavylyon?
"Thou sluest my cosyn Coldran
"Of all Sarasyns the boldest man, etc Sign. Q. iii.
.
I will add Guy's combat with the Danish giant Colbrond, as it is touched with
great spirit, and may serve to illustrate some preceding hints concerning this
part of our hero's history.

Then came Colbronde forth anon,
On foot, for horse could bare him none.
For when he was in armure dight
Four horse ne bare him might.
A man had enough to done
To bear him his wepon.
Then Guy rode to Colbronde,
On his stead full well rennende Running.
:
Colbronde smote Guy in the field
In the midst of Sir Guyes shield;
Through Guyes hawberk that stroke went
And for no manner thing it withstent "Nothing could stop it."
.
In two yt share Divided.
Guyes stedes body
And fell to ground hastily.
Guy upstert as an eger lyoune,
And drue his good sword brown:
To Colbronde he let it fly,
But he might not reche so hye.
On his shoulder the stroke fell down
Through all his armure share Guyon "Guy cut through all the giant's armor."
.
Into the body a wound untyde
That the red blude began out glyde.
Colbronde was wroth of that rap,
He thought to give Guy a knap.
He smote Guy on the helm bright
That out sprang the fire light.
Guy smote Colbronde again,
Through shield and armure certain.
He made his sword for to glyde
Into his body a wound ryht wide.
So smart came Guyes bronde
That it braste in his hond.
The romance of the SQUIRE OF LOW DEGREE, who loved the king's daughter of
Hungary It contains thirty-eight pages in quarto. "Imprinted at London by me
Wyllyam Copland." I have never seen it in manuscript.
, is alluded to by Chaucer in the Rhyme of Sir Topas See Observations on the
Fairy Queen, i.. iv. p. 139.
. The princess is thus represented in her closet, adorned with painted glass,
listening to the squire's complaint Sign. a. iii.
.

That ladi herd his mournyng all,
Right undir the chamber wall:
In her oryall An Oriel seems to have been a recess in a chamber, or hall,
formed by the projection of a spacious bow-window from top to bottom. Rot. Pip.
an. 18. Hen. iii. [A. D. 1234.] "Et in quadam capella pulchra et decenti
facienda ad caput Orioli camere regis in castro Herefordie, de longitudine xx:
pedum." This Oriel was at the end of the king's chamber, from which the new
chapel was to begin. Again, in the castle of Kenilworth. Rot. Pip. an. 19. Hen.
iii. [A. D. 1235.] "Et in uno magno Oriollo pulchro et competenti, ante ostium
magne camere regis in castro de Kenilworth faciendo, vi l. xvi s. iv d. per
Brev. regis."
there she was,
Closyd well with royal glass,
Fulfyllyd yt was with ymagery,
Every window by and by
On each side had there a gynne,
Sperde Closed, shut. In P. Plowman, of a blind man. "unsparryd his eine." i.
e. opened his eyes.
with many a dyvers pynne.
Anon that lady fair and fre
Undyd a pynne of yvere,
And wyd the wyndowes she open set,
The sun shonne in at her closet.
In that arbre fair and gaye
She saw where that sqyure lay, etc.
I am persuaded to transcribe the following passage, because it delineates in
lively colors the fashionable diversions and usages of ancient times. The king
of Hungary endeavors to comfort his daughter with these promises, after she
had fallen into a deep and incurable melancholy from the supposed loss of her
paramour.

To morrow ye shall in huntyng fare;
And yede, my daughter, in a chare,
Yt shall be coverd with velvette reed
And clothes of fine gold al about your heed,
With damask white and asure blewe
Well dyaperd Embroidered, Diversified. Chaucer of ^ bow, Romans R. v. 934. And
it was painted well and thwitten
And ore all diapred, and written, etc.
Thwitten is, twisted, wreathed. The following instance from Chaucer is more to
our purpose. Knight's Tale, v. 2160. Upon a stead bay, trappid in s^^le,
Coverid with cloth of gold diaprid well.
This term, which is partly heraldic, occurs in the Provisor's rolls of the
Greatwardrobe, containing deliveries for furnishing rich habiliments, at tilts
and tournaments, and other ceremonies. "Et ad faciendum tria harnesia pro Rege,
quorum duo de velvetto albo operato cum garteriis de blu et di^s^r^^ per totam
campedinem cum wodehouses." Ex Comp. J. Coke clerici, Provisor. Magn. Garderob.
ab ann. xxi. Edw. iii. de 23 membranis. ad ann. xxiii. memb. x. I believe it
properly signifies embroidering on a rich ground, as tissu^, cloth of gold,
etc. This is confirmed by Peacham. "DIAPERING is a term in drawing. -- It
chi^fly serves to counterfeit cloth of gold, silver, damask, brancht velvet,
camblet, etc." Compl. Gent. p. 345. Anderson, in his History of Commerce,
conjectures, that Dia^^r, a speci^s of printed linen, took it is name from the
city of Ypres in Flanders, where it was first made, being originally called
d'ipr^. But that city, and others in Flanders, were no less famous for rich
manufactures of stuff; and the word in question has better pretensions to such
a derivation. Thus rich cloth ^mbroidered with raised work we called d'ipre,
and from thence diaper; and to do this, or any work like it, was called to
diaper, from whence the participle. Satin of Brug^s, another city of Flanders,
often occurs in inventories of monastic ves^ments, in the r^ign of Henry the
eighth: and the cities of Arras and Tours are celebrated for their t^p^stry in
Spenser. All these cities and others in their neighborhood, became ^amous for
this sort of workmanship before 1200. The Arm^tor of Edward the third, who
^inishes all the costly apparatus for the shows abovementioned, consisting,
among other things, of variety of the most sumptuous and ornamented
embroideries on velvet, sa^^in, tissu^, etc. is John of Cologn. Unless it be
Colonia in It^ly. Rotul. praedict. memb. viii. memb. xiii. "Quae omnia ordinata
fu^^unt per garderob^rium competentem, de precepto ipsius Regis: et facta et
parata par manus Johis de Colonia, Armatoris ipsius domini nostri Regis."
Johannes de Strawesburgh [Strasburgh] is mentioned as broudator r^gis, i. e. of
Richard the second, in Anstis^ Ord. Gart. i. 55. See also, ii. 42. I will add a
passage from Chaucer's Wife of Bath, v. 450. Of cloth-making she had such a
haunt,
She passid them of Ipre and of Gaunt.
"Cloth of Gaunt," i. e. Ghent, is mentioned in the Romaunt of the Rose, v.
574. Bruges was the chief mart for Italian commodities, about the thirteenth
century. In the year 1318, five Venetian gal^asses, laden with Indian goods,
arrived at this city in order to dispose of their cargoes at the fair. L. Guic.
Descr. di Paesi bass. p. 174. Silk manufactures were introduced from the east
into Italy, before 1130. Gianon. Hist. Napl. xi. 7. The crusades much improved
the commerce of the Italian states with the east in this article, and produced
new artificers of their own. But to recur to the subject of this note. Diaper
occurs among the rich silks and stuffs in the French Roman de la Ros^, where it
seems to signify Damask. v. 21867. Samites, dyapres, camelots. I find it
likewise in the Roman d'Alexandre, written about 1200. MSS. Bodl. fol. i. b.
col. 2. Dyapres d'Antioch, samis de Romanie. Here is also a proof that the
Asiatic stuff^ were at that time famous: and probably Romani^ is Romania. The
word often occurs in old accounts of rich ecclesiastical vestments. Du Cange
derives this word from the Italian diaspro, a jasper, a precious stone which
shifts its colors. V. DIASPRUS. In Dugdale's Monasticon we have diasperatus,
diapered. "Sandalia cum caligis de rubeo sameto DIASPERATO breudata cum
imaginibus regum." tom. iii. 314. And 321.
with lyllyes new:
Your pomelles shall be ended with gold,
Your chains enameled many a fold.
Your mantell of rich degree
Purple palle and armyne fre.
Jennets of Spain that been so wight
Trapped to the ground with velvet bright.
Ye shall have harp, sautry, and song,
And other myrthes you among,
Ye shall have rumney, and malespine,
Both ypocrasse and vernage wine;
Mountrese and wine of Greek,
Both algrade and despice eke;
Antioche and bastard,
Pyment Sometimes written pimeate. In the romance of Sir B^vys, a knight just
going to repose, takes the usual draught of pimeate: which mixed with spices is
what the French romances call vin du couch^r, and for which an officer, called
ESPICIER, was appointed in the old royal household of France. Signat. m. iii.

The knight and she to chamber went: --
With pimea^e, and with spisery,
When they had dronken the wine.
See Carpentier, Suppl. Gloss. Lat. Du Cange, tom. iii. p. 842. So Chaucer,
Leg. Dido, v. 185.

The spicis parted, and the wine agon,
Unto his chamber he is lad anon.
Froissart says, among the delights of his youth, that he was happy to taste,
-- Au couchier, pour mieulx dormir,
Especes, clairet, et rocelle.


Mem. Lit. x. 665. Not. 4to. Lidgate of Tideus and Polimite in the palace of
Adrastus at Thebes. Stor. Theb. p. 634. ed. Chauc. 1687.

-- Began anon repair
To her lodging in a full stately toure;
Assigned to hem by the herbeiour.
And aftir spicis plenty and the wine
In cuppis great wrought of gold full fine,
Without tarrying to bed straightes they gone, etc.
Chaucer has it again, Squ. T. v. 311. p. 62. Urr. And Mill. T. v. 270. p. 26.
He sent her piment, methe, and spicid ale. Some orders of monks are enjoined to
abstain from drinking pigmentum, or piment. Yet it was a common refection in
the monasteries. It is a drink made of wine, honey, and spices. "They ne could
not medell the gefte of Bacchus to the clear honey; that is to say, they could
not make ne piment ne clarre." Chaucer's Boeth. p. 371. a. Urr. Clarre is
clarified wine. In French Cla^ey. Perhaps the same as piment, or hypocrass. See
Mem. Lit. viii. p. 674. 4to. Compare Chauc. Sh. T. v. 2579. Urr. Du Cange,
Gloss. Lat. V. PIGMENTUM. SPECIES. And Suppl. Carp. And Mem. sur l'anc.
Chevalier. i. p. 19. 48. I must add, that (...), or (...), signified an
Apothecary among the middle and lower Greeks. See Du Cange, Gl. Gr. in Voc. i.
1167. And ii. Append. Etymolog. Vocab. Ling. Gall. p. 301. col. 1. In the
register of the bishop of Nivernois, under the year 1287, it is covenanted,
that whenever the bishop shall celebrate mass in S. Mary's abbey, the abbess
shall present him with a peacock, and a cup of piment. Carpentier, ubi supt.
vol. iii. p. 277.


also, and garnarde;
Wine of Greek, and muscadell,
Both clare, pyment, and rochell,
The reed your stomach to defye
And pottes of osey set you bye.
You shall have venyson ybake Chaucer says of the Frankelein, Prol. p. 4. Urr.
v. 345. Withoutin bake mete never was his house. And in this poem, Signat. B.
iii.

With birds in bread ybake,
The tele the duck and drake.

,
The best wild foul that may be take:
A lose of harehound In a manuscript of Froissart full of paintings and
illuminations, there is a representation of the grand entrance of queen Isabel
of England into Paris, in the year 1324. She is attended by a greyhound who has
a flag, powdered with fleurs de lys, bound to his neck. Montf. Monum. Fr. ii.
p. 234.
with you to streke,
And heart, and hynde, and other like,
Ye shall be set at such a tryst
That heart and hynde shall come to you fyst.
Your de^ease to dryve ye fro,
To here the bugles there yblowe.
Homward thus shall ye ride,
On haukyng by the ryvers side,
With goshauke and with gentil fawcon
With buglehorn and merlyon.
When you come home your menie among,
Ye shall have revell, daunces, and song:
Little children, great and small,
Shall sing as does the nyghtyngale,
Than shall ye go to your evensong,
With tenours and trebles among,
Threscore of copes of damask bright
Full of perles they shall be pyghte. --
Your sensours shall be of gold
Endent with asure many a fold:
Your quere nor organ song shall want
With country note and dyscaunt.
The other half on orgayns playing,
With young children full fayn syngyng.
Than shall ye go to your suppere
And sytte in tentis in grene arbere,
With clothe of arras pyght to the ground,
With sapphires set of dyamounde. --
A hundred knights truly told
Shall play with bowls in alayes cold.
Your disease to dryve away,
To se the fisshes in poles plai^.
To a draw bridge then shall ye,
The One half of stone, the other of tree,
A barge shall meet you full ryht,
With xxiiii ores full bright,
With trompettes and with claryowne,
The fresshe watir to row up and down.
Than shall you, daughter, ask the wine
With spises that be good and fine:
Gentle pottes, with genger grene,
With dates and deynties you between.
Forty torches brenynge bright
At your brydges to bring you light.
Into your chamber they shall you bring
With much myrthe and more liking.
Your blankettes shall be of fustyane,
Your shetes shall be of cloths of rain Cloth, or linen, of Rennes, a city in
Britany. Chaucer, Dr. v. 255. And many a pilowe, and every bear
Of cloth^ of raynes to sleep on soft,
Him their not need to turnin often.
Tela de Reins is mentioned among habits delivered to knights of the garter, 2
Rich. ii. Anstis, Ord. Gart. i. 55.
:
Your head-shete shall be of pery pyght "Inlaid with jewels." Chaucer, Kn. T. v.
2938. p. 22. Urr. And then with cloth of gold and with perie.

And in numberless other places.


,
With dy^mondes set and rubys bright.
When you are laid in bed so soft,
A cage of gold shall hang aloft,
With long peper fair burning,
And cloves that be sweet smellyng,
Frankinsense and olibanum,
That when ye sleep the taste may come
And if ye no rest can take
All night mynstrels for you shall wake Sign. D. ii. seq. At the close of the
romance it is said, that the king, in the midst of a great feast which lasted
forty days, created the squire king in his room; in the presence of his TWELVE
LORDS. See what I have observed concerning the number TWELVE, Introd. DISS. i.
.
SIR DEGORE is a romance perhaps belonging to the same period It contains
thirty-two pages in quarto. Coloph. "Thus ends the Tretyse of Sir Degore,
imprynted by Willyam Copland." There is another copy dated 1560. There is a
manuscript of it among bishop More's at Cambridge, Bibl. Publ. 690. 36. Sir
DEGARE.
. After his education under a hermit, Sir Degore's first adventure is against a
dragon. This horrible monster is marked with the hand of a master Sign. B. ii.
.

Degore went forth his way,
Through a forest half a day:
He ^erd no man, nor saw none,
Till yt past the high none,
Then herd he great strokes fall,
That yt made great noise with all,
Full sone he thought that to se,
To wete what the strokes might be:
There was an earl, both stout and gaye,
He was com there that same day,
For to hunt for a dear or a do,
But his hounds were gone him fro.
Then was there a dragon great and grymme,
Full of fire and also venymme,
With a wide throat and tuskes great,
Upon that knygte fast began he beat.
And as a lion then was his feet,
His tail was long, and full unmeete:
Between his head and his tail
Was xxii foot withouten fail;
His body was like a wine tonne,
He shone full bright against the sun:
His eyes were bright as any glass,
His scales were hard as any brass;
And thereto he was necked like a horse,
He bare his head up with great force:
The breath of his mouth that did out blow
As yt had been a fire on low.
He was to look on, as I you tell,
As yt had been a fiende of hell.
Many a man he had shent,
And many a horse he had rent.
As the minstrell profession became a science, and the audience grew more
civilized, refinements began to be studied, and the romantic poet sought to
gain new attention, and to recommend his story, by giving it the advantage of a
plan. Most of the old metrical romances are, from their nature, supposed to be
incoherent rhapsodies. Yet many of them have a regular integrity, in which
every part contributes to produce an intended end. Through various obstacles
and difficulties one point is kept in view, till the final and general
catastrophe is brought about by a pleasing and unexpected surprise. As a
specimen of the rest, and as it lies in a narrow compass, I will develope the
plan of the fable now before us, which preserves at least a coincidence of
events, and an uniformity of design.

A king's daughter of England, extremely beautiful, is solicited in marriage
by numerous potentates of various kingdoms. The king her father vows, that of
all these suitors, that champion alone shall win his daughter who can unhorse
him at a tournament. This they all attempt, but in vain. The king every year
assisted at an anniversary mass for the soul of his deceased queen, who was
interred in an abbey at some distance from his castle. In the journey thither,
the princess strays from her damsels in a solitary forest: she is discovered by
a knight in rich armor, who by many solicitations prevails over her chastity,
and, at parting, gives her a sword without a point, which he charges her to
keep safe; together with a pair of gloves, which will fit no hands but her own
Gloves were anciently a costly article of dress, and richly decorated. They
were sometimes adorned with precious stones. Rot. Pip. an. 53. Hen^. iii. [A.
D. 1267.] "Et de i. pectine auri c^m lapidibus pretiosis ponderant. xliii s. et
iii d. ob. Et de ii. paribus chirothecarum cum LAPIDIBUS." This golden comb,
set with jewels, realises the wonders of romance.
. At length she finds the road to her father's castle, where, after some time,
to avoid discovery, she is secretly delivered of a boy. Soon after the
delivery, the princess having carefully placed the child in a cradle, with
twenty pounds in gold, ten pounds in silver, the gloves given her by the
strange knight, and a letter, consigns him to one of her maidens, who carries
him by night, and leaves him in a wood, near a hermitage, which she discerned
by the light of the moon. The hermit in the morning discovers the child; reads
the letter, by which it appears that the gloves will fit no lady but the boy's
mother, educates him till he is twenty years of age, and at parting gives him
the gloves found with him in the cradle, telling him that they will fit no lady
but his own mother. The youth, who is called Degore, sets forward to seek
adventures, and saves an earl from a terrible dragon, which he kills. The earl
invites him to his palace, dubs him a knight, gives him a horse and armor, and
offers him half his territory. Sir Degore refuses to accept this offer, unless
the gloves, which he had received from his foster-father the hermit, will fit
any lady of his court. All the ladies of the earl's court are called before
him, and among the rest the earl's daughter, but upon trial the gloves will fit
none of them. He therefore takes leave of the earl, proceeds on his adventures,
and meets with a large train of knights; he is informed that they were going to
tourney with the king of England, who had promised his daughter to that knight
who could conquer him in single combat. They tell him of the many barons and
earls whom the king had foiled in several trials. Sir Degore, however, enters
the lists, overthrows the king, and obtains the princess. As the knight is a
perfect stranger, she submits to her father's commands with much reluctance. He
marries her; but in the midst of the solemnities which preceded the
consummation, recollects the gloves which the hermit had given him, and
proposes to make an experiment with them on the hands of his bride. The
princess, on seeing the gloves, changed color, claimed them for her own, and
drew them on with the greatest ease. She declares to Sir Degore that she was
his mother, and gives him an account of his birth: she told him that the knight
his father gave her a pointless sword, which was to be delivered to no person
but the son that should be born of their stolen embraces. Sir Degore draws the
sword, and contemplates its breadth and length with wonder: is suddenly seized
with a desire of finding out his father. He sets forward on this search, and on
his way enters a castle, where he is entertained at supper by fifteen beautiful
damsels. The lady of the castle invites him to her bed, but in vain; and he is
lulled asleep by the sound of a harp. Various artifices are used to divert him
from his pursuit, and the lady even engages him to encounter a giant in her
cause All the romances have such an obstacle as this. They have all an
enchantress, who detains the knight from his quest by objects of pleasure; and
who is nothing more than the Calypso of Homer, the Dido of Virgil, and the
Armida of Tasso.
. But Sir Degore rejects all her temptations, and pursues his journey. In a
forest he meets a knight richly accoutred, who demands the reason why Sir
Degore presumed to enter his forest without permission. A combat ensues. In the
midst of the contest, the combatants being both unhorsed, the strange knight
observing the sword of his adversary not only to be remarkably long and broad,
but without a point, begs a truce for a moment. He fits the sword to a point
which he had always kept, and which had formerly broken off in an encounter
with a giant; and by this circumstance discovers Sir Degore to be his son. They
both return into England, and Sir Degore's father is married to the princess
his mother.

The romance of KING ROBERT OF SICILY begins and proceeds thus MS. Vernon, ut
supr. Bibl. Bodl. f. 299. It is also in Caius College Camb. MSS. Class. E. 147.
4. And Bibl. Publ. Cambr. MSS. More, 690. 35. And Brit. Mus. MSS. Harl. 525. 2.
f. 35. Cod. membran. Never printed.
.

Here is of king Robert of Cicyle,
Hou pride dude him beguile.
Princes proud that beth in pres,
I wol ou tell thing not lees.
In Cisyle was a noble king,
Fair and strong and sumdele yng Young.
;
He had a brother in greet Room,
Pope of al cristendome;
Another he had in Alemayne,
An emperor that Sarazins wrougte pain.
The king was hete Named.
king Robert,
Never mon ne wuste him ferte,
He was king of great honor
Ffor that he was conqueror:
In all the world nas his peer,
King ne prince, far ne near:
And, for he was of chivalrie flour,
His brother was made emperor:
His oder brother, gods vikere,
Pope of Rome, as I seide ere;
The pope was hot pope Urban,
He was good to god and man:
The emperor was hot Valemounde,
A stronger warreoure nas non found,
After his brother of Cisyle,
Of whom that I schal tell awhyle.
The king yhoughte he had no peer
In all the world, far no near,
And in his yougt he had pride
Ffor he was nounpere in uche side.
At midsomer a saint Jones niht,
The king to church com full riht,
Ffor to heren his even-song;
Him thouhte he dwelled there full long,
He thouhte more in worlds honor
Than in Crist our saveour:
In Magnificat The hymn so called.
he herd a verse,
He made a clerk het him rehers,
In language of his own tongue,
In Latin he nuste He wist. Knew not.
what heo song;
The verse was this I tell ye,
"Deposuit potentes de sede
"Et exaltavit humiles,"
This was the verse withouten les
The clerk seide anon right,
"Sire such is gods mihte,
"That he make heyge low,
"And low heyge, in luytell throw;
"God may do, without lyge Lie.
,
"His will in twenkling of an eige Eye.
,
The king seide, with heart unstabl
"All yor song is false and fable:
"What man has such power
"Me to bring low in danger?
"I am flower of chivalrye,
"Mine enemies I may distruye:
"No man lyveth in no land
"That may me withstonde.
"Then is this a song of noht."
This erreur he had in thought,
And in his thought a sleep him tok,
In his pulput Stall, or seat.
, as seith the book.
When that evensong was al don,
A king i lyk hem out gone
And all men with hem wend,
King Roberd left out of mind "A king like him went out of the chapel, and
all the company with him; while the real king Robert was forgotten and left
behind."
.
The new Supposed.
king was, as I you tell,
Gods angel his pruide to fell.
The angel in hall joye made,
And all men of him weore glade.
The king wakede that lay in church,
His men he thouhte woe to werche;
Ffor he was left there alon,
And dark niht him fell upon.
He began cry after his men,
There nas non that spak again.
But the sextune atten end
Of the church him began wend Went to him.
,
And said, "what do thou nouth here,
"Thou falls thef, thou losenger?
"Thou art her with felenye
"Holy church to robby, etc."
The king bigon to run out fast;
As a mon that was wood,
At his paleys gate he stood,
And hail the porter gadelyng Renegado, traitor.
,
And bad him com in higing At the call.
:
The porter seide, "Who clepeth Calls.
so?"
He answerde, "Anon tho,
"Thou schalt witen ar I go;
"Thy king I am thou schalt know:
"In prisoun thou schall ligge low,
"And ben an hanged and to draw
"As a traitor by the law,
"You schal well witen I am king, etc."
When admitted, he is brought into the hall; where the angel, who had assumed
his place, makes him the fool of the hall, and clothes him in a fool's coat.
He is then sent out to lie with the dogs; in which situation he envies the
condition of those dogs, which in great multitudes were permitted ^o remain in
the royal hall. At length the emperor Valemounde sends letters to his brother
king Robert, inviting him to visit, with himself, their brother the pope at
Rome. The angel, who personates king Robert, welcomes the messengers, and
clothes them in the richest apparel, such as could not be made in the world.

The angel welcomede the messagers,
And gaf them clothes rich of pers Price.
,
Ffurred al with ermyne,
In crystendone is non so fine;
And all was chouched midd^ perre Precious stones.
,
Better was non in cristante:
Such clothe, and hit werre to dihte,
Al cristendom hit make ne mihte,
Of that wondrede all that land,
How that clothe was wrought with hand,
Where such cloth was to selle,
He ho hit made couthe no mon tell.
The messengers went with the king That is, the Angel.
^
To great Rome, without lettynge;
The Fool Robert also went,
Clothed in lodly Lothly, loathsome.
garnement,
With ffoxes tails money a boute In many knots.
,
Men mihte him known in the route,
The aungel was clothed al in whyt
Was never seyge Seen.
such samyt Cloth of gold.
:
And al was crouched on pe^les rich,
Never mon seighe non hem liche.
Al whit attyr was, and steed,
The steed was fair there he yede Went.
,
So feir a steed as he on rod
Was never mon that ever by strod.
The aungel came to Room sone
Real Royal.
as fell a king to done.
So rech a king com never in Room
All men wondrede whether he come.
His men weore realliche Royally.
dight
Heore Their.
riches can seothe no wiht,
Of clothis, gurdles, and other thing,
Evriche sqyzer Squire.
thought a king;
And al ride of rich array,
Bote But.
king Robert, as i ow say,
Al men on him began pyke,
For he rod al other unlyke.
An ape rod of his clothing
In tokne that he was underling.
The pope and the emperor also,
And other lords money mo,
Welcommede the aungel as for king
And made joye of his coming;
Theose three bredrene made cumfort,
The aungel was brother mad by sort,
Well was the pope and emperor
That hadden a brother of such honor.
Afterward they return in the same pomp to Sicily, where the angel, after so
long and ignominious a penance, restores king Robert to his royalty.

Sicily was conquered by the French in the eleventh century There is an old
French Romance, ROBERT LE DIABLE, often quoted by Carpentier in his Supplement
to Du Cange. And a French Morality, without date, or name of the author, in
manuscript, Comment il fut enjoint a ROBERT le diable, fills du du^ de
Normandy, pour ses mesfaites, de fair le fol sang parler, et depuis N. S. ut
merc^ du lui. Beauchamps, Rech. Theat. Fr. p. 109. This is probably the same
Robert.
, and this tale might have been originally got or written during their
possession of that island, which continued through many monarchies A passage in
Fauchett, speaking of rhyme, may perhaps deserve attention here. "Pour le
regard de Sicili^ns, je me tiens presque asseure, que Guillaume Ferrabrach
friar de Robert Guischard et autres seigneurs de Calabre et Pouille enfans de
Tancred Francois-Normand, l'ont portee aux pais de leur conqueste, estant une
constume des gens de deca chanter, avaunt que combattre, les beaux faits de
leurs ancestres, composez en verse." Rec. p. 70. Boccacio's Tancred, in his
beautiful Tale of TANCRED AND SIGISMUNDA, was one of these Franco-Norman kings
of Sicily. Compare Nouv. Abreg. Chronol. Hist. Fr. page 102. edit. 1752.
. But Sicily, from its situation, became a familiar country to all the western
continent at the time of the crusades, and consequently soon found its way into
romance, as did many others of the mediterranean islands and coasts, for the
same reason. Another of them, Cilicia, has accordingly given title to an
ancient tale called, the KING OF TARS; from which I shall give some extracts,
touched with a rude but expressive pencil.

"Her bigenneth of the KING OF TARS, and of the Soudan of Dammias Damascus.
, how the Soudan of Dammias was cristened thoru godis gras MS. Vernon. Bibl.
Bodl. f. 304. It is also in Bibl. Adv. Edingb. W. 4. 1. Number. iv. In five leaves
and a half. Never printed.
." Herkeneth now, both old and yng,
Ffor Marie love, that sweet thing:
How a werre by began
By tweene a god cristene king,
And an hethene heih lordyng,
Of Damas the Soudan.
The king of Tars had a wife,
The feireste that mihte bear life,
That any mon tell can:
A daughter they had ham by tweene,
That heore Their.
rihte heir scholde ben;
Whit so As.
father of swan:
Chaast heo She.
was, and feir of chere,
With rode Ruddy.
red so blosme on brere,
Eigen Eyes.
stepe and gray,
Low schuldres, and whyt swear Neck.
;
Her to seo See.
was great preyere
Of princes pert in play.
The word The report of her.
of hire spronge full wide
Ffeor and ner, by vch a side:
The Soudan herd say;
Him thougte his heart would broke on five
Bote he mihte have hire to wive,
That was so feire a may,
The Soudan there he satte in halle;
He sent his messagers fast with all,
To hire fader the king.
And seyde, hou so hit ever by fall,
That maid he would clothe in palle
And spousen hire with his ryng.
"And alles Also.
I swear withouten fail
"I chull Shall.
hire winnen in pleye battle
"With money an heih lordyng, etc."
The Sultan, on application to the king of Tarsus for his daughter, is refused;
and the messengers return without success. The Soldan's anger is painted with
great characteristical spirit.

The Soudan sat at his des,
I served of his furste mes;
They comen into the halle
To fore the prince proud in pres,
Heore tale they told withouten les
And on heore knees began fall:
And seide, "Sire the king of Tars
"Of wikked words nis not scars,
"Hethene hounde A phrase often applied to the Saracens. So in Sir Bevys,
Signat. C. ii. b.

To speak with an hethene hound^.


he does the Thee.
call;
"And or his dogtur he give the tille "Before his daughter is given to ^hee."

Thyn heart blood he woll spille
"And thy barrons all."
When the Soudan this i herd,
As a wod man he ferde,
His robe he rent adoune;
He tar the har "Tore the hair."
of head and berde,
And seide he would her wene with sword,
Beo his lord saint Mahoune.
The table adoune rihte he smote,
In to the the floor foot hot Struck. Stamped.
,
He lokede as a wild lyoun;
All that he hitte he smotte down riht
Both sergeaunt and kniht,
Earl and eke baroun.
So he ferde forsothe a plihte,
Al a day, al a nihte,
That no man mihte him chaste Check.
:
A morwen when hit was day lihte,
He sent his messagers full rihte,
After his barouns in haste:
"Lordynges, he seith, what to read "What counsel shall we take."
,
"Me is done a great mysdede,
"Of Taars the christian king;
"I bad him both land and led
"To have his daughter in worthli wede,
"And spousen hire with my ryng.
"And he seide, withouten fail
"First he would me sle in battle,
"And money a great lordynge.
"At sertes "But certainly."
he schal be forswore,
"Or to wrothele Loss of health or safety. Malediction. So R. of Brunne, Chron.
Apud. Hearne's Rob. Glouc. p. 737. 738. Morgan did after conseile,
And wrought him self to wrotherheile.
Again, To ow al was a wikke conseile,
That e selle se full wrotherheile.

that he was bore,
"Bote he hit thereto "To that issue."
bring.
"Therefore lordynges, I have after ow sent
"Ffor to come to my parliment,
"To wite of ow counsel."
And all onswerde with good intent
They would be at his commandment
Withouten any fail.
And when they were all at his heste,
The Soudan made a well great feste,
For love of his battle;
The Soudan gedrede a host unryde Unright. Wicked.
,
With Sarazyns of muchel pride,
The king of Taars to assail.
When the king hit herd that tide
He sent about on vche side,
All that he mihte off seende;
Great werre tho by began to wrake
Ffor the marriage ne most be take
Of that same maiden heende Hend. Handsome.
.
Battle they set upon a day,
With inn the thridde day of May,
Ne longer nolde they leende Tarry.
.
The Soudan com with great power,
With helm briht, and feir banere,
Upon that king to wend.
The Soudan ladde an huge ost,
And com with much pruyde and cost,
With the king of Taars to fihte.
With him money a Sarazyn feer Companion.
,
All the feolds feor and near,
Of helmes leomede Shone.
lihte.
The king of Taars com also
The Soudan battle for to do
With money a cristene knihte;
Either ost gone othur assail
There by gone a strong battle
That grisly che was of sihte.
Threo hethene again twey cristene men,
And field hem down in the fen,
With wepnes stif and good:
The steorne Sarazyns in that fihte,
Slow vr christian men down rihte,
They fouhte as heo weore wood.
The Souldan's oste in that stounde
Ffeolde the cristene to the ground,
Money a freoly food;
The Sarazyns, with outen fail,
The cristens culd Killed.
in that battle,
Nas non that hem withstoode.
When the king of Taars saw the siht
Wood he was for wrath Wraththe. Orig.
a pliht;
In hand he hent a spear,
And to the Soudan he rode full riht,
With a dunt Dint. Wound, stroke.
of much miht,
Adoun he gone him bear:
The Souldan neigh he had islawe,
But thritti thousant of hethen law
Commen him for to were;
And brougten him again upon his stead,
And help him well in that need,
That no mon miht him dear Hurt.
.
When he was brouht upon his stead,
He sprung as sparkle does of glede Coal. Firebrand.
,
Ffor wrath and for envye;
All that he hot he made them blede,
He ferde as he would a wede "As if he was mad."
,
Mahoun help, he began cry.
Money an helm there was unweved,
And money a bacinet Helmet.
to cleved,
And saddles money emptye;
Men miht se upon the field
Moni a kniht ded under schelde,
Of the christian cumpagnie.
Whon the king of Taars saug hem so ride,
No longer then he nold abide,
Bote fleyh Flew.
to his own cite:
The Sarazyns, that ilke tide,
Sloug a down by vche side
Vr cristene folk so fre.
The Sarazyns that time, sauns fayl^,
Slow ure cristene in battle,
That reuthe it was to se;
And on the morwe for heore Their.
sake
Truwes they gunne for to gidere take "They began to make a truce together."
,
A month and days three.
As the king of Taars satte in his halle,
He made full great deol Dole. Grief.
withalle,
Ffor the folk that he hedde ilore Lost.
:
His douhter com in rich palle,
On kneos he She.
began biforen him fall,
And seide with sything sore:
"Ffather, he seide, let me by his wife
"That there be no more stryf, etc."
To prevent future bloodshed, the princess voluntarily declares she is willing
to be married to the Sultan, although a Pagan: and notwithstanding the king her
father peremptorily refuses his consent, and resolves to continue the war, with
much difficulty she finds means to fly to the Soldan's court, in order to
produce a speedy and lasting reconciliation by marrying him.

To the Souldan heo She.
is i fare;
He com with money an heig lordyng,
Ffor to welcome that sweet thing,
Theor he com in hire chare Chariot.
:
He cust Ki^t.
hire with money a sith
His joye couthe no man hithe Know.
,
A wei was al hire care.
Into chamber heo was led,
With rich clothes heo was cled,
Hethene as thaug heo were "As if she had been a heathen. One of that country."
.
The Souldan there he satte in halle,
He commanded his knihtes all
That maiden ffor to fette,
On cloth of rich purpil palle,
And on here head a comli call,
By the Souldan she was set.
Unsemli was hit ffor to se
Heo that was so bright of ble
To habbe Have.
so foul a met Mate.
, etc.
They are then married, and the wedding is solemnised with a grand tournament,
which they both view from a high tower. She is afterward delivered of a son,
which is so deformed as to be almost a monster. But at length she persuades the
Sultan to turn christian; and the young prince is baptized, after which
ceremony he suddenly becomes a child of most extraordinary beauty. The Sultan
next proceeds to destroy his Saracen idols.

He hente a stof with heart great,
And al his goddis he began to beat,
And drough hem al adoun;
And leyde on til that he con sweet,
With stern strokes and with great,
On Jovyn and Plotoun,
On Astrot and sire Jovyn
On Termagaunt and Apollin,
He brak them scul and croun;
On Termagaunt, that was heore brother,
He left no lym hol wit other,
Ne on his lord saint Mahoun, etc.
The Sultan then releases thirty thousand christians, whom he had long detained
prisoners. As an apostate from the pagan religion, he is powerfully attacked by
several neighboring Saracen nations: but he sollicits the assistance of his
father in law the king of Tars; and they both joining their armies, in a
pitched battle, defeat five Saracen kings, Kenedoch, Lesyas king of Taborie,
Merkel, Cleomadas, and Membrok. There is a warmth of description in some
passages of this poem, not unlike the manner of Chaucer. The reader must have
already observed, that the stanza resembles that of Chaucer's RHYME OF SIR TOPAS
The romance of SIR LIBEAUX or LYBIUS DISCONIUS, quoted by Chaucer, is in this
stanza. MSS. Cott. CALL. A. 2. f. 40.
.

IPOMEDON is mentioned among the romances in the Prologue of RICHARD CUER DE
LION; which, in an ancient copy of the British museum, is called SIR IPOMYDON:
a name borrowed from the Theban war, and transferred here to a tale of the
feudal times MSS. Harl. 2252. 44. f. 54. And in the library of Lincoln
cathedral, (K k. 3. 10.) is an ancient imperfect printed copy, wanting the
first sheet.
. This piece is evidently derived from a French original. Our hero Ippomedon is
son of Ermones king of Apulia, and his mistress is the fair heiress of
Calabria. About the year 1230, William Ferrabras Bras de fer. Iron arms.
, and his brethren, sons of Tancred the Norman, and well known in the romantic
history of the Paladins, acquired the signories of Apulia and Calabria. But our
English romance seems to be immediately translated from the French; for Ermones
is called king of Poyle, or Apulia, which in French is Pouille. I have
transcribed some of the most interesting passages MSS. f. 55.
.

Ippomedon, although the son of a king, is introduced waiting in his father's
hall, at a grand festival. This servitude was so far from being dishonorable,
that it was always required as a preparatory step to knighthood See p. supr.
.

Every year the king weld
At Whytsuntyde a fest held
Of dukis, erlis, and barouns,
Mani there com from diverse tounes,
Ladies, maidens, gentill and fre,
Come thedyr from far country:
And grette lordis of far land,
Thedyr were prayed by fore the hond Beforehand.
.
When all were com to gidyr than
There was joy of mani a man;
Ffull rich I wene were there pryse,
Ffor better might no man devyse.
Ippomedon that day servyde in halle,
All spoke of him both great and small,
Ladies and maiden by held him on,
So goodly a youth they had seen non:
His feyre chere in halle them smerte
That money a lady son smote throw the heart.
And in their hartys they made moan
That there lordis ne were such one.
After mete they went to pley,
All the people, as I you say;
Some to chamber, and some to boure,
And some to the hye toure In the feudal castles, where many persons of both
sexes were assembled, and who did not know how to spend the time, it is natural
to suppose that different parties were formed, and different schemes of
amusement invented. One of these, was to mount to the top of one of the highest
towers in the castle.
;
And some on the halle stood
And spoke what hem thoht good:
Men that were of that cite The Apulians.

Enquired of men of other cuntre, etc.
Here a conversation commences concerning the heiress of Calabria: and the
young prince Ippomedon immediately forms a resolution to visit and to win her.
He sets out in disguise.

Now they forth go on their way,
Ippomedon to his men began say,
That they be none of them all,
So hardi by his name him call,
Whenso they wend far or near,
Or over the strange ryvere;
Ne no man tell what I am
Where I schall go, ne where I came.
All they granted his commandment,
And furthe they went with one consent.
Ippomedon and Thelomew
Robys had on and mantills new,
Of the richest that might be,
There nas ne such in that cuntree:
Ffor many was the rich stone
That the mantills were upon.
So long there way they have nome Took.

That to Calabre they are come:
They come to the castle yate
The porter was ready there at,
The porter to them they began call
And prayed him go into the halle
And say thy lady She was lady, by inheritance, of the signory. The female
feudataries exercised all the duties and honors of their feudal jurisdiction
in person. In Spenser, where we read of the Lady of the Castle, we are to
understand such a character. See a story of a Comtesse, who entertains a knight
in her castle with much gallantry. Mem. sur l'anc. Chev. ii. 69. It is well
known that anciently in England ladies were sheriffs of counties.
gent and fre,
That commen are men of far contree,
And if yt please her we will her pray,
That we might ete with her to day.
The porter said full cortessly
"Your errand to do I am ready."
The lady to her mete was set,
The porter came and fair her grette,
"Madame, he seyde, god you save,
"At your gate gestis you have,
"Strange men us for to se
"They ask mete for charity."
The lady commands sone anon
That the gates were undone,
"And bring them all before me
"Ffor well at ese shall they be."
They took heyr pagis horse and all,
These two men went into the halle,
Ippomedon on knees him set,
And the lady feyre he grette:
"I am a man of strange country
"And prye you of your will to be
"That I might dwell with you to gere
"Of your nourture for to lere Learn.
,
"I am com from far land;
"Ffor speech I here by fore the hand
"That your nourture and your servyse,
"Is holden of so great empryse,
"I pray you that I may dwell here
"Some of your servyse to bear."
The lady by held Ippomedon,
He seemed well a gentilmon,
She knew non such in her land,
So goodli a man and well farrand Handsome.
;
She saw also by his norture
He was a man of great valor:
She cast full sone in hire thought
That for no servyse cum he noght;
But hit was worship her untoo
In feir servyse him to do.
She said, "Sir, welcome ye be,
"And all that common be with the;
"Sith ye have had so great travayle,
"Of a servyse ye shall not fail:
"In this cuntre ye may dwell here
"And al your will for to here,
"Of the cup ye shall serve me
"And all your men with you shall be,
"Ye may dwell here at your will,
"Bote Unless.
your beryng be full ylle."
"Madame, he said, grantmercy,"
He thanked the lady corteysly.
She commandith him to the mete,
But or he set in any sete,
He saluted them greet and small,
As a gentillmon should in halle;
All they said sone anon,
They saw nevir so godli a mon,
Ne so light, ne so glad,
Ne non that so rich atire had:
There was none that sat nor yede Walked.
,
But they had merveille of his deed Behavior.
,
And said, he was no little sire
That myht show soche atyre.
When they had ete, and grace said,
And the tabyll away was laid;
Upp then aroos Ippomedon,
Ant to the bottery he went anon,
Ant his mantyl him a boute;
On him lokyd all the route,
Ant every mon said to other there,
"Will ye se the proud squeer
"Shall serve "Who is to serve."
my lady of the wine,
"In his mantyll that is so fine?"
That they him scornyd wist he noght
On othyr thing he had his thought.
He took the cup of the botelere,
And drew a lace of sylke full clear,
Adowne than fell his mantylle by,
He preyed him for his curtesy,
That little gift i. e. His mantle.
that he would nome
Tell afte sum better come.
Up it took the bottelere,
By fore the lady he began it bear
Ant preyd the lady heartily
To thank him of his curtessie,
All that was tho in the halle
Great honor they spoke him all.
And said he was no little man
That such gyftis giffie kan.
There he dwelled moni a day,
And servyd the lady well to pay,
He bare him on so fair manner
To knightis, ladies, and squyere,
All loved him that com him by,
Ffor he bare him so cortessly.
The lady had a cosyn that hight Jason,
Full well he loved Ippomedon;
When that he yed in or out,
Jason went with him about.
The lady lay, but she slept noght,
For of the squyerre she had great thought;
How he was feyre and shape well,
Body and arms, and every dele:
There was non in all her land
So well he semyd dougti of hand.
But she howde well for no case,
Whence he came nor what he was,
Ne of no man could enquere
Other than of that squyere.
She hire by thought of a quayntyse,
If she miht know in any wise,
To wete whereof he were come;
This was her thought al their some
She thought to wode her men to tame f. Tempt.

That she might know him by his game.
On the morrow when yt was day
To her men she began to say,
"To morrow when it is day light,
"Lok ye be al ready dight,
"With your houndis more and less,
"In fforrest to take my gresse,
"And their I will myself be
"Your game to by hold and se."
Ippomedon had houndis three
That he brought from his cuntree;
When they were to the wode gone,
This lady and her men ichone,
And with hem her houndis ladde,
All that any houndis had.
Sir Tholomew for gate he noght,
His maistres hounds thedyr he brought,
That many a day he had run ere,
Fful well he thought to note hem there.
When they came to the launde on hight,
The queen's pavylyon thar was pight,
That she might see all the best,
All the game of the forest,
And to the lady brought mani a best Beast.
,
Heart and hynd, buck and do,
And other bestis many mo.
The houndis that were of great prise,
Plucked down dear all atryse,
Ippomedon he with his hounds throo
Drew down both buck and do,
More he took with hounds three
Than all that other cumpagnie,
Their squyres undyd her dear
Each man after his manner:
Ippomedon a dear gede unto,
That full konningly gone he hit undo,
So feyre that venyson he began to dight,
That both him by held squyere and knight:
The lady looked out of her pavylyon,
And saw him dight the venyson.
There she had great dainte
And so had all that did him see:
She saw all that he down droughe
Of hunting she wist he could ynoghe
And thought in her heart then
That he was com of gentillmen:
She bade Jason hire men to call
Home then passyd great and small:
Home they com son anon,
This lady to her met began gone,
And of venery Venison.
had her fille
Ffor they had take game at will.
He is afterward knighted with great solemnity.

The heraudes gaff the child Ippomedon.
the gee,
And M pound he had to fee,
Mynstrelles had gifts of gold
And forty days this fest was hold MS. f. 61. b.
.
The metrical romance entitled, LA MORT ARTHURE, preserved in the same
repository, is supposed by the learned and accurate Wanley, to be a translation
from the French: who adds, that it is not perhaps older than the times of Henry
the seventh MSS. Harl. 2252. 49. f. 86. Pr. "Lordinges that are leffe and
dear." Never printed.
. But as it abounds with many Saxon words, and seems to be quoted in SIR BEVYS,
I have given it a place here Signat. K. ii. b.
. Notwithstanding the title, and the exordium which promises the history of
Arthur and the Sangreal, the exploits of Sir Lancelot du Lake king of Benwike,
his intrigues with Arthur's queen Geneura, and his refusal of the beautiful
daughter of the earl of Ascalot, form the greatest part of the poem. At the
close, the repentance of Lancelot and Geneura, who both assume the habit of
religion, is introduced. The writer mentions the Tower of London. The following
is a description of a tournament performed by some of the knights of the Round
Table MS. f. 89. b.
.

Tho to the castelle gone they fare,
To the lady fair and bryhte:
Blithe was the lady their,
That they would dwell with her that night.
Hastily was there soper yare Ready. See GLOSSARY to the Oxford edition of
Shakespeare, 1771. In Voc.

Of mete and drink richely dight;
On the morrow began they dine and fare
Both Lancellot and that other knight.
When they come in to the field
Myche there was of game and play,
Awhile they lovid Hovered.
and by held
How Arthur's knightis rode that day,
Sir Galaad's.
Galehodis party bigun to Perhaps yield, i. e. yield.
held
On foot his knightis ar led away.
Launcellott stiff was undyr schelde,
Thenkis to help if that he may.
Beside him come than sir Gawayne,
Breme Fierce.
as any wild bore;
Lancellot springis hem again Against
,
In read armies that he bore:
A dynte he gaff with mekill main,
Sir Ewayne was unhorsid their,
That al men went Weened.
he had be^ slain
So was he woundyd wondyr sare Sore.
.
Sir Beorte thought no thing good,
When Sir Ewaine unhorsyd was;
Fforth he springis, as he were wode,
To Launcelott withouten lose:
Launcellot^ hitt him on the hode,
The next way to ground he chese:
Was non so stiff again him stood
Fful thin he made the thikkest prees Crowd.
.
Sir Lyonell be gonne to tene Be Troubled.
,
And hastily he made him bowne Ready.
,
To Launcellott, with heart kene,
He rode with helm and sword brown;
Launcellott hytt him as I wene,
Through the helm in to the crown:
That any aftir it was seen
Both horse and man there yod adoune.
The knightis gadrede to gedre than
And began with craft, etc.
I could give many more ample specimens of the romantic poems of these nameless
minstrells, who probably flourished before or about the reign of Edward the
second Octavian is one of the romances mentioned in the Prologue to Cure de
Lion, above cited. See also p. 119. In the Cotton manuscripts there is the
metrical romance of Octavian imp^rator, but it has nothing of the history of
the Roman emperors. Pr. "Jhesu that was with spear ystonge." Calig. A. 12. f.
20. It is a very singular stanza. In Bishop More's manuscripts at Cambridge,
there is a poem with the same title, but a very different b^ginning, viz.
"Little and mykyll old and young." Bibl. Publ. 690. 30. The emperor Octavyen,
perhaps the same, is mentioned in Chaucer's Dreme, v. 368. Among Hatton's
manuscripts in Bibl. Bodl. we have a French poem, Romaunce de Otheniem Empereur
de Rome. Hyper. Bodl. 4046. 21.

In the same line of the aforesaid Prologue, we have the romance of Ury. This
is probably the father of the celebrated Sir Ewaine or Yvain, mentioned in the
Court Mantell. Mem. Anc. Cheval. ii. p. 62.

Li rois pris par la destre main
L' amiz monseignor Yvain
Qui au ROI URIEN fu filz,
Et bons chevaliers et hardiz,
Qui tant ama chiens et oisiaux.
Specimens of the English Sir Bevys may be seen in Percy's Ball. iii. 216, 217,
297. edit. 1767. And Observations on the Fairy Queen,. ii. p. 50. It is extant
in the black letter. It is in manuscript at Cambridge, Bibl. Publ. 690. 30. And
Coll. Caii. A. 9. 5. And MSS. Bibl. Adv. Edingb. W. 4. 1. Number. xxii.

Si^racke was translated into English verse by one Hugh Campden; and printed,
probably not long after it was translated, at London, by Thomas God^r^y, at the
cost of Dan Robert Saltwood, monk of saint Austin's in Canterbury, 1510. This
piece therefore belongs to a lower period. I have seen only one manuscript copy
of it. Laud, G. 57. fol. membran.

Chaucer mentions, in Sir Topaz, among others, the romantic poems of Sir
Blandamoure, Sir Libeaux, and Sir Ippotis. Of the former I find nothing more
than the name occurring in Sir Libeaux. To avoid prolix repetitions from other
works in the hands of all, I refer the reader to Percy's Essay on ancient
metrical Romances, who has analyzed the plan of Sir Libeaux, or Sir Libius
Disconius, at large, p. 17. See also p. 24. ibid.

As to Sir Ippotis, an ancient poem with that title occurs in manuscript, MSS.
Cotton, Calig. A. 2. f. 77. and MS. Vernon, f. 296. But as Chaucer is speaking
of romances of chivalry, which he means to ridicule, and this is a religious
legend, it may be doubted whether this is the piece alluded to by Chaucer.
However I will here exhibit a specimen of it from the exordium. MS. Vernon, f.
296.

Her by ginnith a tretys
That men cl^peth YPOTIS.
All that wolleth of wisdom lere,
Lusteneth now, and e may here;
Of a tale of holy writ
Saint John the evangelist witnesses it.
How hit bifelle in great Rome,
The cheef city of cristendome,
A child was sent of mihtes most,
Through virtue of the holy ghost:
The emperor of Rome than
His name was hoten ^ire Adrian;
And when the child of great honor
Was come before the emperor,
Upon his knees he him set
The emperor full fair he grette:
The emperor with mild chere
Askede him whethence he come were, etc.
We shall have occasion, in the progress of our poetry, to bring other
specimens of these compositions. See Obs. on Spenser's Fairy Queen, ii. 42, 43.

I must not forget here, that Sir Gawaine, one of Arthur's champions, is
celebrated in a separate romance. Among Tanner's manuscripts, we have the
Wedding of Sir Ga^vain, Numb. 455. Bibl. Bodl. It begins, "Be ye blythe and
listeneth to the life of a lord rich." Dr. Percy has printed the Marriage of
Sir Gawayne, which he believes to have furnished Chaucer with his Wife of Bath.
Ball. i. 11. It begins, "King Arthur lives in merry Carlisle." I think I have
somewhere seen a romance in verse entitled, The Turk and Gawaine."


. But it is neither my inclination nor intention to write a catalogue, or
compile a miscellany. It is not to be expected that this work should be a
general repository of our ancient poetry. I cannot however help observing, that
English literature and English poetry suffer, while so many pieces of this kind
still remain concealed and forgotten in our manuscript libraries. They contain
in common with the prose-romances, to most of which indeed they gave rise,
amusing images of ancient customs and institutions, not elsewhere to be found,
or at least not otherwise so strikingly delineated: and they preserve pure and
unmixed, those fables of chivalry which formed the taste and awakened the
imagination of our elder English classics. The antiquaries of former times
overlooked or rejected these valuable remains, which they despised as false and
frivolous; and employed their industry in reviving obscure fragments of
uninstructive morality or uninteresting history. But in the present age we are
beginning to make ample amends: in which the curiosity of the antiquarian is
connected with taste and genius, and his researches tend to display the
progress of human manners, and to illustrate the history of society.

As a further illustration of the general subject, and many particulars, of
this section and the three last, I will add a new proof of the reverence in
which such stories were held, and of the familiarity with which they must have
been known, by our ancestors. These fables were not only perpetually repeated
at their festivals, but were the constant objects of their eyes. The very walls
of their apartments were clothed with romantic history. Tapestry was anciently
the fashionable furniture of our houses, and it was chiefly filled with lively
representations of this sort. The stories of the tapestry in the royal palaces
of Henry the eighth are still preserved "The second part of the Inventorye of
our late sovereigne lord king Henry the eighth, containing his guardrobes,
household stuff, etc. etc." MSS. Harl. 1419. fol. The original. Compare p. 114.
supr. and Walpole's Anecd. Paint. i. p. 10.
; which I will here give without reserve, including other subjects as they
happen to occur, equally descriptive of the times. In the tapestry of the tower
of London, the original and most ancient seat of our monarchs, there are
recited Godfrey of Bulloign, the three kings of Cologn, the emperor
Constantine, saint George, king Erkenwald So in the record. But he was the
third bishop of St. Paul's, London, son of king O^fa, and a great benefactor to
St. Paul's church, in which he had a most superb shrine. He was canonised.
Dugdale, among many other curious particulars relating to his shrine, says,
that in the year 1339 it was decorated anew, when three goldsmiths, two at the
wages of ^ive shillings by the week, and one at eight, worked upon it for a
whole year. Hist. St. Paul's, p. 21. See al^o p. 233.
, the history of Hercules, Fame and Honor, the Triumph of Divinity, Esther and
Ahasuerus, Jupiter and Juno, saint George, the eight Kings, the ten Kings of
France, the Birth of our Lord, Duke Joshua, the rich history of king David,
the seven Deadly Sins, the rich history of the Passion, the Stem of Jesse This
was a favorite subject for a large gothic window. This subject also composed a
branch of candlesticks thence called a JESSE, not unusual in the ancient
churches. In the year 1097, Hugo de Flori, abbot of S. Aust. Canterb. bought
for the choir of his church a great branch-candlestick. "Candelabrum magnum in
choro aeneum quod j^s^^ vocatur in partibus emit transmarinis." Thorn, Dec.
Script. col. 1796. About the year 1330, Adam de Sodbury, ^bbot of Glastonbury,
gave to his convent "Unum dorsale lan^um le JESSE." Hearn. Joan. Glaston. p.
26^. That is, piece of tapestry embroidered with the ^iem of Jess^, to be hung
round the choir, or other parts of the church, on high festivals. He also gave
a tapestry of this subject for the abbot's hall. Ibid. And I cannot help
adding, what indeed is not immediately connected with the subject of this note,
that he gave his monastery, among other costly presents, a great clock,
processionibus et spectaculis insignitum, an organ of prodigious size, and
eleven bells, six for the tower of the church, and five for the clock tower. He
also new vaulted the nave of the church, and adorned the new roof with
beautiful paintings. Ibid.
, our Lady and Son, king Solomon, the Woman of Canony, Meleager, and the dance
of Maccabre f^ 6. In many churches of France there was an ancient show or
mimicry, in which all ranks of life were personated by the ^cclesiastics, who
all danced together, and disappeared one after another. It was called DANCE
MACCABRE, and seems to have been often performed in St. Innocent's at Paris,
where was a famous painting on this subject, which gave rise to Lydgate's poem
under the same title. See Carpent. Suppl. Du Cange, Lat. Gl. ii. p. 1103. More
will be said of it when we come to Lydgate.
. At Durhamplace we find the City of Ladies A famous French allegorical
romance.
, the tapestrie of Thebes and of Troy, the City of Peace, the Prodigal Son A
picture on this favorite subject is mentioned in Shakespeare. And in
Randolph's Muses Looking-glass. "In painted cloth the story of the PRODIGAL."
Dods^. Old Pl. vi. 260.
, Esther, and other piec^s of scripture. At Windsor castle the siege of
Jerusalem, Ahasuerus, Charlemagne, the siege of Troy, and hawking and hunting
f. 298.
. At Nottingham castle Amys and Amelion f. 364.
. At Woodstock manor, the tapestri^ of Charlemagne f. 318.
. At the More, a palace in Hertfordshire, king Arthur, Hercules, Astyages and
Cyrus. At Richmond, the arras of Sir Bevis, and Virtue and Vice fighting f. 346.
. Many of these subjects are repeated at Westminster, Greenwich, Oatelands,
Bedington in Surry, and other royal seats, some of which are now unknown as
such Some of the tapestry at Hampton Court, described in this inventory, is to
be seen still in a fine old room, now remaining in its original state, called
the Exchequer.
. Among the rest we have also Hannibal, Holofernes, Romulus and Remus, Aeneas,
and Susannah Montfaucon, among the tapestry of Charles the Fifth, king of
France, in the year 1370, mentions, Le tappis de la vie du s^int Th^seus. Here
the officer who made the entry calls Theseus a saint. The seven D^adly Sins, Le
saint Graal, Le grant tappis de Neuf Preux, Reyne d'Ireland, and Godfrey of
B^lloign. Monum. Fr. iii. 64. The neuf preux are the Nine Worthies. Among the
stores of Henry the eighth, taken as above, we have, "two old stained clothes
of the ix worthies for the great chamber," at Newhall in Essex, f. 362. These
were pictures. Again, at the palace of Westminster in the little study called
the New Librarye, which I believe was in Holbein's elegant Gothic gatehouse
lately demolished, there is, "Item, xii pictures of men on horseback of
enamelled stuff of the Nine Worthies, and others upon square tables." f. 188.
MSS. Harl. 1419. ut supr.
. I have mentioned romances written on many of these subjects, and shall
mention others. In the romance of SIR GUY, that hero's combat with the dragon
in Northumberland is said to be represented in tapestry in Warwick castle. In
Warwike the truth shall ye see
In arras wrought full craftily Signat. Ca. 1. Some perhaps may think this
circumstance an innovation or addition of later minstrells. A practice not
uncommon.
.
This piece of tapestry appears to have been in Warwick castle before the year
1398. It was then so distinguished and valued a piece of furniture, that a
special grant was made of it by king Richard the second in that year, conveying
"that suit of arras hangings in Warwick castle, which contained the story of
the famous Guy earl of Warwick," together with the castle of Warwick, and other
possessions, to Thomas Holland, earl of Kent Dugd. Bar. i. p. 237.
. And in the restoration of forfeited property to this lord after his
imprisonment, these hangings are particularly specified in the patent of king
Henry the fourth, dated 1399. When Margaret, daughter of king Henry the
seventh, was married to James king of Scotland, in the year 1503, Holyrood
House at Edinburgh was ^plendidly decorated on that occasion; and we are told
in an ancient record, that the "hanginge of the queens grett chammer
represented the ystory of Troy t^une." Again, "the king's grett chammer had
one table, w^r was satt, his chammerlayn, the grett sqyer, and many others,
well served; the which chammer was haunged about with the story of Hercules,
together with other ystorys Leland. Coll. vol. iii. p. 295, 296. Opuscul. edit.
1770.
." And at the same solemnity, "in the hall where the qwene's company were satt in
like as in the other, an which was haunged of the history of Hercules, etc. Ibid.
" A stately chamber in the castle of Hesdin in Artois, was furnished by a duke
of Burgundy with the story of Jason and the Golden Fleece, about the year 1468
See Obs^ Fair. Qu. i. p. 177.
. The affecting story of Coucy's Heart, which gave rise to an old metrical
English romance entitled, the KNIGHT OF COURTESY, and the LADY OF FAGUEL, was
woven in tapestry in Coucy castle in France Howel's Letters, xx, vi. B. i. This
is a true story, about the y^ar 1180. Fauchett relates itat large from an old
authentic French chronicle; and then adds, "A^nsi finerint les amors du
Chastelain du Couci et de la dame de Faiel." Our Castellan, whose name is
Regnard de Couci, was famous for his chansons and chivalry, but more so for his
unfortunate love, which became proverbial in the old French romances. See
^auch. Rec. p. 124. 128.
. I have seen an ancient suite of arras, containing Ariosto's Orlando and
Angelica, where, at every groupe, the story was all along illustrated with
short rhymes in romance or old French. Spenser sometimes dresses the superb
bowers of his fairy castles with this sort of historical drapery. In Hawes's
Poem called the PASTIME OF PLEASURE, written in the reign of Henry the seventh,
of which due notice will be taken in its proper place, the hero of the piece
sees all his future adventures displayed at large in the sumptuous tapestry of
the hall of a castle. I have before mentioned the most valuable and perhaps
most ancient work of this sort now existing, the entire series of duke William^
descent on England, preserved in the church of Bayeux in Normandy, and intended
as an ornament of the choir on high festivals. Bartholinus relates, that it was
an art much cultivated among the ancient Islanders, to weave the histories of
their giants and champions in tapestry Antiquit. Dan. Lib. i. 9. p. 51.
. The same thing is recorded of the old Persians; and this furniture is still
in high request among many oriental nations, particularly in Japan and China In
the royal palace of Jeddo, which overflows with a pro^usion of the most
exquisite and superb eastern embellishments, the tapestry of the emperor's
audience-hall is of the finest silk, wrought by the most skilful arti^icers of
that country, and adorned with pearls, gold, and silver. Mod. Univ. Hist. B.
xiii. c. ii. vol. ix. p. 83. (Not. G.) edit. 1759.
. It is well known, that to frame pictures of heroic adventures in needle work,
was a favorite practice of classical antiquity.

SECT. VI.
ALTHOUGH much poetry began to be written about the reign of Edward the second,
yet I have found only one English poet of that reign whose name has descended
to posterity Robert de Brunne, above mentioned, lived, and perhaps wrote some
of his pieces, in this reign; but he more properly belongs to the last.
. This is Adam Davy or Davie. He may be placed about the year 1312. I can
collect no circumstances of his life, but that he was marshall of
Stratford-le-bow near London This will appear from citations which follow.
. He has left several poems never printed, which are almost as forgotten as his
name. Only one manuscript of these pieces now remains, which seems to be coeval
with it is author MSS. Bibl. Bodl. Laud I. 74. fol. membran. It has been much
damaged, and on that account is often illegible.
. They are VISIONS, THE BATTLE OF JERUSALEM, THE LEGEND OF SAINT ALEXIUS,
SCRIPTURE HISTORIES, OF FIFTEEN TOKNES BEFORE THE DAY OF JUDGMENT,
LAMENTATIONS OF SOULS, and THE LIFE OF ALEXANDER In the manuscript there is
also a piece in prose, entitled, The Pylgrymages of the holy land. f. 65. --
66. It begins. "Qwerr soever a cross standyth there is a forgivenes of pain." I
think it is a description of the holy places, and it appears at least to be of
the handwriting of the rest.
.

In the VISIONS, which are of the religious kind, Adam Davie draws this picture
of Edward the second standing before the shrine of Edward the Confessor in
Westminster abbey at his coronation. The lines have a strength arising from
simplicity.

To our Lord Jeshu Crist in heven
Iche to day shawe mine sweven Dream.
,
That iche motte Thought, dreamed. In the first sense, we have me m^tte in
Chaucer, Non. Pr. T. v. 1013. Urr. And below.
in one nycht,
Of a knycht of mychel mycht:
His name is Named.
yhote sir Edward the king,
Prince of Wales Engelonde the fair thing;
Me mott that he was armid well,
Both with yrne and with stele,
And on his helm that was of stel,
A coroune of gold bicom him well.
Before the shryne of Seint Edward he stood,
Myd glad chere and myld of mood ^ol. 27.
.
Most of these Visions are compliments to the king. Our poet then proceeds thus:

Another suevene me met on a twef^it Twel^th-night.

Before the fest of Alhalewen of that ilke knigt,
His name is nempned Named.
hure before,
Blissed be the time that he was bore, etc.
Of Sir Edward our derworth Dear-worthy.
king
Iche met of him anothere fair metyng, etc.
Me thought he wod upon an ass,
And that ich take God to witness;
A wondur he was in a mantell gray,
Toward Rome he nom Took.
his way,
Upon his hevede sat a gray hure,
It seemed him well a mesure;
He wood withouten hose and sho,
His wonen was not so to do;
His shankes semeden al bloodrede,
Mine heart wop Wept.
for great dread;
As a pilgrim he rood to Rome,
And thider he com well swithe sone.
The third suevene me met a nigt
Rigt of that derworth knight:
On wednysday a nigt it was
Next the dai of seint Lucie before Christenmasse, etc.
Me thougth that ich was at Rome,
And thider iche come swithe sone,
The pope and sir Edward our king
Both They.
hy had a new dublyng, etc.
Thus Crist full of grace
Grant our king in every place
Maistrie of his witherwines
And of al wicked Sarasynes.
Me met a suevene one worthig Worthig. Orig.
a nigth
Of that ilche derworthi knigth,
God iche it show and to witness take
And so shilde me fro, etc.
Into a chapel I cum of ure lefdy Lady.
,
Jhe Crist her leve Dear.
son stod by,
On rod Cross.
he was an loveliche mon,
Al thilke that on rode was don
He unneled Unnailed.
his honden two, etc.
Adam the marchal of Strattford at Bow
Well swithe wide his name is iknowe
He himself met this metyng,
To witness he takes Jhu hevene king,
On wedenyssday Wodenis day. Woden's day. Wednesday.
in clean leinte Lent.

A voice me bid I schulde nougt feinte,
Of the suevenes that her ben write
I should swithe don Make haste.
my lord king to wite.
The thursday next the beryng Christmass-day.
of our lefdy
Me thougth an aungel com sir Edward by, etc.
Iche tell you forsooth withoutten les Lies.
,
Als God of hevene maid Marie to mother ches "As sure as God chose the Virgin
Mary to be Christ's Mother."
,
The angel com to me Adam Davie and seide
Bot^thou Adam show this thee worth well yvel mede, etc.
Whosoever will speak myd me Adam the marchal
In Stretforde bow he is yknown and over al,
Iche ne schewe nougt this for to have mede
Bot for God almigtties dread.
There is a very old prose romance, both in French and Italian, on the subject
of the Destruction of Jerusalem In an ancient inventory of books, all French
romances, made in England in the reign of Edward the third, I find the romance
of TITUS and VESPASIAN. Madox, Formul. Anglican. p. 12. See also Scipio
Maffei's Traduttori Italiani, p. 48. Crescimbeni (Volg. Poes. vol. i. l. 5. p.
317.) does not seem to have known of this romance in Italian. Du Cange mentions
Le Roman de 'a Prise de Jerusalem par Titus, in verse. Gloss. Lat. i. IND.
AUCT. p. cxciv. A metrical romance on this subject is in the royal manuscripts.
16 E viii. 2. Brit. Mus. There is an old French play on this subject, acted in
1437. It was printed in 1491. fol. M. Beauchamps, Rech. Fr. Theat. p. 134.
. It is translated from a Latin work, in five books, very popular in the middle
ages, entitled, HEGESIPPI de Bello Judaico et Excidio Urbis Hierosolymitanae
Libri quinque. This is a licentious paraphrase of a part of Josephus's Jewish
history, made about the fourth century: and the name Hegesippus is most
probably corrupted from Josephus, perhaps also called Josippus. The paraphrast
is supposed to be Ambrose of Milan, who flourished in the reign of Theodosius
He mentions Constantinople and New Rome: an^ the provinces of Scotia and
Saxonia. From this work the Maccabe^s seem to have got into romance. It was
first printed at Paris. fol. 1511. Among the Bodleian manuscripts there is a
most beautiful copy of this book, believed to be written in the Saxon times.
. On the subject of Vespasian's siege of Jerusalem, as related in this book,
our poet Adam Davie has left a poem entitled the BATTLE OF JERUSALEM The
latter part of this poem appears detached, in a former part of our manuscript,
with the title THE VENGEANCE OF GODS DEATH, viz. f. 22. b. Thi^ latter part
begins with these lines.

And at the forty days end,
Whider I would he bade me we^de,
Upon the mount of olyvete, etc.

. It begin thus.

Listeneth all that beth alyve,
Both christian men and wyve:
I wol you tell of a wondur cas,
How Jhesu Crist bihated was,
Of the Jews fell and kene,
That was on him sith ysene,
Gospelles I draw to witness
Of this matter more or less, MS. ut supr. f. 72. b.
etc.
In the course of the story, Pilate challenges our Lord to single combat. This
subject will occur again.

Davie's LEGEND OF SAINT ALEXIUS THE CONFESSOR, SON OF EUPHEMIUS, is translated
from Latin, and begins thus:

All that willen here in ryme,
How good men in old time,
Loveden God almigth;
That weren rich, of great valor,
Kings sons and emperor
Of bodies strong and ligth;
ee habbeth yherde often in geste,
Of holy men maken feste
Both day and nigth,
For to have the joye in hevene
(With aungells song, and merry stevene,)
The which is broad and brigth:
To you all heige and low
The rigth sothe to biknowe
our souls for to save, etc MS. ut s^pr. f. 22. -- 72. b.
.
Our author's SCRIPTURE HISTORIES want the beginning. Here they begin with
Joseph, and end with Daniel.

Ffor thritti pens Thirty pence
they sold that child
The seller higth Judas,
Itho. Orig.
Itho Ruben com him and myssed him
Ffor ynow he was MS. ut supr. f. 66. -- 72. b.
.
His FIFTEEN TOKNES Tokens.
BEFORE THE DAY OF JUDGMENT, are taken from the prophet Jeremiah.

The first sign thar ageins, as our lord himself sede,
Hungere schal on earth be, treachery, and falshede,
Batteles, and littell love, sickness and haterede,
And the earth schal quaken that vche man schal ydrede:
The moon schal turn to blood, the sun to derkhede MS. ut supr. f. 71. b.
, etc.
Another of Davie's poems may be called the LAMENTATION OF SOULS. But the
subject is properly a congratulation of Christ's advent, and the lamentation,
of the souls of the fathers remaining in limbo, for his delay.

Off joye and bliss is my song care to bileve Leave.
,
And to here him among that altour soroug shall reve,
Ycome he is that sweet dew, that sweet honey drope,
The king of all kings to whom is our hope:
Become he is our brother, whar was he so long?
He it is and no other, that bougth us so strong:
Our brother we mow May.
him clepe well Sometimes.
, so seith himself ilome MS. ut supr. f. 72.
.
My readers will be perhaps surprised to find our language improve so slowly,
and will probably think, that Adam Davie writes in a less intelligible phrase
than many more ancient bards already cited. His obscurity however arises in
great measure from obsolete spelling, a mark of antiquity which I have here
observed in exact conformity to a manuscript of the age of Edward the second;
and which in the poetry of his predecessors, especially the minstrell-pieces,
has been often effaced by multiplication of copies, and other causes. In the
mean time it should be remarked, that the capricious peculiarities and even
ignorance of transcribers, often occasion an obscurity, which is not to be
imputed either to the author or his age Chaucer in TROILUS AND CRESSIDA
mentions "the great diversite in English, and in writing of our tongue." He
therefore prays God, that no person would miswrite, or misse-metre his poem.
lib. ult. v. 1792. seq.
.

But Davie's capital poem is the LIFE OF ALEXANDER, which deserves to be
published entire on many accounts. It seems to be founded chiefly on Simeon
Seth's romance abovementioned; but many passages are also copied from the
French ROMAN D' ALEXANDRE, a poem in our author's age perhaps equally popular
both in England and France. It is a work of considerable length MS. ut supr. f.
28. -- 65.
. I will first give some extracts from the Prologue.

Diverse in this myddel erde
To lewed men and Leg. lerd. Learned.
lered, etc.
Natheles well feel and fulle
Bethe ifound in heart and skulle,
That hadden lever a rybaudye,
Then here of god either seint Marye;
Either to drink a copful ale,
Than to heren any good tale:
Swiche ich would weren out bishet
For certeynlich it were nett
For hy ne habbeth will be ich woot well
Bot in the got and the barrel, etc. The work begins thus. f. 28. Whilom
clerks well ylerede
On three digten this myddel erde,
And cleped him in her maistrie,
Europe, Affryk, and Asie:
At Asie also mychel is
As Ethiope, and Affryke, I wis, etc.
And ends with this distich. f. 65. Thus ended Alisander the king:
God grant us his blissyng. Amen.


Adam Davie thus describes a splendid procession made by Olympias.

In they time fair and jalyf Jolly.
.
Olympias that fair wife,
Wolden make a rich fest
Of knights and lefdyes Ladies.
honest,
Of burges and of jugelors
And of men of vch mesters Of each, or every, profession, trade, sort.
,
For mon seth by north and south "All mankind are agreed."

Wymen.....
Mychal Much.
she desires to show hire body,
Her fair hare, her face rody Ruddy.
,
To have lees Praise.
and al praising,
And al is folly by heven king.
She has marshales and knyttes
..... to ride and ryttes,
And levadyes and demosile
Which ham.... thousands feel,
In fair attire in dyvers... F. Guise.
.
Many thar rood Rode.
in rich wise.
So dude the dame Olympias
Forto shawe hire gentle face.
A mule also, white so As.
milk,
With sadel of gold, sambuc of sylke,
Was ybrought to the queen
And money bell of sylver shene,
Yfastened on orfreys Embroidered work, cloth of gold. Auri^rigrium, Lat.
of mounde
That hangen nere down to ground:
Fourth she ferd Fared. Went.
myd her route,
A thousand lefydes of rych soute Sort.
.
A sperwek Sparrow-hawk. A hawk.
that was honest Well-bred.
^
So sat on the lefdye's ^yst:
Ffoure trompes toforne Before.
hire blewe;
Many men that day hire knew.
A hundred thousand, and eke moo,
All alonton Went. Aller, Fr.
hire untoo.
All the town bihonged "Hung with tapestry." We find this ceremony practiced
at the entrance of lady Elisabeth, queen of Henry the seventh, into the city of
London. -- "All the strets there which she should pass by were clenly dressed
and besene with cloth, of tappestrye and arras, and some streets as Chepe,
hanged with rich clothes of gold, velvettes and silks." This was in the year
1481. Leland. Coll. iv. Opuscul. p. 220. edit. 1770.
was
Agens "Against her coming."
the lefdy Olympias See the description of the tournament in Chaucer, Knight's
Tale, where the city is hanged with cloth of gold. v. 2570. Urr.
:
Orgues, chymbes, vche manner glee "Organs, chimes, all manner of music."
,
Was drynan again that levady fre,
Wythoutin the tounis murey The town-wall.

Was mered vche manner pley "All sorts of sports."
,
Thar was knyttes tornaying,
Thar was maidens karoling,
Thar was champions skirmynge Skirmishing.
,
..... also wrestlynge.
Of lions chase, and bare bayting,
A bay of bore "Baying, or bayting of the boar."
, of bole slayting Slaying bulls, bull-feasts. Chaucer says that the chamber of
Venus was painted with "white bolis great." Compl. of Mars and Ven. v. 86.
.
All the city was byhonge
With rich samytes Satin.
and pelles Skins.
long.
Dame Olympias, myd this prees Crowd. Company.
,
Sangle rood Rode single.
al mantelless. --
Hire yalewe har Yellow hair.
was fair attired
Mid rich strenge of gold wyred,
It helyd "Covered her all over."
hire abouten al
To hire gentil myddle small.
Bright and shine was her face fol. 55. a.

Every fairehede Beauty.
in her was John Gower, who lived an hundred years after our author, has
described the same procession. Confess. Amant. lib. vi. fol. 137. a. b. edit.
Berthel. 1554. But in that city then was
The queen, which Olimpias
Was hot, and with solempnitee
The feste of her nativitee,
As it befell, was than hold:
And for her lust to be behold,
And preised of the people about,
She shop her for to ridenout,
Al aftir meet al opinly.
Anon al men were ready;
And that was in the month of May:
This lusty queen in good araie
Was set upon a mule white
To seen it was a great delight
The joye that the city made.
With fresh things and with glade
The noble town was al behonged;
And every wight was son alonged
To see this lusty lady ride.
There was great mirth on al side,
When as she passed by the streate
There was full many a tymbre beat,
And many a maid carolende.
And thus throughout the town plaiende
This queen unto the plaiene rode
Whar that she hoved and abode
To se diverse games play,
The lusty folk just and tornaye.
And so couth every other man
Which play with, his play began,
To please with this noble queen.
Gower continues this story, from a romance mentioned above, to fol. 140.
.
Much in the same strain the marriage of Cleopatras is described.

There was many a blithe grome:
Of olive and of ruge Red.
flowers
Weren ystrewed halle and boures:
With samytes and baudekyns
Weren curtayned the gardyns.
All the innes of the ton
Hadden litel foyson Provision.
,
That day that comin Cleopatras,
So michel people with her was.
She rode on a mule white so milk,
Her harneys were gold-beaten sylke:
The prince her lad of Sandas,
And of Sydoyne Sir Jonachas.
Ten thousand barons her come myde,
And to church with her ride.
Yspoused she is and set on deys:
Now gynneth gestes of great nobleys:
At the fest was harpyng
And pipyng and tabouryng fol. 63. a.
.
We have frequent opportunities of observing, how the poets of these times
engraft the manners of chivalry on ancient classical history. In the following
lines Alexander's education is like that of Sir Tristram. He is taught tilting,
hunting, and hawking.

Now can Alexander of skirmyng,
And of stedes derayning,
Upon stedes of justyng,
And wit swords turneying,
Of assayling and defendyng:
In green wood and of huntyng:
And of ryver of haukyng Chaucer, R. of Sir Thop. v. 3245. Urry's edit. p. 145.
He couth hunt all the wild dear,
And ride an hawkyng by the rivere.
And in the Squyr of low degree, s^pr. citat. p. 179. -- Shall ye ride
On hawkyng by the river side.
Chaucer, Frankleins Tale, v. 1752. p. 111. Urr. edit. These fauconers upon a
fair rivere
That with the hawkis han the heron s^aine.

:
Of battle and of all thing.
In another place Alexander is mounted on a steed of Narbone; and amid the
solemnities of a great feast, rides through the hall to the high table. This
was no uncommon practice in the ages of chivalry See Observations on the Fairy
Queen, i.. v. p. 146.
.

On a stead of Narabone,
He dassheth forth upon thy land,
The rich coroune on his hand,
Of Nicholas that he wan:
Beside him rydeth money a gentil man,
To the paleys he comethe ride,
And fyndeth this feste and all this pride;
Fforth good Alisaundre sauns stable
Righth unto the hith table fol. 64.
.
His horse Bucephalus, who even in classical fiction is a horse of romance, is
thus described.

An horn in the forehead armyd ward
That would perce a shield hard.
To which these lines may be added.

Alisaunder arisen is,
And in his deys sits ywys:
His dukes and barons sauns doubt
Stondeth and sits him about, etc MS. ut supr. f. 46. b.
.
The two following extracts are in a softer strain, and not inelegant for the
rude simplicity of the times.

Merry is the blast of the stynoure I cannot explain this word. It is a
wind-instrument.
,
Merry is the touching of the harpoure This poem has likewise, in the same vein,
the following well-known old rhyme, which paints the manners, and is perhaps
the true reading. fol. 64. Merry swithe it is in halle
When the ^erdes waveth all.
And in another place we have, Merry it is in halle to here the harp;
The minstrelles sing, the jogelours carpe.
fol. sine number. ad ^in. Here, by the way, it appears, that the minstrels and
juglers were distinct characters. So Robert de Brunne, in describing the
coronation of king Arthur, apud Anstis, Ord. Gart. i. p. 304. Jogeleurs were
there inouh
That were queitise for the drouh,
Mynstrels many with dyvers glue, etc.
And Chaucer mentions "minstrels and eke joglours." Romans R. v. 764. But they
are often confounded or made the same.
:
Sweet is the smelling of the flower,
Sweet it is in maidens bower:
Appel sweet beneth fair col^ure fol. 40.
.
Again,

In time of May the nightingale
In wood makes merry gale,
So don the fowls great and small,
Sum in hills and sum in dale Ibid.
.
Much the same vernal delights, clothed in a similar style, with the addition
of knights turneying and maidens dancing, invite king Philip on a progress; who
is entertained on the road with hearing tales of ancient heroes.

Merry time yt is in May
The fowls syngeth her lay,
The knights loves to tournay;
Maidens do dauncen and they play,
The king ferth rydeth his journay,
Now hereth gests of great noblay fol. sine number.
.
Our author thus describes a battle MS. ut supr. f. 45. b.
.

Alisaundre tofore is ride,
And many gentill a knigth him myde;
As for to gader his meigne free,
He abides under a tree:
Ffourty thousand of chyvalerie
He takes in his compaignye,
He dassheth him than fast forthward,
And the other comes afterward.
He sees his knigttes in meschief,
He takes it gretlich a greef,
He takes Bultyphal Bucephalus.
by thy side,
So as a swalewe he gynneth forth glide,
A duke of Perce sone he met
And with his lance he him grett.
He perceth his breny, cleveth his shield,
The heart tokeneth the yrne
The duke fell down to the ground,
And starf quickly in that stounde:
Alisaunder aloud than seide,
Other tol never ich ne paiede,
ut ee schullen of mine pay,
Or ich gone mor assaie.
Another lance in hand he hent
Again the prince of Tire he went
He.... him through the breast and their Sic.

And out of sadel and crouthe him bare,
And I sigge for soothe thing
He braak his neck in the falling.
...... with mychell wonder,
Antiochus had him under,
And with swerd would his heved
From his body habbe yreved:
He seig Alisaundre the good gome,
Toward him swithe come,
He let his pray, and flew on horse,
Ffor to save his owen cors:
Antiochus on stead lep,
Of none wounds ne tok he kep,
And eke he had four forde
All ymade with speres ord Point.
.
Tholomeus and all his felawen Fellows.

Of this socour so weren welfawen,
Alysaunder made a cry hardy
"Ore tossed aby aby."
Then the knigttes of Achaye
Justed with them of Arabye,
Thoo They.
of Rome with hem of Mede
Many land.....
Egipte justed with hem of Tire,
Simple knigtts with rich sire:
There nas foregift ne forberyng
Bitwene vavasoure Servant. Subject.
ne king;
To fore men migtten and by hynde
Cuntecke seek and cuntecke Strife.
find.
With Perciens fougtten the Gregeys c Greeks.
,
There wos cry and great honteys Shame.
.
They kidden Thought.
that they weren mice
They broken speres alto slice.
There migth knigth find his pere,
There les Lost.
many his destrere Horse. Lat. Dextrarius.
:
There was quyk in litell thrawe Short time.
,
Many gentill knigth yslawe:
Many arm, many heved Head.

Some from the body reved:
Many gentill lavedy Lady.

There les quyk her amy Paramour.
.
There was many maym yled "Led along, maimed, wounded."
,
Many fair pensel bibled "Many a rich banner, or flag, sprinkled with blood."
:
There was swerdes liklakyng Clashing.
,
There was speres bathing MS. bathing. I do not understand the word.

Both kings there saunz doubt
Beeth in dassht with all her route.
..... speak
The other his harms for to wreke.
Many lands neir and far
Lesen her lord in that werre.
..... quaked of her rydyng,
The wedar Weather. Sky.
thicked of her cryeyng:
The blood of hem that weren yslawe
Ran by floods to the low, etc.
I have already mentioned Alexander's miraculous horn.

He blewe in horn quyk sans doubt,
His folk him swithe Came, followed.
about:
And hem he said with voice clear
Iche bid friends that ge ine here
Alisaunder is comen in this land
With strong knittes with migty hand, etc.
Alexander's adventures in the deserts among the Gymnosophists, and in Inde,
are not omitted. The authors whom he quotes for his vouchers, show the reading
and ideas of the times MS. ut supr. f. 50.
.

Tho Alisaunder went thoroug desert,
Many wonders he seig apert Saw openly.
,
Which he dude well descryve,
By good clerks in her lyve;
By Aristotle his maistr that was,
Beeter clerk sithen non nas;
He was with him, and sew and wroot,
All thise wondre god it woot:
Solomon that all the world thoroug yede
In soothe witness held him myde.
Ysidre ^sidor^. He means, I suppose, Isidorus Hispalensis, a Latin writer of
the seventh century.
also that was so wys
In his book tells this:
Master Eustroge bears him witness,
Of the wondres more and less.
Saint Jerome gu schullen ywyte
Them has also in book ywryte:
And Magestene, the good clerk,
Has made thereof mychel werk,
... that was of good memory
It shows al in his book of story:
And also Pompie He means Justin's Trogus Pompeius the historian, whom he
confounds with Pompey the Great.
, of Rome lord,
.... written every word.
Bie heldeth me thareof no fynder "Don't look on me as the inventor."
^
Her books ben my shewer:
And the Life of Alysaunder
Of whom fleig so rich sklaunder.
Gif gee wills give listnyng,
Now gee shullen here good thing.
In summers tide the day is long,
Fowls syngeth and makes song:
King Alysaunder ywent is,
With dukes, earls, and folk of pris,
With many knigths, and douty men,
Toward the city of Fa.... aen;
After king Porus, that flowen Fled.
was
Into the city of Bandas,
He would wend thorough desert
This wonders to seen apert,
Gromyes he nome Took.
of the land,
Ffyve thousand, I understonde,
That hem shulden led ryth Strait.

Thoroug deserts, by day and nyth.
The Sy.. res loveden the king nougth,
And wolden have him bicaugth.
Thii ledden him therefore, als I find,
In the straungest peril of Ynde:
As so iche find in thy book
Thii weren asshreynt in her crook.
Now rides Alysaunder with his oost,
With mychel pride and mychel boost;
As ar hii comen to a castle.. ton.
I schullen speken another lesson.
Lordynges, also I find
At Mede so bigynneth Ynde,
Fforsothe ich woot it stretches ferrest
Of all the lands in the Est
And oath the MS. oththe.
southhalf sikerlyk
To the sea of Affryk,
And the north half to a mountain
That is ycleped Caucasayne Caucasus.
:
Fforsothe ee shullen undirstonde,
Twyes is somer in that land,
And nevermore winter, ne chele Chill. Cold.
,
That land is full of all well.
Twyes hii gaderen fruit there
And wine and corn in one year.
In the land also I find of Ynde
Been cites fyve-thousynd,
Withouten ydles, and castelis,
And borugh tounnes swithe feles Very many.
.
In the land of Ynde thou migth lere
Vyve thousand folk of selcouth Uncommon.
manner
That there non is other ylyche
Bie hold thou it nougth ferlyche,
And by that thou understa^de the gestes,
Both of men and of bestes, etc.
Edward the second is said to have carried with him to the siege of Stirling
castle, in Scotland, a poet named Robert Baston. He was a Carmelite friar of
Scarborough; and the king intended that Baston, being an eyewitness of the
expedition, should celebrate his conquest of Scotland in verse. Hollingshead,
an historian not often remarkable for penetration, mentions this circumstance
as a singular proof of Edward's presumption and confidence in his undertaking
against Scotland: but a poet seems to have been a stated officer in the royal
retinue when the king went to war Leland. Script. Brit. p. 338. Hollingsh.
Hist. ii. p. 217. 220. Tanner mentions, as a poet of England, one Gulielmus
Peregrinus, who accompanied Richard the first into the holy land, and sung his
achievements there in a Latin poem, entitled ODOEPORICON RICARDI REGIS, lib.
i. It is dedicated to Herbert archbishop of Canterbury, and Stephen Turnham, a
captain in the expedition. He flourished about A. D. 1200. Tann. Bibl. p. 591.
See Voss. Hist. Lat. p. 441. He is called "poeta per eam aetatem excellens."
See Bal. iii. 45. Pits. 266.
. Baston, however, appears to have been chiefly a Latin poet, and therefore
does not properly fall into our series. At least his poem on the siege of
Striveling castle is written in monkish Latin hexameters It is extant in
Fordun's Scoti-chron. c. xxiii. l. 12.
: and our royal bard being taken prisoner in the expedition, was compelled by
the Scotch to write a panegyric, for his ransom, on Robert Brus, which is
composed in the same style and language Leland. ut supr. And MSS. Harl. 1819.
Brit. Mus. See also Wood, Hist. Ant. Univ. Oxon. i. p. 101.
. Bale mentions his Poemata, et Rhythmi, Tragaediae et Comoediae vulgares Apud
Tanner, p. 79.
. Some of these indeed appear to have been written in English: but no English
pieces of t^is author now remain. In the mean time, the bare existence of
dramatic compositions in England at this period, even if written in the Latin
tongue, deserve notice in investigating the progress of our poetry. For the
same reason I must not pass over a Latin piece, called a comedy, written in
this reign, perhaps by Peter Babyon; who by Bale is styled an admirable
rhetorician and poet, and flourished about the year 1317. This comedy is thus
entitled in the Bodleian manuscript, De Babione et Croceo domino Babionis et
Viola filias^ra Babionis quam Croceus duxit invito Babione, et Pecula uxore
Babionis et Fodio suo, etc Arch. B. 52.
. It is written in long and short Latin verses, without any appearance of
dialogue. In what manner, if ever, this piece was represented theatrically,
cannot easily be discovered or ascertained. Unless we suppose it to have been
recited by one or more of the characters concerned, at some public
entertainment. The story is in Gower's CONFESSIO AMANTIS. Whether Gower had it
from this performance I will not enquire. It appears at least that he took it
from some previous book.

I find writ of Babio,
Which had a love at his menage,
There was no fairer of her age,
And hight Viola by name, etc.
And had affaited to his hand
His servant, the which Spodius
Was hot, etc.
A fresh a free and friendly man, etc.
Which Croceus by name hight, etc Lib. v. f. 109. b. Edit. Berth. 1554.
.
In the mean time it seems most probable, that this piece has been attributed
to Peter Babyon, on account of the likeness of the name BABIO, especially as he
is a ridiculous character. On the whole, there is nothing dramatic in the
structure of this nominal comedy; and it has certainly no claim to that title,
only as it contains a familiar and comic story carried on with much scurrilous
satire intended to raise mirth. But it was not uncommon to call any short poem,
not serious or tragic, a comedy. In the Bodleian manuscript, which comprehends
Babyon's poem just mentioned, there follows COMEDIA DE GETA: this is in Latin
long and short verses Carmina composuit, voluitque placere poeta.
, and has no marks of dialogue f. 121.
. In the library of Corpus Christi college at Cambridge, is a piece entitled,
COMEDIA ad monasterium de Hulme ordinis S. Benedicti Dioces. Norwic. directa ad
Reformationem sequentem, cujus data est primo die Septembris sub anno Christi
1477, et a morte Joannis Fastolfe militis eorum benefactoris In the episcopal
palace at Norwich is a curious piece of old wainscot brought from the monastery
of Hulme at the time of its dissolution. Among other antique ornaments are the
arms of Sir John Falstaff, their principal benefactor. This magnificent knight
was also a benefactor to Magdalene College in Oxford. He bequeathed estates to
that society, part of which were appropriated to buy liveries for some of the
senior scholars. But this benefaction, in time, yielding no more than a penny a
week to the scholars who received the liveries, they were called, by way of
contempt, Falstaff's buckram-men.
precipui 17, in cujus monasterii ecclesia humatur Miscell. M. p. 274.
. This is nothing more than a satirical ballad in Latin; yet some allegorical
personages are introduced, which however are in no respect accommodated to
scenical representation. About the reign of Edward the fourth, one Edward
Watson, a scholar in grammar at Oxford, is permitted to proceed to a degree in
that faculty, on condition that within two years he would write one hundred
verses in praise of the university, and also compose a COMEDY Hist. Antiq.
Univ. Oxon. ii. 4. col. 2.
. The nature and subject of Dante's COMEDIES, as they are styled, is well
known. The comedies ascribed to Chaucer are probably his Canterbury tales. We
learn from Chaucer's own words, that tragic tales were called TRAGEDIES. In the
Prologue to the MONKS TALE.

TRAGEDY is to tell a certain story,
As old bokis makin often memory,
Of hem that stood in great prosperity,
And be fallen out of her high degree, etc v. 85. See also, ibid. v. 103. 786.
875.
.
Some of these, the Monk adds, were written in prose, others in meter.
Afterward follow many tragical narratives: of which he says, TRAGIDIES first
wol I tell
Of which I have an hundred in my cell.
Lidgate further confirms what is here said with regard to comedy as well as
tragedy.

My master Chaucer with fresh COMEDIES,
Is dead, alas! chief poet of Britain:
That whilom made full piteous TRAGEDIES Prol. F. Pr. v. i. See also Chaucer's
Troil. and Cr. v. 1785. 1787.
.
The stories in the MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES are called TRAGEDIES, so late as the
sixteenth century The elegant Fontenelle mentions one Parasols a Limosin, who
wrote Cinque belles TRAGEDIES des gestes de Jeanne reine de Naples, about the
year 1383. Here he thinks he has discovered, so early as the fourteenth
century, "une Poet tragique." I have never seen these five Tragedies, nor
perhaps had Fontenelle. But I will venture to pronounce, that they are nothing
more than five tragical narratives: Queen Jane murdered her four husbands, and
was afterward put herself to death. See Fontenelle's Hist. de Theatr. Fr.
Oevr. tom. trois. p. 20. edit. Paris, 1742. 12mo. Nor can I believe that the
Tragedies and Comedi^s, as they are called, of Anselm Fayditt, and other early
troubadours, had any thing dramatic. It is worthy of notice, that pope Clement
the seventh rewarded Parasols for his five tragedies with two canonries.
Compare Recherches sur les Theatr. de France, par M. de Beauchamps, Paris,
1735. 4to. p. 65.
. Bale calls his play, or MYSTERY, of GOD'S PROMISES, a TRAGEDY, which appeared
about the year 1538.

I must however observe here, that dramatic entertainments, representing the
lives of saints and the most eminent scriptural stories, were known in England
for more than two centuries before the reign of Edward the second. These
spectacles they commonly styled MIRACLES. I have already mentioned the play of
saint Catharine, acted at Dunstable about the year 1110 DISSERTATION ii.
. William Fitz-Stephen, a writer of the twelfth century, in his DESCRIPTION of
LONDON, relates that, "London, for its theatrical exhibitions, has holy plays,
or the representation of miracles wrought by confessors, and of the sufferings
of martyrs "Lundonia pro spectaculis theatralibus, pro ludis scenicis, ludos
habet sanctiores, representationes miraculorum quae sancti confessores operati
sunt, seu representationes passionum quibus claruit constantia martyrum." Ad
calc. STOWE'S SURVEY OF LONDON, p. 480. edit. 1599. The reader will observe,
that I have construed sanctiores in a positive sense. Fitz-Stephen mentions at
the end of his tract, "Imperatricem Matildem, Henricum regem tertium, et beatum
Thomam. etc." p. 483. Henry the third did not accede till the year 1216.
Perhaps he implied futurum regem tertium.
." These pieces must have been in high vogue at our present period; for Matthew
Paris, who wrote about the year 1240, says that they were such as "MIRACULA
VULGARITER APPELLAMUS Vit. Abbat. ad calc. Hist. p. 56. edit. 1639.
." And we learn from Chaucer, that in his time PLAYS OF MIRACLES were the
common resort of idle gossips in Lent.

Therefore made I my visitations,
To prechings eke and to pilgrimagis,
To PLAYS of MIRACLES, and mariagis, etc Prol. Wif. B. v. 555. p. 80. Urr.
.
This is the genial WIFE OF BATH, who amuses herself with these fashionable
diversions, while her husband is absent in London, during the holy season of
Lent. And in PIERCE PLOWMAN'S CREED, a piece perhaps prior to Chaucer, a friar
Minorite mentions these MIRACLES as not less frequented than markets or
taverns. We haunten no tavernes, ne hobelen abouten,
At markets and MIRACLES we medeley us never Signat. A. iii. b. edit. 1561.
.
Among the plays usually represented by the guild of Corpus Christi at
Cambridge, on that festival, LUDUS FILIORUM ISRAELIS was acted in the year 1355
Masters's Hist. C. C. C. C. p. 5. vol. i. What was the antiquity of the
Guary-Miracle, or Miracle-Play in Cornwall, has not been determined. In the
Bodleian library ar^ three Cornish interludes, written on parchment. B. 40.
Art. In the same library there is also another, written on paper in the year
1611. Arch. B. 31. Of this last there is a translation in the British Museum.
MSS. Harl. 1867. 2. It is entitled the CREATION OF THE WORLD. It is called a
Cornish play or opera, and said to be written by Mr. William Jordan. The
translation into English was made by John Keigwin of Moushole in Cornwall, at
the request of Trelawney, bishop of Exeter, 1691. Of this William Jordan I can
give no account. In the British Museum there is an ancient Cornish poem on the
death and resurrection of Christ. It is on vellum, and has some rude pictures.
The beginning and end are lost. The writing is supposed to be of the fifteenth
century. MSS. Harl. 1782 4to. See the learned Lwhyd's Archaeol. Brit. p. 265.
And Borlase's Cornwall, Not. Hist. p. 295. edit. 1758.
. Our drama seems hitherto to have been almost entirely confined to religious
subjects, and these plays were nothing more than an appendage to the specious
and mechanical devotion of the times. I do not find expressly, that any play on
a profane subject, either tragic or comic, had as yet been exhibited in
England. Our very early ancestors scarce knew any other history than that of
their religion. Even on such an occasion as the triumphant entry of a king or
queen into the city of London, or other places, the pageants were almost
entirely scriptural When our Henry the sixth ent^red Paris in 1431, in the
quality of king of France, he was met at the gate of Saint Denis by a Dumb
Show, representing the birth of the Virgin Mary and her marriage, the adoration
of the three kings, and the parable of the sower. This pageant indeed was given
by the French: but the readers of Hollingshead will recollect many instances
immediately to our purpose. See Monstrelet. apud Fonten. Hist. Theatr. ut supr.
p. 37.
. Yet I must observe, that an article in one of the pipe-rolls, perhaps of the
reign of king John, and consequently about the year 1200, seems to place the
rudiments of histrionic exhibition, I mean of general subjects, at a much
higher period among us than is commonly imagined. It is in these words. "Nicola
uxor Gerardi de Canvill, reddit computum de centum marcis pro maritanda Matildi
filia sua cuicunque voluerit, exceptis MIMICIS regis Rot. incert. ut videtur
Reg. Johann. Apud. MSS. James, Bibl. Bodl. vii. p. 104.
." -- "Nicola, wife of Gerard of Canville, accounts to the king for one hundred
marks for the privilege of marrying his daughter Maud to whatever person she
pleases, the king's MIMICS excepted." Whether or no MIMICI REGIS are here a
sort of players kept in the king's household for diverting the court at stated
seasons, at least with performances of mimicry and masquerade, or whether they
may not strictly imply MINSTRELLS, I cannot indeed determine. Yet we may
remark, that MIMICUS is never used for MIMUS, that certain theatrical
entertainments called mascarades, as we shall see below, were very ancient
among the French, and that these MIMICI appear, by the context of this article,
to have been persons of no very respectable character John of Salisbury, who
wrote about 1160, says, "Histriones et mimi non possunt recipere sacram
communionem." POLICRAT. i. 8.
. I likewise find in the wardrobe-rolls of Edward the third, in the year 1348,
an account of the dresses, ad faciendum LUDOS domini regis ad ffestum Natalis
domini celebratos apud Guldeford, for furnishing the plays or sports of the
king, held in the castle of Guildford at the feast of Christmas Comp. J. Cook,
Provisoris Magnae Garderob. ab ann. 21. Edw. i. ad ann. 23. Membr. ix.
. In these LUDI, says my record, were expended eighty tunics of buckram of
various colors, forty-two visours of various similitudes, that is, fourteen of
the faces of women, fourteen of the faces of men with beards, fourteen of heads
of angels, made with silver; twenty-eight crests I do not perfectly understand
the Latin original in the place. viz. "xiiij Crestes cum tibiis reversatis et
calceatis, xiiij Crestes cum montibus et cuniculis." Among the stuffs are "viii
pelles de Roan." In the same wardrobe rolls, a little above, I find this entry,
which relates to the same festival. "Et ad faciendum vi pennecellos pro tubis
et clarionibus contra ffestum natalis domini, de syndone, vapulatos de armis
regis quartellatis." Membr. ix.
, fourteen mantles embroidered with heads of dragons: fourteen white tunics
wrought with heads and wings of peacocks, fourteen heads of swans with wings,
fourteen tunics painted with eyes of peacocks, fourteen tunics of English linen
painted, and as many tunics embroidered with stars of gold and silver Some
perhaps may think, that these were dresses for a MASQUE at court. If so,
Hollingshead is mistaken in saying, that in the year 1512, "on the day of
Epiphanie at night, the king with eleven others were disguised after the manner
of Italy called a ma^ke, a thing not seen before in England. They were
apparelled in garments long and broad wrought all with gold, with visors and
caps of gold, etc." Hist. vol. iii. p. 812. ^. 40. Besides, these maskings most
probably came to the English, if from Italy, through the medium of France.
Hollingshead also contradicts himself: for in another place he seems to allow
their existence under our Henry the fourth, A. D. 1400. "The conspi^ators meant
upon the sudden to have to have set upon the king in the castle of Windsor,
under color of a mask or mummerie, etc." ibid. p. 515. b. 50. Strype says
there were PAGEAUNTS exhibited in London when queen Eleanor rode through the
city to her coronation, in 1236. And for the victory over the Scots by Edward
the first in 1298. Anecdot. Brit. Topograph. p. 725. Land. edit. 1768.
. In the rolls of the wardrobe of king Richard the second, in the year 1391,
there is also an entry which seems to point out a sport of much the same
nature. "Pro xxi coifs de tela linea pro hominibus de lege contrafactis pro
LUDO r^gis tempore natalis domini anno xii Comp. Magn. Gard^rob. an. 14. Ric.
ii. f. 193. b.
." That is, "for twenty-one linen coifs for counterfeiting men of the law in
the king's play at Christmas."It will be sufficient to add here on the last
record, that the sergeants at law at their creation, anciently wore a cap of
linen, lawn, or silk, tied under the chin: this was to distinguish them from
the clergy who had the tonsure. Whether in both these instances we are to
understand a dumb show, or a dramatic interlude with speeches, I leave to the
examination of those who are professedly making enquiries into the ^history of
our stage from its rudest origin. But that plays on general subjects were no
uncommon mode of entertainment in the royal palaces of England, at least at the
commencement of the fifteenth century, may be collected from an old memoir of
shows and ceremonies exhibited at Christmas, in the reign of Henry the seventh,
in the palace of Westminster. It is in the year 1489. "This cristmas I saw no
disguysings, and but right few PLAYS. But there was an abbot of Misrule, that
made much sport, and did right well his office." And again, "At night the
king, the qweene, and my lady the kings mother, came into the Whitehall, and
there hard a PLAY Leland. Coll. iii. Append. p. 256. edit. 1770.
."

As to the religious dramas, it was customary to perform this species of play
on holy festivals in or about the churches. In the register of William of
Wykeham, bishop of Winchester, under the year 1384, an episcopal injunction is
recited, against the exhibition of SPECTACULA in the cemetery of his cathedral
Registr. lib. iii. f. 88. "Canere Cantilenas, ludibriorum spectacula facere,
saltationes et alios ludos inhonestos frequentare, choreas, etc." So in Statut.
Eccles. Nannett. A. D. 1405. No "mimi vel joculatores, ad monstra larvarum in
ecclesia et cemeterio," are permitted. Marten. Thesaur. Anecd. iv. p. 993. And
again, "Joculatores, histriones, saltatrices, in ecclesia, cemeterio, vel
porticu. -- nec aliquae choreae." Statut. Synod. Eccles. Leod. A. D. 1287. apud
Marten. ut supr. p. 846. Fontenelle says, that anciently among the French,
comedies were acted after divine service, in the churchyard. "Au sortir du
sermon ces bonnes gens alloient a la Comedy, c'est a dire, qu'ils changeoint
de Sermon." Hist. Theatr. ut supr. p. 24. But these were scriptural comedies,
and they were constantly preceded by a BENEDICITE, by way of prologue. The
French stage will occur again below.
. Whether or no these were dramatic SPECTACLES, I do not pretend to decide. In
several of our old scriptural plays, we see some of the scenes directed to be
represented cum cantu et organis, a common rubric in the missal. That is,
because they were performed in a church where the choir assisted. There is a
curious passage in Lambarde's Topographical Dictionary written about the year
1570, much to our purpose, which I am therefore tempted to transcribe Page 459.
edit. 1730. 4to.
. "In the days of ceremonial religion, they used at Wytney (in Oxfordshire) to
set fourth yearly in manner of a show, or interlude, the resurrection of our
Lord, etc. For the which purposes, and the more lyvely heareby to exhibit to
the eye the hole action of the resurrection, the priests garnished out certain
small puppettes, representing the persons of Christ, the watchmen, Marie, and
others; amongst the which, one bare the part of a wakinge watchman, who
espiinge Christ to arise, made a continual noyce, like to the sound that is
caused by the metynge of two styckes, and was thereof commonly called Jack
Snacker of Wytney. The like toye I myself, being then a child, once saw in
Poule's church at London, at a feast of Whitsuntyde; wheare the coming down
of the Holy Ghost was set forth by a white pigion, that was let to fly out of a
hole that yet is to be seen in the mydst of the roof of the great i will, and by
a long censer which descendinge out of the same place almost to the very
ground, was swinged up and down at such a length, that it reached with
the one swepe almost to the west-gate of the church, and with the other to the
quyre stairs of the same; breathinge out over the whole church and company a
most pleasant perfume of such sweet things as burned therein. With the like
doom shows also, they used every where to furnish sondrye parts of their
church service, as by their spectacles of the nativitie, passion, and
ascension, etc."

This practice of acting plays in churches, was at last grown to such an
enormity, and attended with such inconvenient consequences, that in the reign
of Henry the ^ighth, Bonner, bishop of London, issued a proclamation to the
clergy of his diocese, dated 1542, prohibiting "all manner of common plays,
games, or interludes to be played, set forth, or declared, within their
churches, chapels, etc Burnet, Hist. Ref. i. Coll. Rec. page 225.
." This fashion seems to have remained even after the Reformation, and when
perhaps profane stories had taken place of religious From a puritanical
pamphlet entitled THE THIRD BLAST OF RETRAIT FROM PLAYS, etc. 1580. 12mo. p.
77. Where the author says, the players are "permitted to publish their
mamettrie in every temple of God, and that, throughout England, etc." This
abuse of acting plays in churches is mentioned in the canon of James the first,
which forbids also the profanation of churches by court-leets, etc. The canons
were given in the year 1603.
. Archbishop Grindal, in the year 1563, remonstrated against the danger of
interludes: complaining that players "did especially on holy days, set up bills
inviting to their play Strype's Grindall, p. 82.
." From this ecclesiastical source of the modern drama, plays continued to be
acted on sundays so late as the reign of Elizabeth, and even till that of
Charles the first, by the choristers or singing-boys of Saint Paul's cathedral
in London, and of the royal chapel.

It is certain, that these MIRACLE-PLAYS were the first of our dramatic
exhibitions. But as these pieces frequently required the introduction of
allegorical characters, such as Charity, Sin, Death, Hope, Faith, or the like,
and as the common poetry of the times, especially among the French, began to
deal much in allegory, at length plays were formed entirely consisting of such
personifications. These were called MORALITIES. The miracle-plays, or
MYSTERIES, were totally destitute of invention or plan: they tamely represented
stories according to the letter of scripture, or the respective legend. But the
MORALITIES indicate dawnings of the dramatic art: they contain some rudiments
of a plot, and even attempt to delineate characters, and to paint manners. From
hence the gradual transition to real historical personages was natural and
obvious. It may be also observed, that many licentious pleasantries were
sometimes introduced in these religious representations. This might
imperceptibly lead the way to subjects entirely profane, and to comedy, and
perhaps earlier than is imagined. In a MSS. Digb. 134. Bibl. Bodl.
Mystery of the MASSACRE OF THE HOLY INNOCENTS, part of the subject of a sacred
drama given by the English fathers at the famous council of Constance, in the
year 1417 L'Ensant. ii. 440.
, a low buffoon of Herod's court is introduced, desiring of his lord to be
dubbed a knight, that he might be properly qualified to go on the adventure of
killing the mothers of the children of Bethlehem. This tragical business is
treated with the most ridiculous levity. The good women of Bethlehem attack our
^night-errant with their spinning-wheels, break his head with their distaffs,
abuse him as a coward and a disgrace to chivalry, and send him home to Herod as
a recreant champion with much ignominy. It is in an enlightened age only that
subjects of scripture history would be supported with proper dignity. But then
an enlightened age would not have chosen such subjects for theatrical
exhibition. It is certain that our ancestors intended no sort of impiety by
these monstrous and unnatural mixtures. Neither the writers nor the spectators
saw the impropriety, nor paid a separate attention to the comic and the srious
part of these motley scenes; at least they were persuaded that the solemnity of
the subject covered or excused all incongruities. They had no just idea of
decorum, consequently but little sense of the ridiculous: what appears to us to
be the highest burlesque, on them would have made no sort of impression. We
must not wonder at this, in an age when courage, devotion, and ignorance,
composed the character of European manners; when the knight going to a
tournament, first invoked his God, then his mistress, and afterward proceeded
with a safe conscience and great resolution to engage his antagonist. In these
Mysteries I have sometimes seen gross and open obscenities. In a play of the
Old and New Testament MSS. Harl. 2013, etc. Exhibited at Chester in the year
1327, at the expense of the different trading companies of that city. The Fall
of Lucifer by the Tanners. The Creation by the Drapers. The Deluge by the
Dyers. Abraham, Melchis^dech, and Lot by the Barbers. Moses, Balak, and Balaam
by the Cappers. The Salutation and Nativity by the Wrightes. The Shepherds
feeding their flocks by night by the Painters and Glaziers. The three Kings by
the Vintners. The Oblation of the three Kings by the Mercers. The Killing of
the Innocents by the Goldsmiths. The Purification by the Blacksmiths. The
Temptation by the Butchers. The last Supper by the Bakers. The Blindmen and
Lazarus by the Glovers. Jesus and the Lepers by the Corvesarys. Christ's
Passion by the Bowyers, Fletchers, and Ironmongers. Descent into Hell by the
Cooks and Innkeepers. The Resurrection by the Skinners. The Ascension by the
Tailors. The election of S. Matthias, Sending of the holy ghost, etc. by the
Fishmongers. Antechrist by the Clothiers. Day of Judgment by the Websters. The
reader will perhaps smile at some of these COMBINATIONS. This is the substance
and order of the former part of the play. God enters creating the world: he
breathes life into Adam, leads him into Paradise, and opens his side while
sleeping. Adam and Eve appear naked and not ashamed, and the old serpent enters
lamenting his fall. He converses with Eve. She eats of the forbidden fruit and
gives part to Adam. They propose, according to the stage-direction, to make
themselves subligacula a foliis quibus tegamus Pudenda. Cover their nakedness
with leaves, and converse with God. God's curse. The serpent exit hissing. They
are driven from Paradise by four angels and the cherubim with a flaming sword.
Adam appears digging the ground, and Eve spinning. Their children Cain and Abel
enter: The former kills his brother. Adam's lamentation. Cain is banished, etc.
, Adam and Eve are both exhibited on the stage naked, and conversing about
their nakedness: this very pertinently introduces the next scene, in which they
have coverings of fig leaves. This extraordinary spectacle was beheld by a
numerous assembly of both sexes with great composure: they had the authority of
scripture for such a representation, and they gave matters just as they found
them in the third chapter of Genesis. It would have been absolute heresy to
have departed from the sacred text in personating the primitive appearance of
our first parents, whom the spectators so nearly resembled in simplicity: and
if this had not been the case, the dramatists were ignorant what to reject and
what to retain.

In the mean time, profane dramas seem to have been known in France at a much
earlier period John of Salisbury, a writer of the eleventh century, speaking of
the common diversions of his time, says, "Nostra aetas prolapsa ad fabulas et
quaevis inania, non modo aures et cor prostituit vanitati, etc." POLICRAT. i.
8. An ingenious French writer, Mons. Duclos, thinks that PLAYS are here
implied. By the word Fabula, says he, som^thing more is signified than dances,
gesticulation, and simple dialogue. Fable properly means composition, and an
arrangement of things which constitute an action. Mem. Acad. Inscr. xvii. p.
224. 4to. But perhaps fabula has too vague and general a sense, especially in
its present combination with quaevis inania, to bear so precise and critical an
interpretation. I will add, that if this reasoning be true, the words will be
equally applicable to the English stage. -- At Constantinople it seems that the
stage flourished much under Justinian and Theodora, about the year 540. For in
the Basilical codes we have the oath of an actress (...). Tom. vii. p. 682.
edit. Fabrot. Graeco-Lat. The ancient Greek fathers, particularly saint
Chrysostom, are full of declamation against the drama: and complain, that the
people heard a comedian with much more pleasure than a preacher of the gospel.
. Du Cange gives the following picture of the king of France dining in public,
before the year 1300. During this ceremony, a sort of farces or drolls seems to
have been exhibited. All the great officers of the crown and the household, says
he, were present. The company was entertained with the instrumental music of
the minstrells, who played on the kettle-drum, the flagellet I believe, a sort
of pipe. This is the French word, viz. Demy-canon. See Carpent. Du Cange, Gl.
Lat. i. p. 760.
, the cornet, the Latin cittern, the Bohemian flute, the trumpet, the Moorish
cittern, and the fiddle. Besides there were "des FARCEURS, des jongleurs, et
des plaisantins, qui divertisseoient les compagnies par leur faceties et par
leur COMEDIES, pour l'entretien." He adds, that many noble families in France
were entirely ruined by the prodigious expenses lavished on those performers
Dissertat. Joinv. p. 161.
. The annals of France very early mention buffoons among the minstrells at
these solemnities; and more particularly that Louis le Debonnaire, who reigned
about the year 830, never laughed aloud, not even when at the most magnificent
festivals, players, buffoons, minstrels, singers, and harpers, attended his
table Ibid.
. In some constitutions given to a cathedral church in France, in the year
1280, the following clause occurs. "Nullus SPECTACULIS aliquibus quae aut in
Nuptiis aut in Scenis exhibentur, intersit Montfauc. Catal. Manuscript. p.
1158. See also Marten. Thesaur. Anecd. tom. iv. p. 506. Statut. Synod. A. D.
1468. "Larvaria ad Nuptias, etc." Stowe, in his SURVEY OF LONDON, mentions the
practice of acting plays at weddings.
." Where, by the way, the word Scenis seems to imply somewhat of a professed
stage, although the establishment of the first French theater is dated not
before the year 1398. The play of ROBIN and MARIAN is said to have been
performed by the schoolboys of Angiers, according to annual custom, in the
year 1392 The boys were deguisiez, says the old French record: and they had
among them un Fillette desguisee. Carpent. ubi supr. V. ROBINET. PENTECOSTE.
Our old character of MAID MARIAN may be hence illustrated. It seems to have
been an early fashion in France for schoolboys to present these shows or
plays. In an ancient manuscript, under the year 1477, there is mentioned
"Certain MORALITE, ou FARCE, que les escolliers de Pontoise avoit fait, ainsi
qu'il est de coustume." Carpent. ubi supr. V. MORALITAS. The MYSTERY OF THE OLD
AND NEW TESTAMENT is said to have been represented in 1424, by the boys of
Paris placed like statues against a wall, without speech or motion, at the
entry of the duke of Bedford, regent of France. See J. de Paris, p. 101. And
Sauval, Ant. de Paris. ii. 101.
. A royal carousal given by Charles the fifth of France to the emperor Charles
the fourth, in the year 1378, was closed with the theatrical representation of
the Conquest of Jerusalem by Godfrey of Bulloign, which was exhibited in the
hall of the royal palace Felib. tom. ii. p. 681.
. This indeed was a subject of a religious tendency; but not long afterward,
in the year 1395, perhaps before, the interesting story of PATIENT GRISILDE
appears to have been acted at Paris. This piece still remains, and is entitled,
Le MYSTERE de Grisildis marquise de Saluce It has been printed, more than once,
in the black letter. Beauchamps, p. 110.
. For all dramatic pieces were indiscriminately called MYSTERIES, whether a
martyr or a heathen god, whether saint Catharine or Hercules was the subject.

In France the religious MYSTERIES, often called PITEAUX, or PITOUX, were
certainly very fashionable, and of high antiquity: yet from any written
evidence, I do not find them more ancient than those of the English. In the
year 1384, the inhabitants of the village of Aunay, on the sunday after the
feast of saint John, played the MIRACLE of Theophilus, "ou quel Jeu avoit un
personnage de un qui devoit getter d'un canon Carpentier, Suppl. Du Cange Lat.
Gl. V. LUDUS.
." In the year 1398, some citizens of Paris met at saint Maur to play the
PASSION of CHRIST. The magistrates of Paris, alarmed at this novelty, published
an ordonnance, prohibiting them to represent, "aucuns jeux de personages soit
de vie de saints ou autrement," without the royal license, which was soon
afterward obtained Beauchamps, ut supr. p. 90. This was the first theater of
the French: the actors were incorporated by the king, under the title of the
Fraternity of the passion of our Savior. Beauch. ibid. See above, Sect. ii. p.
91. n. The Jeu de personages was a very common play of the young boys in the
larger towns, etc. Carpentier, ut supr. V. PERSONAGIUM. And LUDUS PERSONAG. At
Cambray mention is made of the show of a boy larvatus cum maza in collo with
drums, etc. Carpent. ib. V. KALENDAE JANUAR.
. In the year 1486, at Anjou, ten pounds were paid toward supporting the
charges of acting the PASSION of CHRIST, which was represented by masks, and,
as I suppose, by persons hired for the purpose "December libr. ex part nationis,
ad onera supportanda hujus Mi^terii." Carpent. ut supr. V. PERSONAGIUM.
. The chaplains of Abbeville, in the year 1455, gave four pounds and ten
shillings to the PLAYERS of the PASSION Carpent. ut supr. V. LUDUS. Who adds,
from an ancient Computus, that three shillings were paid by the ministers of a
church in the year 1537, for parchment, for writing LUDUS RESURRECTIONIS DOMINI.
. But the French MYSTERIES were chiefly performed by the religious communities,
and some of their FETES almost entirely consisted of a dramatic or personated
show. At the FLAST of ASSES, instituted in honor of Baalam's Ass, the clergy
walked on Christmas day in procession, habited to represent the prophets and
others. Moses appeared in an alb and cope, with a long beard and rod. David had
a green vestment. Baalam with an immense pair of spurs, rode on a wooden ass,
which enclosed a speaker. There were also six Jews and six Gentiles. Among
other characters the poet Virgil was introduced as a gentile prophet and a
translator of the Sibylline oracles. They thus moved in procession, chanting
versicles, and conversing in character on the nativity and kingdom of Christ,
through the body of the church, till they came into the choir. Virgil speaks
some Latin hexameters, during the ceremony, not out of his fourth eclogue, but
wretched monkish lines in rhyme. This feast was, I believe, early suppressed
See p. 210.
. In the year 1445, Charles the seventh of France ordered the masters in
Theology at Paris to forbid the ministers of the collegiate Marten. Anecd. tom.
i. col. 1804. See also B^let. de Divin. offi^. cap. 72. And Gussanvill. post.
Not. ad Petr. Bl^sens. Feilbien confounds La Fete de Fous et la Fete de Sotise.
The latter was an entertainment of dancing called Les Sa^ltes, and thence
corrupted into Soties or Sotise. See Mem. Acad. Inscript. xvii. 225. 226. See
also Probat. Hist. Antissiodor. p. 310. Again, the Feast of Fools seems to be
pointed at in Statut. S^nonens. A. D. 1445. Instr. tom. xii. Gall. Christian.
Coll. 96. "Tempore divini servitii larvatos et monstruosos vultus def^re^do,
cum vestibus mulierum, aut lenonum, aut histrionum, choreas in ecclesia ^t
choro ejus ducendo, etc." With the most immod^st spectacles. The nuns of some
French convents are said to have had Ludibr^a on saint Mary Magdal^ne's and
other f^stivals, when they wore the habits of seculars, and dan^ed with them.
Carpent. ubi supr. V. KALENDAE. There was the office of Rex Stultorum in
Beverley church, prohibited 1391. Dugd. Mon. iii. Append. 7.
churches to celebrate at Christmas the FEAST of FOOLS in their churches, where
the ^lergy danced in masks and antic dresses, and exhibited plusieurs
mocqueries spectacles publics, de leur corpse deguisements, farces, rigmeries,
with various enormities shocking to decency. In France as well as England it
was customary to celebrate the feast of the boy-bishop. In all the collegiate
churches of both nations, about the feast of Saint Nicholas, or the Holy
Innocents, one of the children of the choir completely apparelled in the
episcopal vestments, with a mitre and crosier, bore the title and state of a
bishop, and exacted ceremonial obedience from his fellows, who were dressed
like priests. They took possession of the church, and performed all the
ceremonies and offices In the statutes of Eton-college, given 1441, the
EPISCOPUS PUERORUM is ordered to perform divine service on saint Nicholas's
day. Rubr. xxxi. In the statutes of Winchester-college, given 1380, PUERI, that
is, the boy-bishop and his fellows, are permitted on Innocent's-day to execute
all the sacred offices in the chapel, according to the use of the church of
Sarum. Rubr. xxix. This strange piece of religious mockery flourished greatly
in Salisbury cathedral. In the old statutes of that church there is a chapter
DE EPISCOPO CHORISTARUM: and their Processionale gives a long and minute
account of the whole ceremony. edit. Rothom. 1555.
, the mass excepted, which might have been celebrated by the bishop and his
prebendaries This ceremony was abolished by a proclamation, no later than 33
Hen. viii. Brit. Mus. MSS. Cott. TIT. B. 1. f. 208. In the inventory of the
treasury of York cathedral, taken in 1530, we have "Item una mitra parva cum
petris pro episcopo puerorum, etc." Dudgd. Monast. iii. 169. 170. See also 313.
314. 177. 279. See also Dugd. Hist. S. Paul's, p. 205. 206. Where he is called
EPISCOPUS PARVULORUM. See also Anstis Ord. Gart. ii. 309. Where, instead of
Nihilensis, read Nicolensis, or NICOLATENSIS.
. In the statutes of the archiepiscopal cathedral of Tulles, given in the year
1497, it is said, that during the celebration of the festival of the
boy-bishop, "MORALITIES were presented, and shows of MIRACLES, with farces and
other sports, but compatible with decorum. -- After dinner they exhibited,
without their masks, but in proper dresses, such farces as they were masters
of, in different parts of the city Statut. Eccles. Tullens. apud Carpent.
Suppl. Lat. Gl. Du Cang. V. KALENDAE.
." It is probable that the same entertainments attended the solemnisation of
this ridiculous festival in England It appears that in England, the boybishop
with his companions went about to different parts of the town; at least visited
the other religious houses. As in Rot. Comp. Coll. Winton. A. D. 1461. "In Dat.
episcopo Nicolatensi." This I suppose, was one of the children of the choir of
the neighboring cathedral. In the statutes of the collegiate church of S. Mary
Ottery, founded by bishop Grandison in 1337, there is this passage. "Item
statuimus, quod nullus canonicus, vicarius, vel secundarius, pueros choristas
in festo sanctorum Innocentium extra Parochiam de Otery trahant, aut eis
licentiam vagandi concedant." cap. 50. MS. Registr. Priorat. S. Swithin.
Winton. quat. 9. In the wardrobe-rolls of Edward iii. an. 12. we have this
entry, which shows that our mock-bishop and his chapter sometimes exceeded
their adopted clerical commission, and exercised the arts of secular
entertainment. "EPISCOPO PUERORUM ecclesiae de Andeworp cantanti coram domino
rege in camera sua in festo sanctorum Innocentium, de dono ipsius dom. regis.
xiii s. vi d."
: and from this supposition some critics may be inclined to deduce the practice
of our plays being acted by the choir-boys of St. Paul's church, and the chapel
royal, which continued, as I before observed, till Cromwell's usurpation. The
English and French stages mutually throw light on each other's history. But
perhaps it will be thought, that in some of these instances I have exemplified
in nothing more than farcical and gesticulatory representations. Yet even these
traces should be attended to. In the mean time we may observe upon the whole,
that the modern drama had its foundation in our religion, and that it was
raised and supported by the clergy. The truth is, the members of the
ecclesiastical societies were almost the only persons who could read, and their
numbers easily furnished performers: they abounded in leisure, and their very
relaxations were religious.

I did not mean to touch upon the Italian stage. But as so able a judge as
Riccoboni seems to allow, that Italy derived her theater from those of France
and England, by way of an additional illustration of the antiquity of the two
last, I will here produce one or two MIRACLE-PLAYS, acted much earlier in Italy
than any piece mentioned by that ingenious writer, or by Crescimbeni. In the
year 1298, on "the feast of Pentecost, and the two following holidays, the
representation of the PLAY OF CHRIST, that is of his passion, resurrection,
ascension, judgment, and the mission of the holy ghost, was performed by the
clergy of Civita Vecchia, in ^uria domini patriarchae Austriae civitatis
honorifice et laudabiliter Chron. Forojul. in Append. ad Monum. Eccl. Aquilej.
page 30. col. 1.
." And again, "In 1304, the chapter of Civita Vecchia exhibited a Play of the
creation of our first parents, the annunciation of the virgin Mary, the birth
of Christ, and other passages of sacred scripture Ibid. page 30. col. 1. It is
extraordinary, that the Miracle-plays, even in the churches, should not cease
in Italy till the year 1660.
." In the mean time, those critics who contend for the high antiquity of the
Italian stage, may adopt these instances as new proofs in defense of that
hypothesis.

In this transient view of the origin and progress of our drama, which was
incidentally suggested by the mention of Baston's supposed Comedies, I have
trespassed upon future periods. But I have chiefly done this for the sake of
connection, and to prepare the mind of the reader for other anecdotes of the
history of our stage, which will occur in the course of our researches, and are
reserved for their respective places. I could have enlarged what is here
loosely thrown together, with many other remarks and illustrations: but I was
unwilling to transcribe from the colle^^ions of those who have already treated
this subject with great comprehension and penetration, and especially from the
author of the Supplement to the Translator's Preface of Jarvis's Don Quixote
See also Doctor Percy's very ingenious ESSAY ON THE ORIGIN OF THE ENGLISH
STAGE, etc.
. I claim no other merit from this digression, than that of having collected
some new anecdotes relating to the early state of the English and French
stages, the original of both which is intimately connected, from books and
manuscripts not easily found, nor often examined. These hints may perhaps prove
of some service to those who have leisure and inclination to examine the
subject with more precision.

SECT. VII.
EDWARD the third was an illustrious example and patron of chivalry. His court
was the theater of romantic elegance. I have examined the annual rolls of his
wardrobe, which record various articles of costly stuffs delivered occasionally
for the celebration of his tournaments; such as standards, pennons, tunics,
caparisons, with other splendid furniture of the same sort: and it appears that
he commanded these solemnities to be kept, with a magnificence superior to that
of former ages, at Litchfield, Bury, Guildford, Eltham, Canterbury, and twice
at Windsor, in little more than the space of one year Comp. J. Cook,
Provisoris Magn. Garderob. ab ann. 21. Edw. iii. ad ann. 23. supr. citat. I
will give, as a specimen, this officer's account for the tournament at
Canterbury. "Et ad faciendum diversos apparatus pro corpore regis et suorum pro
hastiludio Cantuariensi, an. reg. xxii. ubi Rex dedit octo hernesia de syndone
ynde facta, et vapulata de armis dom. Stephani de Cosyngton militis, dominis
principibus comiti Lancastriae, comiti Suffolciae, Johanni de Gray, Joh. de
Beauchamp, Roberto Maule, Joh. Chandos, et dom. Rogero de Beauchamp. Et ad
faciendum unum harnesium de bokeram albo pro rege, extencellato cum argento,
viz. tunicam et scutum operata cum dictamine Regis, "Hay Hay the with swan
"By Gods soul I am thy man."
Et croparium, pectorale, testarium, et arcenarium extencellata cum argento. Et
ad parandum i. tunicam Regis, et i. clocam et capuciam cum c. garteriis paratis
cum boucles, barris, et pendentibus de argento. Et ad faciendum unum dublettum
pro Rege de tela linea habente, circa manicas et ^imbriam, unam borduram de
panno longo viridi operatam cum nebulis et vineis de auro, et cum dictamine
Regis. It is as it is." Membr. xi. [A. D. 1349.]
. At his triumphant return from Scotland, he was met by two hundred and thirty
knights at Dunstable, who received their victorious monarch with a grand
exhibition of these martial exercises. He established in the castle of Windsor
a fraternity of twentyfour knights, for whom he erected a round table, with a
round chamber still remaining, according to a similar institution of king
Arthur Walsing, p. 117.
. Anstis treats the notion, that Edward in this establishment had any
retrospect to king Arthur, as an idle and legendary tradition Ord. Gart. ii. 92.
. But the fame of Arthur was still kept alive, and continued to be an object of
veneration long afterward: and however idle and ridiculous the fables of the
round table may appear at present, they were then not only universally known,
but firmly believed. Nothing could be more natural to such a romantic monarch,
in such an age, than the renovation of this most ancient and revered
institution of chivalry. It was a prelude to the renowned order of the garter,
which he soon afterward founded at Windsor, during the ceremonies of a
magnificent feast, which had been proclaimed by his heralds in Germany, France,
Scotland, Burgundy, Heynault, and Brabant, and lasted fifteen days Barnes, i.
chapter 22. p. 292. Froissart, c. 100. Anstis, ut supr.
. We must not try the modes and notions of other ages, even if they have
arrived to some degree of refinement, by those of our own. Nothing is more
probable, than that this latter foundation of Edward the third, took its rise
from the exploded story of the garter of the countess of Salisbury Ashmole
proves, that the orders of the Annunciada, and of the Toison d'Or, had the like
origin. Ord. Gart. p. 180. 181. Even in the ensigns of the order of the Holy
Ghost, founded so late as 1578, some lovemysteri^s and emblems were concealed
under ^yphers introduced into the blasonrie. See L^ Labourer, Contin. des Mem.
de Castelnau, p. 895. "Il y eut plus de myssteres d'amourettes que de religion,
etc." But I cannot in this place help observing, that the fantastic humor of
unriddling emblematical mysteries, supposed to be concealed under all ensigns
and arms, was at length carried to such an extravagance, at least in England,
as to be checked by the legislature. By a statute of queen Elisabeth, a severe
penalty is laid, "on all fond fantastical prophecies upon or by the occasion
of any arms, fields, beasts, badges, or the like things accustomed in arms,
cognisaunces, or signetts, etc." Statut. v. Eliz. chapter 15. A. D. 1564.
. Such an origin is interwoven with the manners and ideas of the times. Their
attention to the fair sex entered into every thing. It is by no means
unreasonable to suppose, that the fantastic collar of Esses, worn by the
knights of this Order, was an allusion to her name. Froissart, an eyewitness,
and well acquainted with the intrigues of the court, relates at large the
king's affection for the countess; and particularly describes a grand carousal
which he gave in consequence of that attachment Ubi supr.
. The first festival of this order was not only adorned by the bravest
champions of christendom, but by the presence of queen Philippa, Edward's
consort, accompanied with three hundred ladies of noble families They soon
afterward regularly received robes, with the knights companions, for this
ceremony, powdered with garters. Ashmol. Ord. Gart. 217. 594. And Anstis, ii.
123.
. The tournaments of this stately reign were constantly crowded with ladies of
the first distinction; who sometimes attended them on horseback, armed with
daggers, and dressed in a succinct soldier-like habit or uniform prepared for
the purpose Knyghton, Dec. Script. p. 2597.
. In a tournament exhibited at London, sixty ladies on palfries appeared, each
leading a knight with a gold chain. In this manner they paraded from the tower
to Smithfield Froissart apud Stowe's Surv. Land. p. 718. edit. 1616. At an
earlier period, the growing gallantry of the times appears in a public
instrument. It is in the reign of Edward the first. Twelve jurymen depose upon
oath the state of the king's lordship at Woodstock: and among other things it
is solemnly recited, that Henry the second often resided at Woodstock, "pro
amore cujusdam mulieris nomine Rosamunda." Hearne's Avesbury, Append. p. 331.
. Even Philippa, a queen of singular elegance of manners And of distinguished
beauty. Hearne says, that the statuaries of those days used to make queen
Philippa a model for their images of the Virgin Mary. Gloss. Rob. Brun. p. 349.
He adds, that the holy virgin, in a representation of her assumption was
constantly figured young and beautiful; and that the artists before the
Reformation generally "had the most beautiful women of the greatest quality in
their view, when they made statues and figures of her." ibid. p. 550.
, partook so much of the heroic spirit which was universally diffused, that
just before an engagement with the king of Scotland, she rode round the ranks
of the English army encouraging the soldiers, and was with some difficulty
persuaded or compelled to relinquish the field Froissart. i. c. 138.
. The countess of Montfort is another eminent instance of female heroism in
this age. When the strong town of Hennebond, near Rennes, was besieged by the
French, this redoubted amazon rode in complete armor from street to street, on
a large courser, animating the garrison Froissart says, that when the English
proved victorious, the countess came out of the castle, and in the street
kissed Sir Walter Manny the English general, and his captains, one after
another, twice or thrice, ^omme noble et valliant dame. On another like
occasion, the same historian relates, that she went out to meet the officers,
whom she kissed and sumptuously entertained in her castle. i. c. 86. At many
magnificent tournaments in France, the ladies determined the prize. See Mem.
anc. Cheval. i. p. 175. seq. p. 223. seq. An English squire, on the side of the
French, captain of the castle of Beaufort, called himself le Poursuivant
d'amour, in 1369. Froissart, l. i. c. 64. In the midst of grand engagements
between the French and English armies, when perhaps the interests of both
nations are vitally concerned, Froissart gives many instance^ of officers
entering into separate and personal combat to dispute the beauty of their
respective mistresses. Hist. l. ii. chapter 33. 43. On this occasion an ingenious
French writer observes, that Homer's heroes of ancient Greece are just as
extravagant, who in the heat of the sight, often stop on a sudden, to give an
account of the genealogy of themselves or of their horses. Mem. anc. Cheval.
ubi supr. Sir Walter Manny, in 1343, in attacking the castle of Guigard
exclaims, "let me never be beloved of my mistress, if I refuse this attack,
etc." Froissart, i. 81.
. Finding from a high tower that the whole French army was engaged in the
assault, she issued, thus completely accoutred, through a convenient postern at
the head of three hundred chosen soldiers, and set fire to the French camp
Froissart, i. c. 80. Du Chesne, p. 656. Mezeray, ii. 3. p. 19. seq.
. In the mean time riches and plenty, the effects of conquest, peace, and
prosperity, were spread on every side; and new luxuries were imported in great
abundance from the conquered countries. There were few families, even of a
moderate condition, but had in their possession precious articles of dress or
furniture; such as silks, fur, tapestry, embroidered beds, cups of gold,
silver, porcelain, and crystal, bracelets, chains, and necklaces, brought from
Caen, Calais, and other opulent foreign cities Walsing. Ypodigm. 121. Hist. 159.
. The increase of rich furniture appears in a foregoing reign. In an act of
Parliament of Edward the first A. D. 1300. Edw. i. an. 28. cap. xx.
, are many regulations, directed to goldsmiths, not only in London, but in
other towns, concerning the sterling allay of vessels and jewels of gold and
silver, etc. And it is said, "Gravers or cutters of stones and seals shall give
every one their just weight of silver and gold." It should be remembered, that
about this period Europe had opened a new commercial intercourse with the ports
of India Anderson, Hist. Comm. i. p. 141.
. No less than eight sumptuary laws, which had the usual effect of not being
observed, were enacted in one session of parliament during this reign Ann. 37.
Edw. iii. cap. viii. seq.
. Amid these growing elegancies and superfluities, foreign manners, especially
of the French, were perpetually increasing; and the native simplicity of the
English people was perceptibly corrupted and effaced. It is not quite uncertain
that masks had their beginning in this reign See supr. p. 338.
. These shows, in which the greatest personages of the court often bore a part,
and which arrived at their height in the reign of Henry the eighth, encouraged
the arts of address and decorum, and are ^ym^t^ms of the rise of polished
manners This spirit of splendour and gallantry was continued in the reign of his
successor. See the genius of that reign admirably charact^rised, and by the
hand of a master, in bishop Lowth's LIFE OF WYKEHAM, page 222. See also
Hollingsh. Chron. sub ann. 1399. p. 508. col. 1.
.

In a reign like this, we shall not be surprised to fi^d such a poet as
Chaucer: with whom a new era in English poetry begins, and on whose account
many of th^se circumstances are mentioned, as they serve to prepare the reader
for his character, on which they throw no inconsider^ble light.

But before we enter on so ample a field, it will be perhaps less embarrassing,
at least more consistent with our prescribed method, if we previously display
the merits of two or three poets, who appeared in the former part of the reign
of Edward the third, with other incidental matters.

The first of these is Richard Hampole, an eremite of the order of saint
Augustine. He was a doctor of divi^ity, and lived a solitary life near the nuns
of Hampole, four miles from Doncaster in Yorkshire. The neighborhood of this
female society could not withdraw our recluse from his devotions and his
studies. He flourished in the year 1349 Wharton, App. ad Cave, p. 75. Saecul.
Wickley.
. His Latin theological tracts, both in prose and ve^se, are numerous; in which
Leland justly thinks he has di^played more erudition than eloquence. His
principal pieces of English rhyme are a Paraphrase of part of the book of Job,
of the lord's prayer, of the seven penitential psalms, and the PRICK OF
CONSCIENCE. But our hermit's poetry, which indeed from these titles promises
but little entertainment, has no tincture of sentiment, imagination, or
elegance. The following verses are extracted from the PRICK OF CONSCIENCE, one
of the most common manuscripts in our libraries, and I prophesy that I am its
last transcriber. But I must observe first, that this piece is divided into
seven parts. I. Of man's nature. II. Of the world. III. Of death. IV. Of
purgatory. V. Of the day of judgment. VI. Of the torments of hell. VII. Of the
joys of heaven STIMULUS CONSCIENTIAE this book is named. MS. Ashmol. fol. No.
41. There is much transposition in this copy. In MS. Digb. Bibl. Bodl. 87. it
is called THE KEY OF KNOWING. Princ.

The migt of the fader almiti
The wisdom of the sone al witti.

.

Monkynde is to godus will
And all his biddyngus to fulfille
Ffor of al his making more and les
Man most principal creature es
All that he made for man hit was done
As ye schal here aftir lone
God to monkynde had great love
When he ordained to monnes behove
This world and heven him to glade
There in myddulerd mon last he made
To his likeness in feire stature
To be most worthy creature
Beforen all creatures of kind
He yef him wit skile and mind
Ffor too know both good and ille
And als he yaf him a fre will
Fforto chese and forto hold
Good or yvel whedur he would
And as he ordained mon to dwell
To lyve in earth in flessch and fell
To know his workus and him worshepe
And his commandment to keep
And yif he be to god buxome
To endeles blis aftir to come
And yif he wrongly here wend
To pain of hell withouten end
God made to his own likeness
Each mon lyving here more and les
To whom he has gyven wit and skill
Ffor to know both good and il
And will to these as they vouchsave
Good or evil whether they wole have
He that his will to good wole bow
God wole him with great mede allow
He that wukudnes wole and woe
Great pain shall he have also
That mon therefore hold is for wood
That chesuth the evel and leveth the good
God made mon of most dignite
Of all creatures most fre
And namely to his own liknes
As before told hit es
And most has gyven and yet gyveth
Than to any creature that lyveth
And more has het him yet thereto
Hevene blis yif he well do
And yet when he had don amys
And had lost that ilke blis
God tok monkynde for his sake
And for his love death would take
And with his blod boughte hem ayene
To his bliss fro endeles pain.
PRIMA PARS DE MISERIA HUMANAE CONDITIONIS.
Thus great love god to man kidde
And money good dedus to him did
Therefore each mon lernd and lewed
Schulde think on love that he hem schewed
And these good dedus hold in mind
That he thus did to monkynde
And love and thank him as he con
And ellus he is unkynde mon
Bot he serve him day and night
And his yiftes usen hem right
To spend his wit in godus servyse^
Certainly ellus he is not wise
Bot he know kyndely what god es^
And what mon is that is les
Thou febul mon is soul and body
Thou strong god is and mighty
Thou mon greveth god that does not well
What mon is worthi therefore to feel
Thou merciful and gracious god is
And thou full of all goodness
Thou right wis and thou sothfaste
What he has done and shall at last
And each day does to monkynde
This schulde each mon have in mind
Ffor the rihte way to that blis
That leduth mon thidur that is this
The way of mekenes principally
To love and dread god almighty
This is the way into wisdom
Into whuche way non may come
Withouten knowing of god here
His myghtus and his works sere
But ar he to that knowing win
Himself he mot know withynne
Ellus knowing may not be
To wisdom way non enter
Some han wit to undurstonde
And yet they are full unknowonde
And some thing has no knowing
That might them sture to good lyving
Tho men had need to learn each day
Of men that con more then they
That myhte to knowing hem led
In mekenes to love god and dread
Which is way and good wissyng
That may to heven blis men bring
In great pil [peril] of soul is that mon
That has wit mind and no good con
And wole not learn for to knawe
The workus of god and his law
He nyle do afturmest no lest
Bot lyveth like an unskilful best
That nouther has skill wit nor mind
That mon lyveth ayeyn his kind
Yet excuses not his unknowyng
That his wit uses not in leryng
Namely in that him owes to know
To meke his heart and make it low
The unknowyng schulde have will
To learn to know good and ille
He that ought con schulde lere more
To know all that nedeful wore
For the unknowyng by lerning
May brought be to understondyng
Of money thyngus to know and se
That has bin is and shall be
And so to mekenes sture his will
To love and dread god and leve al ille
Money ben glad triful to here
And vanitees woll gladly lere
Bisy they bin in word and thought
To learn that soul helputh naught
Bot that that n^deful were to know
To here they are wondur-slowe
Therefore con they nothing se
The pereles they schulde dread and fle
And what weye they schulde take
And which weye they schulde forsake
No wondur is though they go wrong
In derknes of unknowyng they gonge
Without light of undurstondynge
Of that that falluth to right knowing
Therefore each christian mon and wommon
That wit and wisdom any con
That tou the right weye not sen
Nor fly the periles that wise flen
Schulde buxom be and bisy
To heren and leren of hem namely
That undurstonden and known still
Wheche weye is good and wheche is il
He that wole right weye of lyving look
Shall thus bigynne seith the book
To know first what himself is
So may he come to mekenys
That ground of all virtues is last
On which all virtues may be stedefast
He that knows well and con se
What he is was and schal be
A wisere man may be told
Whethur he be young or old
Then he that con al other thing
And of himself has no knowing
He may no good know ny feel
Bot he furst know him selven well
Therefore a m^n schulde furst lere
To know himself propurly here
Ffor yif he knew himself kyndely
Then may he know god almighty
And on endyng think schulde he
And on the last day that schal be
Know schulde he what this world es
Full of pomp and lecherousnes
And learn to know and think with all
What schal aftir this life bifalle
Knowing of this schulde him led
To mete with mekenes and with dread
So may he come to good lyvyng
And at last to good endyng
And when he of this world schal wend
Be brought to blis withouten end
The bigynnyng of this process
Right knowing of a mon himself hit es
Bot sum mon han great lettynge
That they may have no right knowing
Of hemselfe that they schulde first knawe
That first to mekenes schulde hem draw
There of some thyngus I find
That monnes wit makuth often blind
And knowing of himself hit lettuth
Wherefore he himself foryetuth
To this witness Bernard answers
And tho four are written in these verse Compare Tanner, Bibl. p. 375. col. 1.
And p. 374. col. 1. Notes. And GROSTHEAD. And MSS. Ashm. 52. pergamen. 4to.
, etc.
In the Bodleian library I find three copies of the PRICK OF CONSCIENCE very
different from that which I have just cited. In these this poem is given to
Robert Grosthead bishop of Lincoln, above mentioned Laud. K. 65. pergamen. And
G. 21. And MSS. Digb. 14. Princ.

"The migt of the fader of hevene
"The wit of his son with his gifts sevene."

. With what probability, I will not stay to enquire; but hasten to give a
specimen. I will only premise, that the language and handwriting are of
considerable antiquity, and that the lines are here much longer. The poet is
describing the future rewards and punishments of mankind.

The good soul schal have in his herynge
Great joye in hevene and great liking:
Ffor hi schulleth yhere the aungeles song,
And with hem hi schulleth Shall.
sing ever among,
With delitable voys and swythe clear,
And also with that hi schullen have ire Ever, always.
^
All other manner of each a melodye,
Off well lykyng noise and menstralsye,
And of al manner tenes Tunes.
of music,
The whuche to man's beorte migte like,
Without eni manner of travayle,
The whuche schal never cesse ne fail:
And so Shrill.
schil schal that noise by, and so swete^
And so delitable to small and to great,
That all the melodye of this world here
That ever was yhuryd far or near
Were thereto But.
bote as sorwe Sorrow.
and care
To the bliss that is in hevene well are Prepared.
.
Of the contrary of that bliss.
Well great sorwe schal the synfolke Sinners.
bytyde,
Ffor he schullen yhere in each a side Either side.
,
Well great noise that the feondes Devils.
willen make,
As they all the world scholde alto schake;
And all the men lyvynge that migte hit yhure,
Scholde here wit Senses.
loose, and no lengere alyve Remain.
dure.
Thanne hi They.
schulleth for sorwe here hondes wringe,
And ever weilaway hi schullethe be cryinge, etc.
The good men schullethe have worschipes great,
And each of them schal be yset in a rich sete,
And there as kings be ycrownid fair,
And digte with rich perrie Precious stones.
and so ysetun Seated.
in a chair,
And with stones of virtue and preciouse of choice,
As David thy said to god with a mylde voice,
Posuisti, domine, super caput eorum, etc.
"Lord, he seyth, on his heved thou set well arigt
"A coronne of a precious ston richeliche ydigt."
And so fair a coronne nas never non ysene,
In this world on kings hevede Head.
, ne on queen;
Ffor this coronnc is the coronne of bliss,
And the ston is joye whereof hi schilleth never miss, etc.
The synfolke schulleth, as I have before ytold,
^fele outrageous hete, and afterward to much cold;
Ffor now he schullethe freose, and now brenne This is the Hell of the monks,
which Milton has adopted.
,
And so be ypyned that non schal other kenne Know.
,
And also be ybyte with dragonnes fell and kene,
The whuche schulleth hem destrye outrigte and clean,
And with other vermyn and bestes fell,
The which beothe nougt but fendes of hell, etc.
We have then this description of the New Jerusalem.

This city is yset on an hei hille,
That no synful man may thereto tille Come.
:
The whuche ich likne to beril clean,
And so fair berel may non be ysene.
Thulke hyl is nougt else to understondynge
Bote holy thugt, and desyr brennynge,
The whuche holy men had here to that place,
Whiles hi had on eorthe here lyves space;
And i likne, as ymay ymagene in my thougt,
The walls of hevene, to walls that were ywrougt
Of all manner preciouse stones yset yfere Together.
,
And ysemented with gold brigt and clear;
Bot so brigt gold, ne non so clean,
Was in this world never ysene, etc.
The wards of the cite of hevene brigt
I likne to wards that well were ydygt,
And clenly ywrougt and sotely enteyled,
And on silver and gold clenly avamayled Aumayled.
, etc.
The torettes Turretts.
of hevene great and small
I likne to the torrettes of clean cristale, etc.
I am not, in the mean time, quite convinced that any manuscript of the PRICK
OF CONSCIENCE in English belongs to Hampole. That this piece is a translation
from the Latin appears from these verses.

Therefore this book is in Englis draw
Of feel Many.
matters that been unknawe
To lewed men that are unkonande Ignorant.

That con no latin undirstonde MSS. Digb. ut supr. 87. ad princip.
.
The Latin original in prose, entitled, STIMULUS CONSCIENT^AE In the Cambridge
manuscript of Hampole's PARAPHRASE ON THE LORD'S PRAYER, abovementioned,
containing a prolix description of human virtues and vices, at the end, this
remark appears. "Explicit quidam tractatus super Pater noster secundum Ric.
Hampole qui obiit A. D. MCCCLXXXIV." [But the true date of his death is in
another place, viz. 1348.] MSS. More, 215. Princ. "Almighty God in trinite
"In whom is only persons three."
The PARAPHRASE ON THE BOOK OF JOB, mentioned also before, seems to have
existed first in Latin prose under the title of PARVUM JOB. The English begins
thus: "Lieff lord my soul thou spare." In Bibl. Bodl. MSS. Laud. F. 77. 5, etc.
etc. It is a paraphrase of some Excerpta from the book of Job. THE SEVEN
PENITENTIAL PSALMS begin thus: "To goddis worschippe that d^re us bougt." MSS.
Bodl. Digb. 18. Hampole's EXPOSITIO IN PSALTERIUM is not uncommon in English.
It has a preface in English rhymes in some copies, in praise of the author and
his work. Pr. "This blessed book that hire." MSS. Laud. F. 14, etc. Hampole was
a very popular writ^r. Most of his many theological pieces seem to have been
translated into English soon after they appeared: and those pieces abound among
our manuscripts. Two of his tracts were translated by Richard Misyn, prior of
the Carmelites at Lincoln, about the year 1435. The INCENDIUM AMORIS, at the
request of Margaret Hellingdon a reclus^. Princ. "To the asking of thy
desire." And DE EMENDATIONE VITAE. "Tarry thou not to our." They are in the
translator's own handwriting in the library of C. C. C. Oxon. MSS. 237. I find
other ancient translations of both these pieces. Particularly, The PRICK OF
LOVE after Richard Hampol treting of the thre^ d^grees of love. MSS. Bodl.
Arch. B. 65. f. 109. As a proof of the confusions and uncertainties attending
the works of our author, I must add, that we have a translation of his tract DE
EMENDATIONE under this title. The ^orm of p^r^yt living, which ^oly Richard the
hermit wrote ^o a recluse named Margaret^. MS. Vernon. But Margarete is
evidently the recluse, at whose request Richard Misyn, many years after
Ha^pole's death, translated the INCENDIUM AMORIS. These observations, to which
others might be added, are suf^ici^nt to conf^rm the suspicions insinuated in
the text. Many of Hampole's Latin th^ologi^al trac^s were printed very early at
Pa^is and Cologne.
, was most probably writtten by Hampole: and it is not very likely that he
should translate his own work. The author and translator were easily
confounded. As to the copy of the English poem given to bishop Grosthead, he
could not be the translator, to say nothing more, if Hampole wrote the Latin
original. On the whole, whoever was the author of the two translations, at
least we may pronounce with some certainty, that they belong to the reign of
Edward the third.

SECT. VIII.
THE next poet in succession is one who deserves more attention on various
accounts. This is Robert Longlande, author of the poem called the VISION OF
PIERCE PLOWMAN, a s^cular priest, and a fellow of Oriel college, in Oxford. He
flourished about the year 1350 I have here followed a date commonly received.
But it may be observed, that there is in this poem an allusion to the fall of
Edward the second. The si^ge of Calais is also mentioned as a recent fact; and
Bribery accuses Conscience of obstructing the conquest of France. See more in
Observations on the Fairy Queen, ii.. xi. p. 281.
. This poem contains a series of distinct visions, which the author imagines
himself to have seen, while he was sleeping, after a long ramble on
Malverne-hills in Worcestershire. It is a satire on the vices of almost every
profession: but particularly on the corruptions of the clergy, and the
absurdities of superstition. These are ridiculed with much humor and spirit,
couched under a strong vein of allegorical invention. But instead of availing
himself of the rising and rapid improvements of the English language, Longland
prefers and adopts the style of the Anglo-Saxon poets. Nor did he make these
writers the models of his language only: he likewise imitates their
alliterative versification, which consisted in using an aggregate of words
beginning with the same letter. He has therefore rejected rhyme, in the place
of which he thinks it sufficient to substitute a perpetual alliteration. But
this imposed constraint of seeking identical initials, and the affectation of
obsolete English, by demanding a constant and necessary departure from the
natural and obvious forms of expression, while it circumscribed the powers of
our author's genius, contributed also to render his manner extremely perplexed,
and to disgust the reader with obscurities. The satire is conducted by the
agency of several allegorical personages, such as Avarice, Bribery, Simony,
Theology, Conscience, etc. There is much imagination in the following picture,
which is intended to represent human life, and its various occupations.

Then began I to meten a mervelouse sweven,
That I was in wilderness, I wist never where:
As I beheld into theast, on high to the sun
I saw a tower on a loft, rychlych ymaked,
A deep dale beneth, a dungeon therein,
With deep diches and darcke, and dreadful of sight:
A fair field full of folk found I there between,
Of all manner men, the mean and the rich,
Working and wandering, as the world asks;
Some put hem to the plough^, pleiden full selde,
In setting and sowing swonken full hard:
And some put hem to pride Fol. i. a. edit. 1550. By Roberte Crowley. 4to. He
printed three editions in this one year. Another was printed [with Pierce
Plowman's CREED annexed] by Owen Rogers, 1561^ 4to. See Strype, Ann. Re^ormat.
i. 135. And Ames, Hist. Print. p. 270.
, etc.
The following extracts are not only striking specimens of our author's
allegorical satire, but contain much sense and observation of life, with some
strokes of poetry F. 39. seq. Pass. viii. seq. edit. 1550.
.

Thus robed in russet, I romed about
All a somer season, for to seek Do-well.
DOWEL
And freyned Enquired.
full often, of folk that I met
If any wight wist, where DOWEL Lived.
was at inn,
And what man he might be, of many man I asked,
Was never wight as I went, that me wysh Inform me.
could
Where this ladde lenged Lived.
, less or more,
Till it befell on a Friday, two friars I met
Masters of the minours The friars minors.
, men of great wit
I halsed hem hendelye Saluted them civilly.
, as I had learned
And prayed hem for charity, or they passed furthur
If they knew any court or country as they went
Where that DOWELL dwells, do me to wit Know.

For they be men on this mould, that most wide walk
And know contries and courts, and many kinnes Sorts of.
places
Both princes palaces, and pore menes cotes
And DOWEL and DOEVIL, where they dwell both,
Amongst us quoth the minours, that man is dwellinge
And ever has as I hope, and ever shall hereafter,
Contra quod I, as a clarke, and cumsed to disputen
And said him sothelye, Septies in die cadit justus,
Seven Times.
sythes says the book, synneth the rightful,
And who so synneth I say, does evel as me thinks,
And DOWEL and DOEVYL may not dwell together,
Ergo he is not always among you friars
He is other while else where, to wyshen the people.
I shall say the my son, said the friar than
How seven sithes the sad Sober. Good.
man on a day synneth,
By a forvisne Similitude.
quod the friar, I shall the fair show
Let bring a man in a boat, amyd the broad water
The wind and the water, and the boat waggyng
Make a man many time, to fall and to stand
For stand he never so stiff, he stumbleth if he move
And yet is he safe and sound, and so him behooves,
For if he ne arise the rather, and raght to the stere,
The wind would with the water the boot overthrow.
And than were his life lost through latches Laziness.
of himself.
And thus it falls quod the friar, by folk here on earth
The water is likned to the world, that waneth and wexeth
The goods of this world ar likened to the great waves
That as winds and wethers, walken a bout.
The boot is likende to our body, that brytil is of kind
That through the flesh, and the frail world
Synneth the sad man, a day seven times
And deadly sin does he not, for DOWEL him keeps
And that is CHARITY the chapion, chief help again sin,
For he strengtheth man to stand, and stirs man's soul
And though thy bodi bow, as bote does in water,
Aye is thy soul safe, but if thou wylt thy self
Do a deadlye sin, and drenche so thy soul
God will suffer well thy sloth, if thy self lyketh
For he gafe the two yeresgifts, to teme well thy self
And that is wit and frewil, to every wight a portion
To flyinge fowls, to fishes, and to beasts
And man has most thereof, and most is to blame
But if he worch well therewith, as DOWEL him teaches.
I have no kind knowing quoth I, to coceive all your words
And if I may live and look, I shall go learn better
I bikenne the Christ, that on the cross dyed
And I said the same, save you from mischaunce
And give you grace on this ground good me to worth.
And thus I went wide where, walking mine one
By a wide weldernes, and by a woddes side,
Bliss of the birds, brought me on sleep,
And under a lynde Lime tree.
on a land, lened I a stounde A while.

To lyth the lays Listen.
, tho lovely fowls made,
Myrthe of her mouths made me there to sleep
The marvelousest metelles, met Dreamed.
me than
That ever dremed wight, in world as I went.
A much man as me thought, and like to my self,
Came and called me, by my kind Own.
name
What art thou quod I tho, thou that my name knoweste
That thou wottest well quod he, and no wight better
Wot I what thou art? THOUGHT said he than,
I have sued Sought.
the this seven years, se ye me no rather?
Art thou THOUGHT quoth I tho, thou could me wysshe
Where that DOWEL dwells, and do me that to know
DOWEL and DOBETTER, and DOBEST the third quod he
Are three fair virtues, and be not far to find,
Who so is true of his tongue, and of his two hands
And through his labor or his lod, his livelod wineth Getts.

And is trusty of his taylyng Dealing. Reckoning.
, takes but his own
And is no drunklewe Drunkard.
ne dedigious, DOWEL him follows
DOBET does right thus, and he does much more
He is as low as a lamb, and lovely of speech
And helps al men, after that hem needs
The bags and the bigirdles, he has to brok Broke to pieces.
hem al,
That the earl avarous held and his heirs
And thus to mamons money he has made him friends
And is run to religion, and has rendered Translated.
the bible
And preached to the people, saint Paul's werdes.
Libenter suffertis insipientes cum sitis ipsi sapientes.
And suffers the unwyse, with you for to lyve
And with glad will does he good, for so god you hoteth
DOBEST is above boeth, and bears a bishops cross
Is hoked on that one end to halye Draw.
men from hell
A pyke is on the potent Staff.
to pull down the wyked
That wayten any wykednes, DOWELL to tene
And DOWELL and DOBET, amongst hem have ordained
To crown one to be king, to rule hem boeth
That if DOWELL and DOBET, arne Are.
against DOBESTE
Then shall the king com, and cast hem in yrons
And but if DOBEST bid for hem, they be there for ever
Thus DOWELL and DOBET, and DOBESTE the third
Crouned one to be king, to kepen hem al
And to rule the realm, by her Their.
three wits
And none other wise, but as they three assentyd.
I thanked THOUGHT tho, that he me thus taught
And yet savoreth me not thy suging, I covet to learn,
How DOWEL DOBEST, and DOBETTER, done among the people
But WIT can wish the Thee.
quoth THOUGHT, were tho They.
iii dwell
Else wot I none that can tell, that now is alyve.
THOUGHT and I thus, three days we yeden Went.

Disputynge upon DOWELL, day after other.
And ere we were ware, with WIT began we mete
He was long and lean, like to none other
Was no pride on his apparel, nor poverty nether
Sad of his semblaunce, and of soft chere
I durst not move no matter, to make him to laughe,
But as I bade THOUGHT tho be mean between
And put forth some purpose, to prevent his wyts
What was DOWELL fro DOBET, and DOBEST fro hem both.
Than THOUGHT in that time, said these words
Whether DOWELL DOBET, and DOBEST ben in land
Here is will would wit, if WIT could teach him
And whether he be man or woman, this man fain would espy
And worch as they three would, this is his enten,
Here DOWELL dwells quod WIT, not a day hence
In a castle that kind Nature
made, of four kins things
Of earth and air is it made, mingled togithers
With wind and with water, witterly Cunningly.
enjoined
KIND has closed therein, craftily withal
A Lemman Paramour.
that he loves, like to him self
ANIMA she hight, and Envye her hates
A proud pricke^ of France, princeps hujus mundi
And would win her away with wiles and h^ might
And KIND knows this well, and keeps he the better.
And does her with sir DOWELL is duke of this marches
DOBET is her damsel, sir DOWEL'S daughter
To serve this lady lelly Fair lady.
, both late and rathe Early.
.
DOBEST is above both a bishops pere,
That he bid moote be do Must be done.
he rules them all
ANIMA that lady, is led by his lerning,
And the constable of the castle, that keeps all the watch,
Is a wise knight withal, sir Inwit he hight
And has fyve fair sons by his first wife
Sir Seewel and Saywel, and Hearwell the end
Sir Worchwel with thy hand, a wight man of strength
And Sir Godfray Gowel, great lords forsooth
These fyve been set, to save this lady Anima
Till KIND com or send, to save her for ever
What kins thing is KIND quod I, can thou me tell
Kind quod Wit is a creator, of al kinnis things
Father and former of all, that ever was makyd
And that is the great god that ginning had never
Lord of life and of light, of blys and of pain
Angels and al thing arne at his will,
And man is him most like, of mark Fashion. Similitude.
and of shape,
For through the word that he spoke, wexen forth bestes
And made Adam, likest to him self one
And Eve of his ribbe bone, without any mean
For he was singular him self, and said faciamus
As who say more must hereto, then my word one
My might must help now with my speech,
Even as a lord should make leters, and he lacked perchment
Though he could write never so well, if he had no pen
The letters for all his lordship, I leve were never imaked
And so it seems by him, as the bible tells,
There he said, Dixit et facta sunt.
He must worch with his word, and his wit show
And in this manner was man made, by might of God almighty
With his word and his workmaship, and with life to last
And thus God gave him a ghost Spirit.
, of the godhed of heven
And of his great grace, granted him bliss
And that is life that aye shall last, to al our lineage after
And that is the castle that KIND made, Caro it hight
And is as much to mean, as man with a soul
And that he wrought with work, and with word both
Through might of the majesty, man was imaked
Inwyt and Alwyts, closed been therein
For love of the lady Anima, that life is nempned Named.

Over al in man's body, she walks and wandreth
And in the heart is her home, and her most Greatest.
rest
And Inwit is in the head, and to the heart looks
What Anima is leef or loath Willing.
, he leadith her at his will. --
Than had WIT a wife, was hot dame STUDY,
That leve was of lere, and of liche boeth.
She was wonderli wroght, Wit me so teched
And al staryng dame Study, sternely said.
Well art you wise quoth she to Wit, any wysdomes to tell
To flatterers or to foles, that frentyke be of wits
And blamed him and banned Cursed.
him, and bade him be still
With such wise words, to wysh any sottes
And said, Noli mittere man, Margarite Pearls
Among hogs, that have hawes at will.
They do but drivel thereon, See Dra^^esack. Chauc. Urr. p. 33. v. 1098.
drafe were hem lever Rather.
,
Than al precious pearls that in paradise waxes Grow.
.
I say it by such, quod she, that show it by her works,
That hem were lever land They had rather.
, and lordshyp on earth,
Or riches or rentes, and rest at her will,
Than all the soth sawes, that Solomon said ever.
Wisdom and wit, now is not worth a kerse Not worth a straw.

But if it be carded with covetis Covetousness.
, as clothers kemb her woule
Whosoever can contryve deceites, and conspyre wrongs
And lead forth a love day Lady.
, to let with truth
He that such crafts can, is often cleped to counsel,
They lead lords with leasinges, and belieth truth
Job the gentel in his gestes, greatly witnesses
That wicked men welden the wealth of this world
The psalter says the same, by such as done evyl
Ecce ipsi peccatores habundantes in seculo obtinuerunt divitias.
Lo says holy lecture, which lords be these shrewes?
Thilke that god geveth most, lest good they deals
And most unkind be to that comen, that most catel weldeth Commands.
.
Que perfecisti destruxerunt, justus autem etc.
Harlots for her harlotrye, may have of her goods
And japers and judgelers Jugglers.
, and jangelers of jestes
And he that has holy write, aye in his mouth
And can tell of Tobie, and of the twelve apostles
Or preach of the penance, that Pilate falsely wrought
To Jesu the gentle, that Jews to draw:
Little is he loved, that such a lesson shows
Or daunten or draw forth, I do it on god him self
But tho They.
that feign hem foles, and with fayting Deceiving.
lives
Again the law of our lord, and lien on hem self
Spitten and spuen, and speak foul words
Drynken and drivelen, and do men for to gape
Lyken men, and lie on hem, and leneth hem no gifts
They can Know.
no more minstrelsy ne musyke men to glad
Than Mundie the milner, of multa fecit deus.
Ne were her vile harlotry, have god my troth
Should never king ne knight, ne canon of Poules
Gyve hem to her years gift, ne gift of a grote,
And mirth and minstrelsy amongst men is naught
Lechery, losenchery Lying.
, and losels tales,
Glotony and great oaths, this mirthe they loves,
And if they carpen Speak.
of Christ, these clerks and these lewed.
And they meet in her mirth, when mynstrels ben still
When tells they of the trinity, a tale or twain
And brings forth a blade reason, and take Bernard S. Bernard.
to witness
And put forth a presumption to preve the soth
Thus they dreveil at her dayse Their table.
the deity to scorn
And gnawen God to her gorge Throat.
when her guts fallen
And the carfull Poor.
may cry, and carpen at the gate
Both a fyngerd and a furste, and for chel Cold.
quake
Is none to nymen hem nere, his noye Trouble.
to amend
But hunten him as a hounde, and hoten him go hence,
Little loves he that lord that lent him all that bliss,
That thus parts with pore, a percel when him needs
Ne were mercy in mean men, more than in rich
Mendynauntes meatles Beggars supperless.
, might go to bed.
God is much in the gorge of these great masters,
And among mean men, his mercy and his worckes
And so says the psalter, I have seen it often.
Clerks and other kinnes men, carpen of god fast
And have him much in the mouth, and mean men in heart
Friars and fayters, have founden such questions
To plese with the proud men, since the pestilence time
And preachen at S. Paul's, for pure envi of clarks
That folk is not firmed in the faith, ne fre of her goods
Ne sorry for her sins, so is pride waxen,
In religion, and in all the realm, amongst rich and pore
That prayers have no pore, the pestilence to let
And yet the wretches of this world, are none ware by other
Ne for dread of the death, withdraw not her pride
Ne ben plentuous to the pore, as pure charity would
But in gains and in glotony, forglote goods hem self
And breketh not to the beggar, as the book teaches.
And the more he wynneth, and wexeth welthy in riches
And lordeth in lands, the less good he deals
Tobie tells ye not so, takehede ye rich
How the bible book of him bears wytnes,
Who so has much spend manly, so means Tobit
And who so little weldeth, rule him thereafter,
For we have no letter of our life, how long it shall endure
Such lessons lords, should love to hear
And how he might most meyny, manlych find
Not to fare as a fideler, or a friar to seek feasts,
Homely at other men's houses, and haten her own.
Elenge Strange, deserted. Henry the eighth in a letter to Anne Bullen, speaks
of his Ellengness since her departure. Hearne's Avesb. p. 260.
is the hal every day in the weke
There the lord ne the lady lyketh not to sytte
Now has each rich a rule Custom.
, to eaten by hem self
In a privy parler, for poor men's sake
Or in chamber with a chymney, and leave the chief hal
That was made for meals, men to eat in. --
And when that Wit was ware, what dame Study told
He became so confuse he cunneth not look
And as dombe as death, and drew him arere Back.

And for no carping I cold after, ne kneling to therth
I might get no grain, of his great wyttis
But al laughing he louted, and looked upon Study
In sign that I should, besechen her of grace
And when I was war of his will, to his wife I loutid
And said mercy madame, your man shall I worth
As long as I live both late and early
For to worchen your will, the while mi life endures
With this that ye ken me kindlye, to know to what is DOWEL
For thy mekenes man quod she, and for thy mild spech
I shall ken the to my cosen, that Clergy is hoten Named.

He has weddyd a wife, within these syx months
Is syb Mother.
to the seven arts, Scripture is her name
They two as I hope, after my teachinge
Shall wishen the Dowel, I dare under take.
Than was I as feign Cheerful.
, as foul Bird.
of fair morrow
And glader then the gleman Harper.
that gold^ has to gift
And asked her the high way where that Clergy Learning.
dwelt
And tellme some token quod I, for time is that I wend
Ask the high way quod she, hence to suffer
Both well and woo, if that thou wylt learn
And ride forth by riches, and rest thou not therein,
For if thou couplest ye therewith to clergy come thou never,
And also the licores land that lechery hight
Leav^ it on thy left half, a large mile and more,
Till thou come to a court, keep well thy tongue
Fro leasinges and lyther speech Wanton.
, and licorous drinckes
Than shall thou se Sobriety, and Simplicity of speech
That each might be in his will, his wit to show
And thus shall ye come to Cleargye that can mani things
Say him this sign, I set him to schole
And that I great well his wife, for I wrote her many books
And set her to Sapience, and to the psalter gloss
Logike I learned her, and many other laws,
And all the unisons to music, I made her to know,
Plato the poet, I put hem first to book,
Aristotle and other more, to argue I taught
Grammar for gyrles, I guard first to write
And beat hem with a bales, but if they would learn
Of all kinnes crafts, I contrived tools
Of carpentre of carvers, and compassed masons
And learned hem level and line, though I look dim
And Theology has tened me, seven score times,
The more I muse therein, the mistier it seems
And the deper I devine, the darker me it thinks.
The artifices and persuasions of the monks to procure donations to their
convents, are thus humorously ridiculed, in a strain which seems to have given
rise to Chaucer's SOMPNOUR'S TALE.

Than he assoyled her sone, and sithen he said:
We have a window in working, will set us full high,
Woudst thou glase the gable, and grave therein thy name,
Scher should thy soul be heven to have fol. xii. a. b. These, and the
following lines, are plainly copied by Chaucer, viz. And I shall cover your
kyrke, and your cloisture do maken. Chaucer, Sompn. T. p. 93. v. 835. edit.
Urr. But with new strokes of humor. Yeve me then of thy gold to make our
cloister,
Quod he, for many a muscle and many an oyster,
When other men have been full well at ease,
Have been our fode our cloister for to reyse.
And yet, god wot, unnethe the fundament
Parfourmid is, ne of our pavement
Thar is not yet a tile within our wones,
Bigod, we owe forty pound for stones.
So also in the PLOUGHMAN'S CREED, hereafter mentioned. Sign. B. iii. A friar
says, So that thou mow amend our house with money other else
With some catal, other corn or cups of sylvere.
And again, Sign. A. iii. ibid. And might on amenden as with money of thine
own,
Thou sholdest knely before Christ in compass of gold,
In the wide wyndowe westward, well nigh in the midel.
That is, "your figure shall be painted in glass, in the middle of the west
window, etc." But of this passage hereafter.
, etc.
COVETISE or Covetousness, is thus drawn in the true colors of satirical
painting.

And then came COVETIS, can I him no discrive,
So hungerly and hollow, so sternely he looked,
He was bittle-browed and baberlypped also;
With two blered eyes as a blind hagge,
And as a lethren purse lolled his chekes,
Well syder than his chyn they shevered for cold:
And as a bound man of his bacon his berd was bidrauled,
With a hode on his head, and a lousy hatte above.
And in a tawny taberde Tabard. A coat.
, of twelve winter age,
All torn and baudye, and full of lyce creepinge;
But that if a louse could have lepen the better,
She had not walked on the welte, so was it thredbare.
I have been Covetise, quoth this catife,
For sometime I servid Symme at style,
And was his prentice plight, his profyt to wate.
First I lernid to lie, a leef other twain
Wychedly to way, was my first lesson:
To Wy and to Winchester Anciently, before many flourishing towns were
established, and the necessaries or ornaments of life, from the convenience of
communication and the increase of provincial civility, could be procured in
various places, goods and commodities of every kind, were chiefly sold at
fairs; to which, as to one universal mart, the people resorted periodically,
and supplied most of their wants for the ensuing year. The display of
merchandise, and the conflux of customers, at these principal and almost only
emporia of domestic commerce, was prodigious: and they were therefore often
held on open and extensive plains. One of the chief of them seems to have been
that of St. Giles's hill or down near Winchester, to which our poet here
refers. It was instituted and given as a kind of revenue to the bishop of
Winchester, by William the conqueror; who by his charter permitted it to
continue for three days. But in consequence of new royal grants, Henry the
third prolonged its continuance to sixteen days. Its jurisdiction extended
seven miles round, and comprehended even Southampton, then a capital trading
town: and all merchants who sold wares within that circuit, forfeited them to
the bishop. Officers were placed at a considerable distance, at bridges and
other avenues of access to the fair, to exact toll of all merchandise passing
that way. In the mean time, all shops in the city of Winchester were shut. In
the fair was a court called the pavilion, at which the bishop's justiciaries
and other officers assisted, with power to try causes of v^rious sorts for
seven miles round: nor among other singular claims could any lord of a manor
hold a court baron within the said circuit, without license from the pavilion.
During this time, the bishop was empowered to take toll of ^very load or parcel
of goods passing through the gates of the city. On Saint Giles's eve, the
mayor, bailiffs, and citizens of the city of Winchester, delivered the keys of
the four city gates to the bishop's officers; who, during the said sixteen
days, appointed a mayor and bailiff of their own to govern the city, and also a
coroner to act within the said city. Tenants of the bishop, who held lands by
doing service at the pavilion, attended the same with horses and armor, not
only to do suit at the court there, but to be ready to assist the bishop's
officers in the execution of writs and other services. But I cannot here
enumerate the many extraordinary privileges granted to the bishop on this
occasion; all tending to obstruct trade, and to oppress the people. Numerous
foreign merchants frequented this fair: and it appears, that the justiciaries
of the pavilion, and the treasurer of the bishop's palace of Wolvesey, received
annually for a fee, according to ancient custom, four basins and ewers, of
those foreign merchants who sold brazen vessels in the fair, and were called
mercat^res diaunteres. In the fair several streets were formed, assigned to the
sale of different commodities; and called the Drap^ry, the Pottery, the
Spicery, etc. Many monasteries, in and about Winchester, had shops, or houses,
in these streets, used only at the fair, which they held under the bishop, and
often let by lease for a term of years. One place in the fair was called
Speciarium San^^i ^wythini, or the Spicery of Saint Swithin's monastery. In the
revenue-rolls of the ancient bishops of Winchester, this fair makes a grand and
separate article of reception, under this title. FERIA. Computus ^^^^iae sancti
Egidii. But in the revenue-roll of bishop Will. of Waynflet^, [an. 1471.] it
appears to have greatly decayed: in which, among other proofs, I find mention
made of a district in the fair being unoccupied, "Ubi homines Cornubiae stare
solebant." From whence it likewise appears that different counties had their
different stations. The whole reception to the bishop this year from the fair,
amoun^ed only to 45 l. 18 s. 5 d. Yet this sum, small as it may seem, was worth
upwards of 400 l. Edward the first sent a precept to the sheriff of Hampshire,
to restore to the bishop this fair; which his escheator Malcolm de Harlegh had
seized into the king's hands, without command of the treasurer and barons of
the exchequer, in the year 1292. Registr. Joh. de Pontissara, Episc. Wint. fol.
195. After the charter of Henry the third, many kings by charter confirmed this
fair, with all its privileges, to the bishops of Winchester. The last charter
was of Henry the eighth to bishop Richard Fox and his successors, in the year
1511. But it was followed by the usual confirmation-charter of Charles the
second. In the year 1144, when Brian Fitz-count, lord of Wallingford in
Berkshire, maintained Walling^ord castle, one of the strongest garrisons
belonging to Maud the empress, and consequently sent out numerous parties for
contributions and provisions, Henry de Blois bishop of Winchester enjoined him
not to molest any passengers that were coming to his fair at Winchester, under
pain of excommunication. Omnibus ad FERIAM MEAM ve^^entibus, etc. MSS.
Dodsworth. vol. 89. f. 76. Bibl. Bodl. This was in king Stephen's reign. In
that of Richard the first, in the year 1194, the king grants to Portsmouth a
fair lasting for ^^fteen days, with all the privileges of Saint Giles's fair at
Winchester. Anders. Hist. Com. i. 197. In the year 1234, the eighteenth of
Henry the second, the fermier of the city of Winchester paid twenty pounds to
Ailward chamberlain of Winchester castle, to buy a robe at this fair for the
king's son, and diverse silver implements for a chapel in the castle. Madox,
Exch. p. 251. It appears from a curious record now remaining, containing The
Estab^ishment and Expenses of the household of Henry Percy, fifth earl of
Northumberland, in the year 1512, and printed by doctor Percy, that the stores
of his lordship's house at Wresille, for the whole year, were laid in from
fairs. "He that stands charged with my lords house for the houll yeir, if he
may possible, shall be at all FAIRES where the groice emptions shall be boughte
for the house for the houlle yeire, as wine, wax, beiffes, multons, wheite, and
maltie." p. 407. This last quotation is a proof, that fairs still continued to
be the principal marts for purchasing necessaries in large quantities, which
now are supplied by frequent trading towns: and the mention of beiffes and
^ultons, which were salted oxen and sheep, shows that at so late a period they
knew but little of breeding cattle. Their ignorance of so important an article
of husbandry, is also an evidence, that in the reign of Henry the eighth the
state of population was much lower among us than we may imagine.

In the statutes of Saint Mary Ottery's college in Devonshire, given by bishop
Grandison the founder, the stewards and sacrist are ordered to purch^se
annually two hundred pounds of wax for the choir of the college, at this fair.
"Cap. lxvii. -- Pro luminaribus vero omnibus supradictis inveniendis, etiam
statuimus, quod senescalli scaccarii per visum et auxilium sacriste, omni anno,
in NUNDINIS WYNTON, vel alibi apud Toryngton et in partibus Barnstepol, ceram
sufficientem, quam ad ducentas libras aestimamus pro uno anno ad minus, faciant
provideri." These statutes were granted in the year 1338. MS. apud Registr.
Priorat. S. Swithin. Winton. In Archiv. Wolves. In the accounts of the Priories
of Maxtoke in Warwickshire, and of Bicester in Oxfordshire, under the reign of
Henry the sixth, the monks appear to have laid in yearly stores of various yet
common necessaries, at the fair of Sturbridge in Cambridgeshire, at least one
hundred miles distant from either monastery. It may seem surprising, that their
own neighborhood, including the cities of Oxford and Coventry, could not
supply them with commodities neither rare nor costly, which they thus fetched
at a considerable expense of carriage. It is a rubric in some o^ the monastic
rules, De Euntibus ad Nundinas. See Dugd. Mon. Angl. ii. p. 746. It is hoped
the reader will excuse this tedious note, which at least developes ancient
manners and customs.


I went to the fair
With mani manner merchandise, as mi master me hight. --
Than drove I me among drapers my donet Lesson. Properly a Grammar, from Aelius
Donatus the grammarian. Chaucer, Testam. L. p. 504. b. edit. Urr. "No passe^ to
virtues of this Margarite, but therein al my donet can I learn." In the statutes
of Winchester-college, [written about 1386,] grammar is called "Antiquus
donatus," i. e. the old donat, or the name of a system of grammar at that time
in vogue, and long before. The French have a book entitled " LE DONNET, traite
de grammaire, baille a feu roi Charles viii." Among Rawlinson's manuscripts at
Oxford, I have seen Donatus optimus noviter compilatus, a manuscript on vellom,
given to Saint Alban's, by John Stoke, abbot, in 1450. In the introduction, or
little Proheme, to Dean Colet's GRAMMATICES RUDIMENTA, we find mention made of
"certain introducyons into latin speech called Donates, etc." Among the books
written by bishop Pecock, there is the DONAT into christian religion, and the
Follower to the DONAT. Lewis's PECOCK, p. 317. I think I have before observed,
that John of Basing, who flourished in the year 1240, calls his Greek Grammar
DONATUS GRAECORUM. Pegge's WESEHAM, p. 51. Wynkyn de Word printed DONATUS ad
Anglicanarum scholarum usum. Cotgrave (in V.) quotes an old French proverb, "
Les diables estoient encores a leur DONAT, The devils were but yet in their
grammar."
to learn.
To draw the lyfer along, the longer it seemed
Among the rich rays, etc fol. xxiii. a. b.
.
Our author, who probably could not get preferment, thus inveighs against the
luxury and diversions of the prelates of his age.

And now is religion a rider, a romer by the street,
A leader of lovedayes Levadies. Ladies.
and a loud Lewd.
b^ggar,
A prick^r on a palfrey from manner to manner,
An heap of hound^s at his arse as he a lord were Walter de Suffield, bishop
of Norwich, bequeathes by will his pack of hounds to the king, in 1256.
Blome^ield's Norf. ii. 347. See Chauc^r's Monk, Prol. v. 165. This was a
common topic of satire. It occurs again, fol. xxvii. a. See Chaucer's TESTAMENT
OF LOVE, p. 492. col. ii. Urr. The archd^acon o^ Ri^hmond, on his visitation,
com^s to the pricr^ of Bridlington in Yorkshire, in 1216, with nin^tys^ven
horses, twenty-on^ dogs, and three hawks, Dugd. Mon. ii. 65.
.
And if but his knave knele, that shall his cope bring,
He loured on him, and asked who taught him curtesye Fol. l. a. The following
prediction, although a probable conclusion, concerning a king, who after a time
would suppress the rel^gious houses, is remarkable. I imagined it was foisted
into the copies, in the reign of king Henry the eighth. But it is in
manuscripts of this poem older than the year 1400. fol. l. a. b. And THERE SHALL
COME A KING, and confess your religions,
And beat you as the bible tells, for breking of your rule:
And amend moniales, monks and chanoines. --
And then ^ri^rs in her freytor shall find a key
Of Constantynes coffers, in which is the catal
That Gregory's godchyldren had it dispended.
And than shall the abot of Abingdon, and all his issue for ever,
HAVE a KNOCK of a KING, and INCURABLE THE WOUND.
Again, fol. lxxxv. a. Where he alludes to the knights-templers, lately
suppressed. -- Men of holy kirk
Shall turn as templars did, the time approaches nere.
This, I suppose, was a favorite doctrine in Wickliffe's discourses. I cannot
help taking notice of a passage in Piers Plowman, which shows how the reigning
passion for chivalry infected the ideas and expressions of the writers of this
period. The poet is describing the crucifixion, and speaking of the person who
pierced our Savior's side with a spear. This person our author calls a knight,
and says that he came forth, "with his spear in hand, and j^sted with Jesus."
Afterward for doing so base an act as that of wounding a dead body, he is
pronounced a disgrace to knighthood: and our "Champion chevaler c^^^se knight"
is ordered to yield himself recreant. fol. lxxxviii. b. This knight's name is
Longis, and he is blind: but receives his sight from the blood which springs
from our Savior's side. This miracle is recorded in the GOLDEN LEGENDE. He is
called Longias, "A blind knight men ycallid Longias," in Chaucer, Lam. Mar.
Magd. v. 177.
.
There is great picturesque humor in the following lines.

HUNGER in hest tho hent wastour by the maw,
And wrong him so by the womb that both his eyes watered:
He buffeted the breton about the chekes
That he looked like a lantern al his life after fol. xxiii. b.
.
And in the following, where the Vices are represented as converted and coming
to confession, among which is the figure of Envy.

Of a freres froke were the fore sleves,
And as a l^ke that has lied long in the sun
So looked he with lean chekes, lowering foul ^^l. xlii. a.
.
It would be tedious to transcribe other strokes of humor with which this poem
abounds. Before one of the Visions the poet falls asleep while he is bidding
his beads. ^n another he describes Antichrist, whose banner is borne by Pride,
as welcomed into a monastery with ringing of bells, and a solemn congratulatory
procession of all the monks marching out to meet and receive him f^l. cxii. a.
.

These images of mercy and truth are in a different strain.

Out of the west cost, a wenche as me thought,
Come walking in the way, to hevnward she looked;
Mercy hight that maid, a meke thing withal,
A full benign bird, and buxome of speech;
Her sister, as yt seemed, came worthily walking,
Even out of theste, and westward she looked,
A full comely creature, Truth she hight,
For the virtue that her followed afered was she never.
When these maidens met, Mercy and Truth,
Either asked other of this great marvel,
Of the din and of the darkness, etc fol. lxxxviii. b.
.
The imagery of Nature, or KIND, sending forth his diseases from the planets,
at the command of CONSCIENCE, and of his attendants AGE and DEATH, is conceived
with sublimity.

KIND CONSCIENCE then heard, and came out of the planetts,
And sent forth his forriours Fevers, and Fluxes,
Coughes, and Cardiacles, Crampes, and Toth-aches,
Reumes, and Radgondes, and raynous Scalles,
Byles, and Botches, and burning Agues,
Freneses and foul Evil, foragers of KIND!
There was "Harowe! and Help! here comes KIND!
"With Death that is dreadful, to undo us all!"
The lord that lyveth after lust tho aloud cried. --
Age the hoore, he was in the vaw-ward,
And bare the banner before Death: by right he it claimed.
KIND came after, with many kene sores,
As Pockes and Pestilences, and much people shent.
So KIND through corruptions, killed full many:
DEATH came dryvyng after, and all to dust pashed
Kings and Kaysers, knights and popes.
Many a lovely lady, and lemman of knights,
Swoned and swelted for sorrow of DEATH'S dyntes.
CONSCIENCE, of his curtesye, to KIND he besoght
To cease and sufire, and se where they would
Leave Pride prively, and be perfect christen,
And KIND ceased tho, to see the people amend fol. cxiii. a.
.
These lines at least put us in mind of Milton's Lazarhouse Par. L. ii. 475.
.

..... Immediately a place
Before his eyes appeared, sad, noisome, dark:
A lazar-house it seemed, wherein were laid
Numbers of all diseased: all maladies
Of ghastly spasm, or racking torture, qualms
Of heart-sick agony, all feverous kinds,
Convulsions, epilepsies, fierce catarrhs,
Intestine stone, and ulcer, cholic pangs,
Demoniac phrenzy, moping melancholy,
And moon-struck madness, pining atrophy,
Marasmus, and wide-wasting Pestilence:
Dropsies and asthma, and joint-racking rheum.
Dire was the Tossing! Deep the groans! DESPAIR
Tended the sick, busy from couch to couch;
And over them triumphant DEATH his dart
Shook, but delayed to strike, etc.
At length FORTUNE or PRIDE sends forth a numerous army led by LUST, to attack
CONSCIENCE.

And gadered a great host, all again CONSCIENCE:
This LECHERY led on, with a laughyng chere,
And with a privye speech, and painted words,
And armed him in idleness and in high bearyng.
He bare a bow in his hand, and many bloody arrows,
Were fethered with fair behest, and many a false truth Ibid.
.
Afterward CONSCIENCE is besieged by Antichrist, and seven great giants, who
are the seven capital or deadly sins: and the assault is made by SLOTH, who
conducts an army of more than a thousand prelates.

It is not improbable, that Longland here had his eye on the old French ROMAN
D' ANTECHRIST, a poem written by Huon de Meri, about the year 1228. The author
of this piece supposes that Antichrist is on earth, that he visits every
profession and order of life, and finds numerous partisans. The VICES arrange
themselves under the banner of ANTECHRIST, and the VIRTUES under that of
CHRIST. These two armies at length come to an engagement, and the battle ends
to the honor of the Virtues, and the total defeat of the Vices. The BANNER OF
ANTICHRIST has before occurred in our quotations from Longland. The title of
Huon de Meri's poem deserves notice. It is TURNOYEMENT DE L' ANTECHRIST. These
are the concluding lines.

Par son droit nom a peau cet livre
Qui tresbien s' avorde a l' escrit
Le Tournoiement de l' Antechrist.
The author appears to have been a monk of St. Germain des Pres, near Paris.
This allegory is much like that which we find in the old dramatic MORALITIES.
The theology of the middle ages abounded with conjectures and controversies
concerning Antichrist, who at a very early period was commonly believed to be
the Roman pontiff See this topic discussed with singular penetration and
perspicuity, by doctor Hurd, in TWELVE SERMONS INTRODUCTORY TO THE STUDY OF THE
PROPHECIES. Land. 1772. p. 206. seq.
.

SECT. IX.
TO the VISION OF PIERCE PLOWMAN has been commonly annexed a poem called PIERCE
THE PLOWMAN'S CREED, and which may properly be considered as its appendage The
first edition is by R. Wolf, London, 1553. 4to. In four sheets. It was
reprinted, and added to Rogers's, or the fourth edition of the Vision, 1561. It
was evidently written after the year 1384. Wickliffe died in that year, and he
is mentioned as no longer living in Signat. C. ii. edit. 1561. Walter Britte or
Brit^e, a follower of Wickliffe, is also mentioned, Signat. C. iii. Britte is
placed by Bale in 1390. Cent. vi. 94. See also Fuller's Worth. p. 8. Wales. The
reader will pardon this small anticipation for the sake of connection.
. It is professedly written in imitation of our VISION, but by a different
hand. The author, in the character of a plain uninformed person, pretends to be
ignorant of his creed; to be instructed in the articles of which, he applies by
turns to the four orders of mendicant friars. This circumstance affords an
obvious occasion of exposing in lively colors the tricks of those societies.
After so unexpected a disappointment, he meets one Pierce, or Peter, a plowman,
who resolves his doubts, and teaches him the principles of true religion. In a
copy of the CREED lately presented to me by the bishop of Gloucester, and once
belonging to Mr. Pope, the latter in his own hand has inserted the following
abstract of its plan. "An ignorant plain man having learned his Paternoster
and Ave-mary, wants to learn his creed. He asks several religious men of the
several orders to teach it him. First of a friar Minor, who bids him beware of
the Carmelites, and assures him they can teach him nothing, describing their
faults, etc. But that the friars Minors shall save him, whether he learns his
creed or not. He goes next to the friars Preachers, whose magnificent monastery
he describes: there he meets a fat friar, who declaims against the Augustines.
He is shocked at his pride, and goes to the Augustines. They rail at the
Minorites. He goes to the Carmes; they abuse the Dominicans, but promise him
salvation, without the creed, for money. He leaves them with indignation, and
finds an honest poor PLOWMAN in the field, and tells him how he was
disappointed by the four orders. The plowman answers with a long invective
against them."

The language of the CREED is less embarrassed and obscure than that of the
VISION. But before I proceed to a specimen, it may not be perhaps improper to
prepare the reader, by giving an outline of the constitution and character of
the four orders of mendicant friars, the object of our poet's satire: an
enquiry in many respects connected with the general purport of this history,
and which, in this place at least, cannot be deemed a digression, as it will
illustrate the main subject, and explain many particular passages, of the
PLOWMAN'S CREED And of some perhaps quoted above from the VISION.
.

Long before the thirteenth century, the monastic orders, as we have partly
seen in the preceding poem, in consequence of their ample revenues, had
degenerated from their primitive austerity, and were totally given up to luxury
and indolence. Hence they became both unwilling and unable to execute the
purposes of their establishment: to instruct the people, to check the growth of
heresies, or to promote in any respect the true interests of the church. They
forsook all their religious obligations, despised the authority of their
superiors, and were abandoned without shame or remorse to every species of
dissipation and licentiousness. About the beginning therefore of the thirteenth
century, the condition and circumstances of the church rendered it absolutely
necessary to remedy these evils, by introducing a new order of religious, who
being destitute of fixed possessions, by the severity of their manners, a
professed contempt of riches, and an unwearied perseverance in the duties of
preaching and prayer, might restore respect to the monastic institution, and
recover the honors of the church. These were the four orders of mendicant or
begging friars, commonly denominated the Franciscans, the Dominicans, the
Carmelites, and the Augustines The Franciscans were often styled friars-minors,
or minorites, and greyfriars: the Dominicans, friars-preachers, and sometimes
black-friars: The Carmelites white-friars; and the Austins greyfriars. The
first establishment of the Dominicans in England was at Oxford in 1221. Of the
Franciscans at Canterbury. These two were the most eminent of the four orders.
The Dominican friary at Oxford stood in an island on the south of the city,
south-west of the Franciscan friary, the site of which is hereafter described.
.

These societies soon surpassed all the rest, not only in the purity of their
lives, but in the number of their privileges, and the multitude of their
members. Not to mention the success which attends all novelties, their
reputation arose quickly to an amazing height. The popes, among other uncommon
immunities, allowed them the liberty of traveling wherever they pleased, of
conversing with persons of all ranks, of instructing the youth and the people
in general, and of hearing confessions, without reserve or restriction: and as
on these occasions, which gave them opportunities of appearing in public and
conspicuous situations, they exhibited more striking marks of gravity and
sanctity than were observable in the deportment and conduct of the members of
other monasteries, they were regarded with the highest esteem and veneration
throughout all the countries of Europe.

In the mean time they gained still greater respect, by cultivating the
literature then in vogue, with the greatest assiduity and success. Gianoni
says, that most of the theological professors in the university of Naples,
newly founded in the year 1220, were chosen from the mendicants Hist. Nap. xvi.
3.
. They were the principal teachers of theology at Paris, the school where this
science had received its origin See Boul. Hist. Academ. Paris. iii. p. 138.
240. 244. 248, etc.
. At Oxford and Cambridge respectively, all the four orders had flourishing
monasteries. The most learned scholars in the university of Oxford, at the
close of the thirteenth century, were Franciscan friars: and long after this
period, the Franciscans appear to have been the sole support and ornament of
that university This circumstance in some degree roused the monks from their
indolence, and induced the greater monasteries to procure the foundation of
small colleges in the universities for the education of their novices. At
Oxford the monks had also schools which bore the name of their respective
orders: and there were schools in that university which were appropriated to
particular monasteries. Kennet's Paroch. Ant. p. 214. Wood, Hist. Ant. Univ.
Oxon. i. 119. Leland says, that even in his time, ^t Stamford, a temporary
university, the names of halls inhabited by the novices of Peterborough,
Sempringham, and Vauldrey abbeys, were remaining. Itin. vi. p. 21. And it
appears, that the greater part of the proceeders in theology at Oxford and
Cambridge, just before the reformation, were monks. But we do not find, that in
consequence of all these efforts, the monks made a much greater figure in
literature.

In this rivalry which subsisted between the mendicants and the monks, the
latter sometimes availed themselves of their riches: and with a view to attract
popularity, and to eclipse the growing luster of the former, proceeded to their
degrees in the universities with prodigious parade. In the year 1298, William
de Brook, a Benedictine of Saint Peter's abbey at Gloucester, took the degree
of doctor in divinity at Oxford. He was attended on this important occasion by
the abbot and whole convent of Gloucester, the abbots of Westminster, Reading,
Abingdon, Evesham, and Malmesbury, with one hundred noblemen and esquires, on
horses richly caparisoned. These were entertained at a sumptuous feast in the
refectory of Gloucester college. But it should be observed, that he was the
first of the Benedictine order that attained this dignity. Wood, Hist. Ant.
Univ. Oxon. i. 25. col. 1. See also Stevens, Mon. 1. 70.


. Hence it was that bishop Hugh de Balsham, founder of Peter-house at
Cambridge, orders in his statutes given about the year 1280, that some of his
scholars should annually repair to Oxford for improvement in the sciences "De
scholaribus emittendis ad universitatem Oxonie pro doctrina." Cap. xviii.
. That is, to study under the Franciscan readers. Such was the eminence of the
Franciscan friary at Oxford, that the learned bishop Grosthead, in the year
1253, bequeathed all his books to that celebrated seminary Leland. Script.
Brit. p. 283. This house stood just without the city walls, near Little-gate.
The garden called Paradise was their grove or orchard.
. This was the house in which the renowned Roger Bacon was educated; who
revived, in the midst of barbarism, and brought to a considerable degree of
perfection the knowledge of mathematics in England, and greatly facilitated
many modern discoveries in experimental philosophy It is probable, that the
treatises of many of Bacon's scholars and followers, collected by Thomas Allen
in the reign of James the first, still remain among the manuscripts of Sir
Kenelm Digby in the Bodleian library.
. The same fraternity is likewise said to have stored their valuable library
with a multitude of Hebrew manuscrips, which they purchased of the Jews on
their banishment from England Wood, ubi supr. 1. 77. col. 2.
. Richard de Bury, bishop of Durham, author of PHILOBIBLON, and the founder of
a library at Oxford, is prolix in his praises of the mendicants for their
extraordinary diligence in collecting books Philobibl. cap. v. This book was
written, 1344.
. Indeed it became difficult in the beginning of the fourteenth century to find
any treatise in the arts, theology, or canon law, commonly exposed to sale:
they were all universally bought up by the friars Yet I find a decree made at
Oxford, where these orders of friars flourished so greatly, in the year 1373,
to check the excessive multitude of persons selling books in the university
without license. Vet. Stat. Univ. Oxon. D. fol. 75. Archiv. Bodl.
. This is mentioned by Richard Fitzralph, archbishop of Armagh, in his
discourse before the pope at Avignon in 1357, their bitter and professed
antagonist; who adds, without any intention of paying them a compliment, that
all the mendicant convents were furnished with a "grandis et nobilis libraria
MSS. Bibl. Bodl. Propositio coram papa, etc. And MSS. C. C. C. Oxon. 182.
Propositio coram, etc. S^e a translation of this Sermon by Trevisa, MSS. Harl.
1900. fol. Pergam. 2. See f. 11. See also Browne's append. Fascic. Rer.
expetend. fugiend. ii. p. 466. I believe this discourse has been printed twice
or thrice at Paris. In which, says the archbishop, there were thirty thousand
scholars at Oxford in my youth, but now (1357,) scarce six thousand. At Bennet
in Cambridge, there is a curious manuscript of one of Fitzrauf's Sermons, in
the first leaf of which there is a drawing of four devils, hugging four
mendi^ant friars, one of each of the four orders, with great familiarity and
affection. MSS. L. 16. This book belonged to Adam Eston, a very learned
Benedictine of Norwich, and a witness against Wickliffe at Rome, where he lived
the greatest part of his life, in 1370.
." Sir Richard Whittington built the library of the Gray Friars in London,
which was one hundred and twenty-nine feet long, and twelve broad, with
twenty-eight desks Stowe's Surv. Land. p. 255. edit. 1599.
. About the year 1430, one hundred marks were paid for transcribing the
profound Nicholas de Lyra, in two volumes, to be chained in this library Stowe,
ibid. p. 256. Stevens, Monast. i. 112.
. Leland relates, that John Wallden, a learned Carmelite, bequeathed to the
same library as many manuscripts of approved authors, written in capital roman
characters, as were then estimated at more than two thousand pieces of gold
Aurei.
. He adds, that this library, even in his time, exceeded all others in London
for multitude of books and antiquity of copies Script. Brit. p. 441. And
Collectan. iii. p. 52.
. Among many other instances which might be given of the learning of the
mendicants, there is one which greatly contributed to establish their literary
character. In the eleventh century, Aristotle's philosophy had been condemned
in the university of Paris as heretical. About a hundred years afterward,
these prejudices began to subside; and new translations of Aristotle's writings
were published in Latin by our countryman Michael Scotus, and others, with more
attention to the original Greek, at least without the pompous and perplexed
circumlocutions which appeared in the Arabic versions hitherto used. In the
mean time the mendicant orders sprung up: who happily availing themselves of
these new translations, and making them the constant subject of their
scholastic lectures, were the first who revived the doctrines of this
philosopher, and acquired the merit of having opened a new system of science
See Joann. Laun. de varia Aristotel. Fortun. in Acad. Paris. p. 78. edit.
Paris. 1662.
. The Dominicans of Spain were accomplished adepts in the learning and language
of the Arabians; and were employed by the kings of Spain in the instruction and
conversion of the numerous Jews and Saracens who resided in their dominions R.
Simon's Let. Choif. tom. iii. p. 112. They studied the arts of popular
entertainment. The mendi^ants, I believe, were the only religious in England
who acted pl^ys. The CREATION OF THE WORLD, annually performed by the Gray
sriars at Coventry, is still extant. See supr. p. 92. 243. And they seem to
have been famous abroad for these exhibitions. Gualva^ei de la Flamma, who
flourished about the year 1340, has the following curious passage in his
chronicle of the VICECOMITES of Milan, publi^hed by Muratori. In the year 1336,
says he, on the feast of Epiph^ny, the first feast of the three kings was
celebrated at Milan, by the convent of the friars preachers. The three kings
appeared crowned on three great horses, r^chly habited, surrounded by pages,
body-guards, and an innumerable retinue. A golden star was exhibited in the
sky, going before them. They proceeded to the pillars of S. Lawrence, where
king H^rod was represented with his s^ribes and wisemen. The three kings ask
Herod where Christ should be born: and his wisemen having consulted their
books, answer him at Bethlehem. On which, the three kings with their golden
crowns, having in their hands golden cups filled with frankincense, myrrh, and
gold, the star still going before, marched to the church of S. Eustorgius, with
all their attendants; preceeded by trumpets and horns, apes, baboons, and a
great variety of animals. In the church, on one side of the high altar, there
was a manger with an ox and an ass, and in it the infant Christ in the arms of
his mother. Here the three kings offer their gifts, etc. The concourse of the
people, of knights, ladi^s, and ec^l^^iastics, was such as never before was
beheld, etc. Rer. Italic. S^riptor. tom. xii. col. 1017. D. fol. Mediolan.
1728. Compare p. 249. supr. This feast in the ritual is called ^ he feast of
the Star. Joann. Episcop. Abrin^. de Offic. Eccl. p. 30.
.

The buildings of the mendicant monasteries, especially in England, were
remarkably magnificent, and commonly much exceeded those of the endowed
convents of the second magnitude. As these fraternities were professedly poor,
and could not from their original institution receive estates, the munificence
of their benefactors was employed in adorning their houses with stately
refectories and churches: and for these and other purposes they did nor want
address to procure multitudes of patrons, which was facilitated by the notion
of their superior sanctity. It was fashionable for persons of the highest rank
to bequeath their bodies to be buried in the friary churches, which were
consequently filled with sumptuous shrines and superb monuments Their churches
were esteemed more sacred than others.
. In the noble church of the Gray friars in London, finished in the year 1325,
but long since destroyed, four queens, besides upwards of six hundred persons
of quality, were buried, whose beautiful tombs remained till the dissolution
Weav. Fun. Mon. p. 388.
. These interments imported considerable sums of money into the mendicant
societies. It is probable that they derived more benefit from casual charity,
than they would have gained from a regular endowment. The Franciscans indeed
enjoyed from the popes the privilege of distributing indulgences, a valuable
indemnification for their voluntary poverty See Baluz. Miscellan. tom. iv. 490.
vii. 392.
.

On the whole, two of these mendicant institutions, the Dominicans and the
Franciscans, for the space of near three centuries, appear to have governed the
European church and state with an absolute and universal sway: they filled,
during that period, the most eminent ecclesiastical and civil stations, taught
in the universities with an authority which silenced all opposition, and
maintained the disputed prerogative of the Roman pontiff against the united
influence of prelates and kings, with a vigor only to be paralleled by its
success. The Dominicans and Franciscans were, before the Reformation, exactly
what the Jesuits have been since. They disregarded their monastic character and
profession, and were employed, not only in spiritual matters, but in temporal
affairs of the greatest consequence; in composing the differences of princes,
concluding treaties of peace, and concerting alliances: they presided in
cabinet councils, levied national subsidies, influenced courts, and managed the
machines of every important operation and event, both in the religious and
political world.

From what has been here said it is natural to suppose, that the mendicants at
length became universally odious. The high esteem in which they were held, and
the transcendent degree of authority which they had assumed, only served to
render them obnoxious to the clergy of every rank, to the monasteries of other
orders, and to the universities. It was not from ignorance, but from a
knowledge of mankind, that they were active in propagating superstitious
notions, which they knew were calculated to captivate the multitude, and to
strengthen the papal interest; yet at the same time, from the vanity of
displaying an uncommon sagacity of thought, and a superior skill in theology,
they affected novelties in doctrine, which introduced dangerous errors, and
tended to shake the pillars of orthodoxy. Their ambition was unbounded, and
their arrogance intolerable. Their increasing numbers became, in many states,
an enormous and unweildy burden to the commonwealth. They had abused the
powers and privileges which had been entrusted to them; and the common sense of
mankind could not long be blinded or deluded by the palpable frauds and
artifices, which these rapacious zealots so notoriously practiced for enriching
their convents. In England, the university of Oxford resolutely resisted the
perpetual encroachments of the Dominicans Wood, ut supr. i. 150. 154. 196.
; and many of our theologists attacked all the four orders with great vehemence
and severity. Exclusive of the jealousies and animosities which naturally
subsisted between four rival institutions, their visionary refinements, and
love of disputation, introduced among them the most violent dissensions. The
Dominicans aimed at popularity, by an obstinate denial of the immaculate
conception. Their pretended sanctity became at length a term of reproach, and
their learning fell into discredit. As polite letters and general knowledge
increased, their speculative and pedantic divinity gave way to a more liberal
turn of thinking, and a more perspicuous mode of writing. Bale, who was himself
a Carmelite friar, says, that his order, which was eminently distinguished for
scholastic erudition, began to lose their estimation about the year 1460. Some
of them were imprudent enough to engage openly in political controversy; and
the Augustines destroyed all their repute and authority in England by seditious
sermons, in which they labored ^o supplant the progeny of Edward the fourth,
and to establish the title of the usurper Richard Newcourt, Repert. i. 289.
. About the year 1530, Leland visited the Franciscan friary at Oxford, big with
the hopes of finding, in their celebrated library, if not many valuable books,
at least those which had been bequeathed by the learned bishop Grosthead. The
delays and difficulties with which he procured admittance into this venerable
repository, heightened his curiosity and expectations. At length, after much
ceremony, being permitted to enter, instead of an inestimable treasure, he saw
little more than empty shelves covered with cobwebs and dust Leland describes
this adventure with some humor. "Contigit ut copiam peterem videndi
bibliothecam Franciscanorum, ad quod obstreperunt asini aliquot, rudentes nulli
prorsus mortalium tam sanctos aditus et recessus adire, nisi Gardiano ^et
sacris sui collegii baccalariis. Sed ego urgebam, et principis diplomate
munitus, tantum non coegi ut sacraria illa aperirent. Tum unus e majoribus
asinis multa subrudens tandem fores aegre reseravit. Sum Jupiter quid ego
illic inveni? Pulverem autem inveni, telas aranearum, tineas, blattas, situm
denique et squallorem. Inveni etiam et libros, sed quos tribus obolis non
emerem." Script. Brit. p. 286.
.

After so prolix an introduction, I cannot but give a large quotation from our
CREED, the humor and tendency of which will now be easily understood: and
especially as this poem is not only extremely scarce, and has almost the rarity
of a manuscript, but as it is so curious and lively a picture of an order of
men who once made so conspicuous a figure in the world.

For first I frayned Asked.
the freres, and they me full tolden,
That all the fruit of the faith, was in her four orders,
And the cofres of christendom, and the keie bothen
And the lock of byleve Belief.
, lies locken in her hondes
Then wennede Thought.
, I to wit, and with a whight I met
A Minoure in amorwetide, and to this man I said,
Sir for great gods love, the graith Truth.
thou me tell,
Of what myddel erde man might I best learn
My creed, for I can it naught, my care is the more,
And therefore for Christ's love, thy counseyl I preie,
A Carme Carmelite.
me has ycovenant, ye need me to teache.
But for thou know Carmes well, thy counsel I ask.
This Minour looked on me, and laughyng he said
Leve christen man, I leve Believe.
that thou mad.
Whough should they teache the God, that con non hemselve?
They ben but jugulers, and japers of kind,
Lorels and lechures, and lemans holden,
Neither in order ne out but unneth lybbeth Deceives.
,
And byjapeth the folk with gestes Legends.
of Rome.
It is but a faint folk, yfounded up on japes,
They makes hem Mary's men The Carmelites, sometimes called the brethren of
the Blessed Virgin, were fond of boasting their familiar intercourse with the
Virgin Mary. Among other things, they pretended that the Virgin assumed the
Carmelite habit and profession: and that she appeared to Simon Sturckius,
general of their order, in the thirteenth century, and gave him a solemn
promise, that the souls of those christians who died with the Carmelite
scapulary upon their shoulders should infallibly escape damnation.
, and so they men tellen.
And leieth on our lady many a long tale.
And that wicked folk wymmen betraieth,
And begileth hem of her good with glavering words.
And there Their.
with holden her house in harlotes warkes.
And so save me God I hold it great sin,
To gyven hem any good, swiche glotones to find
To maintain swiche manner men the michel good destruieth
Yet Say.
seyn they in her sutiltie, to sottes in towns
They comen out of Carmeli, Christ for to folwen.
And feyneth hem with holiness, the yvele hem bisemeth.
They lyven more in lechery, and lies in her tales,
Than suen Follow.
any good liif, but lurken in her selles,
But wynnen werdliche Wordly.
good, and wasten it in sin,
And gif If.
they couthen Knew.
her creed other on Christ leveden
They weren naught so hardy, swyche harlotri usen,
Sikerli I can naught fynden who hem first founded,
But the foles foundeden hem self freres of the pie,
And maken hem mendyans, and mar the pule.
But what glut of the gomes may any good kachen,
He will kepen it hem self, and cofrene it fast.
And thoigh his felawes fail good, for by he may sterve
Her monei may by quest, and testament maken
And none obedience here, but don as him lust.
And right as Robartes men raken about
At feyres and at full ales, and fyllen the cup I suppose the FRIARS
ROBERTINES, instituted by Robert Flower, hermit of Knaresburgh, in the reign of
king John, a branch of the Trinitarians, who were a branch of the Franciscans.
See Dugd. Mon. ii. 833. And Leland. Itin. i. 82. The poet cannot mean the
Cistercians, founded by Robert, abbot of Molesme in Burgundy.

And precheth al of pardon, to plesen the puple,
But patience is al pased, and put out to ferme
And pride is in her poverty, that litell is to preisen
And at the lullyng of our lady The Carmelites pretended that their order was
originally founded on Mount Carmel where Elias lived: and that their first
convent was placed there, within an ancient church dedicated to the Virgin
Mary, in the year 1121.
, the wymmen to lyken
And miracles of mydwyves, and maken wymmen to wenen
That the lace of our lady smok lights hem of children.
They ne prechen naught of Powel St. Paul.
, ne penance for sin,
But al of merci and mensk Mercy.
, that Marie may helpen.
With stern staves and strong, they overlond straketh,
Thider as here lemans liggeth, and lurketh in towns.
Gray great heded queen's, with gold by the eighe^,
And seyne that her sustern they ben that sojurneth about^,
And thus abouten the gone and gods folk betrayeth,
It is the puple that Powel preched of in his time.
He seyde of swiche folk that so about went
Weeping, I warn you of walkers about,
It beth enemies of the cross that Christ upon tholede.
Swiche slomreers Slumberers.
in sleep slaughte Sloth.
is her end.
And glotonye is her god, with glopping of drink
And gladness in glees, and great joye ymaked
In the shending Destr^ying.
of swiche shall mychel folk lauwghe.
Therefore friend for thy feith fond to don beter,
Leve naught on tho losels, but let hem forth pasen,
For they ben falls in her faith, and feel mo other.
Alas friar, quath I tho, my purpos is yfailed,
Now is my comfort a cast, can ou no bote,
Where I might meten with a man that might me wyssen
For to conne my creed, Christ for to folwen.
Certain felawe, quath the friar, withouten any fail
Of al men upon mold Earth.
we Minorites most shows
The pure aposteles leif, with penance on earth,
And suen Follow.
hem in sanctite, and sufferen well hard.
We haunten not tavernes, ne hobelen Skip. Run.
abouten
At marketes and miracles we medeley us never See supr. p. 236.
.
We houlden Collect. Hide. Possess. Hoard.
no money, but moneliche faren Live like m^nks, like men dedicated to
religion. Or rather, moneyless poor.

And haven hunger at the mete, at ich a mel ones.
We haven forsaken the world, and in woe libbeth Live.

In penance and poverte, and prechethe the puple People.
^
By ensample of our liif, souls to helpen
And in poverte preien, for all our part^neres
That gyveth us any good, God to honouren
Other bell other book, or bred to our food,
Other catel other cloth, to coveren with our bones Either bells, or books, or
bread, or cattle, etc.
:
Money, other money worth, here mede is in hevene
For we builds a burugh A house.
, a brod and a large,
A chirch and a chapitle A chapter house. Capitulum. "May. Might."
, with chaumbers a lofte.
With wide wyndowes ywrought, and walls well heye
That mote ben portreid, and paint and pulched full clean Painted and
beautifully adorned.
.
With gay glitering glass, glowing as the sun,
And If you would help us with your money.
mightestou amenden us with money of thine owen,
Thou should knely before Christ in compass of gold,
In the wide window westward well neigh in the middell Your figure kneeling to
Christ shall be painted in the great west window. This was the way of
representing benefactors in painted glass. See supr. p. 278.
,
And saint Franceis him self, shall fold the in his cope,
And present the to the trinite, and pray for thy sins,
Thy name shall noblich be write and wrought for the nones
And in remembrance of the, praid therefore ever Your name shall be written in
our table of benefactors for whose souls we pray. This was usually hung up in
the church. Or else he means, Written in the windows, in which manner
benefactors were frequently recorded.
,
And brother be thou naught aferd, bythenkin thine heart
Though thou cone Know.
naught thy creed, care thou no more
I shall asoilen Absolve.
the sir, and setten it on my soul.
And thou may maken this good, thenke thou non other.
Sir (I said) in certain I shall gone and asaye,
And he set on me his hond, and asoiled me clean,
And there I parted him fro, withouten any pain,
In covenant that I come again, Christ he me be taught.
Than said I to myself, here seems litel treuthe,
First to blame his brother, and bakbyten him foul,
Ther^ as curteis Christ clerliche said:
Whow might thou in thy brothers eighe a bare mote look
And in thine owen eighe naught a beme toten,
See first on thy self, and sithen on a another,
And cleanse clean thy sight, and keep well thine eighe,
And for another man's eighe, ordeyne after
And also I see coveitise, catel to fongen Take. Receive.
,
That Christ has clerliche forboden Forbidden.
, and clenliche destruede
And said to his sueres Followers.
, for sothe on this wise:
Naught thy neighbors good coveyte in no time.
But charity and chastity, ben chased out clean,
But Christ seide by her fruit, men shall hem full known.
Thannesaide I, certain sir, thou demest full true.
Than thought I to frayne To ask.
the first of this four ordres.
And presed to the Prechoures I hastened to the friars preachers.
, to proven her will.
Ich highed I went to their monastery.
to her house, to harken of more,
And when I came to that court, I gaped about,
Swich a bild bold ybuld upon earth heighte,
Say I naught in certain syththe a long time It is long since I have seen so
fine a building.
.
I Gazed.
seemed upon that house, and yerne Earnestly.
thereon looked,
Whow the pileres weren ypaint and pulchud Polished.
full clean,
And queyntly ycorven, with curious knottes,
With wyndowes well ywrought, wide up alofte,
And than I entered in, and even forth went,
And all was walled that wone House Habitation.
, though it wiid were
With posternes in privite to passen when hem list.
Orcheyardes, and erberes Arbour^.
euesed well clean,
And a curious cross, craftly entayled Carved. See Spenser, ii. 3. 27. 6. 29.
,
With tabernacles ytight to toten To look.
al abouten.
The pris of a ploughlond, of penies so round^,
To aparaile that pyler, were pure litel The price of a carucate of land would
not raise such another building.
,
Than I munte me Went.
forth, the mynstere Church.
to known,
And I saw one.
awayted won, wonderly well ybild,
With arches on everich half, and bellyche Beautifully.
yeorven
With crochetes on corneres, with knottes of gold.
Wide wyndowes ywrought ywriten full thikke With texts, or names.

Shynen That is, coats of arms of benefactors painted in the glass. So in an
ancient roll in verse, exhibiting the descent of the family of the lords of
Clare in Suffolk, pres^rved in the Austin friary at Clare, and written in the
year 1356. Dame Malt, a lady full honorable,
Borne of the Ulsters, as shows ry^e
Her arms of glass in the eastern gable. --
-- So conjoined be
Ulstris arms and Glocestris through and through,
As shewith our Wyndowes in houses three,
Dortur, chapiter-house, and fraitour, which she
Made out the ground both plancher and wall.
Dugdale cites this roll, Mon. Angl. i. p. 535. As does Weaver, who dates it in
1460. Fun. Mon. p. 734. But I could prove this fashion to have been of much
higher antiquity.
with shapen sheldes, to shown about,
With Imagery brought from foreign countries. Mark is used for image in
Chaucer, Frank. T. v. 2426. Urr. Sin mankind is so fair part of thy work.
That thou it madist like to thine own merke.
And Prol. W. B. v. 696. See P. Plowm. Vis. f. 42. a. edit. 1550. These were
ymedel^d between, that is, intermixed, interspersed.
merkes of merchauntes, ymedeled between,
Mo than twenty and two, twyse ynoumbbred;
There is non heraud that has half swich a roll Such a roll.

Right as a rageman has rekned hem new
Tombs upon tabernacles, tylde upon lofte Set up on high.
,
Housed Surrounded with iron rails. Horns seems to be irons.
in horns, hard set abouten Placed very close or thick about the church.

Of armede alabaustre, clad for the nones,
Maad opon marbel in many manner wise
Knights in there conisante In their proper habiliments. In their cognisances,
or surcoats of arms. So again, Signat. C. ii. b.

For though a man in her minstre a mass would heren,
His sight shall also byset on sondrye works,
The pennons, and the poinells, and pointe^ of sheldes
Withdrawn his devotion and dusken his heart.
That is, the banners, achievements, and other armorial ornaments, hanging
over the tombs.


clad for the nones
All it seemed seyntes, ysacred opon earth,
And lovely ladies ywrought, leyen by her sides
In many gay garnemens, that weren gold beten,
Though the tax often year were trewely gadered,
Nolde it naught maken that house, half as I trow.
Than came I to that cloystre, and gaped abouten,
Whough it was pilered and peynt, and portreyd well clean
Alhyled Covered.
with leed, low to the stones,
And ypaved, with poynttyl Point en point is a French phrase for in order,
exactly. This explains the latter part of the line. Or poyntill may mean tiles
in squares or dies, in chequer-work. See Skinner in POINT, and Du Fresne in
PUNCTURA. And then ich POINT after other will be one SQUARE after another. So
late as the reign of Henry the eighth, so magnificent a structure as the
refectory of Christchurch at Oxford was, at its first building, paved with
green and yellow tiles. The whole number was two thousand six hundred, and each
hundred cost three shillings and sixpence. MSS. Br. Twyne, Archiv. Oxon. 8 p.
352. Wolsey's great hall at Hampton Court, evidently built in every respect on
the model of this at Christchurch, was very probably paved in the same manner.
See OBSERVAT. on SPENS. vol. ii.. p. 232.
, ich point after other
With cundites of clean tyn closed al about Spouts. Or channels for conveying
the water into the Lavatory, which was usually placed in the cloister.
,
With lavoures of lattin Laten, a metal so called.
, loveliche ygreithed Prepared. Adorned.

I trow the gaynage of the ground, in a great shyre
Nold aparaile that place, oo point till other end From one end to the other.
.
Thane was the chapitre house wrought as a greet chirch
Corven and covered, ant queytelyche entayled The chapter house was
magnificently constructed in the style of church-architecture, finely vaulted,
and richly carved.

With semliche selure yseet on lofte A seemly cieling, or roof, very lofty.

As a parliament house ypeynted about That they painted the walls of rooms,
before tapestry became fashionable, I have before given instances, OBSERVAT.
SPENS. vol. ii.. p. 232. I will here add other proofs. In an old French romance
on the MIRACLES OF THE VIRGIN, live. i. Carpent. Suppl. Lat. Gl. Du Cang. V.
LAMBROISSARE. Lors moustiers tiennent ors et sals,
Et lor cambres, et lor grans sales,
Font lambroissier, paindre, et pourtraire.
Gervasius Dorobernensis, in his account of the burning of Canterbury Cathedral
in the year 1174, says, that not only the beam-work was destroyed, but the
cieling underneath it, or concameration called coelum, being of wood
beautifully painted, was also consumed. "Coelum inferius ^gregie depictum,
etc." p. 1289. Dec. Script. Land. 1652. And Stubbes, Actus Pontif.
Eborac^nsium, says, that arch bishop Aldred, about 1060, built the whole church
of York from the Presbytery to the Tower, and "superius opere pictorio quod
Coelum vocant auro multi^ormiter intermixto, mirabili art construxit." p.
1704. Dec. Script. ut supr. There are many instances in the pipe-rolls, not yet
printed. The roof of the church of Cassino in Italy is ordered to be painted in
1349, like that of St. John Lateran at Rome. Hist. Cassin. tom. ii. p. 545.
col. 1. Dugdale has printed an ancient French record, by which it appears that
there was a hall in the castle of Dover called Arthur's hall, and a chamber
called Geneura's chamber. Monast. ii. 2. I suppose, because the walls of these
apartments were respectively adorned with paintings of each. Geneura is
Arthur's queen. In the pipe-rolls of Henry the third we have this notice, A. D.
1259. "Infra portam castri et birbecanam, etc. ab exitu CAMERAE ROSAMUNDAE
usque capellam sancti Thomae in Castro Wynton." Rot. Pip. Henr. iii. an. 43.
This I once supposed to be a chamber in Winchester castle, so called because it
was painted with the figure or some history of fair Rosamond. But a
ROSAMUND-CHAMBER was a common apartment in the royal castles, perhaps in
imitation of her BOWER at Woodstock, literally nothing more than a chamber,
which yet was curiously constructed and decorated, at least in memory of it.
The old prose paraphrast of the Chronicle of Robert of Gloucester says, "BOURES
had the Rosamonde a bout in Engelonde, which this king [Hen. ii.] for her
sake made: at Waltham bishope's, in the castelle of Wynchester, at park of
Fremantel, at Marteleston, at Woodestoke, and other feel [many] places."
Chron. edit. Hearne, 479. This passage indeed seems to imply, that Henry the
second himself provided for his fair concubine a BOWER, or chamber of peculiar
construction, not only at Woodstock, but in all the royal palaces; which, as
may be concluded from the pipe-roll just cited, was called by her name. Leland
says, that in the stately castle of Pickering in Yorkshire, "in the first court
be a ^oure Toures, of the which one is caullid R^samundes Toure." Itin. fol.
71. Probably because it contained one of these bowers or chambers. Or, perhaps
we should read ROSAMUNDES BOURE. Compare Walpole's Ane^d. Paint. i. p. 10. 11.
.
Thanne ferd I into fraytoure Fratry.
, and fond there a another,
An halle for an high king, an household to holden,
With brod bordes abouten, ybenched well clean,
With wyndowes of glass, wrought as a church A series of stately Gothic
windows.
.
Than walkede I ferrer Further.
, and went al abouten
And seigh Saw.
halles full heygh, and houses full noble,
Chambres with chymneys, and chapels gaye,
And kychenes for an high king, in castles to holden,
And her dortoure Dormitory.
ydight, with doors full strong
Fermerye and fraitur Infirmary, etc.
, with feel mo houses Many other apartments.

And al strong ston wall stern opon heithe
With gaye garites, and great, and iche hole glased.
And other houses ynowe, to hereberwe the queen To lodge the qu^en.
,
And yet these bilderes wiln beggen a bag full of whete
Of a pure poor man, that may onethe pay Scarcely.

Half his rent in a year, and half ben byhynde.
Than turned I apen when I had al ytoted Observed.

And fond in a freitoure a friar on a benche,
A greet chorl and a grym, grown as a tonne,
With a face so fat, as a full bleddere Bladder.
,
Blown bretful of breath, and as a bag honged.
On bothen his chekes, and his chyn, with a chol lollede
So greet a gos ey, grown al of greece.
That al wagged his fleish, as a quick mire Quag-mire.
,
His cope Covered.
that biclypped him, well clean was it folden
Of double worstede ydyght, down to the hele.
His kyrtel of clean whiit, clenlyche ysewed
Hit was good ynow of ground, greyn for to baren.
I haylsede that thirdman, and hendliche I said,
Good sire for gods love, can on me graith tellen,
To any worthily wiight, that wissen me couthe,
Whom I should conne my creed, Christ for to folwe,
That lenede lelliche Truly.
him self, and lyved there after,
That feynede no falshede, but fully Christ suwede,
Forsith a certain man syker would I trosten
That he would tell me the truth, and turn to none other.
And an Austyn this ender day, egged Moved.
me fast
That he would techen me well, he plyght me his treuthe
And seyde me certain, sighten Christ deyed
Our order was evels, and erst yfounde.
First felaw^ quath he, fie on his pylthe
He is but abortiif, eked with cloutes.
He holds his ordinance with hores and theves,
And purchases hem privileges, with penyes so round.
It is a pure pardoners craft, prove and asay
For have they thy money, a month thereafter
Certes theigh thou come again, he will ye naught known.
But felawe our foundement was first of the other
And we ben founded fulliche, withouten fayntise
And we ben clerks renowen, cunning in schole
Proved in procession by process of law.
Of our order there beth bichopes well many,
Seyntes on sundry stedes, that suffreden hard
And we ben proved the priis of popes at Rome
And of grettest degree, as gospelles tells.
I must not quit our Ploughman without observing, that some other satirical
pieces anterior to the Reformation, bear the adopted name of PIERS THE PLOWMAN.
Under the character of a plowman the religious are likewise lashed, in a poem
written in apparent imitation of Longland's VISION, and attributed to Chaucer.
I mean the PLOWMAN'S TALE Perhaps falsely. Unless Chaucer wrote the Creed,
which I cannot believe. For in Chaucer's PLOWMAN'S TALE this Creed is alluded
to. v. 3005. And of Freris I have before
Told in a making of a Cr^de;
And yet I could tell worse and more.
This passage at least brings the PLOWMAN'S TALE below the CREED in time. But
some have thought, very improbably, that this Creed is Jack Upland.
. The measure is different, and it is in rhyme. But it has Longland's
alliteration of initials: as if his example had, as it were, appropriated that
mode of versification to the subject, and the supposed character which supports
the satire It is extraordinary that we should find in this poem one of the
absurd arguments of the puritans against ecclesiastical establishments. v.
2253. Urr. edit. For Christ made no cathedralls,
Ne with him was no Cardinals.
But see what follows, concerning Wickliffe.
. All these poems were, for the most part, founded on the doctrines newly
broached by Wickliffe It is remarkable, that they touch on the very topics
which Wickliffe had just published in his OBJECTIONS OF FRERES charging them
with fifty heresi^s. As in the following. "Also Freres buildin many great
churches, and costy wast houses and cloisteres, as it wern castles, and that
wit^^uten need, etc." Lewis's WICKLIFF, p. 22. I will here add a passage from
Wickliffe's tract entitled WHY POOR PRIESTS HAVE NO BENEFICES. Lewis^ App. Number.
xix. p. 289. "And yet they [lords] wolen not present a clerk able of kunning of
god's law, but a kitchen clerk, or a penny clerk, or wise in buil^ing castle^,
or worldly doing, though he kunne not read well his sauter, etc." Here is a
manifest piece of satire on Wykeham, bishop of Winche^^er, Wickliffe's
cotemporary; who is supposed to have recommended himself to Edward the third by
rebuilding the castle of Windsor. This was a recent and notorious instance. But
in this appointment the king probably paid a compliment to that prelate's
singular talents for business, his activity, circumspection, and management,
rather than to any scientific and professed skill in architecture which he
might have possessed. It seems to me that he was only a supervisor or
comptroller on this occasion. It was common to depute churchmen to this
department, from an idea of their superior prudence and probity. Thus John, the
prior of St. Swithin's at Winchester in 1280, is commissioned by brief from the
king, to supervise large repairs done by the sheriff in the castle of
Winchester, and the royal manor of Wolmer. MS. Registr. Priorat. Quat. 19. fol.
3. The bishop of S. David's was master of the works at building King's College.
Hearne's Elmh. p. 353. Alcock, bishop of Ely, was comptroller of the royal
buildings under Henry the seventh. Parker Hist. Cambr. p. 119. He, like
Wykeham, was a great builder, but not therefore an architect. Richard Williams,
dean of Litchfield and chaplain to Henry the eighth, bore the same office. MSS.
Wood, Litchfield. D. 7. Ashmol. Nicholas Townley clerk, was master of the works
at Cardinal College. MS. Twyne, 8. f. 351. Se^ also Walpole, i. Anecd. Paint.
p. 40.
: who maintained, among other things, that the clergy should not possess
estates, that the ecclesiastical ceremonies obstructed true devotion, and that
mendicant friars, the particular object of our Plowman's CREED, were a public
and insupportable grievance. But Wickliffe, whom Mr. Hume pronounces to have
been an enthusiast, like many other reformers, carried his ideas of purity too
far; and, as at least it appears from the two first of these opinions, under
the design of destroying superstition, his undistinguishing zeal attacked even
the necessary aids of religion. It was certainly a lucky circumstance, that
Wickliffe quarrelled with the pope. His attacks on superstition at first
probably proceeded from resentment. Wickliffe, who was professor of divinity at
Oxford, finding on many occasions not only his own province invaded, but even
the privileges of the university frequently violated by the pretensions of the
mendicants, gratified his warmth of temper by throwing out some slight censures
against all the four orders, and the popes their principal patrons and
abettors. Soon afterward he was deprived of the wardenship of Canterbury hall,
by the archbishop of Canterbury, who substituted a monk in his place. Upon this
he appealed to the pope, who confirmed the archiepiscopal sentence, by way of
rebuke for the freedom with which he had treated the monastic profession.
Wickliffe, highly exasperated at this usage, immediately gave a loose to his
indignation, and without restraint or distinction attacked in numerous sermons
and treatises, not only the scandalous enormities of the whole body of monks,
but even the usurpations of the pontifical power itself, with other
ecclesiastical corruptions. Having exposed these palpable abuses with a just
abhorrence, he ventured still farther, and proceeded to examine and refute with
great learning and penetration the absurd doctrines which prevailed in the
religious system of his age: he not only exhorted the laity to study the
scriptures, but translated the bible into English for general use and popular
inspection. Whatever were his motives, it is certain that these efforts
enlarged the notions of mankind, and sowed those seeds of a revolution in
religion, which were quickened at length and brought to maturity by a
favorable coincidence of circumstances, in an age when the increasing growth
of literature and curiosity naturally led the way to innovation and
improvement. But a visible diminution of the authority of the ecclesiastics, in
England at least, had been long growing from other causes. The disgust which
the laity had contracted from the numerous and arbitrary encroachments both of
the court of Rome, and of their own clergy, had greatly weaned the kingdom from
superstition; and conspicuous symptoms had appeared, on various occasions, of a
general desire to shake off the intolerable bondage of papal oppression.

SECT. X.
LONGLAND'S peculiarity of style and versification, seems to have had many
cotemporary imitators. One of these is a nameless author on the fashionable
history of Alexander the Great: and his poem on this subject is inserted at the
end of the beautiful Bodleian copy of the French ROMAN D'ALEXANDRE, before
mentioned, with this reference See above, p. 240. It is in a different hand yet
with Saxon characters. See ad calc. cod. f. 209. It has miniatures in water
colors.
. "Here fails a prossesse of this romaunce of Alixaunder the which prossesse
that fails ye schulle find at the end of this book ywrete in Engeliche
ryme." It is imperfect, and begins and proceeds thus There is a poem in the
Ashmolean museum, complete in the former part, which I believe is the same.
MSS. Ashm. 44. It has twenty-seven passus, and begins thus:

Whener folk fastid and fed, feign would they her
Some farand thing, etc.

.

How Alexander partyd thennys At the end are these rubrics, with void spaces,
intended to be filled.

"How Alexandre remewid to a flood that is called Phison."

"How king Duidimus sent lettres to king Alexandre."

"How Duidimus enditid to Alexaundre of here levyng."

"How he spares not Alexandre to tell him of his governance."

"How he tells Alexandre of his maumetrie."

"How Alexandre sent answer to Duidimus by lettres."

"How Duidimus sendyd an answer to Alexandre by lettre."

"How Alexandre sent Duidimus another lettre."

"How Alexandre pight a pelyr of marbyl there."


.
When this weith at his will wedinge
Had, fful rathe rommede he rydinge
Thedince so ondrace with his ost
Alixandre wendeth there wild contre
Was wist and wonderful people
That weren proved full proud, and prys of hevi held
Of bodi went they their without any wede
And had grave on the ground many great cavys
There here wonnynge was wyntur^s and somerus
No syte nor no sur stead sothli they ne had
But holus holwe in the ground to hide hem inn
Now is that name to mean the nakid wise
Wan the kiddeste of the cavus that was king hold
Hurde tydinge tell and loknynge wiste
That Alixaundre with his ost at led thidince
To beholden of hom hure hieest prince
Than ways of worshipe witty and quainte
With his lettres he let to the lud send
Thanne southte they sone the foresaid prince
And to the schamlese schalk schewen hur lettres
Than rathe let the.... reden the sonde
That new tythinge is told in this wise
The gentil Gymnosophists.
Geneosophistians that good were of wit
To the emperor Alixandre here aunsweris wreten
This is worschip of word worthi to have
And in conqueror kid in contres many
Us is sertefyed seg as we soth heren
That thou have meant with the man among us far
But if thou king to us come with caere to figte
Of us getist thou no good gome we the warn
For what richesse... us might you us by reve
When no wordliche well is with us found
We ben sengle of us silfe and semen full bare
Nouht welde we now but naked we wend
And that we happili her haven of kind
May no man but god make us fine
They thou fond with thy folk to fight us all
We schulle us keep on caugt our cavns withinne
Nevere werred we with wigth upon earth
For we ben hid in our holis or we harm laache had
Thus said sothli the loud that thy sent
And al so cof as the king kende the saw
New lettres he let the.... by take
And with his sawes of soth he hem all
That he would fair with his folk in a fair wise
To by holden here home and non harm wurke
So heth the king with hem sent and sithen with his people
..... cosli til hem to kenne of hure fare
But when thai sieu the seg with so many ride
They war a grison of his grym and wend gref tholie
Ffast heiede they to holis and hidden there
And in the cavus hem kept from the king stern, etc.
Another piece, written in Longland's manner, is entitled, THE WARS OF THE
JEWS. This was a favorite subject, as I have before observed, drawn from the
Latin historical romance, which passes under the name of HEGESIPPUS DE EXCIDIO
JERUSALEM.

In Tyberyus time the true emperor
Sir Sesar him suls saysed in Rome
While Pylot was provost under that prince rich
And sewen justice also in Judeus londis
Herodes under his empire as heritage would
King of Galile was ycallid when that Crist deyad
They Sesar sakles were that often syn hatide
Throw Pilet pyned he was and put on the rode
A pyler pygt was don upon the plain earth
His body bouden thereto beten with scourgis
Whippes of quyrbole by went his white sides
Til he al on read blood ran as rayn on the street
Such stockyd him an a stole with styf menes hondis
Blyndfelled him as a be and boffetis him ragte
if you be a prophet of pris prophecy they said
Which man her about bolled the last
A thrange thorn crown was thraste on his head
... casten him with a cry and on a cross slowen
Ffor all the harm that he had hasted he nogt
On him the vyleny to venge that his venys brosten
Bot ay tarried on the time gif they tone would
Gaf he space that him spilede they he speed lyte
If aynt was as yfynde and no fewer Laud... 22. MSS. Bibl. Bodl. Ad calc. "Hic
tractatur bellum Judaicum apud Jerusalem." f. 19. b. It is also in Brit. Mu^.
Cott. MSS. CALIG. A. 1. fol. 109. -- 123. Gyraldus Cambrensis says, that the
Welsh and English use alliteration, "in omni sermon exquisito." Descript.
Cambr. cap. xi. p. 889. O'Flaherty also says of the ^rish, "Non parvae est apud
nos in oratione elegantiae schema, quod Paromaeon, i. e. Assimile, dicitur:
quoties multae dictiones, ab eadem litera incipientes, ex ordine collocantur."
Ogyg. part. iii. 30. p. 242. See also Dr. Percy's judicious Essay on the METER
OF PIERCE PLOWMAN'S VISIONS.
, etc.
Notwithstanding what has been supposed above, it is not quite certain, that
Longland was the first who led the way in this singular species of
versification. His VISION was written on a popular subject, and is the only
poem, composed in this capricious sort of meter, which has been printed. It is
easy to conceive how these circumstances contributed to give him the merit of
an inventor on this occasion.

The ingenious doctor Percy has exhibited specimens of two or three other poems
belonging to this class Essay on the Metr. of P. P. Vis. p. 8. seq.
. One of these is entitled DEATH AND LIFE: it consists of two hundred and
twenty-nine lines, and is divided into two parts or Fitts. It begins thus:

Christ christen king that on the cross tholed,
Had pains and passions to defend our souls;
Give us grace on the ground the greatly to serve
For that royal red blood that rann from thy side.
The subject of this piece is a VISION, containing a contest for superiority
between Our lady Dame LIFE, and the ugly fiend Dame DEATH: who with their
several attributes and concomitants are personified in a beautiful vein of
allegorical painting. Dame LIFE is thus forcibly described.

She was brighter of her blee than was the bright son:
Her rud redder than the rose that on the rise hangs:
Meekely smiling with her mouth, and merry in her looks;
Ever laughing for love, as she like would:
And as she came by the banks the boughs each one
They lowted to that lady and laid forth their branches;
Blossoms and burgens breathed full sweet,
Flowers flourished in the frith where she forth stepped,
And the grass that was gray grened belive.
The figure of DEATH follows, which is equally bold and expressive. Another
piece of this kind, also quoted by doctor Percy, is entitled CHEVELERE ASSIGN,
or DE CIGNE, that is the Knight of the Swan. This is a romance which is extant
in a prose translation from the French, among Mr. Garrick's noble collection of
old plays K. vol. 10. "Imprinted at London by me Wylliam Copland." There is an
edition on parchment by W. de Word, 1512. "Newly translated out of Frenshe
into English at thinstigacion of the puyssaunt prince lord Edward duke of
Buckynghame." Here I understand French prose.
. We must not forget, that among the royal manuscripts in the British Museum,
there is a French metrical romance on this subject, entitled L'YSTOIRE DU
CHEVALIER AU SIGN 15 E. vi. 9. fol. And in the Royal library at Paris, MS.
7192. "Le Roman du Chevalier au Cigne en verse." Montf. Cat. MSS. ii. p. 789.
. Our English poem begins thus See MSS. Cott. CALIG. A. i. f. 109. 123.
:

All-weldynge god, whence it is his wyll^,
Well he wereth his work with his owene hand,
For often harms were hente that help wene mygte
Nere the hygnes of hem that lengeth in hevene
For this, etc.
This alliterative measure, unaccompanied with rhyme, and including many
peculiar Saxon idioms appropriated to poetry, remained in use so low as the
sixteenth century. In doctor Percy's Ancient Ballads, there is one of this
class called THE SCOTTISH FEILDE, containing a very circumstantial narrative of
the battle of Flodden fought in the year 1513.

In some of the earliest of our specimens of old English poetry See Sect. i.
, we have long ago seen that alliteration was esteemed a fashionable and
favorite ornament of verse. For the sake of throwing the subject into one
view, and further illustrating what has been here said concerning it, I choose
to cite in this place a very ancient hymn to the Virgin Mary, never printed,
where this affectation professedly predominates Among the Cotton manuscripts
there is a Norman Saxon alliterative hymn to the Virgin Mary. NER. A. xiv. f.
240. cod. membran. 8vo. "On god ureisun to ure lesdi." That is, A good prayer
to our lady.

Cristes mild mother seynte Marie
Mines hues leonie, mi leoue lesdi.

.

I.
Hail beo you See some pageant-poetry, full of alliteration, written in the
reign of Henry the seventh, Leland. Coll. iii. App. 180. edit. 1770.
Marie, moodur and may,
Mylde, and meke, and merciable;
Heyl folliche fruit of sothfast fay,
Again vche stryf studefast and stable!
Heil sothfast soul in vche a say,
Undur the son is non so able.
Heil logge that vr lord in lay,
The formast that never was founden in fable,
Heil true, trouthfull, and tretable,
Heil cheef i chosen of chastity,
Heil homely, hende, and amyable
To preye for us to thy sone so fre! AVE.
II.
Heil stern, that never stinteth liht;
Heil bush, brennyng that never was brent;
Heil rihtful rulere of everi riht,
Schadewe to schilde that scholde be schent.
Heil, blessed be you blosme briht,
To truth and trust was thine intent;
Heil maiden and modur, most of miht,
Of all mischeves and amendment;
Heil spice sprung that never was spent,
Heil trone of the trinity;
Heil soiene F. Seyen. S^yon.
that god us sone to sent
You preye for us thy sone fre! AVE.
III.
Heyl hertely in holiness.
Heyl hope of help to heighe and low,
Heyl strength and stel of stabylnesse,
Heyl wyndowe of hevene wowe,
Heyl reason of rihtwysnesse,
To vche a caityf comfort to know,
Heyl innocent of angernesse,
Vr takel, vr tol, that we on trow,
Heyl ^^end to all that beoth fortth flow
Heyl liht of love, and of bewte,
Heyl brihter th^n the blod on snow,
You preye for us thy sone so fre! AVE.
IV.
Heyl maiden, heyl modur, heyl martyr trow,
Heyl kyndly i know confessor,
Heyl evenere of old law and new,
Heyl buildor bold of cristes bour,
Heyl rose higest of hyde and hew,
Of all ^^ruytes feirest fflour,
Heyl turtell trustiest and true,
Of all trou^he thou art tresour,
Heyl puyred princess of paramour,
Heyl blosme of brere brihtest of ble,
Heyl owner of eorthly honor,
You preye for us thy sone so fre! AVE, etc.
V.
Heyl hende, heyl holy emperesse,
Heyle queen corteois, comely, and kind,
Heyl distruyere of everi strisse,
Heyl mender of everi monnes mind,
Heil bodi that we ouht to bless,
So feythful friend may never mon find,
Heil levere and lovere of largeness
Sweet and swetest that never may swynde,
Heil botenere of every bodi blind,
Heil borgun brihtes of all bounte,
Heyl trewore then the wode bind,
You preye for us thy sone so fre! AVE.
VI.
Heyl modur, heyl maiden, heyl hevene queen,
Heyl gatus of paradys,
Heyl sterre of the se that ever is seen,
Heyl rich, royal, and ryhtwys,
Heyl burde i blessed mote you been,
Heyl perle of al perey the pris,
Heyl schadewe in vche a schour schene,
Heyl fairer thae that flour de lys,
Heyl cher chosen that never nas chis
Heyl chef chamber of charity
Heyl in woe that ever was wis
You preye for us thy sone so fre! AVE, etc. etc. MS. Vernon. f. 122. In this
manuscript are several other pieces of this sort.
.
These rude stanzas remind us of the Greek hymns ascribed to Orpheus, which
entirely consist of a cluster of the appellations appropriated to each divinity.

SECT. XI.
ALTHOUGH this work is professedly confined to England, yet I cannot pass over
two Scotch poets of this period, who have adorned the English language by a
strain of versification, expression, and poetical imagery, far superior to
their age; and who consequently deserve to be mentioned in a general review of
the progress of our national poetry. They have written two heroic poems. One of
them is John Harbor, archdeacon of Aberdeen. He was educated at Oxford; and
Rymer has printed an instrument for his safe passage into England, in order to
prosecute his studies in that university, in the years 1357 and 1365 Fo^d. vi.
31. 478.
. David Bruc^, king of Scotland, gave him a pension for life, as a reward for
his poem called the HISTORY OF ROBERT BRUCE, KING OF THE SCOTS Tanner, Bibl. p.
73.
. It was printed at Glasgow in the year 1671 12mo.
. A battle ^ought by lord Douglas is thus described.

When that thus their two batttles were
Assembled, as I said you air,
The Stewart Walter that then was,
And the good lord als of Douglas,
In a battle when that they saw
The earl, foroutten dread or aw,
Assemble with his company
On all that folk so sturdily,
For to help him they held their way,
And their battle with good array,
Beside the earl a little by,
They sembled all so hardily,
That their foes felt there coming well;
For with weapons stallwort of steel,
They dang on them with all their might,
Their foes received well, I heght,
With swords and spears, and als with mass,
The battle there so fellon was,
And so right great spilling of blood,
That on the erd the slouces stood.
The Scottishmen so well them bare,
And so great slaughter made they there,
And fra so feil the lives they reav'd,
That all the field was bloody leaved.
That time that their three battles were
All side by side fighting well near,
There might men hear many a dint,
And weapons upon arms stint,
And might see tumble knights and steeds,
And many rich and royal weeds
Foully defiled under feet.
Some held on loft, some tint the suet.
A long while fighting thus they were,
That men in no wise might hear there.
Men might hear naught but groans and dints
That flew, as men strike fire on flints.
They fought ilk ane so eagerly,
That they made neither noise nor cry,
But dang on other at their might,
With weapons that were burnisht bright.
The arrows also thick there flaw,
(That they well might say, that them saw)
That they a hideous shower can ma;
For where they fe^l, I underta,
They left after them tokening,
That shall need, as I trow, leeching.
The English archers shot so fast,
That might their shot have any last,
It had been hard to Scottishmen.
But king Robert, that well can ken,
That their archers were perilous,
And their shot right hard and grievous,
Ordained forouth the assembly,
His marshal, with a great menie,
Five hundred armed into steel,
That on light horse were horsed well,
For to prick amongst the archers,
And to assail them with their spears,
That they no leisure have to shoot.
This marshal that I hereof mute,
Sir Robert of Keith he was called,
And I before here have you told.
When that he saw the battles so
Assemble, and together go,
And saw the archers shoot stoutly,
With all them of his company,
In hy upon them can he ride,
And overtake them at a side,
And rushed among them so rudely,
Sticking them so despiteously,
And in lik fusion bearing down,
And slaying them forout ransoun,
That they them skailed e'erilkane;
And, fra that time forth, ther^ was nan^
That assembled, shot for to ma.
When Scots archers saw that they sa
Reboted were, they waxed hardy,
And with their might shot eagerly
Among the horfemen that there rade,
And wounds wide to them they made,
And slew of them a full great deal.
They bore them hardily and well;
For fra tbat their foes archers were
Skailed, as I said to you air,
They more than they were b^ great thing,
So that they dread not their shooting.
They waxed so hardy, that them thought,
They should set all their foes at naught p. 262.
.
The following is a specimen of our author's talent at rural description. The
verses are extremely soft.

This was in midst of month of May,
When birds sing in ilka spray,
Melland their notes with seemly soun,
For softness of the sweet seasoun,
And leaves of the branches spreeds,
And blooms bright beside them breeds,
And fields strawed are with flowers
Well savouring of seir colors,
And all thing worthis, blyth and gay p. 326.
.
The other wrote a poem on the exploits of Sir William Wallace. It was first
printed in 1601. And very lately reprinted at Edinburgh in quarto, with the
following title, "The acts and deeds of the most famous and valiant champion
Sir William Wallace, knight, of Ellerslie. Written by BLIND HARRY in the year
1361. Together with ARNALDI BLAIR RELATIONES. Edinburgh, 1758." No
circumstances of the life of our blind bard appear in Dempster See Dempst.
viii. 349. 662.
. This poem, which consists of twelve books, is translated from the Latin of
Robert Blare, or Blair, chaplain to Sir William Wallace Tit. GESTA WILLELMI
WALLAS. See Dempst. ii. 148. He ^lourished in 1300. He has left another Latin
poem, DE LIBERATA TYRANNIDE SCOTIA. Arnald Blair, mentioned in the title page
in the text, probably Robert's brother, if not the same, was also ^haplain to
Wallace, and monk of Dumferling about the year 1327. Relat. ^t supr. p. 1. B^t
see p. 9, 10. In the fifth book of the Scotch poem we have this passage, p. 94.
v. 533.

Master JOHN BLAIR was often in that message,
A worthy clerk, both wise and als right sage,
Levyt he was before in PARIS town, etc.
He was the man that principell undertook,
That first compild in dyte the Latin book,
Of WALLACE life, right famous in rensown,
And THOMAS GRAY parsoun of LI^ERTOUN,
With him they were and put in story all
Often one or both mickle of his travel, etc.

. The following is a description of the morning, and of Wallace arming himself
in his tent P. 229. B. viii. v. 65. The editor seems to have modernised the
spelling.
.

Into a vale by a small river fair,
On either side where wild deer made repair,
Set watches out that wisely could them keep,
To supper went, and timeously they sleep,
Of meat and sleep they cease with suffisaunce,
The night was mirk, overdrave the darksom chance,
The merry day sprang from the orient,
With beams bright illuminate occident,
After Titan Phoebus upriseth fair,
High in the sphere, the signs he made declare.
Zephyrus then began his morning course,
The sweet vapor thus from the ground resourse;
The humble bregth down from the heaven avail
In every mead, both frith, forest and dale.
The clear read among the rockis rang
Through grene branches where the byrds blythly sang,
With joyous voice in heavenly harmony,
When Wallace thought it was no time to ly:
He crossyd him, syn suddenly arose,
To take the air out of his pallion goes
Master John Blair was ready to revess,
In good intent syne bouned to the mass.
When it was done, Wallace can him array,
In his armore, which goodly was and gay;
His shining shoes that birnisht was full been,
His leg-harness he clapped on so clean,
Pullane grees he braced on full fast,
A close birnie with many siker clasp,
Breast Plate, brasars, that worthy were in wear:
Beside him forth Jop could his basnet bear;
His glittering gloves that graven on either side,
He seemed well in battle to abide.
His good girdle, and syne his buirly brand,
A staff of steel he gripped in his hand.
The host him blessed, etc.
Adam Wallaice and Boyd forth with him yeed
By a river, throughout a florisht mead^
And as they walk attour the fields so green,
Out of the south they saw when that the queen
Toward the host came riding soberly,
And fi^ty ladies in her company, etc.
The four following lines on the spring are uncommonly terse and elegant.

Gentle Jupiter, with his mild ordinance,
Both herb and tree reverts into pleasance;
And fresh Flora her flowery mantle spread,
In every dale both hop, hight, hill, and mead Lib. ix. v. 22. chapter i. p. 250.
.
A different season of the year is here strongly painted.

The dark region appearing wonder fast,
In November when October was past,
The day failed through right course worthit short,
To banished man that is no great comfort:
With their power in paths worthis gang,
Heavy they think when that the night is lang.
Thus good Wallace saw the night's messenger;
Phoebus had lost his fiery beams so clear:
Out of the wood they durst not turn that side
For adversours that in their way would hide L. v. chapter 1. p. 78. v. 1.
.
The battle of Black-Ernside shows our author a master in another style of
painting.

Kerlie beheld unto the bold heroun,
Upon Fawdoun as he was looking down,
A subtle stroke upward him took that tide
Under the cheeks the grounden sword gart glide,
By the mail good, both halse and his craig-bane
In sunder struck; thus ended that chiftain,
To ground he fell, feil folk about him throng,
Treason, they cried, traitors are us among.
Kerlie, with that, fled out soon at a side,
His fellow Steven then thought no time to bide.
The fray was great, and fast away they yeed,
Both toward Ern; thus escaped they that dread.
Butler for woe of weeping might not stint.
Thus raklesly this good knight have they tint.
They deemed all that it was Wallace men,
Or else himself, though they could not him ken;
He is right near, we shall him have but fail,
This feeble wood may little him avail.
Forty there past again to Saint Johnstoun,
With this dead corpse, to burying made it bown.
Parted their men, syne diverse ways they rode,
A great power at Doplin still there bode.
To Dalwryeth the Butler past but let,
At sundry fords the gate they unbeset,
To keep the wood while it wa, day they thought.
As Wallace thus in the thick forest sought,
For his two men in mind he had great pain,
He wist not well, if they were taken or slain,
Or escaped haill by any jeopardy.
Thirteen were left with him, no more had he;
In the Gask-hall their lodging have they taken.
Fire got they soon, but meat then had they nane;
Two sheep they took beside them of a fold,
Ordained to sup into that seemly hold:
Graithed in haste some food for them to dight:
So heard they blow rude horns upon hight.
Two sent he forth to look what it might be;
They bode right long, and no tidings heard he,
But bousteous noise so bryvely blowing fast;
So other two into the wood forth past.
None came again, but bousteously can blaw,
Into great ire he sent them forth on raw.
When that alone Wallace was leaved there,
The awful blast abounded meikle mare;
Then trow'd he well they had his lodging seen;
His sword he drew of noble metal keen,
Syne forth he went where at he heard the horn.
Without the door Fawdoun was him beforn,
As to his sight, his own head in his hand;
A cross he made when he saw him so stand.
At Wallace in the head he swakked there,
And he in haste soon hint it by the hair,
Syne out again at him he could it cast,
Into his heart he greatly was aghast.
Right well he trow'd that was do sprit of man,
It was some devil, that sic malice began.
He wist uo wale there longer for to bide.
Up through the hail thus wight Wallace can glide,
To a close stair, the boards they rave in twin,
Fifteen foot large he lap out of that inn.
Up the water he suddenly could fare,
Again he blink'd what pearance he saw there,
He thought he saw Fawdoun, that ugly ^ire,
That haiil hall he had set into a fire;
A great rafter he had into his hand.
Wallace as then no longer would he stand.
Of his good men full great marvel had he,
How they were tint through his feil fantasy.
Trust right well that all this was sooth indeed,
Suppose that it no point be of the creed.
Power they had with Lucifer that fell,
The time when he parted from heaven to hell.
By sik mischief if his men might be lost,
Drowned or slain among the English host;
Or what it was in likeness of Fawdoun.
Which brought his men to sudden confusion;
Or if the man ended in ill intent,
Some wicked sprit again for him present.
I cannot speak of sik divinity,
To clerks I will let all sic matters be:
But of Wallace, now forth I will you tell.
When he was won out of that peril fell,
Right glad was he that he had escaped sa,
But for his men great mourning can he ma.
Flait by himself to the Maker above
Why he suffered he should sik paining prove.
He wist not well if that it was God^s will;
Right or wrong his fortune to fulfill,
Had he pleased God, he trow'd it might not be
He should him thole in sik perplexity.
But great courage in his mind ever draw,
Of Englishmen thinking amends to have.
As he was thus walking by him alone
Upon Ern side, making a piteous moan,
Sir John Butler, to watch the fords right,
Out from his men of Wallace had a sight;
The mist again to the mountains was gone,
To him he rode, where that he made his moan.
On loud he speir'd, What art thou walks that gate?
A true man, Sir, though my voyage be late;
Erands I pass from Down unto my lord,
Sir John Stewart, the right for to record,
In Down is now, newly come from the king.
Then Butler said, this is a selcouth thing,
You lied all out, you have been with Wallace,
I shall thee know, ere you come off this place,
To him he start the courser wonder wight,
Drew out a sword, so made him for to light.
Above the knee good Wallace has him taken,
Through thigh and brawn in sunder struck the bane.
Derfly to dead the knight fell on the land.
Wallace the horse soon seized in his hand,
An ackward stroke syne took him in that stead,
His craig in two; thus was the Butler dead.
An Englishman saw their chiftain was slain,
A spear in rest he cast with all his main,
On Wallace drove, from the horse him to bear;
Warily he wrought, as worthy man in wear.
The spear he wan withouten more abode,
On horse he lap, and through a great rout rode;
To Dalwryeth he knew the ford full well:
Before him came feil stuffed in fine steel.
He struck the first, but bade, on the blasoun,
While horse and man both fleet the water down.
Another soon down from his horse he bare,
Stamped to ground, and drowned withouten mare.
The third he hit in his harness of steel,
Throughout the cost, the spear it brake some deal.
The great power then after him can ride.
He saw no waill there longer for to bide.
His burnisht brand braithly in hand he bare,
Whom he hit right they followed him na mare.
To stuff the chase feil freiks followed fast,
But Wallace made the gayest ay aghast.
The muir he took, and through their power yeed,
The horse was good, but yet he had great dread
For failing ere he wan unto a strength,
The chase was great, skail'd over breadth and length,
Through strong danger they had him ay in sight.
At the Blackford there Wallace down can light,
His horse stuffed, for way was deep and lang,
A large great mile wightly on foot could gang.
Ere he was horsed riders about him cast,
He saw full well long so he might not last.
Sad men indeed upon him can renew,
With returning that night twenty he slew,
The fiercest ay rudely rebuted he,
Kept his horse, and right wisely can flee,
While that he came the mickest muir amang.
His horse gave over, and would no further gang p. 82.
.
I will close these specimens with an instance of our author's allegorical
invention.

In that slumber coming him thought he saw,
An aged man fast toward him could draw,
Soon by the hand he hint him hastily,
I am, he said, in voyage charged with thee.
A sword him gave of basely burnisht steel,
Good son, he said, this wand you shall bruik well.
Of topaz stone him thought the plummet was,
Both hilt and hand all glittering like the glass.
Dear son, he said, we tarry here too long,
Thou shall go see where wrought is meikle wrong;
Then he him led to a mountain on hight,
The world him thought he might see at a sight.
He left him there, syne soon from him he went,
Thereof Wallace studied in his intent,
To see him more he had still great desire,
Therewith he saw begin a fellon fire,
Which braithly burnt in breadth through all the land,
Scotland all over, from Ross to Solway-sand.
Then soon to him there descended a queen,
Illuminate, light, shining full bright and sheen^
In her presence appeared so meikle light,
That all the fire she put out of his sight,
Gave him a wand of color red and green,
With a sapphire saved his face and eyn,
Welcome, she said, I choose thee for my love^
Thou art granted by the great God above,
To help people that suffer meikle wrong,
With thee as now I may not tarry long,
Thou shall return to thy own use again,
Thy dearest kin are here in meikle pain;
This right region you must redeem it all,
Thy last reward in earth shall be but small;
Let not therefore, take redress of t^is miss,
To thy reward thou shall have lasting bliss.
Of her right hand she beraught him a book,
And humbly thus her leave full soon she took,
Unto the cloud ascended off his sight.
Wallace brake up the book in all his might.
Into three parts the book well written was,
The first writing was gross letters of brass,
The second gold, the third was silver sheen.
Wallace marvell'd what this writing should mean;
To read the book he busied him so fast,
His spirit again to waking mind is past,
And up he ro^e, syne ^oundly forth he went.
This clerk he found, and told him his intent
Of his vision, as I have said before,
Completely through, what needs any words more.
Dear son, he said, my wit unable is
To ransack sik, for dread I say amiss;
Yet I shall deem, though my cunning be small,
God grant no charge after my words may fall.
Saint Andrew was gave thee that sword in hand,
Of saints he is the vower of Scotland;
That mountain is, where he had thee on hight,
Knowledge to have of wrong that thou must right;
The fire shall be fell tidings, ere ye part,
Which shall be told in many sundry airt.
I cannot well wit what queen that should be,
Whether Fortune, or our Lady so free,
Likely it is, by the brightness she brought,
Mother of him that all the world has wrought.
The pretty wand, I trow, by mine intent,
Assigns to you rule and cruel judgment;
The red color, who graithly understood,
Betokens all to great battle and blood;
The green, courage, that thou art now among,
In trouble and war thou shall continue long;
The sapphire stone she blessed thee withal,
Is lasting grace, will God, shall to thee fall;
The threefold book is but this broken land,
Thou must redeem by worthiness of hand;
The brass letters betokens but to this,
The great oppress of war and meikle miss,
The which you shall bring to the right again,
But you therefore must suffer meikle pain;
The gold betokens honor and worthiness,
Victory in arms, that thou shall have by grace;
The silver shows clean life and heaven's bliss,
To thy reward that mirth thou shall not miss,
Dread not therefore, be out of all despair.
Further as now hereof I can na mare.
About the present period, historical romances of recent events seem to have
commenced. Many of these appear to have been written by heralds See Le Pere
Mene^^rier, Cheval. Ancien. c. v. p. 225. Par. 12mo.
. In the library of Worcester college at Oxford, there is a poem in French,
reciting the achievements of Edward the Black Prince, who died in the year
1376. It is in the short verse of romance, and was written by the prince's
herald, who attended close by his person in all his battles, according to the
established mode of those times. This was John Chandois-herald, frequently
mentioned in Froissart. In this piece, which is of considerable length, the
names of the Englishmen are properly spelled, the chronology exact, and the
epitaph It is a fair and beautiful manuscript on vellum. It is an oblong
octavo, and formerly belonged to Sir William Le Neve Clarencieux herald.
, forming a sort of peroration to the narrative, the same as was ordered by the
prince in his will The hero's epitaph is frequent in romances. In the French
romance of SAINTRE, written about this time, hi^ epitaph is introduced.
. This poem, indeed, may seem to claim no place here, because it happens to be
written in the French language: yet, exclusive of its subject, a circumstance I
have mentioned, that it was composed by a herald, deserves particular
attention, and throws no small illustration on the poetry of this era. There
are several proofs which indicate that many romances of the fourteenth century,
if not in verse, at least those written n p. 150.
in prose, were the work of heralds. As it was their duty to attend their
masters in battle, they were enabled to record the most important transactions
of the field with fidelity. It was customary to appoint none to this office but
persons of discernment, address, experience, and some degree of education Le
Pere Menestrier Cheval. Ancien. ^t supr. p. 225. chapter v. "Que l'on croyoit avoir
l'Esprit, etc." Feron says, that they gave this attendance in order to make a
true report. L'Instit. des Roys et Herauds, p. 44. a. See also Favin. p. 57.
See a curious description in Froissart, of an interview between the Chandois
herald, mentioned above, and a marshal of France, where they enter into a warm
and very ser^ous disput^ concerning the devices d'amour borne by each army.
Live. i. chapter 161.
. At solemn tournaments they made an essential part of the ceremony. Here they
had an opportunity of observing acoutrements, armorial distinctions, the number
and appearance of the spectators, together with the various events of the
turney, to the best advantage: and they were afterward obliged to compile an
ample register of this strange mixture of foppery and ferocity "L'un des
principaux fonctions des Herautes d'armes etoit se trouver au jousts, etc. ou
ils gardoient les ecus pendans, recevoient les noms et les blasons des
chevaliers, en tenoient REGISTRE, et en composoient recueils, etc." Menes^r.
Orig. des Armoir. p. 180. See also p. 119. These registers are mentioned in
Perceforest, xi. 68. 77.
. They were necessarily connected with the minstrells at public festivals, and
thence acquired a facility of reciting adventures. A learned French antiquary
is of opinion, that anciently the French heralds, called Hiraux, were the same
as the minstrells, and that they sung metrical tales at festivals Carpentier,
Suppl. Du-Cang. Gloss. Lat. p. 750. tom. ii.
. They frequently received fees or largess in common with the minstrells Thus
at St. George's feast at Windsor we have, "Diversis heraldis et ministrallis,
etc." Ann. 21. Ric. ii. 9 Hen. vi. Apud Anstis, Ord. Gart. i. 56. 108. And
again, Exit. Pell. M. ann. 22. Edw. iii. "Magistro Andreae Roy Norreys, [a
herald,] Lybekin le Piper, et Hanakino filio suo, et sex aliis menes^rallis
regis in denariis eis liberatis de dono regis, in subsidium expensarum suarum,
lv. s. iv. d." -- Exit. Pell. P. ann. 33. Edw. ii. "Willielmo Volaunt regi
heraldorum et ministrallis existentibus apud Smithfield in ultimo hastiludio de
dono regis, x.l." I could give many other proofs.
. They traveled into different countries, and saw the fashions of foreign
courts, and foreign tournaments. They not only committed to writing the process
of the lists, but it was also their business, at magnificent feasts, to
describe the number and parade of the dishes, the quality of the guests, the
brilliant dresses of the ladies, the courtesy of the knights, the revels,
disguisings, banquets, and every other occurrence most observable in the course
of the solemnity. Spenser alludes expressly to these heraldic details, where he
mentions the splendour of Florimel's wedding.

To tell the glory of the feast that day^
The goodly servyse, the devisefull sights,
The bridegrome's state, the bride's most rich array^
The pride of ladies, and the worth of knights,
The royal banquettes, and the rare delights,
Were work fit for an HERALD, not for me ^. Q. v. iii. ^.
.
I suspect that Chaucer, not perhaps without ridicul^, glances at some of these
descriptions, with which his age abounded; and which he probably regarded with
less reverence, and read with less edification, than did the generality of his
cotemporary readers.

Why should I tellen of the rialte
Of that wedding? or which course goth beforn?
Who blowith in a trumpe, or in a horn Man of Lawe's T. v. 704.
?
Again, in describing Cambuscan's feast.

Of which shall I tell all the array,
Then would it occupy a sommer's day:
And eke it needs not to devise,
At every course the order of servise:
I will not tellen as now of her strange sewes,
Ne of her swans, ne of her heronsewes Squire^ T. v. 83^
.
And at the feast of Theseus, in the KNIGHT'S TALE V. 2199. p. 17. Urr.
.

The minstralcie, the service at the feste,
The great geftes also to the most and lest,
The rich array of Theseus palleis,
Ne who sat first or last upon the deis,
What ladies feyrist ben, or best daunsing,
Or which of them can best dauncin or sing,
Ne who most felingly spekith of love,
Ne what hawks sittin on perchis above,
Ne what hounds liggen on the flower adoun,
Of all this now I make no mentioun.
In the FLOWER and the LEAF, the same poet has described, in eleven long
stanzas, the procession to a splendid tournament, with all the prolixity and
exactness of a herald From v. 204. to v. 287.
. The same affectation, derived from the same sources, occurs often in Ariosto.

It were easy to illustrate this doctrine by various examples. The famous
French romance of SAINTRE was evidently the performance of a herald. John De
Saintre, the knight of the piece, was a real person, and, according to
Froissart, was taken prisoner at the battle of Poitiers, in the year 1356
Froissart^ Hist. i. p. 178.
. But the compiler confounds chronology, and ascribes to his hero many pieces
of true history belonging to others. This was a common practice in these books.
Some authors have supposed that this romance appeared before the year 1380
Bysshe, Not. in Upton. Milit. Offic. p. 56. Menestrier, Orig. Arm. p. 23.
. But there are reasons to prove, that it was written by Antony de la Sale, a
Burgundian, author of a book of CEREMONIES, from his name very quaintly
entitled LA SALLADE, and frequently cited by our learned antiquary Seldom Tit.
Hon. p. 413, etc.
. This Antony came into England to see the solemnity of the queen's coronation
in the year 1445 Anst. Ord. Gart. ii. 321.
. I have not seen any French romance which has preserved the practices of
chivalry more copiously than this of SAINTRE. It must have been an absolute
masterpiece for the rules of tilting, martial customs, and public ceremonies
prevailing in its author's age. In the library of the Office of Arms, there
remains a very accurate description of a feast of Saint George, celebrated at
Windsor in 1471 MSS. O^^ic. Arm. M. 15. fol. 12. 13.
. It appears to have been written by the herald Blue-mantle Poursuivant.
Menestrier says, that Guillaume Rucher, herald of Henault, has left a large
treatise, describing the tournaments annually celebrated at Lisle in Flanders
"Guillaume Rucher, heraut d'armes du titre de Heynaut, a fait un gros volume
des rois de l'Epinette a Lisle ^n Flanders; c'est une ceremony, ou un feste,
don't il a decrit les jouites, tournois, noms, armoiries, livrees, et equipages
de diverse seign^urs, qui se rendoient de diverse endroits, avec le catalogues de
rois de cette feste." Menestr. l'Orig. des Armoir. p. 64.
. In the reign of Edward the Fourth, John Smarte, a Norman, garter king at
arms, described in French the tournament held at Bruges, for nine days, in
honor of the marriage of the duke of Burgundy with Margaret the king's
daughter See many other instances in MSS. Harl. 69. fol. entit. THE BOOK OF
CERTAIN^ TRIUMPHS. See also APPENDIX to the new edition of Leland's
COLLECTANEA.
. There is a French poem, entitled, Les noms et les arms des seigneurs, etc. a
l'assiege de Karleverch en Escoce, 1300 MSS. Cott. Brit. Mus.
. This was undoubtedly written by a herald. The author thus describes the
banner of John duke of Bretaigne.

Baniere avoit cointee et paree
De or et de asur eschequeree
Au rouge ourle o jaunes lupars
Determinee estoit la quarte pars The bishop of Gloucester has most obligingly
condescended to point out to me another source, to which many of the romances
of the fourteenth century owed their existence. Montfaucon, in his MONUMENS DE
LA MONARCHY FRANCOISE, has printed the Statuts de l'Ordre du Saint Esprit au
droit desir ou du No^ud etabli par Louis d'Anjou roi de Jerusalem et Sicile en
1352-3-4. tom. ii. p. 329. This was an annual celebration au Chastel de l'Euf
enchanti du merveilleux peril. The castle, as appears by the monuments which
accompany these statutes, was built at the foot of the obscure grot of the
ENCHANTMENTS of Virgil. The statutes are as extraordinary as if they had been
drawn up by Don Quixote himself, or his assessors the curate and the barber.
From the seventh chapter we learn, that the knights who came to this yearly
festival at the chat^l de l'euf, were obliged to deliver in writing to the
clerks of the chapel of the castle their yearly adventures. Such of these
histories as were thought worthy to be recorded, the clerks are ordered to
transcribe in a book, which was called Le livre des av^n^ments aux chevaliers,
etc. Et demerra le dit livre toujours en la dicte chapelle. This sacred
register certainly furnished from time to time ample materials to the
romance-writers. And this circumstance gives a new explanation to a reference
which we so frequently find in romances: I mean, that appeal which they so
constantly make to some authentic record.
.
The pompous circumstances of which these heraldic narratives consisted, and
the minute prolixity with which they were displayed, seem to have infected the
professed historians of this age. Of this there are various instances in
Froissart, who had no other design than to compile a chronicle of real facts. I
will give one example out of many. At a treaty of marriage between our Richard
the second and Isabel daughter of Charles the fifth king of France, the two
monarchs, attended with a noble retinue, met and formed several encampments in
a spacious plain, near the castle of Guynes. Froissart expends many pages in
relating at large the costly furniture of the pavilions, the riches of the
side-boards, the profusion and variety of sumptuous liquors, spices, and
dishes, with their order of service, the number of the attendants, with their
address and exact discharge of duty in their respective offices, the presents
of gold and precious stones made on both sides, and a thousand other
particulars of equal importance, relating to the parade of this royal interview
See Froissart's CRONYCLE, translated by Lord Berners. Pinson, 1523. vol. ii. f.
242.
. On this account, Caxton, in his exhortation to the knights of his age, ranks
Froissart's history, as a book of chivalry, with the romances of Lancelot and
Percival; and recommends it to their attention, as a manual equally calculated
to inculcate the knightly virtues of courage and courtesy Book of the Order of
Chevalrye or Knighthood: translated out of the Frenshe and imprinted by Wylliam
Caxton. S. D. Perhaps 1484. 4to.
. This indeed was in an age when not only the courts of princes, but the
castles of barons, vied with one another in the luster of their shows: when
tournaments, coronations, royal interviews, and solemn festivals, were the
grand objects of mankind. Froissart was an eyewitness of many of the
ceremonies which he describes. His passion seems to have been that of seeing
magnificent spectacles, and of hearing reports concerning them His father was a
painter of armories. This might give him an early turn for shows. See M. de la
Curne de S. Palaye, Mem. Lit. tom. x. p. 664. edit. 4to.
. Although a canon of two churches, he passed his life in traveling from court
to court, and from castle to castle He was originally a clerk of the chamber to
Philippa, queen of Edward the third. He was afterward canon and treasurer of
Chimay in Henault, and of Lisle in Flanders: and chaplain to Guy Earl of
Castellon. Labor. Introd. a l'Hist de Charle^ vi. p. 69. Compare also
Froissart's Chron. ii. f. 29. 305. 319. And Bullart, Academ. des Arts et des
Scienc. i. p. 125. 126.
. He thus, either from his own observation, or the credible informations of
others, easily procured suitable materials for a history, which professed only
to deal in sensible objects, and those of the most splendid and conspicuous
kind. He was familiarly known to two kings of England, and one of Scotland
Cron. ii. f. 158. 161.
. But the court which he most admired was that of Gaston earl of Foix, at
Orlaix in Bearn; for, as he himself acquaints us, it was not only the most
brilliant in Europe, but the grand center for tidings of martial adventures
Cron. ii. f. 30. This was in 1381.
. It was crowded with knights of England and Arragon. In the mean time it must
not be forgot, that Froissart, who from his childhood was ^trongly attached to
carousals, the music of minstrells, and the sports of hawking and hunting See
Mem. Lit. ut supr. p. 665.
, cultivated the poetry of the troubadours, and was a writer of romances
Speaking of the death of king Richard, Froissart quotes a prediction from the
old French prose romance of BRUT, which he says was fulfilled in that
catastrophe. ^^v. iv. c. 119. Froissart will be mentioned again as a poet.
. This turn, it must be confessed, might have some share in communicating that
romantic cast to his history which I have mentioned. During his abode at the
court of the earl of Foix, where he was entertained for twelve weeks, he
presented to the earl his collection of the poems of the duke of Luxemburgh,
consisting of sonnets, balades, and virelays. Among these was included a
romance, composed by himself, called, MELIADER, or THE KNIGHT OF THE SUN OF
GOLD. Gaston's chief amusement was to hear Froissart read this romance I t^ke
this opportunity of remarking, that romantic tales or histories appear at a
very early period to have been RE AD as well as SUNG at feasts. So Wace in the
Roman du ROU, in the British Museum, abovementioned.

Doit l'en les verse et les reges^es,
Et les estoires LIRE as festes.

every evening after supper Froissart brought with him for a present to Gaston
Earl of Foix four greyhounds, which were called by the romantic names of
Tristram, He^tor, Brut, and Roland. Gaston was so ^^nd of hunting, that he kept
upwards of six hundred dogs in his castle. M. de la Curne, ut supr. p. 676.
678. He wrote a treatise on hunting, printed 1520. See Verdier, Art. GASTON
Comte de Foix. In illustration of the former part of this note, Crescimbeni
says, "Che in molte nobilissime famiglie Italiane, ha 400 a piu anni,
passarono' i nomi de' Lancillotti, de' Tristani, de Galvani, di Gal^otti, delle
Isotte, [Isoulde] delle Genevre, e d'altri cavalieri, a dame in esse TAVOLA
RITONDA operanti, etc." Istor. Volg. Poes. vol. i. lib. v. p. 327. Venez. 4to.
. At his introduction to Richard the second, he presented that brilliant
monarch with a book beautifully illuminated, engrossed with his own hand, bound
in crimson velvet, and embellished with silver bosses, clasps, and golden
roses, comprehending all the matters of AMORS and MORALITIES, which in the
course of twenty-four years he had composed I should think that this was his
romance of MELIADER. Froissart says, that the king at receiving it, asked him
what the book treated of. He answered d' Amor. The king, adds our historian,
seemed much pleased at this; and examined the book in many places, for he was
fond of reading as well as speaking French. He then ordered Richard Crendon,
the chevalier in waiting, to carry it into his privy chamber, don't il me ^it
bo^^e ch^re. He gave copies of the several parts of his chronicle^ as they were
finished, to his different patrons. Le La^oureur says, that Froissart sent
fifty-six quires of his ROMAN AU CRONIQUES to Guillaume de Bailly an
illuminator; which, when illuminated, were intended as a present to the king of
England. Hist. chapter vi. En la vie de Louis duc d'Anjou. p. 67. seq. See also
Cron. i. iv. c. 1. -- iii. 26. There are two or three fine illuminated copies
of Froissart now remaining among the royal manuscripts in the British Museum.
Among the stores of Henry the eighth at his manor of Bedington in Surry, I ^ind
the fashionable reading of the times exempli^^ed in the following books, viz. "
Item, a great book of parchmente written and lymned with gold of graver's work
De Confessione Amantis, with xviii other books, Le premier volume de Lancelot,
FROISSART, Le grant voyage de Jerusalem, Enguerain de Monstrellot, etc." MSS.
Harl. 1419. f. 382. Froissart was here properly classed.
. This was in the year 1396. When he left England the same year Froissart says,
that he accompanied the king to various palaces, "A Elten, a Ledos, a
Kinkestove, a Cenes, a Certesee et a Windsor." That is, Eltham, Leeds,
Kingston, Chertsey, etc. Cron. live. iv. c. 119. p. 348. The French are not much
improved at this day in spelling English places and names.
, the king sent him a massy goblet of silver, filled with one hundred nobles
Cron. f. 251. 252. 255. 319. 348. Bail, who has an article on Froissart, had
no idea of searching for anecdotes of Froissart's life in his CHRONICLE.
Instead of which, he swells his notes on this article with the contradictory
accounts of Mor^ri, Vossius, and others: whose disputes might have been all
easily settled by recurring to Froissart himself, who has interspersed in his
history many curious particulars relating to his own life and works.
.

As we are approaching to Chaucer, let us here stand still, and take a
retrospect of the general manners. The tournaments and carousals of our ancient
princes, by forming splendid assemblies of both sexes, while they inculcated
the most liberal sentiments of honor and heroism, undoubtedly contributed to
introduce ideas of courtesy, and to encourage decorum. Yet the national manners
still retained a great degree of ferocity, and the ceremonies of the most
refined courts in Europe had often a mixture of barbarism, which rendered them
ridiculous. This absurdity will always appear at periods when men are so far
civilized as to have lost their native simplicity, and yet have not attained
just ideas of politeness and propriety. Their luxury was inelegant, their
pleasures indelicate, their pomp cumbersome and unwieldy. In the mean time it
may seem surprising, that the many schools of philosophy which flourished in
the middle ages, should not have corrected and polished the times. But as their
religion was corrupted by superstition, so their philosophy degenerated into
sophistry. Nor is it science alone, even if founded on truth, that will polish
nations. For this purpose, the powers of imagination must be awakened and
exerted, to teach elegant feelings, and to heighten our natural sensibilities.
It is not the head only that must be informed, but the heart must also be
moved. Many classic authors were known in the thirteenth century, but the
scholars of that period wanted taste to read and admire them. The pathetic or
sublime strokes of Virgil would be but little relished by theologists and
metaphysicians.

SECT. XII.
THE most illustrious ornament of the reign of Edward the third, and of his
successor Richard the second, was Jeffrey Chaucer; a poet with whom the history
of our poetry is by many supposed to have commenced; and who has been
pronounced, by a critic of unquestionable taste and discernment, to be the
first English versifier who wrote poetically Johnson's DICTION. Pref. p. 1.
. He was born in the year 1328, and educated at Oxford, where he made a rapid
progress in the scholastic sciences as they were then taught: but the
liveliness of his parts, and the native gaiety of his disposition, soon
recommended him to the patronage of a magnificent monarch, and rendered him a
very popular and acceptable character in the brilliant court which I have above
described. In the mean time, he added to his accomplishments by frequent tours
into France and Italy, which he sometimes visited under the advantages of a
public character. Hitherto our poets had been persons of a private and
circumscribed education, and the art of versifying, like every other kind of
composition, had been confined to recluse scholars. But Chaucer was a man of
the world: and from this circumstance we are to account, in great measure, for
the many new embellishments which he conferred on our language and our poetry.
The descriptions of splendid processions and gallant carousals, with which his
works abound, are a proof that he was conversant with the practices and
diversions of polite life. Familiarity with a variety of things and objects,
opportunities of acquiring the fashionable and courtly modes of speech,
connections with the great at home, and a personal acquaintance with the
vernacular poets of foreign countries, opened his mind and furnished him with
new lights The earl of Salisbury, beheaded by Henry the fourth, could not but
patronise Chaucer. I do not mean for political reasons. The earl was a writer
of verses, and very fond of poetry. On this account, his acquaintance was much
cultivated by the famous Christina of Pisa; whose works, both in prose and
verse, compose so considerable a part of the old French literature. She used to
call him, "Gracieux chevalier, aimant dictiez, et lui-meme gracieux dicteur."
See M. Boivin, Mem. Lit. tom. ii. p. 767. seq. 4to. I have seen none of this
earl's Ditties. Otherwise he would have been here considered in form, as an
English poet.
. In Italy he was introduced to Petrarch, at the wedding of Violante, daughter
of Galeazzo duke of Milan, with the duke of Clarence: and it is not improbable
that Boccacio was of the party Froissart was also present. VIE DE PETRARQUE.
iii. 772. Amst. 1766. 4to. I believe Paulus Jovius is the first who me^tions
this anecdote. Vit. Galeas. ii. p. 152.
. Although Chaucer had undoubtedly studied the works of these celebrated
writers, and particularly of Dante, before this fortunate interview; yet it
seems likely, that these excursions gave him a new relish for their
compositions, and enlarged his knowledge of the Italian fables. His travels
likewise enabled him to cultivate the Italian and Provencial languages with the
greatest success; and induced him to polish the asperity, and enrich the
sterility of his native versification, with softer cadences, and a more copious
and variegated phraseology. In this attempt, which was authorized by the recent
and popular examples of Petrarch in Italy and Alain Chartier in France Leland
Script. Brit. 421.
, he was countenanced and assisted by his friend John Gower, the early guide
and encourager of his studies Gower, Confess. Amant. l. v. fol. 190. b.
Barthel. 1554. And great well Chaucer, when ye mete,
As my dis^^ple and my poet:
For in the flowers of his youth,
In sundry wise as he well couth,
Of dites and of songs glade
The which he for my sake made, etc.

. The revival of learning in most countries appears to have first owed its rise
to translation. At rude periods the modes of original thinking are unknown, and
the arts of original composition have not yet been studied. The writers
therefore of such periods are chiefly and very usefully employed in importing
the ideas of other languages into their own. They do not venture to think for
themselves, nor aim at the merit of inventors, but they are laying the
foundations of literature: and while they are naturalising the knowledge of
more learned ages and countries by translation, they are imperceptibly
improving the national language. This has been remarkably the case, not only in
England, but in France and Italy. In the year 1387, John Trevisa canon of
Westbury in Wiltshire, and a great traveller, not only finished a translation
of the Old and New Testaments, at the command of his munificent patron Thomas
lord Berkley See H. Wharton, Append. Cav. p. 49.
, but also translated Higden's POLYCHRONICON, and other Latin pieces Such as
Bartholomew Hantwille De Propri^ta^ibus Rerum, lib. xix. Printed by Wynkyn de
Word, 1494. fol. And Vegetius De Art Militari. MSS. Digb. 233. Bibl. Bodl. In
the same manuscript is Aegidius Romanus De R^gimine Principum, a translation
probably by Trevisa. He also translated some pieces of Richard Fitzralph,
archbishop of Armagh. See supr. p. 291. He wrote a tract, prefixed to his
version of the POLYCHRONICON, on the utility of translations. De Utilitate
Translationum, Dialogus int^r Clericum et Patronum. See more of his
translations in MSS. Harl. 1900. I do not find his ENGLISH BIBLE in any of our
libraries, nor do I believe that any copy of it now remains. Caxton mentions it
in the preface to his edition of the English POLYCHRONICON.
. But these translations would have been alone insufficient to have produced or
sustained any considerable revolution in our language: the great work was
reserved for Gower and Chaucer. Wickliffe had also translated the bible It is
observable, that he made his translation from the vulgate Latin version of
Jerome. It was finished 1383. See MS. Cod. Bibl. Coll. Eman. Cant. 102.
: and in other respects his attempts to bring about a reformation in religion
at this time proved beneficial to English literature. The orthodox divines of
this period generally wrote in Latin: but Wickliffe, that his arguments might
be familiarised to common readers and the bulk of the people, was obliged to
compose in English his numerous theological treatises against the papal
corruptions. Edward the third, while he perhaps intended only to banish a badge
of conquest, greatly contributed to establish the national diaiect, by
abolishing the use of the Norman tongue in the public acts and judicial
proceedings, as we have before observed, and by substituting the natural
language of the country. But Chaucer manifestly first taught his countrymen to
write English; and formed a style by naturalising words from the Provencial, at
that time the most polished dialect of any in Europe, and the best adapted to
the purposes of poetical expression.

It is certain that Chaucer abounds in classical allusions: but his poetry is
not formed on the ancient models. He appears to have been an universal reader,
and his learning is sometimes mistaken for genius: but his chief sources were
the French and Italian poets. From these originals two of his capital poems,
the KNIGHT'S TALE Chaucer alludes to some book from whence this tale was taken,
more than once, viz. v. 1. "Whilom, as old stories tellin us." v. 1465. " As
old books to us saine, that all this story tells more plain." v. 2814. "Of
soulis find I naught in this registre." That is, this History, or narrative.
See also v. 2297. In the Legende of good women, where Chau^^r's works are
mentioned, is this passage, which I do not well understand. v. 420.

And all the love of Palamon and Arcite
Of Thebis, though the story is known lite.

, and the ROMAUNT OF THE ROSE, are imitations or translations. The first of
these is taken from Boccacio.

Boccacio was the disciple of Petrarch: and although principally known and
deservedly celebrated as a writer or inventor of tales, he was by his
cotemporaries usually placed in the third rank after Dante and Petrarch. But
Boccacio having seen the Platonic sonnets of his master Petrarch, in a fit of
despair committed all his poetry to the flames Goujet, Bibl. Fr. Tom. vii. p.
328. But we must except, that besides the poem mentioned below, Boccacio's
AMAZONIDA, E FORZE D'ERCOLE, are both now extant: and were printed at Ferrara
in, or about, the year 1475. fol.
, except a single poem, of which his own good taste had long taught him to
entertain a more favorable opinion. This piece, thus happily rescued from
destruction, is at present so scarce and so little known, even in Italy, as to
have left its author but a slender proportion of that eminent degree of
poetical reputation, which he might have justly claimed from so extraordinary a
performance. It is an heroic poem, in twelve books, entitled LE TESEIDE, and
written in the octave stanza, called by the Italians ottava rima, which
Boccacio adopted from the old French chansons, and here first introduced among
his countrymen See Crescimben. I^tor. Volgar. Poes. vol. i. L. i. p. 65. Ven.
1731. 4to.
. It was printed at Ferrara, but with some deviations from the original, and
even misrepresentations of the story, in the year 1475 Poema della TESEIDE del
Boccacio chiosato, e dichia^ato du Andrea de Bassi in Ferrara, 1475. fol.
. Afterward, I think, in 1488. And for the third and last time at Venice, in
the year 1528 4to.
. But the corruptions have been suffered to remain through every edition.

Whether Boccacio was the inventor of the story of this poem is a curious
enquiry. It is certain that Theseus was an early hero of romance In Lydgate's
TEMPLE OF GLASS, never printed, among the lovers painted on the wall is The^eus
killing the Mino^aure. I suppose from Ovid. Bibl. Bodl. MSS. Fair^ax, 16. Or
from Chaucer, Legende Ar^adne.
. He was taken from that grand repository of the Grecian heroes, the History of
Troy, written by Guido de Colonna See^ p. 126. supr. And foregoing not^.
. In the royal library at Paris, there is a manuscript entitled, The ROMAN DE
THESEUS ET DE GADIFER MSS. Bibl. [Reg. Paris.] Tom. ii. 974. E.
. Probably this is the printed French romance, under the title, "Histoire du
Chevalier THESEUS de Coulogne, par sa prouesse empereur de Rome, et aussi de
son fills Gadifer empereur du Greece, et de trois enfans du dit Gadifer,
traduite de vieille rhyme Picarde en prose Francoise. Paris, 1534 Fol. tom. ii.
Again^ ibid. 4to. Bl. Let. See Lenglet, Bibl. Romans p. 191.
." Gadifer, with whom Theseus is joined in this ancient tale, written probably
by a troubadour of Picardy, is a champion in the oldest French romances The
chevaliers of the courts of Charles the fifth and sixth adopted names from the
old romances, such as Lancelot, Gadifer, Carados, etc. Mem. anc. Cheval. i. p.
340.
. He is mentioned frequently in the French romance of Alexander See p. 141.
supr.
. In the romance of PERCEFORREST, he is called king of Scotland, and said to be
crowned by Alexander the Great See History du Perce^orrest roy de la Gr.
Bretagne, et Gadiffer roy d'Escosse, etc. 6 tom. Paris, 1531. fol.
. But whether or no this prose HISTOIRE DU CHEVALIER THESEUS is the story of
Theseus in question, or whether this is the same Theseus, I cannot ascertain.
There is likewise in the same royal library a manuscript, called by Montfaucon,
HISTORIA THESEI IN LINGUA VULGARI, in ten books Bibl. MSS. ut supr. p. 773.
. The Abbe Goujet observes, that there is in some libraries of France an old
French translation of Boccacio's THESEID, from which Anna de Graville formed
the French poem of PALAMON and ARCITE, at the command of queen Claude, wife of
Francis the first, about the year 1487 Ut supr. p. 329.
. Either the translation used by Anna de Graville, or her poem, is perhaps the
second of the manuscripts mentioned by Montfaucon. Boccacio's THESEID has also
been translated into Italian prose, by Nicolas Granuci, and printed at Lucca in
1579 4to. There is a French prose translation with it. The THESEID has also
been translated into French prose by D. C. C. 1597. 12mo. Paris. "La THESEIDE
de Jean Boccace, contenant les chastes amors de deux chevaliers Thebans,
Arcite et Polemon, etc." Jane de la Fontaine also translated into French verse
this poem. She died 1536. Her translation was never printed. It is applauded by
Joannes Secundus, Eleg. xv.
. Boccacio himself mentions the story of Palamon and Arcite. This may seem to
imply that the story existed before his time: unless he artfully intended to
recommend his own poem on the subject by such an allusion. It is where he
introduces two lovers singing a portion of this tale. "Dioneo e Fiametta gran
pezza canterona insieme d'ARCITE e di PALAMONE Giorn. vii. Nov. 10. page 348.
edit. Vineg. 1548. 4to. Chaucer himself alludes to this story, B^. Kn. v. 369.
Perhaps on the same principle.
." By Dioneo, Boccacio represents himself; and by Fiametta, his mistress, Mary
of Arragon, a natural daughter of Robert king of Naples.

I confess I am of opinion, that Boccacio's THESEID is an original composition.
But there is a Greco-barbarous poem extant on this subject, which, if it could
be proved to be antecedent in point of time to the Italian poem, would degrade
Boccacio to a mere translator on this occasion. It is a matter that deserves to
be examined at large, and to be traced with accuracy.

This Greek poem is as little known and as scarce as Boccacio's THESEID. It is
entitled, (...). It was printed in quarto at Venice in the year 1529. Stampata
in Vinegia per Giovanantonio et fratelli da Sabbio a requisitione de M. Damiano
de Santa Maria de Spici M. D. XXIX. del Mese de Decembrio A manuscript of it is
in the Royal library at Paris, Cod. 2569. Du Cange, Ind. Auct. Gloss. Gr. Barb.
ii. p. 65. col. 1.
. It is not mentioned by Crusius or Fabricius; but is often cited by Du Cange
in his Greek glossary, under the title, DE NUPTIIS THESEI ET AEMILIAE. The
heads of the chapters are adorned with rude wooden cuts of the story. I once
suspected that Boccacio, having received this poem from some of his learned
friends among the Grecian exiles, who being driven from Constantinople took
refuge in Italy about the fourteenth century, translated it into Italian. Under
this supposition, I was indeed surprised to find the ideas of chivalry, and the
ceremonies of a tournament minutely described, in a poem which appeared to have
been written at Constantinople. But this difficulty was soon removed, when I
recollected that the Franks, Venetians, and Germans had been in possession of
that city for more than one hundred years; and that Baldwin earl of Flanders
was elected emperor of Constantinople in the year 1204, and was succeeded by
four Latin or Frankish emperors, down to the year 1261 About which period it is
probable that the anonymous Greek poem, called the Loves of Lybister and
Rhodamna, was written. This appears by the German name Frederic, which often
occurs in it, and is grecised, with many other German words. In a manuscript of
this poem which Crusius saw, were many paintings and illuminations; where, in
the representation of a battle, he observed no guns, but javelins, and bows and
arrows. He adds, "et musicae testudines." It is written in the iambic measure
mentioned below. It is a series of wandering adventures with little art or
invention. Lybister, the son of a Latin king, and a Christian, sets forward
accompanied with an hundred attendants in search of Rhodamna, whom he had lost
by the stratagems of a certain old woman skilled in magic. He meets Clitophon
son of a king of Armenia. They undergo various dangers in different countries.
Lybister relates his dream concerning a partridge and an eagle; and how from
that dream he fell in love with Rhodamna daughter of Chyses a pagan king, and
communicated his passion by sending an arrow, to which his name was affixed,
into a tower, or castle, called Argyrocastre, etc. See Crusii Turco-Graecia, p.
974. But we find a certain specie^ of erotic romances, some in verse and some
in prose, exi^ting in the Greek empire, the remains and the dregs of
Heliodorus, Achilles Tatius, Xenophon the Ephesian, Charito, Eustathius or
Eumathius, and others, about or rather before the year 1200. Such are the Loves
of Rhodan^e and Dosicles of Theodorus Prodromus, who wrote about the year 1130.
This piece was imitated by Nicetas Eugenianus in the Loves of Charicell and
Drosilla. See Labb. Bibl. Nov. Manu^cript. p. 220. Whether or no The Loves of
Cal^imac^us and ^hrysorrhoe, The Erot^c history of Hemperius, The history of
the Loves of Florius and Platzaflora, with some others, all by anonymous
authors, and in Greco-barbarous iambics, were written at Constantinople; or
whether they were the compositions of the learned Greeks after their
dispersion, of whom more will be said hereafter, I am not able to determine.
See Nessell. i. p. 342. 343. Meurs. Gloss. Gr. Barb. V. (...). And Lambecc. v.
p. 262. 264.
. Add to this, that the word, (...), a TOURNAMENT, occurs in the Byzantine
historians As also (...), Ha^tiludium. Fr. Tour^oi. And (...), hastiludio
co^tendere. John Cantacuzenus relates, that when Anne of Savoy, daughter of
Amadeus, the fourth earl of the Allobroges, was married to the emperor
Andronicus, junior, the Frankish and Savoya^d nobles, who accompanied the
princess, held tilts and tournaments before the court at Constantinople; which,
he adds, the Greeks learned o^ the Franks. This was in the year 1326. Hist.
Byzant. ^. i. cap. 42. But Nicetas says, that when the emperor Manuel made some
stay at Antioch, the Greeks held a solemn tournament against the Franks. This
was about the year 1160. Hist. Byzant. l. iii. cap. 3. Cinnamus observes, that
the same emperor Manuel altered the shape of the ^hields and lances of the
Greeks to those of the Franks. Hist. Byzant. lib. iii. Nicephorus ^regoras, who
wrote about the year 1340^ affirms, that the Greeks learned this practice from
the Franks. Hist. Byzant. l. x. p. 339. edit. fol. Genev. 1615. The word (...),
Knights, Ch^valiers, occurs often in ^he Byzantine histo^ians, even as early as
Anna Commena, who wrote about 1140. Alexiad. lib. xiii. p. 411. And we have in
J. Cantacuzenus, "(...)," He conferred the honor of Knighthood. This indeed is
said of the Franks. Hist. ut supr. l. iii. cap. 25. And in the Greek poem now
under consideration one of the titles is, "(...)." How Theseus dubbed the two
Thebans Knights. lib. vii. Signatur. (...). fol. verse.
. From the same communication likewise, I mean the Greek exiles, I fancied
Boccacio might have procured the stories of several of his tales in the
DECAMERON: as, for instance, that of CYMON and IPHIGENIA, where the names are
entirely Grecian, and the scene laid in Rhodes, Cyprus, Crete, and other parts
of Greece belonging to the imperial territory Giorn. v. Nov. 1.
. But, to say no more of this, I have at present no sort of doubt of what I
before asserted, that Boccacio is the writer and inventor of this piece. Our
Greek poem is in fact a literal translation from the Italian THESEID. It
consists of twelve books, and is written in Boccacio's octave stanza, the two
last lines of every stanza rhyming together. The verses are of the iambic kind,
and something like the VERSUS POLITICI, which were common among the Greek
scholars a little before and long after Constantinople was taken by the Turks,
in the year 1443. It will readily be allowed, that the circumstance of the
stanzas and rhymes is very singular in a poem composed in the Greek language,
and is alone sufficient to prove this piece to be a translation from Boccacio.
I must not forget to observe, that the Greek is extremely barbarous, and of the
lowest period of that language.

It was a common practice of the learned and indigent Greeks, who frequented
Italy and the neighboring states about the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries,
to translate the popular pieces of Italian poetry, and the romances or tales
most in vogue, into these Greco-barbarous iambics That is versus politici
abovementioned, a sort of loose iambic. See Langii PHILOLOGIA GRAECO-BARBARA.
Tzetes's Chiliads are written in this versification. See Du Cange, Gl. Gr. ii.
col. 1. 96.
. PASTOR FIDO was thus translated. The romance of AL^XANDER THE GREAT was also
translated in the same manner by Demetrius Zenus, who flourished in 1530, under
the title of (...), and printed at Venice in the year 1529 Crus. ut supr. p.
373. 399. See supr. p. 129.
. In the very year, and at the same place, when and where our Greek poem on
Theseus, or Palamon and Arcite, was printed. APOLLONIUS OF TIRE, another famous
romance of the middle ages, was translated in the same manner, and entitled
(...) That is, Rhythmically, Poetically. Gr. Barb.
(...) Du Cange mentions, "(...)." Ind. Auct. Gloss. Gr. Barb. ii. p. 36. col.
b. Compare Fabricius, Bibl. Gr. vi. 821. I believe it was first printed at
Venice, 1563. viz. "Historia Apollonii Tyanaei, [Tyrensis] Ven. 1563. Liber
Eroticus, Gr. barb. lingua exaratus ad modum rythmorum nostrorum, rarissimus
audit, etc." Vogt. Catal. libr. rarior. p. 345. edit. 1753. I think it was
reprinted at Venice, 1696. apud Nicol. Glycem. 8vo. In the works of Velserus,
there is Narratio Eorum quae Apolloni^ regi acciderunt, etc. He says it was
first written by some Greek author. Velseri Op. p. 697. edit. 1682. fol. The
L^tin is in Bibl. Bodl. MSS. Laud, 39. -- Bodl. F. 7. 7. And F. 11. 45. In the
preface, Velserus, who died 1614, says, that he believes the original in Greek
still remains at Constantinople, in the library of Manuel Eugenicus. Montsaucon
mentions a noble copy of this romance, written in the thirteenth century, in
the royal library at Paris. Bibl. MSS. p. 753. Compare MSS. Langb. Bibl. Bodl.
vi. p. 15. G^sta Apollonii, etc. There is a manuscript in Saxon of the romance
of APOLLONIUS OF TIRE. Wanley's Catal. apud Hickes, ii. 146. See Martin. Crusii
Turco-Graec. p. 209. edit. 1594 Gower recites many stories of this romance in
his CONFESSIO AMANTIS. He calls Apollonius "a young, a fresh, a lusty
knight." See Lib. viii. fol. 175. b. -- 185. a. But he refers to Godfrey of
Viterbo's PANTH^ON, or universal Chronicle, called also Memoriae Saeculorum,
partly in prose, partly verse, from the Creation of the world, to the year
1186. The author died in 1190. -- A Croni^e in days gone
The which is cleped Panteone, etc.
fol. 175. a. The play called PERICLE^ PRINCE OF TIRE, attributed to
Shakespeare, is taken from this story of Apollonius as told by Gower, who
speaks the Prologue. It existed in Latin before the year 900. See Barth.
Adversar. lviii. cap. i. Chaucer calls him "of Tire Apolloneus." PROL. Man. L.
TALE. v. 81. p. 50. Urr. edit. And quotes from this romance, How that the
cursid king Antiochus
Biraste his daughter of her maidinhede,
That is so horrible a tale to read,
When he her drew upon the pavement.
In the royal library there is "Histoire d'Apollin roy de Their." Brit. Mus.
MSS. Reg. 20 C. ii. 2. With regard to the French editions of this romance, the
oldest I have seen is, "Plaisante et agreeable Histoire d' Apollonius prince de
Thyr en Affrique et Toy d' Antioch, tradulte par Gilles Corozet, Paris, 1530.
8vo." And there is an old black-letter edition, printed in quarto at Geneva,
entitled, "La Chronique d' Appollin roy de Their." (...) the story appeared in a
modern dress by M. le Brun, under the title of "Avantures d'Apollonius de
Thyr," printed in twelves at Paris and Roterdam, in 1710. And again at Paris
the following year.
. The story of king Arthur they also reduced into the same language. The
learned Martinus Crusius, who introduced the Greco-barbarous language and
literature into the German universities, relates, that his friends who studied
at Padua sent him in the year 1564^ together with Homer's Iliad, (...) REGIS
ARTHURI, ALEXANDER abovementioned, and other fictitious histories or
story-books of a similar cast So I translate "alios id genus minores libellos."
Crus. ibid. p. 489. Crusius was born in 1526, and died 1607.
. The French history or romance of BERTRAND DU GUESCELIN, printed at Abbeville
in 1487 At the end of Le Triumph des NEUF PREUX, etc. fol. That is, The NINE
WORTHIES.
, and that of BELISAIRE, or Be^isarius, they rendered in the same language and
meter, with the titles (...) See du Cange, Gl. Gr. Barb. ii. Ind. Auctor. p.
36. col. b. This history contains Beltrand's, or Bertrand's amors with (...),
Chrysatsa, the king of Antioch's daughter.
, and (...), etc See Lambecc. Bibl. Caesar. Lib v. p. 264. It is remarkable,
that the story of Date obolum Belis^rio is not in Procopius, but in this
romance. Probably Vandyck got this story from a modernised edition of it,
called B^LLISAIRE ou le Conquerant, Paris. 1643. 8vo. Which, however, is said
in the title page to be taken from Procopius. It was written by the sieur de
Grenailles.
. Boccacio himself, in the DECAMERON They sometimes applied their Greek iambics
to the works of the ancient Greek poets. Demetrius Zenus, abovementioned,
translated Homer's (...): and Nicolaus Lucanus, the Iliad. The first was
printed at Venice, and afterward reprinted by Crusius, Turco-Graec. p. 373.
The latter was also printed at Venice, 1526. apud Steph. Sabium. This Demetrius
Zenus is said to be the author of the (...), or BATTLE OF THE CATS AND MICE.
See Crus. ubi supr. 396. And Fabric. Bibl. Gr. i. 264. 223. On account of the
Greco-barbarous books which began to grow common, chiefly in Italy, about the
year 1520, Stephen a Sabio, or Sabius, abovementioned, the printer of many of
them, published a Greco-barbarous lexicon at Venice, 1527, entitled, "CORONA
PRETIOSA, (...)." It is a mixture of modern and ancient Greek words, Latin and
Italian. It was reprinted at Venice by Petrus Burana, 1546.
, mentions the story of Troilus and Cressida in Greek verse: which I suppose
had been translated by some of the fugitive Greeks with whom he was connected,
from a romance on that subject; many ancient copies of which now remain in the
libraries of France See Lenglet's Bibl. Romans p. 253. "Le Roman de Troylus." And
Montfaucon, Bibl. MSS. p. 792. 793. etc. etc. There is, "L'Amore di Troleo et
Griseida que si tratta in buone part la Guerra di Troja, d'Angelo Leonico,
Ven. 1553." in octave rhyme. 8vo. More will be said of this hereafter, p. 384.
. The story of FLORIUS AND PLATZFLORA, a romance which Ludovicus Vives with
great gravity condemns under the name of Florian and Blanca-Flor, as one of the
pernicious and unclassical popular histories current in Flanders about the year
1523 Lud. Viv. de Christiana Femina. lib. i. cap. cui tit. Qui non legendi
Scriptores, etc. He lived at Bruges. He mentions other romances common in
Flanders, LEONELA AND CANAMOR, CURIAS AND F^ORELA, and PYRAMUS AND THISBE.
, of which there are old editions in French, Spanish FLORES y BLANCAFLOR. En
Alcala, 1512. 4to. -- Histoire Amoreuse de FLORES et de BLANCHEFLEUR, traduite
de l'Espagnol par Jacques Vincent. Paris, 1554. 8vo. -- FLORIMONT ET PASSEROZE,
traduite de l'Espagnol en prose Francoise, Lion, 15... 8vo. There is a French
edition at Lions, 1571. It was perhaps originally Spanish.
, and perhaps Italian, is likewise extant very early in Greek iambics, most
probably as a translation into that language See supr. p. 348. In the Notes.
Where, for want of further information, I left this point doubtful.
. I could give many others; but I hasten to lay before my readers some
specimens both of the Italian and the Greek PALAMON AND ARCITE For the use of
the Greek THESEID I am obliged to the politeness of Mr. Stanley, who
condescends to patronise and assist the studies he so well understands. I
believe there is but one more copy in England, belonging to Mr. Ramsay the
painter. Yet I have been told that Dr. George, provost of King's, had a copy.
The first edition of the Italian book, no less valuable a curiosity, is in the
excellent library of the very learned and communicative Dr. Askew. This is the
only copy in England. See BIBL. SMITH. Addend. fol. xl. Venet. 1755. 4to.
. Only premising, that both have about a thousand verses in each of the twelve
books, and that the two first books are introductory: the first containing the
war of Theseus with the Amazons, and the second that of Thebes, in which
Palamon and Arcite are taken prisoners. Boccacio thus describes the Temple of
Mars.

N e icampi Tracii sotto icieli hyberni
D a tempesta continua agitati
D oue schiere di nimbi sempiterni
D auenti or qua e or la trasmutati
I n uarii loghi ne iguazosi uerni
E de aqua globi per fredo agropati
G itati sono eneue tutta uia
C he in giazo amano aman se induria
E una selua sterile de robusti
C erri dove eran folti e alti molto
N odosi aspri rigidi e uetusti
C be de ombra eterna ricopreno il uolto
D el tristo suolo enfra li antichi fusti
D i ben mill furor sempre rauolto
V i si sentia grandissimo romore
N e uera bestia anchora ne pastore
I n questa nide la cha delo idio
A rmipotente qu^sta edificata
T utta de azzaio splendido e pulio
D alquale era del sol riuerberata
L aluce che aboreua il logho rio
T utta differro era la stretta entrata
E le port eran de eterno admante
F errato dogni part tutte quante
E le le colone di ferro custei
V i would ch^ lo edificio sosteneano
L i imp^ti de menti parue alei
V eder ch^ fieri dela porta usiano
E il ciecho pechare e ogne omei
S imilemente quiui si uedeano
V idiue le ire rosse come focho
E la paura palida in quel locho
E con gli occulti ferri itradimenti
V i would ele insidie con uista apparenza
L i discordia sedea esanguinenti
F erri auea in mano eogni differenza
E tutti iloghi pareano strepenti
D aspre minaze edi crudel intenza
E n mezo illocho la uertu tristissima
S edea di degne laud pouerissima
V ideui ancora lo alegro furore
E oltre acio con uolto sanguinoso
L a morte armata uide elo stupore
E ogni altar qui uera copioso
D i sangue sol ne le bataglie fore
D i corpi human cacciato eluminoso
E ra ciaschun di focho tolto aterre
A rse ediffate per le triste guerre
E t era il tempio tutto historiato Thus, (...) means paintings, properly
history-paintings, and (...), and (...), is to paint, in barbarous Greek. There
are various examples in the Byzantine writers. In middle Latinity
Historicgraphus signifies literally a Painter. Perhaps our HISTORIOGRAPHER
ROYAL was originally the king's Illuminator. (...) occurs in an Inscription
published by Du Cange, Dissertat. Joinv. xxvii. p. 319. Where (...) implies an
artist who painted in mosaic work called (...), or (...), Musivum. In the Greek
poem before us (...) is used for a Painter, lib. ii. (...).
In the middle Latin writers we have deping^^^ HISTORIALITER, To paint with
histories or figures, viz. "Forinsecus dealbavit illud [delubrum,] intrinsecus
autem depinxit historialiter." Dudo de Act. Norman. l. iii. p. 153. Dante uses
the Italian word before us in the same sense. Dante, Purgat. Cant. x. Quivi era
HISTORIATA l' alta gloria
Del Roman Prince. --
(...) frequently occurs, simply for picture or representation in colors.
Nilus Monach. lib. iv. Epist. 61. (...). "PICTURES of birds, serpents, and
plants." And in a thousand other instances.

D i socil mano e disopra edintorno
E cio che pria ui uide designato
E ran le prede de nocte edi giorno
T olto ale terre equalunque sforzato
F u era qui in habito musorno
V ideanuissi le gente incatenate
P orti di ferro e forteze spezate
V edeui ancor le naue bellatrici
I n uoti carri eli uolti guastati
E i miseri pianti and infelici
E t ogni forza con li aspecti e lati
O gni ferita ancor si vedea lici
E sangue con le terre mescolati
E ogni logo con aspecto fi^ro
S i uedea Mart turbido e altiero, etc. L. vii.

The Temple of Venus has these imageries.

P oi presso ase uidde passar belleza
S enza ornamento alchun se riguardando
E gir con lei uidde piaceuolleza
E luna laltra secho comendano
P oi con lor uidde istarsi gioueneza
D estra e adorna molto festegiando
E daltra part uidde el fool ardire
L usinge e ruffiania in sieme gire
I n mezo el locho in su alte colone
D i rame uidde un tempio al qual dintorno
D anzando giouenette uidde e done
Q ual da se belle: e qual de habito adorno
D iscinte e schalze in giube e in gone
E in cio sol dispendeano il giorno
P oi sopra el tempio uidde uolitare
P assere molte e columbi rugiare
E alentrata del tempio uicina
V idde che si sedeua piana mente
M adona pace: e in mano una cortina
N anzi la porta tenea lieue mente
A presso lei in uista assai tapina
P acientia sedea discreta mente
P allida ne lo aspecto: e dogni part
E intorno alei uidde promise e carte
P oi dentro al tempio entrata di sospiri
V i senti un tumulto che giraua
F ochoso tutto di caldi desiri
Q uesto glialtri tutti aluminaua
D i noue ^iame nate di martiri
D i qua ciaschun di lagrime grondaua
M osse da una dona cruda e ria
C he uidde li chiamata gilosia, etc.
Some of these stanzas are thus expressed in the Grecobarbarous translation
From which it was thought proper to give on larger specimen, as the language is
intelligible only to a very few curious scholars.
.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) L. vii. Sign. m g.
.
In passing through Chaucer's hands, this poem has received many new beauties.
Not only those capital fictions and desc^iptions, the temples of Mars, Venus,
and Diana, with their allegorical paintings, and the figures of Lycurgus and
Emetrius with their retinue, are so much heightened by the bold and spiri^ed
manner of the British bard, as to strike us with an air of originality. In the
mean time it is to be remarked, that as Chaucer in some places has thrown in
strokes of his own, so in others he has contracted the uninteresting and
tedious prolixity of narrative, which he found in the Italian poet. And that he
might avoid a servile imitation, and indulge himself as he pleased in an
arbitrary departure from the original, it appears that he neglected the
embarrassment of Boccacio's stanza, and preferred the English heroic couplet,
of which this poem affords the first conspicuous example extant in our language.

The situation and structure of the temple of Mars are thus described.

-- A forest
In which there wonneth nether man ne best:
With knotty knarry barrein treys old,
Of stubbys shape, and hideous to behold,
In which there was a rombyll and a swough Sound.

As though a storm should burstein every bough.
And downward from a hill, under a bent Precipice.
,
There stood the temple' of Mars armipotent,
Wrought all of burnyd Burnished.
stele: of which the entr^
Was long, and straight, and ghastly for to se:
And therout came such a rage and avyse Noise.
^
That it made all the gatys for to rise "It strained the doors: Almost forced
them from their hinges."
.
The northern light in at the doris shone,
For window on the wall ne was there none,
Through which men mightin any light dissern.
The door was al of adamant eterne,
Yclenchid overthwart and endelong,
With iron tough, for to makin it strong.
Every pillar the tempyl to sustene
Was tonne great A great tun. A tun-weight.
of yren bright and shene.
The gloomy sanctuary of this tremendous fane, was adorned with these
characteristical imageries.

There saw I first the dark Ymagining
Of Felony, and all the compassing:
The cruel Ire, red as any glede Coal.
.
The Pikpurse also, and eke the pale Dread Fear.
;
The Smyter with the knife undir the cloak Dryden has converted this image into
clerical hypocrisy, under which he takes an opportunity of gratifying his
spleen against the clergy. Knight's Tale, B. ii. p. 56. edit. 1713.

Next stood Hypocrisy with holy leer,
Soft-smiling and demurely looking down,
But hid the dagger underneath the gown.

:
The shepin brenning with the blake smoke Perhaps, for shepyn we should read
chepyn, or cheping, i. e. a town, a place of trade. This line is therefore to
represent, A City on fire. In Wickliffe's bible we have, "It is lyk to children
sittynge in CHEPYNGE." Matt. xi. 16.
;
The Treason of the murdering in the bed Dryden has lowered this image, The
assassinating wife. --

,
The opin War with woundis all bebledde;
Conteke Strife.
with bloody knyves This image is likewise entirely misrepresented by Dryden,
and turned to a satire on the church.

Contest with sharpened knives in cloisters drawn,
And all with blood bespread the holy lawn.

, and sharp Menace,
All full of chirkin Any disagreeable noise, or hollow murmur. Properly, the
jarring of a door upon the hinges. See also Chaucer's Boeth. p. 364. b. Urr.
edit. "When the field chirkinge agrisethe of the cold, by the fellnesse of the
wind Aquilon." The original is, "Vento Campus inhorruit."
was that sorry place!
The slear of himself yet saw I there,
His heart blood has bathid all his here,
The nail ydryvyn in the shode Head.
anyght In the night.
,
With the cold death the mouth gapyng upryght This couplet refers to the suicide
in the preceding one: who is supposed to kill himself by driving a nail into
his head in the night, and to be found dead and cold in his bed, with his
"mouth gapyng upryght." This is properly the meaning of his "hair being bathed
in blood." Shode, in the text, is literally a bush of hair. Dryden has finely
paraphrased this passage.
.
Amiddis of the temple sat Mischaunce,
With discomfort, and sorry countenance.
Yet saw I Wodeness Madness.
laughing in his rage.
Armid complaint of Theft, and fers Courage;
The carrein in the bush with throat ycorve Throat cut.
,
A thousand sleyne and not of qualme ystorve "Slain, not destroyed by sickness
or dying a natural death."
.
The tyrant with the prey by force yreft,
The town destroyid there was nothing left.
Yet saw I brent the ships upon steris,
The hunter straunglid with the wild boris.
The sow fretting Devouring.
the child right in the cradel,
The coke scaldid for all his long ladel.
Naught was forgott the infortune of Mart;
The cartir Charioteer.
overriddin by his cart Chariot.
,
Under the whele he lay full low adowne.
There were also of Marts divisioune,
The Harbor, and the Butcher, and the Smith
That forgith sharp swerdis on the stith Anvil.
.
And all above, depeintid in a towr,
Saw I Conquest sitting in great honor,
With the sharp sword right ovir his head,
Hanging but by a subtill-twined thread v. 1998. p. 16. Urr.
.
This groupe is the effort of a strong imagination, unacquainted with selection
and arrangement of images. It is rudely thrown on the canvas without order or
art. In the Italian poets, who describe every thing, and who cannot, even in
the most serious representations, easily suppress their natural predilection
for burlesque and familiar imagery, nothing is more common than this mixture of
sublime and comic ideas There are many other instances of this mixture. v.
1179. "We strive as did the houndis for the bone." v. 1264. "We fare as he that
dronk is as a mouse, etc." v. 2762. "Farewell physic! Go bear the corse to
church." v. 2521. "Some said he lokid grim and he would ^ight, etc."
. The form of Mars follows, touched with the impetuous dashes of a savage and
spirited pencil.

The statue Form, or figure. Statuary is not implied here. Thus he mentions the
statue of Mars on a banner, supr. v. 977. I cannot forbear adding in this place
these fine verses of Mars arming himself in haste, from our author's Complaint
of Mars and Venus, v. 99. He throwith on his helm of huge weight;
And girt him with his sword, and in his hond
His mighty spear, as he was wont to feight,
He shekith so, that it al^ost to wend.
Here we see the force of description without a profusion of idle epithets.
These verses are all sinew: they have nothing but verbs and substantives.
of Mars upon a cart Chariot.
stood,
Armid, and lokid grym as he were wode Mad.
.
A wolf there stod before him at his fete
With eyin red, and of a man he ete.
With sotill pensil paintid was the story,
In Recording.
redouting Mars and of his glory v. 2043.
.
But the groundwork of this whole description is in the Thebaid of Statius. I
will make no apology for transcribing the passage at large, that the reader may
judge of the resemblance. Mercury visits the temple of Mars, situated in the
frozen and tempestuous regions of Thrace Chaucer points out this very temple in
the introductory lines, v. 1981.

Like to the estries of the grisly place
That hight the great temple of Mars in Thrace.
In thilke cold and frosty region,
There as Mars has his sovran mansion.

.

Hic steriles delubra notat Mavortia sylvas,
Horrescitque tuens: ubi mill furoribus illi
Cingitur, adverso domus immansueta sub Aemo.
Ferrea compago laterum, ferro arcta teruntur
Limina, ferratis incumbunt tecta columnis.
Laeditur adversum Phoebi jubar, ipsaque sedem
Lux timet, et dirus contristat sydera fulgor.
Digna loco statio. Primis subit impetus amens
E foribus, caecumque Nefas, Iraeque rubentes,
Exanguesque Metus; occultisque ensibus astant
Insidiae, geminumque tenens Discordia ferrum.
Innumeris strepit aula minis. Tristissima Virtus
Stat medio, laetusque Furor, vultuque cruento
Mors armata sedet. Bellorum solus in aris
Sanguis, et incensis qui raptus ab urbibus ignis.
Terrarum exuviae circum, et fastigia templi
Captae insignibant gentes, coelataque ferro
Fragmina portarum, bellatricesque carinae,
Et vacui currus, protritaque curribus ora Stat. Theb. vii. 40. And below we
have Chaucer's Doors of adamant eterne, viz. v. 68. -- Clausaeque adamante
perenni
Dissiluere fores. --
Statius also calls Mars, Armipotens. v. 78. A sacrifice is copied from
Statius, where says Chaucer, v. 2296. And did her thingis as men might behold
In Stace of Thebes. --
I think Statius is copied in a simile, v. 1640. The introduction of this poem
is also taken from the Thebaid, xii. 545. 481. 797. Compare Chaucer's lines, v.
870. seq. v. 917. seq. v. 996. seq. The funeral pyre of Arcite is also
translated from Theb. vi. 195. seq. See Chapter v. 2940. seq. I likewise take this
opportunity of observing, that Lucretius and Plato are imitated in this poem.
Together with many passages from Ovid and Virgil.
.
Statius was a favorite writer with the poets of the middle ages. His bloated
magnificence of description, gigantic images, and pompous diction, suited their
taste, and were somewhat of a piece with the romances they so much admired.
They neglected the gentler and genuine graces of Virgil, which they could not
relish. His pictures were too correctly and chastely drawn to take their
fancies: and truth of design, elegance of expression, and the arts of
composition, were not their objects In Troilus and Cresside he has translated
the arguments of the twelve books of the Thebaid of Statius. See B. v. p. 1479.
seq.
. In the mean time we must observe, that in Chaucer's Temple of Mars many
personages are added: and that those which existed before in Statius have been
retouched, enlarged, and rendered more distinct and picturesque by Boccacio and
Chaucer. Arcite's address to Mars, at entering the temple, has great dignity,
and is not copied from Statius.

O strong god, that in the reignis cold
Of Thrace honourid art, and God yhold!
And have in every reign, and every land,
Of armis all the bridil in thy hond;
And them fortunist, as they lest devise,
Accept of me my pitous sacrifice v. 2375.
.
The following portrait of Lycurgus, an imaginary king of Thrace, is highly
charged, and very great in the gothic style of painting.

There may 'ou You.
see, coming with Palamon,
Lycurgus himself, the great king of Thrace;
Blake was his berde, and manly was his face:
The circles of his eyin in his head
They glowdin betwixt yalowe and read:
And like a lion lokid he about,
With kempid heris on his browis stout:
His limis great, his brawnis herd and strong,
His shulderes broad, his armis round and long.
And as the guise ywas in his contre
Full high upon a char of gold stood he:
With four great white bullis in the tracis.
Instead of court cote armur, on his harneis
With yalowe nails, and bright as any gold,
He has a beris A bear's.
skinn cole-blak for old.
His long here was kemped behind his bak,
As any raven's fether't shone for blak.
A wrethe of gold armgrete As big as your arm.
, of huge weight,
Upon his head, set full of stonis bright,
Of fine rubies, and clear diamondes.
About his char there wentin white alandes Greyhounds. A favorite species of
dogs in the middle ages. In the ancient pipe-rolls, payments are frequently
made in greyhounds. Rot. Pip. an. 4. Reg. Johann. [A. D. 1203.] "Rog.
Constabul. Cestrie debet D. Marcas, et X. palfridos et X. laissas Leporariorum
pro habenda terra Vidonis de Loverell de quibus debet reddere per ann. C. M."
Ten leashes of greyhounds. Rot. Pip. an. 9. Reg. Johann. [A. D. 1208.]
"SUTHANT. Johan. Teingre debet C. M. et X. leporarios magnos, pulchros, et
bonos, de redemtione sua, etc." Rot. Pip. an. 11. Reg. Johan. [A. D. 1210.]
"EVERVEYCSIRE. Rog. de Mallvell redd. comp. de I. palefrido velociter currente,
et II. Laisiis leporariorum pro habendis literis deprecatoriis ad Matildam de
M." I could give a thousand other instances of the sort.
,
Twenty and more, as great as any stere,
To huntin at the lion or wild bear;
And folowid him with mosil Muzzle.
fast ybound,
Coleres of gold In Hawes's PASTIME OF PLEASURE, [written temp. Hen. vii.] Fame
is attended with two greyhounds; on whose golden collars Grace and Governaunce,
are inscribed in diamond letters. See next note.
and torretes Rings. The fastening of dogs collars. They are often mentioned in
the INVENTORY of furniture, in the royal palaces of Henry the eighth, above
cited. MSS. Harl. 1419. In the Castle of Windsor. Article COLLARS. f. 409. "Two
greyhoundes collars of crimsun velvett and cloth of gold, lacking torrettes."
-- "Two other collars with the kings arms, and at the end portcullis and
rose." -- "Item, a collar embrawdered with pomegranates and roses with turrets
of silver and gilt." -- "A collar garnished with stoleworke with one shallop
shelle of silver and gilte, with torrettes and pendauntes of silver and
guilte." -- "A collar of white velvette, embrawdered with perles, the swivels
of silver."
filid Filed. Highly polished.
round.
A hundrid lordis had he irr his rout,
Armid full well, with hertis stern and stout v. 2129.
.
The figure of Emetrius king of India, who comes to the aid of Arcite, is not
inferior in the same style, with a mixture of grace.

With Arcite, in storys as men find,
The great Emetrius, the king of Ind,
Upon a stead bay, trappid in steel,
Coverid with clothe of gold diaprid See this word expl^ined above, p. 176.
well,
Came riding like the god of armis Mars:
His cote armure was of the clothes of Tars Not of Tarsus in Cilicia. It is
rather an abbreviation for Tartarin, or Tartarium. See Chaucer's Flower and
Leaf, v. 212.

On every trumpe hanging a broad bannere
Of fine Tartarium full richely beat.
That it was a costly stuff appears from hence. "Et ad faciendum unum Jupoun de
Tartaryn blu pouderat. cum garterii^ blu paratis cum boucles et pendants de
argento deaurato." Comp. J. Coke Provisoris Magn. Garderob. temp. Edw. iii. ut
supr. It often occurs in the wardrob^accounts for furnishing to^^naments. Du
Cange says, that this was a fine cloth manufactured in Tartary. Glo^^.
Tartarium. But Skinner in V. derives it from Torto^a in the Milanese. He cites
Stat. 4. Hen. viii. c. vi.


,
Couchid with perles white and round and great;
His sadill was of brent Burnt. Burnished.
gold new ybete,
A mantlet upon his shulderes hanging,
Bretfull Quite full.
of rubies red as fire sparkling.
His crispe here like ringes Rings.
was yronne,
And yt was yalowe, glittering as the son.
His nose was high, his eyin bright citryn Lemon-colour. Lat. Citrinus.
^
Ruddy his lips, his color was sangyn.
And a few frekles in his face yspreint Sprinkled.
,
Betwixt yalowe and somedele blak ymeint "A mixture of black and yellow."
.
And as a lion he his eyis kest Cast. Darted.
.
Of five and twenty year his age I ghest.
His berde was well begonning for to spring,
His throat was as a trompet thondiring.
Upon his head he wered, of laurer grene
A garlond fresh, and lusty for to seen.
Upon his hand he bore for his delight
An egle tame, as any lilie white See supr. p. 166.
.
An hundrid lordis had he with them there,
All armid, saaf their heddis, in their gere Armor.
.
About this king there ran on every part
Full many a tame lion, and libart Libbard. v. 2157.
.
The banner of Mars displayed by Theseus, is sublimely conceived.

The red statue of Mars, with spear and targe,
So shines in his white banner large
That all the feldis glittrin up and down v. 977.
.
This poem has many strokes of pathetic description, of which these specimens
may be selected.

Upon that other side when Palamon
Wist that his cousin Arcite was ygon,
Such sorrow makith he, that the great tour
Resoundid of his yelling and clamor:
The fetteris upon his shinnis great
Werin of his bitter salt teris wete v. 1277.
.
Arcite is thus described, after his return to Thebes, where he despairs of
seeing Emilia again.

His sleep, his mete, his drink, is him byrest;
That lene he waxith, and dry as a sheft:
His eyin hollow, grisly to behold
His hew sallowe, and pale as ashin Ashes.
cold:
Solitary he was, evir alone,
And wayling all the night making his moan.
And if he herd song or instrument,
Than would he wepin, he might not be stent Stayed.
.
So febyll were his spirits and so low,
And chaungid so that no man might him know V. 1363.
.
Palamon is thus introduced in the procession of his rival Arcite's funeral.

Tho began this woeful Theban Palamon
With slotery Squallid.
berde, and ruggy ashey here is,
In clothis blak bedropped all with teres,
And, passing ovir weping Emily,
Was rufullist of all the company V. 2884.
.
To which may be added the surprise of Palamon, concealed in the forest, at
hearing the disguised Arcite, whom he supposes to be the squire of Theseus,
discover himself at the mention of the name of Emilia.

-- Through his heart
He felt a cold sword suddenly to glide:
For ire he quoke, no longer would he bide,
And when that he had heard Arcitis tale,
As he were wode, with face al deed and pale,
He sterte him up out of the bushis thick, etc. V. 1576.

A description of the morning must not be omitted; which vies, both in
sentiment and expression, with the most finished modern poetical landscape, and
finely displays our author's talent at delineating the beauties of nature.

The merry lark, messengere of the day,
Salewith Saluteth.
in her song the morrow gray;
And fiery Phoebus rysith up so bright,
That all the orient laugith at the sight In the Greek, (...). iii. Signat. e e
iiii. (...), etc. See Dante, Purgat. c. 1. p. 234.
:
And with his stremis dries in the greves Groves. Bushes.

The silvir dropis hanging in the leves 1493.
.
Nor must the figure of the blooming Emilia, the most beautiful object of this
vernal picture, pass unnoticed.

-- Emilie, that fairir was to seen
Than is the lilly upon the stalk grene;
And freshir than the May with flouris new,
For with the rosy color strofe her hew V. 1037.
.
In other parts of his works he has painted morning scenes con amore: and his
imagination seems to have been peculiarly struck with the charms of a rural
prospect at sunrising.

We are surprised to find, in a poet of such antiquity, numbers so nervous and
flowing: a circumstance which greatly contributed to render Dryden's paraphrase
of this poem the most animated and harmonious piece of versification in the
English language. I cannot leave the KNIGHT'S TALE without remarking, that the
inventor of this poem, appears to have possessed considerable talents for the
artificial construction of a story. It exhibits unexpected and striking turns
of fortune; and abounds in those incidents which are calculated to strike the
fancy by opening resources to sublime description, or interest the heart by
pathetic situations. On this account, even without considering the poetical and
exterior ornaments of the piece, we are hardly disgusted with the mixture of
manners, the confusion of times, and the like violations of propriety, which
this poem, in common with all others of its age, presents in almost every page.
The action is supposed to have happened soon after the marriage of Theseus with
Hippolita, and the death of Creon in the siege of Thebes: but we are soon
transported into more recent periods. Sunday, the celebration of matins,
judicial astrology, heraldry, tilts and tournaments, knights of England, and
targets of Prussia The knights of the Teutonic order were settled in Prussia,
before 1300. See also Chapter Prol. v. 53. Where tournaments in Prussia are
mentioned. Arcite quotes a fable from Aesop, v. 1179.
, occur in the city of Athens under the reign of Theseus.

SECT. XIII.
CHAUCER'S ROMAUNT OF THE ROSE is translated from a French poem entitled, LE
ROMAN DE LA ROSE. It was begun by William of Lorris, a student in
jurisprudence, who died about the year 1260 Fauchet, p. 198.
. Being left unfinished, it was completed by John of Meun, a native of a little
town of that name, situated on the river Loire near Orleans, who seems to have
flourished about the year 1310 Id. ibid. p. 200. He also translated Boethius De
Consolatione, and Abelard's Letters, and wrote Answers of the Sybills, etc.
. This poem is esteemed by the French the most valuable piece of their old
poetry. It is far beyond the rude efforts of all their preceding romancers: and
they have nothing equal to it before the reign of Francis the first, who died
in the year 1547. But there is a considerable difference in the merit of the
two authors. William of Lorris, who wrote not one quarter of the poem, is
remarkable for his elegance and luxuriance of description, and is a beautiful
painter of allegorical personages. John of Meun is a writer of another cast. He
possesses but little of his predecessor's inventive and poetical vein; and in
that respect was not properly qualified to finish a poem begun by William of
Lorris. But he has strong satire, and great liveliness The poem consists of
22734 verses. William of Lorris's part ends with v. 4149. viz.

"A peu que je ne m'en desespoir."

. He was one of the wits of the court of Charles le Bell.

The difficulties and dangers of a lover, in pursuing and obtaining the object
of his desires, are the literal argument of this poem. This design is couched
under the allegory of a Rose, which our lover after frequent obstacles gathers
in a delicious garden. He traverses vast ditches, scales lofty walls, and
forces the gates of adamantine and almost impregnable castles. These enchanted
fortresses are all inhabited by various divinities; some of which assist, and
some oppose, the lover's progress In the preface of the edition printed in the
year 1538, all this allegory is turned to religion. The Rose is proved to be a
state of grace, or divine wisdom, or eternal beatitude, or the Holy Virgin to
which heretics cannot gain access. It is the white Rose of Jericho, Quasi
plantatio Ros^^ in Jericho, etc. etc. The chemists, in the mean time, made it a
search for the Philosopher's Stone: and other professions, with labored
commentaries, explained it into their own respective sciences.
.

Chaucer has luckily translated all that was written by William of Lorris See
Occleve's Letter of Cupide, written 1402. Urry's Chaucer, p. 536. v. 283. Who
calls John of Moon the author of the Romaunt of the Rose.
: he gives only part of the continuation of John of Meun Chaucer's poem
consists of 7699 verses: and ends with this verse of the original, viz. v.
13105.

"Vous aurez absolution."
But Chaucer has made several omissions in John of Meun's part, before he comes
to this period. He has translated all William of Lorris's part, as I have
observed; and his translation of that part ends with v. 4432. viz.

"Than shuldin I fallin in wanhope."
Chaucer's cotemporaries called his Romant of the Rose, a translation. Lydgate
says that Chaucer

-- Notably did his business
By great avyse his wits to dispose,
To translate the ROMANS OF THE ROSE.
Prol. Boch. st. vi. It is manifest that Chaucer took no pains to disguise his
translation. He literally follows the French, in saying, that a river was
"less than Saine." i. e. the Seine at Paris. v. 118. "No wight in all Paris."
v. 7157. A grove has more birds "than ben in all the relme of France, v. 495.
He calls a pine, "A tree in France men call a pine." v. 1457. He says of roses,
"so fair werin nevir in Rone." v. 1674. "That for Paris ne for Pavie." v.
1654. He has sometimes reference to French ideas, or words, not in the
original. As "Men clepin hem Sereins in France." v. 684. "From Jerusalem to
Burgoine." v. 554. "Grein de Paris." v. 1369. Where Skinner says, Paris is
contracted for Paradise. In mentioning minstrells and juglers, he says, that
some of them "Songin songs of Loraine." v. 776. He adds, For in Loraine there
notis be
Full swetir than in this contre.
There is not a syllable of these songs, and singers, of Loraine, in the
French. By the way, I suspect that Chaucer translated this poem while he was at
Paris. There are also many allusions to English affairs, which I suspected to
be Chaucer's; but they are all in the French original. Such as, "Hornpipis of
Cornevaile." v. 4250. These are called in the original, "Chalemeaux de
Cornouaille." v. 3991. A knight is introduced, allied to king "Arthour of
Bretaigne." v. 1199. Who is called, "Bon roy Artus de Bretaigne." Orig. v.
1187. Sir Gawin, and Sir Kay, two of Arthur's knights, are characterised, v.
2206. seq. See Orig. v. 2124. Where the word Keulx is corrupt for Keie. But
there is one passage, in which he mentions a Bachelere as fair as "The Lordis
son of Windisore." v. 1250. This is added by Chaucer, and intended as a
compliment to some of his patrons. In the Legende of good Women, Cupid says to
Chaucer, v. 329.

For in plain text, withoutin need of gloss,
Thou have translatid the Romaunt of the Rose.

. How far he has improved on the French original, the reader shall judge. I
will exhibit passages selected from both poems; respectively placing the French
under the English, for the convenience of comparison. The renovation of nature
in the month of May is thus described.

That it was May, thus dremed me, Qu'on joli moys de May songeoye,
Ou temps amoreux plein de joye,
Qu^ toute chose si s'^sgaye,
Si qu'il n'y a buissons ne hay
Qui en May parer ne se vueille,
Et couvrir de nouvelle fueille:
Les boys recouvrent leur verdure,
Qui sont sces tant qui l'hiver dure;
La terre mesmes s'en orgouille
Pour la rougee qui ta mouille,
En oublian la povrete
Ou elle a tout l'hiver este;
Lors devient la terre si gobe,
Qu'elle veult avoir neusve robe;
Si scet si cointe robe fair,
Que de couleurs y a cent pair,
D'herbes, de ^leures Indes and Perses:
Et de maintes couleurs diverses
Est la robe que je devise
Parquoy la terre mieulx se prise.
Les oiseaulx qui tant se sont teuz
Pour l'hiver qu'ils ont tous sentuz,
Et pour le froit et diverse temps,
Sont en May, et par la printemps,
Si liez, etc.
v. 51.
,
In time of love and jollite,
That all thing ginnith waxin gay,
For there is neither bushe nor hay Bush, or hedge-row. Sometimes Wood. Rot.
Pip. an 17. Henr. iii. "Et Heremitae sancti Edwardi in haga de Birchenwude, xl.
sol."

In May that it n'ill shroudid been,
And it with new levis wrene Hide. From wrie, or wrey, to cover.
:
These wooddis eke recoverin grene,
That dry in winter ben to seen;
And the earth waxith proud withal
For sote dewis that on it fall,
And the povir estate forgette
In which that winter had it set:
And than becomes the ground so proud,
That it will have a new shroud;
And make so quaynt his robe and fair,
That it had hewes an hundred pair,
Of grass and flowris Inde and Pers:
And many hewis full diverse
That is the robe I mean iwis,
Through which the ground to praisin is,
The birdis, that han left their song
While they han suffrid cold full strong,
In wethers grille Cold.
and dark to sight,
Ben in May, for the sun bright
So glad, etc v. 51.
.
In the description of a grove, within the garden of Mirth, are many natural
and picturesque circumstances, which are not yet got into the storehouse of
modern poetry.

These trees were set as I devise Mais sachies que les arbres furent
Si loing a loing comme estre durent
L'ung fut de l'autre loing assis
De cinque toises voyre de six,
Mais moult furent ^ueilluz et haulx
Pour gardir de l'este le chaulx
Et si espis par dessus furent
Que chaleurs percer ne lis peuvent
Ne ne povoient bas descendre
Ne fair mal a l'erbe tender.
Au vergier eut dains and chevreleux,
Et aussi beaucoup d'escureux,
Qui par dessus arbres sailloyent;
Conuins y avoit qui yssoient
Bien souvent horse de leurs tanieres,
En moult de diverses manieres.
v. 1368.
,
One from another in a toise,
Five fadom or six, I trow so,
But they were hie and great also;
And for to keep out well the sun,
The croppis were so thik yrunne "The tops, or boughs, were so thickly twisted
together."
,
And every branch in other knitte
And full of grene levis sit Set.
,
That sun might there none discende
Lest the tendir grassis shende Be hurt.
.
There might men does and roes ise See.
,
And of squirels full great plente,
From bow to bow alwaie lepinge;
Connis Conies.
there were also playing Chaucer imitates this passage in the Assemble of
Fowls. v. 190. seq. Other passages of that poem are imitated from Roman de la
Rose.
.
That comin out of there clapers Buroughs.
,
Of sondrie colors and manners;
And madin many a turneying
Upon the fresh grass springing v. 1391.
.
Near this grove were shaded fountains without frogs, running into murmuring
rivulets, bordered with the softest grass enamelled with various flowers.

In placis saw I wellis there Par lieux y eut cleres fontaines,
Sans barbelotes A sp^cies of insect often found in stagnant water.
and sans raines,
Qui des arbres estoient umbrez,
Par moy ne vous seront nombrez,
Et petit ruisseaulx, que Deduit
Avoit la trouves par conduit;
L'eaue alloit aval faisant
Son melodieux et plaisant.
Aux bortz des ruisseaulx et des rives
Des fontaines cleres et vives
Poignoit l'erbe dru et plaisant
Grant soulas et plaisir faisant.
Amy povoit avec sa mye
Soy deporter never doubtez mye. --
Violette y fut moult belle
Et aussi parvenche nouvelle;
Fleurs y eut blanches et vermeilles,
Ou ne pourroit trouver pareilles,
De toutes diverses couleurs,
De haulx pris et de grans valeurs,
Si estoit soef flairans
Et reflagrans et odorans.
v. 1348.

In which there no froggis were,
And fair in shadow was each well;
But I ne can the nombre tell
Of stremis small, that by devise
Mirth had don com thorough condise Conduits.
,
Of which the watir in renning,
Began makin a noise full liking.
About the brinkis of these wellis,
And by the stremes ovir at ellis
Sprange up the grass as thick isett
And soft eke as any velvett.
On which man might his leman ley
As soft as fetherbed to pley. --
There sprange the violet all new,
And fresh perwinke Periwinkle.
rich of hew;
And flouris yalowe white and read,
Such plenti grew there ner in mede:
Full gaie was all the ground and queint
And poudrid, as men had it peint,
With many a fresh and sundry flower
That castin up full good savoure v. 1411.
.
But I hasten to display the peculiar powers of William de Lorris in
delineating allegorical personages; none of which have suffered in Chaucer's
translation. The poet suppo^es, that the garden of Mirth, or rather Love, in
which grew the Rose, the object of the lover's wishes and labors, was enclosed
with embatlled walls, richly painted with various figures, such as Hatred,
Avarice, Envy, Sorrow, Old Age, and Hypocrisy. Sorrow is thus represented.

SORROW was paintid next ENVY De les ENVY etoit TRISTESS^
Painte aussi et garny^ d'angoisse.
Et bien paroit a sa couleur
Qu'elle avoit a cueur grant douleur:
Et sembloit avoir la jaunice,
La n'y faisoit riens AVARICE,
Le paliss^ur ne de maigresse
Car le travail et la destresse, etc.
Moult sembloit bien que fust dolente;
Car el n'avoit pas este lent
D'esgratignier toute sa chiere;
Sa robe ne luy estoit chiere
En mains lieux l'avoit dessiree,
Comme culle qui fut yree.
Ses cheveulx derompus estoient,
Qu'autour de son col pendoient,
Presque les avoit tous desroux
De maltalent et de corroux.
v. 300.

Upon that wall of masonrie.
But well was seen in her color,
That she had livid in languour;
Her seemid to have the jaundice,
Not half so pale was AVARICE,
Ne nothing alike of lenenesse
For sorrow, thought, and great distress.
A s'rowful thing well semid she;
Nor she had nothing slow ybe
For to bescrachin of her face,
And for to rent in many place
Her clothes, and for to tere her swire Neck.
,
As she that was fulfilled of ire:
And al to torn lay eke her here
About her shoulders, here and there;
As she that had it all to rent
For anger and for male talent v. 300.
.
Nor are the images of HATRED and AVARICE inferior.

Amiddis saw I HATE ystonde Au milieu de mur je vy HA^NE.
Si n'estoit pas bien atournee,
Ains sembloit estre forcence
Rechignee estoit et fron^e
Avoit le nez et rebo^rse.
Moult hydeuse estoit et souillee
Et fut sa test entortillee
Tres ordement d'un touaille,
Qui moult estoit d'horrible taille.
143.
. --
And she was nothing well araide
But like a wode woman afraid:
Yfrowncid foul was her visage,
And grinning for dispiteous rag^,
Her nose ysnortid up for tene Anger.

Full hideous was she forti seen,
Full foul and rustey was she this,
Her head iwrithin was iwis,
Full grimly with a great towaile, etc v. 147.
.
The design of this work will not permit me to give the portrait of Idleness,
the portress of the garden of Mirth, and of others, which form the groupe of
dancers in the garden: but I cannot resist the pleasure of transcribing those
of Beauty, Franchise, and Richesse, three capital figures in this genial
assembly.

The God of love, jolife and light Le Dieu d'amours si s'estoit pris
A une dame de hault pris,
Pres se tenoit de son cost
Celle dame eut nom BEAULTE.
Ainsi comme une des cinque flesches
En ille aut toutes bonnes taiches:
Point ne fut obscur, ne brun,
Mais fut clear comme la lune. --
Tender eut la chair comme rousee,
Simple fut comme une espousee.
Et blanch comme fleur de lis,
Visage eut bell doulx et alis,
Elle estoit gresle et alignee
N'estoit fardi^ ne pignee,
Car elle n'avoit pas mestier
De soy farther et affaictier.
Les cheveulx ent blons et si longs
Qu' ils batoient aux talons.
v. 1004.
,
Ladde on his hand a lady bright,
Of high prise, and of great degree,
Thy lady called was BEAUTY.
And an arowe, of which I told,
Full well ythewid Having good qualities. See supr. v. 939. seq.
was she hold:
Ne was she dark ne brown, but bright,
And clear as is the moon light. --
Her flesh was tender as dew of flower,
Her chere was simple as bird in boure:
As white as lilie, or rose in rise On the bush. Or, In perfection. Or, A
budding rose.
,
Her face was gentil and tretise Well proportioned.
;
Fetis F^tious. Handsome.
she was, and small to se,
No wintrid Contracted.
browis hedde she;
No popped Affectedly dressed. Properly, dressed up like a puppet.
here, for it neded naught
To windir To trim. To adorn.
her or to peint ought.
Her tresses yalowe and long straughten Stretch^d. Spread abroad.

Unto her helis down the Reached.
raughten v. 1003.
.
Nothing can be more sumptuous and superb than the robe, and other ornaments,
of RICHESSE, or Wealth. They are imagined with great strength of fancy. But it
should be remembered, that this was the age of magnificence and show; when a
profusion of the most splendid and costly materials were lavished on dress,
generally with little taste and propriety, but often with much art and
invention.

RICHESSE a robe of purpre on had De pourpre fut le vestement
A RICHESSE, si noblement,
Qu'en tout le monde n'eust plus bell,
Mieulx fait, ne aussi plus nouvel:
Pourtraictes y furent d'orfroys
Hystoryes d'empereurs et roys.
Et encores y avoit-il
Un ouvrage noble et sobtil;
A noyaulx d'or au col fermoit,
Et a bendes d'azur tenoit:
Noblement cut le chief pare
De riches pierres decore
Qui gettoient moult grant clarte,
Tout y estoit bien assorte.
Puis eut une rich sainture
Saint par dessus sa vesture:
Le boucle d'une pierre fu,
Gross et de moult grant virtue
Celluy qui sur soy le protoit
De tous venins guard estoit. --
D'autre pierre fut le mordans
Qui guerissoit du mal des dens.
Cest pierre portoit bon cur,
Qui l'avoit pouvoit estre asseur
De sa sante et de sa vei,
Quant a jeun il l'avoit vei:
Les cloux furent d'or epure,
Par dessus le tissu door,
Qui estoient grans et pesans,
En chascun avoit deux besans.
Si eut avecques a Richesse
Uns cadre d'or mis sur la tresse,
Si rich, si plaisant, et si bell,
Qu'onques ou ne veit le pareil:
De pierres estoit fort garny,
Precieuses et aplany,
Qui bien en vouldroit deviser,
On ne les pouvroit pas priser
Rubis, y eut saphirs, jagonces,
Esmerandes plus de cent onces:
Mais devant eut par grant maistrise,
Un escarboucle bien assise
Et le pierre si clear estoit
Que cil qui devant la mettoit
Si en povoit veoir au besoing
A soy conduire une lieue loing,
Tell clarte si en yssoit
Que Richesse en resplandissoit
Par tout le corpse et par sa face
Aussi d'autour d'elle la place.
v. 1066.
,
Ne trow no^ that I lie or mad "That I lie, or am mad."
,
For in this world is none it liche Like.
,
Ne by a thousand dele Parts.
so rich,
Ne none so fair: For it full well
With orfraies Embroidery in gold.
laid was every dele,
And purtraied in the ribaninges Laces laid on robes. Embroideries.

Of dukis stories and of kings;
And with a bend Band. Knott.
of gold tassiled,
And knoppis Knobbs. Buttons.
fine of gold amiled Enameled. Enameling, and perhaps pictures in enamel, were
common in the middle ages. From the Testament of Joh. de Foxle, knight, Dat.
apud Bramshill Co. Southampt. Nov. 5. 1378. "Item lego domino abbati de Waltham
unum annulum auri grossi, cum una saphiro infixa, et nominibus trium regum [of
Cologne] sculptis in eodem annulo. Item lego Margarite sorori me unam tabulam
argenti deaurati et amelitam, minorem de duabus quas habeo, cum diversis
ymaginibus sculptis in eadem. -- Item lego Margerie uxori Johannis de Wilton
unum monile auri, cum S. litera sculpta et amelita in eodem." Registr. Wykeham,
Episc. Winton. P. ii. fol. 24. See also Dugd. Bar. i. 234. a.
.
About her neck, of gentle' entaile Of good workmanship, or carving^ From
Intagliare. Ital.
,
Was set the rich chevesaile Necklace.
;
In which there was full great plente
Of stonis clear and fair to se.
RICHESE a girdle had upon
The bokill Buckle.
of it was of ston
Of virtue great and mokill Muck^l. Great.
might,
For who so bare the ston so bright
Of venim durst him nothing doubt
While he the ston had him about. --
The mordaunt Tongue of a buckle. Mordeo. Lat.
wrought in noble guise
Was of a ston full precious,
That was so fin and virtuous
That whole a man it couth ymake
Of palsy, and of the tothe ache:
And yet the ston had soche a grace
That he was sikre Certain.
in evvrie place
All thilke day not blind to been
That fasting might that ston seen.
The barris I cannot give the precise meaning of Barris, nor of Cloux in the
French. It seems to be part of a buckle. In the wardrobe-roll, quoted above,
are mentioned, " One hundred garters cum boucles, barris, et pendentibus de
argento." For which were delivered, "ccc bars argenti." An. 21. Edw. iii.
were of gold full fine
Upon a tissue of satin,
Full hevie, great, and nothing light,
In everiche was a besaunt wight "The weight of a besant." A byzant was a
species of gold-coin, stamped at Byza^tium. A wedge of gold.
.
Upon the tressis of RICHESSE
Was set a circle of noblesse,
Of brende Burnished.
gold, that full light yshone,
So fair, trow I, was nevir none.
But he were konning for the nones "Well-skilled in these things."

That could devisin all the stones,
That in the circle shewin ^lere,
It is a wonder thing to here:
For no man could or praise Appraise. Value.
, or guess,
Of^hem the value or richesse:
Rubies there were, saphirs, ragounces The gem called a Jacinth. We should read,
in Chaucer's text, Jagonces instead of Ragounces, a word which never existed;
and which Speght, who never consulted the French Roman de la Rose, interprets
merely from the sense of the context, to be "A kind of precious stone." Gloss.
Chapter in V. The knowledge of precious stones was a grand article in the natural
philosophy of this age: and the medical virtue of gems, alluded to above, was a
doctrine much inculcated by the Arabian naturalists. Chaucer refers to a
treatise on gems, called the LAPID^RY, famous in that time. House of Fame, L.
ii. v. 260. And they were set as thick of ouchis
Fine, of the finist stonis fair
That ^en r^di^ in the LAPIDAIRE.
Montfaucon, in the royal library at Paris, recites, "Le LAPIDAIRE, de la virtue
des pierres." Catal. MSS. p. 794. This I take to be the book here referred to
by Chaucer. Henry of Huntingdon wrote a book D^ Gemmis. He flourished about
1145. Tann. Bibl. p. 395. See a Greek Treatise, Du Cange, Gloss. Gr. Barb. ii.
^^d. Auctor, p. 37. col. 1. In the Cotton library is a Saxon Treatise on
precious stones. TIBER. A. 3. liii. fol. 98. The writing is more ancient than
the conquest. See supr. p. 10. SECT. i. Pelloutier mentions a Latin poem of the
eleventh century on Precious Stones, written by Marbode bishop of Rennes, and
soon afterward translated into French verse. Mem. Lang. Celt. part. i. vol. i.
chapter xiii. p. 26. The translation begins, Evax fut un mult rich reis
Lu reign tint d' Arabeis.
It was printed in OEUVRES de Hildebert Eveque du Mons, edit. Ant. Beaugendre,
col. 1638. This may be reckoned one of the oldest pieces of French
versification. A manuscript De Speciebus Lapidum, occurs twice in the Bodleian
library, ^alsely attributed to one Adam Nidzarde, Cod. Digb. 28. f. 169. --
Cod. Laud. C. 3. Prin^. "Evax rex Arabum legitur scripsisse." But it is, I
think, Marbode's book abovementioned. Evax is a fabulous Arabian king, said to
have written on this subject. Of this Marbode, or Marbodaeus, see Ol. Borrich.
Diss. Acad. de Poet. page 87.. 78. edit. Francof. 1683. 4to. His poem was
published, with notes, by Lampridius Alardus. The eastern writers pretend, that
king Solomon, among a variety of physiological pieces, wrote a book on Gems:
one chapter of which treated of those precious stones, which resist or repel
evil Genii. They suppose that Aristotle stole all his philosophy from Solomon's
books. See Fabric. Bibl. Gr. xiii. 387. seq. And i. p. 71. Compare Herbelot,
Bibl. Oriental. p. 962. b. Artic. ^ETAB alahgiar. seq.
,
And emeraudes more than two ounces:
But all before full subtly
A fine carboncle set saw I:
The stone so clear was and so bright,
That al so sone as it was night,
Men mightin se to go for need,
A mile or two, in length or bread;
Soche light ysprang out of the stone^
That RICHESSE wondir bright yshone
Both on her hedde and all her face
And eke about her all the place v. 1071.
.
The attributes of the portrait of MIRTH are very expressive^

Of berde unnethe had he nothing Et si n'avoit barbe a menton
Si non petit poil follaton;
Il etoit jeune damoysaulx;
Son bauldrier fut portrait d'oiseaulx
Qui tout etoit e or batu,
Tres richement estoit vestu
D'un' robe moult desgysee,
Qui fut en maint lieu inci^ee,
Et decouppee par quointise,
Et fut chaus^^ par mignotise
D'un ^ouliers decouppes a las
Par joyeusete et soulas^
Et sa neye luy ^i^t chapeau
De roses gracieux et beau.
v. 832.
,
For it was in the ^irste spring:
Full young he was and merie' of thought,
And in samette Samit^. Satin. Explained above.
with birdis wrought,
And with gold beat full fetously,
His body was clad full richely;
Wrought was his robe in strange gise,
And all to slittered Cut and slashed.
for queintise,
In many a place low and hie,
And ^hod he was, with great maistrie,
With shone decopid Cut or marked with figures. From Decouper, Fr. To cut. Thus
the parish clerk Absolon, in the Miller's Tale, v. 210. p. 26. Urr. With Poulis
windows carven on his shose.
I suppose Poulis windows was a cant phrase for a fine device or ornament.
and with lace,
By drurie Modesty.
and eke by solace;
His lefe Mistress.
a rosin chapelet
Had made and on his hedde it set v. 833.
.
FRANCHISE is a no less attractive portrait, and sketched with equal grace and
delicacy.

And next him daunsid dame FRANCHISE Apres tous ceulx estoit FRANCHISE,
Qui ne ^ut ne brune ne bise;
Ains ^ut comme la neige blanch
Courtoise estoit, joyeuse et franche,
Le nez avoit long et tretis
Yeulx verse rins, soureils saitis,
Les cheveulx eut tres-blons et longs,
Simple feut comme les coulons.
Le cueur eut doulx et debonnaire.
v. 1190.
,
Arayid in full noble guise.
She n'as not broune ne dunne of hew,
But white as snow ifallin new,
Her nose was wrought at point devise With the utmost exactness.
,
For it was gentill and tretise;
With eyin glad and browis bent,
Her hare down to her helis went All the females of this poem have gray eyes
and yellow hair. One of them is said to have "Her eyes graie as is a faucon."
v. 546. Where the original word, translated graie, is verse. v. 546. We have
this color again, Orig. v. 822. "Les yeulx eut verse." This too Chaucer
translates, "Her eyin graie." 862. The same word occurs in the French text
before us, v. 1195. This comparison was natural and beautiful, as drawn from a
very familiar and favorite object in the age of the poet. Perhaps Chaucer
means "gray as a falcon's eyes."
:
Simple she was as dove on tree,
Full debonaire of heart was she v. 1211.
.
The personage of DANGER is of a bolder cast, and may serve as a contrast to
some of the preceding. He is supposed suddenly to start from an ambuscade; and
to prevent Bialcoil, or Kind Reception, from permitting the lover to gather the
rose of beauty.

With that anon out start DANGERE A tant saillit villain DANGERE,
De la on il estoit muee;
Grant fut, noir et tout herice
S'ot, les yeulx rouges comme feux,
Le vis fronce, le nez hydeux
Et scerie tout forcenez.
v. 2959.
,
Out of the place where he was hid;
His malice in his chere was kidde "Was discovered by his behavior, or
countenance." Perhaps we should read cheke, for chere.
;
Full great he was, and black of hew,
Sturdie and hideous whosoever him knew;
Like sharp urchons e Urchins. Hedge-hogs.
his here was grow,
His eyes red sparcling as fire glow,
His nose frouncid Contracted.
full kirkid Cr^ok^^. Turned upwards.
stood,
He come criande "Crying as if he was mad."
as he were wood v. 3130.
.
Chaucer has enriched this figure. The circumstance of DANGER'S hair standing
erect like the prickles on the urchin or hedgehog, is his own, and finely
imagined.

Hitherto specimens have been given from that part of this poem which was
written by William de Lorris, its first inventor. Here Chaucer was in his own
walk. One of the most striking pictures in the style of allegorical
personification, which occurs in Chaucer's translation of the additional part,
is much heightened by Chaucer, and indeed owes all its merit to the translator;
whose g^nius was much better adapted to this species of painting than that of
John of Meun, the continuator of the poem.

With her, Labor and eke Travail Travail et douleur la hebergent,
Mais ill le lient et la chargent,
Que mort prochaine luy presentent,
Et talent de seq repentir;
Tant luy sont de fleaux sentir;
Adonc luy vient en remembrance,
En cest tardifve presence,
Quant et se voit foible et chenue.
v. 4733.
,
Lodgid been, with sorrow and woe,
That nevir out of her court go.
Pain and Distress, Sickness and Ire,
And Melanc'ly that angry ^ire,
Ben of her palais Palace.
senators;
Groaning and Grutching her herbegeors Chamberlains.
;
The day and night her to tourment,
With cruill death they her present,
And tellin her erliche Early.
and late,
That DEATH stondith armid at her gate.
Then bring they to remembrance,
The folly deeds of her enfance v. 4994.
.
The fiction that Sickness, Melancholy, and other beings of the like sort, were
counselors in the palace of OLD AGE, and employed in telling her day and
night, that "DEATH stood armed at her gate," was far beyond the sentimental and
satirical vein of John of Meun, and is conceived with great vigor of
imagination.

Chaucer appears to have been early struck with this French poem. In his DREME,
written long before he begun this translation, he supposes, that the chamber in
which he slept was richly painted with the story of the ROMAUNT OF THE ROSE v.
322. Chaucer alludes to this poem in The MARCHAUNT'S TALE, v. 1548. p. 72. Urr.
. It is natural to imagine, that such a poem must have been a favorite with
Chaucer. No poet, before William of Lorris, either Italian or French, had
delineated allegorical personages in so distinct and enlarged a style, and with
such a fullness of characteristical attributes: nor had descriptive poetry
selected such a variety of circumstances, and disclosed such an exuberance of
embellishment, in forming agreeable representations of nature. On this account,
we are surprised that Boileau should mention Villon as the first poet of France
who drew form and order from the chaos of the old French romancers.

Villon sceut le PREMIER, dans ces siecles grossiers
Debrouiller l'ART CONFUS de nos vieux ROMANCIERS Art. Poet. chapter i. He died
about the year 1456.
.
But the poetry of William of Lorris was not the poetry of Boileau.

That this poem should not please Boileau, I can easily conceive. It is more
surprising that it should have been censured as a contemptible performance by
Petrarch, who lived in the age of fancy. Petrarch being desired by his friend
Guy de Gonzague to send him some new piece, sent the ROMAN DE LA ROSE. With the
poem, instead of an encomium, he returned a severe criticism; in which he
treats it as a cold, inartificial, and extravagant composition: as a proof, how
much France, who valued this poem as her chief work, was surpassed by Italy in
eloquence and the arts of writing See Petrarch. Carm. L. i. Ep. 30.
. In this opinion we must attribute something to jealousy. But the truth is,
Petrarch's genius was too cultivated to relish these wild excursions of
imagination: his favorite classics, whom he revived, and studied with so much
attention, ran in his head. Especially Ovid's ART OF LOVE, a poem of another
species, and evidently formed on another plan; but which Petrarch had been
taught to venerate, as the model and criterion of a didactic poem on the
passion of love reduced to a system. We may add, that although the poem before
us was founded on the visionary doctrines and refinements concerning love
invented by the Provencial poets, and consequently less unlikely to be
favorably received by Petrarch, yet his ideas on that delicate subject were
much more Platonic and metaphysical.

SECT. XIV.
CHAUCER'S poem of TROILUS and CRESSEIDE is said to be formed on an old
history, written by Lollius, a native of Urbino in Italy Petrus Lambeccius
enumerates Lollius Urbicus among the Historici Latini profani of the third
century. Prodrom. p. 246. Hamb. 1659. See also Voss. Historic. Latin. ii. 2. p.
163. edit. Ludg. Bat. But this could not be Chaucer's Lollius. Chaucer places
Lollius among the historians of Troy, in his House of Fame, iii. 380. It is
extraordinary, that Du Fresne, in the Iudex Auct^rum, used by him for his Latin
glossary, should mention this Lollius Urbicus of the third century. Tom. i. p.
141. edit. i. As I apprehend, none of his works remain. A proof that Chaucer
translated from some Italian original is, that in a manuscript which I have
seen of this poem, I find, M^nesteo for Menestes, Rupheo for Ruphes, Phebuseo
for Phebuses, lib. iv. 50. seq. Where, by the way, Xantippe, a Trojan chief,
was perhaps corruptly written for Xantippo, i. e. Xantippus. As Joseph. Iscan.
iv. 10. In Lydgate's Troy, Zantiphus, iii. 26. All corrupted from Antiphus,
Dict. Cret. p. 105. In the printed copies we have Ascalapho for Ascalaphus.
lib. v. 319.
. Lydgate says, that Chaucer, in this poem,

-- made a translacion
Of a book which called is TROPHE
In Lumbarde tongue, etc. Prol. Boch. st. iii.
.
It is certain that Chaucer, in this piece, frequently refers to "MINE AUCTOR
LOLLIUS See lib. i. v. 395.
." But he hints, at the same time, that Lollius wrote in Latin Lib. ii. v. 10.
. I have never seen this history, either in the Lombard or the Latin language.
I have before observed, that it is mentioned in Boccacio's Decameron, and that
a translation of it, was made into Greek verse by some of the Greek fugitives
in the fourteenth century. Du Fresne, if I mistake not, somewhere mentions it
in Italian. In the royal library at Paris it occurs often as an ancient French
romance. "Cod. 7546. Roman de Troilus." -- "Cod. 7564. Roman de Troilus et de
Briseida ou Criseida." -- Again, as an original work of Boccacio. "Cod. 7757.
Philostrato dell' amorose fatiche de Troilo per GIOVANNI BOCCACIO." "Les
suivans (adds Montfaucon Bibl. p. 793. col. 2. Compare Lengl. Bibl. Romans ii. p.
253.
) contiennent les autres oeuvres de Boccace." Much fabulous history concerning
Troilus, is related in Guido de Columna's Destruction of Troy. Whatever were
Chaucer's materials, he has on this subject constructed a poem of considerable
merit, in which the vicissitudes of love are depicted in a strain of true
poetry, with much pathos and simplicity of sentiment Chaucer however claims no
merit of invention in this poem. He invokes Clio to favor him with rhymes
only; and adds, -- To every lover I me' excuse
That of no sentiment I this endite
But out of latin in my tongue it write.
L. ii. v. 10. seq. But Sir Francis Kinaston who translated TROILUS AND
CRESSEIDE [1635.] into Latin rhymes, says, that Chaucer in this poem "has taken
the liberty of his own inventions." In the mean time, Chaucer, by his own
references, seems to have been studious of seldom departing from Lollius. In
one place, he pays him a compliment, as an author whose excellencies he could
not reach. L. iii. v. 1330. Bot sothe is, though I can not tellen all,
As can mine author of his excellence.
See also L. iii. 576. 1823.
. He calls it, "a litill tragedy L. ult. v. 1785.
." Troilus is supposed to have seen Cresside in a temple; and retiring to his
chamber, is thus naturally described, in the critical situation of a lover
examining his own mind after the first impression of love.

And when that he in chamber was alone,
He down upon his beddis fete him set,
And first he began to sihe Sigh.
, and then to groan,
And thought aie on her so withoutin let:
That as he satte and woke, his spirit met Thought. Imagined.

That he her saugh, and temple, and all the wise Manner.

Right of her look, and began it new avise L. i. v. 359.
.
There is not so much nature in the sonnet to Love, which follows. It is
translated from Petrarch; and had Chaucer followed his own genius, he would not
have disgusted us with the affected gallantry and exaggerated compliments which
it extends through five tedious stanzas. The doubts and delicacies of a young
girl disclosing her heart to her lover, are exquisitely touched in this
comparison.

And as the n^we abashid nightingale
That stintith Stops.
first, when she beginith sing,
When that she herith any herdis Herdsman. A Shepherd.
tale,
Or in the hedgis any wight stirring,
And after sikir With confidence.
does her voice outring;
Right so Cresseide when that her dread stent Her fears ceased.

Op^ned her heart and told him her intent L. iii. v. 1239.
.
The following pathetic scene may be selected from many others. Troilus seeing
Cresside in a swoon, imagines her to be dead. H^ unsheaths his sword with an
intent to kill himself, and utters these exclamations.

And thou, cite, in which I live in woe,
And thou Priam, and brethren al ifere Together.
,
And thou, my mother, farwell, for I go:
And, Atropos, make ready thou my bear:
And thou Creseide, O sweet heart dear,
Receive thou now my spirit, would he say,
With swerd at heart all ready for to dey.
But as god would, of swough Swoon.
she tho abraide Then awaked.
,
And began to sighe, and TROILUS she cride:
And he answerid, Lady mine Creseide,
Livin ye yet? And let his sword down glide,
Yes, heart mine, that thankid be Cupide,
Quoth she: and therwithall she sore sight Sighed.

And he began to glad her as he might.
Took her in armis two, and kissed her often,
And her to glad he did all his intent:
For which her ghost, that flickered aie alo
Into her woeful breast aien it went:
But at the last, as that her eyin glent Glanced.

Aside, anon she began his sword aspie,
As it lay bear, and began for fere to cry:
And askid him why he had it outdrawe?
And Troilus anon the cause her told,
And how therewith himself he would have slawe:
For which Creseide upon him began behold,
And began him in her armis fast to fold;
And said, O mercy, God, to which a deed
Alas! how nere we werin both deed L. iv. v. 1205.
!
Pathetic description is one of Chaucer's peculiar excellencies.

In this poem are various imitations from Ovid, which are of too particular and
minute a nature to be pointed out here, and belong to the province of a
professed and formal commentator on the piece. The Platonic notion in the third
book v. 1750.
about universal love, and the doctrine that this principle acts with equal and
uniform influence both in the natural and moral world, are a translation from
Boethius Consolat. Philosoph. L. ii. Met. ult. iii. Met. 2. Spenser is full of
the same doctrine. See Fairy Queen, i. ix. 1. iv. x. 34. 35, etc. etc. I could
point out many other imitations from Boethius in this poem.
. And in the KNIGHT'S TALE he mentions, from the same favorite system of
philosophy, the FAIR CHAIN OF LOVE v. 2990. Urr.
. It is worth observing, that the reader is referred to Dar^s Phrygius, instead
of Homer, for a display of the achievements of Troilus. His worthi dedis who
so list him here,
Read DARES, he can tell hem all ifere L. iv. v. 1770.
.
Our author, from his excessive fondness for Statius, has been guilty of a very
diverting and what may be called a double anachronism. He represents Cresside,
with two of her female companions, sitting in a pavid parlour, and reading the
THEBAID of Statius L. ii. v. 81.
, which is called the Geste of the Siege of Thebes L. ii. v. 84.
, and the Romance of Thebis L. ii. v. 100. Bishop Amphiorax is mentioned, ib.
v. 104. Pandarus says v. 106. -- All this I know my selve,
And all the assiege of Thebes, and all the care;
For hereof ben there makid bokis twelve.
In his Dreme, Chaucer, to pass the night away, rather than play at chess,
calls for a Romaunce; in which "were writtin fables of quenis livis and of
kings, and many other thingis small." This proves to be Ovid. v. 52. seq. See
Man. of L. T. v. 54. Urr. There was an old French Romance called PARTONEPEX,
often cited by Du Cange and Carpentier. Gl. Lat. This is Parthenopeus, a hero
of the Theban story. It was translated into English, and called PERTONAPE. See
p. 123. supr.
. In another place, Cassandra translates the Arguments of the twelve books of
the THEBAID L. v. v. 1490. I will add here, that Cresside proposes the trial of
the Ordeal to Troilus. L. iii. v. 1048. Troilus, during the times of truce,
amuses himself with hawking. L. iii. v. 1785.
. In the fourth book of this poem, Pandarus endeavors to comfort Troilus with
arguments concerning the doctrine of predestination, taken from Brawardine, a
learned archbishop and theologist, and nearly Chaucer's cotemporary In his book
DE CAUSA DEI, published by Sir Henry Savile, 1617. He touches on this
controversy, Nonne's Pr. T. v. 1349. Urr. See also Tr. Cr. L. iv. v. 961. seq.
.

This poem, although almost as long as the Eneid, was intended to be sung to
the harp, as well as read. And read where so thou be, or ellis song L. ult.
v. 1796.
.
It is dedicated to the moral Gower, and to the philosophical Strode. Gower
will occur as a poet hereafter. Strode was eminent for his scholastic
knowledge, and tutor to Chaucer's son Lewis at Merton college in Oxford.

Whether the HOUSE OF FAME is Chaucer's invention, or suggested by any French
or Italian poet, I cannot determine. But I am apt to think it was originally a
Provencial composition, among other proofs, from this passage.

And there came out so great a noise,
That had it standin upon OYSE,
Men might have herd it esily,
I trow, to ROME sikerly L. ii. v. 838.
.
The Oyse is a river in Picardy, which falls into the river Seine, not many
leagues from Paris. An Englishman would not have expressed distance by such an
unfamiliar illustration. Unless we reconcile the matter, by supposing that
Chaucer wrote this poem during his travels. There is another passage where the
ideas are those of a foreign romance. To the trumpeters of renown the poet
adds, -- All that usid clarion
In Casteloigne or Arragon B. iii. v. 157.
.
Casteloigne is Catalonia in Spain See MARCHAUNT'S TALE, v. 1231. p. 70. Urr.
He mentions a rock higher than any in Spain. B. ii. v. 27. But this I believe
was an English proverb.
. The martial musicians of English tournaments, so celebrated in story, were a
more natural and obvious allusion for an English poet He mentions a plate of
gold, "As fine as duckett in Venise." B. iii. v. 258. But he says, that the
Galaxy is called Watlyngstrete. B. ii. v. 431. He swears by Thomas a Beckett,
B. iii. v. 41. In one place he is addressed by the name of GEOFFREY. B. ii. v.
221. But in two others by that of PETER. B. i. v. 526. B. iii. v. 909. Among
the musicians, he mentions "Pipirs of all the Duche tongue." B. iii. v. 144.
.

This poem contains great strokes of Gothic imagination, yet bordering often on
the most ideal and capricious extravagance. The poet, in a vision, sees a
temple of glass,

In which were more images
Of gold stondinge in sundry stages,
Set in more rich tabernacles,
And with perre Jewels.
more pinnacles,
And more curious pourtraituris,
And quaint manir of figuris,
Of gold work than I saw evir B. i. v. 120.
.
On the walls of this temple were engraved stories from Virgil's Eneid Where he
mentions Virgil's hell, he likewise refers to Claudian De Raptu Proserpinae,
and Dante's Inferno. v. 450. There is a translation of a few lines from Dante,
whom he calls "the wise poet of Florence," in the WIFE OF BATH'S TALE, v. 1125.
p. 84. Urr. The story of Hugolin of Pisa, a subject which Sir Joshua Reynolds
has lately painted in a capital style, is translated from Dante, "the great
poet of Italy that hight Dante," in the MONKS TALE, v. 877. A sentence from
Dante is cited in the LEGENDE OF GOOD WOMEN, v. 360. In the FREERE'S TALE,
Dante is compared with Virgil, v. 256.
, and Ovid's Epistles It was not only in the fairy palaces of the poets and
romance-writers of the middle ages, that Ovid's stories adorned the walls. In
one of the courts of the palace of Nonesuch, all Ovid's Metamorphoses were cut
in stone under the windows. Hearne, Coll. MSS. 55. p. 64. But the Epistles seem
to have been the favorite work, the subject of which coincided with the
gallantry of the times.
. Leaving this temple, he sees an eagle with golden wings soaring near the sun.

-- Fast by the son on hie,
As kennyng might I with mine eye,
Methought I saw an egle sore;
But that it semid mochil more Greater.
,
Then I had any egle seen The eagle says to the poet, that this house stands
"Right so as thine ane book tellith."
B. ii. v. 204. That is, Ovid's Metamorphoses. See Met. L. xii. v. 40, etc.
. --
It was af gold, and shone so bright,
That nevir man saw such a sight B. i. v. 496. seq.
, etc.
The eagle descends, seizes the poet in his talons, and mounting again, conveys
him to the House of Fame; which is situated, like that of Ovid, between earth
and sea. In their passage thither, they fly above the stars; which our author
leaves, with clouds, tempests, hail, and snow, far beneath him. This aerial
journey is partly copied from Ovid's Phaeton in the chariot of the sun. But the
poet apologizes for this extravagant fiction, and explains his meaning, by
alleging the authority of Boethius; who says, that Contemplation may soar on
the wings of Philosophy above every element. He likewise recollects, in the
midst of his course, the description of the heavens, given by Marcianus Capella
in his book De Nuptiis Philologiae et Mercurii See The MARCHAUNT'S TALE, v.
1248. p. 70. Urr. And Lidg. Stor. Theb. fol. 357.
, and Alanus in his Anticlaudian A famous book in the middle ages. There is an
old French translation of it. Bibl. Reg. Paris. MSS. Cod. 7632.
. At his arrival in the confines of the House of Fame, he is alarmed with
confused murmurs issuing from thence, like distant thunders or billows. This
circumstance is also borrowed from Ovid's temple See Met. xii. 39. And Virg.
Aen. iv. 173. Val. Flacc. ii. 117. Lucan. i. 469.
. He is left b^ the eagle near the house, which is built of materials bright as
polished glass, and stands on a rock of ice of excessive height, and almost
inaccessible. All the southern side of this rock was covered with engravings of
the names of famous men, which were perpetually melting away by the heat of the
sun. The northern side of the rock was alike covered with names; but being here
shaded from the warmth of the sun, the characters remained unmelted and
uneffaced. The structure of the house is thus imagined.

-- Me thoughtin by saint Gile,
That all was of stone of berille,
Both the castle and the toure,
And eke the hall and every boure Chamber.
:
Without pecis or joynynges,
And many subtle compassyngs,
As barbicans Turrets.
and pinnacles,
Imageries and tabernacles
I saw, and full eke of windowis
As flakis fallin in great snowis.
In these lines, and in some others which occur hereafter B. ii. v. 211.
, the poet perhaps alludes to the many new decorations in architecture, which
began to prevail about his time, and gave rise to the florid Gothic style.
There are instances of this in his other poems. In his DREAM, printed 1597 v.
81. p. 572. Urr.
.

And of a suit were all the touris,
Subtily carven aftir flouris. --
With many a small turret hie.
And in the description of the palace of PLEASANT REGARD, in the ASSEMBLY OF
LADIES V. 158.
.

Fairir is none, though it were for a king,
Devisid well and that in every thing;
The towris hie, full plesante shall ye find,
With fannis fresh, turning with every wind.
The chambris, and the palirs of a sort,
With bay windows, goodly as may be thought:
As for daunsing or other wise disporte,
The galeries be al right well ywrought.
In Chaucer's Life by Anthony Hall, it is not mentioned that he was appointed
clerk of the king's works, in the palace of Westminster, in the royal manors of
Shene, Kenington, Byfleet, and Clapton, and in the Mews at Charing Claus. 8.
Ric. ii.
. Again in 1380, of the works of St. George's chapel at Windsor, then ruinous
Pat. 14. Ric. ii. Apud Tanner, Bibl. p. 166. Not. e.
. But to return.

Within the niches formed in the pinnacles stood all round the castle,

-- All manir of minstrelis,
And jestours This word is above explained.
that tellyn tales
Both of weping and eke of game.
That is, those who sung or recited adventures either tragic or comic, which
excited either compassion or laughter. They were accompanied with the most
renowned harpers, among which were Orpheus, Arion, Chiron, and the Briton
Glaskerion Concerning this harper, see Percy's Ballads.
. Behind these were placed, "by many a thousand time twelve," players on
various instruments of music. Among the trumpeters are named Joab, Virgil's
Misenus, and Theodamas See also The MARCHAUNT'S TALE, v. 1236. seq. p. 70. Urr.
. About these pinnacles were also marshalled the most famous magicians,
juglers, witches, prophetesses, sorceresses, and professors of natural magic,
See the FRANKELEIN'S TALE, where several ^eats are described, as exhibited at a
feast done by natural magic, a favorite science of the Arabians. Chaucer there
calls it "An art which sotill tragetoris play." v. 2696. p. 110. Urr. Of this
more will be said hereafter.
which ever existed in ancient or modern times: such as Medea, Circe, Calliope,
Hermes None of the works of the first Hermes Trismegistus now remain. See
Cornel. Agrip. Van. Scient. cap. xlviii. The astrological and other
philosophical pieces under that name are supposititious. See Fabr. Biblioth.
Gr. xii. 708. And Chan. Y^M. TALE, v. 1455. p. 126. Urr. Some of these pieces
were published under the fictitious names of Abel, Enoch, Abraham, Solomon,
Saint Paul, and of many of the patriarchs and fathers. Cornel. Agripp. De Van.
Scient. cap. xlv. Who adds, that these ^ri^ies were followed by Alphonsus king
of Castile, Robert Grosthead, Bacon, and Apponus. He mentio^s Zabulus and
Barnabas of Cyprus as famous writers in magic. See also Gower's Confess. Amant.
p. 134. b. 149. b. Edit. 1554. fol. per Berthelette. In speaking of ancient
authors, who were known or celebrated in the middle ages, it may be remarked,
that Macrobius was one. He is mentioned by William de Lorris in the ROMAN DE LA
ROSE, v. 9. "Ung aucteur qui ot nom Macrobe." A line literally translated by
Chaucer, "An author that hight Macrobes." v. 7. Chaucer quotes him in his
DREME, v. 284. In the NONNES PRIEST'S TALE, v. 1238. p. 171. Urr. In the
ASSEMBLY OF FOWLS, v. 111. see also ibid. v. 31. He wrote a comment on
Tully's SOMNIUM SCIPIONIS, and in these passages he is referred to on account
of that piece. Petrarch, in a letter to Nicolas Sigeros, a learned Greek of
Constantinople, quotes Macrobius, as a Latin author of all others the most
familiar to Nicolas. It is to prove that Homer is the fountain of all
invention. This is in 1354. Famil. Let. ix. 2. There is a manuscript of the
first, and part of the second book of Macrobius, ^legantly written, as it
seems, in France, about the year 800. MSS. Cotton. VITELL. C. iii. Cod. Membr.
fol. viii. fol. 138. M. Planudes, a Constantinopolitan monk of the fourteenth
century, is said to have translated Macrobius into Greek. But see Fabric. Bibl.
Gr. x. 534. It is remarkable, that in the above letter, Petrarch apologizes for
calling Plato the Prince of Philosophers, after Cicero, Seneca, Apuleius,
Plotinus, Saint Ambrose, and Saint Austin.
, Limotheus, and Simon Magus Among these he mentions Juglers, that is, in the
present sense of the word, those who practiced Legerdemain: a popular science
in Chaucer's time. Thus in Squ. T. v. 239. Urr. As jugelours playin at these
festis great.
It was an appendage of the occult sciences studied and introduced into Europe
by the Arabians.


. At entering the hall he sees an infinite multitude of heralds, on the
surcoats of whom were richly embroidered the armorial ensigns of the most
redoubted champions that ever tourneyed in Africa, Europe, or Asia. The floor
and roof of the hall were covered with thick plates of gold, studded with the
costliest gems. At the upper end, on a lofty shrine made of carbuncle, sat
Fame. Her figure is like those in Virgil and Ovid. Above her, as if sustained
on her shoulders, sat Alexander and Hercules. From the throne to the gates of
the hall, ran a range of pillars with respective inscriptions. On the first
pillar made of lead and iron In the composition of these pillars, Chaucer
displays his chemical knowledge.
, stood Josephus, the Jewish historian, "That of the Jewis gestis told," with
seven other writers on the same subject. On the second pillar, made of iron,
and painted all over with the blood of tigers, stood Statius. On another higher
than the rest stood Homer, Dares Phrygius, Livy Dares Phrygius and Livy are
both cited in Chaucer's DREME, v. 1070. 1084. Chaucer is fond of quoting Livy.
He was also much admired by Petrarch; who, while at Paris, assisted in
translating him into French. This circumstance might make Livy a favorite with
Chaucer. See Vie de Petrarque, iii. p. 547.
, Lollius, Guido of Columna, and Geoffry of Monmouth, writers of the Trojan
story. On a pillar of "tinnid iron clear," stood Virgil: and next him, on a
pillar of copper, appeared Ovid. The figure of Lucan was placed on a pillar of
iron wroght full sternly, accompanied with many Roman historians Was not this
intended to characterise Lucan? Quintilian says of Lucan, " Oratoribus magis
quam poetis annumerandus." Instit. Orat. L. x. c. i.
. On a pillar of sulphur stood Claudian, so symbolised, because he wrote of
Pluto and Proserpine.

That bare up all the fame of hell;
Of Pluto and of Proserpine
That queen is of the dark pine B. iii. v. 419. Chaucer alludes to this poem
of Claudian in the MARCHAUNT'S TALE, where he calls Pluto, the king of
"fayrie." v. 1744. p. 73. Urr.
.
The hall was filled with the writers of ancient tales and romances, whose
subjects and names were too numerous to be recounted. In the mean time crowds
from every nation and of every condition filled the hall, and each presented
his claim to the queen. A messenger is dispatched to summon Eolus from his cave
in Thrace; who is ordered to bring his two clarions called SLANDER and PRAISE,
and his trumpeter Triton. The praises of each petitioner are then resounded,
according to the partial or capricious appointment of Fame; and equal merits
obtain very different success. There is much satire and humor in these
requests and rewards, and in the disgraces and honors which are
indiscriminately distributed by the queen, without discernment and by chance.
The poet then enters the house or labyrinth of RUMOR. It was built of ^allow
twigs, like a cage, and therefore admitted every sound. Its doors were also
more numerous than leaves on the trees, and always stood open. These are
romantic exaggerations of Ovid's inventions on the same subject. It was
moreover sixty miles in length, and perpetually turning round. From this house,
says the poet, issued tidings of every kind, like fountains and rivers from the
sea. Its inhabitants, who were eternally employed in hearing or telling news,
together with the rise of reports, and the formation of lies are then
humourously described: the company is chiefly composed of sailors, pilgrims,
and pardoners. At length our author is awakened at seeing a venerable personage
of great authority: and thus the Vision abruptly concludes.

Pope has imitated this piece, with his usual elegance of diction and harmony
of versification. But in the mean time, he has not only misrepresented the
story, but marred the character of the poem. He has endeavored to correct it is
extravagancies, by new refinements and additions of another cast: but he did
not consider, that extravagancies are essential to a poem of such a structure,
and even constitute it is beauties. An attempt to unite order and exactness of
imagery with a subject formed on principles so professedly romantic and
anomalous, is like giving Corinthian pillars to a Gothic palace. When I read
Pope's elegant imitation of this piece, I think I am walking among the modern
monuments unsuitably placed in Westminster-abbey.

SECT. XV.
NOTHING can be more ingeniously contrived than the occasion on which Chaucer's
CANTERBURY TALES are supposed to be recited. A company of pilgrims, on their
journey to visit the shrine of Thomas a Beckett at Canterbury, lodge at the
Tabarde-inn in Southwark. Although strangers to each other, they are assembled
in one room at supper, as was then the custom; and agree, not only to travel
together the next morning, but to relieve the fatigue of the journey by telling
each a story There is an inn at Burford in Oxfordshire, which accommodated
pilgrims on their road to Saint Edward's shrine in the abbey of Gloucester. A
long room, with a series of Gothic windows, still remains, which was their
refectory. Leland mentions such another, Itin. ii. 70.
. Chaucer undoubtedly intended to imitate Boccacio, whose DECAMERON was then
the most popular of books, in writing a set of tales. But the circumstance
invented by Boccacio, as the cause which gave rise to his DECAMERON, or the
relation of his hundred stories It is remarkable, that Boccacio chose a Greek
title, that is, (...), for his Tales. He has also given Gre^k names to the
ladies and gentlemen who recite the tales. His Eclogues are full of Greek
words. This was natural at the revival of the Greek language.
, is by no means so happily conceived as that of Chaucer for a similar purpose.
Boccacio supposes, that when the plague began to abate at Florence, ten young
persons of both sexes retired to a country house, two miles from the city, with
a design of enjoying fresh air, and passing ten days agreeably. Their principal
and established amusement, instead of playing at chess after dinner, was for
each to tell a tale. One superiority which, among others, Chaucer's plan
afforded above that of Boccacio, was the opportunity of displaying a variety of
striking and dramatic characters, which would not have easily met but on such
an expedition. A circumstance which also contributed to give a variety to the
stories. And for a number of persons in their situation, so natural, so
practicable, so pleasant, I add so rational, a mode of entertainment could not
have been imagined.

The CANTERBURY TALES are unequal, and of various merit. Few, if any, of the
stories are perhaps the invention of Cha^cer. I have already spoken at large of
the KNIGHT'S TALE, one of our author's noblest compositions The reader will
excuse my irregularity in not considering it under the CANTERBURY TALES. I have
here given the reason, which is my apology, in the text.
. That of the CANTERBURY TALES, which deserves the next place, as written in
the higher strain of poetry, and the poem by which Milton describes and
characterises Chaucer, is the SQUIER'S TALE. The imagination of this story
consists in Arabian fiction engrafted on Gothic chivalry. Nor is this Arabian
fiction purely the sport of arbitrary fancy: it is in great measure founded on
Arabian learning. Cambuscan, a king of Tartary, celebrates his birthday
festival in the hall of his palace at Sarra, with the most royal magnificence.
In the midst of the solemnity, the guests are alarmed with a miraculous and
unexpected spectacle: the minstrells cease on a sudden, and all the assembly is
hushed in silence, surprise, and suspense.

While that the king sat thus in his noblay,
H^rkining his minstrelis there thingis play,
Beforn him at his board deliciously:
In at the halle door, full sodeinly,
There came a knight upon a stead of brass;
And in his hand a broad mirror of glass:
Upon his thombe he had of gold a ring,
And by his side a nakid sword hanging.
And up he rides to the hie board:
In all the hall ne was there spoke a word,
For marveile of this knight him to behold v. 96. S^e a fine romantic story of
a Count de Macon: who, while revelling in his hall with many knights, is
suddenly alarmed by the entrance of a gigantic figure of a black man, mounted
on a black steed. This terrible stranger, without receiving any obstruction
from guards or gates, rides directly forward to the high table; and, with an
imperious tone, orders the count to follow him, etc. Nic. Gillos, chron. ann.
1120. See also O^S. FAIR. QU.. v. p. 146.
.
These presents were sent by the king of Araby and Inde to Cambuscan in honor
of his feast. The Horse of brass, on the skillful movement and management of
certain secret springs, transported his rider into the most distant region of
the world in the space of twenty-four hours; for, as the rider chose, he could
fly in the air with the swiftness of an eagle: and again, as occasion required,
he could stand motionless in opposition to the strongest force, vanish on a
sudden at command, and return at his master's call. The Mirror of glass was
endued with the power of showing any future disasters which might happen to
Cambuscan's kingdom, and discovered the most hidden machinations of treason.
The Naked Sword could pierce armor deemed impenetrable, "Were it as thik as is
a branchid ok^."
And he who was wounded with it could never be healed, unless its possessor
could be entreated to stroke the wound with its edge. The Ring was intended for
Canace, Cambuscan's daughter; and, while she bore it in her purse, or wore it
on her thumb, ^nabled her to understand the language of every species of birds,
and the virtues of every plant.

And when this knight has first his tale ytold,
He ridd out of the hall and down he light:
His Stead, which that shone as the sun bright,
Stant in the court as still as any stone.
The knight is to his chamber lad anon,
He is unarmed and to the mete ysette:
And all these presents full rich been yfette,
That is to saine, the Sword and the Mirror,
All born anon was unto the high tour,
With certain officers ordained therefore:
And unto Canace the Ring is bore
Solemnly there as she sat at the table v. 188.
.
I have mentioned, in another place, the favorite philosophical studies of the
Arabians Diss. i. ii.
. In this poem the nature of those studies is displayed, and their operations
exemplified: and this consideration, added to the circumstances of Tartary
being the scene of action, and Arabia the country from which these
extraordinary presents are brought, induces me to believe this story to be one
of the many fables which the Arabians imported into Europe. At least it is
formed on their principles. Their sciences were tinctured with the warmth of
their imaginations; and consisted in wonderful discoveries and mysterious
inventions.

This idea of a horse of brass took it is rise from their chemical knowledge and
experiments in metals. The treatise of Jeber a famous Arab chemist of the
middle ages, called LAPIS PHILOSOPHORUM, contains many curious and useful
processes concerning the nature of metals, their fusion, purification, and
malleability, which still maintain a place in modern systems of that science
The Arabians call chemistry, as treating of minerals and metals, SIMIA. From
SIM, a word signifying the veins of gold and silver in the mines. Herbelot,
Bibl. Orient. p. 810. b. Hither, among many other things, we might refer
Merlin's two dragons of gold finished with most exquisite workmanship, in
Geoffrey of Monmouth, l. viii. c. 17. See also ibid. vii. c. 3. Where Merlin
prophesies that a brazen man on a brazen horse shall guard the gates of London.
. The poets of romance, who deal in Arabian ideas, describe the Trojan horse as
made of brass See Lydgate's TROY BOOK, B. iv. c. 35. And Gower's CONF. AMANT.
B. i. f. 13. b. edit. 1554. "A horse of brass they let do forge."
. These sages pretended the power of giving life or speech to some of their
compositions in metal. Bishop Grosthead's speaking brazen head, sometimes
attributed to Bacon, has its foundation in Arabian philosophy Gower, Confess.
Amant. ut supr. L. iv. fol. lxiiii. a. edit. 1554. For of the great clerk
Groostest
I red, how ready that he was
Upon clergy a HEAD of BRASS
To make, and forge it for to tell.
Of such things as befell, etc.

. In the romance of VALENTINE and ORSON, a brazen head fabricated by a
necromancer in a magnificent chamber of the castle of Clerimond, declares to
those two princes their royal parentage Chapter xxviii. seq.
. We are told by William of Malmesbury, that Pope Sylvester the ^econd, a
profound mathematician who lived in the eleventh century, made a brazen head,
which would speak when spoken to, and oracularly resolved many difficult
questions De Gest. Reg. Angl. lib. ii. cap. 10. Compare Majer. Symbolor^ Aure^e
Me^^ae, lib. x. p. 453.
. Albertus Magnus, who was also a profound adept in those sciences which were
taught by the Arabian schools, is said to have framed a man of brass; which not
only answered questions readily and truly, but was so loquacious, that Thomas
Aquinas while a pupil of Albertus Magnus, afterward a seraphic doctor, knocked
it in pieces as the disturber of his abstruse speculations. This was about the
year 1240 Delrio, Disquis. Magic. lib. i. cap. 4^
. Much in the same manner, the notion of our knight's horse being moved by
means of a concealed engine, corresponds with their pretenses of producing
preternatural effects, and their love of surprising by geometrical powers.
Exactly in this notion, Rocail, a giant in foam of the Arabian romances, is
said to have built a palace, together with his own sepulcher, of most
magnificent architecture, and with singular artifice: in both of these he
placed a great number of gigantic statues, or images, figured of different
metals by talismanic skill, which, in consequence of some occult machinery,
performed actions of real life, and looked like living men H^rb^lot, Bibl.
Orient. V. ROCAIL. p. 717. ^.
. We must add, that astronomy, which the Arabian philosophers studied with a
singular enthusiasm, had no small share in the composition of this miraculous
steed. For, says the poet,

He that it wrought couth many a gin,
He waitid many a constellation
Ere he had don this operation v. 149. I do not precisely understand the line
immediately following. And knew full many sele and many a bond.
Sele, i. e. S^al, may mean a talismanic sigil used in astrology. Or the
Hermetic seal used in chemistry. Or, connected with B^nd, may signify contracts
made with spirits in chemical operations. But all these belong to the Arabian
philosophy, and are alike to our purpose. In the Arabian books now extant, are
the alphabets out of which they formed Talismans to draw down spirits or
angels. The Arabian work KIMIA, not only signifies chemistry, but a magical and
superstitious science, by which they bound spirits to their will and drew from
them the information required. See Herbelot, Dict. Orient. p. 810. 1005. The
curious and more inquisitive reader may consult Cornelius Agrippa, De Vanit.
Scient. cap. xliv. xlv. xlvi.
.
Thus the buckler of the Arabian giant Ben Gian, as famous among the orientals
as that of Achilles among the Greeks, was fabricated by the powers of astronomy
Many mysteries were concealed in the composition of this shield. It destroyed
all the charms and enchantments which either demons or giants could make by
g^etic or magic art. Herbelot ubi supr. V. GIAN. p. 396. a.
. And Pope Sylvester's brazen head, just mentioned, was prepared under the
influence of certain constellations.

Natural magic, improperly so called, was likewise a favorite pursuit of the
Arabians, by which they imposed false appearances on the spectator. This was
blended with their astrology. Our author's FRANK^LEIN'S TALE is entirely
founded on the miracles of this art.

For I am siker Sure.
there be sciences,
By which men maken diverse appearances,
Soche as these sotill tragetories Juglers.
play:
For often at festis, I have herd say,
That tragetors, within a halle large,
Have made to comin watir in a barge,
And in the halle rowin up and down:
Sometime has semid come a grim liown,
And sometime flouris spring as in a maede;
Sometimes a vine, and grapis white and read;
Sometimes a castill, etc v. 2700. Urr.
.
Afterward a magician in the same poem shows various specimens of his art in
raising such illusions: and by way of diverting king Aurelius before supper,
presents before him parks and forests filled with deer of vast proportion, some
of which are killed with hounds and others with arrows. He then shows the king
a beautiful lady in a dance. At the clapping of the magician's hands all these
deceptions disappear But his most capital performance is to remove an immense
chain of rocks from the seashore: this is done in such a manner, that for the
space of one week, "it semid all the rockis were away." ibid. 2849. By the way,
this tale appears to be a translation. He says, "As the book does me remember."
v. 2799. And "From Garumne to the mouth of Seine." v. 2778. The Garonne and
Seine are rivers in France.
. These feats are said to be performed by consultation of the stars See
Frankel. T. v. 2820. p. 111. Urr. The Christians called this one of the
diabolical arts of the Saracens or Arabians. And many of their own
philosophers, who afterward wrote on the subject or performed experiments on
it is principles, were said to deal with the devil. Witness our Bacon, etc. From
Sir John Maundeville's Travels it appear^, that these sciences were in high
request in the court of the Cham of Tartary about the year 1340. He says, that,
at a great festival, on one side of the Emperor's table, he saw placed many
philosophers skilled in various sciences, such as astronomy, necromancy,
geometry, and pyromancy: that some of these had before them astrolabes of gold
and precious stones, others had horologes richly furnished, with many other
mathematical instruments, etc. chap. lxxi. Sir John Maundeville began his
travels into the East in 1322, and finished his book in 1364. chap. cix. See
Joa^nnes Sarisb. Polycrat. L. i. cap. xi. fol. 10. b.
. We frequently read in romances of illusive appearances framed by magicians
See what is said of Spenser's FALSE FLORIMEL, OBS. SPENS.. xi. p. 123.
, which by the same powers are made suddenly to vanish. To trace the matter
home to it is true source, these fictions have their origin in a science which
professedly made a considerable part of the Arabian learning Herbelot mentions
many oriental pieces, "Qui traittent de cette art pernicieux et defendu." Dict.
Orient. V. SCHR. Compare Agrippa, ubi supr. cap. xlii. seq.
. In the twelfth century the number of magical and astrological Arabic books
translated into Latin was prodigious "Irrepsit hac aetate etiam turba
astrologorum et Magorum, ejus farinae libris una cum aliis de Arabico in
Latinum conversis. Conring. Script. Comment. Saec. xiii. cap. 3. p. 125. See
also (...) Bibl. Orient. V. KETAB. passim.
. Chaucer, in the fiction before us, supposes that some of the guests in
Cambuscan's hall believed the Trojan horse to be a temporary illusion, effected
by the power of magic John of Salisbury says, that magicians are those who,
among other deceptions, "Rebus adimunt species suas." Polycrat. i. 10. fol. 10.
b. Agrippa mentions one Pasetes a jugler, who "was wont to show to strangers a
very sumptuouse banquet, and when it pleased him, to cause it vanishe away, al
they which sat at the table being disapointed both of meat and drink, etc."
Van. Scient. cap. xlviii. p. 62. b. Engl. Transl. ut infr. Du Halde mentions a
Chinese en^hanter, who, when the Emperor was inconsolable for the loss of his
deceased queen, caused her image to appear before him. Hist. Chin. iii.. iv.
See the deceptions of Hakem an Arabian jugler in Herbelot, in. V. p. 412. See
supr. p. 393. 394.
.

An appearaunce ymade by some magike,
As jogleurs playin at these festis great v. 238.
.
In speaking of the metallurgy of the Arabians, I must not omit the sublime
imagination of Spenser, or rather some British bard, who feigns that the
magician Merlin intended to build a wall of brass about Cairmardin, or
Carmarthen; but that being hastily called away by the Lady of the Lake, and
slain by her perfidy, he has left his fiends still at work on this mighty
structure round their brazen cauldrons, under a rock among the neighboring
woody cliffs of Dynevaur, who dare not desist till their master returns. At
this day, says the poet, if you listen at a chink or cleft of the rock,

-- Such ghastly noise of iron chains
And brazen cauldrons thou shall rombling hear,
Which thousand sprights with long enduring pains
Do toss, that it will stunn thy feeble brains.
And oftentimes great groans and grievous stowndes
When too huge toil and labor them constraines,
And oftentimes loud strokes and ringing sowndes
From under that deep rock most horribly reboundes.
X.
The cause some say is this: a little while
Before that Merlin did, he did intend
A BRAZEN WALL in compass to compyle
About Cairmardin, and did it commend
Unto those sprights to bring to perfect end:
During which work the Lady of the Lake,
Whom long he lovd for him in haste did send,
Who thereby forced his workmen to forsake,
Them bound, till his return, their labor not to slake.
XI.
In the mean time, through that false ladies train,
He was surprised, and buried under bear,
Ne ever to his work returned again:
Nathlesse those feends may not their work forbear,
So greatly his commandment they fear,
But there do toil and travayle night and day,
Until that BRAZEN WALL they up do rear Fairy Queen, iii. 3. 9 seq.
.
This story Spenser borrowed from Giraldus Cambrensis, who during his progress
through Wales, in the twelfth century, picked it up among other romantic
traditions propagated by the British bards See Girald. Cambrens. Itin. Cambr.
i. c. 6. Hollingsh. Hist. i. 129. And Camden's Brit. p. 734. Drayton has this
fiction, which he relates somewhat differently. Polyolb. lib. iv. p. 62. edit.
1613. Hence Bacon's wall of brass about England.
. I have before pointed out the source from which the British bards received
most of their extravagant fictions.

Optics were likewise a branch of study which suited the natural genius of the
Arabian philosophers, and which they pursued with incredible delight. This
science was a part of the Aristotelic philosophy; which, as I have before
observed, they refined and filled with a thousand extravagancies. Hence our
strange knight's MIRROR OF GLASS, prepared on the most profound principles of
art, and endued with preternatural qualities.

And some of them wondrin on the mirror,
That born was up into the master tour:
How men mightin in it such thingis se.
And other seid, certis it well might be
Naturally by compositiouns
Of angles, and of sly reflectiouns:
And said, that at Rome was soche an one,
They spak of Alcen and Vitellion,
And Aristote, that writith in their lives
Of queint MIRROURIS, and of PERSPECTIVES v. 244.
.
And again.

The mirror eke which I have in my hand,
Has such a might, that men may in it se
When there shall fall any adversite
Unto your reign, etc. v. 153.
.
Alcen, or Alhazen, mentioned in these lines, an Arabic philosopher, wrote
seven books of perspective, and flourished about the eleventh century.
Vitellio, formed on the same school, was likewise an eminent mathematician of
the middle ages, and wrote ten books of Perspective. The Roman mirror here
mentioned by Chaucer, as similar to this of the strange knight, is thus
described by Gower.

When Rome stood in noble plite
Virgile, which was the par^ite,
A mirror made of his clergy Learning. Philosophy.

And set it in the towns eye
Of marbre on a pillar without,
That they be thyrte mile about
By day and eke also by night
In that mirror behold might
Her enemies if any were, etc. Con^ess. Amant. l. v. ^ol. xciv. 6. edit. Berth.
1554. ut supr.
.
The oriental writers relate, that Giamschid, one of their kings, the Solomon
of the Persians and their Alexander the Great, possessed, among his inestimable
treasures, cups, globes, and mirrours, of metal, glass, and crystal, by means
of which, he and his people knew all natural as well as supernatural things. A
title of an Arabian book, translated from the Persian, is, "The Mirror which
reflects the World." There is this passage in an ancient Turkish poet, "When I
am purified by the light of heaven my soul will become the mirror of the
world, in which I shall discern all abstruse secrets." Monsieur l'Herbelot is
of opinion, that the orientals took these notions from the patriarch Joseph's
cup of divination, and Nestor's cup in Homer, on which all nature was
symbolically represented Herbelot. Dict. Oriental. V. GIAM. p. 392. col. 2.
John of Salisbury mentions a species of diviners called SPECULARII, who
predicted future events, and told various secrets, by consulting mirrours, and
the surfaces of other polished reflecting substances. Polycrat. i. 12. page 32.
edit. 1595.
. Our great countryman Roger Bacon, in his OPUS MAJUS, a work entirely formed
on the Aristotelic and Arabian philosophy, describes a variety of Specula, and
explains their construction and uses Edit. Jebb. p. 253. Bacon, in one of his
manus^ripts, complains, that no person read lectures in Oxford DE PERSPECTIVA,
before the year 1267. He adds, that in the university of Paris, this science
was quite unknown. In Epist. ad OPUS MINUS. Clementi iv. Etibid. OP. MIN. iii.
cap. ii. MSS. Bibl. Coll. Univ. Oxon. c. 20. In another he affirms, that Julius
C^sar, before he invaded Britain, viewed our harbors and shores with a
telescope from the British coast. MSS. lib. DE PERSPECTIVIS. He accurately
describes reading glasses or spectacles, Op. Maj. p. 236. And the Camera
Obscura, I believe, is one of his discoveries.
. This is the most curious and extraordinary part of Bacon's book, which was
written about the year 1270. Bacon's optic tube, with which he pretended to see
future events, was famous in his age, and long afterward, and chiefly
contributed to give him the name of a magician Wood, Hist. Antiquit. Univ.
Oxon. i. 122.
. This art, with others of the experimental kind, the philosophers of those
times were fond of adapting to the purposes of thaumaturgy; and there is much
occult and chimerical speculation in the discoveries which Bacon affects to
have made from optical experiments. He asserts, and I am obliged to cite the
passage in his own mysterious expressions, "Omnia sciri per Perspectivam,
quoniam omnes actiones rerum fiunt secundum specierum et virtutum
multiplicationem ab agentibus hujus mundi in materias patientes, etc. Op. Min.
MSS. ut supr.
." Spenser feigns, that the magician Merlin made a glassie globe, and presented
it to king Ry^nc^, which showed the approach of enemies, and discovered
treasons Fairy Queen, iii. ii. 21.
. This fiction, which exactly corresponds with Chaucer's Mirror, Spenser
borrowed from some romance, perhaps of king Arthur, fraught with oriental
fancy. From the same sources came a like fiction of Camo^ns, in the Lusiad Can
t. x.
, where a globe is shown to Vasco de Gama, representing the universal fabric or
system of the world, in which he sees future kingdoms and future events. The
Spanish historians report an American tradition, but more probably invented by
themselves, and built on the Saracen fables, in which they were so conversant.
They pretend that some years before the Spaniards entered Mexico, the
inhabitants caught a monstrous fowl, of unusual magnitude and shape, on the
lake of Mexico. In the crown of the head of this wonderful bird, there was a
mirror or plate of glass, in which the Mexicans saw their future invaders the
Spaniards, and all the disasters which afterward happened to their kingdom.
These superstitions remained, even in the doctrines of philosophers, long after
the darker ages. Cornelius Agrippa, a learned physician of Cologne, about the
year 1520, author of a famous book on the Vanity of the Sciences, mentions a
species of mirror which exhibited the form of persons absent, at command It is
diverting in this book to observe the infancy of experimental philosophy, and
their want of knowing how to use or apply the mechanical arts which they were
even actually possessed of. Agrippa calls the inventor of magnifying glasses,
"without doubt the beginner of all dishonestie." He mentions various sorts of
diminishing, burning, reflecting, and multiplying glasses, with some others. At
length this profound thinker closes the chapter with this sage reflection, "All
these things are vain and superfluous, and invented to no other end but for
pomp^ and idle pleasure!" Chap. xxvi. p. 36. A translation by James Sandford,
Land. 1569. 4to. Bl. Let.
. In one of these he is said to have shown to the poetical earl of Surry, the
image of his mistress, the beautiful Geraldine, sick and reposing on a couch
Drayton's Heroical Epist. p. 87. b. edit. 1598.
. Nearly allied to this, was the infatuation of seeing things in a beryl, which
was very popular in the reign of James the first, and is alluded to by
Shakespeare. The Arabians were also famous for other machineries of glass, in
which their chemistry was more immediately concerned. The philosophers of their
school invented a story of a magical steel-glass, placed by Ptolemy on the
summit of a lofty pillar near the city of Alexandria, for burning ships at a
distance. The Arabians called this pillar He madeslaeor, or the pillar of the
Arabians The same fablers have adapted a similar fiction to Hercules: that he
erected pillars at Cape Finest^rre, on which he raised magical looking-glasses.
In an eastern romance, called the SEVEN WISE MASTERS, of which more will be
said hereafter, at the siege of Hur in Persia, certain philosophers terrified
the enemy by a device of placing a habit (says an old English translation) "of
a giant-like proportion, on a tower, and covering it with burningglasses,
lookingglasses of cristall, and other glasses of several colors, wrought
together in a mavelous order, etc." chapter xvii. p. 182. edit. 1674. The
Constantinopolitan Greeks possessed these arts in common with the Arabians. See
Morisotus, ii. 3. Who says, that in the year 751, they set fire to the Saracen
fleet before Constantinople by means of burning glasses.
. I think it is mentioned by Sandys. Roger Bacon has left a manuscript tract on
the formation of burning-glasses MSS. Bibl. Bodl. Digb. 183. And Arch. A. 149.
But I think it was printed at Francfort, 1614. 4to.
: and he relates that the first burningglass which he constructed cost him
sixty pounds of Parisian money Twenty pounds sterling. Compend. Stud. Theol. c.
i. p. 5. MS.
. Ptolemy, who seems to have been confounded with Ptolemy the Egyptian
astrologer and geographer, was famous among the eastern writers and their
followers for his skill in operations of glass. Spenser mentions a miraculous
tower of glass built by Ptolemy, which concealed his mistress the Egyptian
Phao, while the invisible inhabitant viewed all the world from every part of it.

Great Ptolomee it for his leman's sake
Ybuilded all of glass by magic power,
And also it impregnable did make Fairy Queen, iii. ii. 20.
.
But this magical fortress, although impregnable, was easily broken in pieces
at one stroke by the builder, when his mistress ceased to love. One of
Boyardo's extravagancies is a prodigious wall of glass built by some magician
in Africa, which obviously betrays its foundation in Arabian fable and Arabian
philosophy Hither we might also refer Chaucer's House of Fame, which is built
of glass, and Lydgate's TEMPLE OF GLASS. It is said in some romances written
about the time of the Crusades, that the city of Damascus was walled with
glass. See Hall's VIRGIDEM. or Satyrs, etc. B. iv. S. 6. written in 1597.

Or of Damascus magic wall of glass,
Or Solomon his swea^ing piles of brass, etc.

.

The Naked Sword, another of the gifts presented by the strange knight to
Cambuscan, endued with medical virtues, and so hard as to pierce the most solid
armor, is likewise an Arabian idea. It was suggested by their skill in
medicine, by which they affected to communicate healing qualities to various
substances The notion, mentioned before, that every stone of Stone-henge was
washed with juices of herbs in Africa, and tinctured with healing powers, is a
piece of the same philosophy.
, and from their knowledge of tempering iron and hardening all kinds of metal
Montfaucon cites a Greek chemist of the dark ages, "CHRISTIANI LABYRINTHUS
SALOMONIS, de temperando ferro, conficiendo crystallo, et de aliis naturae
arcanis." Palaeogr. Gr. p. 375.
. It is the classical spear of Peleus, perhaps originally fabricated in the
same regions of fancy.

And other folk han wondrid on the Sword,
That would so percin through every thing;
And fell in speech of Telephus the king,
And of Achilles for his quynte spear
For he couth with it both hele and dear Hurt. Wound.

Right in soche wise as men may by that sword,
Of which right now you have your selfis hard.
They spoke of sundri harding of metal
And spoke of medicinis there withal,
And how and when it sholdin hardin be, etc v. 256.
.
The sword which Berni in the ORLANDO INNAMORATO, gives to the hero Ruggiero,
is tempered by much the same sort of magic. Quel brando con tal tempra
fabbricato,
Che taglia incanto ad ogni fatatura Orl. Innam. ii. 17. st. 13.
.
So also his continuator Ariosto, Non vale incanto, ov'elle met il taglio
Orl. Fur. xii. 83.
.
And the notion that this weapon could resist all incantations, is like the
fiction abovementioned of the buckler of the Arabian giant Ben Gian, which
baffled the force of charms and enchantments made by giants or demons Amadis de
Gaul has such a sword. See Don Quixote, B. iii. Chapter iv.
. Spenser has a sword endued with the same efficacy, the metal of which the
magician Merlin mixed with the juice of meadow-wort, that it might be proof
against enchantment; and afterward, having forged the blade in the flames of
Etna, he gave it hidden virtue by dipping it seven times in the bitter waters
of Styx Fairy Queen, ii. viii. 20. See also Ariost. xix. 84.
. From the same origin is also the golden lance of Berni, which Galafron king
of Cathaia, father of the beautiful Angelica and the invincible champion
Argalia, procured for his son by the help of a magician. This lance was of such
irresistible power, that it unhorsed a knight the instant he was touched with
its point.

-- Una lancia d'oro,
Fatto con art, e con sottil lavoro.
E quella lancia di natura tale,
Che resister non puossi alla sua spinta;
Forza, o destrezza contra lei non vale,
Convien che l'una, e l'altra resti vinta:
Incanto, a cui non e nel mondo eguale,
L'ha di tanta possanza intorno cin^a,
Che ne il conte di Brava, nei Rinaldo,
Ne il mondo al colpo suo star^bbe saldo Orl. Innam. i. i. st. 43. See also, i.
ii. st. 20, etc. And Ariosto, viii. 17. xviii. 118. xxiii. 15.
.
Britormart in Spenser is armed with the same enchanted spear, which was made
by Bladud an ancient British king skilled in magic Fairy Queen, iii. 3. 60. iv.
6. 6. iii. 1. 4.
.

The Ring, a gift to the king's daughter Canace, which taught the language of
birds, is also quite in the style of some others of the occult sciences of
these inventive philosophers Rings are a frequent implement in romantic
enchantment. Among a thousand instances, see Orland. Inn^m. 1. 14. Where the
palace and gardens of Dragontina vanish at Angelica's ring of virtue.
: and it is the fashion of the oriental fabulists to give language to brutes in
general. But to understand the language of birds, was peculiarly one of the
boasted sciences of the Arabians; who pretend that many of their countrymen
have been skilled in the knowledge of the language of birds, ever since the
time of king Solomon. Their writers relate, that Balkis the queen of Sheba, or
Saba, had a bird called Hudhud, that is, a lapwing, which she dispatched to
king Solomon on various occasions; and that this trusty bird was the messenger
of their amors. We are told, that Solomon having been secretly informed by
this winged confident, that Balkis intended to honor him with a grand embassy,
enclosed a spacious square with a wall of gold and silver bricks, in which he
ranged his numerous troops and attendants in order to receive the ambassadors,
who were astonished at the suddenness of these splendid and unexpected
preparations Herbelot, Dict. Oriental. V. BALKIS, p. 182.
. Monsieur l'Herbelot tells a curious story of an Arab feeding his camels in a
solitary wilderness, who was accosted for a draught of water by Alhejaj a
famous Arabian commander, and who had been separated from his retinue in
hunting. While they were talking together, a bird flew over their heads, making
at the same time an unusual sort of noise; which the camel-feeder hearing,
looked steadfastly on Alhejaj, and demanded who he was. Alhejaj, not choosing to
return him a direct answer, desired to know the reason of that question.
"Because, replied the camel-feeder, this bird assured me, that a company of
people is coming this way, and that you are the chief of them." While he was
speaking, Alheja^'s attendants arrived See Herbel^ ubi supr. V. HEGIAGE ^BN
YUSEF AL THAKEFI. p. 442. This Arabian commander was of the eighth cent^ry. In
the SEVEN WISE MASTERS, one of the tales is founded on the language of bird^.
^^. xvi.
.

This wonderful ring also imparted to the wearer a knowledge of the qualities
of plants, which formed an important part of the Arabian philosophy See what is
said of this in the DISSERTATIONS.
.

The virtues of this ring if ye woll here
Are these, that if she list it for to were,
Upon her thomb, or in her purse it bear,
There is no foul that fleith undir heven
That she ne shall well understond his steven Language.
,
And know his mening opinly and plain,
And answer him in his language again.
And every grass that growith upon rote,
She shall well know, and whom it woll do bote:
All be his woundis never so deep and wide v. 166.
.
Every reader of taste and imagination must regret, that instead of our
author's tedious detail of the quaint effects of Canace's ring, in which a
falcon relates her amors, and talks familiarly of Troilus, Paris, and Jason,
the notable achievements we may suppose to have been performed by the
assistance of the horse of brass, are either lost, or that this part of the
story, by far the most interesting, was never written. After the strange knight
has explained to Cambuscan the management of this magical courser, he vanishes
on a sudden, and we hear no more of him.

And aftir suppir goth this nobil king
To seen this Horse of Brass, with all his rout
Of lordis and of ladies him about:
Soch wondering was there on this Horse of Brass Cervantes mentions a horse of
wood, which, like this of Chaucer, on turning a pin in his forehead, carried
his rider through the air. This horse, Cervantes adds, was made by Merlin for
Peter of Provence; with which that valorous knight carried off the fair
Magalona. From what romance Cervantes took this I do not recollect: but the
reader sees its correspondence with the fiction of Chaucer's horse, and will
refe^ it to the same original. See Don Quixote, B. iii. chapter 8. We have the same
thing in VALENTINE AND ORSON, chapter xxxi.
,
That sithin the great siege of Troy was,
There as men wondrid on an horse also,
Ne was there soch a wondering as was tho Then.
.
But finally the king askith the knight
The virtue of this coursere and the might;
And prayid him to tell his governaunce^
The horse anon began forth to trip and dance,
When that the knight laid hold upon his reine. --
Enfourmid when the king was of the knight,
And has conceivid in his wit aright,
The mannir and the form of all the thing,
Full glad and blyth, this nobil doubty king
Repairith to his revell as beforne:
The brydil is into the Toure yborn,
And kept among his jewels Jocalia. Precious things.
lefe and dear:
The horse vanishith: I'not in what manner v. 322. seq. 355. seq.
.
By such inventions we are willing to be deceived. These are the triumphs of
deception over truth.

Magnanima mensogna, hor quando e al vero
Si bello, che si possa a te preporre?
The CLERK OF OXENFORDES TALE, or the story of Patient Grisilde, is the next
of Chaucer's Tales in the serious style which deserves mention. The Clerk
declares in his Prologue, that he learned this tale of Petrarch at Padua. But
it was the invention of Boccacio, and is the last in his DECAMERON Giorn. x.
Nov. 10. Dryden, in the superficial but liv^ly Preface to his Fables, says,
"The Tale of Grisilde was the invention of Petrarch: by him sent to Boccace,
from whom it came to Chaucer."
. Petrarch, although most intimately connected with Boccacio for near thirty
years, never had seen the Decameron till just before his death. It accidentally
fell into his hands, while he resided at Arque between Venice and Padua, in the
year one thousand three hundred and seventy-four. The tale of Grisilde struck
him the most of any: so much, that he got it by heart to relate it to his
friends at Padua. Finding that it was the most popular of all Boccacio's tales,
for the benefit of those who did not understand Italian, and to spread its
circulation, he translated it into Latin with some alterations. Petrarch
relates this in a letter to Boccacio: and adds, that on showing the translation
to one of his Paduan friends, the latter, touched with the tenderness of the
story, burst into such frequent and violent fits of tears, that he could not
read to the end. In the same letter he says, that a Veronese having heard of
the Paduan's exquisiteness of feeling on this occasion, resolved to try the
experiment. He read the whole aloud from the beginning to the end, without the
least change of voice or countenance; but on returning the book to Petrarch,
confessed that it was an affecting story: "I should have wept, added he, like
the Paduan, had I thought the story true. But the whole is a manifest fiction.
There never was, nor ever will be, such a wife as Grisilde Vie de Petrarch,
iii. 797.
." Chaucer, as our Clerke's declaration in the Prologue seems to imply,
received this tale from Petrarch, and not from Boccacio: and I am inclined to
think, that he did not take it from Petrarch's Latin translation, but that he
was one of those friends to whom Petrarch used to relate it at Padua. This too
seems sufficiently pointed out in the words of the Prologue.

I wolle you tell a tale which that I
Lernid at Padow of a worthy clerk: --
Frauncis Petrarke, the laureate poet,
Hightin this clerk, whose rhetorike so sweet
Enluminid Italy of poetry v. 1057. p. 96. Urr. Afterward Petrarch is
mentioned as dead. He died of an apoplexy, Jul. 18. 1374. See v. 2168.
.
Chaucer's tale is also much longer, and more circumstantial, than Boccacio's.
Petrarch's Latin translation from Boccacio was never printed. It is in the
royal library at Paris, and in that of Magdalene college at Oxford Viz. "Vita
Grisildis per Fr. Petrarcham de vulgari in Latinam linguam traducta." But
Rawlinson cites, "Epistola Francisci Petrarchae de insigni obedientia et ^ide
uxoria Griseldis in Waltherum Ulme, impress." per me R.... A. D. 1^^3. MS. Not.
in Mattairii Typogr. Hist. i. i. p. 104. In Bibl. Bodl. Oxon. Among the royal
manuscripts, in the British Museum, there is, "Fr. Petrarchae super Historiam
Walterii Marchionis et Griseldis uxoris ejus." 8. B. vi. 17.
.

The story soon became so popular in France, that the comedians of Paris
represented a Mystery in French verse entitled LE MYSTERE DE GRISEILDIS MARQUIS
DE SALUCES, in the year 1393 It was many years afterward printed at Paris, by
Jean Bonnefons. The writers of the French stage do not mention this piece. See
p. 246. Their first theater is that of Saint Maur, and it is commencement is
placed five years later, in the year 1398. Afterward Apostolo Zeno wrote a
theatrical piece on this subject in Italy. I need not mention that it is to
this day represented in England, on a stage of the lowest species, and of the
highest antiquity: I mean at a puppet-show. The French have this story in their
PAREMENT DES DAMES, see Mem. Lit. Tom. ii^ p. 743. 4to.
. Lydgate, almost Chaucer's cotemporary, in his manuscript poem entitled the
TEMPLE OF GLASS And in a Balade, translated by Lydgate from the Latin,
"Grisilde's humble patience" is recorded. Urr. Chapter p. 550. v. 108.
, among the celebrated lovers painted on the walls of the temple There is a
more curious mixture in Chaucer's Balade to king Henry iv. Where Alexander,
Hector, Julius Caesar, Judas Maccabeus, David, Joshua, Charlemagne, Godfrey of
Bulloign, and king Arthur, are all thrown together as ancient heroes. v. 281.
seq. But it is to be observed, that the French had a metrical romance called
Jud^s Macchabe^, begun by Gualtier de Belleperche, before 1240. It was finished
a few years afterward by Pierros du Rie^. Fauch. p. 197. S^e also Lydgate,
Urr. Chauc. p^ 550. v. 89. M. de la Curne de Saint Palaye, has given us an
extract of an old Provencial poem, in which, among heroes of love and
gallantry, are enumerated Paris, Sir Tris^ram, Ivaine the inventor of gloves
and other articles of elegance in dress, Apollonius of Tire, and king Arthur.
Mem. Chev. Extr. de Poes. Prove. ii. p. 154. In a French romance, Le livre de
cu^r a' amor espris, written 1457, the author introduces the blasoning of the
arms of several celebrated lovers: among which are king David, Nero, Mark
Antony, Theseus, Hercules, Eneas, Sir Lancelot, Sir Tristram, Arthur duke of
Bretagne, Gaston du Foix, many French dukes, etc. Mem. Lit. ^iii. p. 592. edit.
4to. The chevalier Bayard, who died about the year 1524, is compared to Scipio,
Hannibal, Theseus, king David, Samson, Judas Maccabeus, Orlando, Godfrey of
Bulloign, and monsieur de Palisse, marshal of France. LA VIE ET LES GESTES DU
PREUX CHEVALIER BAYARD, etc. Printed 1525.
, mentions Dido, Medea and Jason, Penelope, Alcestis, PATIENT GRISILDE, Bell
Isoulde and Sir Tristram From MORTE ARTHUR. They are mentioned in Chaucer's
ASSEMBLY OF FOWLS, v. 290. See also Compl. Bl. Kn. v. 367.
, Pyramus and Thisbe, Theseus, Lucretia, Canace, Palamon and Emilia MSS. Bibl.
Bodl. Fairfax. 16.
.

The pathos of this poem, which is indeed exquisite, chiefly consists in
invention of incidents, and the contrivance of the story, which cannot
conveniently be developed in this place: and it will be impossible to give any
idea of it is essential excellence by exhibiting detached parts. The
versification is equal to the rest of our author's poetry.

SECT. XVI.
THE TALE of the NONNES PRIEST is perhaps a story of English growth. The
figment of Dan Burnell's Ass is taken from a Latin poem entitled SPECULUM
STULTORUM v. 1427. p. 172. Urr.
, written by Nigellus de Wireker, monk and precentor of Canterbury cathedral, a
profound theologist, who flourished about the year 1200 Or John of Salisbury.
Printed at Cologn in 1449.
. The narrative of the two pilgrims is borrowed from Valerius Maximus v. 1100.
. It is also related by Cicero, a less known and a less favorite author See
Val. Max. i. 7. And Cic. de Divinat. i. 27.
. There is much humor in the description of the prodigious confusion which
happened in the farm-yard after the fox had conveyed away the cock.

-- Aftir him they ran,
And eke with stavis many anothir man.
Ran Coll our dog, Talbot, and eke Garlond Names of dogs.
,
And Malkin with her distaffe in her hond.
Ran cow and calfe, and eke the very hogs. --
The duckis cried as men would hem quell Kill.
,
The geese for fere flewin ovir the trees,
Out of the hivis came the swarm of bees V. 1496.
.
Even Jack Strawe's insurrection, a recent transaction, was not attended with
so much noise and disturbance.

So hidious was the noise, ah Benedicite!
Certes ne Jacke Straw, ne all his meine,
Ne madin nevir shoutis half so shrill^ etc v. 1509. This is a proof that the
CANTERBURY TALES were not written till after the year 1381.
.
The importance and affectation of sagacity with which dame Partlett
communicates her medical advice, and displays her knowledge in physic, is a
ridicule on the state of medicine and its professors v. 1070.
.

In another strain, the cock is thus beautifully described, and not without
some striking and picturesque allusions to the manners of the times.

-- A cock hight chaunticlere,
In all the land of crowing nas his pere.
His voice was merier than the merry orgon
On masse-daies that in the churchis gone.
Well sikerer Clearer.
was his crowing in his loge Pen. Yard.

Than is a clock, or abbey horologe. --
His comb was reddir than the fine coral,
And battelled Embattelled.
as it were a castill wall,
His bake was black as any get it shone,
Like asure were his leggis, and his tone Toes.
:
His nailis whiter than the lilly flower,
And like the burnid gold was his color v. 962.
.
In this poem the fox is compared to the three arch-traitors Judas Iscariot,
Virgil's Sinon, and Ganilion who betrayed the Christian army under Charlemagne
to the Saracens, and is mentioned by archbishop Turpin v. 1341. See also Monk.
T. v. 806.
. Here also are cited, as writers of high note or authority, Cato, Physiologus
or Pliny the elder, Boethius on music, the author of the legend Organ.
of the life of saint Kenelme, Josephus, the historian of Sir Lancelot du Lake,
Saint Austin, bishop Brawardine, Jeffrey Vinesauf who wrote a monody in Latin
verse on the death of king Richard the first, Ecclesiastes, Virgil, and
Macrobius.

Our author's JANUARY and MAY, or the MARCHAUNT'S TALE, seems to be an old
Lombard story. But many passages in it are evidently taken from the
POLYCRATICON of John of Salisbury. De molestiis et oneribus conjugiorum
secundum Hieronymum et alios philosophos. Et de pernicie libidinis. Et de
mulieris Ephesinae et similium fide L. viii. c. 11. fol. 193. b. edit. 1513.
. And by the way, about forty verses belonging to this argument are translated
from the same chapter of the POLYCRATICON, in the WIFE OF BATH'S Prologue
Mention is made in this Prologue of St. Jerome and Theophrast, on that subject,
v. 671. 674. The author of the Polycraticon quotes Th^ophrastus from Jerome,
viz. "Fertur auctore Hieronimo aurcolus Theophrasti libellus de non ducenda
uxore." fol. 194. a. Chaucer likewise, on this occasion, cites Val^rie, v. 671.
This is not the favorite historian of the middle ages, Valerius Maximus. It is
book written by Walter Mapes, archdeacon of Oxford, under the assumed name of
Valerius, entitled, Valerius ad Ru^inum de non ducenda uxore. This piece is in
the Bodleian library with a large Gloss. MSS. Dibg. 166. ii. 147. Mapes perhaps
adopted this name, because one Valerius had written a treatise on the same
subject, inserted in St. Jerome's works. Some copies of this Prologue, instead
of "Valeric and Theophrast," read Paraphrast. If that be the true reading,
which I do not believe, Chaucer alludes to the gloss abovementioned. Helowis,
cited just afterward, is the celebrated Eloisa. Trottula is mentioned, v. 677.
Among the manuscripts of Merton College in Oxford, is, "Trottula Mulier
Salernitana de passionibus mulicrum." There is also extant, "Trottula, seu
potius Erotis medici muliebrium liber." Basil. 1586, 4to. See also Montfauc.
Catal. MSS. p. 385. And Fabric. Bibl. Gr. xiii. p. 439.
. In the mean time it is not improbable, that this tale might have originally
been oriental. A Persian tale is just published which it extremely resembles By
Mr. Dow, chapter xv. p. 252.
; and it has much of the allegory of an eastern apologue.

The following description of the wedding-feast of January and May is conceived
and expressed with a distinguished degree of poetical elegance.

Thus ben they weddid with solempnite,
And at the feste sittith both he and she,
With other worthy folk upon the deis I have explained this word, p. 40. But
will here add some new illustrations of it. Undoubtedly the high table in a
public refectory, as appears from these words in Matthew Paris, "Priore
prandente ad MAGNAM MENSAM quam DAIS vulgo appellamus." In Vit. Abbat. S.
Albani, p. 92. And again the same writer says, that a cup, with a foot, or
stand, was not permitted in the hall of the monastery, "Nisi tantum in MAJORI
MENSA quam DAIS appellamus." Additam. p. 148. There is an old French word,
DAIS, which signifies a throne, or canopy, usually placed over the head of the
principal person at a magnificent feast. Hence it was transferred to the table
at which he sat. In the ancient French Roman de Garin;

Au plus haut DAIS sist roy Anseis. Either at the first table, or, which is
much the same thing, under the highest canopy.


:
All full of joye and bliss is the paleis,
And full of instruments and of vitaile,
And the most dayntyist of al Itaile.
Before him stood soche instruments of soune,
That Orpheus, ne of Thebis Amphioune
Ne madin nevir soche a melody;
At every course came the loud minstr^lcie,
That never Joab trompid Such as Joab never, etc.
, for to here,
Neither Theodamas yet half so clear,
At Thebis, when the cite was in dout Danger.
.
Bacchus the wine them skinkith Fill, pour.
al about,
And Venus laugith blithe on every wight,
For January was become her knight,
And would in both assayin his courage
In liberty and eke in marriage,
And with her firebronde in her hond about
Dauncith before the bride and all the route.
And certainly I dare say well right this,
Hymeneus that god of wedding is
Saw never so merry a wedded man.
Hold thou thy p^ace, thou poet Marcian See supr, p, 391.
,
That writist us that ilk wedding merry
Of Philology and of Mercury,
And of the songis that the Muses song;
Too small is both thy pen, and eke thy tongue,
For to descrivin of his marriage,
When tendir Youth has married stooping Age. --
MAY that sittin with so benign a chere
That her to behold it seemed a feirie A phantasy, enchantment.
:
Queen Hester lokid ner with soch an eye
On Assuere, so meke a look has she:
I may you not devis al her bewte,
But thus much of her bewte tell I may
That she was like the bright morrow of May,
Fulfilled of all bewte and plesaunce.
Tho JANUARY is ravished in a trance
At every time he lokid in her face,
But in his heart he began her to menace, etc v. 1225. Urr.
.
Dryden and Pope have modernised the two last mentioned poems. Dryden the tale
of the NONNES PRIEST, and Pope that of JANUARY and MAY: intending perhaps to
give patterns of the best of Chaucer's Tales in the comic species. But I am of
opinion that the MILLER'S TALE has more true humor than either. Not that I
mean to palliate the levity of the story, which was most probably chosen by
Chaucer in compliance with the prevailing manners of an unpolished age, and
agreeable to ideas of festivity not always the most delicate and refined.
Chaucer abounds in liberties of this kind, and this must be his apology. So
does Boccacio, and perhaps much more, but from a different cause. The
licentiousness of Boccacio's tales, which he composed per cacciar le malincolia
delle femine, to amuse the ladies, is to be vindicated, at least accounted for,
on other principles: it was not so much the consequence of popular incivility,
as it was owing to a particular event of the writer's age. Just before Boccacio
wrote, the plague at Florence had totally changed the customs and manners of
the people. Only a few of the women had survived this fatal malady; who having
lost their husbands, parents, or friends, gradually grew regardless of those
constraints and customary formalities which before of course influenced their
behavior. For want of female attendants, they were obliged often to take men
only into their service: and this circumstance greatly contributed to destroy
their habits of delicacy, and gave an opening to various freedoms and
indecencies unsuitable to the sex, and frequently productive of very serious
consequences. As to the monasteries, it is not surprising that Boccacio should
have made them the scenes of his most libertine stories. The plague had thrown
open their gates. The monks and nuns wandered abroad, and partaking of the
common liberties of life, and the levities of the world, forgot the rigor of
their institutions, and the severity of their ecclesiastical characters. At the
ceasing of the plague, when the religious were compelled to return to their
cloisters, they could not forsake their attachment to these secular
indulgences; they continued to practice the same free course of life, and would
not submit to the disagreeable and unsocial injunctions of their respective
orders. Cotemporary historians give a shocking representation of the unbounded
debaucheries of the Florentines on this occasion: and ecclesiastical writers
mention this period as the grand epoch of the relaxation of monastic
discipline^ Boccacio did not escape the censure of the church for these
compositions. His conversion was a point much labored; and in expiation of his
follies, he was almost persuaded to renounce poetry and the heathen authors,
and to turn Carthusian. But, to say the truth, Boccacio's life was almost as
loose as his writings; till he was in great measure reclaimed by the powerful
remonstrances of his master Petrarch, who talked much more to the purpose than
his confessor. This Boccacio himself acknowledges in the fifth of his eclogues,
which like those of Petrarch are enigmatical and obscure, entitled
PHILOSOTROPHOS.

But to return to the MILLER'S TALE. The character of the Clerk of Oxford, who
studied astrology, a science then in high repute, but under the specious
appearance of decorum, and the mask of the serious philosopher, carried on
intrigues, is painted with these lively circumstances.

This clerk yclepid was hend Nicholas The g^ntle Nicholas.
,
Of derne S^cret.
love he couth and of solas:
And th^rto was he sly, and right prive,
And like unto a maidin for to se.
A chamber had he in that hostelrie H^spitium, one of the old hostels at
Oxford, which were very numerous before the foundation of the colleges. This is
one of the citizens houses: a circumstance which gave rise to the story.

Alone, withoutin any company,
Full fetously ydight with herbis sote Sweet.
;
And he himself as sweet as in the rote Root.

Of licoris, or any seduwall The herb Valerian.
.
His almagist A book of astronomy written by Ptolemy. It was in thirteen books.
He wrote also four books of judicial astrology. He was an Egyptian astrologist,
and flourished under Marcus Antoninus. He is mentioned in the Sompnour's Tale,
v. 1025, and the Wife of Bath's Prologue, v. 324.
, and bokis grate and small,
His asterlagour Asterlabore. An astrolabe.
longing for his art,
His augrim stonis Stones for computation. Augri m is Algorithm, the sum of the
principal rules of common arithmetic. Chaucer was himself an adept in this sort
of knowledge. The learned Seld^n is of opinion, that his Astrolabe was compiled
from the Arabian as^ronomers and mathematicians. See his Pref. to Notes on
Drayt. Polyolb. p. 4^ where the word Dulcarnon, (Troil. ^r. iii. 933, 935.) is
explained to be an Arabic term for a root in calculation. His CHANON YEMAN'S
TALE, proves his intimate acquaintance with the Hermetic philosophy, then much
in vogue. There is a statute of Henry the fifth, against the transmutation of
metals, in Statut. an. 4 Hen. V. cap. iv. viz. A. D. 1416. Chaucer, in the
Astrolab^, refers to two famous mathematicians and astronomers of his time,
John Some, and Nicholas Lynne, both Carmelite friars of Oxford, and perhaps his
friends, whom he calls "reverent clerks." Astrolabe, p. 440. col. i. Urr. They
both wrote calendars, which, like Chaucer's Astrolabe, were constructed for the
meridian of Oxford. Chaucer mentions Alcabucius, an astronomer, that is,
Abdilazi Alchabitius, whose I^agoge in astrologiam was printed at Venice, 1485,
4to. Ib. fol. 440. col. ii. Compare Herbelot. Bibl. Oriental. p. 963. b. V.
KETAB. Al^st^orlab. p. 141. a. Nicholas Lynne abovementioned is said to have
made several voyages to the most northerly parts of the world, charts of which
he presented to Edward the third. Perhaps to Iceland, and the coasts of Norway,
for astronomical observations. These charts are lost. Haklu^t apud Anderson.
Hist. Com. i. p. 191. sub. ann. 1360. (See Hakl. Voy. i. 121. seq. ^d. 1598.)
lying feire apart,
On shelvis, al couchid at his beddis head;
His press Press.
ycoverid with a folding read:
And all above there lay a gay sautrie Psaltery. An instrument like a harp.
,
On which he made on nightis melody
So swetely that all the chamber rung,
And Angelus ad Virginem he sung v. 91. p. 24. Urr.
.
In the description of the young wife of our philosopher's host, there is great
elegance with a mixture of burlesque allusions. Not to mention the curiosity of
a female portrait, drawn with so much exactness at such a distance of time.

Fair was this young wife, and therwithall
As a wesill Weasle.
her body gent and small.
A seint she werid, barrid all with silk "A girdle edged with silk." But we
have no exact idea of what is here meant by barrid. See supr. p. 377. The
DOCTOR OF PHYSIC is "girt with a seint of silk with barris small." Prol. v.
138. I once conjectured barded. See Hollingsh. Chron. iii. 84. col. ii. 850.
col. 1. etc. etc.
,
A barmecloth Apron.
eke, as white as morrow milk,
Upon her lendis, full of many a gore Plait. Fold.
.
White was her smok, embroudid all before Edged. Adorned.
,
And eke behind, on her colere about,
Of coleblak silk, within, and eke without.
The tapis Tapes. Strings.
of her white volipere Head-dress.

Were of the same suit of her colere Collar.
.
Her fillit Knot. Top-knot.
broad of silk, and set full hie,
And sikerly Certainly.
she had a licorous eye.
Full small ypullid "Made small or narrow, by plucking."
were her browis two,
And tho They.
were bent Arched.
and blak as any slo.
And she was much more blisfull for to se
Than is the new perienet A young pear tree. Fr. Poir jeunet.
tree;
And softer than the wool is of a wether:
And by her girdil hong a purse of lether,
Tassid Tasseled. Fringed.
with silk, and parlid I would read purfild.
with latoun Latoun, or chekelaton, is cloth of gold.
.
In all this world to sekin up and down,
There nis no man so wise that couthe thence
So gay a popelete "So pretty a puppet."
or so gay a wench.
Full brightir was the shining of her hew
Than in the Tower the noble A piece of money.
forgid new.
But of her song she was so loud and yerne Shrill.
,
As any swallow sitting on a berne.
Thereto she couthe skip, and make a game,
As any kid or calfe foll'wing her dame.
Her mouth was sweet as brackit Bragget. A drink made of honey, spices. etc.
or the methe,
Or hord of applis laid in hay or heth.
Winsing she was as is a jolly colt,
Long as a mast, and upright as a bolt "Straight as an arrow."
.
A broche A jewel.
she bare upon her low collere
As broad as is the bosse of a bokelere Buckler.
.
Her shoes were lacid on her leggis hie, etc v. 125. Urr.
.
Nicholas, as we may suppose, was not proof against the charms of his blooming
hostess. He has frequent opportunities of conversing with her: for her husband
is the carpenter of Oseney Abbey near Oxford, and often absent in the woods
belonging to the monastery See v. 557.

-- I trow that he bewent
For timber, there our abbot has him sent:
For he is wont for timber for to go,
And dwellin at the grange a day or two.

. His rival is Absalom, a parish-clerk, the gaiest of his calling, who being
amorously inclined, very naturally avails himself of a circumstance belonging
to his profession: on holidays it was his business to carry the censer about
the church, and he takes this opportunity of casting unlawful glances on the
handsomest dames of the parish. His gallantry, agility, affectation of dress
and p^rsonal elegance, skill in shaving and surgery, smattering in the law,
taste for music, and many other accomplishments, are thus inimitably
represented by Chaucer, who must have much relished so ridiculous a character.

Now was there of the chirch a parish clerk,
The which that was yclepid Absalon,
Crull was his here, and as the gold it shone,
And stroutid as a fan long and broad,
Full straight and even lay his jolly shode Hair.
.
His rude Complexion.
was read, his eyin gray as gose,
With Poulis windows carvin on his shose See p. 379. supr.
.
In hosin r^d he went full fetously:
Yclad he was full small and propirly
Al in a kirtil Jacket.
of a light watchet,
Full fair, and thick be the pointis set:
And thereuppon he had a gaie surplice
As white as is the blosome on the rice Hawthorn.
.
A merry child he was, so god me save,
Well couth he lettin blood, and clip, and shave.
Or make a chartre of land or acquittaunce;
In twenty manir couth he trip and dance,
After the schole of Oxenfordi tho,
And with his leggis castin to and fro.
And pleyin songis on a small ribible v. 224. A species of guittar. Lydgate,
MSS. Bibl. Bodl. Fairf. 16. In a poem never printed, called Reason and
Sensuallite, compyled by Jhon Lydgate.

Lutys, rubibis, (l. ribibles) and geternes,
More for estatys than tavernes.

,
Thereto he sometimes soud a long quinible Treble.
.
His manner of making love must not be omitted. He serenades her with his
guittar.

He wakith all the night, and all the day,
He kembith his locks broad, and made him gay.
He woith her by menis and brocage By offering money: or a settlement.
,
And swore that he would ben her own page.
He singith broking Quavering.
as a nightingale.
He sent her piment Explained above, p. 178.
, methe, and spicid ale,
And wafirs piping hot out of the glede The coals. The oven.
,
And, for she was of town, he proffred mede See RHYME OF SIR THOPAS, v. 3357. p.
146. Urr. Mr. Walpole has mentioned some curious particulars concerning the
liquors which anciently prevailed in England. Anecd. Paint. i. p. 11. I will
add, that cider was very early a common liquor among our ancestors. In the year
1295, an. 23 Edw. I. the king orders the sher^ff of Southamptonshire to provide
with all speed four hundred quarters of wheat, to be collected in parts of his
bailiwick nearest the sea, and to convey the same, being well winnowed, in good
ships from Portsinouth to Win^helsea. Also to put on board the said ships, at
the same time, two hundred tons of cider. Test. R. apud Canterbury. The cost to
be paid immediately from the king's wardrobe. This precept is in old French.
Registr. Joh. Ponti^s^r. Episc. Winton. fol. 172. It is remarkable that
Wickliffe translates, Luc. i. 21. "He schal not drink wyn ne sydyr." This
translation was made about A. D. 1380. At a visitation of St. Swithin's priory
at Winchester, by the said bishop, it appears that the monks claimed to have,
among other articles of luxury, on many festivals, "Vinum, tam a^ bum quam
rubeum, claretum, medonem, burgarastrum, etc." This was so early as the year
1285. Registr Priorat. S. Swith. Winton. MS. supr. citat. quatern. 5. It
appears also, that the Horda^i^s and Cam^rarius claimed every year of the prior
ten dolia vini, or twenty pounds in money, A. D. 1337. Ibid. quatern. 5. A
bene^actor grants to the said convent on the day of his anniversary, "unam
pipam vini pret. xx. s." for their r^f^ction, A. D. 1286 Ibid. quatern. 10.
Before the year 1200, "Vina et medones" are mentioned as not uncommon in the
abbey of Evesham in Worcestershire. Stevens Monast. Append. p. 138. The use of
mead, medo, seems to have been very ancient in England. See Mon. Angl. i. 26.
Thorn, Chron. sub. ann. 1114. Compare DISSERTAT. i.
. --
Sometimes to show his lightness and maistry
He playith heraudes Speght explains this "feats of activity, furious parts in
a play." Gloss. Chapter Urr. Perhaps the character of HEROD in a MYSTERY.
on a scaffold hie.
Again,

When that the first cok has crow anon,
Uprist this jolly lovir Absolon;
And him arayith gay at point devise.
But first he chewith greyns Greyns, or grains, of Paris, or Paradise, occurs
in the ROMANT OF THE ROSE. v. 1369. A rent of herring pies is an old payment
from the city of Norwich to the king, seasoned among other spices with half an
ounce of grains of Paradise. Blomf. Norf. ii. 264.
and licorice,
To smellin sote, ere he had kempt his here.
Under his tongue a true love knot he bare,
For thereby wend he to be graciouse;
Then romith to the carpenteris house v. 579. It is to be remarked, that in
this tale the carpenter swears, with great propriety, by the patroness saint of
Oxford, saint Frideswide, v. 340.

This carpenter to blissin him began,
And seide now help in us saint Frideswide.

.
In the mean time the scholar, intent on accomplishing his intrigue, locks
himself up in his chamber for the space of two days. The carpenter, alarmed at
this long seclusion, and supposing that his guest might be sick or dead, tries
to gain admittance, but in vain. He peeps through a crevice of the door, and at
length discovers the scholar, who is conscious that he was seen, in an affected
trance of abstracted meditation. On this our carpenter, reflecting on the
danger of being wise, and exulting in the security of his own ignorance,
exclaims,

A man wott littil what shall him betide!
This man is fallen with his astronomy
In some wodeness, or in some agony.
I thoughtin ay well how it should be:
Men should not know "Pry into the secrets of nature."
of gods privite.
Yea blessid be always the lewde-man Unlearned.
,
That naught but only his belefe can "Who knows only what he believes." Or, his
Creed.
.
So farde another clerk with astronomy;
He walkid in the feldis for to pry
Upon the stars to wate what should bifall
Till he was in a marlepit yfall;
He saw not that. But yet, by seint Thomas,
Me ruith sore on hende Nicholas:
He shall be ratid for his studying.
But the scholar has ample gratification for this ridicule. The carpenter is at
length admitted; and the scholar continuing the farce, gravely acquaints the
former that he has been all this while making a most important discovery by
means of astrological calculations. He is soon persuaded to believe the
prediction: and in the sequel, which cannot be repeated here, this humourous
contrivance crowns the scholar's schemes with success, and proves the cause of
the carpenter's disgrace. In this piece the reader observes that the humor of
the characters is made subservient to the plot.

I have before hinted, that Chaucer's obscenity is in great measure to be
imputed to his age. We are apt to form romantic and exaggerated notions about
the moral innocence of our ancestors. Ages of ignorance and simplicity are
thought to be ages of purity. The direct contrary, I believe, is the case. Rude
periods have that grossness of manners which is not less friendly to virtue
than luxury itself. In the middle ages, not only the most flagrant violations
of modesty were frequently practiced and permitted, but the most infamous
vices. Men are less ashamed as they are le^s polished. Great refinement
multiplies criminal pleasures, but at the same time prevents the actual
commission of many enormities: at least it preserves public decency, and
suppresses public licentiousness.

The REVES TALE, or the MILLER of TROMPINGTON, is much in the same style, but
with less humor See also THE SHIPMAN'S TAL^, which was originally taken from
some comic Fren^h trobadour. But Chaucer had it from Boccacio. The story of
Zenobia, in the MONKS TALE, i^ from Boccacio's Cas. Vir. Illustr. (See Lydg.
Boch. viii. 7.) That of Hugolin of Pisa in the same Tale, from Dante. That of
Pedro of Spain, from archbishop Turpin, ibid. Of Julius Caesar, from Lucan,
Suetonius, and Valerius Maximus, ibid. The idea of this TALE was suggested by
Boccacio's book on the same subjec^.
. This story was enlarged by Chaucer from Boccacio Decamer. Giom. ix. Nov. 6.
. There is an old English poem on the same plan, entitled, A right pleasant and
mery^ history of the Myln^r of A^ington, with his Wife and fair Daught^r, and
^wo poor Scholars of Cambridge A manifest mistake for Oxford, unless we read
Trumpington for Abingdon, or retaining Abingdon we might rea^ Oxford for
Cambridge. Imprint. at London by Richard Jones, 4to. Bl. Let. It is in Bibl.
Bodl. Seldom, C. 39. 4to. This book was probably given to that library, with
many other petty black l^tter histories, in prose and verse, of a similar cast,
by Robert Burton, author of the ANATOMY of MELANCHOLY, who was a great
collector of such pieces. One of his books now in the Bodleian is the HISTORY
OF TOM THUMB; whom a learned antiquary, while he lam^nts that ancient history
ha^ been much disguised by romantic narratives, pronounces to have been no less
important a personage than king Edgar's dwarf.
. It begins with these lines. "Fair lordinges, if you list to here
"A merry jest Story.
your minds to cheer."
This piece is supposed by Wood to have been written by Andrew Board, a
physician, a wit, and a poet, in the reign of Henry the eighth See Wood's
Athen. Oxon. BOARD. And Hearne'^ Bened. Abb. i. Prae^at. p. xl. lv. I am of
opinion that Solere-Hall, in Cambridge, mentioned in this poem, was Aula
Solarii. The hall, with the upper story, at that time a sufficient circumstance
to distinguish and de^ominate one of the academical hospitia. Although Chaucer
calls it, "a great college," v. 88. Thus in Oxford we had Chimney-hall, Aula
cum Camino, an almost parallel proof of the simplicity of their ancient houses
of learning. Twyne also mentions Solerehall, at Oxford. Also Aula Selarii,
which I doubt not is properly Solarii. Compare Wood. Ant. Oxon. ii. 11. col. i.
13. col. i. 12. col. 2. Caius will have it to be Clarehall. Hist. Acad. p. 57.
Those who read Scholars-hall (of Edw. iii.) may consult Wacht. V. SOLLER^ In
the mean time for the reasons assigned, one of th^se two hal^s or colleg^s at
Cambridge, might at first have been commonly called Soler-hall. A hall near
Brazen-nose coll^ge, Oxford, was called Glazen-hall, having glass windows,
anciently not common. See Twyn^ Miscel. quaedam, etc. ad calc. Apol. Antiq.
Aca^^ Oxon.
. It was at least evidently written after the time of Chaucer. It is the work
of some tasteless imitator, who has sufficiently disguised his original, by
retaining none of its spirit. I mention these circumstances, lest it should be
thought that this frigid abridgment was the groundwork of Chaucer's poem on
the same subject. In the class of ^umourous or satirical tales, the SOMPNOUR'S
TALE, which exposes the tricks and extortions of the mendicant friars, has also
distinguished merit. This piece has incidentally been mentioned above with the
PLOWMAN'S TALE, and Pierce Plowman.

Genuine humor, the concomitant of true taste, consists in discerning
improprieties in books as well as characters. We therefore must remark under
this class another tale of Chaucer, which till lately has been looked upon as a
grave heroic narrative. I mean the RHYME OF SIR THOPAS. Chaucer, at a period
which almost realised the manners of romantic chivalry, discerned the leading
absurdities of the old romances: and in this poem, which may be justly called a
prelude to Don Quixote, has burlesqued them with exquisite ridicule. That this
was the poet's aim, appears from many passages. But, to put the matter beyond a
doubt, take the words of an ingenious critic. "We are to observe, says he, that
this was Chaucer's own Tale: and that, when in the progress of it, the good
sense of the host is made to break in upon him, and interrupt him, Chaucer
approves his disgust, and changing his note, tells the simple instructive Tale
of MELIBOEUS, a moral tale virtuous, as he terms it; to show what sort of
fictions were most expressive of real life, and most proper to be put into the
hands of the people. It is further to be noted, that the Book of The Giant
Olyphant, and Child Thop^s, was not a fiction of his own, but a story of
antique fame, and very celebrated in the days of chivalry: so that nothing
could better suit the poet's design of discrediting the old romances, than the
choice of this venerable legend for the vehicle of his ridicule upon them See
Dr. Hurd's LETTERS ON CHIVALRY AND ROMANCE. Dialogues, etc. iii. 218. edit.
1765.
. But it is to be remembered, that Chaucer's design was intended to ridicule
the frivolous descriptions, and other tedious impertinencies, so common in the
volumes of chivalry with which his age was overwhelmed, not to degrade in
general or expose a mode of fabling, whose sublime extravagancies constitute
the mavelous graces of his own CAMBUSCAN; a composition which at the same
time abundantly demonstrates, that the manners of romance are better calculated
to answer the purposes of pure poetry, to captivate the imagination, and to
produce surprise, than the fictions of classical antiquity.

SECT. XVII.
BUT Chaucer's vein of humor, although conspicuous in the CANTERBURY TALES, is
chiefly displayed in the Characters with which they are introduced. In these
his knowledge of the world availed him in a peculiar degree, and enabled him to
give such an accurate pic^ure of ancient manners, as no cotemporary nation has
transmitted to post^rity. It is here that we view the pursuits and employments,
the customs and diversions, of our ancestors, copied from the life, and
represented with equal truth and spirit, by a judge of mankind, whose
penetration qualified him to discern their foibles or discriminating
peculiarities; and by an artist, who understood that proper selection of
circumstances, and those predominant characteristics, which form a finished
portrait. We are surprised to find, in so gross and ignorant an age, such
talents for satire, and for observation on lif^; qualities which usually exert
themselves at more civilized periods, when the improved state of society, by
subtilising our speculations, and establishing uniform modes of b^haviour,
disposes mankind to study themselves, and renders deviations of conduct, and
singularities of character, more immediately and necessarily the obj^cts of
censure and ridicule. These curious and valuable remains are specimens of
Chaucer's native genius, unassisted and unalloyed. The figures are all British,
and bear no suspicious signatures of classical, Italian, or French imitation.
The characters of Theophrastus are not so lively, particular, and appropriated.
A few traites from this celebrated part of our author, yet too little tasted
and understood, may be sufficient to prove and illustrate what is here advanced.

The character of the PRIORESSE is chiefly distinguished by an excess of
delicacy and decorum, and an affectation of courtly accomplishments. But we are
informed, that she was educated at the school of Stratford at Bow near London,
perhaps a fashionable seminary for breeding nuns.

There was also a nonne a Prioresse
That of her smiling was simble and coy;
Her gretist oath was but by saint Eloye Seynte Loy, i. e. Saint Lewis. The
same ^ath occurs in the FR^ERE'^ TALE, v. 300. p. 88. Urr.
.
And French she spoke full fair and fetisly,
Aftir the schole of Stratford at Bow,
For French of Paris was to her unknowe.
At mete Dinner.
was she well ytaught withal;
She let no morsel from her lippis fall,
Ne wet her fingris in the sauce deep;
Well couth she carry a morsel, and well keep,
That no drope ne fell upon her breast;
In courtesy was set full much her lest Pleasure. Desire.
.
Her ovirlippe wipid she so clean,
That in her cup there was no ferthing seen
Of greece, when she dronkin had her draught,
Full semily aftir her mete she raught Literally, Stretched.
. --
And painid her to counterfete chere
Of court, and to ben stately of manner Prol. v. 124.
.
She has even the false pity and sentimentality of many modern ladies.

She was so charitable and so pitous,
She would weep if that she saw a mous
Caught in a trapp, if it were ded or bled.
Of small houndis had she that she fed
With rostid flesh, or milk, or wastell bred Bread of a ^iner sort.
:
But sore wept she if any of them were ded,
Or if men smote them with a yard Stick.
smert:
And all was conscience and tendir heart v. 143.
.
The WIFE OF BATH is more amiable for her plain and useful qualifications. She
is a respectable dame, and her chief pride consists in being a conspicuous and
significant character at church on a Sunday.

Of clothmaking It is to be observed, that she lived in the neighborhood of
Bath; a country famous for clothing to this day.
she had such a haunt
She passid them of Ipre and of Gaunt See above, p. 177.
.
In all the parish, wife ne was there none
That to the offryng was before her gone;
And if there did, certain so wroth was she,
That she was outin of all charity.
Her coverchefes Head dress.
were large and fine of ground,
I durst to swear that they weyid three pound,
That on a sunday were upon her hedde:
Her hosin werin of fine scarlett read,
Full strait istreynid, and her shoos full new:
Bold was her face, and fair and read her hew.
She was a worthy woman all her live:
At the southern entrance of Norwich cathedral, a representation of the
ESPOU^ALS, or sacrament of marriage, is carved in stone; for here the hands of
the couple were joined by the priest, and great part of the service performed.
Here also the bride was endowed with what was called Dos ad ostium ecclesiae.
This ceremony is exhibited in a curious old picture engraved by Mr. Walpole,
where king Henry the seventh is married to his queen, standing at the facade or
western portal of a magnificent Gothic church. Anecd. Paint. i. 31. Compare
Marten. Rit. Eccl. Anecdot. ii. p. 630. And Hearne's Antiquit. Glastonb.
Append. p. 310.
Husbands at the church door had she had five v. 449.
.
The FRANKELEIN is a country gentleman, whose estate consisted in free land,
and was not subject to feudal services or payments. He is ambitious of showing
his riches by the plenty of his table: but his hospitality, a virtue much more
practicable among our ancestors than at present, often degenerates into
luxurious excess. His impatience if his sauces were not sufficiently poignant,
and every article of his dinner in due form and readiness, is touched with the
hand of Pope or Boileau. He had been a president at the sessions, knight of the
shire, a sheriff, and a coroner An office anciently executed by gentlemen of
the greatest respect and property.
.

An householder, and that a great, was he:
Saint Julian he was in his country Simon the leper, at whose house our Savior
lodged in Pethany, is called, in the ^egends, Julian the good ^^rborow, and
bishop of Bethpage. In the TALE OF BIRYN, St. Julian is invoked to revenge a
traveller who had been traitorously used in his lodgings. See Urr. Chapter p. 599.
v. 625.
.
His bread, his ale, was always aftir one;
A bettir viendid Better vianded.
men was no where none.
Withoutin bake mete never was his house
Of fish and flesh, and that so plenteouse,
It fnewid Snowed.
in his house of mete and drink,
And of all dainties that men couth of think.
Aftir the sondrie seasons of the year,
So chaungid he his mete Dinner.
, and his supp^re.
Many a fat partriche had he in mewe,
And many a breme, and many a luce Pike.
, in stewe.
Woe was his cook, but that his saucis were
Poinant and sharp, and ready all his gere!
His table dormaunt Never removed.
in the hall^ always,
Stood ready coverid, all the long day v. 356.
.
The character of the Doctor of PHYSIC preserves to us the state of medical
knowledge, and the course of medical erudition then in fashion. He treats his
patients according to rules of astronomy: a science which the Arabians
engrafted on medicine.

For he was groundid in astronomy:
He kept his pacients a full great dele
In houris by his magike natural v. 416.
.
Petrarch leaves a legacy to his physician John de Dondi, of Padua, who was
likewise a great astronomer, in the year 1370 See Acad. Inscript. xx. 443.
. It was a long time before the medical profession was purged from these
superstitions. Hugo de Evesham, born in Worcestershire, one of the most famous
physicians in Europe about the year 1280, educated in both the universities of
England, and at others in France and Italy, was eminently skilled in
mathematics and astronomy Pits. p. 370. Bale, iv. 50. xiii. 86.
. Pierre d'Apono, a celebrated professor of medicine and astronomy at Padua,
wrote commentaries on the problems of Aristotle, in the year 1310. Roger Bacon
says, "astronomiae pars melior medicina Bacon, Op. Maj. edit. Jebb, p. 158. See
also p. 240. 247.
." In the statutes of New-College at Oxford, given in the year 1387, medicine
and astronomy are mentioned as one and the same science. Charles the fifth king
of France, who was governed entir^ly by astrologers, and who commanded all the
Latin treatises which could be found relating to the stars, to be translated
into French, established a college in the university of Paris for the study of
medicine and astrology Montfaucon, Bibl. Manusc^^pt. tom. ii. p. 791. b.
. There is a scarce and very curious book, entitled, "Nova medicinae methodus
curandi morbos ex mathematica scientia deprompta, nunc denuo revisa, etc.
Joanne Hasfurto Virdungo, medico et astrologo doctissimo, auctore, Haganoae
excus. 1518 In quarto.
." Hence magic made a part of medicine. In the MARCHAUNTS second tale, or
HISTORY OF BERYN, falsely ascribed to Chaucer, a chirurgical operation of
changing eyes is partly performed by the assistance of the occult sciences.

-- The whole science of all surgery,
Was undyd or the change was made of both eye,
With many sotill enchantours, and eke nygrymauncers,
That sent were for the nonis, maistris, and scoleris v. 2989. Urr. Chapter
.
Leland mentions one William Glatisaunt, an astrologer and physician, a fellow
of Merton college in Oxford, who wrote a medical tract, which, says he, "nescio
quid MAGIAE spirabat Lel. apud Tann. Bibl. p. 262. And Lel. Script. Brit. p.
400.
." I could add many other proofs See Ames's Hist. Print. p. 147.
.

The books which our physician studied are then enumerated.

Well knew he the old Esculapius,
And Dioscorides, and eke Rufus,
Old Hippocrates, Haly, and Galen,
Serapion, Rasis, and Avicen,
Averrois, Damascene, Constantine,
Bernard, and Gattisden, and Gilbertin.
Rufus, a physician of Ephesus, wrote in Greek, about the time of Trajan. Some
fragments of his works still remain Conring. Script. Com. Saec. i. cap. 4. p.
66. 67. The Arabians have translations of him. Herbel. Bibl. Orient. p. 972. b.
977. b.
. Haly was a famous Arabic astronomer, and a commentator on Galen, in the
eleventh century, which produced so many famous Arabian physicians Id. ibid.
Saec. xi. cap. 5. p. 114. Haly, called Abbas, was likewise an eminent physician
of this period. He was called, "Simia Galeni." Id. ibid.
. John Serapion, of the same age and country, wrote on the practice of physic
Id. ibid. p. 113, 114.
. Avicen, the most eminent physician of the Arabian school, flourished in the
same century Id. ibid. See Pard. T. v. 2407. Urr. p. 136.
. Rhasis, an Asiatic physician, practiced at Cordoua in Spain, where he died in
the tenth century Conring. ut supr. Saec. x cap. 4. p. 110. He wrote a large
and famous work, called Continens. Rhasis and Almasor, (f. Albuma^ar, a great
Arabian astrologer,) occur in the library of Peterborough Abbey, Matric. Libr.
Monast. Burgi S. Petri. Gunton, Peterb. p. 187. See Hearne, Ben. Abb. Praef.
lix.
. Averroes, as the Asiatic schools decayed by the indolence of the Caliphs, was
one of those philosophers who adorned the Moorish schools erected in Africa and
Spain. He was a professor in the university of Morocco. He wrote a commentary
on all Aristotle's works, and died about the year 1160. He was styled the most
Peripatic of all the Arabian writers. He was born at Cordoua of an ancient
Arabic family Conring. ut supr. Saec. xii. cap. 2. p. 118.
. John Damascene, secretary to one of the Caliphs, wrote in various sciences,
before the Arabians had entered Europe, and had seen the Grecian philosophers
Voss Hist. Gr. L. iii. c. 24.
. Constantinus Afer, a monk of Cassino in Italy was one of the Saracen
physicians who brought medicine into Europe, and formed the Salernitan school,
chiefly by translating various Arabian and Grecian medical books into Latin
Petr. Diacon. de Vir. illustr. Monast^ Cassin. cap. xxiii. See the
DISSERTATIONS. He is again mentioned by our author in the MARCHAUNT'S TALE, v.
1326. p. 71. Urr. And lectuaries had he there full fine,
Soche as the cursid monk Dan Constantine
Has written in his book de Coitu.
The title of this book is, "DE COITU, quibus pro^it aut obsit, quibus
medicaminibus et alimentis acuatur impediaturve." Inter Op. Bas^l. 1536. fol.
. He was born at Carthage: and learned grammar, logic, geometry, arithmetic,
astronomy, and natural philosophy, of the Chaldees, Arabians, Persians,
Saracens, Egyptians, and Indians, in the schools of Bagdat. Being thus
completely accomplished in these sciences, after thirty-nine years study, he
returned into Africa. where an attempt was formed against his life.
Constantine, having fortunately discovered this design, privately took ship and
came to Salerno in Italy, where he lurked some time in disguise. But he was
recognized by the Caliph's brother then at Salerno, who recommended him as a
scholar universally skilled in the learning of all nations, to the notice of
Robert duke of Normandy. Robert entertained him with the highest marks of
respect: and Constantine, by the advice of his patron, retired to the monastery
of Cassino, where being kindly received by the abbot Desiderius, he translated
in that learned society the books abovementioned, most of which he first
imported into Europe. These versions are said to be still extant. He flourished
about the year 1086 See Leo Ostiensis, or P. Diac. Auctar. ^d Leon. Chron. Mon.
Cassin. lib. iii. c. 35. p. 445. Scriptor. Italic. tom. iv. Murator. In his
book DE INCANTATIONI^US, one of his enquiries is, An invenerim i^ libris
GR^ECORUM ^^c qualiter in INDORUM lib^is est invenire, etc. Op. tom. i. ut supr.
. Bernard, or Bernardus Gordonius, appears to have been Chaucer's cotemporary.
He was a professor of medicine at Montpelier, and wrote many treatises in that
faculty Petr. Lambec. Prodrom. Sa^c. xiv. p. 274. edit. ut supr.
. John Gatisden was a fellow of Merton college, where Chaucer was educated,
about the year 1320 It has been before observed, that at the introduction of
philosophy into Europe by the Saracens, the clergy only studied and pr^cticed
the medical art. This fashion prevailed a long while afterward. The Prior and
Convent of S. Swithin's at Winchester granted to Thomas of Shaftesbury, clerk,
a corrody, consisting of two dishes daily from the Prior's kitchen, bread,
drink, robes, and a competent chamber in the monastery, for the term of his
life. In consideration of all which concessions, the said Thomas paid them
fifty marcs: and moreover is obliged, "deservire nobis in Art^ medicin^^. Dat.
in dom. Capitul. Feb. 15. A. D. 1319." Registr. Priorat. S. Swithin. Winton.
MS. supr. citat. The most l^arn^d and accurate Fabricius has a separate article
on THEOLOGI MEDICI^ Bibl. Gr. xii. 739. seq. See also Gianon. Istor. Neapol. l.
x. chapter xi.. 491. In the romance of SIR GUY, a monk heals the knight's wounds^
Signat. G. iiii. There was a monk^ beheld him well
That could of l^ach cra^te some d^ll.
In G. of Monmouth, who wrote in 1128, Eopa intending to poison Ambrosius,
introduces himself as a physician. But in order to sustain this character with
due propri^ty, he first shaves his head, and assumes the habit of a monk. lib.
viii. c. 14. John Arundale, afterward bishop of Chich^ster, was chaplain and
first physician to H^nry the sixth, in 1458. Wharton, Angl. sacr. i. 777.
Faricius abbot of Abingdon, about 1110, was eminent for his skill in medicine;
and a great cure p^rformed by him is recorded in the r^gist^r of the abbey.
Hearne's Bened. Abb. Pr^^f. xlvii. King John, while sick at N^wark, mad^ use of
William de Wod^stoke, ab^ot of the neighboring monastery of Croxton, as his
physician. B^v^r, Chron. MSS. Harl. ap^d Hearne, P^a^f^ ut supr. p. xlix Many
ot^^^ ^nstances may be added. The physic^^n^ of the university of Paris were
not allowed to marry till the year 1452. Menagian^ p. 333. In the same
university, anciently at the admission to the degree of doctor in phys^c, they
took an oath that they were not married. MSS. Br. Twyne, 8. p. 249.
. Pitts says, that he was professor of physic in Oxford p. 414.
. He was the most celebrated physician of his age in England; and his principal
work is entitled, ROSA MEDICA, divided into five books, which was printed at
Paris in the year 1492 Tanner, Bibl. p. 312. Leland styles this work, "opus
lu^ulentum juxta ac eruditum." Script. Brit. p. 355.
. Gilbertine, I suppose is Gilbertus Anglicus, who flourished in the thirteenth
century, and wrote a popular compendium of the medical art Conring. ut supr.
S^ec. xiii. cap. 4. p. 127. And Leland. Script. Brit. p. 291. Who says, that
Gilbert's Practica ^t C^mpendium M^dicinae was most carefully studied by many
"ad quoes^um properantes^" H^ adds, that it was common, about this time, for
foreign writers to assume the surname Anglicus, as a plausible recommendation.
. About the same time, not many years before Chaucer wrote, the works of the
most famous Arabian authors, and among the rest those of Avicenne, Averroes,
Serapion, and Rhasis, abovementioned, were translated into Latin Conring. ut
supr. Saec. xiii. cap. 4. p. 126. About the same time, the works of Galen and
Hippocrates were first tran^lated from Greek into Latin: but in a most
barbarous style. Id. ibid. p. 127.
. These were our physician's library. But having mentioned his books, Chaucer
could not forbear to add a stroke of satire so naturally introduced.

His study was but litill in the bible v. 440.
.
The following anecdotes and obs^rvations may serve to throw general light on
the learning of the authors who compose this curious library. The Aristotelic
or Arabian philosophy continued to be communicated from Spain and Africa to the
rest of Europe chiesly by means of the Jews: particularly to France and Italy,
which were overrun with Jews about the tenth and eleventh centuries. About
these p^riods, not only the courts of the Mohammedan princes, but even that of
the pope himself, were filled with Jews. Here they principally gained an
establishment by the profession of physic; an art then but imperfectly known
and practiced in most parts of Europe. Being well versed in the Arabic tongue,
from their commerce with Africa and Egypt, they had studied the Arabic
translations of Galen and Hippocrates; which had become still more familiar to
the great numbers of their brethren who resided in Spain. From this source al^o
the Jews learned philosophy; and Hebrew versions made about this period from
the Arabic, of Aristotle and the Greek physicians and mathematicians, are stil^
extant in some libraries Eusebius. Renaudot. apud Fabric. Bibl. Gr. xii. 254.
. Here was a beneficial effect of the dispersion and vagabond condition of the
Jews: I mean the diffusion of knowledge. One of the most eminent of these
learned Jews was Moses Maimonides, a physician, philosopher, astrologer, and
theologist, educated at Cordoua in Spain under Averroes. He died about the year
1208. Averroes being accused of heretical opinions, was sentenced to live with
the Jews in the street of the Jews at Cordoua. Some of these learned Jews began
to flourish in the Arabian schools in Spain, as early as the beginning of the
ninth century. Many of the treatises of Averroes were translated by the Spanish
Jews into Hebrew: and the Latin pieces of Averroes now extant were translated
into Latin from these Hebrew versions. I have already mentioned the school or
university of Cordoua. Leo Africanus speaks of "Platea bibliothecariorum
Cordouae." This, from what follows, appears to be a street of booksellers. It
was in the time of Averroes, and about the year 1220. One of our Jew
philosophers having fallen in love, turned poet, and his verses were publicly
sold in this street Leo African. de Med. et Philosoph. Hebr. c. xxviii. xxix.
. My author says, that renouncing the dignity of the Jewish doctor, he took to
writing verses Leo ibid. "Amore capitur, ^t DIGNITATE DOCTORUM POSTHABITA
coepit edere carmina." See also Simon. in Suppl. ad Leon. Mutinens. de Ritib.
Hebr. p. 104.
.

The SOMPNOUR, whose office it was to summon uncanonical offend^rs into the
archdeacon's court, where they were very rigorously punished, is humourously
drawn as counteracting his profession by his example: he is libidinous and
voluptuous, and his rosy countenance belies his occupation. This is an indirect
satire o^ the ecclesiastical proceedings of those times. His affectation of
Latin terms, which he had picked up from the decrees and pleadings of the
court, must have formed a character highly ridiculous.

And when that he well dronkin had the wine,
Then would he speak no word but Latin.
A few schole termis couth he two or thr^,
That he had lernid out of some decre.
No wonder is, he herd it all the day:
And ye well knowin eke, how that a jay
Can clepe wult as well as can the pope:
But whosoever couth in other things him grope Examine.
,
Then had he spent al his philosophy,
A question quid juris Read "Aye, question, etc."
would he cry v. 639.
.
He is with great propriety made the friend and companion of the PARDONERE, or
dispenser of indulgences, who is just arrived from the pope, "brimful of
pardons come from Rome al hot:" and who carries in his wall^t, among other
holy curiosities, the virgin Mary's veil, and part of the sail of Saint Peter's
ship v. 670. s^q.
.

The MONK is represented as more attentive to horses and hounds than to the
rigorous and obsolete ordinances of Saint Benedict. Such are his ideas of
secular pomp and pleasure, that he is even qualified to be an abbot There is
great humor in the circumstances which qualify our monk ^o be an abbot. Some
time in the thirteenth century, the prior and convent of Saint Swithin's at
Winche^ter, appear to have recommended one of their brethren to the convent of
Hyde as a proper person to be preferred to the abbacy of that convent, then
vacant. These are his merits. "Est eni^ con^rater ille noster in glosanda ^acra
pagina been callens, in scriptura [transcribing] peritus, in capitalibus
literis appingendis bonus artifex, in regula S. Benedicti instructissimus,
psallendi doctissimus, etc." MS. Regi^tr. ut supr. quat... These were the
ostensible qualities of the master of a capital monastery. But Chaucer, in the
verses before us, seems to have told the real truth, and to have given the real
character as it actually existed in life. I believe, that our indu^^rious
confrere, with all his knowledge of glossing, writing, illuminating, chanting^
and Benedict's rules, would in fact have been less likely to succeed to a
vacant abbey, than one of the g^nial complexion and popular accomplishments
here inimitably described.
.

An outrider that lovid venery Hunting.
,
A manly mon, to ben an abbot able:
Many a dainty horse he had in stable. --
This ilke Same.
monk let old thingis to pace,
And heldin aftir the new world to trace.
He gave not of the text a pullid hen "He did not care a straw for the text,
etc."

That says, that hunters be not holy men v. 176. seq.
.
He is ambitious of appearing a conspicuous and stately figure on horseback. A
circumstance represented with great elegance.

And when he rode, men might his bridle here
Gingiling in a whistling wind, as clear
And eke as loud, as does the chapel bell See supr. p. 164.
.
The gallantry of his riding-dress, and his genial aspect, is painted in lively
colors.

I see his sleves purfilid Fringed.
at the hand,
With grys Fur.
, and that the finist in the land.
And to sustene his hode undir his chin
He had of gold wrought a full curious pin,
A love-knot in the greter end there was.
His head was bald, and shone as any glass,
And eke his ^ace as he had been anoint:
He was a lord full fat, and in good point.
His eyin stepe, and rolling in his head,
That stemith as a furneis of led.
His boots souple, his horse in great estate,
Now certainly he was a fair prelate!
He was not pale as a forpynid ghost;
A fat swan lovde he best of any roast.
His palfry was as brown as is the berry v. 193.
.
The FRIAR, or friar, is equally fond of diversion and good living; but the
poverty of his establishment obliges him to travel about the country, and to
practice various artifices to provide money for his convent, under the sacred
character of a confessor A friar that had a particular grant for begging or
hearing confessions within certain limits. See supr. p. 288. seq.
.

A friar there was, a wanton and a merry;
A limitour Of mendicants.
, and a full solemn man:
In all the orders four In Urry's Glossary this expression, on a Rote, is
explained, by Rote. But a rote is a musical instrument. Lydgate, MSS. Fairfax,
Bibl. Bodl. 16.

For there was Rotys of Almayne,
And eke of Arragon and Spain.
Again, in the same manuscript, Harpys, ^itheles, and eke rotys,
Well acording to there notys.
Where fitheles is fiddles, as in the Prol. Cl. Oxenf. v. 590. So in the Roman
d' Alexandre, MSS. Bibl. Bodl. ut supr. fol. i. b. col. 2.

Rote, harp, viole, et gigne, et siphonie.
I cannot help mentioning in this place, a pleasant mistake of bishop Morgan,
in his translation of the New Testament into Welsh, printed 1567. He translates
the VIALS of wrath, in the Revelations, by Crythan i. e. Crowds or Fiddles,
Rev. v. 8. The greek is (...). Now it is probable that the bishop translated
only from the English, where he found VIALS, which he took for VIOLS.


is none that can
So much of daliaunce, and of fair langage. --
Full swetely herd he their confessioune:
Full pleasant was his absolutioune.
His tippit was aye farfid full of knives
And pinnis for to givin to fair wives.
And certainly he had a merry note:
Well couthe he sing and playin on a rote In Urry's Glossary this expression,
on a Rote, is explained, by Rote. But a rote is a musical instrument. Lydgate,
MSS. Fairfax, Bibl. Bodl. 16.

For there was Rotys of Almayne,
And eke of Arragon and Spain.
Again, in the same manuscript, Harpys, ^itheles, and eke rotys,
Well acording to there notys.
Where fitheles is fiddles, as in the Prol. Cl. Oxenf. v. 590. So in the Roman
d' Alexandre, MSS. Bibl. Bodl. ut supr. fol. i. b. col. 2.

Rote, harp, viole, et gigne, et siphonie.
I cannot help mentioning in this place, a pleasant mistake of bishop Morgan,
in his translation of the New Testament into Welsh, printed 1567. He translates
the VIALS of wrath, in the Revelations, by Crythan i. e. Crowds or Fiddles,
Rev. v. 8. The greek is (...). Now it is probable that the bishop translated
only from the English, where he found VIALS, which he took for VIOLS.


.
Of yedding Yelding, i. e. dalliance.
he bare utterly the price.
There n'as no man no where so virtuous;
He was the best beggare in all his house Convent.
.
Somewhat he lipsid for his wantonness,
To make his English sweet upon his tongue;
And in his harping, when that he had song,
His eyi^ twinkelid in his head aright
As donn the starris in a frostie night v. 208.
.
With these unhallowed and untrue sons of the church is contrasted the
PARSOUNE, or parish priest: in describing whose sanctity, simplicity,
sincerity, patience, industry, courage, and conscientious impartiality, Chaucer
shows his good sense and good heart. Dryden imitated this character of the GOOD
PARSON, and is said to have applied it to bishop Ken.

The character of the SQUIRE teaches us the education and requisite
accomplishments of young gentlemen in the gallant reign of Edward the third.
But it is to be remembered, that our squire is the son of a knight, who has
performed feats of chivalry in every part of the world; which the poet thus
enumerates with great dignity and simplicity.

At Alissandre' he was when it was won,
Full often timis had he the bourd begone See this phrase explained above, p. 172.
I will here add a similar expression from Gower, Conf. Amant. lib. viii. fol.
177, b. edit. B^rthel. 1554. -- Bad his marshall of his hall
To setten him in such degree,
That he upon him might se.
The king was soon set and served:
And he which had his prise deserved,
After the kyngis own word,
Was made b^gyn a myddle board.
That is, "he was seated in the middle of the table, a place of distinction and
dignity."
,
Abovin all naciouns in Pruce Prussia.
.
In Lettow Lithuania.
had he riddin and in Luce Livonia.
:
No christian man so often of his degree
In Granada, and in the sege had he be
Of Algezir A city of Spain. Perhaps Gibraltar.
, and ridd in Belmary Speght supposes it to be that country in Barbary which is
called Benamarin. It is mentioned again in the KNIGHT'S TALE, v. 2632. p. 20.
Urr. Ne in Balmarie there is no lion,
That huntid is, etc.
By which at least we may conjecture it to be some country in Africa. Perhaps a
corruption for Barbary.
.
At Leyis Some suppose it to be Lavissa, a city on the continent, near Rhodes.
Others Lybissa, a city of Bithynia.
was he, and at Sataly A city in Anatolia, called Atalia. Many of these places
are mentioned in the history of the crusades.
,
When they were won: and in the great sea:
At many a noble army had he be:
At mortal battles had he ben fiftene,
And foughtin for our faith at Tramisene "In the holy war at Thrasimene, a city
in Barbary.

In lystis thrys, and always slein his fo.
This ilke worthy Knight had been also
Sometimis with the lord of Palathy Palathia, a city in Anatolia. See
Froissart, iii. 40.
:
Ayens Against.
another hethen in Turkey.
And evirmore he had a sovrane prize,
And thoug that he was worthy he was wise v. 51.
.
The poet in some of these lines implies, that after the Christians were driven
out of Palestine, the English knights of his days joined the knights of Livonia
and Prussia, and attacked the pagans of Lithuania, and its adjacent
territories. Lithuania was not converted to christianity till toward the close
of the fourteenth century. Prussian targets are mentioned, as we have before
seen, in the KN^GHT'S TALE. Thomas duke of Gloucester, youngest son of king
Edward the third, and Henry earl of Derby, afterward king Henry the fourth,
traveled into Prussia: and in conjunction with the grand Masters and Knights
of Prussia and Livonia, fought the infidels of Lithuania. Lord Derby was
greatly instrumental in taking Vilna, the capital of that county, in the year
1390 See Hakluyt's Voyages, i. 122. seq. edit. 1598. See also Hakluyt's account
of the conquest of Prussia by the Dutch Knights Hospitalaries of Jerusalem,
ibid.
. Here is a seeming compliment to some of these expeditions. This invincible
and accomplished champion afterward tells the heroic tale of PALAMON and
ARCITE. His son the SQUIER, a youth of twenty years, is thus delineated.

And he had been sometime in chivauchie i Chivalry, riding, exercises of
horsemanship, Compl. M^r. Ven. v. 144.

Ciclinius riding in his chi vauhcie
From Venus. --


In Flandris, in Artois, and Picardie:
And born him well, as of so littill space,
In hope to standin in his ladies grace.
Embroudid was he as it were a mede
All full of fresh flouris both white and read.
Singing he was and floityng all the day,
He was as fresh as in the month of May.
Schort was his gown with slevis long and wide,
Well couth he sit an horse, and fair yride.
And songis couth he make, and well endite,
Just, and eke dance, and well portraie, and write v. 85.
.
To this young man the poet, with great observance of decorum gives the tale of
Cambuscan, the next in knightly dignity to that of Palamon and Arcite. He is
attended by a y^oman, whose figure revives the ideas of the forest laws.

And he was clad in cote and hode of grene:
A shaft of pecocke arrows bright and kene Comp. Gul. Waynflete, episc. Winton.
an. 1471. (supr. citat.) Among the stores of the bishop's castle of Farnham. "
(...) ^um ^h^rdi^. Et red. comp. de xxiv. a^cubus cum xxiv. chordis de
remanent^a. -- Sagittae ^^gnae. Et de cxliv. sagitt^s magnis barbatis cum
pennis pavonum." In a Computus of bishop Gervays, ^pisc. Winton. an. 1266.
(supr. citat.) among the stores of the bi^hop's castle of Taunton, one of the
heads or styles is, Caudae p^von^m, which I suppose were used for ^eathering
arrows. In the articles of Arma, which are part of the episcopal stores of the
said castl^, I find enumerated one thousand four hundre^ and twenty-one great
arrows for cross bows, remaining over and above three hundred and seventy-one
delivered to the bishop's vassals ^empore gu^rr^. Under the same title occur
cross-bows made of horn. Arrows with feathers of the peacock o^cur in Lydgate's
Chronicle of Troy, B. iii. cap. 2^. sign. O iii. ^dit. 1555. fol.

-- Many good archers
Of Boeme, which with their arrows kene.
And with fethirs of peco^ke fr^sh^ and shene, etc.

.
Undir his belt he bare full thriftily:
Well couth he dress his tackle yomanly:
His arrows droupid not with featheris low;
And in his hand he bare a mighty bow.
Upon his arm he bare a gay bracer Armor for the arm^.
,
And by his side a sword and bokeler. --
A Christopher A saint who presided over the weather. The patron of field
sports.
on his breast of silver shene:
A horn he bare, the baudrick was of grene v. 1^3.
,
The character of the REEVE, an officer of much greater trust and authority
during the feudal constitution than at present, is happily pictured. His
attention to the care and custody of the manors, the produce of which was then
kept in hand for furnishing his lord's table, perpetually employs his time,
preys upon his thoughts, and makes him le^n and choleric. He is the terror of
baili^^s and hinds: and is rem^rkable for his circumspection, vigil^nc^, and
s^btlety. He is n^v^r in arrears, and no auditor is able to ov^r-reach or
detect him in his accounts: yet he makes more commodious purch^ses for himself
than for his master, without forf^iting the good will or bounty of the latter.
Amidst th^se strokes of ^atire, Chaucer's genius for descriptive painting
breaks forth in this simple and beautiful description of the REEVE'S rural
habitation.

His wonning Dwelling.
was full fair upon a heth,
With grene trees yshadowed was his place v. 608.
.
In the CLERK OF OXENFORDE our author glances at the inattention paid ^o
literature, and the unprofitableness of philosophy. He is emaciated with study,
clad in a threadbare cloak, and rides a steed lean as a rake.

For he had gotten him no benefice,
Ne was so worldly for to have office:
For him had lever Rather.
han at his bedshed
Twenty bokis, yclad in with black or red,
Of Aristotle and his philosophy,
Th^n robis rich, fithell Fiddle. See supr. p. 147.
, or gay sautrie:
But albe that he was a philosopher,
Yet had he but little gold in his coffer v. 293. Or it may be explained, "Yet
he could not find the philosopher'^ stone."
.
His unwearied attention to logic had tinctured his conversation with much
pedantic formality, and taught him to speak on all subjects in a precise and
sententious style. Yet his conversation was instructive: and he was no less
willing to submit than to communicate his opinion to others.

Sowning in moral virtue was his speech,
And gladly would he learn, and gladly teache v. 300.
.
The perpetual importance of the SERGEANT OF LAW, who by habit or by
affectation has the faculty of appearing busy when he has nothing to do, is
sketched with the spirit and conciseness of Horace.

No where so busy'a man as he there n'as,
And yet he semid busier than he was v. 323. He is said to have "oftin yben at
the parvise." v. 312. It is not my design to enter into the disputes concerning
the meaning or etymology of parvis: from which parvisia, the name for the
public schools in Oxford, is derived. But I will observe, that parvis is
mentioned as a court or portico before the church of Notre Dame at Paris, in
John de Meun's part of the Roman de la Rose, v. 12529. A Paris n'eust hommes ne
femme
Au parvis devant Nostre Dame.
The passage is thus translated by Chaucer Romans R. v. 7157. There n'as no wight
in all Paris
Before our Lady at Parvis.
The word is supposed to be contracted from Paradise. This perhaps signified an
ambulatory. Many of our old religious house^ had a place called Paradise. In
the year 1300, children were taught to read and sing in the Pa^vis of St.
Martin's church at Norwich. Blomf. Norf. ii. 748. Our Sergeant is afterward
said to have received many f^es and robes, v. 319. The sergeants and all the
officers of the superior courts of law, anciently received winter and summer
robes from the king's wardrobe. He is likewise said to cite cases and
decisions, "that from the time of king William were full," v. 326. For this
line see the very learned and ingenious Mr. Barrington's Observations on the
ancient Statutes.
.
There is some humor in making our lawyer introduce the language of his
pleadings into common conversation. He addresses the host, Host, quoth he, de
pardeux jeo assent v. 309.
.
The affectation of talking French was indeed general, but it is here
appropriated and in character.

Among the rest, the character of the HOST, or master of the Tabarde inn where
the pilgrims are assembled, is conspicuous. He has much good sense, and
discovers great talents for managing and regulating a large company; and to him
we are indebted for the happy proposal of obliging every pilgrim to tell a
story during their journey to Canterbury. His interpositions between the tales
are very useful and enlivening; and he is something like the chorus on the
Grecian stage. He is of great service in encouraging each person to begin his
part, in conducting the scheme with spirit, in making proper observations on
the merit or tendency of the several stories, in settling disputes which must
naturally arise in the course of such an entertainment, and in connecting all
the narratives into one continued system. His love of good cheer, experience in
marshalling guests, address, authoritative deportment, and facetious
disposition, are thus expressively displayed by Chaucer.

Great chere our Host made us everichone,
And to the suppere set he us anon;
And servid us with vitailes of the best:
Strong was his wine, and well to drink us lest "We liked."
.
A semely man our Host was withal
To been a marshall in a lordis hal.
A large man was he, with eyin stepe,
A fayrer burgeis is there none in Chepe Cheapside.
.
Bold of his speech, and wise, and well ytaught,
And of manhood lakid him right naught.
And eke thereto he was a merry man, etc Prol. v. 749.
.
Chaucer's scheme of the CANTERBURY TALES was evidently left unfinished. It was
intended by our author, that every pilgrim should likewise tell a Tale on their
return from Canterbury Or rather, two on their way thither, and two on their
return. Only Chaucer himself tells two tales. The poet says, that there were
twenty-nine pilgrims in company: but in the CHARACTERS he describes more. Among
the TALES which remain, there are none of the Prioresse's Chaplains, the
Haberdasher, Carpynter, Web, Dyer, Tapicer, and Host. The Chanon Yeman has a
TALE, but no CHARACTER. The Plowman's Tale is cert^inly supposititious. See
supr. p. 3^6. And Obs. Sp^ns. ii. 217. It is omitted in the best manuscript of
the CANTERBURY TALES, MSS. Harl. 1758. fol. membran. These TALES were supposed
to be spoken, not written. But we have in the Plowman's, "For my WRITING me
allow." v. 3309. Urr. And in other places. "For my WRITING if I have blame." --
"Of my WRITING have me excused." etc. See a NOTE at the beginning of the CANT.
TALES, MSS. Laud. K. 50. Bibl. Bodl. written by John Barcham. But the
discussion of these points properly belongs to an editor of Chaucer.
. A poet who lived soon after the CANTERBURY TALES made their appearance, seems
to have designed a supplement to this deficiency, and with this view to have
written a Tale called the MARCHAUNT'S SECOND TALE, or the HISTORY OF BERYN. It
was first printed by Urry, who supposed it to be Chaucer's Urr. Chauc. p. 595.
. In the Prologue which is of considerable length, there is some humor and
contrivance: in which the author, happily enough, continues to characterise the
pilgrims, by imagining what each did, and how each behaved, when they all
arrived at Canterbury. After dinner was ordered at their inn, they all proceed
to the cathedral. At entering the church one of the monks sprinkles them with
holy water. The Knight with the better sort of the company goes in great order
to the shrine of Thomas a Beckett. The Miller and his companions run staring
about the church: they pretend to blazon the arms painted in the glass windows,
and enter into a dispute in heraldry: but the Host of the Tabarde reproves
them for their improper behavior and impertinent discourse, and directs them
to the martyr's shrine. When all had finished their devotions, they return to
the inn. In the way thither they purchase toys for which that city was famous,
called Canterbury brochis: and here much facetiousness passes betwixt the Friar
and the Sompnour, in which the latter vows revenge on the former, for telling a
Tale so palpably levelled at his profession, and protests he will retaliate on
their return by a more severe story. When dinner is ended, the Host of the
Tabarde thanks all the company in form for their several Tales. The party then
separate till supper-time by agreement. The Knight goes to survey the walls and
bulwarks of the city, and explains to his son the Squier the nature and
strength of them. Mention is here made of great guns. The Wife of Bath is too
weary to walk far; she proposes to the Prioresse to divert themselves in the
garden, which abounds with herbs proper for making salves. Others wander about
the streets. The Pardoner has a low adventure, which ends much to his disgrace.
The next morning they proceed on their return to Southwark: and our genial
master of the Tabarde, just as they leave Canterbury, by way of putting the
company into good humor, begins a panegyric on the morning and the month of
April, some lines of which I shall quote, as a specimen of our author's
abilities in poetical description There is a good description of a magical
palace, v. 1973 -- 2076.
.

Lo! how the seson of the year, and Averell April.
shouris,
Doith Make.
the busshis burgyn Shoot.
out blossoms and flouris.
Lo! the prymerosys of the year, how fresh they been to seen,
And many other flouris among the grassis grene.
Lo! how they spring and sprede, and of diverse hue,
Beholdith and seith, both white, red, and blue.
That lusty bin and comfortabyll for mannis sight,
For I say for mys^lf it makith my heart to light v. 690.
.
On casting lots, it falls to the Merchant to tell the first tale, which then
follows. I cannot allow that this Prologue and Tale were written by Chaucer.
Yet I believe them to be nearly coeval.

SECT. XVIII.
IT is not my intention to dedicate a volume to Chaucer, how much soever he may
deserve it; nor can it be expected, that, in a work of this general nature, I
should enter into a critical examination of all Chaucer's pieces. Enough has
been said to prove, that in elevation, and elegance, in harmony and perspicuity
of versification, he surpasses his predecessors in an infinite proportion: that
his genius was universal, and adapted to themes of unbounded variety: that his
merit was not less in painting familiar manners with humor and propriety, than
in moving the passions, and in representing the beautiful or the grand objects
of nature with grace and sublimity. In a word, that he appeared with all the
luster and dignity of a true poet, in an age which compelled him to struggle
with a barbarous language, and a national want of taste; and when to write
verses at all, was regarded as a singular qualification. It is true indeed,
that he lived at a time when the French and Italians had made considerable
advances and improvements in poetry: and although proofs have already been
occasionally given of his imitations from these sources, I shall close my
account of him with a distinct and comprehensive view of the nature of the
poetry which subsisted in France and Italy when he wrote: pointing out in the
mean time, how far and in what manner the popular models of those nations
contributed to form his taste, and influence his genius.

I have already mentioned the troubadours of Provence, and have observed that
they were fond of moral and allegorical fables See supr. p. 148.
. A taste for this sort of composition they partly acquired by reading
Boethius, and the PSYCHOMACHIA of Prudentius, two favorite classics of the dark
ages; and partly from the Saracens their neighbors in Spain, who were great
inventors of apologues. The French have a very early metrical romance DE
FORTUNE ET DE FELICITE, a translation from Boethius's book DE CONSOLATIONE, by
Reynault de Louens a Dominican friar See Mem. Lit. tom. xviii. p. 74^. 4to. And
tom. vii. 293. 294. I have before mentioned John of Meun's translation of
Boethius. It is in verse. John de Langres is said to have made a translation in
prose, about 1336. It is highly probable that Chaucer translated Boethius from
some of the French translations. In the Bodleian library there is an EXPLANATIO
of Boethius's CONSOLATION by our countryman Nicholas Trivett, who died before
1329.
. From this source, among many others of the Provencial poems, came the
Tournament of ANTICHRIST abovementioned, which contains a combat of the
Virtues and Vices See supr. p. 285.
: the Romaunt of Richard de Lisle, in which MODESTY fighting with LUST PUTERIE.
Properly Bawdry, Obscenity. MODESTY is drowned in the river, which gives
occasion to this conclusion, "Don't vien que plus n'y a HONTE dans Paris." The
author lived about the year 1300.
is thrown into the river Seine at Paris: and, above all, the ROMAUNT OF THE
ROSE, translated by Chaucer, and already mentioned at large in its proper
place. Visions were a branch of this species of poetry, which admitted the most
licentious excursions of fancy in forming personifications, and in feigning
imaginary b^ings and ideal habitations. Under these we may rank Chaucer's HOUSE
OF FAME, which I have before hinted to have been probably the p^oduction of
Provence.

But the principal subject of their poems, dictated in great measure by the
spirit of chivalry, was love: especially among the troubadours of rank and
distinction, whose castles being crowded with ladies, presented perpetual
scenes of the most splendid gallantry. This passion they spiritualised into
various metaphysical refinements, and filled it with abstracted notions of
visionary perfection and felicity. Here too they were perhaps influenced by
their neighbors the Saracens, whose philosophy chiefly consisted of fantastic
abstractions. It is manifest, however, that nothing can exceed the profound
pedantry with which they treated this favorite argument. They defined the
essence and characteristics of true love with all the parade of a Scotist in
his professorial chair: and bewildered their imaginations in speculative
questions concerning the most desperate or the most happy situations of a
sincere and sentimental heart In the mean time the greatest libertie^ and
indecencies were practiced and encouraged. These doctrines did not in^luence
the manners of the times. In an old French tale, a countess in the absence of
her lord having received a knight into her castle, and conducted him in great
state to his repose, will not suffer him to sle^p alone: with in^inite
politeness she orders one of her damsels, la plus cortoise et la plus b^l^,
into his bed-chamb^r, av^^ ^e ch^valier g^sir. Mem. Cheval. ut supr. tom. ii.
p. 70. Not. 17.
. But it would be endless, and indeed ridiculous, to describe at length the
systematical solemnity with which they clothed this passion This infatuation
continued among the French down to modern times. "Les gens de qualite, says the
ingenious M. de la Curne de Saint Palaye, conservoient encore ce gout que
leurs peers avoient pris dans nos anciennes course: ce fut sans doubt pour
complaire a son fondateur, que l'Academie Francoise traita, dans ses premiers
seances, plusieurs sujets qui concernoient l'AMOUR; et l'on vit encore dans
l'hotel du Longueville les persons les plus qualifees et le plus spiritualles
du siecle de Louis xiv. se disputer a qui commenteroit et et ra^^^n^roit le
mieux sur la delicatesse du coeur et des sentimens, a qui ^eroit, sur ce
chapitre, les distinctions le plus subtiles." Mem. Cheval. ^t supr. tom. ii. P.
v. page 17.
. The ROMAUNT OF THE ROSE which I have just alleged as a proof of their
all^gorising turn, is not less an instance of their affectation in writing on
this subject: in which the poet, under the ^gency of allegorical personages,
displays the gradual approach^s and impediments to fruition, and introduces a
regular disputation conducted with much formality between Reason and a lover.
Chaucer's TESTAMENT OF LOVE is also formed on this philosophy of gallantry. It
is a lover's parody of Boethius's book DE CONSOLATIONE mentioned above. His
poem called LA BELLE DAME SANS MERCY Translated or imitated from a French poem
of Alain Chartier, v. 11. Which Maistir Alayne made of remembrance
Chief secretary to the king of France.
He was secretary to Charles the sixth and seventh. But he is chiefly famous
for his prose.
, and his ASSEMBLE OF LADIES, are from the same school So is Gower's CONFESSIO
AMANTIS, a^ we shall see hereafter.
. Chaucer's PRIORESSE and MONK, whose lives were devoted to religious
reflection and the most serious engagements, and while they are actually
traveling on a pilgrimage to visit the shrine of a sainted martyr, openly avow
the universal influence of love. They exhibit, on their apparel, badges
entirely inconsistent with their profession, but easily accountable for from
these principles. The Prioresse wears a bracelet on which is inscribed, with a
crowned A, Amor vincit omnia v. 162.
. The Monk ties his hood with a true-lover's knot v. 197.
. The early poets of P^ovence, as I before hinted, formed a society called the
COURT OF LOVE, which gave rise to others in Gascony, Languedoc, Poictou, and
Dauphiny: and Picardy, the constant rival of Provence, had a similar
institution called Plaids et Gieux sous l'Ormel. These establishments consisted
of ladies and gentlemen of the highest rank, exercised and approved in
courtesy, who tried with the most consummate ceremony, and decided with supreme
authority, cases in love brought before their tribunal. Martial d'Avergne, an
old French poet, for the diversion and at the request of the countess of
Beaujeu, wrote a poem entitled ARRESTA AMORUM, or the Decrees of Love, which is
a humourous description of the Plaids of Picardy. Fontenelle has recited one of
their processes, which conveys an idea of all the rest Hist. Theat. Franc. p.
15. tom. iii. Oe^vr. Paris, 1742.
. A queen of France was appealed to from an unjust sentence pronounced in the
love-pleas, where the countess of Champagne presided. The queen did not choose
to interpose in a matter of so much consequence, nor to reverse the decrees of
a court whose decision was absolute and final. She answered, "God forbid, that
I should presume to contradict the sentence of the countess of Champagne!" This
was about the year 1206. Chaucer has a poem called the COURT OF LOVE, which is
nothing more than the love-court of Provence See also Chaucer's TEN
COMMANDMENTS O^ LOVE, p. 554. Urr.
: it contains the twenty statutes which that court prescribed to be universally
observed under the severest penalties Vie de Petrarque, tom. ii. Not. xix. p.
60. Probably the Cour d'Amour was the origin of that called La C^ur Amorcuse,
established under the gallant reign of Charles the sixth, in the year 1410. The
latter had the most considerable families of France for its members, and a
parade of grand officers, like those in the royal household and courts of law.
See Hist. Acad. Inscript. Tom. vii. p. 287. seq. 4to. See also Hist. Langued.
tom. iii. p. 25. seq.

The most uniform and unembarrassed view of the establishment and usages of
this COURT, which I can at present recollect, is thrown together from scattered
and scarce materials by the ingenious author of VIE DE PETRAQUE, tom. ii. p.
45. seq. Not. xix. But for a complete account of these institutions, and other
curious particular^ relating to the anti^nt manners and ancient poetry of the
French, the public waits with impatience for the history of the Provencial
poets written by Mons. de la Curne de Saint Palaye, who has copied most of
their manuscripts with great care and expense.


. Not long afterward, on the same principle, a society was established in
Languedoc, called the Fraternity of the Penitents of Love. Enthusiasm was here
carried to as high a pitch of extravagance as ever it was in religion. It was a
contention of ladies and gentlemen, who should best sustain the honor of their
amorous fanaticism. Their object was to prove the excess of their love, by
showing with an invincible fortitude and consistency of conduct, with no less
obstinacy of opinion, that they could bear extremes of heat and cold.
Accordingly the resolute knights and esquires, the dames and damsels, who had
the hardiness to embrace this severe institution, dressed themselves during the
heat of summer in the thickest mantles lined with the warmest fur^ In this they
demonstrated, according to the ancient poets, that love works the most
wonderful and extraordinary changes. In winter, their love again perverted the
nature of the seasons: they then clothed themselves in the lightest and
thinnest stuffs which could be procured. It was a crime to wear fur on a day of
the most piercing cold; or to appear with a hood, cloak, gloves, or muff. The
flame of love kept them sufficiently warm. Fires, all the winter, were utterly
banished from their houses; and they dressed their apartments with evergreens.
In the most intense frost their beds were covered only with a piece of canvass.
It must be remembered, that in the mean time they passed the greater part of
the day abroad, in wandering about from castle to castle; insomuch, that many
of these devotees, during so desperate a pilgrimage, perished by the inclemency
of^ the weather, and died martyrs to their profession See D. Vaisette, Hist. du
Languedoc, ^om. iv. p. 184. seq. Compare p. 145. Note, y.
.

The early universality of the French language greatly contributed to
facilitate the circulation of the poetry of the troubadours in other countries.
The Frankish language was familiar even at Constantinople and its dependent
provinces in the eleventh century, and long afterward. Raymond Montaniero, an
historian of Catalonia, who wrote about the year 1300, says, that the French
tongue was as well known in the Morea and at Athens as at Paris. "E parlavan
axi belle Francis com dins en Paris Hist. Arragon. c. 261.
." The oldest Italian poetry seems to be founded on that of Provence. The word
SONNET was adopted from the French into the Italian versification. It occurs in
the ROMAN DE LA ROSE, "Lais d'amour et SONNETS courtois v. 720.
." Boccacio copied many of his best Tales from the troubadours Particularly
from Rutebeuf and Hebers. Rutebeuf was living in the year 1310. He wrote tales
and stories of entertainment in verse. It is certain that Boccacio took, from
this old French minstrel, Nov. x. Giorn. ix. And perhaps two or three others.
Hebers lived about the year 1200. He wrote a French romance, in verse, called
the Sev^n Sag^s of Greece, or Dol^pathos. He translated it from the Latin of
Dom Johans, a monk of the abbey of Haute-selve. It has great variety, and
contains several agreeable stories, pleasant adve^tures, ^mblems, and proverbs.
Boccacio has taken from it four Tal^s, viz. Nov. ii. Giorn. iii. Nov. iv.
Gior^. vii. Nov. viii. Giorn. viii. And the Tal^ of the Boy who had never seen
a woman, since finely touched by Fo^taine. An Italian book called Erastus is
compiled from this Roman ^f the Seven Sag^s. It is said to have been first
composed by Sandaber the Indian, a writer of proverbs: that it afterward
appeared successively in Hebrew, Arabic, Syriac, and Greek; was at length
translated i^to Latin by the monk abovementioned, and from thence into French
by Hebers. It is very probable that the monk translated it from some Greek
manuscript of the dark ages, which Huet says was to be found in some libraries.
Three hundred years after the Roman of Hebers, it was translated into Dutch,
and again from the Dutch into Latin. There is an English abridgement of it,
which is a story-book for children. See Mem. Lit. Tom. ii. p. 731. 4to.
Fauchett, p. 106. 160. Huet, Orig. Fab. Romans 136. Fabric. Bibl. Gr. x. 339.
Massieu, Poes. Fr. p. 137. Crescimben. V^lg. Poes. Vol. i. L. v. p. 332. Many
of the old French minstrels deal much in Tales and novels of humor and
amusement, like those of Boccacio's Decameron. They call them Fabliaux.
. Several of Dante's fictions are derived from the same fountain. Dante has
honored some of them with a s^at in his Paradise See^ p. 117. supr. Compare
Crescim^en. Volg. Poes. L. i. c. xiv. p. 162.
: and in his tract DE VULGARI ELOQUENTIA, has mentioned Thiebault king of
Navarre as a pattern for writing poetry See p. 43. 45. And Commed. Infern.
cant. xxii.
. With regard to Dante's capital work the INFERNO, Raoul de Houdane, a
Provencial bard about the year 1180, wrote a poem entitled, LE VOYE OU LE SONG
D'ENFER Fauch. Rec. p. 96.
. Both Boccacio and Dante studied at Paris, where they much improved their
taste by reading the songs of Thiebauld king of Navarre, Gaces Brules,
Chatelain de Coucy, and other ancient French fabulists See Fauchett, Rec. p.
47. 116. And Huet, Romans p. 121. 108.
. Petrarch's refined ideas of love are chiefly drawn from those amorous
reveries of the Provencials which I have above described; heightened perhaps by
the Platonic system, and exaggerated by the subtilising spirit of Italian
fancy. Varchi and Pignatelli have written professed treatises on the nature of
Petrarch's love. But neither they, nor the rest of the Italians who, to this
day, continue to debate a point of so much consequence, consider how powerfully
Petrarch must have been influenced to talk of love in so peculiar a strain by
studying the poets of Provence. His TRIUMFO DI AMORE has much imagery copied
from Anselm Fayditt, one of the most celebrated of these bards. He has likewise
many imitations from the works of Arnaud Daniel, who is called the most
eloquent of the troubadours See p. 117. supr. He lived about 1189. Recherch.
Par Beauchamps, p. 5. Nostradamus asserts, that Petrarch stole many things from
a troubadour called Richard seigneur de Barbezeiuz, who is placed under 1383.
Petrarch however was de^d at that time.
. Petrarch, in one of his sonnets, represents his mistress Laura sailing on the
river Rhone, in company with twelve Provencial ladies, who at that time
presided over the COURT OF LOVE Sonnet. clxxxviii. Dodici Done, etc. The
academicians della Crusca, in their Dictionary, quote a manuscript entitled,
LIBRO D'AMORE of the year 1408. It is also referred to by Crescimbeni in his
Lives of the Provencial poets. It contains verdicts or determinations in the
Court of Love.
.

Pasquier observes, that the Italian poetry arose as the Provencial declined
Pasq. Les Recherch. de la France. vii. 5. p. 609. 611. edit. 1633. ^ol.
. It is a proof of the decay of invention among the French in the beginning of
the fourteenth century, that about that period they began to translate into
prose their old metrical romances: such as the fables of king Arthur, of
Charlemagne, of Oddegir the Dane, of Renaud of Montauban, and other illustrious
champions, whom their early writers had celebrated in rhyme These translations,
in which the originals were much enlarged, produced an infinite number of other
romances in prose: and the old metrical romances soon became unfashionable and
neglec^ed. The romance of PERCEFORREST, one of the largest of the French
romances of chivalry, was written in verse about 1220. It was not ^ill many
years afterward translated into pros^. M. Falconet, an ingenious enquirer into
the early literature of France, is of opinion, that the most ancient romances,
such as that of the ROUND TABLE, were first written in Latin prose: it being
well known that Turpin's CHARLEMAGNE, as it is now extant, was originally
composed in that language. He thinks they were translated into French rhymes,
and at last into French prose, tells que nous les avons aujourduy. See Hist.
Acad. Inscript. vii. 293. But part of this doctrine may be justly doubted.
. At length, about the year 1380, in the place of the Provencial a new species
of poetry succeeded in France, consisting of Chants Royaux With regard to the
Chaunt royal, Pasquier describes it to be a song in honor of God, the holy
Virgin, or any other argument of dignity, especially if joined with distress.
It was written in heroic stanzas, and closed with a l'Envoy, or stanza
containing a recapitulation, dedication, or the like. Chaucer calls the Chant
royal abovementioned, a Kyngis Note. Mill. T. v. 111. p. 25. His Complaintof
Venus, Cuckoo and Nightingal^, and La belle Damesans Mercy, Have all a l'Envoy,
and belong to this species of French verse. His l'Envoy to the Complaint of
Venus, or Mars and Venus, ends with these lines, v. 79. And eke to me it is a
great penance,
Since rhyme in English has soche scarcite,
To follow word by word the curiosite
Of gransonflour of them that make in France.
Make signifies to write poetry; and here we see that this poem was translated
from the French. See also Chaucer's Dream, v. 2204. Petrarch has the Envoi. I
am inclined to think, that Chaucer's Assemble of Fowls was partly planned in
imitation of a French poem written by Gace de la Vigne, Chaucer's cotemporary,
entitled, Roman d'Oiseaux, which treats of the nature, properties, and
management of all birds de chass^. But this is merely a conjecture, for I have
never seen the French poem. At least there is an evident similitude of subject.
, Balades, Rondeaux, and Pastorales About this time, a Prior of S. Genevieve at
Paris wrote a small treatise entitled, L'Art de Dictier BALLADES, ET RONDELLES.
See Mons. Beauchamps Rech. Theatr. p. 88. M. Massieu says this is the first ART
OF POETRY printed in France. Hist. Poes. Fr. p. 222. See L'ART POETIQUE du
Jaques Pelloutier du Mons. Lion, 555. 8vo. Live. 11. chapter i. Du ^'ODE.
. This was distinguished by the appellation of the NEW POETRY: and Froissart,
who has been mentioned above chiefly in the character of an historian,
cultivated it with so much success, that he has been called its author. The
titles of Froissart's poetical pieces will alone serve to illustrate the nature
of this NEW POETRY: but they prove, at the same time, that the Provencial cast
of composition still continued to prevail. They are, The Paradise of Love, A
Panegyric on the Month of May, The Temple of Honor, The Flower of the Daisy,
Amorous Lays, Pastorals, The Amorous Prison, Royal Ballads in honor of our
Lady, The Ditty of the Amourous Spinett, Virelais, Rondeaus, and The Plea of
the Rose and Violet Pasquier, ubi supr. p. 612. Who calls such pieces
MIGNARDISES.
. Whoever examines Chaucer's smaller pieces will perceive that they are
altogether formed on this plan, and often compounded of these ideas. Chaucer
himself declares, that he wrote -- Many an hymn for your holidaies
Here is an elleipsis. He means, And poems.
That hightin balades, rondils, virelaies Prol. Leg. G. W. v. 422. He mentions
this sort of poetry in the Frankelein's Tale, v. 2493. p. 109. Urr. Of which
matere [love] madin he many lays,
Songis, Complaintis, Roundils, Virelayes.
Compare Chaucer's DREME, v. 973. In the FLOWER AND LEAF we have the words of
a French Roundeau, v. 177.
.


But above all, Chaucer's FLOWER AND THE LEAF, in which an air of rural
description predominates, and where the allegory is principally conducted by
mysterious allusions to the virtues or beauties of the vegetable world, to
flowers and plants, exclusive of its general romantic and allegoric vein, bears
a strong resemblance to some of these subjects. The poet is happily placed in a
delicious arbor, interwoven with eglantine. Imaginary troops of knights and
ladies advance: some of the ladies are crowned with flowers, and other^ with
chaplets of agnus castus, and these are respectively subject to a Lady of the
Flower, and a Lady of the Leaf In a decision of the COURT OF LOVE cited by
Fontenelle, the judge is called Le Marquis d^s ^l^ures et violettes. Font. ubi
supr. p. 15.
. Some are clothed in green, and others in white. Many of the knights are
distinguished in much the same manner. But others are crowned with leaves of
oak or of other trees: others carry branches of oak, laurel, hawthorn, and
woodbine v. 270.
. Besides this profusion of vernal ornaments, the whole procession glitters
with gold, pearls, rubies, and other costly decorations. They are preceded by
minstrels clothed in green and crowned with flowers. One of the ladies sings a
bargaret, or pastoral, in praise of the daisy.

A Rather B^rg^rett^. A song du Berger, of a shepherd.
bargaret in praising the daisie,
For as methought among her notis sweet
She said si douce est le margaruite v. 350. A panegyric on this flower is
again introduced in the Prologue to the Leg. of G. Wom. v. 180. The long dai^ I
shope me for to abide
For nothing ellis, and I shall not lie
But for to lokin upon the daisie,
That well by reason men it call may
The D^isie, or else the eye of the day:
The emprise, and the flower, of flouris al, etc.
All this while he means to pay a compliment to Lady Margaret, countess of
Pembroke, king Edward's daughter, one of his patronesses. See the Balade
beginning I^ Fevrere, etc. p. 556. Urr. v. 688. Froissart's song in praise of
the daisy might have the same tendency: for he was patronised both by Edward
and Philipp^. Margarui^e is French for Daisy. Chaucer perhaps intends the same
compliment by the " Margari^e perle," Test. Love, p. 483. col. i. etc. Urr. See
also Prol. L^g. G. Wom. v. 218. 224. That Prologue has many images like those
in the Flower and the L^afe. It was evidently written after that poem.
.
This might have been Froissart's song: at least this is one of his subjects.
In the mean time a nightingale, seated in a laurel-tr^e, whose shade would
cover an hundred persons, sings the whole service, "longing to May." Some of
the knights and ladies do obeisance to the leaf, and some to the flower of the
daisy. Others are represented as worshipping a bed of flowers. Flora is
introduced "of these flouris goddess." The lady of the leaf invites the lady
of the flower to a banquet. Under these symbols is much morality couched. The
leaf signifies perseverance and virtue: the flower denotes indolence and
pleasure. Among those who are crowned with the leaf, are the knights of king
Arthur's round table, and Charlemagne's Twelve Peers; together with the knights
of the order of the garter now just established by Edward the third v. 516.
517. 519.
.

But these fancies seem more immediately to have taken their rise from the
FLORAL GAMES instituted in France in the year 1324 Mem. Lit. tom. vii. p. 422.
4to.
, which filled the French poetry with images of this sort Hence Froissart in
the EPINETTE AMOUREUSE, describing his romantic amusements, says he was
delighted with Violettes en leur saisons
Et roses blanches et vermeilles, etc.
See Mem. Lit. tom. x. p. 665. 287. 4to.
. They were founded by Clementina Isaure countess of Toulouse, and annually
celebrated in the month of May. She published an edict, which assembled all the
poets of France in artificial arbours dressed with flowers: and he that
produced the best poem was rewarded with a violet of gold. There were likewise
inferior prizes of flowers made in silver. In the mean time the conquerors were
crowned with natural chaplets of their own respective flowers. During the
ceremony, degrees were also conferred. He who had won a prize three times was
created a doctor en gaye Science, the name of the poetry of the Provencial
troubadours. The instrument of creation was in verse Recherches sur les poets
couronnez, Mem. Lit. tom. x. p. 567. 4to.
. This institution, however fantastic, soon became common through the whole
kingdom of France: and these romantic rewards, distributed with the most
impartial attention to merit, at least infused an useful emulation, and in some
measure revived the languishing genius of the French poetry.

The French and Italian poets, whom Chaucer imitates, abound in allegorical
personages: and it is remarkable, that the early poets of Greece and Rome were
fond of these creations. Homer has given us, STRIFE, CONTENT^ON, FEAR, TERROR,
TUMULT, DESIRE, PERSUASION, and BENEVOLENCE. We have in Hesiod, DARKNESS, and
many others, if the Shield of Hercules be of his hand. COMUS occurs in the
Agamemnon of Eschylus; and in the Promet heus of the same poet, STRENGTH and
FORCE are two persons of the drama, and perform the capital parts. The
fragments of Ennius indicate, that his poetry consisted much of
personifications. He says, that in one of the Carthaginian wars, the gigantic
image of SORROW appeared in every place: "Omnibus endo locis ingens apparet
imago TRISTITIAS." Lucretius has drawn the great and terrible figure of
SUPERSTITION, "Quae caput e coeli regionibus ostendebat." He also mentions, in
a beautiful procession of the Seasons, CALOR ARIDUS, HYEMS, and ALGUS. He
introduces MEDICINE muttering with silent fear, in the midst of the deadly
pestilence at Athens. It seems to have escaped the many critics who have
written on Milton's noble but romantic allegory of SIN and DEATH, that he took
the person of Death from the Alcestis of his favorite tragedian Euripides,
where THANATOS is a principal agent in the drama. As knowledge and learning
increase, poetry begins to deal less in imagination: and these fantastic beings
give way to real manners and living characters.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
AN INDEX TO THE HISTORY OF ENGLISH POETRY By THOMAS WARTON, B. D. FELLOW OF
TRINITY COLLEGE, OXFORD, AND OF THE SOCIETY OF ANTIQUARIES, AND LATE PROFESSOR
OF POETRY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR LACKINGTON, ALLEN, AND CO. TEMPLE OF THE MUSES, FINSBURY
SQUARE. 1806.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Index to WARTON'S HISTORY of ENGLISH POETRY, which is here presented to
the world, was not originally intended for publication. The great inconvenience
arising from the want of its assistance, must have been severely felt by all
who have, in the course of their literary pursuits, had occasion to refer to
this noble treasure of poetical knowledge. To obviate the disadvantage, as it
related exclusively to himself, the compiler, at a period of leisure, drew out
the present Index. The experience of its utility suggested the idea of
multiplying the copies, by which it is trusted that a commendable service has
been rendered to literature. Though none can with reason think these pages
wholly useless, some may not find it needful to their studies to possess them;
therefore, it has been thought fit to suffer the impression of them to fall far
short of that of the History. It does not exceed one-fourth of the number.

Whether an entire Index of the three volumes together would not have been a
plan more desirable than that which has been pursued, is a question not now to
be examined. It has been considered, and this is the reply: The HISTORY of
ENGLISH POETRY is an unfinished work. The learned and elegant historian was
"gathered to his fathers" almost in the midst of his instructive and
entertaining labors. Much yet remains to be done; and as it is the reverse of
improbable that some other foot (we faintly hope, "passibus aequis,") will
traverse the ground, which he has left untrodden, it cannot be denied, that
with regard to uniformity, a separate table to each volume was the preferable
mode to adopt.

If an Index be copious and correct, it possesses the first qualities belonging
to the nature of such an undertaking. This merit, as far as human diligence
could succeed, the compiler claims, with, in his opinion, the no mean praise of
having been useful.

INDEX TO THE FIRST VOLUME OF WARTON'S History of English Poetry.
ABELARD'S Letters, translated, 368 Adam de Orleton, Bishop of Winchester, 89
Adenez, a French Poet, 135 Aegidius Romanus, 343 Aeneae Gesta post
Destructionem Trojae, 88 Aeneas, Romance of, 134 Aeneas, Story of, on tapestry,
211 Aser Constantinus, 441, 442 Agrippa, Cornelius, 402, 404, 409 Alanus,
Anticlaudian of, 391 Alardus Lampridius, 378 Alban, Saint, Martyrdom of, a
Poem, 98 Albertus Magnus, 401 Albion's England, by Warner, 12 Albumasar, an
Arabian Astrologer, 441 Alcabutius or Alchabitius, Abdilazi, Isagoge in
Astrologiam, by, 426 Alcen, or Alhazen, an Arabic Philosopher, 406 Alcestis,
Romance of, 428 Alchabitius, 426 Age and Youth, Comparison between, a Poem, 32
Alcock, Bishop of Ely, 307 Aldred, Archbishop, 303 Alexander Magnus, Aristoteli
praeceptori suo salutem dicit, 101 Alexander, Romance of, 123, 124, 128, 131,
133. By Adam Davie, 220, 221, 222, 223, 224, 225, 226, 227, 228, 229, 230, 231,
232, 309, 310, 311, 346, 349, 350 Alexander, Life and Actions of, translated
from the Persian, into Greek, by Simeon Seth, 129 Alexander de Paris, 139
Alexander, Roman de, 136, 309 Alexandre, la Vengeance du Grant, 139
Alexandreu akedon, translated by Demetrius Zenus, 132, 349 Alexius, Saint,
Legend of, by Adam Davie, 218 Alfred's Version of Bede's Ecclesiastical Hist. 1
Allen, Thomas, 291 Almasor, or Albumasar, and Rhasis, 441 Alphonsus, King of
Castile, 393 Amadis de Gaul, Romance of, 149 Amazonida, by Boccacio, 344
Ambrose of Milan, Paraphrase of the Siege of Jerusalem, by, 217 Ambrose, Saint,
394 Amille, a French Morality, 88 Amorous Prison, a Poem, by Froissart, 465
Amorous Lays, a Poem, by Froissart, 465 Amoris Incendium, by Hampole, 265 Amys
and Amilion, Romance of, 88, 21^ Anciseno Dominicho Falugi, an Italian Poem, on
Alexander, by, 139 Amor Espris, le Livre de Cuer d', 417 Anderson's History of
Commerce, 176 Anglicus Gilbertus, 443 Anna Commena, 50, 157, 348 Anna de
Graville, 346 Anno, Archbishop of Cologn, Metrical Life of, 8 Annunciada, Order
of the, 252 Answers of the Sybills, 368 Antechrist, the Banner of, 286
Antechrist, Tournoyement de l', Roman de, par H^on de Meri, 285, 458 Anthony de
la Sale, 334 Anticlaudian, by Alanus, 391 Antiochiae Liber de Captione, 88
Antiochiae Gesta et Regum aliorum, etc. 114 Anuar Sohaili, 131. See Pilpay's
Fables Apponus, 393 Apolonius of Tire, Romance of, 349, 350 Apolonii Tyanaei
Historia, 350 Appolin Roy de Their, la Cronique d', 350 Apono Pierre,
Commentaries on the Problems of Aristotle, by, 439 Apuleius, 394 Aquinas,
Thomas, 401 Argenteus Codex, 1 Argonauticon, by Valerius Flaccus, 126 Arios^o,
133, 146, 334, 411 Aristotle, 292, 378, 432, 441, 444 Art de Dictier, Ballades
et Rondelles, 465 Art de Calendar, par Raus, 74 Arres^a Amorum, or the Decrees
of Love, a Poem, 460 Arthur, King, Romans of, 110, 117, 121, 123, 124, 134, 139,
140, 146, 205, 206, 207, 211, 252, 350, 408, 418, 464, 467 Arthur, King, Rites
of, re^^ored by Roger, Earl of Mortimer, 117 Artois, Count d', Ballad on the
Defeat of the^ 57 A^^mole, Elias, 252 Asheldown, Joly Chepert, of, a Romance,
by John Lawerne, 76 Askew, Dr. 352 Assembly of Fowls, by Chaucer, 372, 394
Assembly of Ladies, by Chaucer, 459 Asses, Feast of, Mystery of the, 7
Astyages and Cyrus, History of, on ^apestry, 211 Athanasius, Creed of,
versified, 23 Athelstan, King, a Poem on, 93 Athys and Prophylias, a French
Metrical Romans 139, 146, 334, 411 Averroes, an Asiatic Philosopher, 441, 443,
444 Avicen, or Avicenne, an Arabian Physician, 441 Avranches, Henry d', or
Henry the Veri^^er, 47 Austin, Saint, 394, 421
B
Babyon, Peter, 233 Babione de^ et Croceo domino Babionis, et Viola filiastra
Babionis, quam croceus duxit invito Babione, et Pecula Uxore Babionis, et Fodio
suo, 233 Bacon, Roger, 101, 291, 403, 408, 410, 439 Bale, John, 87, 126, 232,
235, 295 Ballades et Rondelles, l' Art de Dictier, 465 Balsham, Hugh de, 290
Ba^astre, or Banester, William, 75. Gilbert, 75 Bartholinus, or Bartholine,
127, 213 Harbor, John, 318, 319, 320, 321 Barcham, John, 454 Barnabas of
Cyprus, 393 Barrington's Observations on the Ancient Statutes, 46, 453 Baston,
R^bert, 232, 251 Batrachomyomachia of Homer, translated by Demetrius Zenus, 351
Battle of Troy, by Guido de Colum^a, 127 Battle of Jerusalem, a Poem, by
Adam Davie, 217 Bayard, La Vie, et les Ges^es du Preux Chevalier, 418 Beauvais,
Vincent de. See Vincent de Beauvais, 14, 16 Becket, Saint Thomas of, L^g^nd of,
18 Bid, 128 Beauchamp, Lord, 145 Belisaire, or Belisarius, Romance of, 351
Belle Dame sans Mercy, by Chaucer, 459 Bellisaire, ou le Conquerant, 351^
Bellovacensis Vincentius, 125, 133 Bellum contra Runcivallum, 88 Beltrand or
Bertrand's Amors with Chrysatsa, 351 Benedictus, Alexander, 133, 158 Benjamin,
a Jew Traveller, 101 Benoit de Saint More, 136 Beowulf, a Danis^ Saxon Poem,
celebrating the Wars of, 2 Beral, las complanchas de, a Poem, by Fouquett, 118
Bercy, Hugues de, 37 Berlin, Romance of, 135 Berlington, John, 76 Berni, 133,
411, 412 Berners, Lord, Translation of Froissart's Chronicle, by, 336 Bertrand
du Guescelin, French Romance of, 351 Beryn, Tale of, or Marchant's Second Tale,
144, 438, 440, 455 Beuves de Hanton, Romance of, by Pere Labbe. See Sir Beavis
Bevis of Southampton. See Sir Beavis Bible, a Satire, by Hugues de Bercy, 37
Bidpai's Pilpay's Fables. See Pilpay's Fables Biorner, M. 12 Blair, or Blare,
Robert, 321, 322 Blair Arnaldi Relationes, by Blind Harry, 321 Blandamoure,
Sir, Romance of, 145, 208 Blaunpayne, Michael, 47, 48 Blesensis, Archdeacon of
London, 133 Blind Harry, 321, 322, 324, 325, 326, ^27, 328, 329, 330, 331
Blondell de Nesle, Minstrel to Rich. I^ 113, 117 Boccacio Giovanni, 138, 190,
342, 344, 345, 346, 347, 348, 349, 351, 352, 353, 354, 355, 357, 362, 384, 385,
397, 416, 417, 423, 424, 432, 462. Boe^hius, 368, 387, 458, 459 B^illeau, 382
Bokenham, Osberne, 14 Bonaventure de caena et passione Domini, et Poenis S.
Mariae Virginis, translated into English Rymes, by Rob. de Brunne, 77 Bonner,
Bishop of London, 241 Book of Certain Triumphs, 335 Board, Andrew, 432
Borron, Roberts, Translation of the Romance of Lancelot du Lac, by, 114, 115
Boscam, Herbert, Life of Thomas of Becket, by, 85 Bourdour, Account of the, 173
Boy, Bishop, Ceremony of the, 248 Boyardo, 133, 410 Brawardine, Archbishop,
388, 421 Bridlington, or Berlington, John, 76 Brithnorth, Offa's Ealdorman, Ode
in praise of, 2 Brit^e, or Brithe, Walter, 287 Brook, William de, 290 Bruce,
Robert, King of Scots, Poem on, by John Harbor, 232, 318, 319, 320, 321 Bruit
le Petit, by Rause de Boun, 62 Brun, Mons. Le, Avantures d' Apolonius de Thyr,
par, 350 Brunne, Robert de. See Robert de Brunne Brus, or Bru^^, Robert, Poem
on, 232. See Bruce Brut, a French Romance, 62, 337 Bru^ d' Angleterre, by
Eustace, 62 Bruto, Liber de, et de gestis Anglorum, me^rificatus, 63 Burgh,
Thomas, 14 Burton, Robert, 62, 432
C
Caedmon, 1, 2 Calaileg and Damnag, 130. See Pilpay's Fables Callinicus,
Inventor of the Grecian Fire, 157 Callimachus and Chrysorrhoe, the Loves of, a
Romans 348 Callistines, 124, 129, 131 Cambrensis Gyraldus, 103, 131, 312, 405,
406 Camden, Hugh, Translation of the Romance of Sidrac, by, 208 Camera Obscura
discovered by Roger Bacon, 438 Camoens, 408 Cantacuzenus, John, 348 Canterbury
Tales, by Chaucer Chanon Yeman's Tale, 169, 425 Fra^kelein's Tale, 302, 393,
402, 405 to 415, 438 Freere's Tale, 390 Clerk of Oxenford's Tale, 415, 416,
417, 418 Knight's Tale, 173, 222, 334, 344, 358, 367, 387 Man of Lawe's Tale,
333, 350 Marchant's Tale, 389, 391, 393, 395, 421, 422, 423 Miller's Tale, 379,
423, 425, 426, 427, 428, 429, 430, 431 Monke's Tale, 234, 235, 282, 432
Canterbury Tales, by Chaucer Nonnes Priest's Tale, 215, 393, 419, 423 Wife of
Bath's Tale, 390, 437 Prologue to the Wi^e of Bath's Tale, 236, 421, 425 Reve's
Tale, 422 Sompnour'^ Tale, 278, 425, 433, 445 Shipman's Tale, 432 Squier's
Tale, 173, 333, 398 Cantilenae, or Poetical Chronicles, 93 Canute, King, 1
Capella Marcianus de Nuptiis Philogiae, et Mercurii, 391 Carew, Sir George, 85,
87 Carmina Vatacinalia, by John Bridlington, 76 Caroli Gesta Secundum Turpinum,
88 Carpentier's Supplement to Du Cange, 177, 189, 210, 246, 388 Cassianus,
Joannes, 14 Castle of Love, by Bishop Grosthead, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84
Catharine, Saint, Play of, 236 Causa Dei, by B^awardine, 388 Caxton, 14, 62,
127, 138, 336 Ce^^io, Philip, or Christopher, 126 Certain Triumphs, Bo^ke of,
335 Certamen inter Johannem et Barons, versifice, 88 Cervantes, 111, 132, 415
Chant, Royal, 464 Charette, La, Roman, par Chrestien, 135 Charicell and
Drosilla, Loves of, a Romance, 348 Charity, William, 88 Charito, Romance of,
348 Charlemagne, Romance of, 88, 110, 124, 135, 137, 146, 210, 211, 464, 467
Chartier, Alain, 342 Chateau d'Amour of Robert Gros^head, (...) by Robert de
Brunne, 78, 85 Chatelain de Courcy, 463 C^aucer, 38, 68, 74, 126, 127, 128,
142, 143, 144, 148, 164, 165, 169, 172, 173, 175, 197, 208, 215, 220, 222, 224,
234, 235, 236, 255, 278, 282, 302, 306, 334, 339, 341, 342, 343, 350, 357, 358,
359, 360, 362, 364, 365, 366, 367, 368, 369, 370 to 384, to the end Chester
Mysteries, Acc. of the, 243 Chevalier au Sign, l'Ystoire du, a Romance, 348
Chevalrye, or Knighthood, Book of the Order of, translated out of French, 337
Chevelere Assign, or De Cigne, or the Knight of the Swan, Romance of, 313
Chelde Ippomedone, Romance of, 138 Chrestien of Troys, Roman du Graal et Roman
de Perceval le Galois, by, 134, 135 Christi Passionis et Resurrectionis Gesta,
74 Christopher, Saint, Life of, 16 Christ's Passion, etc. ^lay of, 249 Christ's
Resurrection, a Poem on, 237 Chris^ana of Pisa, 342 Chronicae Regnorum, 93, 10^
Chronicon Trojae, 88 Chronicum Brittannorum, 127 Chronicum Magnum Libris, 127
Cicero, 394, 419 Cinnamus, 348 Citharistae, Account of the, 90 City of Ladies,
French Romance of the, 310 Claudian, 390, 395 Cleomades, Romance of, 135
Clergy, Satirical Balad on the, 36 Codex Argenteus, 1 Colbrond, Song of, 89
Collet, Dean, his ^rammaticus Rudimenta, 281 Commedia de Geta, 234 Commena,
Anna, the Alexiad of, 50, 157, 348 Con^essio Amantis, 339 Conquest of Jerusalem
by Godsrey of Bulloigne, Theatrical R^presentation of, 245 Constantine,
Emperor, 210 Constantinopolis Christiana, by Du Cange, 158 Continens, by
R^asis, an Asiatic Physician, 441 Cooper, Mrs. 107 Copia S^edulae valvis domini
regis existentis in Parliamento, suo tento apud Westmonasterium, mense marcii
anno Reg^^ Henerici Sexti vicessimo octavo, a Satirical Balad, stuck on the
Gates of the Royal Palace, 58 Cornwaile, John, 6 Coventry Mysteries, Acc. of,
92, 243 Co^nubyence, Girard, or Cornubiensis Giraldus, 87 Corona Preciosa, by
Stephen, a Sabio, 351 Cors, Lambert li, 139 Cotgrave, 68 Court of Love,
Tribunal of the, 148, 460, 466 Court of Love, a Poem, by Chaucer, 466 Creation
of the World, Miracle Play of 237, 293 Creed of Saint Athanasius, versified, 23
Crescimbini, 139, 249, 464 Crucifixion, Poem on the, 24, 33 Crusius Martinus,
350 Curias and Florela, Romance of, 352 Cursor Mundi, a B^k^ of Stories, 123^
Curtius, Quintus, 133 Cider, an early drink, Acc. of^ 429 Cymon and ^phigenia,
by Boccacio, 348
D
Damascene, John, 441 Dan Burnell's As^, 419 Dance-Maccabre, Acc^ of, 210
Daniel Arnaud, 463 Daniel, the Prophet, Book of, paraphrased by Caedman, 2
Dante, 117, 147, 148, 234, 342, 344, 354, 390, 432, 462, 463 Dares, Phrygius,
125, 126, 136, 388, 394 David, King, History of, 210, 418 D'Avranches, Henry,
or Henry the Ver^isier, 47 Davy, or Davie, Adam, 214, 216, 217, 218, 219, 220,
221, 222, 223, 224, 225, 226, 227, 228, 229, 230, 231, 232 Death and Life, Poem
of, 312 De Brook, William, 290 Decameron of Boccacio, 348, 351, 384, 397, 416,
417 De Graville, Ann^, 346 De Grise, Jehan, 140 De Gulvorde, John, 25 De Hales,
Thomas, 78 De Lyra, Nicholas, 292 De Meun, John. See John de Meun. De Mont^ort,
Simon, Balad on, 43 De Orlton, Adam, Bishop of Winchester, 89 Dermod, King,
Poem on his Expulsion from his Kingdom of Ireland, 69, 85 Destruction of Troy.
See Troy. Degore, Sir, or Sir Dyare, Romance of, 180, 181, 182, 183, 184
Destruction of Jerusalem, Romance of. See Jerusalem. Dictys Cretensis, 125,
126, 136 Dido, Romance of, 418 Digby, 7 Dissolution of the World, a Po^m on
the, 127 Ditty of the Amorous Spinett, a Poem, by Froissart, 465 Dolopathos, or
Seven Sages of Greece, Romance of, 462 Dom Johans, 462 Domesdie Book, 12, 167
Donatus Aelius, 281 Donnet, 281 Dorman, Saint, 18 Dorohernensis Gervasus, ^03
Dow, Mr. 421 Drayton, Michael, 12, 117, 142, 406, 409, 425 Dryden, John, 358,
359, 367, 416, 4^3, 448 Du Carell's Anglo-Norman Antiquities, 64 Du Cange, 136,
137, 146, 157, 158, 159, 164, 165, 167, 168, 173, 177, 210, 244, 347, 349, 350,
351, 354, 364, 378, 388 Du Fres^e, 384 Du Halde, 404 Du Mons, Jaques
Pelloutier, ^'Art Poetique du, 465 Du Ri^, Pierros, Romance of, Judas
Macchabee, by, 417 Duclos, Mons. 244 D^gdale, 177, 302, 303 Dunbar, La
Counte^^e de, demanda a Thomas Essendoune quant la guere d'Escoce prendret syn,
76
E
Ecclesiae de Corrupto Statu, 47 Edward I. King, Elegy on, 103 Edward the Black
Princ^, the Achievements of, a P^em in Fr^nch, 331 Egill's Ransom, a Poe^, 22
Eglamoure, Sir, of Artoys, Romance of, 146, 170, 173 Eight Kings, The, History
of, on tapestry, 210 Emathiu^, or Eus^athius, a Romance, 348 Emendatio Vitae, a
Poem, by R. Hampole, 265 Emma Queen, delivered from the Ploughshares, Tale of,
89 Eneas, Romance of, 134 England, History of, in Verse, by Robert of
Gloucester. See Robert of Gloucester, 48 Ennius, 468 Episcopus Puerorum,
Ceremony of the, 248 Erastus, Romance of, 462 Erceldoune, Romance of, 75
Erceldoune, or Ashelington, Thomas, 75, 76 Erkenwald, King, History of, on
tape^^ry, 210 Eschylus, 468 Ester and Ahasuerus, 210 Eston, Adam, 292 Evesham,
Poem on the Battle of, 46 Eugenianus Nicetas, 348 Euripides, 468 Eustace, or
Eustache, Wistice, or Huistace, Poem of, Br^t d' Angleterre, by, 62, 64
Eustathius, Commentary on Homer, by, 125 Eustathius, or Eumathius, Romans of, 348
Exodus, Book of, Poetical Biblical History, extracted from, 21 Expositio in
Psalterium, by Hampole, 265
F
Fabliaux, 463 Fabricius, 442 Fabyan, 156 Fair Rosamond, Hist. of, 304
Falconet, Mr. 464 Fa^^ol^e, or Falstaff, Sir John, 234 Fauchet, 109, 112, 113,
134, 135, 136, 139, 190, 212 Fayditt, Anselm, 36, 117, 11^, 235, 463 Feast of
Asses, Mystery of the, 247 Feast of Fools, Mystery of the, 247 Ferrabrach,
Guillaume, 190 Festival, or Festiall, 14 Fifteen Tokenes before the Day of
Judgment, a Poem, by Adam Davie, 219 Fitzralph, Richard, Archbishop o^
Armaugh, 291, 343 Fitzrauf. See Fitzralph. Fitzstephen, William, 236 Five Joys
of the Blessed Virgin, a Song, 30 Flacius, Matthias, 47 Flamma Gualvanei de la,
Chronicle of the Vicecomites of Milan, by, 293 Fleetwood, Bishop, 13 Flodde^,
Battle of, a Ballad on the, 314 Floral Games, Account of the, 467 Flores et de
Blanchefleur, Histoire Amoreuse de, traduite de l'Espagnol par Jaques Vincent,
352 Flores y Blanca^^or, Romance of, 352 Florian and Blanca-Flor, Romance of,
351, 352 Florimont et Passeroze, Romance of, translated into French Prose, 352
Florius and Platzaflora, History of, 348, 351 Flower and the Leaf, by Chaucer,
334, 364, 365, 466, 467 Flower of the Daisy, a Poem, by Froissart, 465 Flower,
Robert, 298 Fontaine, Jane de la, 346 Fontenelle, 148, 235, 460, 466 Fools,
Feast of, Mystery of the, 247 Fordun, 232 Fortune et de Felicite, Roman de, 458
Forze d' Ercole, by Boccacio, 344 Fouquett of Marseilles, 117, 118 Fraternity
of the Penitents of Love, Society of the, 461 Friars, Outline of the
Con^^itution of the Four Orders of Mendicant, 288, 289, 290, 291, 292, 293,
294, 295, 296 Froissart, 69, 178, 252, 253, 331, 332, 336, 337, 338 Acc. of his
Poems, 465, 466 Fructus Temporum, 62 Fire Greky^, or Grecian Fire, Ac^. of, 157
G
Galen, translated into Latin, 443, 444 Garin, Rom^n de, 69, 422 Garter,
Account of the Order of the, 252 Gatisden, John, 442 Gaulmin, Gilbert,
Translation of Pilpay's Fables into French, by, 130 Gawain, Romance of, 208
Genesis, Book of, paraphrased by Caedmon, 2 Genesis, Book of, Poetical Biblical
History, extracted from, 21 Geoffry of Monmouth, 48, 49, 50, 51, 62, 63, 124,
128, 394, 400, 442 George, Saint. See Saint George Gervays, Bishop of
Winchester, 451 Gesta Alexandri Regis, 88 Gesta Aeneae post destructionem
Trojae, 88 Gesta A^tiochaeiae, et Regum aliorum etc. 113 Gesta Caroli secundum
Turpinum, 88 Gesta Osuelis, 88 Gesta Passionis et Resurrectionis Christi, 74
Gesta Ricardi Regis, 88 Geste of King Horn. See Horn. Giamschid, King, Acc. of,
407 Gianoni, 289 Giant, Oliphant and Child, Thopas, 433, 434 Gilbertine, or
Gilbertus Anglicus, 443 Gildas, 128 Gilote and Johanne, Adventures of, ^ Poem,
in French, 86 Girard de Vienne, Le Roman d^, par Bertrand le Clear, 146 Giraldi
Cinthio, 149 Glaskerion, the Briton, 393 Glatesaunt, William, an Astrologer,
440 Godfrey de Leigni, 134 ^od ureisun to ure Lesdi, a Saxon Poem, 314 Godfrey
of Bulloign's Conquest of ^erusalem, a Play, 245 Godfrey of Bullogne, Romance
of, 110, 210, 211 Godfrey of Viterbo's Pantheon, 350 God's Promises, Mystery
of, by Bale, 23^ Golden Legende, 14, 282 Gonzaque, Guy de, 383 Gordionus
Bernardus, 442 Gorionides, Joseph, or P^eudo-Gorionides, his translation of the
Li^e and Actions of Al^xander the Great into Hebrew, 131 Gouget, Abbe, 346
Gower, John, 223, 233, 342, 343, 350, 388, 393, 401, 407, 448, 460 Graal,
Saint, 211 Grandison, Bishop, 281 Granuci, Nicholas, translation of the Theseid
of Boccacio into Italian Prose, by, 346 Graville, Anna de, 346 Grant, Kaan,
Histoire de, et des Merveilles du-Monde, 101 Gray, Thoma^, 75. John, 75 Grecian
Fire, Acc. of the, 157 Gregora^ Nicephorus, 348 Grenailles, 351 Greseildis,
Marquis de Sa^u^es, Le Myster^ de, 417 Gresieldis Vita, per Fr. P^trarcham, de
Vulgar in Latinam Linguam traduct^, 417 Gri^dal, Archbishop, 241 Grosthead,
Robert, Bishop of Lincoln, 59, 60, 61, 62, 78, 79, 85, 262, 265, 290, 296, 393,
401 Gualo, a Latin Poet, 47 Gualtier de Belleperche, Romance of
Judas-Macchabee, by, 417 Gualtier de Chatillon, 128 Gualvanci de la Flamma,
Chronicle o^ the Vicecomites of Milan, by, 293 Guido de Colona, or Columna,
119, 124, 126, 138, 345, 385, 394 Guillaume le Briton, Philippeis, a Latin
Poem, by, 158 Guldevorde, John de, 25 Guy, Romance of. See Sir Guy Guy, Earl of
Warwick, Romance of, 87, 89, 142, 145, 211 Guy de Warwick, Chevalier d'
Angleterre, et la belle ^ille Felix samie, 143 Guy and Colbrand, a Poem on, 87
Guy de Burgoyne, 88 Guy de Warwick, le livre de, et de Harold d' Ardenne, a
Romance, 143 Guy of Warwyk, here gynneth the Liff of, out of Latin, made by the
Chronycler called of old Girard Cornubyence, 87 Gyrart de Vianne, Histoire de,
et de ses Freres, 146
H
Hakem, an Arabian Juggler, 404 Hakluyt, 101, 426, 430 Hales, Thomas de, 78
Hall, Anthony, 39^ Hall, Joseph, Bishop, 410 Haly, a ^amou^ Arabic Astronomer,
440 Hampole, Richard, 255, 256, 257, 258, 259, 260, 261, 262, 263, 264, 265
Hannibal, 211 Hantwille, Bartholomew, 342 Harmony of the ^our Gospels, 1, 2
Harper, Account of the King's, 48 Harri^'s Hibernia, 85 Hawes, Stephen, Pastime
of Pleasure, by, 213, 363 Heaven, Death, Judgment, etc. alliterative Ode on, 33
Hearne, 6, 13, 48, 62, 87, 88, 92, 93, 126, 131, 173, 193, 307, 390 Hebers,
Romance of the Seven Sages of Greece, translated by, 462 Hegesippi de Bello
Judaico, et Excidio Urbis-Hierosolymitanae Libri quinque, 217 Hegesippus de
Excidio Jerusalem, 311 Heliodorus, 348 Hemperius, the Erotic, History of, 348
Henricus Verificator Magnus, 47 Henry de Avranches, or Henry the Versi^ier, 47
Henry of Huntingd^n, 47, 128, 378 Henry, King, the First, Elegy on, 107
Herbelot, Mons. 402, 404, 407, 412, 413 Herbert, a Minstrel, 89 Hercules,
French Romance of, 138 Hercules, History of, on tapestry, 210, 211, 212
Herculis and Jason, Romance of, 138 Heregia del Preyres, or Heresy of the
Fathers, a Satirical Drama, by Fayditt, 36 Hermes Trismegistus, 393 Herod,
Pageant of, represented, 293 Herolt Dardenne, Le Romant de, 143 Hesiod, 468
Hibernia^ by Harris, 85 Hic^es's Thesaurus, 2, 7, 8, 13, 36 Higden, Ralph,
Polychronicon, by, 5, 80, 343 Hildebert, Eveque du Mons. Otuvres de, 378
Hippocrates, translated into Latin, 443, 444 Histoire d' Angleterre, en Verse,
par Maistre Wase, 63 Historia de Bello Trojano, 126 Holbein, Hans, 211 Holcot,
Robert, 5 Hollingshead, 232, 237, 238, 406 Holofernes, Histor^ of, on ^ape^^ry,
211 Holy Ghost, Order of the, 252 Homer, 42, 124, 184, 388, 394, 468 Horn,
Geste of King, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42 Horn Child and Maiden Rinivel, a Poem, 42
Houdane, Raoul de, a Provencal, 463 Hoveden, John, 85 House of Fame, by
Chaucer, 74, 128, 378, 389 Hu^, or Hue. See Lucas, 115 Huet, 112 Hugh de
Balsham, Founder o^ Pe^^r House, Cambridge, 290 Hugo, Prior de Montacuto, his
Planctus de Excidio Trojae, 48 Hugo de Evesham, 439 Hugolin of Pisa, Story of,
390 Hugues de Bercy, 37 Humagoun Nameh, (i. e. the Royal Book). See Pilpay's
Fables, 130 Hume, Mr. 307 Huon de Meri, Roman d' Antechrist, par, 285^ 286
Hurd, Dr. 286, 434
J
Jacobus de Voragine, 14 Jack Snacker of Witney, 240 Jack Straw, 420 Jack
Upland, 306 Jason, Romanc^ of, 138, 146 Jason and the Golden Fleece, History
of, on tapestry, 212 Javidian Chrad, i. e. Ae^erna Sapientia, 131 Ici commence
la Passyun Jhu Christ, en Engleys, 25 Jean d' Orronville, 167 Jeber, an Arabian
Chemist, Lapis I hilosophorum, by, 400 Jeffrey the Harper, 92 Jehan du Chesne,
133 Jehan de Grise, 140 Jehan de Nivelois, 139 Jehan de Vignay, French
Translation of the Legenda Aurea, by, 14 Jerome, Saint, French Psalter, by,
translated, 23 Jerusalem, the Destruction of, a ^rose Romance, 217 Jerusalem,
Battle of, a Poem, by Adam Davie, 214, 217, 218 Jerusalem, le Roman de la
Prise de, par Titus, 217 Jeu de Personages, 246 Illyrius (Illyricus) Flacius, 8
Incendium Amoris, by Richard Hampole, 265 Indiae de Situ et Mirabilibu^, 101
Job, Book of, parapbrased by Richard Hampole, 265 Jocatores, Account of the, 90
Joculator, or Bard, Account of, 12, 90 Joel, Rabbi, his Translation of Pilpay's
Fables into Hebrew, 130 Johanni de Wallis, 48 Johannes of Capua, Translation of
P^lpay's Fables into Latin, by, 130 John Chandois Herald, Poem on Edward the
Black Prince, by, 331 John of Basing, 281 John de Dondi, 439 John de
Guldevorde, 25 John de Langres, Transla^ion of Boethius, by, 458 John de Meun,
88, 148, 368, 369, 38^, 453, 458 John of Hoveden, 47 John of Salisbury, 47,
133, 238, 244, 403, 404, 421 John, Prior of Saint Swithin's, Winchester, 307
Jo^nson (Johns^on), N. 62 Joinville, 159, 167, 168, 173 Joly Chepert of
Askeldown, a Romance, by Lawern, 76 Jordan, William, 237 Josaphas, Saint, Life
of, 14 Joseph of Arimathea, History of, 134 Josephus, Flavius, 217, 394, 421
Ipomedon, Romance of, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 203, 204, 205 Ippo^is, Sir,
Romance of, 208 Isagoge in Astrologiam, by Alchabitius, 426 Isame, Fi^th King
of the Indians, the supposed Author of Pilpay's Fables, 131. See Pilpay Isaure,
Clementina, Countess of Toulouse, 467 Isodorus Hispalen^^s, 230 Judas
Macchabee, French metrical Romance of, 417 Juglers, Account of, 225, 394
Juliane, S^inte, Legend of, 13 Julius Valerius, 131 Jupiter and Juno, Hist. of,
on tapestry, 210
K
Kaan, Histoire de Grant, et des Merveilles du monde, 101 Kalila ve Damma,
130. See Pilpay's Fables Karlewerch en Escoce, les Noms et les Arms des
Seigneurs^ a l' Assize de, 335 Katherine, Saint, Life of, 14 Keigwin, John, 237
Kendale, Romance of, 75 Kenelme, Saint, Life of, 421 Kennet, Bishop, 90
Killingworth Castle, Entertainment at, 91 Kinaston, or Kynaston, Sir Francis,
385 King Arthur, Romance of^ See Arthur King Horn, Geste of, 38 King of Tars,
and the Soudan of Dammias, Tale of the, 190, 191, 192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 197
Kirther, 110 Knight of Courtesy and Lady of Faguel, Romance of the, 212 Knight
of the Swan, Romance of the, 313 Kolson, an Ancient Northern Chief, 50
L
Labbe Pere, Romance of Beuves de Hanton, by, 142 Lady of Faguel and Knight of
Courtesy, Romance of the, 212 Lambarde, 240 Lambeccius Petrus, 384 Lamentation
of Souls, a Poem, by Adam Davi^, 219 La Morte d' Arthur. See Arthur Lancelot du
Lac, Romance of, 114, 115, 134, 206, 336, 421 Lancelot du Lac, mis en Francois
par Robert de Borron, du Commandment d' Henri Roi d' Angleterre, av^c figures,
114 Laneham, 91 La^gto^t's Chronicle, 62, 66, 71, 85, 95, 97, 120, 121, 168
Lapidary, a Treatise on G^ms, 378 Lapidum de Speciebus, 378 Lascaris,
Constantius, 125 Lattini, 147 Lannoy, 3 Lawern, John, 76 Lawyers, Satiricall
Balad on the, 36 Lazamon, 63 Le Brun, Monsieur, Avantures d' Apolonius de Thyr,
par, 350 Legenda Aurea, 14 Legende of Good Women, 344, 370, 390, 466 Leirmouth,
or Rymer, Thomas, 76 Leland, 75, 102, 290, 291, 296, 314, 397, 440, 443 Leonela
and Canamor, Romance of, 352 Leonico, Angelo, l' Amore de Troleo et Greseida,
que si Tratta in buone part la Guerra di Troja, di, 351 Letter of Cupide, by
Occleve, 369 Libeaux, Sir, Ro^ance of, 197, 208 Libro d' Amore, 464 Lidgate,
119, 120, 127, 173, 178, 210, 235, 345, 384, 401, 410, 417, 429, 451 Lives of
the Saints, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 94, 123 Livre de cuer d' Amor espris, a
French Romance, 417 Livy, 394 Lobeyra, Vasco, Romance of Amadis de Gaul, by,
149 Lollius, 384, 385, 394 Longland, Robert, the Author of Pierce Plowman's
Vision, etc. 266, 267, 268, 269, 270, 271, 272, 273, 274, 275, 276, 277, 278,
279, 280, 282, 283, 284, 285, 286, 287, 288, 289, 290, 291, 292, 293, 294, 295,
296, 297, 298, 299, 300, 301, 302, 303, 304, 305, 306, 309, 311, 312 Lord's
Prayer, homily, or exhortation, in Ver^e, 20 Lord's Prayer, paraphrased by
Rich. Hampole, 265 Lorris, William de. See William de Lorris Love and
Gallantry, a Poem on, 34 Love Song, the earliest, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30 Loves of
Rhodante and Dosicles, Romance of the, 348 Louis, Duke of Bourbon, Life of, by
Jean Orronville, 167 Louis, Saint, Romance of, by Joinville, 167 Lowth's Life
of William of Wykham, 255 Lucan, 395, 432 Lucanus Nicholaus, 351 Lucas,
Chevalier, Sieur du Chastel du Gast, pres de Salisberi, le Roman de Tristram et
Iseult, traduit de Latin en Francois par, 115 Lucretius, 361 Ludus, Filiorum
Israelis, 237 Ludus Resurrectionis Domini, 247 Lusores, Account of the, 90, 91
Lwyhd, Edward, 25, 237 Lybis^er and Rhodamna, a Greek Poem, 347, 348 Lydgate.
See Lidgate. Lynne, Nicholas, 425, 426 Lyra, Nicholas de, 292 Lyttleton, Lord,
64, 85, 122
M
Mabillon, 3, 4, 125 Macchabee, Judas, French Metrical Romance of, 417
Maccabre, Dance of, on tapestry, 210 Maccabus, Romance of, 217 Macon, Count de,
Romantic History of^ 399 Macrobius, 393, 394 Madox, 146 Maimonides, Moses, 444
Mandeule, John, Parson of Burnham Thorpe, 63 Mandeville, Sir John, 101, 102,
403 Mannyng, Robert. See Robert d^ Brunne Manual of Sins, by Robert de Brunne,
73 Manuel Peche, or Manuel de Peche, translated by Robert de Brunne, 59, 73, 85
Mapes, Walter, 63, 421 Mappa Mundi, by Sir John Mandeville, 102 Marbode, Bishop
of Rennes, Latin Poem on Precious Stones, translated into French Verse, by, 378
Marchaunt's Second Tale, 144, 440, 455 Margaret, Saint, Life of, 12, 13, 14
Marian, Maid, 245 Marian and Robin, Play of, 245 Marine, Saint, Life of, 18
Martial d' Avergne, a French Poet, 460 Martin, Mr. 121 Massacre of the Holy
Innocents, Mystery of the, 242 Massieu, Mon^. 465 Masks, Account of, 255
Mauleon, Savarie de, 113 Maurus Rhabanus, 8 Maximus, Valerius, 419, 421, 432
Medea and Jason, 418 Medeae et Jasonis, Historia, a Guidone de Columna, 138
Medytaciuns of the Soper of our Lord Jhesu, and also of his Passyun, and eke
of the Peynes of his sweet Modyr, Maiden Marye, the which made in Latin,
Bonaventure, Cardynall, by Robert de Brunne, 77 Meliader, or the Knight of the
Sun of Gold, Romance of, 338 Meliboeus, Tale of, by Chaucer, 433 Memoriae
Saeculorum, by Godfrey o^ Viterbo, 350 Menesier, 134 Meri, Huon de, 285, 286
Merlin, Ambrose, 88, 401, 404, 408, 412 Merlini Prophetiae, versifice, 88
Merveilles du Mo^de, Histoire des, et de Grant Kaan, 101 Meun, John de. See
John de Meun. Meurvin, preux fills d' Ogier le Danoi^, l'Histoire de, 136
Mezeray, 111 Mille^, Jaques, 136 Milton, John, 129, 468 Mimi, Acc. of the, 90,
237, 238, 240 Mimici, Account of the, 237, 238 Minstrels, Account of the, 74,
90, 91, 116, 238 Mirabilia Hi^erniae, Angliae, et Orientalis, 103 Mirabilia
Mundi, 100, 101, 102 Mirabilia Terrae Sanctae, 102 Miracles, or Miracle Plays,
Account of the, 235, 236, 237 Miracles of the Virgin, French Romance of the,
303 Mirror for Magistrates, 235 Mirror which reflects the World, 407 Misyn,
Richard, 265 Moller, Har^lieb, translation of Pilpay's Fables into German, by,
131 Mon^chus, Johannes, 131 Montaniero Raymond, 462 Montfaucon, 136, 143, 335,
350, 351, 378, 411 Montfort, Simon de, Ballad on, 43 Montfort, Countess of,
Acc. of the, 253 Moralities, Acc. of, 241, 243, 245, 248, ^86 Morgan, Bishop,
translation of the New Testament into Welsh, by, 447 Morisotus, 410 Mort d'
Arthur. See Arthur. Mortimer, Roger Earl, restored, the Rites of the Round
Table, 117 Mousques, Philipes, 137 Murray, Mr. 93 Muses Library, 107 Mylner of
Abington, with his Wi^e and Fair Daughter, and two Poor Scolars of Cambridge,
History of the, a Poem, 432 Mystere de Gresildis, Marquise de Saluce, 246
Mys^eries, Acc. of, 24^, 243, 245, 246, 247, 248
N
Nasrallah, a Translator of Pilpay's Fables, 130 Nennius, 128 Nepos, Cornelius,
101, 125 Nesle, Blondell de, 113, 117 Neuf Preux, le Grant Tappis de, on
tape^^ry, 211 Neuf Preux, le Triumph des, a French Romance, 351 New Years
Gi^t, an Ancient Scots Poem, by Alexander Scott, 76 Nicene Creed, ver^i^ied, 23
Nicholas de Lyra, 292 Nidzarde, Adam, 378 Nigellus de Wireker, 419 Nightingale,
a Book in French Rymes, 85 Nivelois, Jehan le, 139 Nostradamus, 113, 118, 463
Nine Worthys, 211
O
O'Flaherty, 312 Occleve, 369 Octavian, Romance of, 207 Odoeporicon Ricardi
Regis, a Latin Poem, by Peregrinus, 232 Odorick, a Friar, 101 Oger, or Ogier,
or Oddegir the Dane, R^mance of, 135, 136, 464 Old and New Testament, Mystery
of the, 243, 245, Old and New Testament, trans^ated into Verse, 19, 20 Opus
Majus, by Roger Bacon, 408 Order de Bell Eyse, ^umorous Panageric on the, 37
Orientis de Regi^nibus, 101 Orleton, Adam de, Bishop of Winchester, 89
Orronville, Jean d', 167 Ot^rid, Monk of Weissenburgh, 7, 8 Otheniem, Empereur
de Rome, Ro^^unce de, 208 Otuel, Romance of, 88 Ovid, 134, 361, 383, 388, 390,
391, 394, 395 Our Savior's Descent into Hell, a Poem, 18 Our Savior's
Crusifixon, Elegy on, 33 Owl and the Nightingale, Contest between, a Poem, 25
P
Pageant representing the Birth of our Savior, 237 Pageants, Account of, 239
Palamon and Arcite, 344, 346, 349, 352, 353, 354, 355, 356. By Chaucer, 357,
358, 359, 360, 361, 362, 363, 364, 366, 367, 450, 45^ Palamon and Emilia, 418
Palaye, M. de la Curne de Saint, 74, 142, 149, 337, 417, 459, 461 Palermo,
Roger de, 144 Panegyric on the Month of May, a Poem, by Froissart, 465 Paradise
of Love, a Poem, by Froissart, 465 Parement des Dames, 417 Parasols, Cinque
belles Tragedies des Gestes d^ Je^nne Reine de Naples, par, 235 Paris, History
of, Romance of the, 146 Paris, Alexander de, 139 Paris, Matthew, 168, 236
Partonepex, (...) French Romance, 388 Parvum Job, or the Book of Job
par^phrased, 265 Pa^etes, a Jugler, Account of, 404 Pasquier, 464, 465 Pa^^ion
of Christ, acted at A^jou, 246 Pas^ion and Death of our Savior, a Poem, 34
Passy^n a Jhus Crist, en Englys, 25 Pastime of Pleasure, by Hawes, 213, 363
Pa^^or Fido, translated into Greek, 349 ^astorals, by Froissart, 465 Patient
Gri^ilde, Story of, 246, 415, 416, 418 Patrick, Saint, Life of, 17 Patrum
Vitae, 14 Peacham, Henry, 176 Peckward, 63 Pencriche, Richard, 6 Penelope,
Romance of, 418 Percaval le Galois, par Messenier, 134 Perceforest, Romance of,
346, 464 Percival, Sir, Romance of, 134 Percy, Dr. Bishop of Dromore, 59, 208,
250, 280, 312, 393 Percy, Henry, Fifth Earl of Northumberland, Household
Establishment of, 280 Pere, l'Abbe, 142 Peregrinus Gulielmus, 232 Pericles,
Prince of Tire, Play of, 350 Perizon, 125 ^^rtonape and Ipomedon, 138
P^rtonape, Romance of, translated from the French, 388 Peter de Saint Clost,
139 Petrarch, 118, 147, 342, 344, 383, 385, 394, 415, 416, 417, 4^4, 425, 439,
461, 463 Philippa, Queen of Edward the Third, Account of, 253 Phillippeis, a
Latin Poem, by Guillaume le Breton, 158 Philobiblion, by Richard de Bury, 291
Philosotrophos of Boccacio Pierce Plowman's Vision, 60, 74, 266, 267, 268, 269,
270, 271, 272, 273, 274, 275, 276, 277, 278, 279, 280, 281, 282, 283, 284, 285,
286, 288, 312, 433 Pierce the Plowman's Cre^de, 236, 287, 288, 296, 298, 299,
300, 301, 302, 303, 304, 305, 306, 307 Pignatelli, 463 ^ilpay's Fables,
translated into various Languages, 129, 130, 131 Piteaux, or Pitoux, i. e.
Religious Mysteries, 246 Plaids et Gieux sous l'Ormel, 460 Plato, 125, 361, 394
Plays, Account of, 239, 240, 241, 242, 243, 244, 245 Plays prohibited by Bishop
Bonner, 241 Plea of the Rose and the Violet, a Poem, by Froissart, 465 Plowman,
Pierce. See Pierce Plowman Plowman's Tale, 306, 433 Poetical Bi^lical History,
21 Policraticon. See John of Salisbury Polo Marco, de Regionibus O^ientis, by,
101 Polychronicon, by Higden, 5, 80^ 343, Polyhistor of Julius Solinus, 103
Pope, Mr. 396, 423 Poul, Saint, Visions o^, won he-was rapt in Paradys, 19
Powell's Cambria, 92, 116 Precious Stone^, Saxon T^eatise on, 378 Prester,
John, 102 Prick of Cons^ience, by Richard Hampole, 256, 257, 258, 259, 260,
261, 262, 265 Prick of Love, treating on the three Degrees of Love, after
Hampole, 265 Prickynge of Love, by Bonaventure^ 77 Procopius, 157, 351 Prodigal
Son, Story of, on tape^^ry, 210 Prodromus Theodorus, 348 Prophecies of Banister
of England, 75 Proserpinae de Raptu, by Claudian, 390 Psalms, Book of,
translated, 23 P^olemy, Account of, 410. Book of Astronomy, by, 425 Purchase,
101 Pylgrymages of the Holy Land, 214 Pyramus and This^e, Romance of, 352,
Q
Quilichinus Aretinus, 132 Quintus Curtius, 133
R
Ramsay, Mr. 352 Randal of Ches^er, 89 Randolph's Muses Looking Glas^, 210
Raoul de Houdane, a Provencial Bard, le Voye ou le Song d' Enfer, par, 463
Raoul le Feure, 138 Ravalerie l' Eveque de la, Revolution de Langue Francoise,
a la Suite des Poesies du Roi de Navarre, 112 Rauf, Art de Calendar, par, 74
Rau^e de Boun, le Petit Bruit, pa^^ 62 Rauol de Biavais, 134 Reason and
Sens^alitie, a Poem, by Lidgate, 429 Regis^rum Librorum Omnium et Jocali^m i^
Monas^erio S. Mariae de Pratis prope Leyces^riam, 88 Renaud of Montauban,
Romance of, 464 R^surrectionis Domini Ludus, 247 Reynault de Lou^ns, French
Me^rical Romance, de Fortune et de Fclicite, par, 458 Reynholds, Sir Joshua,
390 Reyne d' Ireland, Hist. of, on tapestry, 211 Rex Stultorum, Office of, 247
Rhasis, an Asiatic Physician, 441, 443 Rhees ap Gryffyth, 115, 116, Rhodante
and Dosicle^, the Loves of, a Romance, 348 Riccomboni, 249 Richard, a Poet, 34
Richard the First, a Poet, Account of, 213 Richard Cuer de Lion, 69, 74, 87,
119, 141, 144, 150, 151, 152, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 162, 163,
164, 165, 166, 167, 1^^, 198, ^07 Richard Roi d'Angleterre, et de Maquemore d'
Irelande, Histoire de, en Rim^, 121 Richard of Alemaigne, King of the Romans,
Satirical Ballad on, 43, 44, 45, 46 Richard de Lisle, Romance of, 458 Richard
de Bury, Bishop of Durham, 291 Richard, Seigneur de Barbezeiuz, 463 Robert de
Brun^e, 40, 44, 59, 62, 64, 66, 72, 77, 78, 95, 97, 105, 115, 116, 120, 121,
156, 158, 161, 166, 173, 193, 214, 225, 253 Robert of Gloucester, 5, 44, 48,
49, 62, 66, 72, 95, 115, 119, 120, 193, 304 Robert of Sicily, Romance of, 184,
185^ 186, 187, 188, 189 Robert le Diabl^, Rom^n de, 189 Robin and Marian, Play
of, 245 Roger de Palermo, translation of Sidra^^ by, 144 Rois d' Angleterre,
Roman de, 62 Rollo, the Story of, a Romance, 62 Roman le Rou, et les Vies des
D^cs de Normandy, 63, 338 Roman de Rois d' Angleterre, 62 Roman du Graal, or
the Adv^ntures of Sangral, by Chre^tien of Troys, 134 Roman de Tiebes, qui ^ut
Racine de Troy la Grande, 126 Roman de la Rose, 68, 88, 177, 368, 372, 378,
383, 393, 462 Romanus, Aegidius, Book de Regimine Principum, by, 343 Romaunt of
the Rose, by Chaucer, 68, 88, 173, 177, 344, 368, 369, 370, 371, 372, 373, 374,
375, 378, 379, 380, 381, 382, 383, 430, 453, 458, 459 Romulus and Remus, Story
of, ^n tapestry, 211 Rondeaus, by Froissart, 465 Rosa Medica^ by John Gatisde^,
44^ Rosamund, Fair, History of, 304 Rosamund's Chamber, 304 Rosarium de
Nativitate, Passione, Ascensione Jhesu Christi, or the Nightingale, a Book in
French Rymes, 85 Roudeki, a celebrated Persian Poet, 130 Round Table of Arthur
revived by Roger, Earl of Mortimer, 117, and by King Edward the Third, 251
Rouse, John, 145 Rowland and Olyvere, Romance of, 122 Roy Marc, Romance of, 134
Royal Ballads in Honor of Our Lady, by Froissart, 465 Rubruquis, William de,
101 Rucher, Guillaume, 335 Rudell, Jeffrey, 118 Ru^us, a Physician of Ephesus,
440 Runcivallum Bellum contra, 88 Rutebeu^ a Troubadour, 462 Rymer, 113, 318
S
Sabio, or Sabiu^, Stephen, his Grecobarbarous Lexicon, 351 Saint Alban,
Martyrdom of, a Poem, 98 Saint Alexius the Confessor, Son of Euphemius, L^gend
of, by Adam Davie, 218 Saint Ambrose, 394 Saint Athanasius, Creed of,
versified, 23 Saint Austin, 394, 421 Saint Catharine, Play of, 236 Saint Clost,
Peter de, ^39 Saint Dorman, 18 Saint George, Feast of, celebrated at Windsor,
Description of, 330. History of, on tapestry, 210 Saint Graal, 211 Saint
Jerome, 14, his French Psalter, translated, 23 Saint Josaphas, Life of, 18
Saint Kenelme, Life of, 421 Saint Katherine, Life of, 14 Saint Louis, Romance
of, by Joinville, 167 Saint Margaret, Life of, a Poem, 12, 13, 14 Saint Marine,
Life of, 18 Saint Theseu^, le Tappis de la Vie d^, 211 Saint Thomas of Becket,
Legend of, 1^, 18 Saint Palaye, Mons. de la Curne d^. See Palaye Saint
Wini^red, Life and Miracles of, 13 Saintre, French Romance of, 331, 334, 335
Saintre, John, 334 Salade, la, a Book of Ceremonies, by Anthony de la Sale,
334 Saladin, Sultan, Life of the, 122 Sale, Anthony de la, 334 Salisbury, Earl
of, a Poet, 342 Salamonis Christiani L^byrinthus, 411 Sanctorum Loca, etc. 102
Salus Anime, or Soul Hele, a Poem, 14, 19 Sandaber, an Indian Writer of
Proverbs, first Composer of the Romance of the Seven Sages of Greece, 462
Sandford, James, translation of the Vanity of Sciences of Cornelius Agrippa,
by, 409 Sandys, 409 Sangral, Adventure^ of, ^ Ro^ance, 134 Satire on the
Monastic Pro^ession, ^ Poem^ 9, 10, 11, 12 Savile, Sir Henry, 388 Saxon
Homilies, 5 Scalds, Account of the, 112, 128 Scalae Chronicon, an Ancient
French Chr^nicle of England, 75 Schilterus, Johannis, 8 Scotch Prophecies, 75
Scott, Alexander, 76 Scott, Johan, 80 Scottish Field, a Poem, 314 Scotu^,
Michael, 29^ Scripture Histories, by Adam Davie, 218 Seinte Juliane, L^g^nd of,
13 Seldom, 116, 425, 432 S^ptimus, Parap^ras^ of Dictys Cretensis, by, 125
Serapion, John, 440, 443 Seth, Simeon, 129, 133, 139, 141, 220 Seven Deadly
Sins, Story of, on tap^stry, 210, 211 Seven Penet^ntial Psalms, by Hampole, 265
Seven Sages of Greece, or Dolopathos, Romance of, translated into various
Langu^ge^, 462 Seven Wise Masters, Romance of the, 410, 414 Shakespeare, 127,
160, 206, 350, 409 Sheldon, Ralph, 13 Sidrac, Romance of, 143, 144, 208
Sigeros, Nicholas, 394 Simon, Alexander ^lebrated by, ^39 Sir Beavis of
Southampton, Roma^c^ of, 87, 141, 145, 170, 177, 192, 206, 208, 211 Sir
Blandamoure, Romanc^ of, 145, 208 Sir Degore, or Sir Dyare, 180, 181, 182, 183^
184 Sir Eglamoure of Artoys, 146, 170, 173 Sir Gawaine, Romance of, 208 Sir
G^y, Romance of, 169, 170^ 171, 172, 173, 174, 175^ 211, 442 Sir Ippotis,
Romance of, 208 Sir Ipomedon, Romance of, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 203, 204,
205 Sir Lance^ot^du Lak, Romance of, ^^4, 115, 134, 206, 336, 42^ Sir Libeaux,
or L^bius Disconius, Romance of, 197, 208 Sir Percival, Romanc^ of, 134 Sir
Topas, Rhyme of, by Chaucer, ^8, 143, 175, 197, 208, 224, 429, 433 Sir
Triamoure, Roma^ce of, 145 Sir Tristram, Romance of, 74, 88, 115, 134, 224, 418
Smarte, John, 335 Solinus, ^^lius, Polyhistor of, 103 Solomon, King, Book on
Gems, by, 378 Some, John, 425 Soul Hele, or Salus Anime, a Poem, 14, 19
Spectacula, or Dramatic Spectacles, Account of, 240 Speculum Stultorum, a Latin
Poem, 419 Speight, 378, 449 Spenser, Edmund, 116, 176, 200, 301, 333^ 387, 404,
405, 408, 412 Squire of Low Degree, 89, 169, 175, 224 Stanley, Mr. 352
Statius, 126^ 360, 361, 362, 388, 394 Steevens Monasticon, 92 Stem of Jesse,
Story of the, on tapestry, 210 Stephanite kai Ichnelate, 129 Stimulus
Conscientiae, by R. Hampole, 256, 257, 258, 259, 260, 261, 262, 265 Stonehenge,
Account of, by Geoffry of Monmouth, 51, 52, 53 Stowe, John, 126, 236, 245, 253
Stricker, 8 Strode, 388 Suetonius, 432 Surrey, Lord, 409 Susanuah, Story of, on
tape^^^^, 211 Swithin, Saint, Li^^ of, 15 Sylvester, ^op^, the Second, ^01, 402
T
Tanc^ed and Sigi^m^nda, by Boccacio, 190 Tapestry, Acco^n^ of var^^us Romances
upon, 209, 210, ^11 Tape^try of the Norman Conquest, 64 Tars, King of, and the
Soudan of Dammias, Romanc^ of, 190, 191, 192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 197 Tasso,
68, 149, 160, 184 Tatius Achilles, 348 Tailor, Silas, 14 Temple of Glass, by
Lidgate, 345, 410, 417 Temple of Honor, a Poem, by Froissart, 465 Ten
Commandments of Love, by Chaucer, 461 Ten Kings of France, History of, on
tapestry, 210 Teseide, Le, by Boccacio, 345 Tesoro, by Brunetto Latini, 147
Testament, the Old and New, translated into Verse, 19, 20 Testament of Love, by
Chaucer, 282, 459, 466 Thake^i Hegiage, Ebn Yuself al, 414 Thebaid of Statius,
388 Thebes, Geste of, 388 Thebis, Romance of, 388 Theophilus, Miracl^ Play of,
246 Theophrastus, 421, 435 THeseo kai gamou te Emelia, 347 Thesei in Lingua
v^lgari Historia, 246 Thesei et Aemiliae, de N^ptiis, 347 Theseid of Boccacio,
346, 347, 351 Theseus et de Gade^ir, Roman de, 345 Theseus, Histoire du
Chevalier, 345^ 346 Theseus, Saint, le Tap^i^ de la Vie de, 211 Thiebault, King
of Navarre, 463 Third Blast of Retrait from Plays, ^41 Thomas, the Author of
the Romance of Sir Tristram, 74 Thoma^ de Hales, 78 Thomas the Rymer, Prophecy
of, 77 Thomas of Sha^tesbury, 442 Thomas Plenus Amoris, 140 Tiebes qui ^ut
ra^ine de Troy la Grande, le Roman d^, 126 Tirante il Blanco, or Tirante the
White^ Romance of, 143 Titus and Vespasian, Romance of, 217 Tobiah, Me^rical
Life of, in French, 85 Toison d' Or, Order of the, 252 Tom Thumb, History of,
432 Topas, Sir, Rhyme of, by Chaucer, 38, 143, 175, 197, 208, 224, 429, 433
Tractatus quidam in Anglico, a Religious or M^ral Ode, 7 Trayl-baston, Libel on
the Commission of, 58 Trebizonde, History of, on tapestry, 110 Trevisa, John,
5, 80, 291, 343 Triamoure, Sir, Romance of, 145 Trionso Magno, a Poem, by
Dominich^ Falugi Anciseno, 139 Tristram, Sir, Romance of, 74, 88, 115, 134,
224, 418 Tristran et Iseult, Le Roman de, traduit de Latin en Franc^is par
Lucas, 115 Trivett, Nicholas, 458 Triumphs, Book of certain, 335 Triumpho di
Amore of Petrarch, 117 Trojae Chronicon, 88 Trojae Liber de Excidio, 88 Trojano
de Bello Historia, 126 Troilus, le Roman de, 351, 384 Troilus and Cressida,
Play of, 127 Troilus and Cressida, Story of, in Gr^ek Verse, 351 Troilus and
Cre^^eide, Poem by Chaucer, 220, 362, 384, 385, 386, 387, 388, 389 Trojomanna
Saga, 138 Troleo et Griseida l'Amore di que ^i tratta in buone part la Guerra
di Troja, 351 Troubadours, Account of the, 110, 111, 118, 147, 457, 462 Troy,
the Destruction of, a Romance, 88, 124, 136, 137, 146, 210, 345, 385 Troy,
Recuel of the Histories of, translated by Caxton, 127 Tully's Somnium
Scipionis, 394 Turk and Gawaine, Romanc^ of the, 203 Turnoyement de
l'Antechrist, par Huon de Mere, 285, 286 Turpin, 88, 124, 132, 135, 137, 146,
420, 432 Twyne, 432 Tyrensis, Wilhelmu^, 68 Tz^tes's Chiliads, 349
V
Vaez, Hussien, translation of P^pay's Fables, by, 130 Valentine and Orson,
Romance of, 401, 415 Valerius ad Ru^^num de non ducenda Uxore, by Wal^er Mapes,
421 Valeriu^ Flaccus, 126 Valerius Julius, 131 Vandyke, 351 Varchi, 463
Velserius, 350 Vengeance of Gods Death, a Poem, by Adam Davie. See Davy
Vernon, Edward, 14 Versus de Ludo Scaccorum, 88 Versus Politici, 349 Versus
Vaticinales, by John Bridlington, 76 Virtue the Engraver, 140 Vignay, Jehan de,
Translation of the Legenda Aurea, by, 14 Villani Giovanni, 147 Villon, 382
Vincent de Beauvais, 137, 164 Vincent, Jaques, 352 Vinesaus, Jeffrey, 421
Virdungus, Hassurtus Joannes, 440 Virelais, by Froissart, 465 Virgidemarium, by
Hall, 410 Virgil, 184, 340, 361, 390, 394 Virgin, Five Joy^ on the Blessed, a
Song^ 30 Virgin, Miracles of the, a French Romanc^, 303 Virgin Mary, an Ancient
Hymn to the, 314 Virtue and Vice Fighting, Story of, on ^ap^s^ry, 211 Visions,
by Adam Davie, 214, 215, 216, Visions of Saint Poul won he was rapt in Paradys,
19 Visions of Pierce Plowman. See Pierce Plowman Visions d' Ogeir le Danois au
Royaume de Faerie, en Verse Francois, 1^6 Vitae Patrum, 14 Vitellio, 407 Vives
Ludovicus, 351 Voragine, Jacobus de, 14 Voye ou le Song d' Enser, by Raoul d^
Houdane, 463 Ury, Romance of, 208 Uselt le Blonde, Romance of, 134 Vyenne,
History of, 146
W
Wace, or Gasse, Master, 62, 63, 64, 66, 67, 338 Wallace, Sir William, Acts
and Deeds of, by Blind Harry, 322, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 328, 329, 330, 331
Wallden, John, 292 Walo, versificator, 47 Walpole, Mr. 85, 113 Walter of
Exeter, Author of the Romance of Guy, Earl of Warwick, 87 Wanley, 155, 206
Warburton, Bishop of Gloucester, 287, 335 Wars of the Jews, a Romance, 311
Warwick, Guy, Earl of, a Romance. See Guy. Watson, Edward, 234, 292 Waynflete,
William, Bishop of Winchester, 450 Whittington, Sir Richard, 291 Why Poor
Priests have no Benefices, by Wicliffe, 306 Wicliffe, 164, 282, 287, 306, 307,
308, 343, 358 William de Brook, 290 William de Rubruqui^, 101 Wil^iam of
Lorris, 368, 369, 373, 374, 381 393 William of Malmsbury, 401 William of
Wykeham, 92, 240, 255, 306 William, Prior of Kenilworth, 85 William the First,
King, Precept in Saxon to the Sheriff of Somers^tshire, from, 3^ Williams,
Richard, Dean of Lichfield 307 Wini^red, Saint, Life and Mir^cles of, 13
Wireker, Nigellus, 419 Wolstan, Bishop of Worces^er, 4. Saint, 15
Z
Zabulus, 393 Zeno Apostolo, an Italian D^amatt^ Writer, 417 Zenophon, the
Ephesian, Romanc^ of^ 348 Zenus Demetrius, 349, 351
INDEX TO THE TWO DISSERTATIONS Prefixed to the First Volume of WARTON'S
History of English Poetry.
ABELARD, cxlix Abdella, King of Persia; account of a Clock presented to
Charlemagne by, xcviii Abotika, or Aristotle's Poetics, translated into Arabic
by Abou Muscha Metta, xc Acca, Bishop of Hexham, xcv Adrian, Abbot of Saint
Austin'^ Canterbury, xciv, ci Aelssin, c Aenigmata, by Aldhelm, xcix Aeneid of
Virgil, x, cxx A^er Leo, li Alanus de Insulis, cxliii, Alaric, lxxiv Alban,
Saint, Latin Poem on the Life of, by Robert Duns^able, cxxiii Albert, Abbot of
Gemblour^, lxxvii Albin, Abbot of Saint Austins, xcviii Alcuine, lxxxix, xcvi,
xcvii, c, ci, cii, cxxiv Aldhelm, Bishop of Shirburn, xcvii, xcviii, xcix, c,
cii, cvi, cx Aldrid, c Aldwin, Abbot of Ramsey, cxxiv Alefleck, Sagan of, lviii
Alexander the Great, xiv Alexander, Bishop of Lincoln, cxxv Alexandreid, by
Philip Gualtier de Chatillon, cxli, cxlii, cxliii, cxliv Alexandri Ges^a, cxix
Alfred's, King, Saxon Translation of the Mercian Law, xi. His Account of the
Northern Seas, xxvii -- xliv, xcvii, xcviii, cxi Alfred of Beverly, ix Allard,
Monsieur, xx Al -- Manum Caliph, Account of the, lxxxviii Andrew, a Jew, cxlvi
A^e^^i^, a Welsh Bard, lxi Angantyr, Scaldic Dialogue at the Tomb of, xl.
Translated by Gray, xl Anlaff, a Danish King, xliv Anselm, Archbishop of
Canterbury, cxiv, cxxvii, cxlix An^eclaudian, by Alanus, cxliii Antiocheis, by
Joseph of Exeter, cxxxvi, cxxxix Antiochenus, Johannes, cxx Antonius, Nicholas,
cxix Apuleius, cx Arator, lxxvi Architrenius, by John Hanvill, cxxviii Ariosto,
xx Aristotle, lxxxvii, lxxxix, xc, c, cxlvii, cxlix Aristotle's Logic,
translated into Latin by S. Austin, lxxxix. Poetic^ translated into Arabic by
Abou Muscha Metta, xc. His Works translated, xc Arthur, King, vii, viii, xi,
xii, xv, xvii, xxi, lviii, lxxii, cxi Asamal (or Asiatic Verses) Account of
the, xxix Athelard, a Monk of Bath, the Arabic Euclid translated into Latin by,
xc Athelstan, King, Ode on, xxxvii, xxxviii, xxxix, xl -- xliv, xlv Attila,
Verses in Praise of, live Aventinus, Johannes, live Averroes, lxxxvii, xc
Augustodunus, Honorius, cxxxi Aungerville, Richard. See Richard of Bury
Aurelianus, Coelius, cxi Ausonius, lxxvi Austin, Saint, lxxxv, lxxxix, xcviii
B
Bacon, Roger, cxlvi, cxlvii, cxlix Bale, John, xciv, civ Banier, xxvi
Barbarossa, Frederick, Latin Poem on the Wars of, by Gunther, cxliv, cxlv
Bards, Irish, Account of the, xlvi. Welsh, Account of the, xlvii, xlviii, xlix.
Celtic, Account of the, live Barthius, cxli Basingstoke, John of. See John
Batthall, an Arabian Warrior, Life of, etc. xii, xiii Bathoniensis, Adelardus,
Quintilian's Declamations, abridged by, lxxvii Beauclerc, Henry, cxvi
Beccatelli, Antonio, cxx Becket, St. Thomas of, cxxv Bid, xi, lxxxv, xciv,
xcv, xcvii, civ, cv, cxxiii, cxxvii Belle-perche, Gaultier Arbalestrier de,
cxxiv Benedict, Abbot of Peterborough, cxix, cxxvii Bernard's Homilies on the
Canticles, lxxxii Bever's Manuscript Chronicle, lxxxv Bevi^, Romance of. See
Sir Bevis Bible, lxxix. History of the, by Leoninus, cxxiii Bible Hystoriaus
la, ou les Histoires Escolastres, lxxxv Bilfrid, c Birinus, Saint, History of,
represented on the Ancient Font in Winchester Cathedral, etc. lxxxv. Account
of, xcii. Life of, cxlv Biscop, Benedict, xciv, civ Blaunpayne, Michael, cxliv
Blois, Peter de, cxxvi, cxxxi, cxxxiv. William de, cxxvi, cxxvii Blondus
Flavius, cxx Boerhaave, lxxxvii Boethius, lxxiv, lxxxiii, lxxxix, xcviii, ciii,
cxviii Borlase's History of Cornwall, xxxvi Boston, cxxxvi Boun o Hamtun
Ystori, xxxvii Boy and the Mantle, or le Court Mantel, Story of, vi Boyardo, xx
Bretomanna Saga, lviii Breton, Guillaume, le, cxli, cxliv Britannus Eremita,
xii Brut-y-Brenhined, or Hist. of the Kings of Britain, translated into Latin
by Geoffrey of Monmouth, vii, viii, ix, x, xi, xii, xiii, xiv, xv, xvi, xvii
Bulloign, Godfrey of. See Godfrey Bury's Philobiblion, lxxxiv Bury, Richard of.
See Richard
C
Caesar, xxvi Caedmon, xxv Calixtus the Second, xix Calliopius, cxix
Calligraphy, Account of the Speci^ens of, c, ci Cambrensis Gyraldus, cxxxii,
^xxxiii, cxxxiv Camden, cxl Canute, History of, xlvi, ^xix Carpe^tier, cxliii
Cassiodorus, lxxiv, ciii Catharine, Saint, Play of, by Geo^^rey Abbot o^
Dunstable, cxv Cedrenu^, lxxxviii Cel^us Apuleius, cxi Ceol^rid, xcvii, ciii,
civ Chardin, xxv Charlemagne, xi, xvii, xviii, xxi, lvii, lix, lx, lxxii,
lxxviii, xci, xcvii, xcix, ^i, cii^ Charle^ the Fi^th, Account of his
Collection of Books, lxxxiv^ Charle^ the Bald, xci Chaucer, vi, cxviii, cxxxi^
Chilperic, King, Two Books of Latin Verses by, cx Chiron, cxi Christopher,
Saint, Legend of, cxix Chrysostom, Saint, xciii Cicero, lxxvii, lxxxiii, xcii,
cxx Claudian, lxxv, cxviii, cxix, cxx, cxxiv Columella, lxxvii Comestor, Peter,
Scholastic History of, lxxxii. Translated into French, lxxxv Commediae et
Tragediae, by William of Blois, cxxvii Conrade, Emperor, Latin Poem on the
Expedition o^, against the Saracens, by Gunther, cxlv Constantius, lxxv
Constantinople, Prose History of the Siege of, by Gunther, cxlv Cor et Oculum,
Disputa^io inter, cxxxv, cxxxvi Court Mantel le, or the Boy and the Mantle,
Story of, vi Cujentos de Viejas, xx Curtius, Quintus, xxxii^ cxli Cyveilog,
Owain, Prince of Powi^, a Po^^ by, (...)
D
Damascenu^, translated into Latin by Robert Grosthead, cxlvi Danois,
Mademoiselle, xx Dares, Phrygius, de Bello Trojano, cxxxvii. Translated into
French Rymes by God^rey of Water^ord, xxi Dead Man's Song, a Ballad, cv
Desiderius, xcii De Vinesauf, Geoffrey, cxlv Dha Hoel, Welsh Laws by, xlix Die
Judicii Meditatio de, by Bid, translated into Saxon Verse, cvi Dionysi^s the
Areopagite, 4 Treati^es of, translated into Latin by John Erigena, cviii. By
Robert Gro^thead, cxlvi Dioscorides, Ancient Mss. of, cxi Dodford, Robert,
cxlviii Domitian, lxvi Donatus, xcii Dubricius, xi Du Cange, ii Dugdale, cvii
Dunstable, Robert, cxxiii Dunstan, Saint, c, ci
E
Eadsrid Bishop of Durham, Book of the Gospel Written by, c Eadmer, cxxvi,
cxxvii Eadwin, cxi Ecbert Bishop of York, xcvi, ci Edda, the, xxvi, xxxii,
lxiv, lxv Edda, a Monk of Canterbury, c Edessenus, Theophilus, Homer,
translated into Syriac by, lxxxvi Eginhart, curious Account of a Clock by,
xcviii Egill, an Islandic Poet, xliv, xlv Eiddin, My^nydaw, a Poem celebrating
the Battles of, lxi Elfleda, Daughter of Alfred, Poetical Epi^tle to, by Henry
of Huntingdon, cxxv Elsric, a Saxon Abbot of Malmsbury, ci Eliduc, Tale of, iii
Engelbert, Abbot of Trevoux Englyn, Milur, or the Warrior's Song, xlviii
E^INIKION, Rythmo Teutonico Ludovico Regi ac^lamatum cum Northmannos, Anno
^ccccxxxiii vicissit, lv Eremita Britannus, xii Eric Widsorla, Sagan af^ lviii
Erigena, John, Translation of Four Treatises of Dionysius the Areopagite into
Latin by, cviii, cix Ervene, ci Espagne, Relation du Voyage d', xx Esseby,
Alexander, cxliv Ethelwold, Bishop of Durham, c Etheldryde, Panegyrical Hymn on
the Miraculous Virginity of, by Bid, cx Evans' Di^^ertatio de Bardis, lxii
Euclid, c Exeter, Joseph of. See Iscanus Josephus Eyvynd, Elogium of Hacon,
King of Norway, by, xliii
F
Fabian, xl, xli Fabricius, cxx Farabi, xc Farice^ cxvi Faries, Arabian Account
of ^he, lxii, lxiii Faryn, Li^e of S. cxxiii Felix, cx Flaherty, xxxiii Flaura
and Marcus, a Latin Tragic Poem, by William of Blois, cxxvii Flodoard of
Rheims, xix Florentinus. See Poggius Florus, xcii Fortunatus, lxxvi Francus
Hunnibaldus, Latin History of France by, x Franeth, Nicholas, cxix Fresne, Tale
of, iii Fridegode, cvii Froissart, lxix Frontinus, xcii
G
Galen, lxxxvii Ganna, a Prophetic Virgin, Account of, lxvi Genesis. Poetical
Paraphrase of, by Junius, xxxv, xxxviii Geoffrey of Monmouth, vii, viii^ ix,
xiii, xiv^ xv. xvi^ xvii, xxxvi^ xl, xli, lvii, lxiv^ lxxii, cvii, cxxv,
cxxviii, cxliii Geoffrey^ Abbot of Dunstable, Play of St. Catharine, by, cxv
Geoffrey de Vi^esau^, cxlv Gerveys. John, Bishop of Winchester, cxxi Gesta
Alexandri, cxix Gla^^onbury, John of. See John Gleemen, Account of, xl
Glouce^^er, Robert of. See Robert God^re^ of Bulloign, Latin Poem on, by
Gunther^ cxlv Godfrey of Water^ord^ Translation of Dares P^ryg^us into French
Rymes, by, xxi Godfrey, Prior of St. Swithin's, Winchester, cxv Gododin, a
Poem, by Aneurin, lxi Gog and Magog, Account of, xiii, xiv Golius, lxxxvii
Grammaticus, Johanne^, cxxii Gray, xl Gregory, Saint, his Pastoral Care, cxix
Gregory of Huntingdon, cxlviii Gregory of Tours, xlviii, cx Grosthead, Robert,
cxlvi, cxlvii Grymbald, cxvi Guallensis, Johannes, cxxii Gualter, Archdeacon of
Oxford, vii, cxxv Gualtier, Philip de Chatillon, cxli, cxliii, cxliv Guigemar,
Tale of, iii Guillaume le Breton, cxli, cxliv Gunther, cxliv Guthlac, Saint,
Miracles in Latin and Saxon, cx Guttyn, Owen, a Welsh Bard, vii Guy, Sir,
Romance of, lxxxviii Gyraldus Cambrensis, cxxxii, cxxxiii, cxxxiv
H
Hacon, Elogium of, xliii Hanvill, John, cxxviii, cxxix, cxxx, cxxxi Haral^ the
Valliant, lxix Hardraade, Harold, King of Norway, a Poet, xxxi Harnes, Michel
de, xxi Harpers, Account of, xl Hearne, ix Hen^y, a Monk of Hyde Abbey, cxviii
Henry of Gaunt, Archdeacon of Tournay, cxlii Henry, a Benedictine Monk, cxviii
Henry of Huntingdon, viii, xxxviii, cxxiv Henry the Second, King, Latin
C^ronicle of, by Benedict, Abbot of Peterborough, cxix. Latin Poem on, by Henry
of Huntingdon, cxxv Herbelot, M. D. xii Herbert de Losinga, cxvi Herculides,
cxi Herman, Bishop of Salisbury, ci, cxiv Heroes, Book of, a Poetical History,
lv Hervarer Saga, liii, lvi Hialmar, History of, a Runic Romance, lxvii
Hialmter oc Oliver, Sagan af, an old Scandic Romance, lvii Hickes, xxviii,
xxxv, liii, c Hippocrates, lxxxviii Hirla^, a Poem, by Cyveilog Prince of
Powis, (...) Historia Brittonum, by Geoffrey of Monmouth, ix Historical Rymes
of King Arthur, etc. lviii Hoel Dha's Wel^h Laws, xlix Holbech, Laurence,
cxlviii Holcott, Robert, cxxi Homer, lxxiv, lxxxvi, xciii, c, cvii, cxliii
Homer's Iliad and Ody^^ey, written on a Dragon's Gut, lxxiv Homer's Iliad and
Odyssey, translated into Syriac, by Theophilus Edessenus, lxxxvi Honain,
Aristotle's Morals, translated by, xc Horace, lxi, xcii, cxxx, cxlv Hoveden,
Roger, cxxvii, cxli Hugh, Master, cxxi Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester, lxxxiii
Hunnibaldus, Francus, x Huntingdon, Gregory of. See Gregory. Henry of. See
Henry
J
Jagiouge and Magiouge, or Gog and Magog, Account of, xiii, xiv, xv Jeber, an
Arabic Chemist, lxxxvii Jerome of Padua, cxix Jerome, Saint, lxxviii, cxx
Illuminated Mss. among the Saxons, Account of, c, ci Ingulphus, cxviii Insula,
Roger d', lxxxii Jocelin, cvii John of Basingstoke, c^lvi John of Glastonbury,
ci John of Salisbury, lxxvii, cxix, cxxvi, cxxxi, cxliii Jornande^, xcii Joseph
of Exeter. See Iscanus, Josephus Josephus, xcii, xciii Jovius, Paulus, xxv, c^x
Iscanus^ Josephus, cxxxvi, cxxxvii, cxxxviii, cxxxix, cxl, cxliii, cxliv
Judiciary Combats, Account of, xxiii Judith, Anglo-Saxon Poem on, xxxvii,
xxxviii Ivent, Sagan af, lviii Julianus^ Duke, Son of S. Giles, History of, l^x
Juni^s, Poetical Paraphrase of Ge^esis, by, xxxv Juvenal, cxxxi Juvencus, lxxiv
K
Karlamagnuse of Hoppum Hans, Sagan af, lix Karlotis, a Po^m, cxli Keating's
History o^ Ireland^ xlvii Kenneth, King of Scotland, xlvii K^ytlinga-Saga^ or
History of Canute, by Harald the Valiant. x^vi, lxix Kyrie E^eison, or Mil^tary
Choru^, Account of, lv
L
Lambeccius, cxi Lan^ranc. Archbishop of Canterbury, lxxviii, lxxix, cxiv,
cxvii, cxlix Lapis Philosophorum, by Jeber, lxxxvii Largus Scribonius, cx
Less, Martin, de Orespe, cxliii Launval or Launsal, Tale of, by Thomas
Chestre, iii Lebeuf, L'Abbe, v Leland, lxxxiii, cxxii, cxxiv, cxxv, cxxxvi Leo,
lxxxvi Leoninus, cxxiii Lhuyd, vii Ligurinus, a Latin Poem by Gunther, cxliv
Livy, lxxxiv, xcii, cxx Llanidan in the Isle of Anglesy, Account of a Druid's
Mansion at, xlvii Lloyd, Bishop, ix Llwellyn, Ode to, by Llyzad Gwr, vii Llygad
Gwr, a Welsh Bard, vii Llywarchen^, a Welsh Bard, iv Lobineau, iii Lodbrog,
Regner, Epicedium of, xxxi, xxxii, lvii, lx, lxviii Lostunga, a Scald, xlvi
Lombard, Peter, Archbishop of Paris, lxxx^, cxlix Losinga, Herbert de, cxvi
Lucan, lxxxiii. Translated, cxliii Lucius, Saint, Acts of, xi Lucretius, lxxvii
Luernius, a Celtic Chief, Account of, by Posidonius, live Lupus, Abbot of
Ferrieres, lxxvii Lyra, Nicholas de, lxxxv Lyttleton, Lord, cxxvii
M
Maban, a celebrated Chantor, xcv Maccabeus, Judas, Romance of, by Gualtier
Arbalestrier de Belle-perche, cxxiv Machaon, cxi Macpherson, lvi Maidu^ph, xcix
Mailros, John, cii Mallet, Monsieur, xxii Maniliu^, lxxvii Map^s, Walter,
cxxxv, ^xxxvi Mara, or Night Mare, Account of, xxxv Marcellu^, cx Mart^al, cxix
Marville, M. de Vigneul, cv Maundev^lle, Sir John, li Mauranus, Rabanus, ci,
cii, cxviii^ cxlv Maximus, a Roman General, Account of, iii, iv Maximu^, Saint,
cix Mayan^ D^n Gregorio, Life of Cervantes, by, xxi Mead, a Favorite Liquor of
the Goths, Account ^f, xlviii Menologe, or Saxon Poctic Calendar, xxxvii Mensa
Rotunda de, et Strenuis Equitibu^ xii Mergian Peri, or Mergian the Fairy,
Account of, lx^i Merlac, Daniel, cxiv Mer in's Prophecies, viii, xv, xvi
Merlin, Po^m on, by Geoff^ey of Monmouth, cxxv Metamorph^sis of Ovid^
Explanation of, by Johannes Grammaticus, cxxii Metta Abou Mu^^ar, Aristotle's
P^etics, translated into Arabic by, xc Meun, John de, lxxxv Michel de Harnes,
translation of Turpin's Charlemagne, by, xxi Milton, John, iv^ cv, cxxviii
Mimus or Mimic, Account of, ^lix Mis^etoe, Divine Virtue attributed to the,
xxvi Mogiah-edir Scirat al, xiii Monk's Tale, by Chaucer, cxviii Monmou^h,
Geo^^rey of. See Geoffrey Montague, W. Earl of Salis^ury, lxxxv Montague, Mrs.
Essay on Shakespeare, by, lvi Monte, Robert de, ix Mon^^aucon, cxxvi
Montichelli, Cardinal, cxliii Morris, Mr. of Penryn, viii Mulso de, ^eu
Hyd^omeli, or, Mead and Methlegin, a panegyrical Ode on, xlvii, xlviii Mut^us,
cxxiii
N
Naiton, a P^ctish King, ciii Nazianzen, Gregory^ cix Necham, Alex. cxx,
cxxxiv, cxxxv Nennius, xi, cx Nepo^, Cornelius, cxxxvi Neville, Archbishop of
York, cxxxii Nicholas de Lyra, lxxxv Nicholas de Ely, lxxix Nigel, cxviii
Niger, cxi
O
Odin or Woden, Account of, xxiv, xxv, xxvi^ xxvii, xxviii, xxxvi, xliii Oell,
Earl^ xix Ohther, xxvii Offa, King, xxxvii Oienhart, xx Oilly, R^bert d', cxvi
Olave, King of Norway, xliii Olaus, Magnus, lix Orosiu^, ^istory of the Pagans,
by, xcviii Ossian's Poem^, xxvi, lii, ^iii, lvi, lxi O^^ald, Ar^hbishop of
York, cxii Oswa^d, Saint, Li^e and Miracles of, cxliii Ovid^ iii, lxxxiii,
xcii, cx, cxxii, cxxxvii Ovid's Art of Love, First Book of, in Sax^n
^haracters, cx Ovid'^ Metamorph^ses, Explanati^n of, by Joannes Grammaticus,
cxxii Owen, Guttyn, a celebrated Welsh Bard, vii
P
Pagans, History of the, by Orosius, xcviii Pamphilus, cxi Paris, Matthew,
lxxxi, cxlvi Parker, Archbishop, cvii Pastoral Care, by Saint Gregory, cxix
Paulin, Abbot, cxvii Paulinus, lxxvi Peckham, Archbishop, ix Pedianus,
Asconius, lxxvii Pelloutier, iv Percy, Dr. xxii, xxxii Pergaus, Appolonius,
lxxxviii Periphismerismus, by John Erigena, cviii Persius, cxx, cxxx Peter de
Rupibu^, cxliv Peter of Blois, cxxvi, cxxxi, cxxxiv Petrarch, cxxi Petronius,
cxxvi Philippid, by Guillaume le Breton, cxli, cxliv Philobiblion, by Richard
of B^ry. lxxxiv^ cxx, cxxi Philoponus, Johannes, cxxii Philosophorum Lapis, by
Jeber, lxxxvii Phrygius, Dares, Poem on the Trojan War by, cxxxvii. Translat^d
i^to French Rymes by God^rey of Waterford, xxi Pindar, lxxxvi, c Pithou, cxli
Plato, translated into Arabic, lxxxvii Pl^utu^, xcii Pliny, cxi Poggius,
lxxvii, lxxviii, xcii, cxx Policraticon, John of Salisbury, cxxvi Pon^issara,
John de, Bishop of Winches^er, lxxix Posidonius, live Powel's History of Wales,
iv Priscus, cxi Prophets, Extracts from the Books of, in Greek and Latin, cvii
Prosper, lxxvi Pruda, Asbiom, xxxi Prudentius, cix Psalter, illuminated with
Letters of Gold, by Eadwin, ci Psalter, Account of an Ancient MS. of the, in
Hebrew, cii Psycomachia^ cix Pulice and Musca de, by William of Blois, cxxvii
Q
Quintilian's Institutes, lxxvii, cxx
R
Rabanu^, Mauru^, ci, cii, cxviii, cxlv Reginald, Abbot of Ramsey, cxxiv
Regner, Lodbrog, Ode of. See Lodbrog Reinesius, lxxxvi, lxxxvii Repingdon,
Bishop of Lincoln, lxxx Revel^tion^ of St. John, lxv Richard of Bury, cxx, cxxi
Richard the First^ ^om^nc^ of, xix, cxl Robert de Monte, ix Robert d'Oilly,
cxvi Robert of Gloucester, cxxvii Rodburn, Thomas, cxliii Roger de Insula,
lxxxii Roger de Wescham, cxlvi Rogwald, Lord of Orcades, xlii Rollo, a Norman
Leader, Account of, lx Romae de Mirabilibus, cxxxvii Romaunt of the Rose, by
Chaucer, vi Rosamund and Earl William, lix Rose, Roman de la, by John de Meun,
lxxxv, cxxvi Rosso Philippo, lxxviii Rudbeckius, Olaus, xxv Runes, or Letters,
Account of the, xxv, xxvi, xxvii Rupibus, Peter de, cxliv Russell, John, Bishop
of Lincoln, lxxxi
S
Saint Austin, lxxxv, lxxxix, xcviii Saint Birinus, History of, represented on
the Ancient Font in Winchester Cathedral, etc. lxxxv Saint Catharine, Play of,
cxv Saint Chrysostom, xciii Saint Christopher, Legend of, cxix Saint Dunstan, c
Saint Gregory's Pastoral Care, xcviii Saint Jerome, lxxviii Saint Lucius, Acts
of, xi Saint Oswald, Life and Miracles of, cxliii Saint Ursula, Legend of, xi
Saint, Lives of the, i^ Latin Verse, by Alexander Esseby, cxliv Salisbury, John
of. See Joh^ Sallust, lxxvii, cxx Sanchem, Graal, by Eremita Britannus, xii
Sanctamund, Bishop of Maestricht, lxxvii Saxo Grammaticus, xxxii Scalds,
Account of the, xxxii, xxxiv, xxxvi, 1 Schilters, Thesaurus Antiquitatum
Teutonicarum, lv Schola Salernitana, by Giovanni di Milano, lxxxvii, cxxiii
Scotus, Michael, cxlvi Sedulius, lxxvi. Hymns of, cix Selling, William, cxx
Seneca, xcii, cxix, cxx Shakespeare, William, lvi Sidelas, Marcellus, a
Physician, cxi Sidonius, Appolinaris, lxxv, lxxvi Sig^usson, Soem^nd, the First
Edda, compiled by, lxv Simeon of Durham, cxxvii Siod, Sagan af, or History of
Siod, lvii Sir Bevis, Romance of, xxxvii Sir Guy, Romance of, xxxvii Snorro
Sturleston, Second Edda, compiled by, lxv Solymarium, or a Latin Poem on the
Expedition of the Emperor Conrade against the Saracens, by Gunther, cxlv
Somner, cx Spenser, Edmund, xv, xxxvi, lvii Statius, xcii, cxx, cxxxvii
Stephen, King, Latin Poem on, etc. by Henry of Huntingdon, cxxv Stephen of
Tournay, cxxxvii Stonehenge, Ancient Fictions relating to, xvi, xvii Sturleson,
Snorro, the Second Edda, compiled by, lxv Suetonius, cxviii Suidas, Lexicon of,
translated by Robert Grosthead, cxlvi Summaripa, Georgio, cxxxi Symposius, xcix
T
Tacitus, lxvi, xcii Tale-tellers, or Poetical Historians, Account of, xlvi,
xlvii, lxi Taliessin, Ode in Praise of Mead, by, xlix, lxi Tasso, lxi, cxxxvii
Terence, xcii, cxviii, cxix, cxx Tertullian, lxxvii Thamyris, xxiv Thebaid of
Statius, cxx Theocritus, xcii Theodoric the Second, King of the Ostrogoths,
lxxiv, lxxv Theodore, Archbishop of Canterbury, xciii, xcviii, ci Theodosius
the Younger, lxxiv Thetide de, et de Lyaeo, cxxxv Tor^aeus, xxxiv Tours,
Gregory of. See Gr^gory Tristram a Wales, Tale of, iii Trithemi^s, lv T^ivet,
Nicholas, cxix Troilus and Cresseide, by Chaucer, cxxxi Tully. See Cicero
Turpin's History of Charlemagne, xvii, xviii, xxi, lvii, lix, lxxii Tyssilio,
History of Britain, by, vii
V
Valens, lxxiv Valeriu^, lxxvii Vellida, a German Prophetess, Account of, lxvi
Victorinus, Marius, cxxiv Vincent of Beauvais, lxxvii Vinesauf, Geoffrey de,
cxlv Virgil, x, xcii, cxx, cxliii Voltaire, xviii, cxxxvii Ursula, Saint,
Legend of, xi
W
Wallingford, Abbot of St. Alban's, cxx Walter, Prior of Saint Swithin's,
lxxxiv Walter or Gualter, Archdeacon of Oxford, vii, cxxv Wareham, Archbishop,
cxxxiii Wassenback, Ernest Cassimer, lvi Waterford, Godfrey of. See Godfrey
Wescham, Roger de, cxlvi Wil^rid, Saint, Archbishop of Canterbury, Life of, by
Fridegode, cvii William the Bastard, History of, lviii, cxiv^ cxlvii William
Ru^us, History of the Destruction of the Monastri^s, by, lviii William of
Blois, cxxv^, cxxvii William of Bretagne. See Guillaume l^ Breton William of
Chester, cxxvii William of Malmsbury, viii, xcv, cvii, cxxvii Willibold, xcii
Woden or Odin, Account of, xxiv, xxv, xxvi, xxvii, xxviii, xxxvi, xliii
Wolstan, a Monk of Winchester, c Wonnius, Olaus, xxvii, xxxiii, xxxiv, liii,
lvi Woton, xlix Writing on the Rocks, Account of the Ancient Custom of, xxv
X
Xenocrates, cxi
Z
Zeno, xxvi Zonares, lxxiv Zaid, Mahomet's Secretary, lxxxv^

