TWO TALES.

AN Impossible Thing. A TALE.

LONDON: Printed: And Sold by J. ROBERTS in Warwick Lane. MDCCXX.

AN IMPOSSIBLE THING. A TALE.
TO thee, Dear Dick, this Tale I send,
Both as a Critic and a Friend.
I tell it with some Variation
(Not altogether a Translation)
From La Fontaine; an Author, Dick,
Whose Muse would touch thee to the quick.
The Subject is of that same kind
To which thy Heart seems most inclined:
How Verse may alter it, God knows,
Thou love it well, I Am sure, in Prose,
So, without Preface, or Pretense,
To hold thee longer in Suspense,
I shall proceed, as I am able,
To the Recital of my Fable.
A Goblin of the merry Kind,
More black of Hue, than cursed of Mind,
To help a Lover in Distress,
Contrived a Charm with such Success;
That in short Space the cruel Dame
Relented, and returned his Flame.
The Dargain made betwixt 'em both,
Was bound by Honor and by Oath:
The Lover laid down his Salvation,
And Satan staked his Reputation.
The Latter promised on his Part
(To serve his Friend and show his Art,)
That Madam should by twelve a Clock,
Though hitherto as hard as Rock,
Become as gentle as a Glove,
And kiss and coo like any Dove.
In short, the Woman should be his,
That is, upon Condition -- Viz;
That He, the Lover, after tasting
What one would wish were everlasting;
Should, in Return for such Enjoyment,
Supply the Fiend with fresh Employment:
That Is all, quoth Pug; my poor Request
Is, only never to have Rest;
You thought, it is like, with Reason too,
That I should have been served, not You:
But what? upon my Friend impose!
No -- though a Devil, none of those.
Your Business then, pray understand me,
Is nothing more but to Command me.
Of one thing only let me warn ye,
Which somewhat nearly may concern ye:
As soon as ever one Work is done,
Strait name a new one; and so on;
Let each to other quick succeed,
Or else -- you know how it is agreed --
For if through any Hums or Haws
There haps an intervening Pause,
In which, for Want of fresh Commands,
Your Slave obsequious, Idle stands,
Nor Soul nor Body ever more
Shall serve the Nymph whom you adore;
But both be laid at Satan's Feet,
To be disposed as he thinks meet.
At once the Lover all approves:
For who can hesitate that loves?
And thus he argues in his Thought:
Why, after all, I venture naught;
What Mystery is in Commanding?
Does that require Much Understanding?
Indeed, were my Part to Obey,
He Would go the better of the Lay:
But he must do what I think fit --
Pshaw, pshaw, young Beelzebub is bit.
Thus pleased in Mind, he calls a Chair;
Adjusts, and combs, and courts the Fair:
The Spell takes Place, and all goes right,
And happy he, employs the Night
In sweet Embraces, balmy Kisses;
And riots in the Bliss of Blisses.
O Joy, cried he, that have no Equal!
But hold -- no Raptures -- mark the Sequel.
For now, when near the Morning's Dawn,
The Youth began as 'twere to yawn;
His Eyes a silky Slumber seized,
Or would have done, if Pug had pleased:
But that officious Demon, near,
Now buzzed for Business in his Ear;
In Haste, he names a thousand Things:
The Goblin plys his wicker Wings,
And in a Trice returns to ask
Another and another Task.
Now, Palaces are built and Towers,
The Work of Ages in few Hours.
Then, Storms are in an Instant raised,
Which the next Moment are appeased.
Now Showers of Gold and Gems are rained,
As if each India had been drained:
And He, in one astonished View,
Sees both Golconda and Peru.
These Things, and stranger Things than these,
Were done with equal Speed and Ease.
And now to Rome poor Pug he will send:
And Pug soon reached his Journey's End.
And soon returned with such a Pack
Of Bulls and Pardons at his Back,
That now, the Squire (who had some Hope
In holy Water and the Pope,)
Was out of Heart, and at a Stand
What next to wish, and what command;
Invention flags, his Brain grows muddy,
And black Despair succeeds brown Study.
In this Distress the woeful Youth
Acquaints the Nymph with all the Truth,
Begging her Counsel, for whose Sake
Both Soul and Body were at Stake.
And is this all? replys the Fair;
Let me alone to cure this Care.
When next your Demon shall appear,
Pray give him -- look, what I hold here.
And bid him labor, soon or late,
To lay these Ringlets lank and strait.
Then, something scarcely to be seen,
Her Finger and her Thumb between
She held, and sweetly smiling, cried,
Your Goblin's Skill shall now be tried.
She said; and gave -- what shall I call
That Thing so shining, crisp and small,
Which round his Finger strove to twine?
A Tendril of the Cyprian Vine?
Or Sprig from Cytherea's Grove;
Shade of the Labyrinth of Love!
With Awe, he now takes from her Hand
That Fleece-like Flower of fairy Land:
Less precious, whilom, was the Fleece
Which drew the Argonauts from Greece;
Or that, which modern Ages see
The Spur and Prize of Chivalry,
Whose Curls of kindred Texture, grace
Heroes and Kings of Spanish Race.
The Spark prepared, and Pug at Hand,
He issues, thus, his strict Command.
This Line, thus Curve and thus Orbicular,
Render direct, and perpendicular;
But so direct, that in no sort
It ever may in Rings retort.
See me no more 'till this be done:
Hence, to thy Task -- avaunt, be gone.
Away the Fiend like Lightning flys,
And all his Wit to Work applys:
Anvils and Presses he employs,
And dins whole Hell with hamm'ring Noise.
In vain: he to no Terms can bring
One Twire of that reluctant Thing;
The elastic Fiber mocks his Pains,
And it is first spiral Form retains.
New Stratagems the Sprite co^ves,
And down the Depths of Sea he dives:
This Sprunt its Pertness sure will lose
When laid (said he) to soak in Ooze.
Poor foolish Fiend! he little knew
Whence Venus and her Garden grew.
Old Ocean, with paternal Waves
The Child of his own Bed receives;
Which often as dipped new Force exerts,
And in more vigorous Curls reverts.
So, when to Earth, Alcides flung
The huge Anteus, whence he sprung,
From every Fall fresh Strength he gained,
And with new Life the Fight maintained.
The bafled Goslin grows perplexed,
Nor knows what Slight to practice next:
The more he trys, the more he fails;
Nor Charm, nor Art, nor Force avails.
But all concur his Shame to show,
And more exasperate the Foe.
And now he pensive turns and sad,
And looks like melancholic mad.
He rolls his Eyes now off, now on
That wonderful Phenomenon.
Sometimes he twists and twirls it round,
Then, pausing, meditates profound:
No End he sees of his Surprise,
Nor what it should be can devise:
For never yet was Wool or Feather,
That could stand buff against all Weather;
And unrelax'd like this, resist
Both Wind and Rain, and Snow and Mist.
What Stuff, or whence, or how 'twas made,
What Spinster Witch could spin such Thread,
He nothing knew; but to his Cost
Knew all his Fame and Labor lost.
Subdued, abashed, he gave it over;
It Is said, he blushed; it is sure, he swore
Not all the Wiles that Hell could hatch
Could conquer that SUPERB MUSTACH.
Defeated thus, thus discontent,
Back to the Man the Demon went:
I grant, quoth he, our Contract null,
And give you a Discharge in full.
But tell me now, in Name of Wonder,
(Since I so heartily knock under,)
What is this Thing? Where could it grow?
Pray take it -- it is in Statu quo.
Much Good may't do you; for my Part,
I wash my Hands often from my Heart.
In Truth, Sir Goblin or Sir Fairy,
Replys the Lad, you're too soon weary.
What, leave this trifling Task undone!
And think Thou this the only one?
Alas! were this subdued, thou would find
Millions of more such still behind,
Which might employ, even to Eternity,
Both you and all your whole Fraternity.
THE PEASANT in Search of his HEIFER. A TALE, After M. De la Fontaine.
IT so befell: a silly Swain
Had sought his Heifer long in vain;
For wanton she had frisking strayed,
And left the Lawn, to seek the Shade.
Around the Plain he rolls his Eyes,
Then, to the Wood, in Haste he hies;
Where, singling out the fairest Tree,
He climbs, in Hopes to hear or see.
Anon, there chanced that Way to pass
A jolly Lad and buxom Lass:
The Place was apt, the Pastime pleasant;
Occasion with her Forelock present:
The Girl agog, the Gallant ready;
So lightly down he lays my Lady.
But so she turned, or so was said,
That she some certain Charms displayed,
Which with such Wonder struck his Sight,
(With Wonder, much; more, with Delight)
That loud he cried in Rapture, What!
What see I, Gods! What see I not!
But nothing named; from whence it is guessed,
'Twas more than well could be expressed.
The Clown aloft, who lent an Ear,
Strait stopped him short in mid Career:
And louder cried, Ho! honest Friend,
That of thy seeing see no End;
Do see the Heifer that I seek?
If do, pray be so kind to speak.
FINIS.

