OUTLINES OF THE GLOBE.

VOL. III.

THE VIEW OF INDIA EXTRA GANGEM, CHINA, AND JAPAN.

BY THOMAS PENNANT, ESQUIRE

VOL. III.

LONDON: Printed by Luke Hansard, Great Turnstile, Lincoln's End Fields; AND
SOLD BY JOHN WHITE, HORACE'S HEAD, FLEET STREET.

M.DCCC.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE sad duty of publishing the posthumous works of a revered Parent having
devolved on me, I now present the Public with two volumes of the continuation
of the "OUTLINES OF THE GLOBE," which comprehend a view of the interesting
countries of China, Japan, New Holland, and the Archipelago of the Indian Ocean.

As an editor, my chief care has been to transcribe with accuracy from the
original manuscript. The finishing touch of the master may be wanting; but the
hand, alas! which gave the glowing tint is now cold, and who shall dare to
usurp the pencil! Some trifling additions, distinguished by an initial, have
been made by myself; and to John Latham, Esquire, I am indebted for an
augmentation to the catalogue of Birds of China, and of New Holland. An
objection may be made by some, that no plates adorn these volumes --
engravings, except of novel objects, or really illustrative, and such,
notwithstanding much exertion, it was not my good fortune to procure, tend
little to the value of a work of science. Two maps, presumed more requisite,
have been constructed from the best materials.

The biography of the valued Author of the following sheets, having been given
by himself in his "Literary Life," to the commencement of the year 1793, little
remains for me to add. To that period his health and felicity had experienced
little interruption; the illness of an amiable daughter then began to embitter
his days, and, after the most unremitting attention that parental fondness
could dictate, he felt the cruel pang of separation, on the first of May 1794;
this shock his spirits never completely recovered. In the April of the ensuing
year, the patella of the knee snapped, while descending a flight of steps, an
accident which confined him long to his room, yet, notwithstanding his advanced
age, and the bones never again reuniting, he recovered sufficiently not only to
walk without difficulty, but to pursue his usual exercise on horseback.

The year 1796 gave to the world his "Account of the parishes of Whitford and
Holywell." The infirmities of nature now began to show themselves more
evidently. The loss of a friend and neighbor, the worthy Sir Roger Mostyn, the
subsequent distractions of the county of Flint by jarring politics, the
melancholy situation of public affairs, the progress of Gallic barbarism, which
threatened to overturn all institutions social and sacred, operated too
forcibly on a mind of the acutest feeling and most exquisite sensibility.
Mental agitation affected the corporeal system; a difficulty of breathing, a
cough, and other pulmonary affections induced him to apply for medical aid, and
he received from his friend Dr. Haygarth, then resident at Chester, all the
assistance that art could give. Considerable discharges of blood from the nose
increased the alarming symptoms; still the energy of his mind sustained itself;
he continued his literary pursuits, and employed his leisure hours, during the
greatest part of 1797, in preparing for the press, and rendering as perfect as
possible, his interesting "VIEW OF HINDOOSTAN," which was published early in
the following year. OEdematous swellings in the legs announced the fatal cause
of his disease; but to expatiate more minutely on the sad catalogue of human
evils might be irksome; suffice it then to say, that he bore their trial with
fortitude and resignation; a natural strength of constitution, aided by a life
of uniform temperance, enabled him long to struggle against infirmity. The
progress of the disorder becoming more rapid, toward the close of October he
collected his nearest relatives, and received with them the mysterious seal of
our Redemption; conscious of his approaching end, his eye beamed with hope,
tempered by the most serene and dignified resignation; combining charity with
devotion, he observed, that the ceremony would be incomplete indeed, were it
not accompanied by an act of beneficence to the poor. This was the last duty of
religion he performed; his life had been a preparation for the aweful
conclusion. Though soon after reduced to the inability of moving, and suffering
much, he continued to share the conversation of his friends and relations,
except during the extreme pressure of pain, or when opiates, employed to
procure a disturbed sleep, or relieve the body from a few pangs, produced their
powerful effect, and sacrificed the reasoning powers and the nobler faculties
of the soul. On the 16th of December 1798, the powers of nature were exhausted,
and the venerated author of my being expired without a groan!

The pen of a son may not be calculated to record the character of an
affectionate and beloved parent; the bias of natural affection may operate too
forcibly, yet the silence of the person most intimately acquainted with the
various virtues of Thomas Pennant, would justly draw down the reproach of
ingratitude.

His religious principles were pure and fervent, yet exempt from bigotry;
though firmly attached to the established church, he, by his writings and
conduct, conciliated the esteem of those of a different persuasion. A steady
friend to our excellent constitution, he ever labored to preserve it entire;
this induced him to petition for the reform of some abuses during the
administration of Lord North, at a period when the influence of the crown was
supposed to have exceeded its due bounds; this brought him forward in later
times, with additional energy, to resist the democratic spirit, which menaced
tenfold evils. The duties of a magistrate he exercised with candor, with a
temperate yet zealous warmth to protect the oppressed. His benevolence to the
poor was unbounded, his repeated exertions to relieve the wants of a populous
neighborhood, by the importation of corn, in times of scarcity, were truly
munificent. Temperate in diet, he enjoyed the fruits of abstinence, and, until
a few years previous to his decease, possessed an unusual share of health and
vigor. His conversation was lively, replete with instruction, and brilliant
with sallies of true humor; yet too great sensiblity at times lowered his
natural flow of spirits, and occasioned severe dejection.

Of his literary character the public is the impartial judge, and that public
not only in this, but in foreign countries has fixed on it the stamp of
approbation. Blessed with a memory the most retentive, his powers of
composition were rapid; his works were generally printed, as they flowed from
the pen, with little or no correction, hence, some inaccuracies may be
expected, but their numbers are trifling.

Such, candid Reader! is the true but imperfect sketch of the character of a
man who to superior talents united the utmost goodness of heart.

Accept, sainted spirit! this unavailing tribute of filial duty! May the
example of thy virtues stimulate my exertions! May my latter end resemble thine!

DAVID PENNANT.
DOWNING, April 12, 1800.
ITINERARY.
KINGDOM of Aracan Page 1 River ibid. Kingdom of Ava Page 5 River Ava Page 6
Lake of Chiamay ibid. Ava City Page 7 Lundsey Page 8 Chedubah Isle ibid. Cape
Negrais Page 9 Pegu ibid. Persaim River Page 10 Isle of Negrais or Siriam ibid.
River of Pegu Page 12 City ibid. Sitang River Page 15 Martaban ibid. Isle of
Junkseilon ibid. Lower Siam Page 16 Town of Mergui ibid. Archipelago of Mergui
Page 17 Hasting's Bay ibid. Islands of Andaman Page 18 Lesser Andaman Page 20
Carn Nicobar ibid. Nicobar Islands ibid. Isle of Junkseilon Page 22 Kingdom of
Quedah Page 23 Streights of Malacca ibid. Pulo Pera Page 24 Pulo Aru ibid.
Malacca City ibid. Kingdom of Johore Page 28 Streights of Sincapour ibid. Cape
Romano Page 29 Pulo Timon ibid. Pahang Page 30 Trangano Page 31 Ridang Isles
ibid. Patani Page 32 Gulf of Siam ibid. Piperi ibid. Upper Siam Page 41
Sangora ibid. Ligore ibid. River Meinam Page 42 City of Juthia Page 43 River of
Liant Page 48 Ponteamas Page 49 Cambodia Page 52 Cattigara ibid. Notium
Promontorium Page 53 City of Cambodia Page 54 Rachmi Page 55 Pulo Condor ibid.
Ciampa Page 59
COCHIN CHINA.
Port of Foy-foe Page 64 Whay Page 68 The Paracels Page 71 Bay of Tonquin Page
72 River of Tonquin Page 75 City of Cachao Page 77
CHINA.
Island of Hainan Page 124 Island of Sanciam Page 125 Macao City ibid. Typa
Harbor Page 126 Bocca Tigris ibid. Canton City Page 127 River of Canton Page
129 Water passage to Peking Page 133 Imperial Canal ibid. City of Xaochew Page
136 Five Horses Heads Page 137 City of Nanhang ibid. Province of Kyang-si ibid.
Vannunga Page 138 Pekkinsa ibid. Nanchang Page 139 The Kyang River ibid.
Nantchang-foo ibid. Lake Poyang ibid. Hoo-tchoo ibid. King-te-ching Page 140
Tong-lyu and Ufun ibid. Nanquin ibid. Yang-choo Page 142 Kajutsui Page 143
Whay-ngan ibid. River Whangho ibid. Xantsui Page 144 Jax Hinno ibid. Lintsin
choo Page 145 Te-choo ibid. Single, and Tiencienwey ibid. Joerwoe Page 146
Tongtchoo-foo ibid. Peking ibid. Ladrone Isles Page 147 Province of Foo-tchien
ibid. Amwy Page 148 Isle of Formosa Page 149 Port of Ta-wan Page 150 Isles of
Pong-ho Page 153 Province of Tche-Tchiang Page 153 Isle of Chewsan Page 154
Ning-po or Limpo ibid. Hang-tchoo Page 156 Si-hu Lake ibid. Isle of Tsong-ming
Page 158 River Whang-ho Page 159 Yellow Sea ibid. Province of Shang-tong ibid.
Ten-choo-foo ibid. Province of Pe-che-li Page 160 Tian-sin, Port of Peking Page
160 Liau-tong Page 162 Korea Page 165 Deserts of Shamo Page 175 Hierkin Page
176 Cashgur ibid. Hoton ibid. Peym ibid. Lop Page 177 Camul ibid. Karakarin
ibid. Haltar-Gobi Page 179 Tanguth ibid. River Amur Page 183 Fort Albusin Page
184 Aigun Page 185 Isle of Sagalin Page 186
JAPAN.
Tatpin Isles Page 209 Isles of Liquejo ibid. Tanaassima Island Page 211 Gold
and Silver Isles Page 244 Nipon Page 247 Sikokf ibid. Awad ibid. Kuisui ibid.
Isle of Blacks Page 261 Miaco Page 267 Jedo Page 268 Korea Page 269 Isle of
Matmay Page 270 Land of Jeso ibid. Acquies Page 274 Kuril Isles Page 277 Staten
Land ibid. Company Land ibid. De Vries's Straight Page 278
ERRATA.
Page 15. line 19. for course read coast. Page 59. -- 26. for conntry read
country. Page 62. -- 12. for ab ae read abate. Page 64. -- 3. for course read
coarse. Page 116. -- 16. for three read these. Page 168. -- 4. for it read
them. Page 168. -- 24. for of read in. Page 189. -- 2. for are read were. Page
272. -- 17. for gives read give.
MAP for MR. PENNANT'S OUTLINES of the GLOBE. Vol. III. 1800.
map

INDIA EXTRA GANGEM.
I NOW enter on that portion of India which is distinguished by the name of
India beyond the Ganges. The distinction is comparatively modern, being known
to the ancients in an imperfect manner. Here and there are scattered a few
names, which they could only have collected from the Indian navigators; but I
shall mention in course any other lights which I discover they might have
received.

ADJOINING to Chittigong is the kingdom of Aracan, KINGDOM OF ARACAN.
which extends along the bay of Bengal about two hundred miles in a
south-eastern direction. According to Mr. Rennel's map, a chain of mountains,
beginning in the southern part of Chittigong skirts the sea the whole length of
this kingdom, as well as that of Ava, to within a few leagues of Cape Negrais.
The whole tract is infested to a very great degree with elephants and beasts of
prey. The topography of this country is very obscure. The mouth of the river
Aracan, the Tocosannae of Ptolemy, RIVER.
is placed in Lat. 20 12. M. D'Anville gives its whole course. Mr. Rennel, more
cautious, and, perhaps, conscious of the uncertainty, only delineates a small
part, ARACAN.
or from the capital, Aracan, to the sea. From Aracan, as high as Lat. 26, with
the exception of a small portion between Malaac and Munnypour, where it is
traversed by the great communication from Ava to the northern parts of Bengal,
it is marked with a dotted line; from that point the river is distinguished by
a certain course, which is continued northward, in the kingdom of Thibet, as
high as Lat. 30 10. All the great tract it passes through is level, which makes
it liable to annual inundations, from the same causes as affect the Bengal and
other of the Indian plains. The tides which run up this river are very high;
they come in with a great bore, and rise from fifteen to twenty feet, according
to the influence of the moon.

THERE is six fathom water, according to Mr. Ovington's account, at the
entrance of the river, and twenty farther up, so that it forms a noble harbor.
From the mouth to the capital is about fifty miles; most of the way deliciously
bounded by woods or plantations, animated by the gambols of the monkey tribe,
or the gay flights of numbers of peacocks. The city of Aracan is seated most
singularly, in a valley surrounded with vast and craggy mountains. These are
assisted by art, so as to prove the most substantial fortifications. The
entrances are cut through the solid rock, as are the gates of the city. The
precipitous face of the mountains serves for walls; besides these, it has a
citadel, and other artificial defenses. The city is said to be fifteen miles in
circumference, and to contain a hundred and sixty thousand inhabitants. The
regal palace is very magnificent, and highly adorned and enriched with works of
massive gold.

IN my Outlines of the Globe, vol. ii. p. 372.
account of Chittigong, in the preceding volume, I have related the share this
kingdom took in the affairs of Hindoostan, by reason of the support it gave the
Portuguese pirates. I shall now take notice of a very remarkable event which
befell Aracan, the result of the misfortunes of Sultan Sujah, OF SULTAN SULJAH.
the second son of the emperor Shah Jehan, and the unfortunate brother of that
successful hypocrite Aurengzebe. After Sujah had long made head against the
usurper, he was at length obliged to retire from his fastness near Monghier to
Dacca, and from thence to the kingdom of Aracan. He had previously sent his son
to the king of the country, to implore his protection. This was immediately
promised, and the unhappy prince embarked with his whole family on board the
vessels of the Portuguese pirates, settled in the mouths of the Ganges,
intending to profit of the favor of the infidel monarch, till he could procure
a ship to convey him to the holy city of Mecca. From thence he intended to go
to the courts of Turkey or Persia, in hopes of an asylum in one or other of the
dominions of those mighty potentates. Sujah is said soon to have discovered the
perfidy of his royal host, who had entered into a treaty with the General of
Aurengzebe, to deliver into his hands, for a sum of money, the fugitive sultan.
This came to the ears of that prince, who rashly determined on revenge. He
entered into a conspiracy against the Aracan monarch, gained over a certain
number of Mahometans resident in the country, and with those, and the few who
were left of his train, resolved to force his way into the palace, to kill the
king, and cause himself to be proclaimed sovereign. All this might have been
executed, ARACAN.
had not the design been discovered. The unhappy Sujah attempted to escape
toward Pegu; he was soon overtaken. His son, sultan Banque, defended himself
with a courage worthy of his birth, till overpowered with numbers, and fainting
under his wounds, he was seized, and with his two little brothers, his sisters,
and his mother, carried away. As to Sujah, he, with one woman, an eunuch, and
two other persons, in ascending a mountain, was knocked down with a stone by
his pursuers. The eunuch bound up his wounded head with a turban, and they both
escaped into the woods. Many relations were spread respecting this event. In
general he was supposed to have died either famished with hunger, or fallen a
prey to wild beasts. Mr. Dalrymple had picked up a story, that Sujah escaped to
Soolo, an isle between that of Borneo and Magindanao, where he long led an
eremitical life; that he died there, and that a tomb was erected over his
grave, to this day an object of veneration with the Mahometans.

THE tragical relation does not end here. Sultan Banque, and other fugitives
who were brought back, were at first treated with a tolerable degree of lenity;
the king even took to wife one of Sujah's daughters. This did not prevent
Banque and his companions from entering into another conspiracy, which was
detected. The king of Aracan determined to root out this illfated family; he
caused the heads of the men to be cut off with blunt axes, the women to be
immured, and starved to death; the lady alone whom he had honored with his bed
was saved.

THE great quantity of gold and diamonds which had been brought into the
country by Sujah, proved the cause of dreadful wars between the two sons of the
king of Aracan, who succeeded him in 1690; they quarrelled about the division
of the treasure, and never ceased from contesting the prize till both the
competitors were destroyed. Many of the diamonds (as is supposed) were
afterward sold to the Dutch, who happened to touch at Aracan, at very low
prices, by reason of the ignorance of the possessors.

THE next kingdom is that of Ava. KINGDOM OF AVA.
I shall comprehend in it three; that of Ava proper, Buraghmah, or, as it is
vulgarly called, Burmah, and Pegu. They once formed so many independent states,
governed by their respective monarchs; but are now by conquest consolidated
into one, being subdued by the king of Burmagh. His dominions extend from the
province of Yunan, in China, as far south as the mouths of the Ava, a tract of
eight hundred miles. The standard of Mahomet was never erected in these
kingdoms; all the inhabitants are rank idolaters; their mode of worship and
their rites agree in many points with those of the Hindoos, and they allow the
doctrine of transmigration. Their pagodas, and those of Pegu, very much
resemble in form that of a bell tent. The more northern part is the kingdom of
Burmagh; that of Meckly, tributary to it, forms on our maps a large vacant
space to the west, divided by a vast chain of mountains from Silhet and Tipera.
Roshuan, another void, is to the south of Meckly. The kingdom of Aracan
separates Burmagh, for a considerable extent, from the eastern part of the bay
of Bengal. The coast of Ava succeeds, and runs, washed by the sea, as far as
Cape Negrais, an extent of above two hundred miles.

THE great river Ava takes its rise far beyond the province of Yunan, RIVER AVA.
in China, and, as is supposed, in Thibet. The Chinese call it Hou-kian. I am
uncertain where it becomes navigable, possibly at the last custom-house in the
Chinese dominions; at least we find, that four people of that nation, with some
others, embarked there on a voyage made in the last century down that river. We
have an account of it in vol. vii. 123, of the Universal History. It is
described, even at the custom-house, as a large and rapid river. They were
twenty days in sailing to the city of Ava, and a month more from thence to
Pegu. Below the capital of the kingdom, the vessels which navigate this mighty
river are said to be as large as our biggest ships, without sail, but the
planks have neither peg or nail to fasten them; they seem to be sewed, like the
Arabian vessels, which will be described in vol. of this work.

MR. DALRYMPLE, in p. 112 of his useful Repertory, says, he is assured, that
the river passes through a great lake, not far above the city of Ava. This
lake, in the old maps, such as Speed's, LAKE OF CHIAMAY.
is called Chiamay, and it is supposed that the rivers of Siam, and possibly of
Aracan, Chittigong, and some others, flow out of it. The river is described as
difficult of navigation, by reason of ripplings and overfalls; and its water,
during the inundations, very cold, occasioned by the snowy mountains from
whence it flows.

THE borders of the Ava, after it enters Burmagh, are in some parts flat, in
others hilly, but in none so low as to be overflowed. The neighboring grounds
are replete with saltpetre, and quantities of common salt are procured by
lixiviation from a black earth which abounds in this district. It is now called
the Irabathy. Munchaboo, the royal residence of the king of Burmagh, stands
about twelve miles from the western bank, in Lat. 23 38, a walled town, of a
square form, containing four thousand families.

Ava, the capital of the kingdom of the same name, AVA CITY.
is seated in Lat. 21 48, on the eastern bank of the river, about 38 miles
below Munchaboo. It is a very large city, built of wood, the streets strait,
and planted on each side with trees. The king's palace alone is of stone, but
mean in its architecture. It was in the sixteenth century prodigiously
populous, but was laid waste by the king of Pegu in the most savage manner.
Purchase Vol. ii. 1728.
gives the horrible relation. The jewellers of Europe visited it in the same
century, for the sake of its rich gems. At present Ava is in a most ruinous
state, and does not contain above a thousand families. The kingdom produces
sapphires and rubies of the highest quality. Mention is made of its rich mines
of copper, lead, and silver. Other provinces are rich in gold.

FROM the city the river assumes the same name of Ava, takes a small curvature
from thence toward the west, and the channel becomes full of isles. Near
Pegongmew, a town seated in a sterile sandy country, and which, from the
remains of numerous pagodas, seems formerly to have been a place of importance,
the Ava takes a more southerly course. Between Lat. 20 and 19 north, TEEK WOODS.
the western side is filled with an immense forest of teek trees, which is said
to produce the best timber of any in India; it is floated down the river, and
is a considerable article of commerce. Prone, once enclosed with
fortifications, lies on the left bank, and is one of the principal trading
towns on its course; the environs are extremely fertile.

AT Lundsey, LUNDSEY.
a town seated on the eastern bank, in Latitude 18 30, begins a rich, fat soil,
formed by the mud brought down by the great annual inundations which this river
is subject to, like the Ganges. Lundsey is distant a hundred and eighty miles
from the sea. The Delta of the Ava begins in about Lat. 18, and extends nearly
a hundred and forty miles before it reaches the southern extremity; the base,
or the lower part, facing the sea, is about two hundred miles; all the upper
part of the Delta is clear land; the lower seems filled with wood, and divided
by a number of channels into islands, like the Sunderbund of the Ganges.

Ptolemy calls the river Ava, Sabaracus. That able geographer D'Anville
mistakes it for the Burrampooter, and accordingly we find it under that name in
his maps. The error is venial, for he did not live to the time of our Rennel.

I SHALL now resume the coasts from the borders of Chittigong. COASTS.
The country abounds with timber, and the woods with all sorts of animals for
food, such as buffaloes, deer, and wild hogs. Here and there a few isles are
dispersed along the shore; some in groups, ISLES.
others single, or few together. The isles are St. Martin's, not far above the
mouth of Aracan river; the Oyster islands nearly opposite; and the Bolongo, a
very little to it is south. CHEDUBAH ISLE.
Chedubah, a large island in about Lat. 18 30, is supposed to be the Bazacuta
of Ptolemy, remarkable, says he, for the quantity of shells; he adds, that the
inhabitants were called Agmatae, and that they went naked. The Sada Civitas is
placed on the coast of Ava by M. D'Anville, in Lat. 18. We are little
acquainted with the country, but that able geographer discovers it to have been
a place still known by the name of Sadoa. Near it was the Sadus Fluvius.
Berabonna was another town of Ptolemy's, seated on the same coast, in Lat. 16
30, now called Barabon; and at the extremity of the southern side of Ava is
Cape Negrais, in about Lat. 16, CAPE NEGRAIS.
the ancient Promontorium Temula. From Mr. Baker's survey, in Mr. Dalrymple's
collection, it appears to be lofty, and in part very precipitous. The isle of
Negrais and another, both off the mouth of the river, form within them a noble
harbor, secure from all winds. The English, of late years, wished to six here a
settlement. The country is incredibly fertile in rice, and might have proved a
fine resource to the Coromandel coast, and even to Bengal, in times of
scarcity, exclusive of the advantages to be derived from the harbor in time of
war. As to rice, it is sold here at twelve pagodas a garce; whereas in
Coromandel it is generally above thirty, and sometimes even eighty a garce.

THE kingdom of Pegu begins at this cape; PEGU.
the coast turns then suddenly to the east, and extends above two hundred
miles, inclining, after some way, slightly to the north, as far as the river of
Martaban, the boundary between Pegu and the province of Martaban, which adjoins
to the kingdom of Siam. Pegu is extremely narrow at the part next to Cape
Negrais; but it widens quickly, so as to take in the whole Delta of the Ava,
and stretches north as high as Lat. 19. In the maps the coast of Ava is
comprehended in the kingdom of Pegu. We know so little of these countries, of
their revolutions and contra-revolutions, that we dare not deny our assent to,
or controvert the relations of writers.

THE great branch of the Delta is immediately to the east of Cape Negrais. It
is called the Persaim river, from a town seated about seventy miles from the
sea, on its eastern banks. In 1758 we had a factory on the opposite side. The
channel is very wide and deep, having most of the way six and seven fathoms of
water. On each side are navigable canals, that probably insulate part of the
flat country to the east and to the west. On the eastern part there is an
inland communication from this river quite to that of Pegu, or the Siriam
river, as there is through the Sunderbunds of Bengal. ISLE OF NEGRAIS.
Negrais isle, marshy and wooded, lies just within the entrance; and on the
outside is Diamond isle, small, and surrounded with rocks. Immediately before
the front of the whole Delta are banks of mud or sand, of great extent, formed
by the waters of the Ava depositing their foul load before the mouths of the
several discharges. The Marcura Metropolis of Ptolemy stood in about the middle
of the Delta, and must have had its navigable approach. I do not know that any
of the discharges are at present useful in navigation, like the channels
between the islands of the Sunderbunds, till we reach the entrance of that
which leads to the town of Siriam. This, known by the name of the Siriam,
SIRIAM.
is a branch of the river of Pegu, and contributes to form another Delta. The
town is about thirty miles from the entrance; near it are factories, belonging
to the French, English, and Dutch. Raynal Hist. of Europ. Set. vol. ii. p. 145.
says, that the Armenians carry on a great trade in topazes, sapphires,
amethysts, and rubies. The river was known to Ptolemy by the title of Besynga,
and gave its name to the modern river of Pegu.

THE other exports of Pegu are teek timber, elephants, ivory, EXPORTS.
beeswax, lac, iron, tin, indigo, oil from different woods, oil of earth, or
Naptha, and of fish. Here are mines of gold and silver, but neither of these
are worked. The iron is native, and found in masses of fifteen or twenty pounds
weight, and ready for the manufacturer; also plenty of sulphur and saltpetre,
but the exportation of the last is most strictly prohibited. Rice is cultivated
in great abundance in the low lands of the country, but no attention is paid to
any sort of manufactures, except that of cotton, for home consumption.

I MAY observe, BEES.
that the bees of the torrid zone are the same with the European, there being
only one species producing honey, which is the Apis Mellifica. No attempts are
made, either in India or the hotter parts of Africa, to hive these admirable
and useful insects; they inhabit the hollows of trees, from which their
treasures are taken.

LAC is the production of another insect, a species of Chermes, LAC.
undescribed by Linnaeus. Doctor Roxburgh, a naturalist now rising in
Hindoostan, gives us an account of its operations, in the Philosophical
Transactions Vol. lxxxi. p. 228. tab. vi.
, under the name of Chermes Lacca. This, like the be, forms cells, pentagons,
hexagons, and irregular squares, which, at Samulcotta, in Orixa, the Doctor's
residence, are affixed to the branches of the Mimosa Cinerea, the Mimosa Glauca
of Koenig, and a new species called by the Gentoos, Conda Corinda. The insects
are very small; they first appear issuing out of the cells six-legged and
wingless, and are amazingly active and lively; each cell contains about a
hundred; the eggs they proceed from are lodged in the cells in a deep-red
liquor. These are the females. The males are winged, and are not in proportion
to the females more than one to five thousand, but they are four or five times
their size. The eggs, and the liquor they are lodged in, give a most beautiful
red. Doctor Roxburgh acknowleges, that the subject from which the materials of
the cells is collected is as yet unknown.

LAC is brought over to Europe in three forms; adhering to the sticks, with the
cells and insects; prepared in form of cakes; or in small grains, or seed lac,
which is the insect advanced into a pupa state. This drug was once used in
medicine, in disorders of the gums, proceeding from colds or scorbutic habits;
but the uses are now confined to the making of sealing wax, or for dying.
Gerard P. 1534.
gives a figure of a stick of the tree, and the lac adhering, and supposes it
to be the Luchs of Avicen, the Cancamum of Dioscorides.

Pegu imports from Bengal great quantities of Indian goods, IMPORTS.
and some European, especially hats. The coco palm does not grow in Pegu, the
nut is therefore a considerable import. Dampier shipped eleven thousand, and
five or six hundred pounds weight of sugar, as presents for the king.

THE river of Pegu arises in the province of Yunan, RIVER OF PEGU.
in China, passes through the upper part of the kingdom of Siam, and forces its
way through a great chain of mountains in about Lat. 20 32, which run from
north to east, dividing Siam from Pegu; here it assumes the name of that
kingdom. CITY.
The capital city stands on the eastern bank, in about Lat. 18 8. In its
prosperity it consisted of two parts, the old and the new; the last was the
royal residence, and completed about the year 1567, by Mandaragri, the second
Burmagh king. A tyrant monarch arose, who oppressed his subjects to such a
degree, as to encourage the neighboring princes to invade his dominions, and in
1596, he was besieged by them in his capital. The Portuguese, in conjunction
with certain Turks, caused the siege to be raised, but out of a hundred and
fifty thousand inhabitants, only thirty thousand were left, all the others
perished, either by the sword or famine; it had at that time three thousand
cannon for its defense, of which one thousand were brass. The kings of Aracan
and Tangu took advantage of his distress, the city was again besieged,
surrendered to the latter, and the unfortunate monarch, and his whole family,
put to death by order of his own sister, queen to the victorious king; the
place was foon deserted, and the seat of empire transferred to Ava. The city of
Pegu was of vast size, a regular square, with four grand streets leading to
four gates, and being seated on a plain, a person at the center could see them
all at once, though the city was a mile each way. The houses were built with
bamboo; it was surrounded with walls, and a deep wet ditch, stocked with
crocodiles, CROCODILES.
to prevent people attempting to get in or out of the city by swimming or
wading.

THE bore, or head wave of the tide, BORE, OR HEAD WAVE.
which runs up this river is of amazing violence and rapidity; people who have
the misfortune of being shipwrecked on the banks near the shore, at low water
or ebb of tide, are obliged to seek the land with all possible speed, for fear
lest they should be swept away. On its entering the channels and the mouths of
rivers, the noise is most tremendous. The bore is said to be sixteen feet high;
the barks which run up the Pegu river, are carried with the rapidity of an
arrow out of a bow. If they cannot finish their voyage in a tide, they anchor
on some of the numerous sand banks with which the river is filled. The
expansion of the tide on those elevated parts lessens the danger; as soon as
the barks begin to be lifted up, they prepare for their voyage. At a certain
time the mariners loosen their anchors, and are carried on as I describe. If
they, or even the largest ships, lay in the channel, they would certainly be
overset, and the crew and the cargo at once overwhelmed in the wave; for this
reason, large ships seldom venture to navigate this river, but discharge their
lading at Siriam, from whence it was wont to be conveyed to Pegu in barks.

THE Portuguese very soon got considerable interest in this country, but by
their profligate conduct were expelled by the reigning monarch. SYLVEIRA, HIS
SAD FATE.
One Thomas Sylveira had by his valor done considerable service to the king in
the Siamese wars; he became a prime favorite, had his state elephant and
body-guard allowed; till one day passing through the streets, and hearing the
mirth of nuptial merriment in a burgher's house, stopped at the door, and
understanding that the bride was a virgin of uncommon beauty, requested a sight
of her; the bridegroom, thinking it an extraordinary honor, brought her to the
side of Sylveira's elephant; the russian caused her to be seized, and carried
to his house. The unhappy bridegroom, unable to sustain his loss, cut his
throat; the relations rent their clothes, and ran through the streets,
appealing to their gods and monarch for revenge. The king heard the complaint,
caused Sylveira to be seized, and to be dragged at the foot of an elephant
through the streets till neither skin or flesh were left on his bones, and all
the Portuguese in Pegu, except the few who could escape by flight, were
instantly massacred.

THE last great mouth of the Pegu river is the Sitang; SITANG RIVER.
it divides the kingdom of Pegu from the province of Martaban. MARTABAN.
The city of that name was for some time a royal residence, and had once been
the capital of an independent monarchy, but was attacked and taken by the king
of Ava, who murdered the sovereign, massacred the inhabitants, and reduced the
place to ashes. After this, Hamilton Account of the East Indies, vol. ii. p. 63.
says, that the conqueror sunk large vessels laden with stones at the mouth of
the port, which was once a fine harbor, so that at present only small ships can
enter. It had formerly been the most flourishing commercial town of the East,
and still retains its potteries and manufactures, jars glazed with lead ore,
large enough to contain two hogsheads. Hamilton also mentions its fisheries,
and adds, that its dried mullets exceed in delicacy all fish of the kind.

FROM the mouth of the Martaban harbor, the course runs due south, as far as
the isle of Junkseilon, ISLE OF JUNKSEILON.
an extent of above five hundred miles. The coast of Martaban takes in about a
hundred and forty of the computation; the currents along the shore are most
swift and violent; the country bordering on the sea little known, and very
barbarous. It is skirted with small isles, and is full of danger.

THE natives of the kingdom of Pegu, NATIVES OF PEGU.
resemble the Malays in appearance and disposition, but are more industrious.
Their masters, the Buraghmahs, are liker to the Arabs in their features, and of
a darker complexion than the Peguers; they are much addicted to commerce, and
so numerous, even in Pegu, as to exceed the natives as 100 to 1. They tattow
themselves, and by rubbing in gunpowder, the marks become permanent: the men
are stout made; they paint their thighs in graceful flourishes.

THE lower Siam, LOWER SIAM.
part of the great kingdom of Siam, begins in Lat. 14 50. TOWN OF MERGUI.
The town of Mergui stands on an island in the mouth of the river Tenasserim,
in Lat. 12 12; it was once a most flourishing emporium, till it was, by the
tyranny of the government, almost totally deserted, and the whole neighborhood
became the habitation of wild beasts. Mergui was, at the close of the last
century, much frequented by the English free merchants; but they were recalled
by the East India company. They likewise had a fort here, now in ruins. During
the inundations, there is a passage from Mergui to Juthia, or the capital of
Siam, which may at that season be performed the greatest part of the way on
rafts in three weeks, but in the dry season the passage takes twice the time.
The river runs several leagues due east, and after it has passed the city of
Tenasserim, turns to the north, and keeps for a vast length of way toward its
origin, which is said to be in China. The river, and the town of Mergui, were
the Daona of Ptolemy, and the city of Tenasserim the Berobe.

A GREAT chain of mountains divides the kingdom of Siam in two; it begins to
the east of Tenasserim, and pointing north passes through the kingdom of Ava,
continues its course through China, and probably unites with those of Thibet
and even Tartary.

Mergui stands opposite to the center of the Archipelago of the same name, a
most numerous group of isles, ARCHIPELAGO OF MERGUI.
beginning in about Lat. 13 13, and reaching as low as Lat. 10 15, and in
length stretching along the coast a hundred and thirty miles from north to
south, and from thirty to fifteen miles distant from the continent: the channel
has all the way good soundings, good anchorage, and regular tides, which on the
springs rise to twelve feet. Captain Thomas Forest, in 1783, took a most
accurate survey of these islands, and proved the advantage of a knowledge of the
channel between them and the main land. At p. p. i. ii. of his preface, he
shows how our Indiamen may, in their way to Europe, save the hazard of being
embayed and losing their passage, by taking this route, and by getting round
Atcheen head in Sumatra, proceed to Europe.

ALL the isles are mountanous, and may be seen in clear weather at the distance
of fourteen or fifteen leagues, and most of them finely wooded: many of the
trees are very lofty; among them is the Poon tree, or Uvaria Altissima, so
useful for masts, and the Coco palm, of such universal use in all parts of
India. In Pegu, the nut is esteemed a necessary of life, nearly as much as rice.

THE islands are of various sizes and forms, but generally very small; many
exactly of the shape of a bee-hive, and clothed with woods; a few are very
rocky, and so rudely broken, as to seem flung up by a mighty convulsion; such
are the rocks called the Cupelo. The largest isles are St. Mathews, St.
Susannas, and Sullivans, or the Domel. Among them are some very good harbors,
particularly Hastings Bay, in the isle of St. Matthew. HASTINGS BAY.
Mr. Forest proposed a settlement to be formed of the natives of Hindoostan,
on some of the islands, in order to profit by the rich commerce of Pegu. He
says, slate and marble are found here, and that there is plenty of coral to
burn into lime. He adds, Swallow, i. e. a sort of Actinia, in great request in
China as a delicacy, and also the edible birds nests.

ABOUT a hundred and fifty leagues to the west of the most eastern part of the
Archipelago of Mergui, are the greater and lesser islands of Andaman. ISLANDS
OF ANDAMAN.
Ptolemy calls the first, Insulae Bonae Fortunae, perhaps, says M. D'Anville,
because navigators might exult at escaping from shores, infamous for being
inhabited by a barbarous Anthropophagi. The ancient name of the lesser Andaman
was Maniole. All the islands, even as far as the group off the west end of
Sumatra, labored under the same scandal.

THE great Andaman is about a hundred and eight miles long, and extends from
north to south between Lat. 13 53, and 12 16; it is nearly of the same breadth,
or between thirty and forty miles. The mountains rise rude and lofty; that
called the Saddle-back, is seen twenty-two leagues distance at sea. By Captain
Wragg's view, there appears a considerable bay on the western side, with a fine
river running into the southern part: this is the island which Marco Polo calls
Angania, and says, that the inhabitants live like wild beasts on fruits, and
also human flesh; and that they have heads and teeth like dogs, but that their
island abounds with fruits and all sorts of perfumes. The Bramins say that
these isles are inhabited by devils incarnate, animated by the souls of impious
men. In respect to the teeth of the inhabitants, it may be in some measure
true, for in many parts of the Eastern world, the natives are used to file
their teeth into the form of those of the canine species.

Frederic Caesar, a traveller of authority Purchase, ii. 1710.
, sailed by these islands about the year 1564; he made the same report of their
barbarity, and adds, that they refuse all commerce with strangers, and have
small barks with which they attack and take any vessels they can master, and
kill and eat the prisoners. Caesar met with two of their barks, having on board
nuts and fruit; they refused money, and were prevaled on to exchange some of
their fruits for old rags, but could not be induced by any means to come on
board.

Hamilton Vol. ii. 66.
speaks of them as a fearless people; that they will swim off to any boat which
approaches their island, and attack it with their wooden weapons in defiance of
numbers, of our musquetry, and of the missive and defensive weapons of iron and
steel. They annually make an excursion in their preos or little barks to their
neighbors of the Nicobar isles, and kill and take prisoners all they can. The
Nicobarians are a quiet people, but once they took courage, and collecting
their force, gave battle, and totally defeated their barbarous enemies. The
same writer, from the report of a native who had been taken prisoner when young
by some Nicobarians, and was converted to Mahometanism, made frequent voyages
to his native islands, and often returned with four or five hundred weight of
quicksilver, with which he said they abounded.

THE whole of the greater Andaman is skirted with small islands. Mr. Dalrymple
makes mention of a cluster inhabited by men most savage in their appearance,
quite black, and with woolly hair like the African Caffres; their noses not so
flat, for in feature they resemble the Malays; they go naked, have canoes, and
use one end of their paddle as a bow to shoot with.

AT a great distance from the eastern side are the Barren Isle, and the isle of
Narcondra, a vast mountain rising out of the sea, a landmark from which ships
take their departure.

ABOUT twelve leagues due south from the greater, LESSER ANDAMAN.
is the lesser Andaman, in length twenty-six miles, a place known only by name.

Carn Nicobar, CARN NICOBAR. BARUSSAE, INS. ANTHROPOPH.
is a flat island a hundred miles to the south of the lesser Andaman, nearly
five miles broad, and very fertile in all the tropical fruits, rich in grass,
and has plenty of cattle and hogs. This island furnishes Pegu with abundance of
coco nuts, which are carried there by the English, French, and Portuguese. The
Nicobar isles extend, NICOBAR ISLANDS.
at no great distances from each other, to the south, SINDAE, INS. ANTHROPOPH.
with an inclination to the east. The middle group consists of fine champaign
land; and is called the Sombrera, from the resemblance of a hill on one of them
to a sombrera or umbrella. Carn Nicobar, lies in Lat. 9 10, the southern point
of the greatest Nicobar, the more southern of the series, is in Lat. 6 51; this
and the adjacent isles are mountanous. This group was called by Ptolemy,
Insulae Sindae, and the Sombrera Barussae; we are made tolerably well
acquainted with these islands by means of Dampier, who on discovering the
piratical designs of his captain, one Read, prevaled to be set on shore, and
with two or three Achenese, who were landed after him, resided there some time.
He represents the natives as honest, civil, and harmless, husband of one wife,
and, according to the English rule, till death does them part. They are neither
addicted to quarrel, theft, or murder; in their persons they are tall and
well-limbed, their visages long, noses well proportioned, and their whole
features agreeable, their hair lank and black, their skins a deep copper; the
men go naked, excepting the wrapper which passes round their waist, and from
thence under the thighs, and brought so as to tuck before. The women wear a
short petticoat not reaching lower than the knee.

THESE people have neither an apparent government or religion; each man is
patriarchal, the ruler of his own family. Their property consists in the
plantations of coco palms, COCO TREES.
which are along the shores; the country inland seemed not cleared, and
impervious by any paths.

THEY have another tree of use, which they call the Melory; MELORY.
it grows wild: Dampier, who was very observant, says he never saw any in other
parts of his travels; he adds, it grows to the size of our larger apple trees;
that the fruit is as big as a penny loaf, of the shape of a pear, with a smooth
greenish rind; the inside is like that of an apple, but full of small strings:
it is their chief food; they either eat it boiled, or scrape the pulp clear
from the strings, and make it into a cake as large as a Dutch cheese, which
will keep six or seven days, and has a good taste; they have a few small hogs,
and some poultry.

THE principal employ of the natives is fishing: their canoes are sharp at each
end; flat on one side, and unequal on the other, and have some slight
outriggers. These vessels go either with a sail or paddle, and hold from nine
to thirty men.

THE Nicobar islands produce the beautiful and singular pigeon, PIGEON.
to which they give name; the feathers on the head are purple, those of the
neck, long, narrow, and sharp-pointed like the haccle of a cock, and reflecting
various glosses of purple, red, gold, blue, and copper; the back a changeable
green; the primaries a fine blue; the tail and its coverts white.

I NOW cross from the greater or more southern Nicobar to the island of
Junkseilon, ISLAND OF JUNKSEILON.
about two hundred and sixty miles distant. It lies north-east of the former,
between Lat. 7 30 and 8 24, is of a long form, the coast extremely indented
with bays, and very salient promontories; the chief port is Popra, the Tacola
emporium of Ptolemy. Hamilton Vol. ii. 68.
says it produces good masts, and that it has plenty of tin; about five hundred
tons are annually exported, according to the account given by Captain Forest,
who was there in 1784. The island, subject to Siam, is governed by a viceroy
and three assistants, and contains about twelve thousand inhabitants. The
northern end is divided from the continent by a channel not exceeding a mile in
breadth. Between the eastern side and the main land, is a great bay filled with
numbers of small isles, and in the middle Pulo Panjang, which from north to
south is in length twenty-three miles Forest, p. 30.
.

THE kingdom of lower Siam, bounds the northern and eastern sides of the bay;
within the last is comprehended the narrow isthmus of the peninsula of Malacca,
which does not exceed in breadth fifty miles.

AT the termination of the kingdom of Siam, KINGDOM OF QUEDAH.
begins the little monarchy of Quedah, a flat and fertile country, which
extends several leagues along the coast. It was once tributary to Siam, but
during a war the Siamese were engaged in with Pegu, it revolted, and is
governed by a Malay Mohammedan prince, as tyrannical as he is poor; he resides
in a town about fifty miles from the sea, on a small navigable river; the mouth
of which is in Lat. 6 10. This river, according to Mannevillette, branches,
peninsulates a great tract, and reverts to the sea, forming two distant
entrances into the country; the interior land rises to a great height. The
monarch never fails visiting the European ships which enter the port, to extort
from them some present; the religion of the country is a mongrel Mahometanism,
mixed with the native idolatry.

THE little Quedah turtle Sonnerat, vol. ii. 177.
is of the size of a sparrow, TURTLE DOVE.
and most delicious food; it has been transported to the Isle of France, where
it has multiplied greatly.

THE northern end of the island of Sumatra lies in Lat. 5 5, and immediately
opposite to old Quedah. That part of Sumatra trends fast to the south-east till
it reaches Cape Diamond, in Lat. 4 50, which is the parallel of Pulo Dolom, an
isle close to the shore of the peninsula of Malacca. STREIGHTS OF MALACCA.
Here commences the Perimulicus sinus, or great streights of Malacca, bounded
by Sumatra on the west, and the peninsula on the east. I shall scarcely mention
that noble island, till I begin with it as chief of those of the Indian Ocean.

THE next place of note on the coast, is a great tract of flat land, insulated
by several channels, which form various isles, and open by different mouths
into the sea.

THE greater isle, PULO PERA.
or Pulo Pera, the ancient Perumela emporium, has a most useful and magnificent
harbor which runs far inland, with various branches on the right and on the
left; it has from eight to five fathoms of water; a mountain rises out of the
middle of the isle; the river that runs up the country is called by Mr.
Forest, Pera. Before its mouth is Pulo Ding-Ding, and other isles. That
navigator P. 28.
went up the river to visit the monarch of the country, who was attended by
guards, dressed in Chinese habits, with the dragon on their breasts.

FARTHER to the south, in Lat. 2 50, the streights contract in breadth very
considerably. PULO ARU.
The small isles Pulo Aru are in the middle of the channel, which here begins
to be greatly narrowed by rocks and banks on each shore. On the Malacca side,
to the south-east of Pulo Aru, is a large bay, filled with flat morassy isles,
divided by very narrow channels. On one of the most southern of them stands
Mount Parcelar, a noted seamark to ships navigating this dangerous straight.

STILL more to the south, MALACCA CITY.
in Lat. 2 20, is Malacca, the capital city of the peninsula; it probably
succeeded Perimula as the emporium of this part of India. When the great
Albuquerque had made his country sovereign of Ceylon, he turned his thoughts
toward this territory, and determined to give to Portugal the whole commerce
of the East. At that time Malacca possessed the entire trade of India; ships
from every port of Hindoostan, from China, the Phillipine and the Molucca
islands, from Persia, Arabia, and even Africa, filled its harbor. The Arabians
brought with them their religion, and established Mahometanism in the court of
this kingdom, as they had done in that of Hindoostan.

THIS port was first visited in 1508 by the Portuguese admiral Lopez Sequiera.
TAKEN BY THE PORTUGUESE.
On his arrival he met with the most friendly reception from the reigning
monarch; but such a jealousy arose among the commercial people of the different
nations, especially the Arabs, which they so effectually instilled into the
prince, as soon to destroy the good understanding between him and the strangers
he had so suddenly taken an affection for. His conduct had lulled the
Portuguese into so deep a security, that numbers of them took up their
residence in the city, and Sequiera even appointed Araujo, a favorite of
Albuquerque's, as consul. The prince did not dare to attack the admiral by open
force, but used every species of treachery to destroy him. Finding his plots
detected, he ordered his subjects to massacre the Europeans who were in their
power. Numbers were slain; but Araujo and a few others were kept as hostages to
prevent the revenge of the admiral, who, after various endeavors to recover
them, was obliged to leave them behind, and to set sail for the Malabar coast.

Albuquerque took advantage of the quarrel; he sailed from Goa in 1511, and
soon appearing before the port of Malacca, clamed the release of his
countrymen. These demands were at first refused; but after some hostilities,
the king was so terrified as to send to Albuquerque, Araujo and all the
surviving Portuguese. Notwithstanding this, it was discovered that he intended
nothing less than the destruction of the Europeans. It is evident he had great
reason to suspect his new guests, for Albuquerque, among other requests,
desired leave to erect a fort to secure his countrymen from any future attacks.
This the king knew was only a prelude to the subjection of him and his subjects
to a foreign yoke. The refusal was followed by the landing of the Portuguese;
several severe skirmishes ensued, which, as usual, ended with the defeat of the
Indians. The city was forced, and the palace taken by storm, but though the
king found means to escape with all his valuable effects, Albuquerque got two
hundred thousand ducats to his share of the plunder. Among other means of
resistance, the Malayes placed in the way of the assailants a sort of chevaux
de frize with poisoned points. No people are so expert as the Malayes in that
dreadful art. The city was also defended by three thousand cannon, a number of
artillery surprising in those days. The monarch fled to the woods, where he
soon died of grief. This success of Albuquerque's struck all the neighboring
nations with admiration. The king of Siam, and the princes of Sumatra and Java,
and the other neighboring isles, sent to him ambassadors, and various rich
presents. Those from Java very politically presented him with spears and darts,
all kinds of hostile weapons, and pieces of embroidery representing the warlike
exploits of their master, to impress on the stranger an idea of the valor of
the Javanese monarch.

THE Portuguese from time to time fortified Malacca in a manner suitable to its
importance, and it became the greatest emporium in India. By this wise stroke
of policy, Albuquerque gave to his country the possession of the gold, the
gems, the spices, and other rich productions of India ultra Gangem, and its
islands, as he did before those of Hindoostan, by the capture of the famous
city of Goa.

THE Portuguese continued in possession of Malacca till the year 1641, EXPELLED
BY THE DUTCH.
when it was wrested out of their hands by the Dutch, after a six months siege.
The governor is accused by historians of treachery, and to have been bribed
into a surrender; but it is certain that he did not give the place up till
after the most gallant defense. The Dutch, sensible of its value, paid the
utmost attention to its fortifications, and to every thing that could revive
the ancient commerce, which had almost sunk to nothing, by the tyranny and
usual ill conduct of the Portuguese.

THE city had in their time several fine churches, and numbers of monasteries;
and the Jesuits a noble college, in which they exercised great hospitality. All
these of course fell to decay under the reign of the sons of Calvin. Sharp as
they are, they were outwitted by the sons of Rome: the religious of the several
convents made a request to the conqueror, that they might be permitted to quit
their houses in solemn procession; each carried a large waxen taper in his
hand, within which were concealed their diamonds, and all the lesser treasures.
The victors were defrauded of the fruits of their valor, and, as Sonnerat says,
their commander lost his head, on his return to Holland, for not having
sagacity enough to discover the trick.

Malacca is exceedingly large; much of it is built of strong bamboo, but the
several stone buildings, among them the governor's house, make a conspicuous
figure. A narrow but deep and rapid river divides the town from the fort, one
side of which is washed by the sea; in that part only four leagues distant from
the low land of Sumatra. Malacca is a true emporium, or mart, the great
magazine of the various rich articles of commerce brought from the several
countries I have mentioned. As to the peninsula itself, it yields little more
than the sine tin and elephants' teeth. Let me conclude, that this place was
celebrated among the ancients for its gold, AUREA CHERSONESUS.
for which reason it was called by them Aurea Chersonesus; still, at no great
distance from the city of Malacca, is a hill called the Golden Mount. Some
imagine this to have been the Ophir of Solomon. I shall mention, in vol. of the
Outlines of the Globe, the supposition that Ophir was a place in Aethiopia. I
will not enter into the dispute, and only say, that if the birds which we know
at present by the name of peacocks, were those intended 1 Kings, chapter x. verse
22.
, this, or some other part of India, might have been the place from which
Solomon drew his wealth, peacocks being found in plenty here, and unknown, at
least in those days, in any part of Africa.

To the south of Malacca is the small kingdom of Johore; KINGDOM OF JOHORE.
we have scarce any acquaintance with it, and know little more of its history,
than that it was governed by a brutal set of princes, and that in 1712 a
rebellion arose, which ended in the expulsion of the royal family.

THE southern entrance into the streights of Malacca is filled with a most
numerous archipelago of small isles, even to the shores of Sumatra. The land
from Tanjong Buro, in Johore, bends into a crescent, likewise filled with
isles. One is called Sincapour, STREIGHTS OF SINCAPOUR.
which gives name to the well-known passage for ships bound to or from the
East. There are several other channels between the islands, but that of
Sincapour is the best; yet all are subject to danger, by reason of the rapidity
and irregularity of the tides, and the reefs or sand banks which are found in
some or other of these narrow passages. The western horn of the crescent is
Cape Romano; this stands in Lat. 2 12, CAPE ROMANO.
and is the most southern point of the continent of Asia. A little to the west
of that point, on a large river, stands the city of Johore, or Batusabar,
erroneously supposed by M. D'Anville to have been the same with the Zaba or
Sabana emporium of Ptolemy. The Cape Romano is certainly the Magnum
Promontorium, or Malaeucolon, a name borrowed from the ancient Malayes. Romano
seems to be a traditional name, used in memory of the nations which frequented
the adjacent port, where the ships must often have been obliged to wait for the
proper wind, to enable them to double the great promontory, and pursue their
voyage to the several marts on each side of the gulf of Siam.

FOR the tracing the remainder of the coasts on the continent, I shall no more
consult the opinion of my able guide, M. D'Anville, but follow that of a
countryman, Mr. John Caverhill, who, in the lviith volume of the Philosophical
Transactions, has given a very able criticism on those parts of Ptolemy which
relate to these particular shores.

AFTER doubling the Cape Romano, the peninsula takes a north north-western
direction. Between Lat. 2 22, and Pulo Varela, in Lat. 3 20 is an extensive
group of small isles, which fill the sea for a considerable breadth, almost to
the very shore; the largest is Pulo Timon. PULO TIMON.
In passing down the streights of Malacca, as far as Cape Romano, navigators
are obliged to take an eastern course Dampier's Voyage, ii. 5.
. This proves how well Ptolemy was informed when he said, that the Roman ships
bound for Cattigara took that direction, but afterward, when they had doubled
the Cape, they (being hurried easterly by the tide, which rushes through the
streights of Sincapour) were under the necessity of making a tack, and
proceeding westerly, to reach the several ports they might be bound for, in the
Magnus Sinus.

Pahang port, PAHANG
and town, are in Lat. 3 50, and in a most fruitful country. The mouth of the
river has an island before it. The north channel has, at high water, the depth
of four fathoms, and just within the bar, good anchorage in six. The estuary is
a mile broad, but so full of sand banks, that it is with great trouble a vessel
of thirty tons can work up to the town, distant twelve miles from the sea. The
river rises far up the country, washes the foot of the hill of Malacca, GOLD.
and contains a vast deal of gold. Hamilton visited this country in 1719, and
reports, that lumps of five or six ounces weight have been found. The diverse
usually descend to the depth of three fathoms, but the greatest lumps of the
precious metal are found in ten. Some years eight hundred weight have been
exported. Well may this country have been supposed to have been another Ophir.
Josephus Lib. viii. c. ii.
seems to have been right in fixing it here, if his authority was good for
saying, that the ancient name of this part of India was Sophora, now the land
of gold, which comes so very near to that of Ophir. Possibly the word is the
Malayan name for the precious metal. M. Le Poivre says, that the inhabitants of
Malacca and Sumatra call their gold mines ophirs, and Mr. Marsden Voyage to
Sumatra, p. 8.
, that in the latter island is a hill named Mount Ophir, possibly from its
having been once rich in gold.

MUCH pepper is cultivated on the sides of the river; PEPPER.
about three hundred tons have been sent to market, but had there been a
demand, three thousand might be raised in the space of five years. The best
canes in the world are said to grow in these parts.

Trangano or Tringoran, TRANGANO.
a small town a little to the north of Pahang, is seated on a river near the
sea, in which small ships may moor securely among the rocks. The town did
consist of above a thousand houses, half of which are inhabited by Chinese, who
traffic in their jonks to Siam, Cambodia, and Tonquin. Trangano is most
deliciously seated amidst low hills, covered with the eternal verdure of
undeciduous trees; lemons, oranges, FRUITS.
mangostans, and all the fruits of the Indies grow here in perfection; and the
valleys laugh with grain, pulse, and sugar, but all owing to the industry of
the Chinese. The feudal Malayes are too lazy to make the earth yield its
increase. Pepper is raised in great abundance, but the port is shut up from
October to March, by a most violent sea, driven in by the north-east monsoons.
In the still months, the sea is said to afford the finest of fish. Ptolemy
places, either in the neighborhood of this town or Pahang, a place called
Thagora.

LATITUDE 6 passes over part of the group of the Ridang isles, RIDANO ISLES.
which lie not remote from the coast. They are inhabited by Malayan pirates,
who seize on any vessels they can master, especially the Chinese, and sell the
crews and passengers for slaves. It is not infrequent that they murder the
whole crew. Their vessels are crowded with men, armed either with lances and
cresses, or short daggers. They suddenly board the ships they think they can
master; and having their native ferocity heightened by opium, instantly stab
all whom they find in their way. These miscreants swarm in the streights of
Malacca, and in all the islands which go under the name of Malaye.

Patani, PATANI.
, in Lat. 6 50, the next town of note, lies close on the shore, and was once
greatly frequented by ships from Surat, the Malabar coast, and that of
Coromandel, beside what come from China and other neighboring countries; but
the merchants finding no protection from the murderous pirates, quite deserted
the place. This may have been the Balonga of Ptolemy.

ADVANCING still north, GULF OF SIAM.
we enter the gulf of Siam, the Magnus Sinus of the same geographer; the land
after passing Patani, makes a considerable curvature toward the west, which
continues as far as Patanor, in about Lat. 10, where it bends toward the
north-east, till it ends in the bottom of the gulf at the river of Siam. Thus
finishes the outline of this celebrated peninsula.

IN this curvature, PIPERI.
near the bottom of the bay, stood the ancient Sipiberis, the modern Piperi;
and to the south of it Sindu, the present Sini.

WE shall take a review of its whole extent, from the northern end of its
isthmus, in Lat. 9 12, to its southern extremity at cape Romano, which is about
six hundred and sixty miles. The breadth in the widest part, is about two
hundred miles; from that part it gradually narrows till it ends nearly in a
point at cape Romano. All the interior parts of the country are hilly; the
lower grounds toward the sea marshy and wooded.

IN respect to the general view of the peninsula, its productions, and the
singular manners and government of the inhabitants, it is impossible to give a
more clear statement than in the words of M. Le Poivre, the author of the
celebrated Voyages d'un Philosophe. We use the translation of 1769, which is
done in a style equally elegant with that of the original; I will not injure it
by abridgment, but give the whole, from p. 67 to p. 78, and afterward some
explanatory remarks on certain parts, and a brief account of the natural
history, collected from different materials. In the articles of botany,
mineralogy, and zoology, there is so great agreement between the productions of
the opposite Sumatra and the peninsula, that I shall, except in a very few
instances, defer entering on those subjects till I arrive in that great island.

I SHALL now return to M. Le Poivre.

"BEYOND the kingdom of Siam," OF THE MALAYES.
says that most observant and judicious traveller, is the peninsula of Malacca,
a country formerly well peopled, and consequently well cultivated. This nation
was once one of the greatest powers, and made a very considerable figure on the
theater of Asia. The sea was covered with their ships, and they carried on a
most extensive commerce. Their laws, however, were apparently very different
from those which subsist among them at present. From time to time they sent out
numbers of colonies, which, one after another, peopled the islands of Sumatra,
Java, Borneo, the Celebes, or Macassar, the Moluccas, the Phillippines, and
those innumerable islands of the Archipelago, which bound Asia on the east, and
which occupy an extent of seven hundred leagues in longitude from east to west,
by about six hundred of latitude from north to south. The inhabitants of all
these islands, those at least upon the coasts, are the same people, they speak
almost the same language, have the same laws, the same manners. -- Is it not
somewhat singular, that this nation, whose possessions are so extensive, should
scarce be known in Europe? I shall endeavor to give you an idea of those laws,
and those manners; you will, from thence, easily judge of their agriculture.

TRAVELERS who make observations on the Malais, are astonished to find, in the
center of Asia, under the scorching climate of the line, the laws, the manners,
the customs, and the prejudices of the ancient inhabitants of the north of
Europe. The Malais are governed by feudal laws, that capricious system,
conceived for the defense of the liberty of a few against the tyranny of one,
whilst the multitude is subjected to slavery and oppression.

A CHIEF, who has the title of king or sultan, issues his commands to his great
vassals, who obey when they think proper; these have inferior vassals, who
often act in the same manner with regard to them. A small part of the nation
live independent, under the title of Oramcai or noble, and sell their services
to those who pay them best; whilst the body of the nation is composed of
slaves, and live in perpetual servitude.

WITH these laws the Malais are restless, fond of navigation, war, plunder,
emigrations, colonies, desperate enterprises, adventures, and gallantry. They
talk incessantly of their honor, and their bravery, whilst they are universally
considered, by those with whom they have intercourse, as the most treacherous,
ferocious people on the face of the globe; and yet, which appeared to me
extremely singular, they speak the softest language of Asia. That which the
Count de Forbin has said in his memoirs, of the ferocity of the Macassars, is
exactly true, and is the reigning characteristic of the whole Malay nations;
more attached to the absurd laws of their pretended honor, than to those of
justice or humanity, you always observe, that amongst them, the strong oppress
and destroy the weak; their treaties of peace and friendship never subsisting
beyond that self-interest which induced them to make them, they are almost
always armed, and either at war amongst themselves, or employed in pillaging
their neighbors.

THIS ferocity, which the Malais qualify under the name of courage, is so well
known to the European companies, who have settlements in the Indies, that they
have universally agreed in prohibiting the captains of their ships, who may put
into the Malay islands, from taking on board any seamen of that nation, except
in the greatest distress, and then, on no account to exceed two or three.

IT is nothing uncommon for a handful of these horrid savages suddenly to
embark, attack a vessel by surprise, poignard in hand, massacre the people, and
make themselves masters of her. Malay batteaus, with twenty-five or thirty men,
have been known to board European ships of thirty or forty guns, in order to
take possession of them, and murder, with their poignards, great part of the
crew. The Malay history is full of such enterprises, which mark the desperate
ferocity of these barbarians.

THE Malais who are not slaves go always armed, they would think themselves
disgraced if they went abroad without their poignards, which they call Crit;
the industry of this nation even surpasses itself, in the fabric of this
destructive weapon.

As their lives are a perpetual round of agitation and tumult, they could never
endure the long flowing habits which prevail amongst the other Asiatics. The
habits of the Malais are exactly adapted to their shapes, and loaded with a
multitude of buttons, which fasten them close to their bodies in every part. I
relate these seemingly trifling observations, in order to prove, that in
climates the most opposite, the same laws produce similar manners, customs, and
prejudices; their effect is the same too with respect to agriculture.

THE lands possessed by the Malais are, in general, of a superior quality;
nature seems to have taken pleasure in there assembling her most favorite
productions. They have not only those to be found in the territories of Siam,
but a variety of others peculiar to these islands. The country is covered with
odoriferous woods, such as the eagle or aloes wood, the sandal, and the Cassia
Odorata, a species of cinnamon: you there breathe an air impregnated with the
odors of innumerable flowers of the greatest fragrance, of which there is a
perpetual succession the year round, the sweet flavor of which captivates the
soul, and inspires the most voluptuous sensations. No traveller, wandering over
the plains of Malacca, but feels himself strongly impelled to wish his
residence fixed in a place so luxuriant in allurements, where nature triumphs
without the assistance of art.

THE Malay islands produce various kinds of dying woods, particularly the
Sapan, which is the same with the Brazil wood. There are also a number of gold
mines, which the inhabitants of Sumatra and Malacca call Ophirs; some of which,
those especially on the eastern coast, are richer than those of Brazil or Peru.
There are likewise mines of fine copper, mixed with gold, which the inhabitants
name Tombage. In the islands of Sumatra and Banca, are mines of calin, or sine
tin; and at Succadana, in the island of Borneo, is a mine of diamonds. Those
islands enjoy also exclusively, the rotin, the sagow, (or bread palm tree) the
camphre, and other precious aromatics, which we know under the names of various
spiceries.

THE sea too teems with abundance of excellent fish, together with ambergris,
pearls, and those delicate birds nests (so much in request in China) formed in
the rocks with the spawn of fishes and the foam of the sea, by a species of
small sized swallow peculiar to those seas; this is of such an exquisite
substance and flavor, that the Chinese long purchased them for their weight in
gold, and still buy them at an excessive price.

IN the midst of all this luxuriance of nature, the Malay is miserable; the
culture of the lands, abandoned to slaves, is fallen into contempt. These
wretched laborers, dragged incessantly from their rustic employments, by then
restless masters, who delight in war and maritime enterprises, have rarely
time, and never resolution, to give the necessary attention to the laboring of
their grounds; their lands, in general, remain uncultivated, and produce no
kind of grain for the subsistence of the inhabitants.

Malacca abounds with quadrupeds, especially with tigers, and others of the
most savage kind. It is customary here and in Pegu, for the tyrants of the
country to make banishment into the woods, for a certain time, a punishment;
the unhappy objects are sure of never returning; they quickly become a prey to
the tiger, or if they chance to escape the fangs of that cruel animal, fall
victims to hunger or corroding fear.

THE only peculiar quadruped seems to be the Civet described by M. Sonnerat
Vol. ii. 144. tab. xci.
, CIVET ANIMAL.
an elegant species, of the size of a common cat; the ground color is a
perlaceous gray, darkest on the upper part of the body; above the eyes is a
line of four small spots; on the hind part of the head commence three black
bands ending on the shoulders; another divides the belly lengthways; on the
reins are three, which end at the tail; on the sides and thighs are seven rows
of round black spots, sixty-one in number; the tail is long, and annulated with
black and gray. This animal inhabits the woods, leaps from tree to tree, and is
extremely fierce. It distills from the opening placed near the genitals, a musky
liquor, which the Malayes collect, and pretend that it fortifies the stomach,
and excites the amorous passions; for which last purpose it is bought and
highly esteemed by the Chinese.

M. Sonnerat Vol. ii. 102.
gives a very apocryphal account of the wild men of Malacca, WILD MEN.
who inhabit the woods and live in the trees. If they see any one pass, they
instantly descend and devour him. There is, says he, another kind, less
ferocious, and which shun the society of their anthropophagous brethren; these
live on fruits, are monogamous, and never cohabit with their wives, but when
nature invites; some even will enter into a sort of traffic with the Malayes,
and deposit at the foot of their tree-habitations, the tin they collect on the
mountains, for which the natives leave fruits, and any trifles they think
acceptable to their secluded brethren; their language is unknown. M. Sonnerat
says he saw one (taken young) in the service of a counselor of Malacca. I wish
he had fallen to the lot of a Scotch Judge; what a treasure would he have been
to Lord Monboddo! Seriously, M. Sonnerat must have collected some tales of the
Ourang Outang, possibly a native of this country, as it is of the Malayan
archipelago.

THE Malayes are a well made people, but rather below (says Mr. Marsden) the
middle stature; their limbs small, well shaped, and particularly slender at the
wrists and ancles; their complexions tawney; their eyes large; their noses
flat, probably by art; their hair black, shining, and very long.

THERE are a few birds that I mention, BIRDS.
because M. Sonnerat ascribes them to the peninsula; yet all that are found
here must also inhabit Sumatra. He gives us the description of the blue-rumped
perroquet of Mr. Latham, Supp. lxvi. The fore head and rump are blue; the
predominant color of the rest of the plumage pale-green; the inner coverts of
the wings crimson.

THE short-tailed Pie, Latham, Supp. 81. Sonnerat, ii. tab. cx. differs very
little from that described in vol. of the Outlines of the Globe.

THE Routoul of Malacca, is a most curious species of crowned pigeon, described
by M. Sonnerat, ii. 174. tab. c.; as is a variety by Mr. Latham, ii. 623, tab.
lxiii.

FOR the woodpecker of Malacca, Sonnerat, ii. p. 211, Latham, Supp. p. 111. I
refer to the authors cited.

LET me return to the vegetable kingdom to make one exception to my design.
MANGOSTAN.
I must here mention the Garcinia Mangostana, the most boasted fruit of the
Indies, and which is found in the highest perfection in this peninsula; the
name Mangostan is Malayan. It is a species confined to Malacca and the Malaye
isles; grows neither in Hindoostan, nor naturally in the Molucca isles, but is
cultivated in Amboina; the tree does not attain any great height; the fruit is
of the size of a small apple, of a round form, and deep red wine color; on the
summit is a star of five or six rays, squared at their ends; at the bottom are
four hollow leaves, the remains of the calyx; the inside is purple, and like a
furrowed globe divided into segments, each containing a kernel. These segments
are full of juice, the most delicious that can be imagined, a fine mixture of
tart and sweet, and so wholesome as to be allowed in any quantities to feverous
patients. This valuable tree is described by Bontius, p. 115, of his Historia
Naturalis Ind. Orient. who ushers in his description with these lines, J. B.
Bontius, l. 6. c. 27.
Cedant Hesperii long hinc, mala aurea fructus,
Ambrosia pascit Mangostam, et nectare, divos.


Laurence Garcin, a physician, first gave a scientifical account of it, and was
honored by Linnaeus, in having his name given to the genus. A full translation
of Garcin's description (with the plate) is published in vol. viii. p. 755, of
Martyn's abridgment of our Transactions. In the Herbarium Amboinense Vol. i. p.
132.
, is a very good description, and in plate xliii an excellent figure of the
same tree. Every voyager who has visited the places of the growth of this
delicious fruit, is full of its p^aises.

I NOW return to the coast. UPPER SIAM.
The kingdom of Siam recommences on this side near Sangora, exactly opposite to
its limits on the bay of Bengal. The town stands on a large river, and has some
commerce in tin, ivory, aloe-wood, and coarse gold. Ligore, about twelve
leagues to the north, LIGORE.
is a very commercial town, and its neighborhood produces abundance of tin and
of elephants teeth. It is seated a few miles up the river, and built of bamboo,
thatched with reeds; the pagodas have lofty steeples in form of pyramids. The
Dutch have or had here a factory; their houses stand a league within the mouth
of the river, and are built with brick. The road for shipping is two leagues at
sea.

THE whole eastern side of Siam is low, steep, and rocky, but inland rises into
lofty mountains. Toward the bottom of the gulf the land approximates, and the
contracted part is called the bay of Siam; its entrance is by the mounts of
Pensels or Pentens, impending over the water on the western shore, and the high
cape Siam on the opposite. The last may be seen from the bar of Siam, or the
Meinam river, twenty-two leagues distant.

ABOUT four hundred and eight miles from Ligore (following the curvature of the
gulf) at the very bottom of the bay of Siam, RIVER MEINAM.
is the mouth of the great river Meinam, the Serus of Ptolemy, and the most
consequential in the kingdom. The road for shipping extends for the space of
three leagues, in which all sorts of vessels may safely ride; such was the case
when that learned traveller Koempfer visited the place in 1690. The country on
both sides the river is marshy, composed of the mud brought down in the annual
floods; this river, like the Ganges, being subject to periodical inundations.
Koempfer informs us that the name Manam or Meinam, in the Siamese language,
signifies the mother of humidities, from its abundance of water, which so
greatly fertilizes the country. It is deep, rapid, and broader than the Elbe;
the upper part is rocky, violent, and interrupted by cataracts; the lower,
divided into several channels, passes through a very level country to the sea.
The banks of the river are covered with trees, animated by monkies; numbers of
villages may be seen on both sides; the houses generally stand, I may say, upon
stilts or lofty posts, so that the water during the inundations may pass
without incommoding the occupiers. Near the city of Judia, many of the villages
consist of inhabited ships, or floating habitations; these occasionally move
from place to place when the waters are high; the inmates keep a sort of fair,
and dispose of their various commodities.

THE Meinam rises at a considerable distance to the north, in the very
extremity of the kingdom, possibly far beyond, for its fountains seem never to
have been traced, and the best accounts are very uncertain; its course, as far
as we know, runs due north and south.

Juthia or Judia, the capital of Siam, is seated in about Lat. CITY OF JUTHIA.
14 30, on a low island in the form of a man's foot. It is surrounded with a
lofty brick wall. The streets are strait, and accommodated with canals, which
pass quite through from east to west. As Mr. Caverhill very reasonably fixes
the Zaba of Ptolemy to have been in the bottom of the bay of Siam, I see no
reason against supposing that it might have been either at Juthia, or at some
place not remote from that port. Ships may enter into many of the canals, and
discharge their cargo near the principal houses. The greater part of the
streets are very mean, built with bamboo, covered with the leaves of palms.
Those of the Chinese, Hindoos, and Moors, are of stone, but very low; the
finest houses in Koempfer's time, were such which had been inhabited by the
English, Dutch, and French. HISTORY OF PHAULKON.
The palace of the unfortunate Phaulkon, minister of state in the last century,
makes the most conspicuous figure; Phaulkon was a Grecian by birth, and seaman
by profession; he had served various nations, but chiefly the English. In their
service, in capacity of a cockswain, he came to Siam, and obtained an
employment at court. He was a man of very fine natural abilities; and by his
good conduct and his success in the management of affairs, rose to the highest
dignities, and became prime minister to the reigning prince.

HIS ambition proved his ruin, and brought him to a violent death by the hands
of the executioner. He became so intoxicated with power, as to entertain a
design upon the throne, to depose his royal master, and to place over the
Siamese, Monpi Totfo, son-in-law to the monarch, a phantom of a king, who was
to be dependent on his will, and to be deposed as soon as affairs came to a
crisis. The king was at that time extremely ill of a dropsy; on his decease,
the whole royal lineage was to be put to death, and Phaulkon usurp the power.

IN order to accomplish his designs, it was necessary to call in foreign aid;
he persuaded his weak master to send an embassy to Louis XIV. to request his
most Christian Majesty to send persons qualified to instruct in the arts his
unpolished subjects, so that he might shine pre-eminent among the Eastern
nations. The first, who set out in 1680, were shipwrecked; the second arrived
safe in 1686. The vanity of Louis made him receive with every mark of respect
these grotesque legates; the memory of their reception is preserved in a medal
Histoire de Medailles, tab. ccxvi.
. The king is represented seated on his throne; the ambassadors making their
obeisance; above his majesty is inscribed Fama virtutis, intimating that the
fame of his high qualities had induced them to come from this distant country.
Louis, in compliance with the wish of the embassy, sent Jesuits, artists, and
military officers; General de Fargues landed with several hundred soldiers, and
was put into possession of Bankok, the key of the kingdom, seated on the river,
between the capital and the sea. Just as every thing was ready for execution,
in May 1689, the plot was discovered; Monpi was seized by the king's son, and
his head cast at Phaulkon's feet. The minister, thus hurled from his greatness,
was tortured and almost starved to death, then carried out of town, and
beheaded; his body cut in two, and covered with a little earth, was soon
devoured by the dogs; a sad proof how Ambitio male suada ruit.

THE kingdom of Siam is divided from north to south by a long range of lofty
mountains. On the west side, ACCOUNT OF SIAM.
or next to the bay of Bengal, the country is visited by continual rains during
the time the Monsoons blow from that quarter. On the eastern side no such
deluges are known, nor any floods but what are the effects of the moderate
inundations of the Meinam, which fertilize the country beyond description.
FERTILITY.
The useful grain rice is produced in amazing crops, and every delicate fruit
of the Indies without cultivation. Raynal mentions among the productions of
Siam, log-wood like that cut in Campeachy. It is a terrestrial paradise, but
loses all its advantages by groaning under the most despotic government on
earth. The monarch rules within his seraglio, and his grandees are let loose to
oppress the wretched commonalty, according to their caprice and unrestrained
will. Dominions thus governed, stretch near a thousand miles from north to
south, or from Lat. 20 35 to Lat. 7 0, and in the broadest part extend three
hundred and sixty.

THE religion of the country is the same with that inculcated by the Bramins;
RELIGION.
but the Bramins of Siam are not a peculiar race, like those of Hindoostan;
here every one who chooses assumes the priesthood; they usually lead a monastic
life, and have their convents; those of each province are governed by a sort of
bishop. Nuns or female monastics are frequent. The pagodas are of various
forms, some have a great resemblance to the Chinese architecture. The idols are
monstrous in their appearance.

THE first knowledge of the Christian religion was received by the mission of
Jesuits, MISSIONARIES.
led here under the conduct of Alexander of Rhodes, some time before the year
1658, when pope Alexander VII. sent over a reinforcement of religious men, but
these being of other orders, were treated by the Jesuits with the utmost
indignity, nor would they condescend to permit them to share in their labors,
which had been attended with prodigious success. As to the message Louis XIV.
sent by his ambassador Mr. Chaumont, in 1684, modestly requesting his Siamese
Majesty to become a good Catholic; he received this very proper reply, that he
left it to his most Christian Majesty to judge, whether a change of a religion
that had been followed in his dominions, without interruption, during two
thousand two hundred and twenty-nine years, could be a matter of small
importance to him, or a demand with which it was easy to comply, and a matter
which related entirely to God and not to him. This well might check the zeal of
the missionaries; but in the next reign, on the discovery of the treachery of
the French general, and the murder of Phaulkon, the whole troop of the
religious were sent away, and all hopes of return entirely overthrown.

IN many respects the Siamese have an agreement with the Chinese; we must
except their bodies, which are small. In their head-dress they agree in the
pointed bonnet, in the frequent inhabiting of ships and boats, and now and then
in their ornamented architecture. The faces of the inhabitants are large, FORM
OF THE SIAMESE.
their cheek bones prominent, their foreheads and chins contract equally to a
point; their cheeks hollow, their eyes small and oblique, nose short and
rounded; their ears long, by artificial distension; their complexions swarthy;
their hair black and coarse, and would be extremely long, but that it is cut so
very close that their heads seem beset with bristles; their teeth black from
art.

IT is to be lamented, that so well informed a traveller as Koempfer should not
have left us any thing on the subject of the natural history of so fertile a
kingdom; we have nothing to say of its vegetable productions, and as to its
animals, we can only inform our readers that it swarms with elephants,
ELEPHANTS.
and that their teeth are a considerable article of commerce. In this tyrannous
government they are quite a pest; these, and other herbivorous beasts, destroy
the labors of the husbandmen, and none dare repel the attacks of those
ravagers. Elephants are here only reserved for state; the king keeps great
numbers, and often makes them the instrument of his cruelty. They are the
executioners of his wrath on his offending subjects, and are instructed how to
put them to various kinds of death, either by trampling them under their broad
feet, or deliberately tearing their limbs off with their lithe proboscis, or
flinging them up into the air, and catching them empaled on their great tusks.

BUFFALOES and deer are found here in vast numbers; DEER.
their skins constitute a great article of commerce; fifty thousand of them
have annually been sent to Japan through the medium of the Dutch. Mandelslo, a
most intelligent traveller, gives the following account of the trade of Siam,
as it was in the year 1639; speaking of the city of Juthia, he says, the
principal commerce consists in stuffs brought from Suratta and the coast of
Coromandel, all sorts of Chinese commodities, precious stones, gold, benjamin,
wax, copper, lead, indico, calamba-wood, brazil-wood, sapphires, rubies, etc.
but above all deer skins, whereof they furnish the Japanese with about fifty
thousand every year. It likewise yields a great trade of rice, which they
transport to all the neighboring isles.

TO this we may add the more modern account of the rich productions of this
kingdom, OTHER PRODUCTIONS.
taken from Mr. Dalrymple's Repertory P. 118.
. The productions of this country are prodigious quantities of grain, cotton,
benjamin, sandal, agualo, and sapan woods; antimony, tin, lead, iron,
load-stones, gold and silver, sapphires, emeralds, agates, crystal, marble, and
tambanck.

HOGS and wild swine swarm in the dominions of Siam; most of the savage beasts
of India are equally numerous in this kingdom. Koempfer speaks of two species
of monkies, one very large, and black, the other smaller, and of a gray color.
The first seems a kind not well ascertained, for the only black monkey of the
old world we are acquainted with, is that described by Mr. Edwards, tab. 311,
which is no larger than a cat.

AFTER doubling cape Liant, RIVER OF LIANT.
a bay opens to the north, and at the bottom receives the river of Liant. A
vast chain of mountains which run from north to south, and unite with those of
China in Lat. 22 0, divide the kingdom of Siam from the kingdoms of Laos and
Cambodia, and almost reach the sea near the river of Liant. The upper part of
this tract is in Laos, the more southern forms the kingdom of Cambodia, which
is compared to a vast valley, bounded by the Siamese chain to the west, and
that of Cochin-China to the east. The coast takes a south-eastern direction
from the bay of Liant as far as cape Cambodia, a space of three hundred miles,
skirted by numbers of small isles washed by the bay of Siam. From the point of
Liant is a sandy barren desert, reaching, according to Hamilton, as far as
Ponteamas, above two-thirds of the coast.

THIS extensive tract has great scarcity of ports; PONTEAMAS.
the most distinguished is that of Ponteamas, in Lat. 10 45. M. Le Poivre gives
so enchanting a picture of this colony, that I will no more risque injuring it
by the abridgment, than I did his history of the Malayes. His descriptions are
so exquisite, that I must hope that they will not fall under a too frequent
imputation on the writers of his lively nation, of being plus beau que la
verite.

Departing, says M. Le Poivre, from the peninsula of Malacca, and the islands
of the Malais, toward the north, I fell in with a small territory called
Cancar, but known on the maritime charts under the name of Ponthiamas.
Surrounded by the kingdom of Siam, where despotism and depopulation go hand in
hand; the dominions of Camboya, where no idea of established government
subsists; and the territories of the Malais, whose genius, perpetually agitated
by their feudal laws, can endure peace neither at home nor abroad; this
charming country, about fifty years ago, was uncultivated and almost destitute
of inhabitants.

A Chinese merchant, commander of a vessel which he employed in commerce,
frequented these coasts; being a man of that intelligent reflective genius,
which so characteristically marks his nation, he could not, without pain,
behold immense tracts of ground condemned to sterility, though naturally more
fertile than those which formed the riches of his own country; he formed,
therefore, a plan for their improvement: with this view, having first of all
hired a number of laborers, some Chinese, others from the neighboring nations,
he, with great address, insinuated himself into the favor of the most powerful
princes, who, for a certain subsidy, assigned him a guard for his protection.

IN the course of his voyage to Batavia, and the Philippine islands, he
borrowed from the Europeans their most useful discoveries and improvements,
particularly the art of fortification and defense; with regard to internal
police, he gave the preference to the Chinese. The profits of his commerce soon
enabled him to raise ramparts, sink ditches, and provide artillery; these
preliminary precautions secured him from a coup de main, and protected him from
the enterprises of the surrounding nations of barbarians.

HE distributed the lands to his laborers, without the least reservation of any
of those duties or taxes known by the names of service, or fines of alienation;
duties which, by allowing no real property, become the most fatal scourge to
agriculture, and is an idea which revolts against the common sense of every
wise nation. He provided his colonists at the same time with all sorts of
instruments proper for the labor and improvement of their grounds.

IN forming a laboring, and commercial people, he thought that no laws ought to
be framed, but those which nature has established for the human race in every
climate; he made these laws respected by obeying them first himself, and
exhibiting an example of simplicity, industry, frugality, humanity, and good
faith: he formed, then, no system of laws -- he did more -- he established
morals.

HIS territories soon became the country of every industrious man who wished to
settle there; his port was open to all nations. The woods were cleared, the
grounds judiciously labored, and sown with rice; canals cut from the rivers
watered their fields; and plentiful harvests, after supplying them with
subsistence, furnished an object of extensive commerce. His integrity, his
moderation, and his humanity, made him respected. He never wished to reign, but
only to establish the empire of reason; his son, who now fills his place,
inherits his virtues as well as his possessions; by agriculture, and the
commerce he carries on with the produce of his lands, he has become so
powerful, that the barbarians, his neighbors, style him king, a title which he
despises: he pretends to no right of sovereignty, but the noblest of all, that
of doing good; happy in being the first laborer and the first merchant of his
country, he merits, as well as his father, a title more glorious than that of
king -- the friend of mankind.

THE barbarians of the neighborhood, amazed to see abundance so suddenly
succeed to sterility, flocked for subsistence to the magazines of Ponthiamas;
whose dominions, at this day, are considered as the most plentiful granary of
that eastern part of Asia; the Malais, the Cochin Chinese, the Siamese, whose
countries are naturally so fertile, considering this little territory as the
most certain resource against famine.

LET me here add, that our plain Hamilton, who visited Ponteamas in 1720, found
the town in ruins. It had been taken and plundered in the year 1717 by the
Siamese fleet, at which time it was a place of considerable trade. It may have
recovered by the time M. Le Poivre was there, so as to vindicate his
enthusiastic account. The town is seated on a deep but narrow river, which in
the season of inundations communicates with that of Meinam Kom, CAMBODIA.
or Cambodia, and the city of the same name on its banks; by which means the
commodities of the kingdom are sent to this port, in preference to that at the
mouth of the Cambodia, which is said to be of very troublesome navigation, by
reason of the numbers of low islands and sand banks which obstruct the channel.

IT is highly probable that such was the state of this river from the very
early times; we find no ancient port at this place, but learn from Ptolemy,
CATTIGARA.
that one, called Cattigara Sinarum Statio, stood on or near the site of
Ponteamas, on a marshy coast, productive of reeds (bamboos) so large, that when
they were joined and tied together, passengers were enabled to cross from one
side to the other.

Marcianus Heracleota, who wrote not long before the building of
Constantinople, adds besides, that it stood on the river Cotiaris, and was the
termination of the known and habitable earth to the south. The Periplus of this
geographer, may be found in the first volume of the Geographiae veteris
Scriptores, published at Oxford in School.

THE Notium Promontorium, NOTIUM PROMONT.
was to the north-west of Ponteamas. The bay mentioned by Marcianus Heracleota
to be so infested by wild beasts, and the part inhabited by the Ethiopian
Icthyophagi, extended from that port to the south; cape Cambodia seems the
Satyrorum Promontorium, probably because it was the haunt of some large species
of monkey.

THE productions of the kingdom of Cambodia are gold and ivory in great
abundance. PRODUCTIONS OF CAMBODIA.
The Siamese, in their expedition of 1717, destroyed not less than two hundred
tons that happened to be in the port, ready for exportation. Sandal wood, sapan
wood, aloes wood, stick lac, and a great variety of drugs. Dampier Voy. Vol.
ii. p. 105.
adds rice, dragons blood, lac, i. e. varnish in large jars, which looked
blackish and thick, and a yellow purging gum in great cakes called Cambodia, by
which he certainly means gamboge. The whole country is prodigiously fertile,
and yields almost every thing that the vegetable or animal kingdom produces in
common with other parts of Eastern India.

THE Portuguese, says Mandelslo, were in possession of the commerce of Cambodia
as late as the year 1639, notwithstanding every effort of the Dutch to come in
for a share; but it must have been long enjoyed by the latter nation, after the
fall of the Portuguese empire in India. The reigning prince in 1720, seemed
very solicitous that the English should settle in his dominions, and offered to
permit us to form factories and build forts to protect our trade. Mr. Bowyear
(hereafter to be mentioned) says that the Cambodians resemble the Malays, whose
language is generally understood in all these parts.

ABOUT two hundred Topasses or Indian Portuguese, were settled and married in
the capital of Cambodia when Hamilton was there, and seemed the only remains of
that people. They all have small pensions from the king of the country; but in
order to support themselves, are obliged to take to the chase of elephants,
which they shoot, for the sake of their teeth, with iron slugs, poisoned by
immersion in the thick bark of a certain tree; the beast is sure to fall in a
short time after receiving its wound. The same method is used in killing the
buffaloes on account of their tongues.

FROM cape Cambodia, the country bends due east; the river of the same name
discharges itself into the sea, at the distance of about one hundred miles,
CITY.
through several mouths. The city stands ninety miles up the river, and
consists of only one street, which is built on an eminence to preserve it from
the annual inundations; the rains begin to fall in June, and continue during
the months of July and August.

THIS was near the site of Thina Metropolis Sinarum of Ptolemy and Marcianus.
Mr. Caverhill quotes Argensol for the proof, and says, on his authority, that
marble ruins of an extensive city have been discovered to the north-west of
Cambodia; yet Ptolemy relates that it was not surrounded with brazen walls, nor
had any thing worth mentioning. Arrian, in his Periplus Maris Erythraei, calls
it the greatest of the inland cities, and that it sent to Barygaza, the modern
Barochia, on the western side of Hindoostan, wool, thread, and othonium sericum
Outlines of the Globe, vol. i. p. 132.
. These were carried the whole of the journey by men on foot; prodigious must
it have been, if it is true that they went through Bactra, a detour of amazing
extent.

THE kingdom of Cambodia was known to the Arabs by the name of Rachmi. RACHMI.
It was visited in the ninth century by two Arabian travelers, who report that
the finest muslins in the world were made there, and that the natives wore
garments so fine that they might be drawn through a middle sized ring. The same
writers speak wonderful things of the Karkandan or unicorn, but from the whole
description, it is evident that they mean no other animal than our one-horned
rinoceros.

LET me conclude the account of the kingdom with saying, THE ANCIENT THINAE AND
SINAE.
that the ancients comprehended under the name of Thinae and Sinae, not only
Cambodia, but also Pegu, Siam, Laos, Cochin-China, and the more southern parts
of China, of which Thina was the common capital.

THE noted island of Pulo Condore lies about fifteen leagues to the south of
the western channel of the Cambodia. It is situated in Lat. 8 40, its form is
that of a crescent; the length not above eight miles, the greatest breadth
about two; the whole is lofty and mountanous, and surrounded by lesser isles;
the name is derived from Pulo, an isle, and Condore a calabash, from its
production of that fruit. It is mentioned by a captain Saris, an Englishman,
who sailed by it in 1605 in his way from Japan. The harbor is between the
greater island and a lesser called the little Condore, lying off the north end,
in which is sufficient depth of water and safe anchorage. Dampier Voy. 288.
in 1686 careened and refitted his ship here, and has given us a good account
of many particulars. He says that the soil is rich and black, the hills craggy,
the eastern part of the island sandy, but clothed with trees of various kinds;
some of the shores are rocky, others low and sandy. All the islands are finely
watered with small rivulets during ten months of the year, which begin to fail
toward the latter end of March, in the dry season; but on digging, water may
be found in many places.

THE vegetabled observed by Dampier Dampier Vol. i. p. 314.
were mangoes in a state of nature; the Areca Oleracea, or cabbage palm; the
coco palm, wild nutmegs, grape trees, and a large tree four feet in diameter,
which, on incision, yields a clammy juice, that, being boiled, proves an
excellent tar, and on farther boiling becomes hard as pitch; DAMMER PITCH.
this probably is the Dammer Ibid. Vol. i. p. 514.
Captain Gore, in Cook's last voyage Voy. iii. 458.
, adds to the list of plants, water melons, potatoes, gourds, plantains,
oranges, shaddocks, pomegranates, rice, and black beans. These, possibly, were
acquisitions since the days of Dampier, and introduced by the French, who
humanely and politically wished to render these islands useful to navigators in
their way to or from Japan, China, Manilla, Tonquin, Cochin-China, and many
parts of India with which the Europeans have intercourse. At the time Captain
Gore visited this island, a Mandarine from Saigore, came here with a
certificate in French, from the bishop of Adran, a Frenchman, certifying that
he was sent in order to give his assistance to any European ship which might
touch at this port. Dampier recommended the erection of a fort, and mentions,
among other advantages, that ships might in this island be supplied with masts
and yards, possibly from the same tree which furnishes the tar and pitch.

THE animals, when Dampier resided on the island, ANIMALS.
were only hogs, lizards, and guanoes. Before Captain Gore reached Pulo
Condore, it was plentifully stocked with buffaloes, transported from the
continent, which increase here very successfully. Numbers of monkies inhabit
the woods, and two species of squirrels, one of a beautiful shining black, the
other of the kind called flying, striped brown and white, and probably a new
species. Gaubil also observed rats with pendulous ears. To the reptiles we add,
that father Gaubil saw here, in 1722, the flying dragon, or Draco-volans; a
scaly species of lizard called Koka, from its piercing note resembling in sound
that word; it resides in hollow trees; its bite is mortal. From these
circumstances I suspect it to be the Gekko.

HERE are a variety of parrots, paroquets, and pigeons, and in the woods
numbers of poultry, in a state of nature. I refer the reader, for a further
account, to page 262. vol. ii. of the Outlines of the Globe. The thrush, called
by Mr. Latham Vol. ii. p. 72.
the Longtailed, may be added to the list of birds.

Dampier found on the shores great plenty of the green turtle; TORTOISES.
these he supposes to have been in a state of migration, being of opinion, that
for want of food it is impossible for them to stay the whole year in the
neighboring seas. Our great navigator found them here from the 13th of March to
the 21st of April. The natives of this island took them in large nets, and
boiled the fat for the sake of the oil.

THE inhabitants of Pulo Condore, supposed to be originally of Cochin-China,
are small in stature, of dark complexion, long visaged, with black and lank
hair, white teeth, thin lips, small eyes, high noses. Their religion is
idolatrous; they worship chiefly the elephant and the horse, similar to the
objects of adoration in Tonquin.

IN 1702 Allan Ketchpole, ENGLISH SETTLEMENT.
director of the English East India Company at Chusan, on the desertion of that
settlement, made an attempt to form one here. He engaged in his service a
number of Macassars, who were to act as soldiers, to assist in building, and to
serve during three years. At the end of the term he basely refused to fulfill
his contract. Those islanders, remarkable for the fidelity with which they
execute all their agreements, are as determined to revenge any injuries offered
to them: in the night they put to death Ketchpole, and most of the English; a
few, on the first alarm, escaped in a boat. The Macassars regained their
liberty, and inflicted a most justifiable punishment on their persidious master.

HERE Dampier's crew was welcomed by the people coming on board, and offering
the free use of their women during their stay. This is a practice in Pegu,
Siam, and other places in the parts of India cis Gangem. Prior, in his Alma, is
very humorous on this subject, in the second canto: In China, Dampier's travels
tell ye,
(Look in his index for Pagelli)
Soon as the British ships unmoor,
And jolly long boats row to shore;
Down come the nobles of the land,
Each brings his daughter in his hand;
Beseeching the imperious tar,
To make her but one hour his care.
The tender mother stands affrighted,
Lest her dear daughter should be slighted;
And poor Miss Yaya dreads the shame
Of going back the maid she came.


ON returning to the estuaries of the river of Cambodia, CIAMPA.
after a short journey eastward, we reach the small territory of Ciampa, or
Bink Thoan, which extends about a hundred and fifty miles along the shore, the
breadth does not exceed ninety. The aboriginal people, called Loyes, are large,
muscular, and well made; LOVES, A PEOPLE.
their complexions tinged with red, their noses somewhat flatted; their hair
long and black; they have small whiskers, but scarcely any beards; their dress,
a shirt and breeches of cotton, the last covered with a sort of petticoat of
white cloth, fringed with silk, according to the circumstance of the wearer.
They are governed by a monarch who resides at Feneri, the capital of the
country, in a mean palace, and with little state; he is in fact a tributary to
the king of Cochin-China, who sends a mandarine to reside at the court as
president of the council, and without his advice nothing of moment is done. The
productions of the country are very few; some cotton, indigo, and bad silk, for
which they traffic with the Chinese. They are inferior to the Cochin-Chinese
in their military, but excel them in naval affairs. Their ships or jonks are
tolerably well built; they are chiefly employed in fisheries, which are very
considerable, and form their chief article of commerce. The Chinese send ships
very frequently to the northern ports of the country laden with tea, an
inferior sort of silk, porcellane, and some other commodities of that empire.
They take in return gold and columba wood, to be burnt on the tombs of their
ancestors and relations, or before the altars of their divinities.

AMIDST the mountains inhabit a race of people named Moyes, MOYES.
who go naked, excepting a cloth which is wrapped round their middle; they are
employed in hard labor, and are little better than slaves. Both the Loyes and
Moyes are regulated by the same laws; the government is very oppressive; they
are punished for the least fault, and among the common people, that of showing
any appearance of wealth, is one of the first moment; the only good in the
system of government is the toleration of religion. Here is found a degenerated
Mahometanism; the doctrine of Confucius; and idolatry, in all the variety and
extravagancy of image worship. We know little of this country; I am obliged to
M. Mannevillette P. 148.
for my information, which he got from the captain of La Galathea, a French
frigate which put into one of the ports of Ciamba in 1720, and was detained
there for some time.

IN 1695 Mr. Higginson, president of Fort St. George, formed the idea of
opening a trade with Ciampa, and sent Mr. Bowyear on a sort of embassy to the
king of Cochin-China. At his court he met with the prince of this country, who
gave him every encouragement, and told him he might, by the river Cambodia,
dispose of great quantities of woollen-cloth among the Loyes.

I MAY add here to my account of the river, that at the mouth is never less
than four fathoms of water, and that it is navigable for ships of some burden
up to the very capital, above which small vessels only are used, and the
navigation is (by report) said to be interrupted by a cataract.

ACCORDING to D'Anville, COCHIN-CHINA.
the kingdom of Cochin-China unites with its tributary Ciampa at the bay of
Comorin; the original name is Anam. The Portuguese bestowed on it the
appellation it bears at present, which, by the help of the Japanese word Cochi,
signifies the country west of China. In describing the form of this extensive
stripe of empire, I shall include in it, its les Pais conquis. The whole,
beginning from the borders of Cambodia, is in form of a bow, bending into the
ocean as far as Cape Varelle, in Lat. 13 0, when it inclines to its northern
extremity in Lat. 17 30. The whole length of this great curvature is about six
hundred and sixty miles, the breadth not exceeding that we have given to
Ciampa. The northern borders are defended by a wall, which runs from the sea to
the great chain of mountains, and forbids all approach from that quarter, as
the inaccessible chain itself does every attempt of invasion from their western
neighbors. The Moyes, who inhabit these mountains, are said to be a most savage
and ferocious race.

THE court of Cochin-China is usually held at Sinoa; a little to the south of
the wall there, says Mr. Bowyear, the king, in his Tongtan or eighth moon,
takes his recreation with his Mandarines, and forbids all interruption by
petitions or any sort of business.

ALL the lower part of the kingdom has its annual inundations, INUNDATED.
like the other tropical countries, which give it prodigious fertility. Borri's
account of the peculiarity of the floods in this kingdom is very curious. The
rains on the mountains during the wet season are intermittent; they happen once
a fortnight, and last three days at a time, bringing fertility and plenty to
the subjacent country. This rain is called Lut; its arrival is celebrated by
every one, from the king to the peasant, with the utmost festivity. The
overflowing of the Nile is not received in Egypt with greater rapture. The
seasons in Cochin-China may be called four. The violent heats last during May,
June, and July; the rains fall in September, October, and November, and ab ae
the violence of the sun. In December, January, and February, the cold northern
winds prevale, accompanied by cooling showers. In March, April, and May, all
the beauties of spring appear, and the fruits of every kind of vegetation bless
the country.

THE great harvest is that of rice; RICE.
two species are cultivated on the mountanous and dry soils; one as white as
snow, and when dressed, of a slimy viscous nature, made into pastes, such as
vermicelli and the like. Both these kinds are exported to China in great
quantities; the different sorts of rice are the staples of this country.

THE sugar-cane is another plant to which the Cochin-Chinese pay the utmost
attention, SUGAR.
and cultivate in vast abundance. They are acquainted with most of the
processes, and annually manufacture great quantities of both white and brown
sugars, so that their country supplies China with the principal part of this
article, that vast empire not producing sufficient for its own consumption. The
city of Faifo or Foy Foe, is the emporium from which the Chinese annually
export about forty thousand barrels, each weighing above two thousand pounds.
To the credit of these orientalists, all the cultivation, and all the posterior
processes in the production of the sugar, is the voluntary labor of freemen.

To these articles of commerce may be added woods of different kinds, such as
aloes wood, or Agollocha, AGOLLOCHA.
erroneously called Eaglewood, Columba, and others of value, either in
mechanics, or for their sweet scent. COLUMBA WOODS.
The price of Columba wood on the very spot is five ducats a pound, at the
ports sixteen, and in Japan, to which much is exported, two hundred. A pillow
of this wood is the highest luxury with the orientalists, particularly the
Japanese, who will give three or four hundred ducats per pound for a piece big
enough for that purpose. The Agollocha bears a good price; great quantities
being shipped for Hindoostan, for the use of the Hindoos to burn their dead,
who seem to emulate the ancient Romans in the aromatic profusion of their
funeral piles.

PEPPER grows here in abundance. PEPPER.
Le Poivre and Raynal mention that cinnamon, superior to that of Ceylon, is
found on a certain mountain, for which the Chinese pay a higher price than for
that brought from the famous staple of that spice. Cassia is another spice; let
me question whether the two are not confounded.

COTTON is much cultivated, as is the mulberry tree, COTTON.
for the use of the silkworms; great quantities of coarse silks are made here,
some so strong as to serve for sails and cordage, but the finest sorts also are
manufactured. The imposing Chinese export from hence the fibers of a tree
called Pitre, which they fraudulently mix with their own manufactures; they
even import into their land of tea a course and black sort; possibly for the
sake of enabling them to export their own, at greater profit, into our island.
The mountains yield some gold, and much iron; the natives fuse the last, and
employ the metal in various manufactories: raw and wrought silk may be added to
the articles of commerce.

THE Portuguese had once considerable influence in the court of Cochin-China;
the Dutch made a strong effort to come in for a share of the commercial
emoluments, but were expelled the kingdom by the superior interest of their
rivals. At present, it is said, that the trade is chiefly in the hands of the
Japanese and Chinese, who are settled at Foy Foe, and preserve their own laws,
religion, and customs. The harbors are still casually frequented by European
ships, but, I think, their imports inconsiderable.

THE chief port is that of Foy Foe, PORT OF FOY FOE.
some miles up a navigable river. The entrance has before it, at a little
distance, the isles of Champellos; the channel between the mouths and the town
is filled with islands, and obstructed by a bar, but not unsurmountable. Ships
of some burden formerly have been brought over, and then were obliged to anchor
before the custom-house, which was the case with Mr. Bowyear. The town consists
but of two rows of houses, inhabited by Chinese and a few Japanese; the first
of whom manage the trade, and import various articles from Canton, Siam,
Camboja, Batavia, and Manilla; Bowyear met with encouragement to settle a
factory near the city, but I believe it never was carried into effect.

THIS country is certainly very favorable to trade and navigation, having not
fewer than sixty safe harbors, and a great depth of water in every part.

THE galleys or shipping of the Cochin-Chinese are very numerous; SHIPPING.
part, allotted to the defense of the coast, are finely painted and highly
varnished, rowed with fifty oars, and carry a cannon at the head, and two small
ones on each side. Notwithstanding the Cochin-Chinese can neither cast cannon
or make fusils, their dexterity, says Mr. Borri Churchill's Col. vl. ii. 806.
, in the art of gunnery is amazing; not one of our Europeans dare enter the
list with them. The navy of this country is quickly manned, every family being
bound to furnish a sailor, who serves with great alacrity, for they are well
treated, and their wives and children supported during their absence; all are
dressed in an uniform, and when they are about to engage, put on a gilt helmet
and a cloak, which leaves their right arm quite bare. Numbers of their vessels
are employed in the fisheries; the fish are found in vast abundance, and form a
great article of commerce; fish and rice constitute the principal food of the
Cochin-Chinese.

THE woods and mountains afford all the variety of birds and quadrupeds of the
adjacent kingdoms; ELEPHANTS.
tigers swarm; elephants are in great abundance and of vast size; these are
taken and reclamed; numbers are kept in the royal stables merely for
ostentation, being no longer used in war; they are rendered of infinite service
to the inhabitants of the country as beasts of burden, the carriers both by
land and water, I may say the stage coaches and ferries of Cochin-China. On
their backs is placed a machine like the body of a coach; reckoning the outside
as well as inside they convey thirteen or fourteen passengers; when they arrive
at a river, they take the water very readily, and will even carry their fare in
perfect safety over an arm of the sea a mile wide.

A GREAT monkey called here the Douc, MONKEY.
by me the Cochin-China, Hist. Quad. ii. No 125, is found of the length of four
feet exclusive of the tail. The tail and lower parts of the arms are pure
white; the crown, upper parts of the arms and thighs black, buttocks clothed
with hair, round the neck a collar of purplish brown; the face bordered up to
the eyes with a great yellowish beard. It is also found in Madagascar, where it
is called Sifac; it walks often erect; its food beans.

I BEG not to be understood to favor the doctrine of some system-makers, by
connecting the description of the monkey of Cochin-China with that of the man.
I readily allow changelings, or artificial monkies among our species, but none
that are natural; we have also our bears. As to the men of this country, they
greatly resemble the Chinese, from whom they are distantly sprung; they are
featured exactly like them, but are less in body, more active and more valiant;
the complexion of those on the coast is olive, that of the inland or alpine
inhabitants is fairer, and not inferior to that of Europeans.

IT is this country that produces in such quantities the edible birds nests,
held by the epicure of the East to be the first of delicacies. It is chiefly
made use of in soups and ragouts of chickens; the nests are first softened in
water, pulled to pieces, and mixed with ginseng, put into the body of the fowl.
The above is then to be stewed in a pot with a sufficient quantity of water,
and left on the coals the whole night. The best kinds which are white, and
quite pure from dirt, are dissolved in broths in order to thicken them, and to
give them that flavor the Orientalists so much admire. Of the black and foul
nests is made glue.

MR. Latham Vol. ii. 579.
gives the following account: It weighs about half an ounce, and is in shape
like half a lemon, or, as some compare it, to that of a saucer, with one side
flatted where it adheres to the rock. The texture of it is somewhat like
Isinglass, or rather more like fine Gum-dragon, and the several layers of the
matter it is composed of very apparent; being fabricated from repeated parcels
of a soft slimy substance, in the same manner as the martins form theirs of
mud. Authors differ much as to the materials of which it is composed; some
suppose it to consist of sea-worms of the Mollusca class; others of the
sea-qualm (a kind of cuttle fish) or a glutinous sea-plant called Agal Agal. It
has also been supposed that they rob other birds of their eggs, and, after
breaking the shells, apply the white of them for that purpose.

THESE nests are found in vast numbers in certain caverns in various isles in
the Soolo Archipelago, situated between Longitude 117 and 120, Lat. 5 and 7;
particularly in three small isles or rather rocks, in the caverns of which the
nests are found fixed to the sides in astonishing numbers. They are also found
in amazing quantities on a small island called Toc, in the streights of Sunda,
the caverns of which are lined with the nests, but no where in greater
abundance than about Croee, near the south end of Sumatra, four miles up a
river of that name; but they are not peculiar to the above places; for they are
likewise common from Java to Cochin-China on the north, and from the point of
Sumatra west, where it is called Layung, to New Guinea on the east, where the
sea is said to be covered with a viscous substance like half melted glue, which
the bird is supposed either to take up from the surface with its bill during
flight, or to pick it from the rocks when left there by the waves.

THE best nests, or those of a pure white, and free from mixture, sell in China
from 1,000 to 1,500 dollars the picle, the black and dirty ones for only twenty
dollars. The last are supposed to arise from age, mixed with dirt, or feathers;
and the gatherers beat down all the black ones they can get at, in hopes that,
from the necessity of the birds making fresh nests, they may meet with the more
valuable ones at the next gathering. It is said, that the Dutch alone export
from Batavia 1,000 picles of these nests every year, which are brought from the
isles of Cochin-China, and those lying to the east of them. Among our East
India imports, it is much to be wondered, that, among other luxuries imported
by us from the East, the use of these nests should not have found a way to our
tables; as yet being so scarce in England, as to be kept as rarities in the
cabinets of collectors.

THE king resides generally at Whay, WHAY, THE KING'S COURT.
in Lat. 16 48 north, about twenty-five miles from the sea, on a river
navigable for vessels of fifty or sixty tons up to the city; but the bar has on
it at low water only four feet. The city is extensive; the palace a large
square, the streets near it wide, long, and regular; the rest of the city
consists of straggling houses; several branches of the river meet here; every
family keeps its covered boat; and there are numbers besides kept for hire, for
most of the conveyance is by water. It is a place of great trade, both from
Kankao, and all parts of their own coasts.

THE celebrated M. Le Poivre was here in 1749, and appeared at court with great
splendour Oriental Repertory, 251.
, bearing a letter from the king of France, and some very paltry gifts for the
Cochin-Chinese monarch. Le Poivre was too open, and boasted so much of his
Grand Monarque, that his veracity was called in question, and in the end he and
his countrymen forced to make a hasty retreat.

THE government of Cochin-China is monarchical. GOVERNMENT OF COCHIN-CHINA.
It had once been a province to Tonquin, but was separated from it in the
beginning of the last century. The story is differently related. I refer the
reader to Hamilton's account Vol. ii. 211.
of the cause and manner: Le Poivre relates it differently; yet both may be
right in the chief circumstances of the event. The ruling religion is that of
the Chinese, not the pure and primaeval worship of the Shangti, the patriarchal
religion; but that of China in its corrupted state. Christianity (introduced by
the Portuguese during the time of their favor at the court of Cochin-China) got
ground for some little time: missionaries were sent, churches erected, and
multitudes of converts made. At length a king arose unfriendly to our doctrine,
who expelled the missionaries, and compelled his subjects to return within the
pale of the national church. Having premised this, I shall treat the reader
with Le Poivre's elegant account of the revolution, and the happy state of this
kingdom; but I must mix my fears with it, that as he hints at corruptions
creeping fast into the original system of government, it may be found at
present as absolute, as tyrannical, and as absurd as other eastern dominions,
under the rule of the infirm individual. To begin,

A Tonquinese prince, unsuccessful in a war he carried on against the king of
Tonquin (under whom he enjoyed an office somewhat resembling the Maires de
palais under the Merovingian race of the kings of France) retired with his
soldiers and adherents across the river which divides that kingdom from
Cochin-China. The savages, who then possessed this country, fled before these
strangers, and took refuge among the mountains of Tsiampa. After a long war
with their old enemies, who pursued them, the Tonquinese fugitives remained at
length peaceable possessors of the country known under the name of
Cochin-China; it extends about two hundred leagues from north to south, but
narrow and unequal from east to west. They then applied themselves entirely to
the cultivation of rice, which, being the ordinary food of the inhabitants of
Asia, is to them an object of the greatest importance. They separated into
little cantonments, and established themselves on the plains, which extend
along the banks of the rivers.

THE six first kings, founders of this monarchy, governed the nation as a
father governs his family; they established the laws of nature alone; they
themselves paid the first obedience to them. Chiefs of an immense family of
laborers, they gave the first example of labor; they honored and encouraged
agriculture, as the most useful and honorable employment of mankind. They
required from their subjects only a small annual free-gift to defray the
expense of their defensive war against their Tonquinese enemies.

OFF the coast of Cochin-China are the Paracels, THE PARACELS.
a vast tract of rocks, reefs, sand-banks, and small isles, extending from
north to south from Lat. 12 10 N. to 16 45 N. two hundred and seventy-six miles
in length, and sixty in breadth. To the north-east of the northern end is a
group of small reefs and rocks, called the Triangles, and again a little to the
south-east of that is a great irregularly shaped shoal, called the Macclesfield
shoal. Between these and the isle of Hainan, belonging to China, is clear and
deep water. That island lies to the north, about one hundred and thirty miles
from the nearest extremity of the Paracels; the interval is the common passage
of our ships bound for China; they sail between the coast of Cochin-China and
the Paracels, till they get sight of the Campellos isles in Lat. 16 10. From
thence they cross over toward Hainan, which is strongly marked by several very
high and craggy mountains, foresights of the general nature of the great empire.

Tinhosa is the next point navigators make for, a small but lofty isle not
remote from Hainan, and from thence is a direct and clear course to the islands
of Sanciam; a little beyond which is that of Macao, and the numerous isles that
bound the channels to the great port of Canton.

THE bay of Tonquin begins near the wall of Cochin-China, BAY OF TONQUIN.
and at the northern extremity of that kingdom. The entrance is bounded on the
eastern side by the island of Hainan. The middle of the bay has very deep
water, and is free from isles, excepting a small one called the Nachtigael; but
the shores are skirted with sands, or groups of little isles; the coasts
themselves, according to Dampier, very low; and the whole interior a flat of
the richest soil, productive of all the fruits, and possibly vegetables, of the
tropics. Pastures or rice ground border the banks of the most considerable
rivers.

THE great orange Cam-chain has a thick rind and rough; FRUITS.
the inside of an amber color; the smell is most fragrant; the taste most
delicious

THE Cam-quit is very small, round, and of a deep red. The taste is equal to
the former, but is esteemed a more unwholesome fruit, as it both creates and
heightens the disorder of the flux. The limes are equal in size to lemons. The
betel is said to surpass any of the Indian.

THE mulberry is much cultivated here for the nourishment of the silkworms.
MULBERRY.
There is a succession of them, for the leaves of the old trees are held to be
less nutritive to the worm, and productive of worse silk. The species of Morus
is generally supposed to be the white.

THE Rhus Vernix is found here and in several other parts of India citra
Gangem. RHUS VERNIX.
It is the valuable tree which yields the varnish so useful in the lacquering
of variety of things, and giving them a sort of immortality; the best is in
Japan. The reader may satisfy his curiosity further by consulting Thunberg,
Flora Japon. p. 121. Koempfer's travels, i. 114. and his Amaen. Acad. 791. fig.
792. Kalm Vol. i. 77.
found it in North America, and mentions it under the name of the poison tree.
It certainly merits the title, but its effects are not general; some persons
can receive its juice on the body or hands without the least ill consequence,
while others are afflicted with violent swelling, acute pains, and blisters so
numerous that the patient will resemble a leper, and his very skin peel off;
some people are even struck with blindness for two days together; much depends
on the constitutions of those affected. There are men that will handle the
tree, or touch the juice with impunity; while others will be visited with all
the deleterious symptoms by being in the way of the smoke, or even of the wind
which carries the effluvia or exhalations of this singular tree.

IT has been observed that the workers in Laquer or Japan, feel the bad
effects, being subject to violent eruptions, in form of boils or blotches. The
laborers can only work in the dry season, when the north winds blow. They are
obliged to lay several coats on, each of which must have time to dry, before
the other is applied. The varnish is brought to market in great tubs all the
working season, the natural color is white, and thick like cream, but changes
in the air, and becomes blackish; Dampier says that the Tonquinese have the art
of making of it a glue the best in the world.

IN this kingdom are abundance of sir and poon trees, both which are very
serviceable for masts. The country also produces Sappan-wood, SAPPAN WOOD.
which Dampier compares to the Logwood of Campeachy. It proves to be the Caju
Sappan, or Lignum Sapan of Rumphius, iv. 56. tab. xxi. Ligno Brasiliano Simile,
Bauhin. Pin. 393. Caesalpina Sappan, Syst. Pl. ii. 259. Loureiro, Fl. loch.
320. This tree grows principally in Siam and Ciamba; is of the first use in
India for the dying of red. Rumphius gives a very full account of the means by
which it produces a tinge of different shades. It is also brought to the
European market. It grows to a moderate size; the branches are thick set with
short spines. The wood is very hard, and much used by the Indians for pegs to
fasten the boards of their ships. This plant has been introduced into the Kew
garden, and is described by Mr. Aiton Hort. Kew. ii. 55.
under the name of Caesalpina vesicaria, narrow-leaved prickly Brasiletto.

THE zoology of Tonquin would give a most plentiful harvest; here seems to be a
continuation of most of the animals of the countries of India we have passed
over. ELEPHANTS.
The elephants are generally in a state of nature; they are very wild and shy;
but when taken their flesh is eagerly sought after; the trunk is a peculiar
dainty: The king keeps a few for state; when one happens to die, the flesh is
given to the poor, and the trunk cut to pieces and sent to the mandarines;
horseflesh is also frequently brought to market. This favors of Tartarian
origin.

THE variety of birds, BIRDS;
terrestrial and aquatic, is incredible. The water fowl pair before May, and
fly in pairs during the months of June and July. From October to March they
collect in vast flocks. The Tonquinese take them in nets set on poles, which
the birds strike on in the twilight.

FISH is in equal abundance. SOYA SAUCE.
That delicate sauce we call Soya is made here of one species; and of a sort of
shrimp, is produced another relishing luxury called Balichaun.

THE chief river of the country is called the river of Tonquin, which empties
itself into the bay by two channels, one called Rok-ho, the other twenty
leagues to the north-east, which Dampier named that of Domea. The first,
frequented by the smaller vessels, has not above twelve feet water at the
entrance, and is the most convenient for the Siamese and Chinese. The other is
used by the European ships on account of the depth. Before the mouth is a line
of hard sand two miles long; the entrance is distinguished by a high ridgy
mountain far up the country called the Elephant. About six leagues from the
mouth of the river is the village of Domea, usually consisting of a hundred
houses, yet on the arrival of the European ships it soon increases to a large
town; the natives resort for sake of trade from all parts; houses suddenly
spring up; for being only constructed of frames of bamboo, and the roof of palm
or other leaves, a temporary town is quickly formed, in which a fair is kept as
long as the ships remain in the harbor.

THE river is subject to the same periodical floods as others in the tropical
regions; and the same fertility is the consequence. The wet season commences
the latter end of April or beginning of May, and lasts till toward the close
of August. The rains are intermittent; some are of two or three days
continuance, others of only a few hours, with intervals of fine weather,
especially toward the beginning and conclusion of the season. During the wet
months the heat is intolerable, especially when the sun can force its rays
through the thick clouds.

THE Typhons, TYPHONS.
or as Dampier calls them Tuffoons, are most tremendous in this bay and on the
coast of China. They prevale in the months of July, August, and September, and
commonly near the change of the moon. They are preceded by very fine weather; a
presaging cloud appears in the north-east, black near the horizon, edged with
copper color, on the upper part fading into a glaring white. It often exhibits
a ghastly appearance twelve hours before the Typhon bursts; its rage lasts many
hours from the north-east, attended with dreadful claps of thunder, large and
frequent flashes of lightning, and excessive hard rains; then it sinks into a
dead clam; after which it begins again with redoubled rage from the south-west,
and continues an equal length of time.

THE great Halley gives an account of the surprising tides in this bay; TIDES.
each flux is of twelve hours duration, and its re-flux the same, so that there
occurs but one high water in twenty-four hours. The great Philosopher shall
speak in his own words:

ON the first and second days, at the water's increase, the influxes are very
small and uncertain, but afterward the tides for thirteen days are constant in
their course, one flood and one ebbing being completed in twenty-four hours
time, equally sharing the space of a lunar circuition of the earth between
them, and every flood beginning nearest three quarters of an hour later than
the precedent flood, and also considerably increasing in the height of the tide
every day, from the third unto the sixth and seventh days of the water's age,
on which two days the flood runs very high; but on the eighth day (which may be
accounted the last of the spring tides) the waters begin gradually to decrease
again, retaining the same orderly difference of time in each tide, until the
next following first day of the water's increase; when, during two days
unsettledness, there is a shifting of the tides in respect of the beginning of
the flood and ebb, after which said shifting, a constancy in their inverted
course is again retained in the above mentioned order for thirteen days
following.

Cachao, the principal city of Tonquin, CITY OF CACHAO.
lies about eighty miles higher up the river, and is the place where the chief
trade is carried on. The imports are conveyed from the ships in large
Tonquinese boats, navigated by the natives. The tide runs with great rapidity
thirty or forty miles above Domea, through a rich and beautiful plain; near
Hean, a town of two thousand houses, is the place where the two channels meet,
and form the Delta of Tonquin, about eighty miles from the sea. The Chinese
merchants have a street to themselves at Hean. For a time they resided at
Cachao, but became so numerous that they seemed to swallow up the very natives;
the king therefore ordered them to remove here. The French also had a factory
in this town in Dampier's time. Is is from that honest voyager I take my
account, having no later authority of any authenticity. The Chinese and Siamese
jonks come up as high as the town, and ride in the middle of the river.

Cachao is a city of twenty thousand houses; the walls usually made of mud and
thatch, but some are of brick, covered with tiles. Here are three regal places;
two very mean, the third more magnificent, but built of timber, and open at the
sides. This, with the courts, fish ponds, and docks for the pleasure boats,
take up a vast space of ground, surrounded by a wall faced with brick. There
are several gates, and stairs to ascend to the top of the walls, round which is
a pleasant walk. This place is the residence or rather prison of the Boua, or
emperor of Tonquin. In this country is a most singular government; by a
revolution which happened long ago, the general of the reigning monarch made
himself master of the empire; he assumed all the regal power, and seized the
whole revenue, but did not venture to extirpate the royal family, for fear of
the affection the people entertained for their ancient rulers. The executive
power is lodged in the general or his heirs, who is called Choua; he is quite
absolute, has his guards, and all the insignia of majesty. The Boua is kept as
a state prisoner, with his wives and children, and diverts himself within the
palace walls, for he is never allowed to stir out. The Choua pays him all
external respects, visits him three times a year, gives him the precedence,
makes him a tender of his life and services, and declares that all he does is
in kindness, to save him the fatigues of government. The Choua places his own
creatures about him, and no others are permitted to have access.

THE English and Dutch have or had factories in this city. FACTORIES.
I am not well acquainted with the exports of the country; they are said to be
gold, woods for dying, raw and wrought silk, some callicoes, varnish,
turpentine, salt, earthen ware, anniseed, and drugs of several kinds; pearls
are also found on the coasts.

THE royal navy is an affair of state, useless and contemptible in wars; and as
to ships of commerce, there are scarcely any; so that every thing is brought in
and out of the kingdom in foreign bottoms.

I MAY be pardoned for digressing to the healing art of the Tonquinese. TONQUIN
MEDICINE.
I must produce their receipt for the cure of the bite of the mad dog, the gaol
distemper, and other maladies incident to human nature; let the good intent
apologize for the following extract, thought worthy of a place in the eleventh
volume P. 1051.
of the Philosophical Transactions.

THEY (the Tonquinese) take of the best musk about gr. xvi. of the purest
native cinnabar, and finest vermillion, each about gr. xxiv. and, having
reduced them separately to impalpable powders, mix and administer them in about
a gill of arrack; which, in two or three hours, generally throws the patient
into a sound sleep and perspiration; if not, they repeat the dose, and think
the cure certain.

THE religion of this country is the same with that of Cochin-China, RELIGION.
but idolatry appears here with much less magnificence; the Pagodas are mean,
and their images numerous. It should seem that the Mandarines and better sort
of people are more enlightened, and confine themselves to the worship of one
GOD. They do not frequent the pagodas, they have no idols, but adore the
supreme in their courts, with uplifted eyes. A person of the family reads the
petition to heaven. Dampier's Vol. ii. 58.
account of the ceremony is curious; "When they make this petition," says he,
they order a great deal of good meat to be dressed, and calling all their
servants into the court where the ceremony is to be performed, they place the
food on a table, where also two incense-pots are placed, and then the mandarine
presents a paper to the clerk, who reads it with an audible voice. In the first
place, there is drawn up an ample account of all that GOD has blessed him withal,
as health, riches, honor, favor of his prince, etc. and long life, if he be
old; and toward the conclusion, there is a petition to GOD for a continuance
of all these blessings, and a further augmentation of them; especially with
long life, and favor of his prince, which last they esteem as the greatest of
all blessings. While this paper is reading, the master kneels down, and bows
his face to the earth, and when the clerk has done reading it, he puts it to
the burning rushes, that are in the incense-pot, where it is consumed; then he
flings in three or four little bundles of sacred paper, which is very fine and
gilded; and when that also is burnt, he bids his servants eat the meat.

IT is singular that in matters relative to their oaths of allegiance, OATH.
a species of sacrament is annually performed, at the season in which the
Mandarines receive from the great officers under them the oath of fidelity to
the king; this is attended with the following ceremony: they cut the throat of
a hen, and let the blood fall into a basin of arrack; of which every man has a
small portion given him to drink, after he has publicly declared his loyalty
and zeal to serve his prince; and this is esteemed the most solemn tie by which
any person can engage himself.

THE Christian religion made considerable progress in this kingdom about the
year 1680, MISSIONARIES.
and some time after. Here were two bishops, one styled of Ascalon, the other
of Adran; but neither they nor the priests were suffered to come to Cachao,
their residence being fixed at Hean; the proselytes they made were among the
meanest of the people, and it is suggested were gained over, more by the
charitable donations of rice in times of scarcity, than by any arguments of the
pious missionaries. The priests were all masters of some mechanic arts which
were useful in this country, and which seem to have been the grounds of their
toleration. By reason of some imprudence on their part, or some spirit of
persecution in the reigning powers, they were at length expelled; and four of
the principal missionaries put to death by decapitation.

I WILL conclude with the extent of the kingdom of Tonquin, EXTENT.
and with a brief account of the inhabitants. It commences toward the south at
the Cochin-China wall, and is there very narrow; to the west it is bounded by
the Cochin-Chinese chain, which soon retires, and gradually leaves a larger and
larger expanse to the great plain of this kingdom. These mountains keeping to
the northwest unite with those of China, and by their branches turning
eastward, constitute the boundaries between Tonquin, and the mighty empire of
which the Tonquinese seem originally to have been a colony. The western limit
is at the river Gannan Kyan, in Lat. 21 35.

THE province bordering on China on the side of the bay is that of Tenan,
small, but extremely fertile in rice; off the coast are multitudes of isles,
very properly called, by the Dutch, the Islands of Pirates. They are inhabited
by fishermen, who make no scruple of robbing every ship they can master. Those
can only be of the most defenseless kind, for these pirates have no other
vessels than the boats in which they carry on the fishing business, and those
unprovided with any sort of firearms. From the extreme corruption of the
government, there is no redress to be obtained against their excesses. An
English captain has been fined for killing one of the crew of these petty
thieves which had showed a design of attacking his vessel.

IN one of the isles the Tonquinese have a custom-house, which is said to bring
in a million of rix-dollars.

THE kingdom is very populous, NATIVES.
being thick set with villages. The natives generally are of a middle stature,
of the tawny India color, but the fairest and clearest of the kind; a blush or
change of tint may be seen in some of them on any surprise of passion,
imperceptible in any other Indians; their faces are flattish and oval, their
noses and lips of due proportions, and altogether agreeable; their hair black,
long, and lank, very thick, and hanging down to their shoulders.

THEIR teeth are (like those of the Siamese) as black as art can make them;
BLACK TEETH.
the dying occupies three or four days, and is done to both boys and girls when
they are about twelve or fourteen years old; during the whole operation they
never take any nourishment, except of the liquid kind, for fear of being
poisoned by the pigment, if they swallowed what required mastication. Every
person, high and low, rich and poor, is obliged to undergo this severe
operation, alleging it would be a disgrace to human nature to have teeth white
as those of dogs or elephants, to which they compare those who labor under that
misfortune.

Prior, with his usual humor, mentions this custom, but transfers it to the
Chinese.

In China none hold women sweet,
Unless their snags are black as jet:
King Chihu put nine queens to death,
Convict on statute ivory teeth.
THUS ends my account of India extra Gangem. The Tonquinese have so much
similitude with the Chinese, that it is with some reluctance I place them as a
separate people. The uniformity of manners, the religion, and even the personal
appearance begin to show themselves far more to the south. The Chinese had
spread themselves to many of the kingdoms we have passed over, and the likeness
is retained in proportion as they kept distinct, or mixed with the natives, so
as to occasion a deviation from their native features and national customs. We
fall in with the general arrangement of geographers, and leave the artificial
distinctions which separate them from that great empire whence they originated.
The ancients thought otherwise, and formed of those kingdoms a mighty
government, distinguished from their neighbors to the south and to the north by
the general name of Thinae or Sinae.

CHINA.
CHINA.
THE miracle of governments! GOVERNMENT.
Its dominion extends from the streights of Hainan, in north Lat. 20 13, to the
extremity of the province of Pe-che-li, in Lat. 41 15, comprehending a space of
near fifteen hundred miles in length, and in breadth above a thousand. The
numbers of its inhabitants (given by the lively Voltaire) are a hundred and
fifty millions The more accurate information obtained by Lord Macartney's
embassy, makes the population of China Proper amount to 333,000,000, inhabiting
a space of 1,297,999 square miles. E.
, yet all are ruled by a single man! The government is founded on the law of
the fifth commandment, and the honor paid to the emperor in the character of
father, amounts to a veneration due to the Divinity himself. The greatest of
his subjects never speak to him without kneeling; his words are law, and every
thing he says is received as oracular. The same respect, proportionably
diminished, is rendered to all his servants, as emanations of his sacred
person, from the first mandarine down to the lowest officer who is invested
with delegated power. He is called Tyen-tse, the son of Heaven; Thau-ting,
palace royal; Van-swi, ten thousand years; and by other epithets emblematic of
the sanctity of his person. All this results primarily from the sense of filial
duties, early imprinted on the hearts of his subjects as the first and greatest
point of religion, and objects of the cognizance of the magistrate. If a son is
incorrigible by a parent, the parent takes him before the judge, who seldom
fails to bring him to a sense of his duty. Filial respect, says Confucius, in
his Auking, a book on that very subject, is the foundation of all virtue, and
of the wise government of the empire.

CHILDREN are treated by the parents with the utmost rigor; the doctrine of
obedience is inculcated with the greatest severity, so that it becomes ever
after habitual: but as this respect toward their superiors is attended with
fear and meanness, so deceit and fraud become the characteristics of the
Chinese nation.

THE same respect to those in a higher station pervades all ranks of people;
hence the Chinese are the most ceremonious of mankind, and the very lowest
orders full of the most profound artificial civility.

THE emperor has the disposal of all offices, nay, even of the lives and
fortunes of every subject. Nothing is done, of any moment, from one extremity
to the other of this vast empire, without his knowledge; in criminal cases the
calendar of prisoners convict are laid before him, with a statement of their
crimes; these lists are returned to the respective judges, with the sentence
affixed to each name, be it of death or free pardon. The lesser punishments are
left to the pleasure of the magistrate.

THE despotism of the emperor is founded upon law and custom; DESPOTIC.
not expressed, yet fully implied, it seems admitted that he can do no wrong!
but it is on the principle that the state is a vast family, that Tyen, i. e.
the Supreme Being, has placed him on the throne, in order that he may be a
father and a mother to his people. In consequence of this, a strong sense of
his duty is continually before his eyes. The mandarines and princes of the
blood are at liberty to remind him of any faults he may fall into; and even the
people, if they find him negligent, are as ready to become tumultuous as in any
other country. The grand secret of government in the emperor is the unremitting
attention paid to the conduct of the mandarines and other magistrates, who are
carefully watched, and most severely punished on every failure of duty. He
himself is perpetually anxious to consult the good of his subjects, and to
avoid incurring their hatred or contempt.

THERE is no country in which the filial duties are carried to such a length.
FILIAL DUTIES.
"A veneration for fathers," says Montesquieu Spirit of Laws, vol. i. p. 433.
, was necessarily connected with a suitable respect for all who represented
fathers, such as old men, masters, magistrates, and the emperor. This respect
for fathers, supposed a return of love toward children, and consequently the
same return from old men to the young, from magistrates to those who were under
their jurisdiction, and from the emperor to his subjects. This formed the
rites, and these rites the general spirit of the nation.

A PARRICIDE is extremely rare in this empire: whenever it happens, the whole
province is in alarm; the relations are punished, and the mandarines deposed,
as it is presumed it must have been through their neglect of admonition on the
first appearance of filial misconduct, that such a monster could be found. The
emperor himself is judge, and the crime is expiated by the sentence of the
criminal being cut into ten thousand pieces.

THE reigning vice of the Chinese is self-interest, SELF-INTEREST.
which gives rise to the infinite variety of frauds of which they are justly
accused. Lord Anson's account of them is by no means exaggerated. Attempts have
been made to clear them from the aspersion, but all has proved a vain labor.
They consider the art of overreaching as a mark of superior genius, and laugh
at their dupe for suffering himself to be imposed on. Du Halde tells a pleasant
story of an English captain who had bargained with a Chinese merchant for
several bales of silk. On opening the first, he found it excellent; but all the
rest were quite rotten. The captain reproached the merchant in the most severe
terms. The Chinese, with great coolness, answered, Blame, Sir, your rogue of an
interpreter, for he assured me, that you never would examine the bales.

PRIDE and self-conceit are the other characteristic faults of this people.
PRIDE.
They assume an imaginary pre-eminence over all the world, and conceive nothing
can be right but what they do. Their arts and their inventions have been
brought to a certain point, at which they must ever stop, till they can prevale
on themselves to lower their high opinion of superiority, and improve upon the
models brought from Europe. They can copy, but they do it with reluctance, as
they look upon themselves to be the first of men. A good effect arises out of
this foible, it represses luxury; they think themselves wiser than the rest of
mankind, and that they are supplied with whatever their situation can require.
Their rule of government, their customs, their arts, their habits, have
remained for centuries the same, and probably will continue so to the end of
time.

THIS leading feature is, besides, ANTIQUITY.
the result of the high and just opinion they entertain of the antiquity of the
Chinese nation, in comparison of that of the rest of the world; and they with
truth observe, that they were a polished people ages before the nations of
modern Europe had emerged from savage manners and profound ignorance.

THE founder of their empire is said to be Fo-hi, FO-HI, FOUNDER OF THE EMPIRE.
cotemporary with Phaleg and Heber. His subjects at that time were nearly in
the state of nature; they fed on what they caught, ate it raw, drank the blood,
and clothed themselves with the skins. He taught them to make fishing-nets and
snares for birds, to rear domestic animals, and instructed them in various arts
of life; and to soften the fierceness of his people, invented music, and the
instrument Kin. China was inhabited above two thousand years before the
Christian era, demonstrable from an eclipse observed at that period. The boast
of the Chinese is, that their monarchy has continued four thousand years under
the government of emperors; that it experienced twenty-two dynasties or
revolutions, but the commotions each occasioned were so short that the country
suffered very little inconveniency, and returned immediately into its former
regular system.

THE original religion of the Chinese was truly pure, RELIGION.
and probably delivered to them by the first founder of the empire, Fo-hi, as
derived from the patriarchs, amongst whom that illustrious character may nearly
be ranked. The first who reached China brought with them the religion of Noah.
They acknowledged one great and supreme Being, and professed to live according
to his laws engraven on their hearts. They justly made that Being the model of
perfection, possessed of omnipotence, omniscience, providence, goodness,
justice, and mercy. They admit the doctrine of grace, for they say that the
most wicked man, if he makes use of the assistance offered to him by Tyen, or
the Supreme Being, may attain the highest virtues. They hold also an expiation
of sins by their own sacrifices; but confess that no external adoration will be
accepted unless it is attended with inward sentiments, and comes directly from
the heart. I cannot, in my contracted plan, give all the detail of their
religion, or the proofs of its origin from the patriarchs. I will only say,
that, like them, they had their Pentateuch. Their five volumes correspondent
with the Mosaical history are esteemed by them the source of all science and
morality.

The great reformer of the religion of China was Consucius, CONFUCIUS.
cotemporary with Pythagoras, and born 551 years before Christ; he purged it
from all corruptions, and brought it to the perfection we have described; it
still continues the religion of the emperor and of the good and learned
throughout his vast dominions.

ABOUT six hundred years before the Christian era, SECT OF TAUT-SE.
arose the sect of Taut-se, founded by Lau-kyun, who confined the felicity of
this life to voluptuousness; and taught that the soul died with the body; yet
at the same time admitted the existence of a Divine Being, which makes some
people believe, that his doctrine had been corrupted by certain of his
profligate disciples, who might think it better to perish than burn; yet as
they must necessarily be perpetually disturbed with the thoughts of death, they
pretended to have invented a liquor of immortality, which, with the credulity
of some of the emperors, gave a prodigious increase to their followers; they
were greatly addicted to magic, introduced worship of spirits, sacrificed to
devils, and deluded the vulgar by a thousand juggling tricks.

THE last was the sect of Fo or Fwe (not to be confounded with the great
Fo-hi.) SECT OF FO.
Their doctrine was transported out of India about 65 years after the birth of
Christ. An emperor dreamed of a saying of Confucius, that the Holy-one was to
be found in the West. He sent ambassadors to India, who brought back the
monstrous image Fo, and all the extravagances of the Hindoo mythology. Temples
or pagodas were erected in all places, and those filled with the most monstrous
idols. They were attended by Bonzees innumerable. This is the religion of the
vulgar, but not always confined to them; the emperors have at times been
infected with it, deceived by the seeming austerities practiced by the Bonzees,
and their senseless penances, similar to those of some of the Indian Faquirs.

THE Christian religion was introduced here as early as the year 636, when, to
the astonishment of the Chinese, CHRISTIANITY.
there appeared among them a set of men with fair hair and blue eyes, and of an
air, form, and habit quite unknown. These proved to be certain bishops,
priests, and deacons sent out of Judea to propagate the gospel in these distant
parts. They were Syrians and Nestorians. At that time Jesuiabas, says Mosheim
Vol. ii. p. 1.
, was at the head of that sect. The memory of this transaction was quite lost
for ages, till in the year 1625 a monument was found in digging under ground
near Si-ngan-su, in the province Shensi. It was a table of marble, ten feet
long and five broad, containing the names of the missionaries, and a history of
the cause of their coming, written in the Syriac language, which was translated
by the Jesuits who happened to be in China at the time of its discovery, and is
given in Kircher's China Illustrata. There is no doubt of the authenticity. The
Jesuits are charged with a most useless and unavaling forgery, especially by
Voltaire. The curious may see more of the affair in Renaudot's account of India
and China Trans. Pt. ii. p. 76 et seq.
. The effect of this mission did not continue long; at first they made
abundance of proselytes; they were favored by the reigning emperor, permitted
to build churches, and inculcate their doctrine among his subjects. This
monument brings down their history to 783, the time of its being made. In the
year 845, an emperor inimical to the monastic life arose, and by an ordinance
entirely suppressed every religious house. This was in fact levelled at the
Bonzees, and the professors of the idolatry of Fo or Fwe, who had not only
expended vast sums in the ornaments of their pagodas and monasteries, CONVENTS.
but made them sanctuaries for all kinds of profligates. This event corresponds
exactly with our celebrated dissolution: here four thousand six hundred of the
great monasteries of male and female recluses, and forty thousand of the
lesser, were directed to be demolished, the lands and revenues to revert to the
royal domain, and a hundred and fifty thousand slaves belonging to the houses
to be set at liberty, enrolled and ranked among the people. As to these
Christians, who in the ordinance are called outlandish Bonzees from Ta-tsing or
Mu-hu-pa, about three thousand in number, they were also included, and directed
to return to a secular life, "to the end that the customs of our empire," says
the decree, "may be uniform and unmixed." From this time the history of these
people was consigned to oblivion, nor ever would have been known, but for the
discovery of the Signan-su monument.

THE ambition of the great Jesuit St. ST. FRANCIS DE XAVIER.
Francis de Xavier to extend the power and importance of his new order, is
mentioned largely at vol. i. p. 113. of this work.

IN 1549 he sailed from Goa to Japan, and after discharging his mission in that
island, determined on a visit to China. Death frustrated his pious design, but
preserved him from the mortification of being refused an entrance into the
empire, according to the most rigid ordinances then in force. He departed this
life off the isle of Sancian. The Chinese had no objection to receive a dead
christian; they permitted his interment; his coffin was filled with unslacked
lime, which miraculously lost its nature, and the body, preserved uninjured,
was found entire, sweet, and with all moisture, fifty years after, (Du Halde
says only as many months) and brought with due veneration to the city of Goa.

FROM this period to the end of the same century, JESUITS.
no attempt was made to follow the great example of St. Xavier. A few
Dominicans and Franciscans would have landed in China with the same pious
intention, could they have obtained leave. The honor of preaching the gospel
with any success in this great empire, was reserved for the rising order of the
Jesuits.

Valignon, superior general of the order of the mission of India, resident at
Macao, burning with zeal for the great design, selected three of his society
for the purpose, Roger of Naples, Pasio of Bologna, FATHER RICCI.
and Ricci of Macerata. The last was a man of superior abilities, who with his
two brethren had rendered themselves masters of the Chinese language at Goa,
before they began their mission. They entered on it in the year 1583. After
several unfavorable essays, Ricci found his way to the court; he had all the
art and insinuation of his order; a noble air, great sweetness of temper, and
an extensive knowledge of the sciences, particularly of the mathematics. He came
also provided with presents; he gave the emperor a clock, a picture of our
Savior, and another of the Virgin, each of which, say the Jesuits, had a most
honorable place. Pasio and Roger had been recalled, and the whole power was
vested in Ricci; under whom crowds of subordinate Jesuits preached the gospel
with the utmost success. They seemed to have a toleration, or at least a
connivance. They reconciled the doctrine of their great master, and the rites
of the Christian religion, with the ceremonies of that of China. Ricci
permitted his proselytes to assist at the annual commemoration of the followers
of Consucius, and to intermingle the rites of both churches, so as to gain
converts innumerable. He baptized several Mandarines and persous of rank; among
others two rich widows, one by the name of Candida, the other that of Agatha.
The wealthy founded churches; and the poor filled them with their numbers.
Persecutions were raised against them; but the abilities of Ricci overcame them
all. He died highly respected, in 1610, at Peking, in the reign of Van Lie; and
by the order of the emperor was most honorably interred in a garden allotted
for that purpose. Ricci incontestibly merited the title he received, of founder
and father of the Chinese church.

SEVERAL other Jesuits of great abilities successively supported his labors; a
persecution had been raised against them, but luckily at the same time an
invasion was threatened by the Tartars. A Mandarine, a Christian convert,
advised the calling in the assistance of the Portuguese engineers to direct the
artillery; the advice was taken, and their success again brought the Christians
into favor.

FATHER Schaal was employed in casting of cannon, FATHER VERBIEST.
and father Verbiest, another Jesuit of first rate abilities, was engaged in
the same service. It certainly was not the spiritual merits of the fathers that
gained them the patronage of the Chinese emperors, but their knowledge of the
arts. They had brethren of all prosessions, painters, mechanics, turners,
watch-makers, founders, accomptants, astronomers, and masters of ordnance.
Verbiest, and some of the ablest of the fathers, were consulted about matters
of state; and by those various means became a most powerful ministry. They were
created Mandarines, and appeared at court in a rich dress of that order, with
the dragon flaming on their breasts. Cam-hi even issued an edict in favor of
the Christian religion. Among the miracles of the times, an eunuch converted
fifty ladies; and Helena Taming, empress of China, held epistolary
correspondence with pope Alexander VIIth.

UNFORTUNATELY for the Jesuits, in 1631, an inundation of other missionaries
poured into the empire. DOMINICANS.
The Dominicans and the Franciscans were zealous to partake of the honor, and
share in the good work; but again, unluckily for both, the Jesuits were more of
this world, their rivals of the other. The last soon discovered the arts by
which the Jesuits had established their power in China. They would not
condescend to preach any but the pure doctrine of Christianity; an inveterate
quarrel ensued among these holy men. The Dominicans and Franciscans carried
their complaints to Rome; the grounds of which were discussed in the highest
ecclesiastical courts, and with various success. The monks had the most subtle
orders to counteract them. The controversy lasted a hundred years; bulls had
been sent to Peking, to disannul all the temporizing compliances of the Jesuits
with the religious rites of the Chinese; some they evaded, and at other times,
by their power at court, excited persecutions against their christian brethren.
They even procured the imprisonment of Tournon, a legate from the Pope himself.
His holiness honored the sufferer with the cardinal's hat; he received it in
consinement, and soon after died, the ridicule of the political Jesuits. The
reader will find a very candid and entertaining account of the Christian church
by Moshcim, in the Chinese Miscellanies, published in 1762, in two small
volumes. My plan forbids me from entering further into the history; let it
suffice to say, that the Jesuits, from the death of Kam-hi, experienced
vicissitudes of fortune; were either depressed or exalted according to the
genius of his successors, or according to the uses to which they were found
subservient. The dissolution of the order probably put an end to the Christian
church in this political empire For a statement of the present situation of the
Missionaries, etc. of the Christian religion in this empire, the reader is
referred to vol. ii. p. 159, et seq. of Sir G. Staunton's account of the
embassy. E.
.

ANOTHER nation, eminent for extending their religion far and wide, could never
effect, by the power of the sword, what this artful order did by insinuation,
and by temporizing with the customs and manners of the people of whom they
intended to make their advantages. The Arabs, ARABS.
who in other places inculcated the doctrine of their famed impostor by
conquest and violence, here never made the attempt; long masters of the sea,
they came from the coasts of Africa, or of Arabia and India, in the form of
traders, in the tenth century. The Chinese admitted them into their ports in
that character, but denied them permission to propagate their faith, as they
had done in India. They were strictly forbidden to make any converts, but were
allowed the free exercise of their own religion, as long as they did not
interfere with that of the empire. The Portuguese, when they first arrived in
China, found the cities full of Arabs or Moors, and Father Navarette, a
Dominican missionary in China in 1665, informs us, that in his time there were
about five hundred thousand, which had greatly increased by intermarriages with
the natives; that many of them took their degrees among the Chinese literati;
which evinces how the Arabs carried with them a thirst after knowledge; but
they were looked on by their brethren as apostates, for mingling with a nation
whose rites were so contrary to their own.

NOTWITHSTANDING the Mahometans have been settled so many centuries in China,
they are in many places considered as intruders, are treated most
contemptuously by the vulgar, and sometimes their mosques have been demolished
by the mob.

LET me now return to the temporal concerns of the Chinese empire. LAST
REVOLUTION.
The last revolution was effected in 1644. The emperor Tsong-Ching, reduced to
despair by a successful rebellion, put himself to death; his brave general made
head against the usurper, but unfortunately, like our Vortigern, called in the
assistance of a foreign power; he invoked the Manchew Tartars, who, headed by
their monarch Tsong-te, united with him, and expelled the usurper. Tsong-te
died as soon as that was effected; but before his death, declared his infant
son emperor of China. The general found his error too late, yet submitted to
the necessity, and supported the new succession. From that time the Tartar line
continued on the throne; but the prince, and all the Tartarian subjects he
brought with him, adopted, in the most minute articles, the ancient rules of
the empire, its laws and customs, and assumed the habits of the conquered
people. Tartars and Chinese are admitted indifferently to places of trust civil
and military. The Tartars compose most of the garrisons, but are now grown as
effeminate as the Chinese themselves, and very little superior to the native
soldiery. The army of China consists of seven hundred thousand men, dispersed
in garrisons, or along the great wall; are well clothed and armed, and make a
fine figure on a review or on a march.

THE characteristic features of the Chinese in the males, FORM OF THE CHINESE.
are a large forehead, short nose, well cut small eyes, a large and square
face, great broad ears, a middle sized mouth, black hair, and a large and fat
body. These constitute beauty in our sex. The complexions in general are as
fair as Europeans, unless in the southern provinces, or among the rank of
people who are obliged to be exposed to the open air.

THE noses of the females are short, their eyes little, their ears long, their
complexions ruddy, their features regular, and countenances gay; their feet
artificially small. LITTLE FEET.
It has ever been the custom of the nurses to bind those parts so close, as to
prevent them from growing; they esteem this a beauty, notwithstanding it gives
them a lameness in their gait; yet they think the smallness of their feet a
charm, and show them as much as possible.

I SHALL now speak of the genius of this singular people, ARTS.
and the progress they have made in the arts.

I WILL begin with the medical. MEDICAL.
All their Materia Medica answers to our Galenical medicines, being drawn from
simples; they have a good knowledge of the uses of the vegetable kingdom. They
never meddle with the violent remedies; gentle cathartics, emollients,
strengtheners, are the kinds they principally prescribe. Green and bohea tea,
the Ginseng, and other salutary roots, are much in use. They are totally
ignorant of anatomy, but pretend to great sagacity in the knowledge of the
pulse; they not only judge of the species and nature of the disease, but apply
their remedy according to the symptoms it exhibits. I refer to Du Halde Vol.
ii. p. 183.
, for the long but curious account of the practice. They were well acquainted
with the circulation of the blood, long before the Europeans attained that
knowledge. As they know nothing of anatomy, it must be by reasoning on the force
and action of the pulse. They bleed, even with a bit of broken china.

THEY had the knowledge of inoculation a great many years ago; INOCULATION.
it is a disputed point whether the Turks (from whom we learned the salutary
art) received it from the Chinese, by means of the Armenian caravans, or
whether the same people might not have communicated it to the Chinese; certain
it is that they have long been in possession of the method; and the emperor
Kam-hi made a noble use of it, sending skilful persons into Tartary, and other
parts of his dominions, to inoculate the children of his Tartarian subjects,
and others; the distemper in every part of the empire being dreaded to the
highest degree, making the same havoc among these eastern people, as the plague
in the western world.

THE art of printing was invented under the emperor Ming-Tsong, PRINTING.
about the year of our Lord 904, being above five hundred years before it was
discovered in Europe. They trace the types through the written copy on blocks
of wood; so never have occasion to break the press, as we do in our quarter of
the globe.

THE manufacture of paper was originally discovered by Tsay-Jun, PAPER.
a great Mandarine of the palace, A. D. 95, who made it nearly in the manner we
do, from old fragments of cloth or silk, and the bark of trees, boiled and
reduced to a thin paste. The consumption of paper in this empire is prodigious;
the Cacoethes Scribendi occasions an amazing demand, and the quantity used for
the papering of their rooms is inconceivable. Their painted papers are more
famed for the richness of the colors, than the justness and elegance of the
design. They have no notion of perspective, nor the least skill in delineating
the human figure, all which appear like so many caricatures. The subjects are
chiefly domestic scenes, agriculture, such as the cultivation of rice, etc.
etc. of tea, and the various processes, from the planting to the package for
foreign markets.

THE consumption of ink must necessarily be equal to that of paper; the
manufacture employs, in the province of Nanquin, INK.
whole villages; lamp-black is the basis, whether of the liquid ink used for
printing, or of that which is brought over to us under the name of Indian ink,
in sticks, with Chinese characters, and ornamented with colored figures of
flowers, etc. The invention of ink in China, is said to have been in the reign
of Ven-ti, about a hundred and sixty years before Christ.

THE emperor Kam-hi caused the wars against the Elaths, and those on the
frontiers of little Bucharia, to be painted, and sent long after into Europe,
in order to be engraven by the best artists; these were the performances of the
Jesuits, and done in a very good manner. They were placed in the hands of Le
Bas at Paris, and engraven in 1770; the plates were sent to China; but because
the figures in the back grounds were not drawn as large as those in the fore,
the plates were returned to be altered (which was done) quite to the taste of
the Chinese. The mountain scenery is magnificent; the actions or surprises
cruel and sanguinary; the fortified places, and little wooden forts, exactly
represented, with various specimens of the art military of these distant
Asiatics. I observed the Bactrian or two bunched camel much in use, carrying
swivel guns on their backs, which were discharged at the fugitives climbing up
the steeps of the mountains. This work consists of sixteen very large prints,
finely engraven. The copies in Europe are rare; ten thousand pounds were
allowed for the execution.

THE use of artillery was not known among the Chinese till the arrival of the
Europeans. ARTILLERY.
The first cannon they ever saw, were three, sent as a present to the emperor,
by the Portuguese of Macao, in 1621. These were afterward used against the
Tartars, who came in swarms to the great wall, but terrified by the slaughter
made among them by these novel machines of war, they never approached it more.

GUNPOWDER was invented in Europe by a monk; GUNPOWDER.
the first cannon ever cast in China, were the work of a Jesuit, Father Adam
Schaal, by order of the emperor; the next of the father Verbiest, the great
ornament of the order; he first cast a hundred and thirty, and after that three
hundred and twenty. They were tried in the presence of the emperor, who so
greatly approved the services of Verhiest, that he loaded him with honors. The
Jesuits, in return, fixed on a day for blessing his labors; dressed in his
religious habit, he nine times prostrated himself, and beat his forehead
against the ground. He had previously fixed a crucifix on an altar before the
train of artillery, which he baptized piece by piece, and gave to each the name
of a male or female saint, taken from the calendar of his own church.

GUNPOWDER was of very early invention in China and in India, but till the time
that I have just mentioned, it was never applied to any other uses than
fireworks on festive occasions, in which the Chinese still excel all the rest
of the world. I refer the reader to p. 362 of the preceding volume, for what I
have said on the subject of the powder and artillery of the Orientalists.

Voltaire asserts that the Chinese had a manufactory of glass above two
thousand years ago. GLASS.
Du Halde says that looking glasses are not among their articles of furniture.
They have indeed at Yen-ching, in the province of Shang-tung, a manufactory,
but so brittle is their Lew-li, or glass, as to break when exposed to too cold
an air. I am farther confirmed by my worthy friend Thomas Fitzhugh, Esquire,
(long resident in China) that the art of making glass in China was in a very
imperfect state, as he informs me that about sixty or seventy years they were
supplied with that article from England, which would not have been the case had
they excelled at home. The glass was carried over in pieces in the shape of
bricks, from which trade it may be supposed the Chinese either did not then
make it, or that they found it more expensive in the process than purchasing
the articles from foreigners The manufacture of glass, if a mere repetition of
the fusion of broken pieces, or of cakes brought from Europe, deserves the
name, is confined to Canton, and unknown in the rest of the empire. E. Embassy
to China, Vol. ii. p. 288.
.

THE works in japan or varnish, JAPANNING.
are very considerable in this empire, but do not equal those made in Japan
itself. The best is that of Tonking and Nanking; the varnish is produced from
the Rhus-vernix, which the Chinese call Tsi. It is the same with that I have
described at p. 72 of this volume. The process in collecting it is the same,
and the workmen are affected with the same diseases in the operation; I
therefore will not repeat what I have before mentioned.

THE very important article of silk shall next be spoken of. SILK.
In my account of Spain will be given the history of the origin of this
manufacture, and the various countries it passed through in its way from China,
its native seat. The care of the silkworm was of the most early date; it was
begun by Si-ling, one of the queens of Whang-ti, third emperor from Fo-hi, at
the period in which his subjects still clothed themselves in the undressed
skins of wild beasts; how surprising was the change for the luxurious habit of
silk. Succeeding empresses followed her example; they went attended by their
fair suite to the orchard of mulberry trees, gathered the leaves of three
trees, either with their own hands, or by the hands of the ladies under their
inspection. A piece of the finest silk was woven and devoted to the ceremony of
the sacrifice to the Shang-Ti, or the Supreme Being. More policy than religion
is intermixed with this sacrifice; the wise Chinese knew that they could not
enforce too strongly the cultivation of a tree which feeds the great staple of
the empire.

The Chinese have two trees which contribute to this purpose; MULBERRY TREES.
the one is the Sang or Te-sang, the Morus Alba or white mulberry tree, so well
known in the south of Europe; this is cultivated in plantations. The other kind
is the Che, or Ye-sang, the wild mulberry, which grows on the hills in forests,
has small roundish rough leaves scalloped on the edges, and terminating in a
point; the branches thorny; the fruit like pepper; in a few words a tree of a
distinct species, if not genus, from the former. On these trees, the young of
the silkworms which are hatched, are laid. The silk, produced from them, is
said to be stronger and earlier than from those bred on the common mulberry.
Paths are cut among the forests of the Che, the ground is cleared of weeds
which may give shelter to serpents that devour the worms; and persons watch
with guns to destroy the birds that make them their food; these trees are also
cultivated in some places like the white mulberry.

I SHALL make mention of a species of silk totally different in its origin from
the preceding; this is described by Du Halde Vol. i. 354.
, SILK OF PLINY.
who says it is made by certain worms in the province of Shangtong. It is not
fabricated by them into Cocons, but left adhering to small trees or shrubs in
form of very long threads, which are gathered and woven into a coarse silk,
called Kien chew, a very thick, lasting sort, which washes well, and is in much
esteem with the Chinese.

THIS account certainly vindicates the opinion held by the ancients that silk
was an article combed from the leaves of certain trees. "Primi sunt hominum"
says Pliny (speaking of the Scytharum Genesis lib. vi. c. xvii.) qui noscantur
Seres, lanicio sylvarum nobiles, perfusam aqua depectentes frondium canitiem:
Virgil delivers the same notion, Velleraque ut foliis depectant tenuia Seres.
The Romans believed it to be the same kind which was produced at Rome from the
silk-thread which had found its way there in the time of Pliny, which makes him
complain of the great trouble the Roman women had in winding and weaving their
silk, whilst the Seres had no more to do than to gather it from the leaves of
trees. Unde geminus foeminis nostris labor redordiendi fila rursusque texendi.
It was long before the manufacture of silks was established at Rome. The use
was discouraged by a law forbidding men to debase themselves by the wearing of
silk, as fit only for women. The effeminate Heliogabalus is the first on record
who wore a dress entirely of silk. The manufactory even in the ribband or
haberdashery way did not reach our kingdom till about the year 1482. Spain had
very long the start of us. Our monarchs were forced to be content with cloth
stockings. Henry VIII. accidentally got a pair now and then from Spain. Sir
Thomas Gresham presented a pair to Edward VI. which was much talked of. Mrs.
Montague, silkwoman to queen Elizabeth, presented her with a pair of black
silk, after which, her highness would never wear any of cloth. Broad silks were
not woven in England till the year 1620. The southern and western parts of
Europe for centuries possessed that species of manufacture.

THE manufacture of cotton must have been of great antiquity. COTTON.
Du Halde Vol. i. p. 319.
mentions the shrub, and the time of the sowing, which immediately follows the
harvest, and in the same field. The produce is woven into calicoes, and into a
cloth well known in England by the name of Nanquins, so called from the place
of manufacture. I imagine that the Chinese have not at present sufficient
quantity of raw materials, as great quantities are said of late to have been
imported from India.

OF the woollen manufactures I can say very little. WOOLLENS.
In the province of Shensi the sheep and goats are sheered thrice a year; and
of the wool of the one and the hair of the other, mixed, is made a stuff much
in request. The sheep are the great tailed kind.

THE Porcelain is of unknown antiquity. PORCELAIN.
The Jesuit D'Entrecolles who had a church in a town in the province of
King-teching, a first rate city which contained upwards of a million of people,
could not trace the origin. That reverend father has been indefatigable in his
enquiry; and has produced a most elaborate account of the materials and process.

THE first knowledge which the Europeans had of China was by the means of the
Seres, SERES.
inhabitants of the northern parts of the empire. These very distant people
were among the nations whom the fame of Augustus had reached, and who
complimented him with an embassy, which took four years journey to perform.
They presented the emperor with pearls, precious stones, and elephants. Silk is
not mentioned; yet probably Virgil learned from them that it was the production
of their country, as I remark from the line of his at p. 107. Horace informs us
how expert the Seres were in the use of the bow.

Puer quis ex aula capillis
Ad cyathum statuetur unctis
Doctus sagittas tendere, Sericas
Arcu paterno.
THE capital of these people is called by Ptolemy, Sera Metropolis, and placed
by him in Lat. 38 36, which so nearly agrees with the latitude of King-chew in
the province of Pe-che-li, as to leave no doubt of that having been the site. I
have, at p. 8. of the first volume of this work, mentioned the Comedae, and the
station of those who were bound for the commerce with the Seres. A branch of
the Imaus runs from thence to the northeast, and after some space to the east.
Part of the country to the south-east of this chain is the Scythia intra Imaum;
and the part to the north-east is the Serica Regio, or land of the Seres.
Various towns or cities of little use to note are mentioned by Ptolemy. In his
time the resting places of the merchants in their road to the Sera Metropolis.
We know no more than that there was a commerce carried on with this country by
caravans from the more western world; that it was interrupted by the Parthians,
who had possessed themselves of most of the country from the Caspian sea to
this branch of the Imaus; and by that means the intercourse was entirely cut
off.

VERY long is the interval between that period and that in which we can find
any travelers who had visited this distant country by land. In the year 1660
Nicolo Polo and his brother Maffio, illustrious Venetians, set out on their
commercial journey. They took their departure from Constantinople for the
splendid courts of the Tartarian princes, who lived in great magnificence, and
gave the utmost encouragement to the European merchants and artists to come
among them, and improve them in the arts. William Ruysbroek, RUBRUQUIS.
better known by the name of Friar Rubruquis, made two journeys into great
Tartary, and mentions Guillaume L'Orfevre and other artists who were employed
in the service of Mongu-khan. To this day many rich proofs of the skill of
European artists are discovered in tombs and other places. The Polos remained
nine years abroad; and returning, Nicolo found his wife dead; he had left her
pregnant; the child survived, and became the famous traveller so well known by
the name of Marco Polo. MARCO POLO.
His father in 1271 accompanied his brother on another journey, and took Marco,
then only eleven years of age, with him. They arrived at the court of
Kublay-Khan, commonly called by the Chinese, Shi-Tsu, fifth emperor of Cathay
or northern China, of the Mogol race, a monarch of abilities, and a great
encourager of the arts. He took a particular liking to young Marco, who soon
learned to read and write the four languages in use in the country; he was in
the service of the emperor seventeen years. The royal residence during summer
at that time was Kambalu or rather Hampalu, i. e. the seat of the Emperor, the
same with the modern Pe-king; but the capital of the empire was the present
Nanquin. Kublay-Khan made use of Marco on several important embassies and
weighty affairs. The father and brother continued with the court; and in their
commercial capacities contributed to its splendour by procuring jewels, and all
the materials of luxury. Marco, his father, and uncle remained with the Khan a
great number of years, and returned safe to Venice in 1295, enriched by their
profession, and in the highest esteem with their countrymen.

Marco wrote his travels, which have been published in most languages; he was a
diligent and faithful observer. I must refer to Bergeron, to Purchase, but
particularly to John Reinhold Forster, for the detail of his travels. He gives
a most splendid account of the court of his master, and shows the state of the
polite arts in China in those early days; mentions the use of the silkworm,
the knowledge of the making of paper from the Morus Papyrisera; the distillation
of brandy from the milk of mares, and numbers of other curious circumstances
beyond the limits of my plan. Marco was also attentive to the natural history
of the country; mentions coals, which he calls black combustible stones;
describes some sorts of falcons and cranes; the Argus pheasant, or pheasants
with tails thirty inches long, and in particular speaks about the number of
partridges and quails. He takes notice of the Musk animal, Hist. Quad. i. No
65. The Thibet cows with long silky tails, No 8. The Argali, No 13, or wild
sheep with enormous horns; and several other matters, both natural and
oeconomical, which have since been confirmed by more modern travelers.

I SHALL now speak of the celebrated Sir John Mandeville. SIR JOHN MANDEVILLE.
Sir John was born at St. Albans, and became the greatest traveller of his or
any other age, having been out thirty-four years, and in the character of
pilgrim, knight errant, and man of observation, visited the greatest part of
Africa and Asia then known. It is probable that he penetrated as far as China.
He left an account of his travels, which were shamefully falsified by the
monks, who destroyed much of their credit, by mingling with them legendary
tales, and stories out of Pliny; but still truth appears so frequently, that
the authenticity of the ground work is by no means impaired. He was called
Johannes de Mandevile aliter dictus ad Barbam, from his forked beard; he found
a grave at Liege, in the convent of the Gulielmites in 1371. He is engraven on
his tomb, armed, and treading on a lion. At his head, the hand of one blessing
him; and these words in the French of the time, Vos ki paseis sor mi pour
l'amour Deix proies por mi. His knives, horse furniture, and spurs, were, in
the time of Ortelius, preserved at Liege by the monks, and shown to strangers.

THE intercourse which the Muscovites had by their caravans with this part of
the eastern world, will be given in a future volume. RUSSIANS.
I shall not therefore introduce it here, but proceed to the first discovery of
China by sea, by the Europeans, in the busy sixteenth century. In the year 1515
Alvarenga, PORTUGUESE.
the Portuguese viceroy of the Indies, turned his thoughts toward a settlement
in China; and bestowed on Ferdinand Pedro Andrada, an able officer, the conduct
of the expedition. In June 1517 he set sail from Malacca, with three ships, and
arrived at the island of Tamanlabua, four leagues from the main land of China.
At that time the coast was infested with pirates; and fortunately Andrada fell
in, says Osorio Vol. ii. p. 244.
, with the imperial fleet, who on sight of him (thinking him a pirate) prepared
for battle; but how great was their surprise when they found that he gave no
sign of hostile intention, but sailed peaceably with them till they anchored
off the isle of Tama. I believe this to be the same which Mr. Nieuhoff Voy. p.
36.
calls Heytamon, and possibly that on which Macao was built. The Chinese
admiral there sent to enquire who these strange people were, and received such
an answer as quite gained his confidence. Andrada then sailed with them for the
port of Nanto, a fine city and harbor about sixty miles from Canton; there he
met with the most hospitable reception, and by his prudent conduct quite
conciliated the affection of the Chinese. He landed there the ambassador
(Thomas Perez) who was immediately conducted to the imperial court. Andrada
returned to the isle of Tama, informed himself of every thing that was
necessary, and greatly enriched himself and companions by his commerce with the
merchants, who flocked to him from different countries. He left China after
impressing on the nation the highest opinion of the integrity of his countrymen.

ALL this was ruined by the ill conduct of Simon his brother, who soon after
arrived there to form the settlement. After building a fort he thought himself
secure, and began to offer insults and violence of every kind to the natives,
who fell on the Portuguese, killed numbers, and obliged Simon to secure himself
by flight.

THE emperor dismissed the ambassador, who on his arrival at Canton, was flung
into prison by the citizens, where he perished miserably.

THE Portuguese for a long time were the detestation of the Chinese; toward
the close of the century they regained their affection by a piece of service
they had an opportunity of doing to the empire by relieving it from the insult
of the pirate Changsi-Lau, who had seized on the island of Macao, and was
besieging Canton. The emperor presented the Portuguese with Macao, as a reward,
who fortified it with two hundred pieces of cannon, at which the subtle Chinese
took no sort of umbrage; for they had stationed their forces in such a manner,
as to cut them off (at will) from even their daily provision. The Portuguese
still retain possession of the city, and have a governor of their own; but a
Mandarine resides here who is supreme over the whole island, so that they are
in a very dependant state; and they besides pay an annual tribute, on the
original agreement of being permitted to erect fortifications. They enjoy their
own laws and religion, and have a bishop of Macao, suffragan to the archbishop
of Goa.

THE English came in late for their share of the Chinese trade. ENGLISH,
In 1584 we made an unsuccessful attempt to get there, but arrived no farther
than the Brazils; our thoughts at that period were full of the rich Cathaian
coast; and all Europe was engaged in many an attempt for the discovery of the
passage to it, but, Mountains of Ice did stop the imagined way
Beyond Petsora eastward to the rich
Cathaian coast.


OUR first factory in that empire was about the year 1701, FIRST AT CHUSAN.
when the Chinese granted to us Chusan, a small island not far from the coast
of Tche-Tchiang, in Lat. 30 40. It had been totally depopulated by the Tartars,
but began to be re-peopled when we settled there. The best account given of the
place is by Mr. J. Cunningham, a very ingenious surgeon who attended our
colony; he says Ph. Trans. Abr. vol. v. p. 171.
it abounded with provisions of all kind, and with cows, buffaloes, deer,
goats, and wild hogs, and many kinds of esculent plants; and with the tea shrub
on the tops of the hills. The Kiew-yeu, Croton Sebiferum Emb. to China, vol.
ii. p. 430. E.
, or tallow tree, is common here, and many other parts of China; and grows as
high as a tall cherry tree; the fruit opens like a chestnut, and contains
kernels enveloped with a pulp, which has all the properties of tallow;
excellent candles, void of any smell, are made of it when melted; it also
supplies the lamps with oil; Du Halde Vol. i. p. 319.
gives us the process. He also describes a tree, called Pe-la-shu, which
produces wax; a kind of little worm fastens on its leaves, wherewith being
covered, in a short time they form combs of wax, much smaller than the honey
combs; this wax is very hard and shining, and considerably dearer than
beeswax. When these worms are accustomed to the trees of any district, they
never quit them, but on particular occasions; if once they remove from a place
they never return, so that others must be procured in their stead, there being
merchants who deal in them.

I cannot ascertain the Genus or species of this tree. There is a Myrica
cerifera in North America that affords a very good wax, Catesby i. tab. 69; and
another at the Cape of Good Hope, Journal Historique, etc. p. 88. tab. opposite
to the page; Sparman i. p. 346. Myrica Aethiopica Lin. Mr. Sparman says, that
the berries are covered at a certain time of the year with a greenish, wax-like
and tallowy substance, which he supposes to be the effect of insects: of this
the natives make candles. I should think it the same with the species just
described; but, that Du Halde says, the insects in the Chinese plants deposit
their wax on the leaves. In the Aethiopica it is found on what Linnaeus calls
cones.

MR. Cunningham also mentions the Syringa Arabica of Gerard, p. 1400; or the
Nyctanthes sambac of Linnaeus. NYCTANTHES SAMBAC.
The Flos Mamorae of Rumph. v. tab. xxx. of general esteem among the
Orientalists on account of the fine scent of the flowers.

OUR factory at Chusan was not of long duration; but was removed to Canton,
which, by a decree of the emperor, was directed to be the only port allotted
for the European commerce. We once had intercourse with the city of Ninpo, but
that is also prohibited.

THE nature and extent of our present trade with China, PRESENT TRADE OF CHINA.
both as to Imports and Exports is as follow. It is delivered in the form it
was communicated to me by Mr. Fitzhugh.

Price Current Goods at Canton, Imports and Exports, 1792.
IMPORTS.
tales. mace. candatines. Amber, fine, white large pieces 50 -- -- # catty.
Ditto false, if very fine 30 -- -- # pecul. Arrack, Batavia 35 -- -- # leagur.
Assafoetida fine 8 -- -- # pecul. Benjamin, first sort 15 a. 17 -- -- ditto.
Betel nut, Batavia and Malacca 3 6 -- ditto. Ditto Cochin-China 4 -- -- ditto.
Birds nest, very fine and transparent 2,300 -- -- ditto. Ditto second sort,
commonly called the first 1,500 -- -- ditto. Ditto 3d sort 800 -- -- ditto.
Bees wax, very best 20 a. 25 -- -- ditto. Black wood 2 5 -- # pecul. Camphor
Barroes, all real head; thin white flakes of this are brought a few catties 12
a. 14 -- -- # catty. Do second sort, head as usually sent 800 a. 900 -- -- #
pecul. Ditto belly and foot 140 a. 160 Cow bezoar, round light yellow pieces 14
-- -- # catty. Cloves first sort, and free from worms 150 -- -- # pecul.
Cochineal, very fine 3 2 -- # catty. Beache de Bau or Swallow, first sort,
black long pieces 18 a. 20 -- -- # pecul. Beache de Bau or Swallow, second sort
8 a. 10. -- -- ditto. Cuttings, scarlet 93 -- -- ditto. Ditto, Colors 38
Cotton Surat, 12 a. 12. 5 a. Cornelian beads from Bombay, bright red according
to quality. Cotch Pegut, black large pieces 3 5 -- # pecul. Ditto, white square
pieces 4 6 Copper, Japan 16, 17, 18 Coral beads and Branch coral according to
quality. Elephants teeth, 3 to a pecul 70 Ditto 4 Ditto 68 Ditto 5 Ditto 66
Ditto 6 Ditto 58 Flints -- 3 6 Fish maws, very best 25,27,30 Ginseng, Canada
fine 27 a. 28 8 Lead 4 8 Ditto red 4 5 Myrrh, best sort 18 a. 20 Ditto ordinary
10 a. 12 Nutmegs, free from worms 350 a. 370 Olibanum, garbled and in chests 8
Ditto ungarbled 8 Ditto ungarbled 5 Pepper, Batavia and Bencoolen 16 Ditto
Malabar 16 5 Putchuck, 15 per Cent to be deducted on the weight; free from
dust, and no black pieces 20 -- -- # pecul. Pearls, according to their quality.
Quicksilver Rattans 4 Rose, Maloes fine 20 a. 22 Red wood 2 8 8 Rabbit skins --
2 8 each. Shark fins, best and largest 28 -- -- # pecul. Ditto second sort 16 8
Smatts first ditto 18 5 Ditto second ditto 15 5 Sandal wood, first sort, 13
pieces to pecul 36 Ditto second ditto, commonly called first 20 Ditto third
ditto 13 Ditto Timore, large pieces 25 Seed pearl, Surat according to quality.
Sagoe 1 8 -- # pecul. Tin 16 Tortoise shell, thick and good 144 Ditto ordinary
57

Bengal Gold, that weigh 2m 9d and 96 Tauch. -- 560 Hd dollars # 100 3m 3d and
94 Tauch. -- 630 Hd dollars # 100 3m 1d and 95 Tauch. -- 600 Hd dollars # 100
Cenetium and 98 Tauch. -- 190 Hd dollars # 100 Star Pagodas, 145 a. Tauch. --
150 Hd dollars # 100


EXPORTS.
tales. maunds. candies. Alum, Amoy 1 6 -- # pecul. Borax 20 China Root 2
Cinnabar 150 Camphor 35 Cassia 11 Ditto (flowers) 12 Dragons blood 23 Dammer 2
5 Gallingal Gamboge 50 Hastal or yellow arsenick Musk 40 -- -- # catty.
Rhubarb, first sort, not procurable Sugar 4 3 -- # pecul. Sugar Candy,
Cochin-China 10 Ditto Chinchew 14 Tutenague 6 Turmerick 2 4 Quicksilver 40
Nankeen 18 cubits long broad 75 -- -- # 100 pieces Nankeen 14 ditto long ditto
35 -- -- ditto. Nankeen raw silk 360 -- -- # pecul. Canton ditto, first sort
220 Canton second ditto 200 Canton third ditto 140 Hyson tea 58 a. 62 Hyson
skins 25 a. 28 Singlo 24 a. 28 Twankay 26 a. 30 Souchon 38 a. 45 Congo 26 a. 28
Bohea 12 Peho 55 a. 60

CHINESE WEIGHTS.
1 Pecul=100 Catties=133 1/1 lb. averdupois. 1 Catty=16 Tales (3 Catties=4 lb.)
1 Tale=10 Mace. 1 Mace=10 Candareens. E.
THE Dutch made their first settlement for the benefit of the Chinese on the
isle of Formosa; DUTCH.
and deceitfully, under pretense of building a house, erected a strong fort, so
as to command the entrance into the port they had sixed on; it was said that
they made use of the stale Phoenician stratagem of the ox's hide, in the
building of Byrsa, or the famous Carthage. The Japanese had not long before
made a conquest of the island, but were too weak to resent this perfidy. The
Dutch now were in possession of a flourishing trade, with the two great empires
of China and Japan. It was lost to them in the year 1661 by the fault of the
factions which reigned at Batavia, the seat of the Dutch government in India.
Iquon, a tailor, who lived in the Dutch town on the island of Formosa, a man of
undaunted courage, had revolted from the Chinese empire, and became so powerful
as to induce the Emperor to get him seized by persidy and poisoned; COXENGA.
his son Coxenga, inherited all his abilities. At first he applied to the Dutch
for succor; but being refused, turned his resentment against them. He prepared
a vast fleet, and army; landed near the Dutch settlement, and notwithstanding
every effort of the governor, Frederick Cojet (whose defense was gallant and
obstinate) at length compelled him to surrender by capitulation. Cojet had been
at first neglected by his countrymen, who when it was too late, sent a strong
fleet from Batavia; it met with a severe repulse, and was compelled to leave
their colony to its fate. We shall hereafter meet the European nations at their
common permissive settlement at Canton. I shall quit the subject I have been
on, and change it to that of a particular topography of the coasts of the vast
empire.

To speak generally; BOUNDARIES OF CHINA.
the country may be said to be divided to the south from Thibet and Boutan, by
chains of most exalted mountains, branches of the Imaus and Hemodus; they
penetrate even into various parts of China: other mountains equally high,
separate the empire from western Tartary. These vast Alpine chains are the
defenses of this mighty empire from invasions by land. The great wall
(hereafter to be mentioned) secures the parts unprotected by nature. The coast
is usually rude and rocky, and the interior often rises into craggy picturesque
mountains, or is intersected by numerous rivers and canals. The seas are
shallow, so that even from a naval attack the country has its protection.

NOTWITHSTANDING part of China is within the tropics, and the great remainder
does not exceed Lat. 43 north, yet the cold is, during winter, intense. There
is no country in which exists such a necessity for furs; their own empire,
Tartary, and Siberia is almost exhausted for the supply; the English even
furnish them with quantities from North America. Ice has been seen at Canton an
inch in thickness. Between Nimpo and Peking the cold has been so severe in
January and February that travelers have been forced to lie by, till the ice
could be broken on the river Hoambo, the largest in China, before they could
pass over. Mr. Kirwan says, that the greatest cold at Peking (in Lat. 39 55) is
5, the greatest heat 98; yet on July 25th, 1773, the thermometer rose to 108
and 110. The extremest cold is produced by a north-east or north-west wind; the
last blows over the vast tract of Tartary and Siberia. In Peking, during
winter, the animals and fowls of all kinds are exposed to sale in the markets,
frozen, and so preserved from putrefaction for weeks together.

THE interior of China maintains a most singular character; it is varied with
chains of mountains winding along its surface, yet so as to leave valleys that
enabled one of the emperors to open a communication by water, partly by means
of rivers and partly by navigable canals, from Peking to Canton, a distance of
1500 miles: little interruption occurs in this vast space, except the lofty
mountains which separate the provinces of Kiang-see and Quan-Tung. We shall
speak farther of this, and the other canals, in their proper places.

I SHALL now enter on the topographical account, ISLAND OF HAINAN.
commencing at its southern extremity. The island of Hainan, i. e. the south of
the sea, expresses its situation. It belongs to the province of Quang-tung
(which, opposite to Hai-nan, juts far south in a peninsulated form) and is
distant above twelve miles from the shore; is a hundred and sixty leagues in
circumference, and produces every thing that can conduce to the wants and
conveniences of life; the climate alone is bad, by reason of the quality of the
water. GOLD.
The island abounds with gold; but as it has been but half conquered, that
valuable metal is in the power of the natives, a brave, independent people, who
live in the middle parts, amidst arduous mountains; the rest of the country
being a plain. The inhabitants had long a traffic with the Chinese; one was
deputed to examine the goods offered; and on the other part a Chinese merchant
went to see those of the mountaineers: the utmost honor was observed on both
sides. The Chinese, especially the governor, made immense profit of the gold.
This the great Kang-hi discovered, and put a final stop to a commerce which
till then had been allowed by law. The Lapis Armenus, which produces blue so
much in request for coloring the porcelane, is also found here, and much of it
sent to Canton for that purpose. The fisheries are very lucrative, twenty or
thirty thousand jonks, of no inconsiderable size, come annually from Canton to
take in cargoes of the dried or salted fish. Our company's ships now and then
put in here, and may be secure during the monsoons.

THE continent, after attaining the bottom of the peninsula, trends toward the
north-east, and is all the way skirted with isles. Those best known to mariners
are the two Sanciams, the False, and that called Saint John's, beneath which is
good anchorage. The great Ladrone and the Asses Ears are noted land marks. The
entrance of the vast bay of Canton opens to the east of Sanciam; the breadth
there is about two and twenty leagues, and the depth nearly the same; but
filled with islands divided by most narrow and intricate channels; possibly
these might be the gates of China mentioned by the two Mohammedan travelers of
the ninth century, as Canton was their Canfu, even at that time a most
flourishing city. It was also the Canectum of the Nubian geographer Page 35.
.

Sanciam is famed for having been the place of interment of Saint Francis de
Xavier, ISLE OF SANCIAM.
and for his tomb, which still is to be seen. Another isle is that of Hoan-pou,
where the Dutch had built a fort in order to command the navigation of the
Tigris, or river of Canton. Their design was discovered, and they were all
massacred.

THE most important city is that of Macao, MACAO.
seated on a little peninsula, and which was, during a certain period,
celebrated for its wealth and commerce; it is now quite declined from its
former splendour, but is well known to the Europeans, as the place where their
ships commonly anchor in their way inward, and from being the residence of all
the European factories, who are obliged by the Chinese to quit Canton as soon
as the ships have left the river. TYPA.
About six miles lower is the Typa, a harbor for careening of ships. Here
Commodore Anson heaved down the Centurion in January 1743, previous to the
capture of the Manilla ship on June 20th, old style, which established the
great fortunes of that lucky house.

THE Hu-men, BOCCA TIGRIS.
or Tigers-gate, or the Bocca-tigris of the Portuguese, is the narrow pass into
that river, which is not a musketshot over, and defended by two miserable
batteries. Mr. Anson passed them in his way to the Canton river. The poor
pilot, who reluctantly carried him through, and the mandarine who commanded the
forts, were most severely punished for what they could not possibly help; the
commodore having threatened to hang the pilot in case of noncompliance. The
poor mandarine knew his own weakness. The real mouth of the river is some miles
below the Bocca, and has on one side the Lion's tower, or pagoda. The river
takes from thence a grand curvature toward the west. The anchoring place for
the European ships is under the isle of Wampoo, a few miles to the east of
Canton. The approach into the bay, and the amazing view along the river, is so
graphically described by my favorite M. Le Poivre, that I cannot resist using
the words of that enchanting author. On the appearance of land (says he) I
perceived along the horizon a forest of masts, and soon after an innumerable
multitude of boats, which covered the surface of the water: these were
thousands of fishermen, whose industry drew from the deeps subsistence for
numbers. The land now began to rise to my view. I advanced to the mouth of the
river, still amidst crowds of fishers, throwing out their lines on every side.
I entered the river of Kanton; it is people like the land; its banks lined with
ships at anchor; a prodigious number of small craft are continually gliding
along in every direction, some with sails, others with oars, vanishing often
suddenly from the sight, as they enter the numberless canals, dug with amazing
labor across extensive plains, which they water and fertilize. Immense fields,
covered with all the glory of the harvest, with stately villages rising to the
eye on every side, adorn the remoter view, whilst mountains, covered with
verdure, cut into terraces, and shaped into amphitheatres, form the back ground
of this noble landscape.

THE Chinese divide their cities into first rate, second, and third. CANTON.
The first may be known by the addition of foo, the second by that of tchoo,
the third by that of hyen. Quang-tchoo-foo, or Canton, is chief among the
first, as it is supposed to contain a million of inhabitants. Fachan, a village
a few miles higher, has the same number. This in some measure inclines us to
think that Voltaire's calculation is not very far out of the way. VERY POPULOUS.
The land, and the very water is inhabited. Millions live in the Sampanes, or
vessels, placed on each side of the great rivers. Those of Canton alone may
contain two hundred and twentyfive thousand inmates. Thousands and thousands
dwell on the exalted rocks; some are excavated into mansions, and every ledge
has on its its elegant cottage; swarms of people inhabit the edges of
precipices, as the myriads of birds do the great promontories of Britain. Paths
are cut through the rocks to render them accessible, and over some are
conducted even public roads. I have seen several of these populated rocks most
accurately represented in rice, with all the economy of their inhabitants
expressed.

THE city is divided into three; the Tartarian, the Chinese, and a third beyond
the first, which is represented on the plan as a void space. The streets are
narrow, but well paved; and cross each other at right angles. The whole is
surrounded with a wall; and each city separated from the other by another wall.
The gates of Canton are shut in the evening, as are the barriers at the end of
every street, so that the greatest cities are as quiet as a private family.

TRIUMPHAL arches are very frequent in most of the cities; TRIUMPHAL ARCHES.
the ancient are the most elegant, adorned with beautiful figures of men,
birds, and flowers in alt-relief, quite standing from the stone, and connected
only by cordons left for the purpose. These monuments are probably honorary
memorials of the great actions of individuals.

IN front, on each side of the city, and on the opposite shore of the river,
EUROPEAN FACTORIES
are large suburbs. The factories of the European merchants consist of a long
row of houses, ranged on the river side, and a space of land behind, about two
hundred yards broad; each has a warehouse for its goods. The mercantile nations
are the English, French, Imperialists, Dutch, Swedes and Danes. Each factory
has the flag of its country erected before it on a tall pole. This is the only
port in the whole empire allowed to the Europeans. Their ships may take in wood
and water where they please, but are every where else strictly forbid to trade;
even here they are a sort of prisoners, they are not to go beyond their bounds;
they may indeed enter the suburbs, but are sure to meet with every species of
abuse from the mob. They are allowed to reside only during the time the ships
remain at Wampu; for as soon as they sail for Europe every factory is obliged
to retire to Macao till the season of their return.

THE proper name of the river of Canton is Ta-Ho, RIVER OF CANTON.
or the great river. The stream is rapid, but affected by the tide which rises
four or five feet opposite to the city; it is navigable for numbers of miles
into the interior parts of the country for large vessels, from the sea even to
the city of Quang-si; and again its advantages are spread far and wide by the
infinity of canals. Not only this, and other cities, but the canals themselves,
for miles together, have their quays made of cut stone of stupendous size,
forming the most magnificent sight which art, applied to commercial purposes,
can exhibit.

THE river of Canton is guarded by various fortifications. The square castle on
the island, engraven by Mr. Nieuhoff, is a specimen of that kind of defense.

THE multitudes of ducks which animate the river about Canton is amazing; TAME
DUCKS.
"they are hatched," says Mr. Latham Ornith. Vol. iii. 492.
by artificial heat; the eggs being laid in boxes of sand, are placed on a
brick hearth, to which is given a proper heat during the required time for
hatching. The ducklings are fed with little craw-fishes and crabs, boiled and
cut small, and afterward mixed with boiled rice, and in about a fortnight
shift for themselves, when the Chinese provide them an old stepmother, who
leads them where they are to find provender for themselves, being first put on
board a Sampane, or boat, which is destined for their habitation, and from
which the whole flock, often to the amount of three or four hundred, go out to
feed, and return at command. This method is used nine months out of the twelve
(for in the colder months it does not succeed) and is so far from a novelty,
that it may be every where seen; but more especially about the time of cutting
the rice and gleaning the crop, when the masters of the duck Sampanes row up
and down the river, according to the opportunity of procuring food, which is
found in plenty at the tide of ebb on the rice plantations, as they are
overflowed at high water. It is curious to see how the ducks obey their master;
for some thousands, belonging to different boats, will feed at large on the
same spot, and on a signal given will follow their leader to their respective
Sampanes, without a stranger being found among them. This is still more
extraordinary if we consider the number of inhabited Sampanes on the Tigris,
supposed to be no less than forty thousand, which are moored in rows close to
each other, with a narrow passage at intervals for boats to pass up and down
the river. The Tigris at Canton is somewhat wider than the Thames at London,
and the whole river is there covered in this manner for the extent of at least
a mile.

THE manner of taking the wild ducks in this country is singular. WILD DUCKS,
HOW TAKEN.
The performers put their heads into the shells of large gourds, with holes
made in them to see and breathe through; then going naked into the water, they
walk or swim so low, that nothing appears but the gourds. The ducks, being
accustomed to see gourds floating on the surface, and to play about them,
approach without fear; when the duck-hunter, taking them by the feet, pulls
them under water to prevent their making a noise, wrings their necks, and
fastens them to his girdle, pursuing his exercise till he has procured a great
number.

I MAY mention here that most elegant of ducks, CHINESE TEAL.
the Chinese Teal Latham, Ornith. Vol. iii. 548.
; but words are almost wanting to express the beauty of the coloring, and the
specific oddity of the fine feathers of the wings, erecting themselves in a
curved manner when the wings are closed. Mr. Edwards's representation Tab. 102.
may serve to give the idea. These are a scarce species, and kept for sale at
Canton, and sold at the rate of six or even ten dollars the pair.

No country abounds with fishes equal to China, FISHES.
yet we have been very unfortunate by the inattention paid to that branch of
its natural history. Osbeck and Sparman, both boasted disciples of Linnaeus,
have given us but a very meagre catalogue. From these, and a few other sources,
I shall give all that I can collect; let me observe that the most numerous
genera of fresh water are the carp and the perch. Du Halde mentions some
curious species of fishes, but his descriptions want the perspicuity of a
naturalist, so are unintelligible.

Du Halde ii. p. 316. gives us two very curious methods of fishing, COVORANTS
TRAINED FOR FISHING.
one is by means of a species of Corvorant trained for the purpose. By the
figure given by Mr. Nieuhoff, p. 118. it seems the very same to our common kind
This Corvorant proves to be a distinct species, distinguished by the name of
Pelicanus Sinensis, and is figured in the 37th plate of Sir G. Staunton's
Account of the Embassy to China; the mode of conveying these birds from place
to place is delineated in Vol. ii. p. 389. of that entertaining and interesting
work. E.
. The Chinese call it Louwa. In Mr. Willughby's ornithology p. 329, we find
that this species of fisheries was in old times frequently practiced in
England. Mr. Latham, vi. 346. informs us that a kind of diver is used also for
the same purpose. "In the morning" (says Du Halde, i. 316.) when the sun rises
one may see on the rivers a considerable number of boats, and several of these
birds sitting at the head of them. Then the fishermen turning their boats
about, at the signal given by striking the water with an oar, the cormorants
fly into the river, one here, another there, and diving to the bottom, seize
the fish they light on by the middle; then rising up again, they carry it to
the bark, where the fisherman receiving it, takes the bird, and holding its
head downwards, passes his hand along the neck to make it disgorge the small
fish that it had swallowed, but is hindered from going into the gullet by a ring
put on the lower part of the neck; which after the fishing is quite over, they
take off and give them something to eat. When the fish happens to be too large
for one bird, they mutually assist each other; one takes the tail, another the
head, and bring it to the boat to their master.

THE other way of taking fish is very simple, and gives but little trouble; for
this purpose they make use of long narrow boats, nailing on each side from one
end to the other, a plank two feet broad. This plank is japanned with white
shining varnish, and slants gently till it almost touches the top of the water;
in the night time, when it is used, they turn it toward the moon, that the
reflection may increase its splendour, so that the fish which are sporting,
easily mistaking the color of the japanned plank for that of the water, leap
often on that side, and fall either on the plank or into the boat.

IN respect to quadrupeds, QUADRUPEDS.
this empire retains many of those of India, but loses also several toward the
northern and western parts: others appear suited to the climate; these are
pointed out in the Faunula, which I reserve as a sort of appendix, unwilling to
interrupt the narrative part of this work.

AT Canton begins the celebrated passage by water from hence to Peking, WATER
PASSAGE TO PEKING.
and the extremity of the great empire of China; an extent, says Du Halde Vol.
ii. 326.
, of six hundred leagues, or about eighteen hundred English miles. The emperor
Shi-tsu finding the defect of tribute he annually sustained, or the vast loss
of his subjects in the articles of commerce which perished at sea in the
conveyance from the maritime parts of his dominions, determined on creating an
internal navigation. IMPERIAL CANAL.
He began the work in 1289; it is probable that he did not complete so
stupendous an undertaking; and it is imagined it was not finished till the time
of Yong-Jo, who began his reign about thirty-five years after. We may well
admit this, as the length of the imperial canal is nine hundred miles, the
depth a fathom and a half, and it conveys annually near ten thousand large
barks belonging to the Emperor, besides others innumerable, the property of
merchants, or of private people, who hire them to travelers. They are all
richly ornamented, especially the imperial, which carry on them the dragon of
five claws, the arms of the empire. The traveller, if he takes the route of
Quang-si and Hu-quang, is under no necessity of ever quitting his bark from
Canton to Peking; he meets with rivers and lakes till he falls in again with
the Yu-Ho, or Royal Canal, as it is named by way of pre-eminence. On that canal
the voyager is only obliged to quit his vessel once in nine hundred miles; the
mountain Meylin intervenes, and makes it necessary for him to take a day's
journey before he can again benefit of the royal work. The shipping on the
canal and rivers are often so numerous as to fill the channel for a mile or
two, and quite obstruct for a time their progress.

GREAT fairs are also kept on the rivers. GREAT FAIR ON THE WATER.
"One season," says Hamilton, at one place, and in other seasons at other
places; and though there may be 10,000 vessels assembled at a fair, yet there
is as good order and decorum kept as in a wellgoverned city. All ships and
boats who have the same species of goods are moored together, along a certain
place on the river side allotted for them by proper magistrates, and at night
watches are sent to prevent thieving and disorder, and offenders are severely
punished without respect of persons.

John Nieuhoff, J. NIEUHOFF.
the celebrated traveller of the last century, is the only one Sir George
Staunton's Account of the spirited and well-conducted Embassy to China was not
published at the time this work was composed. E.
who gives an account of the entire inland voyage from the south to almost the
very north of the mighty empire. That able writer was born on July 22d, 1618,
at Uffen, in the earldom of Bentham, of a respectable family; his person was
elegant, his understanding good, his temper and conversation amiable; he was
fond of the fine arts, poetry, music, and drawing; and master of several
languages. In the year 1646 he entered into the Dutch West India service, and
made his first voyage to the Brazils, where he resided nine years. He has left
us an admirable description of the country, and of the many great events of
that period which happened between his countrymen and the Portuguese.

HIS next voyage was to the East Indies, in the year 1653. He visited the coast
of Malabar, the peninsula of Malacca, and many of the islands, even to the
Moluccas. His accounts are the most satisfactory of any extant; his attention
to several branches of natural history was very considerable; and he has given
various plates of the fishes of the Indies, done with much accuracy,
considering the infant state of the science. On this voyage he was eight years
absent from home. His last voyage (designed also for the East Indies) was begun
on January 1st, 1672. He landed at Madagascar, in order to trade with the
natives, and, as is supposed, was, with his people, massacred by the
inhabitants in the month of September of the same year, for he never more was
heard of. Diligent enquiry was made after him by the surviving part of the crew
left on board his ship, and afterward a yatch was dispatched from the Cape of
Good Hope to repeat the search, which proved equally fruitless.

HIS brother, Henry Nieuhoff, H. NIEUHOFF.
collected together all the papers he left behind, and published them, to the
great honor of his memory. They were written and printed originally in Dutch.
Churchill has given us his voyage to the Brazils and to the East Indies in the
second volume of his collection. The learned Hornius has translated into Latin
the famous journey from Canton to Peking. This is so curious and novel, that I
shall attend the able traveller in his route, and briefly notice the most
remarkable things. HIS TRAVELS TO PEKING.
An embassy was determined on by the Dutch to the coast of Peking, to the great
emperor Kang-hi. Nieuhoff was fortunately appointed secretary. His account is a
first-rate performance; and the more pleasing, as it is attended with views of
the country, cities, and buildings, engraven from drawings done by his skilful
pencil.

THE ambassadors had every possible respect paid to them; they embarked at
Canton, on board a magnificent jonk, on March 17th, 1656, amidst the
acclamations of the people, and a general discharge of the artillery. The
Chinese sent avant-couriers from place to place to make provisions for their
reception, even till their arrival at Peking.

THEY began with ascending the river Pei-kyang-ho, all their route was marked
with beautiful scenery, and various towns and cities, most of them surrounded
with embattled walls, and strengthened by square towers. Many of the landscapes
are most picturesque. We are struck with the river flowing by the vast mountain
Sang-won-hab, over-hanging on both sides; and on one a great frequented road,
STRANGE ROAD.
cut out of the solid rock, impending over the water. At the foot is a pagoda,
the nightly haunt (say the natives) of demons.

FARTHER on, CITY XAOCHEW.
not remote from the city Xaochew or Tchau-tchoofoo, a vast mountain seems to
open its sides to make room for the famed pagoda Konjan-Sjam, filled with
horrid idols, to whom almost constant sacrifices are offered by the fanatical
visitants.

A LITTLE farther is the great castle Mongley, of a quadrangular form, with a
square tower at each corner; equal in size within to a town; seated on a losty
eminence, and accessible by a numerous flight of steps cut out of the live rock.

THE city Xaochew next appears, near the conflux of two rapid rivers, infamous
for frequent wrecks. A pagoda is erected on the banks, famed for its idol, to
which mariners send up their prayers for a safe passage, as the Romans did of
old, and as the Christians of many parts of Europe do to their Saint Elmo to
this very day.

THE rocks called the Five horses heads, FIVE HORSES HEADS.
and the still more curious rocks named Suytjeen, or the five horrible devils,
near to the ferry Suytjeen, as much dreaded as Scylla and Charybdis for the
frequent shipwrecks near them. They are of a columnar form, and appear as if
placed in order by human art.

Nanhang or Nan-sheun-foo, in Lat. 25 11 58, CITY NANHANG.
is the last in the province of Quang-tung, and a considerable trading city; to
the north of it is a famous road over the mountain Meylin, cut through the
rock, three miles in length, with precipices on both sides, but of a secure
wideness. This singular road being a great communication from north to south,
is perpetually crowded as much as the streets of the most populous cities; on
the summit is built a temple in honor of the mandarine who made this useful way
at his own expense.

AFTER traveling some days on horseback, NANGAN.
Mr. Nieuhoff reached the great city Nangan, in the province of Kyang-see,
seated on the river Kanhyang, in Lat. 28 37 12. This river runs through the
middle of the province, and divides it into two equal parts. The Chinese call
it Kan-kiang, THE KYANG RIVER.
or son of the sea, and added that "the sea is without shore, and the Kyang
without bottom;" this fiction arises from the fishermen never using any
sounding lines above sixty fathoms long, but even that depth is a vast one for
a river. By means of the numerous canals that branch from it, the city has vast
commerce, and was once celebrated for its porcelain of a snowy whiteness. The
province is rich in mines of gold, silver, iron, lead, and tin. The silks are
very beautiful; and the rice, and wine made from it, is in high esteem in all
parts of the empire.

THE lakes of this province are in the season covered with the beautiful
blossoms of the Nymphaea Lotus and Nelumbo; NYMPHAEA NELUMBO.
no flowers are in such request with the Chinese as these. The great men have
them transplanted into their little ponds, filled for the purpose with mud and
water, in their courts. The physicians esteem the fruit as highly restorative
after long sickness; and the root of the Nelumbo is a common food, either eaten
raw or made into meal; so that these plants are of the first use in this empire.

Vannunga, VANNUNGA.
on the river Kan, was a city of great size and splendour, now a heap of ruins
from an inroad of the Tartars; a melancholy sight to the numerous passengers
who sail under its walls. PEKKINSA.
Pekkinsa is the next city, a most flourishing place, which supplies the
mariners with all kind of necessaries for their vessels.

NOT far from thence are various specimens of several lofty rocky hills,
PIERCED HILLS.
cut or pierced through by human art, into grotesque forms merely to please the
eye. Those engraven by Mr. Nieuhoff P. 73.
are pierced through in various places, others have great flights of steps, cut
out of the live rock, either to the summit or half way up, round which a walk
is conducted, guarded by rails, and forming a gallery beneath the impending
remainder of the mountain.

Nang-tchang-foo is a city seated in Lat. 29 30, NAN-TCHANGFOO.
near the lake Po-yang, which is about four leagues broad and thirty in length,
LAKE PO-YANG.
abounding with excellent fish, among which are many European, such as
sturgeon, salmon, carp, chubs, trout, shads, and lampries.

ABOUT thirty miles farther to the north of Nan-tchang, the waters of the lake
unite with those of the great river Kyang, which is continued from thence to
the sea. HOO-TCHOO.
The city Hoo-tchoo stands on the eastern bank of the junction. A few miles up
the river to the west, is the city Kyew Kiang, the rendezvous of the barks of
many parts of the empire. The river runs gently from hence to the sea with a
course almost imperceptible; but is at full and new moon affected by the tide.

IN the Kyang near that city, where the river is a league broad, THE FISH
WHANG-YU.
is found the Whang-yu or yellow fish, that often weighs eight hundred pounds;
it is remarkably firm, and most excellent eating; these fish are taken in
certain seasons when they come out of the lake Poyang into the river. We cannot
ascertain the species. Du Halde Vol. i. p. 315.
speaks of another he calls the Cho-kyaryw or armor fish, ARMOR FISH.
being covered with strong scales, placed like tiles in the roof of a house. I
suspect it to be the esox osseus of Linnoeus, or the acus maxima squammosa of
Willughby, Hist. pisc. app. 22. tab. p. viii. This grows to forty pounds
weight, and is in high esteem.

ABOUT fifty miles from the eastern side of the Poyang lake, KING-TECHING.
in Lat. 29 15, stands King-te-ching, on a plain surrounded with mountains, and
having a navigable communication with the lake, by means of a river that passes
by the city Yau-chew, and is crowded with vessels which are continually passing
or re-passing, either with the materials for the famous porcelain ware, or with
the porcelain itself, which is manufactured in no other place in the empire
than at King-te-ching.

IN the Itinerary of Mr. Nieuhoff, TONG-LYU. UFUN.
Tong-lyu, Ufun, Anhing, and Teytong, appear most delightfully seated on the
river. Tong-lyu bears numerous marks of the ravages of the Tartars; at Ufun is
a manufacture of arms famous throughout all the empire.

THE great city of Nanking or Nanquin, NANQUIN.
in Lat. 32 4 30, is seated on an extensive plain, near a league from the
river, but united to it by several canals, capable of bringing up the imperial
barks, which are as large as middle sized ships. This city was once the capital
of China, till it was removed to Peking. It was the Chambdan of the Nubian
geographer, on a river of the same name, which he says P. 69.
was the largest in China. The Tartars made themselves masters of this city in
1127, and before they deserted it, burnt the magnificent imperial palace,
demolished the famous observatory, and violated and destroyed the sepulchers of
the emperors and other distinguished personages. The city is reported to be
ninety miles in circumference; later surveys have made it only eighteen, but it
certainly had been of far greater extent; much is now a waste, and retains all
the marks of the Tartarian fury, but enough is inhabited to make it a most
populous and flourishing city. Of the parts which escaped the rage of the
Tartarian ravages, is the Porcelain tower, PORCELAIN TOWER.
a pagoda of nine stages, of most exquisite workmanship, and lined with
beautiful tiles of Porcelain, from which it derives its name. It is far the
most beautiful in China. Mr. Nieuhoff gives a fine view of this curious
structure, as he does of one of the modern streets, the signs, and manner of
building; the walls of the city, some of the gates, and idol temples, evince
its former grandeur; it is besides the seat of the literati, and consequently
abounds with fine libraries, and is eminent for its booksellers shops, paper,
ink, and all that can feed the Cacoethes scribendi. It is not without other
manufactures; its fattins are in high request, as are the woollen cloths
fabricated here.

Nanquin is garrisoned partly by Chinese, partly by Tartars; the last commanded
by one of their country; they possess one part of the city, and are separated
from the other inhabitants by a single wall.

ABOUT the year 1660, the famous Corsair Coxinga came up the river with three
thousand sail of ships, and laid siege to the place. It happened that on his
birth day, his army past the day with carousals, and all sorts of festivity.
The garrison, guessing that they should find the enemy buried in sleep, sallied
out, surprised the camp, slew multitudes, and forced the rest to find security
in their ships. Coxinga afterward fought and defeated the Tartarian fleet, and
by his cruelty in cutting off the noses of four thousand prisoners, sullied his
victory.

THE passage over the Kyang from Nanquin, was in the time of Nieuhoff on a
bridge composed of fourteen pontoons. The pretty town of Jejenjeen is on the
opposite side. YANG-CHOO.
He entered soon after on the imperial canal, and passed by Yang-choo, a great
and populous city, in Lat. 32 25, flourishing by its being the staple of the
salt trade; that useful article, made on the sea-shores, is brought here by the
lesser canals, and by the same means transported to most parts of the empire;
for they extend in many directions westward, even to the borders of Tartary.
The canal is continued northward on the side of the great lake Kaoyeou-hoo,
SINGULAR VESSELS.
the same which Mr. Nieuhoff calls Piexe. Here the forms of the vessels are
very singular; they are called Longschon or serpentine, and are used to carry
fish, quite to Peking. These are represented in form of a serpent; from the
prow issues the head, on which is placed an idol, with some live ducks pendent;
from the stern is suspended a boy, who is playing all sorts of monkey tricks.
The masts are decorated with numbers of flags, and serpents appear cut or
painted in every part. It is manned with rowers, who with their broad oars, not
unlike paddles, go with most astonishing celerity. It is incredible with what
expedition fish are conveyed fresh to Peking, even from distances of six
hundred miles.

THE city of Yang-choo is infamous for its traffic in women. TRADE IN WOMEN.
It produces the most beautiful in all China, particularly for the admirable
smallness of their feet, and the symmetry of their bodies. They are trained
from their childhood in every accomplishment, singing, dancing, painting, and
composing of verses, but above all, in the practice of every lascivious
attraction. These unfortunate women form a vast article of commerce, and the
merchant panders dispose of them to every part of the empire.

THE next city of note is Kajutsiu; KAJUTSIU.
then follows Hoin-gan-foo, seated on the river Hoai, near which are vast
embankments to keep off the fury of the sea; all this neighborhood is marshy,
yet extremely productive of rice. The whole country may have been gained from
the watery element, yet it must have been many ages past, for a field near
Hoin-gan is distinguished by the numbers of ancient tumuli. Many of the towns
appear like Venice, built in the water, and some even below.

Whay-ngan-foo, in Lat. 33 32, is one; WHAY-NGAN.
it is built below the level of the great canal, which is near that city,
supported by strong dykes. Here, very properly, one of those mandarines resides
who has the charge of the canal, and is called grand master of the waters. Not
far from the west of it is the vast lake Hongtse-hoo, which just below the city
is discharged into the great river Whang-ho or the Yellow River, which rises in
Lat. RIVER WHANG-HO.
35 north, amidst the mountains of the Tartars of Kokonor, near the edge of the
great desert Shamo or Gobi. Its course is about six hundred leagues, and the
current so violent, that it is impossible for a ship to sail up the stream; it
is liable to great inundations; insomuch that the inhabitants of the low
province of Honan are obliged to surround their cities, at a small distance
from their walls, with a strong mound. Mr. Nieuhoff exemplified this in his
plate At p. 117.
The waters are of a yellow color, tinged with the strata they pass through,
which is the origin of the name. This river, in the neighborhood of Whay-ngan,
notwithstanding its low latitude, 33 32, its great breadth, in that part of
more than an English half mile, and its violent rapidity, is at times entirely
frozen.

THE route to Peking is continued through two other provinces, Shan-tung and
Pe-tche-lee. The rich, populous, and commercial city Tong-chang is in Lat. 36
32. This city has also its porcelain tower, being even externally made with
that material, and with little bells pendant at each angle of its eight towers,
which moved by the wind yield a pretty modulation.

Kyo-Few Hyen is a city renowned for having been the birth place of the great
Confucius, CONFUCIUS, WHERE BORN.
so justly celebrated throughout the empire of China.

MR. XANTSUI.
Nieuhoff mentions several other places in this province, such as Xantsui, with
the Teywanmiao, its remarkable pagoda, not distinguished for its grandeur, FINE
PAGODA.
but for the great beauty of the workmanship. It is rather low, and square, of
a vast size, and enclosed within a most extensive wall made of stone, and the
upper part of red and green tiles. The temple itself is of stones, mixed with
yellow tiles (the imperial color) so resplendent as to appear like gold when
shone upon by the sun; it is besides richly decorated with dragons and various
Chinese Chimerae; the inside filled with monstrous idols. On the back part is a
garden, delightful as that of paradise, enriched with variety of fruits and
flowers.

Jax Hinno is a town distinguished by the multitude of square towers which rise
in all parts, JAX HINNO.
like our tower steeples; whether they are for defense or belonging to pagodas
does not appear.

Lintsin-choo is a city in Lat. 36 57, LINTSIN-CHOO.
distinguished by the multitude of vessels continually there in their passage
to the capital, or different parts of the empire, as the great river Eu-teo
unites here with the imperial canal. There is also a custom-house which brings
in a vast revenue. Without the walls is a very splendid pagoda of nine stories;
the outside is of the very fine earth with which porcelain is made, and richly
painted.

Te-tchoo, the last city in the province of Shantung, TE-TCHOO.
is seated on the river, in Lat. 37 32. From hence we immediately enter into
the province of Pe-tche-lee, the most northern in China. The navigation is
continued to Tong-choo-soo, within a small distance of Peking, the latter part
on the river Pei-ho, which flows from the northern capital of China into the
gulf of Pe-tche-lee.

ON the mountains near Sinkosien grow the eagle-wood trees and the Calamba;
EAGLE WOOD.
both form great articles of commerce, and are sold even in China at a large
price, but at still greater in Hindoostan, where so much is consumed by the
Gentoos for burning their dead. Near this city is a most beautiful octagonal
pagoda, consisting indeed but of three stages, but admirable for the roofs, of
most exquisite workmanship.

Single and Tien-sing-foo are the next cities. SINGLE AND TIEN-SING-FOO.
The last is seated Lat. 39 10, on the conflux of three great rivers. On an
island formed at that spot is a most singular castle, of a triangular form,
truncated at the top; this is the greatest emporium in all China, and strongly
fortified in the manner of the country; the resort of jonks, and all sorts of
shipping, are incredible, it being a port free from tribute. The city is not
large, but the suburbs so extensive as to make it one of the most populous in
the empire, and are filled with palaces and pagodas. Nieuhoff imagines this
city to have been the Quinsay of Marco Polo Bergeron's Coll. p. 116.
which he says "was like Venice built on a morass." The emperor, he informs us,
had a magnificent palace here; and adds, that no less than six hundred thousand
families were to be found in this vast place. What is singular, the Neslorians
had a church in the city; a proof that Christianity was tolerated in this
empire in the thirteenth century.

NEAR Joerwoe Mr. JOERWOE.
Nieuhoff went along another canal, made in the river Chaolcang; he passed by
Focheen, Sansianswey, and Tong-tchoo-foo. TONG-TCHOOFOO.
At the distance of four miles from Peking the navigation ends. The reason
assigned for its not being brought to the walls of the city is, that multitudes
of the poor entirely subsist by the carriage of goods and the necessaries of
life into the capital. At this place the Dutch ambassadors were met by a
magnificent cavalcade of mandarines and people of rank, sent by the emperor to
do them honor; and they entered the city in a most pompous procession. After
being treated with the utmost external respect, they were dismissed without
obtaining the end of their embassy.

I SHALL not attempt the description of this magnificent city, but will content
myself with speaking to the eyes by the plates of Mr. Nieuhoff, which I believe
represent with great fidelity the various cities, pagodas, and other buildings
he passed by; in these may be seen the different forms of houses, and public
edifices. The splendour of the emperor's palace, and a general view of the city,
are shown in the 158th page. The pagodas, the idols, in various other pages,
and the customs and dresses of the inhabitants are most frequently exhibited.
In respect to the gardens of the Chinese, those of the private men are
mentioned in the second volume of the Chinese Miscellany, and those of the
emperor most admirably described by Le Friar Attiret, painter to the reigning
monarch in 1743.

I NOW return to the latitude of Canton, COASTS OF CHINA.
and pursue the topography of the coasts. By reason of the great rigor with
which the Chinese exercise their prohibition of trading in any of their ports
except Canton, our knowledge of the shores or harbors is very confined. We
shall have very little to say of an extent of between two and three thousand
miles of coast, following the bending of the outline; the whole of which
appears strangely rugged, with promontories, divided by bays, harbors, and
creeks.

THE Ladrone isles, LADRONE ISLES.
and those of Lema before the bay of Canton, are lofty, rude, and broken; that
of the Asses ears takes its name from two hills that assume the form. Piedra
Biancas, farther to the north, is a very high rock of a white color; both the
last are marks to navigators.

Foo-tchien, the province adjoining to Quang-tung on the north, FOO-TCHIEN.
is a mountanous country, but the mountains, by the industry of the
inhabitants, are formed into amphitheatres, with terraces, which often extend
several miles in length, and a series of twenty or thirty, one above the other.
The account given by Du Halde Vol. i. 273.
is so curious as to merit the attention of our readers. These are planted with
rice, which is nourished by water forced up to a great height, and conveyed to
the different plantations in pipes of bamboo. This province is remarkable for
its vast commerce, opulence, and population, and also for its amazing fertility.

AMONG the vegetable productions, ORANGES.
it is distinguished for its fine oranges; one is very large, and its rind
quite loose to the pulp, which has the taste and smell of the muscadine grape.
This kind is candied, and sent to all parts of the empire; another is of a deep
red; and a third very small. China is the native place of oranges, from whence
they were communicated to the western world.

THE Li-chi and Long-ywen are fruits peculiar to the more southern parts of
this empire, LI-CHI FRUIT.
of most exquisite flavor, especially the first, which has of late years been
most successfully introduced into Bengal.

Hyamen, A-MWY.
or the port of A-mwy, is an excellent road for ships, in a deep bay, beneath
the shelter of the isle of A-mwy, in Lat. 24 27. The island is flat and
morassy, and garrisoned by about six or seven thousand men. Before the
prohibitory edict it was much frequented by European ships. The Dutch, about
the year 1645, made a treacherous attempt on the place; they came with five
ships, and landed about three hundred men, who entered the town; the greater
part of the inhabitants fled, but cunningly left in their houses abundance of
spirituous liquors; this proved the bait they intended. The Dutch intoxicated
themselves to a great degree; of this the fugitive citizens had notice; they
returned, surprised the invaders in their sleep, and put them all to the sword.
The Chinese have preserved the history in large characters, on the face of a
smooth rock near the entrance of the harbor.

ON the isle of A-mwy is a vast rocking stone of forty tons weight, moveable by
the slightest touch. ROCKING STONE.
Whether it is treated with superstitious respect, as the Britons did their
Loggan-stone, Hamilton does not inform us. A stone of this kind is found in
Cachemire, which the Mullahs or priests say is moved by the miraculous power of
the saint to whom it is dedicated.

THE great island of Formosa, ISLE OF FORMOSA.
or Ta-wan as it is called by the Chinese, lies off the coast of Foo-tchien, at
the distance of about sixty miles from the nearest place. The length is ninety
leagues, the greatest breadth about thirty. It is of a curvated form, with the
convexity facing the continent; the tropic of Cancer passes over it, at the
distance of a hundred and five miles from the southern end, almost dividing it
in equal parts. It is very singular, that notwithstanding its proximity it was
unknown to the Chinese till the year 1430, when a eunuch of that nation,
returning from the west, was driven there by a tempest. This was not
immediately productive of any consequences, nor did his countrymen profit of
the discovery before the last century, when, in the reign of the emperor
Kang-Hi, it was invaded by the famous Coxinga, who conquered at last the
western part, not for the empire of China, but for himself. At that time the
kings of Quang-tung and Foo-tchien had revolted from the empire. As soon as
their rebellion was quelled, Kang-hi, in 1683, was put in possession of as much
of Formosa as the young descendant of Coxinga had power to yield.

THE Japanese seized on this island about the year 1620. The Dutch, in their
way from Japan, about the year 1633 made here a settlement. The manner of
obtaining it, and their future expulsion, has been given at p. 122 of this
volume, in my account of their first commerce in these parts with the empire of
China.

THE coasts of Formosa are rude, PORT OF TA-WAN.
lofty, and rocky. The principal port is that of Ta-wan, the same with that
which the Dutch took possession of. Near it is the capital city of the same
name; unfortified, but garrisoned by ten thousand Tartars, and very populous,
to which the Chinese, who are a commercial people, carry on a prodigious trade.
There are besides three other cities and several villages, all inhabited by
Chinese. The whole is remarkably fertile, productive of grain, and all the
fruits which the correspondent parts of China afford. As the whole of the
island was inhabited by a barbarous people, domestic animals are in some degree
scarce. Oxen are in use for riding instead of horses; stags abound; and among
the wild animals, monkies; but it does not appear that tigers or beasts of prey
are known in any part of Formosa.

THE island is divided from north to south by chains of lofty and inaccessible
mountains. NATIVES OF FORMOSA.
The greater part of the western side is inhabited by Chinese, the natives have
the eastern entirely to themselves; those which continue on the western are not
better than servants to the colonists, except the inhabitants of three out of
the twelve districts formed by the Chinese, which have revolted. The Formosans
are a fine people, and of remarkable swiftness, which they attain by practice,
so that they can outrun a horse at full speed. Their shape is easy and slender,
their complexions olive, and their hair fleck, and hanging over their
shoulders. In the southern part of the isle they wear a linen wrapped round the
middle, and falling to the knees: in the northern, the skin of a stag made into
a sleeveless jacket. Their bonnet is formed of Banana leaves, adorned with
tufts of the feathers of cocks or pheasants.

THEIR morals have been much misrepresented by the Chinese and the Jesuits.
They have no external worship, but a strong notion of a Supreme Being, which
renders them a quiet, honest, and benevolent race. An inveterate hatred
subsists between them and the Chinese. The last had reason to suppose that the
island had its gold mines; but as they could not discover them in their part,
they equipped a ship, and sailed to the eastern. They were received by the
natives in the most humane manner, invited on shore, and furnished with every
necessary. In this visit the Chinese observed in the poor cottages a few ingots
of gold left negligently, as if of no value. This excited their avarice; they
made their hosts drunk, and in their sleep cut all their throats, and carried
away the gold, the incitement to this horrid action.

IT must not be forgotten, OF PSALMANAZAR.
that the history of Formosa was written by a person who pretended to be a
Japanese converted to christianity, and to have fled from his country to avoid
the dreadful punishment inflicted by the emperor on all proselytes. He assumed
the name of Psalmanazar, and is generally supposed to have been born in the
south of France. He was a man of uncommon abilities. After leading a vagabond
life through various parts of Europe, in which he acted the part of a most
consummate impostor, and suffering frequently the greatest misery from his
profligate life, he was reduced to become a common soldier in a Scotch regiment
at Sluys; there he first assumed the character of the Japanese. Innes, a
worthless chaplain of the corpse, undertook his conversion, not through
principle, but the hopes of promotion on his arrival in England. Innes had
discovered him to be an impostor, but for their joint interest they united in
the deceit. Psalmanazar formed a Formosan alphabet; he pretended to be
converted in form, was baptized by Innes by the name of George, and the
credulous governor of Sluys stood godfather. Innes had, by his correspondence
with the good Compton, the bishop of London, been encouraged to bring him to
our capital. The prelate was made most completely the dupe of these villains.
Psalmanazar had many patrons and many opponents, but his abilities and
impudence baffled all detection. He undertook a history of Formosa (which he
pretended was subject to Japan), a most fabulous composition; yet, as the
English are always delighted with the mavelous, it was so greedily bought up
as to induce him to prepare a second edition. Innes attained his end, got
preferment, and then basely deserted the cause of his promotion. Psalmanazar
lived some time by various tricks and impostures. At length, at the age of
thirtyeight, he began to feel compunction at the infamy of his life, and was
struck with most sincere remorse. He became a most lively penitent, and applied
his great abilities to useful learning. He wrote his own life, which was not to
be published till after his death. I believe it to be a true narrative, and
that he concealed nothing but his real name and the place of his birth, fearing
to leave reproach upon his family. The list of his works, many of which are on
important subjects, may be found in the Gentleman's Magazine Vol. xxxv. p. 13.
. He lived till August 1763, when he died at the age of eighty; having long led
an exemplary life, fully atoning for the irregularity of his early career.

THE isles of Pong-ho form an Archipelago off the western coast of Formosa,
having the tropic passing over them. ISLES OF PONO-HO.
They are destitute of all the necessaries of life, even to fuel, so that every
thing must be brought from Formosa to supply the Chinese garrison. They consist
of only rocks or sand; yet, as they possess a fine port (which Formosa is
destitute of), they become essential in the preservation of that great island.
The Dutch built a fort at the entrance of the harbor, of which nothing except
the name remains. The Chinese remember it by that of the fort of the Red hairs.
It was the famous Coxinga who took these islands from the Dutch, and kept them
for his own use.

THE province of Tche-Tchiang continues the maritime parts of China from
Foo-tchien. This, like the rest, TCHE-TCHIANG.
is amazingly commercial; remarkable for its rich silks, embroidered with gold
and silver; for its timber, vast forests of the useful bamboo; for its
mushrooms, hams, and the vegetable tallow. SALT.
Salt is made in abundance along the shores, and serves to cure the quantities
of fish taken on the coasts, which are packed in barrels, and sent to the more
distant provinces. The salt itself is transported to several of the internal
parts within any reasonable distance; but those which border on Tartary are
supplied from certain salt pits, providentially given for the use of the
inhabitants For many interesting particulars relating to the preparation of
salt in China, the reader is reserted to Sir George Staunton's Account of the
Embassy, vol. ii. p. 20. E.
.

THIS province, PROVINCES GAINED FROM THE SEA.
and that of Kyang-nan are supposed to have been gained from the sea, as
Holland was by the Dutch. The period is not justly known. The tradition of the
Chinese is, that there had been a mighty deluge: in all probability that of
Noah. Du Halde Du Halde, vol. i. p. 144.
attributes to the emperor Yau the vast works which recovered these provinces
from the sea. I will not dispute the learned Jesuit's skill in chronology; but
the emperor began his reign in 2237 before Christ, and reigned a hundred years;
the period in which he was born could not therefore have been long after the
universal deluge.

Le Poivre also informs us, that these provinces were, some thousand years ago,
covered with water, and regained from the sea by the industry of the
inhabitants. The immense mounds which guard it from the fury of the waves, are
stupendous marks of the power of labor exerted by a most populous nation. They
exceed all the similar dikes of Holland; besides, they have a much more
powerful sea to resist than that which beats on the coast of the European low
countries. Montesquieu attributes to the industry of the natives of these two
provinces, their superior fertility to any in the Chinese empire.

In Lat. ISLE OF CHEW-SHAN.
30, at a small distance from the coast, is the island of Chew-shan, or as we
call it Chusan, mentioned in this volume at p. 115 as the first settlement the
English had in China. It is surrounded with many little isles, the remotest of
which constitutes the most eastern part of the great curved shore of the empire.

AT the bottom of a long estuary stands the city of Ning-po, NING-PO, OR LIMPO.
known to the Europeans by the Portuguese name of Liampo or Limpo. It is seated
in the midst of a fine plain, cultivated like a garden, surrounded with hills,
and divided by a principal canal branching from it, with sixty-six others. On
one of these canals, between Shau-hing-foo and this city, is an example of the
singular method of passing from one level to another, and seemingly a very
awkward one Embassy to China, vol. ii. p. 450, and plate 34 of the solio
volume. E.
. The waters of one canal not being on a level with that of another, the boat,
by means of two capstans, is hoisted upon a stone glacis, or slope, which being
made slippery with water, the boat glides down into the second canal, as swift
as an arrow out of a bow. For this reason, they are made in form of Gondolas,
with keels of a wood hard enough to sustain the weight of a bark. These boats
are proper only for carrying goods from Ning-po, and the towns depending on it,
as far as the canal of Shau-hing. They differ much, both as to size and make,
from the imperial barks, which would be broken to pieces, or at least receive
some considerable damage in the descent.

Ningpo carries on a considerable trade with Batavia, Siam, and Japan. The
Portuguese had early a settlement in this city, where they acquired immense
wealth, and with it, all the vices attendant on riches. Insolent and highly
debauched, PROFLIGACY OF THE PORTUGUESE.
they dared to seize the most beautiful young girls they could hear of, and
employed a set of profligates for that purpose. When they had kept these poor
victims as long as they thought proper, they returned them to the unhappy
parents. Enraged at this, the Chinese cut off a party of the infamous
Chasseurs. The Portuguese had the audacity to complain; the affair was brought
before the highest tribunal; and such scenes of iniquity were discovered, that
a decree was immediately made that the Portuguese should instantly quit the
empire; thus, says Hamilton Vol. ii. p. 284.
, "ended the most opulent colony at that time in the world."

To the north of this city an open bay runs deeply westward into the country,
the vast estuary of the river Tchen-tang-tchiang The great city Hang-tchoo
stands at some distance from its discharge into the bay, HANG-TCHOO.
on a spot where the river is a league broad; here is carried on a great
manufactory of silk, as the province is distinguished for the cultivation of
the worm. In Hang-tchoo sixty thousand workmen live within the walls, and
several hundred thousand in the adjacent country.

NEAR this city is a most beautiful little lake called Si-hu, SI-HU LAKE.
about two leagues in compass. The water quite crystalline; causeways are made
through it for the convenience of walkers, and elegant open halls raised on
posts for the amusement of the citizens. It is full of the famous golden fish,
GOLDEN FISH.
which show to great advantage among the leaves and flowers of the Nymphaea,
with which the lake is filled. This favorite fish of the Chinese is found in
many other provinces; here it forms a species of commerce, the spawn and fry
being transported to all parts of the empire which do not produce them.

THE golden fish is of the most vivid colors; Linnaeus names it Cyprinus
auratus; the gold is highly resplendent, but varies in part of the same fish
into the brightest silver or richest blues which can be imagined. It seldom
reaches the length of eight inches, commonly is much smaller; has one dorsal
sin, which sometimes is wanting, and the back marked by one or two small
protuberances; in many the tail is most remarkable, being so formed as to
exhibit the appearance of two, and even three tails. Mr. Edwards, tab. 209, and
Bloch. iii. tab. 92. give figures of the varieties. They have been introduced
into all parts of Europe, and will not only live but multiply prodigiously in
our little stews.

Du Halde gives the following account of the treatment of them in China: The
next thing remarkable (says the accurate historian) is the Kin-yu or golden
fish; these are kept, either in little ponds, made for that purpose, wherewith
the houses of pleasure belonging to the princes and great lords are
embellished, or else in basins, that commonly adorn the courts of their houses;
in these basins, which are more deep than wide, they put the least that can be
found; for the smaller they are, they think them the more beautiful; besides,
the greater number may be kept of them, and they afford more diversion.

THE prettiest of them are of a curious red, speckled as it were with gold
dust, especially toward the tail, which is forked with two or three points;
some are of a silver color, others white, and some spotted with red; both sorts
are extraordinary lively and active, delighting to play on the surface of the
water; but then their smallness renders them so tender, that the least
impression of air, and even any violent shaking of the vessel, will kill great
numbers of them. Those that are bred in ponds are of various sizes; some are
bigger than our largest pilchards; they teach them to rise up to the top of the
water at the noise of a clapper, which the person uses who feeds them. What is
most surprising is, that according to all accounts, the best way to preserve
them is to give them nothing in winter; it is certain they do not feed them for
three or four months at Peking, while the very cold weather lasts; what they
live on in the mean time, under the ice, it is not easy to understand, except
we suppose, either that they find little worms in the roots of herbs, which
grow at the bottom of the ponds, or else, that pieces of roots themselves,
being softened by the water, become proper food for them; but those which, to
prevent their being frozen, are taken into the houses, and kept all winter in a
chamber, often shut up in a china vessel, without being fed at all, are toward
spring put into the basins again, where they sport with the same strength and
agility as they did the year before. One would imagine they knew their masters,
and those who carry them food, by their being so ready to rise at their
approach. The greatest lords themselves delight in feeding them with their own
hands, and spend some time to observe their nimble motions, and sporting in the
water.

FROM the estuary of the Tchen-tang-tchiang the land bends toward the
north-west. PROVINCE OF KYANG-NAN.
The next province to Tche-tchang is Kyang-nan. On the southern side of the
entrance into the bay of the great river leading to Nanquin, ISLE OF TSONG-MING.
is the island of Tsong-ming, ninety miles in length, in the breadth about
twenty. It was originally a sandy spot overrun with reeds, to which it was
customary to banish robbers and all kinds of profligates; necessity compelled
them to industry; they cleared the ground, sowed the few seeds they brought
with them, and by the assistance of some Chinese who came from the continent to
settle among them, made a barren land fruitful. Other families arrived; the
island was divided among them, and the shares granted in perpetuity, on the
payment of a small yearly rent of the produce of their labor. It is at present
well stocked with buffaloes and hogs, and bears the usual grain and fruits of
the neighboring continent; among the last, it is remarkable for its fine
peaches.

THE approach to Nanquin is now very difficult, the channel being obstructed by
sand, so that the greater ships cannot enter. The Chinese possibly might remedy
this, but it is supposed they wished rather to promote their inland trade than
launch into distant commerce.

THE great and rapid Whang-ho-hoo also empties itself into the ocean near the
northern boundary of this province. RIVER WHANG-HO.
Some leagues farther, opposite to the little isle Yun-tay-shan, in about Lat.
34 31, begins the province of Shan-tung. From thence the land changes its
course, and trends to the north-east as far as Chin-shan-wey. The correspondent
coast to China, all the way from the mouth of the Yellow river, is the kingdom
of Korea, and the intermediate space is named Whang-hay, or the Yellow sea. The
promontory of Shan-tung advances greatly, YELLOW SEA.
and forms the entrance into the gulf of Pe-che-li, which is bounded by part
of the province of Shan-tung, of Pe-che-li, and of Lyauting, a portion of
Chinese Tartary, and finally by the western coast of Korea.

WITHIN the gulf, in Lat. 37 48, TEN-CHOO-FOO.
is the city and port of Ten-choo-foo. On the part of the province more
salient, toward the north, a number of small isles stretch out still further.
This port is a very fine one, and has a strong garrison and fleet to guard the
coast.

AMONG the productions of this province is the famous worm producing the silk
mentioned by Pliny Lib. vi. c. 17.
SILK OF PLINY.
, which that naturalist, with other ancient writers, believed to have been a
vegetable combed from the leaves and branches of trees. I vindicate his opinion
so far as to say that it was collected from a plant, but he was ignorant that
it was the produce of an insect. Du Halde Vol. i. p. 104.
gives an account of its history, but leaves us in the dark as to the species
of insect which yielded this kind of silk. Speaking of a certain sort of silk
manufactured at Tri-nan, a city of this province, he says, that the stuffs
named Kyen-chow incline to a greyish color, which is produced only by the wild
worms, resembling caterpillars. These worms spin their webs on shrubs and
bushes, and furnish as great quantities as the domestic worms. This silk is the
more estimable, as it costs in a manner nothing, and so strong, that the goods
made of it are very lasting, and have a tolerable vent every where.

THE gulf, PROVINCE OF PE-CHE-LI.
from Ten-choo-foo, retires far toward the south, then returns northward, and
in Lat. 38 12 begins the province of Pe-che-li, which in Lat. 39 takes a
north-castern direction, and on the gulf finishes this great empire, in Lat.
40. The capital, Peking, is about a hundred miles from the mouth of the Pei-ho,
TIAN-SIN, PORT OF PEKING.
on which is Tian-sin, the port of the capital. The river flows far to the
south-west, out of the lake Tay-hoo. A canal joins it about thirty miles from
the sea, and receives the vessels which are to discharge their ladings near to
the imperial residence. This province was conquered in about 1324 from the
Tartars, by Tay-tsu, the first emperor of the dynasty of My^g; he took the
capital, Peking, in one day, erected the country into a sovereignty, and vested
it in his fourth son.

THE empire ends about 150 miles farther, in Lat. 40 45. GREAT WALL.
Here begins the celebrated wall, completed two hundred and twenty-one years
before Christ, by the emperor Tsing-chi-whung, to protect the northern parts of
China from the incursions of the Tartars. It appears first in the very sea, on
a vast bulwark, founded on a number of ships, sunk by a wonderful weight of
huge stones, to render immovable the terminating superstructure. The wall is
all the way from twenty to twenty-five feet high, generally cased with brick,
and terrassed at top of a breadth sufficient for five or six horsemen to ride
abreast. It passes along the frontiers of the provinces of Pe-che-li, Shan-si,
and Shen-si; is guarded by a series of square towers or forts, at proper
intervals, of only two bow-shots asunder; and has its gates often of a vast
size, with rooms adjacent, fitted up as places d'armes, and peculiarly well
garrisoned. At no great distance, in several cities, general officers are
posted with considerable bodies of troops. The generalissimo resides at
Kan-choo. Many of these cities are the magazines for the articles of commerce
brought from different parts to be transported into the various provinces of
the empire.

THIS great protection of China is not uniformly built of the same materials.
In some places the walls, and even the forts, are of earth. In the district of
Ning-hya, a few leagues from the city of the same name, the mountains are so
high and precipitous as to supply the necessity of a wall for the space of ten
leagues. In other places it is carried along vast and rugged mountains, almost
inaccessible, yet the fears of the Chinese urged them to prolong their defense
even over the sides or summits of these alps, which direct its course,
according to the nature of the country, over deep valleys or level plains. In a
certain tract a great trench is cut to supply the place of the wall; and on the
banks of the fierce river Whang-ho, or the yellow, are series of sentry-boxes,
filled with soldiers, who keep watch night and day. As the wall must in its
course pass over various great rivers, arches or bridges, of a stupendous
height and strength, are thrown over them.

Later emperors, SECOND WALL.
to give greater security to their capital, have built a second wall, at some
distance from Peking, as strong as the first: It is called the great inner
wall, and unites with the other by Wen-wha-fu. Near it is a city which rises
and falls with the form of the mountain it is built on, and amazes the
spectators with the boldness of the structure.

THE length of the wall, in a strait line, is seven or eight hundred miles, and
allowing for the windings, for the ascents over the craggy mountains, or
descent into the deep valleys, may be estimated at double that length. Yet what
may justly excite our admiration is, that this stupendous work was said to have
been completed in the space of five years. In this empire of obedience every
power was exerted to perform the commands of their common father, issued forth
for the common security.

IMMEDIATELY beyond this bulwark begins the country of the ancient Liau-tong,
LIAU-TONG.
or part of that of the Manchew Tartars, the last conquerors of China, and who
gave the present imperial family to the throne. The gulf of Liau-tong runs
deeply into the north of the country from the foot of the Chinese wall. This
territory has also its guard, but no better than a precinct of palisadoes with
a few mean gates. The capital Mugden, which the Manchews look on as their
metropolis, has a Tartarian commander in chief, and is inhabited by multitudes
of Chinese, who carry on the trade of Tartary. Just without the gates are the
magnificent tombs of their ancient princes. Paper, made of cotton, is a great
manufacture of this country, its principal use is for the sash windows of the
palaces and houses of men of rank in Peking; those of glass have not reached
even the cold latitude of so splendid a people. GING-SENG.
Gingseng, the celebrated medicinal plant of the Chinese, is found in this
country, and many parts of Chinese Tartary, of Korea, and even in the provinces
of Shan-si and Ho-nan, in China itself; but the latter is of an inferior kind.
It grows on the steeps of wooded mountains, or rocks, and on the banks of deep
rivers. The root which is applied to use is said to be of the shape of a man.
There is not a physician of eminence but who has celebrated its virtues; and
exactly in the style of our empyrics. "It fortifies," says Shi-Chin, the noble
parts, keeps the body in good plight, fixes the animal spirits, cures the
palpitations occasioned by sudden frights, dispels malignant vapors, clears
the sight, opens and dilates the heart, and strengthens the judgment. When it
is taken a considerable time together, it makes the body light and active, and
prolongs life. In a few words, there is not a disease incident to the human
body but what it infallibly cures. The Manchews style it Orhota, the most
noble, or queen of plants; others the golden well bordered with precious
stones. There are extant nine ancient receipts and sixtynine modern. GING-SENG.
The value of the root increases; it was formerly worth its weight in silver;
"at present," says Du Halde Vol. ii. 215.
, it is sold for nearly its weight in gold.

IN 1709, when the great Kang-hi was on one of his progresses into his Manchew
dominions, he was desirous to give his favorite Tartarians a valuable
perquisite, and sent ten thousand of his soldiers to collect all the Ging-seng
they could find. Each was to give him two ounces of the best, and to receive
for the remainder an equal weight of fine silver. They sallied forth, and
collected in the year twenty thousand pounds weight; but suffered sufficiently,
for they were allowed neither tent or any sort of covering, and the places of
search swarmed with tigers. Those who did not return on the signal of moving
their quarters, were supposed to have been devoured by those dreadful animals.

IN the Chinese dominions Ging-seng grows between the thirtyninth and
forty-seventh degree north Latitude, and between ten and twenty east Longitude
from Peking: but is not confined to the old world; it was discovered in Canada,
in 1704, by M. Sarrasin, who sent specimens to Paris. It was introduced into
England, in 1740, by the worthy Peter Collinson, and now flourishes in Kew
garden. Linnaeus first called this plant Sion Ninsi, afterward Panax
quinquefolium. Ehret. in True, tab. 6. names it Araliastrum; and Catesby,
Appendix, tab. 16. Aureliana Canadensis, after Lafilau. Doctor Woodville, i.
270. retains the Linnaean name.

IN America it is not confined to Canada. IN AMERICA ALSO.
It is found even as far south as Virginia Gronov. Fl. Virg. 162.
, being discovered on the shady hills and valleys of that state, toward the
end of the last century, by doctor John Clayton. The six Indian nations call it
Garangtoging, or the human thighs. The Europeans have imported a great deal
into China; but it is not in the same esteem, says Osbeck, in which the roots
of the Chinese dominions are held. The Indians of America do not apply them to
any use, but multitudes are employed in collecting them for sale to the
merchants of Quebec. Our physicians depreciate the virtues of this root so
much, that notwithstanding it has found a place in our dispensatory, yet is not
mentioned in the Pharmacopoeia of the London College. The power of the medicine
may possibly have been exaggerated in China, but I never can believe that a
root so universally esteemed in that empire for ages can be destitute of
virtues. Father Jartoux speaks highly of its qualities from his own experience,
and on the very spot Phil. Trans. Abrig. iv. part ii. p. 315.
. To him I give full credit, but at the same time shall observe that the trial
he made was from the fresh roots. The experiments on which the English
physicians founded their opinion, were from dried and exhausted specimens.

ADJACENT to the eastern side of Liau-tong is the peninsula of Korea, KOREA.
extending from Lat. 42 50 to Lat. 34, bounded on one side by the gulf of
Pe-che-li, and the approach to it, on the eastern, by the Japanese gulf. Japan
extends the whole length of the coast, and even stretches beyond its southern
part. Korea is of an oblong form; about a hundred leagues in breadth; its
greatest length extends a hundred and eighty. ITS SITUATION.
It lies between three mighty nations, so that the inhabitants are a mixed
people, but call themselves of Tartar origin; boast of great antiquity; and
produce some books which are two or three thousand years old. They have been
conquered by the Chinese, Japanese, and Tartars; since the conquest of China by
the latter, their yoke has been light; they only are obliged to send four
ambassadors to Peking annually, to perform homage, where, after their audience
from the emperor, they remain in a state of confinement till their return. The
Chinese fear that some time or other they may unite with the Russians, who have
advanced far toward the Chinese frontiers; this may occasion a revolt, and the
consequences prove fatal to the repose of the empire.

Korea had its wall to the north-west, which has long since been in a ruinous
state; but even when complete, did not prevent the conquest of the country by
the Manchew Tartars.

THE Korea is mountainous, and not very fertile, except the vales. It is full
of woods, and produces most of the European fruits and forest-trees. The
southern part yields rice and excellent grain. It breeds a hardy race of
horses, exclusive of a small variety not three feet high; also cows, and black
swine; abounds with various animals; among others are numbers of tigers, the
skins of which are a considerable article of commerce in their intercourse with
Japan. Among the noxious reptiles are crocodiles of an enormous size.

THEY have great quantities of feathered game, and a variety of birds; possibly
many of those we have described in the Arctic Zoology, as belonging to the
Tartarian or Siberian world. But the species of the pheasant kind, with
feathers of the tail three feet long, are confined to this country. The
feathers are sent from Korea an article of commerce to various parts of the
Chinese empire.

THE natives of the northern part are a fine race of men, tall, NATIVES.
robust, active, and without any of the Tartarian aspect. Those of the southern
part resemble the Chinese, of a sallow complexion, and tender constitutions.

THEIR government is regular, GOVERNMENT.
and its customs and laws resemble those of the Chinese. This makes it likely
that their origin may more safely be derived from China than Tartary. The
Chinese pretend that they were subdued as early as the reign of Yau, eighth
emperor from Fo-hi, which may well account, if true, for the similitude of laws
and customs. Their rulers are absolute and sole masters of the land, which is
granted to every man according to his family; but the personal estate descends
from father to son. Their religion is that of Fo, with all its superstitions;
they are very fond of literature, and have triennial examination of Doctors,
Bachelors, and Masters of arts. These adopt the pure doctrine of Confucius, and
despise the ridiculous idolatry of Fo.

THE Koreans of rank are very splendid in their habits, wear fur caps and
brocade clothes; and affect purple-colored silk richly ornamented with gold and
silver. Furs are much in use. The learned are distinguished by two feathers in
their caps.

THE productions of the country are Ginseng, cotton, paper, PRODUCTIONS.
gold, silver, iron, mineral salt, the skins of sables and beavers; and a
beautiful varnish which resembles gilding, made from the gum of a tree.

THE natives carry on a great commerce with China; TRADE.
about sixty merchants attend the annual ambassadors; they travel in March, and
cross the ice of the gulf in sledges; so severe is the cold, even in this
latitude! Others go in August in large vessels, discharge their cargoes in the
Chinese ports, and carry it by land to Peking. They bring with them great
quantities of the window paper, umbrellas, fine mats, tobacco, striped cotton,
furs, and dried fish taken from a large shell on the coast of Japan. This dried
fish is only a covert to the other articles of commerce. They import besides
great quantities of gold and silver in ingots, and part in Spanish Pistoles,
and carry back prodigious cargoes of raw and fine silk, which they manufacture
at home; thin silks, the kind called by the Chinese, Kao-li-Toanza, or Korean
damask; tea, vast quantities of cotton, china ware, and white copper vessels of
all sorts.

THAT penetrating writer, Mr. Campbell, has given an excellent account of the
commerce of this people. My plan is of that confined nature, that I must
content myself with a reference; and request the reader's perusal of Mr.
Campbell's Vol. ii. 1000.
account, in his collection of voyages, which will amply repay them.

THE Koreans trade openly with China, WITH CHINA, etc.
clandestinely with Japan, the Phillippine isles, and perhaps Java; under the
general notion of their being Chinese, they may traffic in disguise to many
other places. Their trade with the nations to the north, and north-west, and
probably with the Russians of their Asiatic dominions, comes under the same
description; all this is strictly prohibited by the Chinese emperor; who even
keeps a Mandarine at the Korean court, to take care that the order be observed;
this precaution, with so corrupt a nation, has very little effect.

THE intercourse to the north, RUSSIANS.
is the most dreaded by the Chinese. The Russians have made great advances on
that side, and had formed settlements on the Amur, which runs through the
northern part of the empire. This brought on more than one war. The Koreans are
said either to navigate the river Songor, or the Schingal, till they arrive in
the Amur; or to sail along the coast, and proceed directly up its mouth, and
trade either with the subjects of Russia, or possibly with the Russians
themselves. All the intervening track from Korea is affectedly given wrong by
the Chinese, in order to keep both their own subjects and those of Russia in
ignorance; but in vain; the Koreans are a match for them in cunning. They
pretend in their voyage up the Amur that they come from some distant isle.
Ysbrande Ides informs us of this, but without knowing that they imposed on him.
They trade even with the Manchew Tartars, subjects of the emperor; but these
people, for gains sake, content themselves with the deception. From them, and
from the Russians, or Russian subjects, they procure the quantities of furs
which they pretend are the produce of their own country.

THE Koreans, having their country three parts surrounded by the sea, must
naturally be a naval people; they trade commonly with Japan, and obtain the
articles of commerce of those islands. WITH JAPAN.
The Japanese have ceded the little intermediate isle of Susima, the Tuitatao
of the Koreans, on purpose to facilitate the trade.

By the pretense of sailing to the island of Quel-praet, seated to the south of
the peninsula, to take in the Chinese manufacture from the magazines formed
there, they proceed on the east side of Formosa, MANILLA.
and to Manilla, where they trade under the name of Chinese, and by this means
acquire such quantities of Spanish silver; they likewise get abundance of
ducats in Japan, exchanging their ingots for specie; with this silver they pay
for great part of the manufactures of China.

THEY do not purchase any European goods in China, yet Korea abounds with those
of our distant world; these are procured in the Phillippines, or at Batavia;
spices, and several other insular commodities, are bought in the same market;
from that of Manilla, they bring amethysts and emeralds; the last certainly
from the mines of Atacames, Manta, and Santa-Fe Ulloa, vol. i. 81. 506.
, in Spanish America. Their intercourse with the Oriental islands must have
been long, for Mr. Campbell observes, that the people who were so cruelly
murdered by the Dutch, in Amboina in the year 1622, for the pretended
conspiracy with the English, were Koreans, and not (as they are called)
Japanese. But there is no limiting the period of trade among these distant
nations, forward as we have shown them to be in the arts of navigation.

I SHALL conclude the account of this singular country, with a view of the
adjacent nations, whether dependent or independent on this mighty empire.

THE kingdoms on the south are Tonquin and Laos; NATIONS ADJACENT TO THE
CHINESE EMPIRE. AVA, THIBET.
a small part of Pegu advances a little into the south-west, and the northern
end of Ava borders on the lower part of the province of Yunan. Thibet is
adjacent to the provinces of Sechwen, a great part of Shen-si, and the upper
part of the last is bounded by Hokonor Tartars; in their country is a large
lake of the same name, in Lat. 35. 36. These Tartars have among them a coarse
woollen manufacture, which they dispose of to the Chinese. Inaccessible and
rude mountains lie to the south of that people, inhabited by a most savage
race, so as to cut them off from all intercourse with the still more southern
countries.

LET me here introduce some account of the celebrated drug, OF RHUBARB.
the Rhubarb, of which Tartary and China is the seat. The rhubarb of all the
medicinal kinds is found in great abundance in several parts of the Chinese
dominions, and even in China itself. In the province of Se-chwen, in the
mountains of Snow, in Shen-si, where troops of camels are laden with nets full
of rhubarb in the months of October and November: it abounds also in Tanguth
about the lake Koko-nor, Little Bucharia, and all the chain of hills from lake
Baikal westward. It grows south as far as Quang-tung; but the southern rhubarb
is little esteemed, yet much of it comes to Europe by sea; I may add, that out
of the Chinese empire it is found in Thibet.

RHUBARB was known to Dioscorides, who lived in the reign of Nero, as a
valuable purge; and Paulus Aeginetus, a physician of the seventh century,
prescribed it for the same purpose. It was brought from the remotest parts of
the ancient Scythia, and the use was continued through all succeeding ages,
without any certain knowledge of the plant to which the roots belonged. Marco
Polo observed it on the rocky mountain near Suchur, in the province of Tanguth,
and says it was sent to all parts of the earth; for it found its way to Europe
from those distant regions even in that early time.

Gerard P. 393.
gives a figure of the well known rhubarb of our gardens, with roundish crisped
leaves. This he names, very properly, Rha verum antiquorum. Parkinson gives
another P. 484, 485.
in his Paradisus terrestris, which he procured from Doctor Matthew Lister,
physician to Charles I. This is acknowledged, from both their accounts, to be
weaker than the other kind which came from China; it is frequent in our
gardens. I do not remember that the roots were ever applied to medicinal uses,
but of the tender shoots of the leaves, are made excellent tarts, in the early
summer, not inferior in taste to the codling.

THE plants which produce the true rhubarb have been but lately discovered; the
seeds of the Rheum Palmatum were sent from Russia by the late Doctor Mounsey,
to Doctor Hope of Edinburgh, in 1763. He sowed them in the botanical garden;
they succeeded greatly; and he, with his usual liberality, communicated them to
the curious. He drew up an account of the plant, and inserted it, attended with
most accurate plates, in vol. lv. p. 290, of our Phil. Transactions. Doctor
Woodville gives also a good figure of the plant at p. 227 of his medicinal
botany; as to that referred to by Linnaeus (Le Brun's travels, i. p. 188, 189)
it seems of some other species of Rheum The Rheum Rhaponticum, cultivated in
our English gardens. F.
.

THAT most excellent character the Duke of Athol, CULTIVATED IN SCOTLAND.
propagated it with great success, not only in his garden, but on the highland
mountains that surround his seat at Athol. His benevolent design of rendering
common and cheap this useful medicine, is blessed with the utmost success. The
roots which he cultivated in the light soils, similar to those of the Tartarian
deserts, the native place, increase to a vast size; some, when fresh, have been
found to weigh fifty pounds, and to be equal in smell, taste, and effect to
those we import at an enormous expense to our country. On being dried, they
shrink to one quarter of their original weight. There is reason to suppose that
the Scotch rhubarb may be superior in virtue to the foreign, the last being
gathered in all seasons, as the Mongall hunters chance to pass by. They draw up
the roots indiscriminately, pierce them at one end, sling them on their belts,
and leave them to dry on their tents without further care. In all probability
the time is not remote in which the British rhubarb will supersede the
necessity of the use of the foreign.

BUT there are other kinds which are said to be equally efficacious with the
Rheum Palmatum, such as the Rheum Rhabarbarum of Linnaeus, the Undulatum of the
Hortus Kewensis, with long waved leaves; the Rheum Compactum, a third species,
boasts of the same virtues; Miller had the seeds sent to him as those of the
true kind. The Rheum Rhaponticum is besides met with in Tartary about lake
Baikal, as well as most of the others. This is the species which gave the name
of Rhubarb or rather Rhabarb to this drug, the plant being first observed near
to the banks of the ancient Rha, or river Volga; the same prescribed by Paulus
Aeginatus as one of the ingredients for a purge, under the name of Rheum
Ponticum; perhaps the trivial might be derived from its being brought from some
part of Pontus, to which it was carried from its place of growth. Pliny Lib.
xxvii. c. 12.
mentions a plant with a medicinal root called Rhacoma; he says it came from
the countries beyond the kingdom of Pontus, and by the name, probably from the
Rha. He describes its uses, but none of them are similar to that of the
rhubarb; I cannot therefore venture to say that it is the same plant.

IN Chinese Tartary the Bobak Marmots, (Hist. Quad. ii. No 324) are said to be
the propagators of Rhubarb. Wherever ten or twenty plants grow you are sure of
sinding several burrows under the shades of their broad spreading leaves. It is
probable the manure they deposit about the roots contributes not a little to
its increase; and their casting up the earth makes it shoot out young buds and
multiply. It appears that the Mongalls never accounted it worth cultivating;
but that the world is obliged to the Marmots for the quantities scattered, at
random, in many districts of this country. For whatever part of the ripe seed
happens to be blown among the thick grass, can very seldom reach the ground but
must there wither and die; whereas, should it fall among the loose earth thrown
up by those animals, it immediately takes root, and produces a new plant.

THE Chinese call rhubarb Tay-whang; they use it nearly in the same manner as
is done in Europe; esteem its virtues much as we do, except that which comes
from Canton: the greatest part of the Tartarian, or most valuable, is engrossed
by the Russians, who purchase it at their town of Kiachta (a little south of
lake Baikal) from Bucharian merchants, and send it to Petersburgh. This is
called the Turkey Rhubarb, because formerly it was brought from Constantinople,
the merchants there receiving it from the Bucharians, who now find a readier
market near home. The Chinese prohibit the exportation of the best rhubarb
under severe penalties, but much of it is procured, either by concealing it
mixed with roots of inferior quality, or by a contraband trade. The Russian
government is very attentive to the business, and appoints at Kiachta persons
to inspect the drug, and to reject all that is bad.

ALL this extensive tract has a most elevated situation, ELEVATED COUNTRY.
giving rise to numbers of great rivers, which, running southward, water the
several parts of India, both intra and extra Gangem: the Ganges itself is one:
the Burrampooter, or Tsampoo of the Chinese, another, with the various
contributary streams that fall into those amazing rivers: the river of Arrakan
may be added to the list; as to those of Ava, Pegu, Siam, and Cambodia, each of
them originate in the south of China. The elevated plains of this part of Asia
did not escape the notice of Marco Polo, for he mentions his journey of twelve
days over one called Pamer Bergeron, p. 31.
; and asserts that he found on those heights the fire to burn with difficulty,
by reason of the excessive cold and rarefaction of the air. These plains are on
the north of Cashgur, and to the west of Little Bucharia.

THE immense deserts of Gobi, or as the Chinese call them, DESERTS OF SHAMO.
Shamo and Hankai, are dreadful boundaries to the north and northwest of the
Chinese dominions. They consist of sands that move with the winds like the
current of a river. Nature has formed three passagesacross them, by means of
three chains of mountains, which run from the great Tartary, and are mixed with
pleasant valleys amidst these oceans of sand. Travelers who take any other
course are liable to be overwhelmed with the torrents of sand, equally
dangerous with the deserts of Arabia. The first of these communications is in
Lat. 42 north, to the E. N. E. of Peking; the second to the east of the
province of Shen-si; and the third in Lat. 32 to the east of Hami, on the
frontiers of Thibet. By these means a safe access was given from the vast
Tartarian regions, and through them, from the countries bordering on the
Caspian sea, and more remotely from Europe itself; they were the roads of the
travelers and merchants of the middle ages.

ADJACENT to the south-western parts were some important cities well known to
those adventurers, HIERKIN. CASHGUR.
such as Hierkin, and Cashgur, already mentioned in this work Outlines of the
Globe, vol. i. p. 8.
, to which Ptolemy gives the names of Comedae and Casia Regio; the first is
supposed to have been Cashgar, the capital of Casia Regio; Hierkin, the Carcham
of Marco Polo, p. 34, is conjectured to have taken its name from its situation
on the Aechardes, a river which runs from the northeast, and was remarkable as
a station which merchants trading with the Seres had in the very neighborhood.
In the time of our great traveller the inhabitants were Mahometans, intermixed
with a few Nestorians.

Hoton or Coton, HOTON.
a province to the south-east of Hierkin, bordering on the desert, is supposed
to have belonged to the ancient Chatae. It is very populous; the inhabitants
are commercial, cultivate cotton, PEYM.
flax, hemp, and wheat, and make wine. Peym is another province productive of
Chalcedonies and Jaspers. The capital of the same name is in Lat. 38. These
places, and many others mentioned by Polo, are to be found in the modern maps.

Lop, the city visited by Marco Polo, lies in Lat. 41, LOP.
and is seated on a lake, which gave name in his time to the great desert. At
Lop the travelers always stop to provide themselves with mules or strong
asses, and provisions for their toilsome journey over the barren waste, which
takes a whole month. Marco Polo seems to have crossed it in the most difficult
part, for the entire tract consisted of unstable sands or rugged mountains,
uninhabitable by even birds or beasts, with scarcely any water, and that
usually bitter. At length he arrived at the city of Sachion, the modern
Shatcheu, at the entrance into the kingdom of Tanguth.

NOT far from thence is Camul, CAMUL.
a city to be found in the old maps. Polo celebrates the great kindness of the
inhabitants, who on the arrival of any strangers, immediately surrender to them
their wives and houses, and retire for the time to other habitations. He adds,
that Mangu Khan, shocked at the indecent custom, directed them to build inns
for the reception of the travelers. This, these contented Cornuti took in such
ill part, that they never rested till by presents and remonstrances they
prevaled on the Khan to revoke the edict.

FURTHER, in Lat. 44 11, Long. 107 from Greenwich, KARAKARIN.
stood Karakarin, the Holin of the Chinese, the capital of the ancient Mongois,
founded before the twelfth century, or the time of Jenghiz Khan. It was
previous to his reign an inconsiderable place, and the residence of Ung, Khan
of the Karaites, when Jenghiz wrested it from him. The conqueror improved it
greatly, and his son Oktay Khan rebuilt it with great splendour about the year
1225; ten years afterward he surrounded it with walls, of no better materials
than of mud; but his palace called Wangan, was of great magnificence. Rubriquis
P. 106 and 95.
gives a full account of it to his master. He informs us that William the
Goldsmith was employed in the ornamental work. The famous silver tree in one of
the courts was in a fine taste. SILVER TREE.
At the foot of the tree were four lions, the same number of gilt serpents
twined round the stem, and their heads appeared out of the branches pointing
different ways, spouting various liquors, one of wine, another of Caracosmos,
or the liquor of mares milk; the third made of honey; the fourth of rice; and
each fell into a great silver cistern placed beneath. On the summit of the tree
was an angel with a trumpet, which sounded by the help of a pipe blown by a man
artificially concealed. All this showed taste in the Khan, as well as beauty of
design in the artist. This city, placed in the middle of the desert, on a
salient chain of mountains, might well astonish the traveller with its
population, and the splendour of its palaces. These parts of Tartary were about
that period full of opulent cities, but little more than the site of them, or
of Karakarin itself, was discoverable by the Jesuits who were employed by the
emperor in the vast work of the survey of his Tartarian dominions. The labors
of the Fathers Regis, Fidelli, and many others, are comprised in twelve maps,
in the second volume of Du Halde. In the third sheet is shown the situation of
this once famous city; and in some of the others, the whole of the desert which
lies in the Chinese territories. The chains of communication are expressed; and
the roads, which the more hardy travelers ventured over, amidst the trackless
sands.

THE part of this desert which is clamed by the Chinese, begins in Lat. 35
north, and in Long. 112 30 east from Paris, winds toward the north-east as
high as Halter Gobi, HALTER GOBI.
in Lat. 47 and Long. 136. After running south-westward to the borders of
India, it skirts Thibet, the country of the Koko-nor Tartars, and then the
borders of the far projecting province of Shen-si. These tracts were known by
the almost obsolete name of the once potent kingdom of Tanguth. TANGUTH.
Rubruquis and Marco Polo traveled through, and describe its flourishing
state, and the number of its cities. The friar is the first who mentions the ox
with a tail like a horse, covered with silken hairs, the grunting ox, Hist.
Quad. i. No 8, since his days fully verified. Polo, in his road to Tanguth,
passed through the great desert, which he names that of Lop. During night, says
he, the caravans are terrified with the delusions of demons which haunt these
horrid sands. The travelers must be careful how they stray, for they will
imagine themselves to be called by their proper names by some of their
comrades, till they are brought to the edge of a precipice; and sometimes they
will be entertained with aerial music. Superstitions fitted to the dread of the
place.

IT afterward passes between the country of the Calmucs and the Kalkas to the
north-west, the Ortus Tartars and the Mongols to the south, and concludes its
course of above two thousand miles, from the borders of India to Halter Gobi,
its remotest extremity. The extreme point to the south-west is not distant from
the lakes Lanke and Mansaroar, the sources of the Ganges; and the lake which
gives origin to the great Burrampooter.

EVEN these deserts do not want inhabitants: some pittance is found amidst the
sands to support the Takija, or wild horses; the Dshikketei, WILD MULES AND
ASSES.
or wild mules; and the Koulan, or wild ass. I refer the readers to p. 2. 4. 8.
vol. i. of my History of Quadrupeds, for an account of those curious animals.

THE Chinese empire in Tartary extends to the north as high as Lat. 56 32. Its
most western limit is not far from the southern end of lake Baikal, in Lat. 51
30, and Long. 100 30 west from Greenwich. It passes southward, with some
irregularity, to the kingdom of Thibet; and has on that side, as a difficult
limit, the great desert of Shamo. The northern boundary runs from the spot
defined, near lake Baikal, eastward for some space, then turns northward along
a vast and lofty range of mountains, the more ancient seat of the Mongols, and
at their extremity, not far from the source of the river Aldan, in Lat. 56 32,
bends to the south-east, and concludes in the sea, in Lat. 54 30, to the north
of the river Amur. All the tract between these lines and the empire of China
Proper are inhabited by Tartars, subject to or under the protection of the
Chinese government. For the further explanation, I refer to my friend the
Reverend William Coxe's Russian Discoveries Page 100.
, and Mr. Arrowsmith's Map of the World, but above all to the Travels of Father
Gerbillon and other Jesuits, who followed the progresses of the great Kang-hi,
or were employed in the actual survey of his vast empire. Their travels are
given in the second volume of Du Halde's History of China.

THE boundaries were settled in 1689 by the treaty of Nertshinsk, TREATY OF
NERTSHINSK.
upon the river Ingoda, in the reigns of John and Peter, afterward surnamed
The Great, and that of Kang-hi. The politic Russians had long been endeavoring
to make themselves masters of the important navigation of the river Amur, which
in time might have given them the command of the Japanese and Chinese seas.
This the Chinese foresaw, attacked and took a fort called Albasin, built by the
Russians. They levelled it to the ground, and carried the garrison prisoners
into China. This brought on an embassy from the Russians. Gallowin, governor of
Siberia, was the ambassador, attended by a most splendid train. So San, captain
of the life guard and minister of state, and Tongue Jau-ye, maternal uncle to the
emperor, were ambassadors on the part of the Chinese, both men of the highest
rank, and to them were added four others of the first distinction. The cunning
of the Chinese was assisted by the subtlety of the Jesuits, for Kang-hi added
to the negotiators Father Gerbillon and Father Pereyra. The Chinese ministers
had a suite inferior indeed in magnificence; but what gave the greater weight
to the negotiation was, that the wise Kang-hi had added ten thousand men
besides the escort, and which were attended by a fleet of seventy-six vessels,
each carrying a piece of artillery. The Russians had fixed on Albasin as the
place for settling the business; but to their surprise, the Chinese appeared
suddenly before Nertshinsk, or, as they call it, Nip-chu, encamped near the
place, and the whole business was transacted under tents. All this gave
argument irresistible. The treaty was concluded. The Chinese offered to swear
to the performance on the crucifix. Gallowin chose that they should swear by
their own gods; and both couched the sacred appeal in these terms (imprecating
the Divine vengeance on the faithless party): We, ambassadors extraordinary of
the two empires, having been sent to settle the bounds of both dominions, and
establish a solid and perpetual peace between both nations, which we happily
executed in the conferences held by us in the seventh moon of the 28th year of
Kang-hi, near the town of Nip-chu, by distinctly setting down in writing the
names of the countries and places where the two empires join each other, have,
by fixing the bounds of both, and ordering in what manner such disputes as may
fall out for the future are to be treated of; have mutually received an
authentic writing, in which is contained the treaty of peace, and have agreed
that the said treaty, with all its articles, shall be engraven on stone, to be
fixed in the places appointed by us for the bounds of both empires, to the end
that all who pass by those places may be fully informed thereof, and that this
peace, with all its conditions, OATH OF OBSERVANCE.
may be for ever inviolably observed. But should any one have the thought only,
or secret design, to transgress these articles of peace, or breaking his word
and faith, should violate them out of private interest, or from the design of
exciting new troubles, and rekindling the fire of war, we pray the supreme Lord
of all things, who knows the bottom of men's hearts, not to suffer such people
to live out their days, but to punish them by an untimely death.

I MAY here remark the observance of two very ancient customs in the execution
of this treaty; A ROMAN FORM.
the one in the manner of the oath, which agrees with that in use among the
Romans, of which Polybius has lest us the following form, made on the occasion,
and which remained in his days, cut on tables of brass, in the temple of
Jupiter Capitolinus, in the archives of the aediles.

THE first of these treaties was confirmed by oath in the following manner: The
Carthaginians swore by the gods of their country, and the Romans by a stone,
agreeably to an ancient custom; and by Mars Enyalius. The ceremony of swearing
by a stone was thus performed: the person that was appointed to this office,
having first solemnly attested the public faith for the due observance of the
treaty, took in his hands a stone, and pronounced the following words -- 'If I
swear truly, may the gods be propitious to me: but if I think or act any thing
that is contrary to my oath, then let the rest enjoy in safety their country,
laws, possessions, household gods, and sepulchers; and let me alone be cast out
from the society, as this stone is now cast away.' At the same time he threw
away the stone Hampton's Polybius, book iii. chap. iii. p. 214.
.

THE other custom was one of the earliest date on this very continent, COLUMNS
MEMORIAL.
that of preserving the memory of any remarkable transactions by pillars of
stone. Thus we find in Genesis Chap. xxxi. v. 51.
, that the treaty between Laban and Jacob was confirmed and perpetuated by the
erection of a pillar and a heap of stones. The Chinese ambassadors raised two
pillars on the spot, to determine the boundaries of the respective empires, and
on them engraved the treaty.

IT was the intention of the Russians to have made the Amur the limits of their
empire. RIVER AMUR.
This vast river is formed originally by the junction of the Onoa and the
Schilka, to the west of Nertshinsk. From thence it flows easterly, takes a vast
bend southernly, and then returns to the north-east, and falls through a mouth
four or five leagues wide into the lower part of the sea of Ochotzk, opposite
to the great island Sachalin, in Lat. 53. The Tartars call the river Sachalin
ula, or the black river; the Chinese, Helong Kiang, or the river of the black
dragon; and the Russians, the Amur. It was first known to them in 1639, by
means of some Cosacks, sent on an expedition toward the river Witim. According
to Du Halde Vol. ii. p 311.
, it is navigable for large barks for the space of five hundred leagues.

THE Russians were charmed with the discovery of a river which report made to
fling up gold and silver; and its neighborhood to abound with the most precious
sables, cattle, fruit, and grain; and its inhabitants to be clad in nothing but
damask and gold brocades: in short, it was represented as a land of Canaan. The
Russian colonists of the neighboring places migrated thither in crowds, and
depopulated their former country. They founded a fort in Lat. 53, FORT ALBUSIN.
which they called Albasin, the Chinese, Jaksa, from the river near which it
was seated. The Chinese burnt it in 1680; but it was resounded, and at length
strongly garrisoned, till it gave such serious cause of jealousy to that nation
as to bring on the treaty which occasioned its total demolition. It is no
wonder that they were alarmed: the borders of the river were remarkably
fertile, had numbers of large cities, and a most populous territory; besides,
the mountains to the north were productive of the richest sables and other
furs, and inhabited by a hardy race of hunters. Had the Russians rendered
themselves masters of the Amur, even Katherine, the moderate, might have made
the Chinese tremble for the fate of Peking itself.

THE Chinese had several places on the Argun of some importance, such as Aigun,
or, as it is called by them, AIGUN.
Sachalin ula Choton, near the junction of the Seja with that great river, a
fort from which they detached their fleets against the Russian encroachments.
Tondon is another town, in Lat. 50, where the cold begins with great severity
as early as the beginning of September; later in the year the greatest rivers
are frozen over. Tigers inhabit even these high Latitudes. This country was
visited and surveyed by some of the missionaries, by order of Kang-hi. Whoever
wishes to gratify his curiosity farther, may consult Du Halde, vol. ii. p. 245,
and the following pages.

THE country is full of forests; the missionaries were nine days in passing
through one. They observed that the inhabitants of Usuni made use of sledges
drawn by dogs, and persons of rank have sometimes a hundred to relieve each
other on long journies on the snows or frozen rivers. The river of Usuri Du
Halde, vol. ii. map the sixth.
, which rises far to the south, and falls into the Amur, abounds with fish,
mostly of species common to Europe. These serve the Ypi Tartars for food and
raiment. YPI TARTARS.
They are very ingenious in dressing the skins, which they dye of various
colors, cut them into shape, and sew them so neatly that they appear like silk.
Sturgeons swarm in these waters. The native Tartars make their boats of the
bark of trees, sewed lightly together.

IT does not appear that the missionaries went farther than Tondon. ISLE OF
SAGALIN.
The report they had of the great island of Sagalin, or Saghalian anga hata, or
the island of the mouth of the black river, was from some Manchews sent by the
emperor in their barks. For want of necessaries, they were soon obliged to
return. They observed certain villages; and that the inhabitants had neither
horses or any beasts of burden, but made use of a sort of tame stags (rein
deer) to draw their sledges. The island is said to be a hundred and eighty
miles long and sixty broad. All the coast of the continent, from the part
opposite to this island, as low as the northern boundary of Korea, is scarcely
known; it bounds the western side of the streights of Yoso. What could be said
of this obscure part, and of the opposite islands, will be delivered in a
future volume of this work.

FAUNULA OF CHINA.
QUADRUPEDS.
I. HOOFED. HORSE. -- THE native horses of China are low, compact, I. HOOFED.
strong, and patient of labor; the flesh of mares is a favorite dish with the
Chinese, a taste perhaps acquired from their conquerors the Tartars. On the
mountain Holan, in the province of Shen-si, are abundance of wild horses. OX.
-- Buffaloes are very common in most parts of the empire, especially the
southern. The Indian, No 7. The silky-tailed or Thibetian, No 8, is found, says
Mr. Nieuhoff, about Teng-chew or Ching-chew. The soldiers ornament their caps
with tufts of the hair; Mr. Nieuhoff's, with horns whiter than ivory, is to be
farther enquired after. It is a wild species, so fond of salt, that the hunters
place some in its haunts; which they lick so eagerly as to be inattentive to
those who lie in wait for them.
SHEEP. -- The Sheep are of the broad tailed kind. Hist. Quadr. i. p. 41.
GOATS. -- Domestic goats are common. ANTELOPE. The Chinese, or yellow, No 44,
abound on the borders adjacent to Tartary, and are great objects of the chase.
DEER. -- Stag, I. HOOFED.
No 54. In Yunan, says Du Halde, i. 122, not taller than common dogs. Fallow
Deer, No 53. Roe-buck, No 61, possibly this species is the tail-less, No 62,
being so near to the regions where that alone is known.
MUSK. -- Thibet, No 65, according to Doctor Forster, is found in China. CAMEL.
-- The two bunched, No 69, B. is very common, both tame and wild, the last only
in the deserts; the tame is a beast of burden, as in other places. The camels
with feet of the wind, are famed for their swiftness. This animal enters into
the materia medica of China; the fat is called the oil of bunches; the flesh,
the milk, and even the hair, and very dung, are admitted into the
prescriptions. HOG. -- "Neque alio ex animali numerosior materia ganeae;" a
remark of Pliny's, may be as well applied to the Chinese as to the Romans. No
animal supplies them with more delicacies, for it is the foundation of all
their feasts, and is in season the whole year round. Their hams are allowed to
be exquisite in the taste of every nation. RHINOCEROS. -- Du Halde, i. 121,
says that the Rhinoceros, No 81, is found in the province of Quang-si, in Lat.
25. ELEPHANT. -- No 165, is placed, like the camel, in the materia medica of
China; they are found in the provinces of Quang-si and Yunan. Do they exist
there at present? None are applied to use.
II. DIGITATED. APE. -- Great black apes, with features like the human, II.
DIGITATED.
in the island of Hai-nan; scarce. Gray apes, in the same island; very ugly,
and common. Apes with yellow hair; in shape, and shrilness of cry like dogs: In
the province of Quang-si. None of these species ascertained.
DOG. -- Dogs are a favorite food in China, and their flesh is common in the
shambles. When the butchers are dragging (as is customary) half a dozen to the
slaughterhouse, they are attacked by all the dogs within hearing of the cries
of their fellows, so that they are obliged to have people to defend them with
sticks.

The common people of China will eat any animal, even if they have died of
sickness, such as dead horses and dogs that they see floating down the canals.
China is certainly the most plentiful, yet from the vast superabundance of the
inhabitants, no people suffer such misery as the lowest order; the produce of
the earth frequently is insufficient to support such multitudes; this, not want
of affection, compels them to expose their infants to death. In China, children
are esteemed a peculiar blessing. In times of famine, or when the mothers fall
sick, or their milk fails, they expose them in the streets, II. DIGITATED.
or leave them to be murdered by the midwives; such horrid spectacles are
frequent in the streets of Peking and Canton.

Wolf, No 159. Fox, No 161.
CAT. -- Tigers, No 180, were found in the province of Tche-tchiang, but are
most frequent on the borders of Tartary. In so very populous an empire one
would have thought it impossible they could long remain unextirpated; but in
the northern roads, hundreds of travelers are seen with lanthorns carried
before them to secure them from these ravenous animals. The hunting of the
tiger was a constant diversion with Kam-hi, in his progresses into Tartary. At
the age of sixty-nine, this great monarch died of an illness contracted by the
violence of his exertions in the chase of one of these animals. There are no
lions in China; the first ever seen in that empire, was a present made to the
emperor Tay-tsu, about the year 1324. Leopard, No 182, or Poupi. Domestic, No
195, eaten in China. Angora, No 195, a. white, with beautiful silky hair, and
hanging ears, the delight of the Chinese ladies. In the province of Shen-si, is
an animal resembling a tiger, Du Halde, i. 108.
BEAR. -- Brown, No 208, or black, No 209. The paws of this, and diverse other
animals, brought salted from Siam, and Cambodia and Tartary, are highly
esteemed in China. BADGER. -- European, No 215, eaten by the Chinese, II.
DIGITATED.
and often found in the shambles. WESEL. -- Martin, No 242. Civet, No 274.
HARE. -- Common, No 299. Rabbit, No 302.
PORCUPINE. -- Crested, No 314, frequent in the shambles. MARMOT. -- Earless,
No 326. Nieuhoff, p. 109, part ii. mentions a large mouse, with a valuable
yellow skin, found in a place he calls Siven. RAT. -- The Rat and mouse very
common; and the first, among the eatables of the country. SQUIRREL. -- Common,
No 329. MANIS. -- Short tailed, ii. No 460, found in Formosa; the Chin-Chion
Seick of the Chinese. BAT. -- Bats, says Du Halde, as big as hens, eaten by the
Chinese, are frequent in Shen-si. These are either the Ternate, No 495, or the
Roujette.

This certainly is a very imperfect Faunula of the great empire.

BIRDS.
I. RAPACIOUS. I. RAPACIOUS.
FALCONS. -- Of various kinds, but chiefly from Tartary. Chinese Eagle, Latham,
i. 35. tab. iii. Asiatic Falcon, Supp. 31.
OWL. -- Chinese, Supp. 44. Sonnerat ii. 185. White barn owl, i. 138. Br. Zool.
No 67.

II. PIES. II. PIES.
SHRIKE. -- Chinese, Latham, i. 173. Jocose, i. 175. White-wreathed, i. 178,
commonly painted on the Chinese paper. Fork-tailed, i. 158.
PARROT. -- Alexandrine, i. 234. Edw. 292. Cockatoo, i. 256. Pl. enl. 263.
Philippine, i. 311. Pl. enl. 520. Lesser white Cockatoo, i. 258. Cochin-China,
Supp. 65. Green and red Chinese, i. 278. Pl. enl. 314. Grisled, Supp. 64.
Sapphire-crowned, i. 312. Pl. enl. 190. fig. 2.
HORN-BILL -- Philippine, i. 345. Pied, i. 349?
CROW. -- Carrion, i. 370. Br. Zool. i. No 75. White breasted, i. 376, tab. xv.
leaves China and the Mongols country in vast flights in the spring, migrating
into the neighborhood of lake Baikal. Jay, i. 384. Br. Zool. No 79, is frequent
in China. Little Jay, Supp. 83. Sonnerat, ii. tab. 107; forehead white, great
white spot under each eye, other colors plain. Red-billed Jay, Latham i. 390.
Pl. Enl. 622. Blue Crow, i. 394. Purple-headed Crow, Supp. 83. Macao Crow,
Supp. 84. Sonnerat, ii. p. 187. a small species. Rufous Crow, Supp. 84.
Sonnerat, ii. p. 186. tab. 106. size of a black bird, very long tailed;
predominant color, reddish; resembles in shape a magpye. Short tailed Crow,
Supp. 82. I have no doubt but the hooded crow, Br. Zool. i. No 77, is found in
China, being a native of the Philippine isles, not very remote from this part
of the continent; the same might be said of the birds of Tartary, or of the
countries adjacent to the west and south of China.
ROLLER. -- Chinese, i. 414. Pl. Enl. 620. Black-headed, Supp. 86.
ORIOLE. -- Kink, ii. 448. Pl. Enl. 617. Golden, ii. 451. var. A. Edw. 77.
Chinese, ii. 452. var. C. Pl. Enl. 570.
GRAKLE. -- Minor or Mino, ii. 456. Edw. i. 17. inhabits the island of Hainan.
Greater Mino, ii. 457. Edw. 17. may be taught to talk, whistle, and sing very
well, even better than a parrot; its food is fruits; if denied what it likes,
will whine like a young child; it inhabits every isle, and possibly the
continent east of the Ganges. Crested, ii. 464. Edw. 19. This has the faculty
of speech, etc. like the preceding; frequent on the Chinese papers or
paintings.
BARBET. -- Grand, ii. 502. Pl. Enl. 871. CUCKOO. -- Spotted, ii. 516. Pl. Enl.
764. Chinese, ii. 530.
WOOD-PECKER. -- Bengal, ii. 581. KINGS-FISHER. -- Cape, ii. 610. Black-capped,
ii. 625. Pl. Enl. 673. Common, ii. 626. Br. Zool. i. p. 246. Arct. Zool. p.
280.
HOOPOE. -- Common, ii. 687. Br. Zool. No 90. CREEPER. -- Gray, Supp. 133.
NUT-HATCH. -- Chinese, Latham, ii. 655.
III. GALLINACEOUS. III. GALLINAGEOUS.
PEACOCK. -- Crested, ii. 668. Pl. Enl. 433. 434. Peacocks are found in vast
numbers in a state of nature, as well as domesticated, in the province of
Quang-tung, and abundance are sent from thence to different parts of the
empire. Iris, or peacock-pheasant, iv. 673. This is a native of the provinces
bordering on Thibet. The Thibet Peacock of M. Brisson is no other than this
bird. It is well figured in tab. 67, 69, of Mr. Edwards's work.
PHEASANT. -- Common, iv. 712. This species abounds in all parts of China and
Chinese Tartary, as does the variety with a white ring round the neck. Argus,
iv. 710. This is a magnificent species found in China. Mr. Edwards has given
two figures of this rare bird, one in the Phil. Trans. vol. lv. p. 88. and the
other never published, of which he presented me with several. It is of the size
of a large turkey-cock; the middle tail seathers are two feet long: the primary
feathers of the wings very broad, and one web most attractively ocellated. The
history is unknown. Its residence is in the north of China and in Korea. There
is in the Chinese empire, a bird, whether of this genus I will not determine,
with some of the tail feathers six feet and one inch long, and an inch and a
half broad; colors white, edged with dull buff; webs as if serrated on each
side of the shaft with black upon the white ground. The bird is said to have
been in body no larger than a pigeon. One of the kind died on board the ship in
1781, in its passage from China. Colonel Davies, of the artillery, made an
accurate drawing from the feather itself, and favored me with a sight of his
performance. Golden, iv. 717. Edw. 68, 69. This species is among the most
splendid of the feathered creation. Is not uncommon in the British menageries,
and hardy enough to bear our climate in a state of liberty, if the brilliancy
of its colors did not make it the mark of our poachers, and quickly bring on
its extirpation. It breeds readily in confinement; its eggs are redder than
those of the common pheasant. These birds are called in China, Kin-ki, or
Golden hens. They are found in the provinces of Yunan, Se-chwen, and Shen-si;
its flesh is more delicate than the common kind. Silver, iv. 719. Edw. 66. In
brilliancy of colors this species must give way to the preceding; but not in
elegance. The whole upper part of the male being white, most beautifully
pencilled with black lines, the lower of a fine purple black; breeds with us in
confinement. Superb, iv. 709. Pencilled, iv. 719. Fire-backed, Embassy to
China, vol. i. p. 246. tab. 13. Not. Misc. pl. 321.
PARTRIDGE. -- Pearled, iv. 772. Brisson i. 234. tab. 28. The Chinese in severe
weather keep their hands warm by holding this and the Chinese quail between
their palms, as appears in many of their painted papers. Chinese, iv. 783. Edw.
247. Pl. Enl. 126. Not above four inches long. The male is scarcer than the
female. The Europeans buy up the females to makes pies for their homeward
voyage. Common, iv. 779. Pl. Enl. 170. These are trained by the Chinese for
fighting, as we do the fighting cocks in England. Hackled, iv. 766. tab. 66.
common to China and the Cape of Good Hope. Du Halde mentions a sand partridge.
I suppose the Tetrao Arenaria of Pallas, Nov. Com. Petrop. xix. 418. tab. 8.
Iter. iii. 699. Latham iv. 751. He says that partridges are seen in China by
thousands in a flock, and appear in clouds together. Green, iv. 777.

IV. COLUMBINE. IV. COLUMBINE.
PIGEON. -- Crested, iv. 668. Queest, iv. 635. Br. Zool. i. No 102. Chinese
Turtle, iv. 647. Collared T. iv. 648. Striated T. iv. 650. Barred T. iv. 650.
Edw. 16. Blue crowned T. iv. 655. Great Turtle, Sonnerat, ii. 178, as large as
the English Queest. Chinese gray, iv. 649. Sonnerat, ii. tab. 102.

V. PASSERINE. V. PASSERINE.
STARE. -- Silky, iii. 10. Brown's Illustr. tab. 21. frequently represented on
the Chinese papers. Green, iii. 10. with the forehead and chin tufted. Brown,
iii. 10.
THRUSH. -- White-wreathed Shrike, iii. 35. Chinese, iii. 36. The Hoamy of the
Chinese. Crescent, iii. 37. Black-faced, iii. 37. The Shan-hu of the Chinese.
Violet, iii. 57. Sonnerat, ii. tab. 108. White-headed, iii. 59. called in
China, by the French, Petites Galinotes. Black-necked, iii. 60. Chanting, iii.
61. Pl. Enl. 604. Inhabits the southern parts of China; is said to be the only
bird in the vast empire that has any thing like a song. Yellow, iii. 63. Green?
iii. 65. Georgi, who saw one in a cage, supposes it came from China, and adds,
it sung well.
GROSBEAK. -- Padda, iii. 129. Edw. 41. 42. Very injurious to the rice grounds;
called in China, Hung-tsoy. Chinese, iii. 135. Malacca, iii. 141. var. A. Edw.
43. Grey-necked, iii. 145. White-headed, iii. 151. Asiatic, iii. 155. called by
the Chinese, Lap-tzoy. Red-billed, iii. 151. Amoen. Acad. iv. 243. Edw. 271.
Orange bellied, iii. 157. var. A. Edw. 83. f. 1. Dwarf, iii. 158. Dominican,
Amoen. Acad. iv. 242. Yellow, Amoen. Acad. iv. 244. Cyaneous, Amoen. Acad. iv.
244. Edw. 125. Brown, Amoen. Acad. iv. 245. Cardinal, Amoen. Acad. iv. 242.
This, if rightly referred to, Catesby, i. tab. 38. is certainly a bird peculiar
to North America. I have my doubts to some of the preceding six; for Mr. Osbeck
seems to have communicated to Mr. Lagerstrom, birds, which the most intelligent
ornithologists have given to other countries, but Mr. Lagerstrom, for the honor
of China, bestows them on that empire.
BUNTING. -- Chinese, Latham, iii. 169. Barred tail, iii. 187. Mixed, B.
TANAGRE. -- Chinese, iii. 229. Military, iii. 242. Amoen. Acad. iv. 241. Edw.
82. 342.
SPARROW. -- House. Br. Zool. i. No 127. This petulant bird is nearly
universal. Chinese, Latham, iii. 277. Brown, iii. 279, very little larger than
a wren. Green, iii. 286. Edw. 272. 128. Chapter Siskin, iii. 293. White-earned,
five specimens, supposed to be varieties. Latham, iii. 314, small birds with a
white spot near each ear; very common on Chinese paper. Ceylon, iii. 317.
Brown-throated, iii. 318. Azure-headed, iii. 319. White-bellied, Edw. 355.
FLY-CATCHER. -- Wreathed, Latham, iii. 336. Sonnerat, ii. p. 107. Green, iii.
336. Grey-necked, iii. 337. Yellow-necked, iii. 337. Orange-vented, ii. 338.
Nitid, Supp. 173. Greenish, Sonnerat, ii. 197. Black-headed, Sonnerat, ii. 197.
LARK. -- Mongolian, iv. 384. White-winged, iv. 383.
WARBLER. -- Nightingale, iv. 408. Br. Zool. i. No 145. Luzonian, iv. 451.
Black-hooded Wheat Ear, Latham, iv. 471. White-crowned, iv. 4^2. Chinese, iv.
474. Long-tailed, iv. 501.
TITMOUSE. -- Chinese, iv. 555. SWALLOW. -- Chimney, iv. 561. Esculent, iv.
570. Chinese Swift, iv. 586.


WATER FOWL. THE numerous waters of this empire must certainly afford infinite
variety and plenty of birds of this class. The rocks and cliffs which border
many of the coasts are doubtlessly the habitation and breeding places of
multitudes of gulls, auks, and corvorants; but we are under the necessity, from
want of authority, of omitting numbers that in all probability are natives of
China.
I. CLOVEN-FOOTED. I. CLOVENFOOTED.
HERON. -- Sibirian Crane, Latham, v. 37, Arct. Zool. ii. No 156, frequently
painted on the Chinese papers. Common Crane, v. 50. Cinnamon H. v. 77. Malacca
H. v. 78. Chinese H. v. 99.
WOODCOCK. -- Common, v. 129. Br. Zool. ii. No 178. Snipe, v. 134. Cape Snipe,
v. 139. Green Shank, v. 147, Br. Zool. ii. 183. Red Shank, v. 150. Br. Zool.
ii. 184.
PLOVER. -- Long-legged, v. 195. Br. Zool. ii. 209. JACANA. -- Chinese, v. 246.
Vappi-pi, Latham, Supp. 25.
GALLINULE. -- Crake, v. 250. Purple, v. 254, common on Chinese papers.
Red-tailed, v. 259, Ind. Zool. p. 49, tab. xii. Crested, v. 269.

II. PINNATED FEET. II. PINNATED FEET.
COOT. -- Common, v. 275. Br. Zool. ii. No 220. Crested, v. 278. tab. xc.

III. WEBBED-FOOTED. III. WEBBEDFOOTED.
DIVER. -- Chinese, vi. 345, tab. xcvii. TERN. -- Chinese, vi. 365. Caspian,
vi. 351.
DUCK. -- Chinese Goose, vi. 447, and var. A. Mallard, vi. 489. Br. Zool, ii.
No 279. Both the wild and tame, in vast numbers in China, and multitudes are
hatched by artificial heat. Falcated, vi. 516. Arct. Zool. ii. p. 301. Chinese
Teal, vi. 548. Common, Br. Zool. ii. No 290. Baikal Teal, vi. 557. Hino. T.
Latham, vi. 558.
PELICAN. -- Frigate, vi. 587. Corvorant, vi. 593. Chinese fishing Shag, Emb.
to China, ii. 388, tab. xxxvii. Lesser Gannet, vi. 611. called in China Bubbi,
one of the species used by the Chinese in fishing. Osbeck, i. 127.


FISHES.
CARTILAGINOUS. CARTILAGINOUS.
LOPHIUS. -- Histrio, Bloch. i. p. 13, tab. cxi. BALISTES. -- Monoceros, Bloch.
ii. p. 12. tab. cxlvii. Catesby, app. tab. xix. Vetula, Bloch. ii. p. 22, tab.
cl. Catesby, ii. tab. xxii. Scriptus, Catesby, ii. tab. xix. Nigro Punctatus,
Osbeck, ii. 331. Ringens. Bloch. ii. p. 27. tab. clii. Sinensis, Marcgrave, 154.
TETRODON. -- Hispidus, Amoen. Acad. iv. p. 247. Ocellatus, Bloch. v. p. 3.
tab. cxlv. Osbeck, ii. 331, Furube, Koempfer, Japan, i. 134.

THE length of this species is about nine inches; DESCRIPTION.
the upper part of the body is smooth, and of a green color; between the
pectoral fins, across the back, is a crescent, black in the middle, bounded on
all parts with bright yellow; the belly covered with whitish spines. It can
blow itself up into the form of a round ball.

THIS, HISTORY.
and some other species of the same genus, are frequent in the Chinese and
Japanese seas. This specimen was taken in the Canton river. The effects of
eating it is dreadful; if eaten entire, it is the most fatal of poisons, and
even when dressed according to art, has had mortal consequences; yet such is
the rage of epicurism, that many people will not forbear this tempting viand.
It is often used by such who in despair wish to remove themselves into the
other world. The Chinese boil with it a branch of the Illicium anisatum, Koemp.
Amoen. tab. 885, in order to secure the effects. Such is the strange but true
history of this deadly fish.



BONEY FISHES. APODAL. APODAL.
TRICHIURUS. -- Lepturus, Brown. Jam. p. 444. tab. xlviii. f. 3. Seb. Mus. iii.
tab. xxxiii.

THORACIC. THORACIC.
GOBIUS. -- Niger, Bloch. ii. p. 5. tab. xxxviii. Br. Zool. iii. No 95, found
also on the coast of Britain. Eleotris, Osbeck, ii. p. 332. Anguillaris, Gmel.
Lin. 1201. Pectinirostris, Osbeck, ii. p. 332.
CHAETODON. -- Pinnatus, Seb. Mus. iii. tab. xxv. fig. 15. Argenteus, Gmel.
Lin. 1242.
SPARUS. -- Nobilis, Osbeck, ii. 332. Chinensis, Osbeck, ii. 332.
LABRUS. -- Opercularis, Gmel. Lin. 1286. Chinensis.
PERCIL. -- Chinensis. SCOMBER. -- Trachurus, Osbeck, ii. p. 332, Br. Zool.
iii. No 134.
ABDOMINAL. ABDOMINAL.
CLUPEA. -- Thrissa, Osbeck, ii. p. 333.

Du Halde, i. 119, calls this species the shad. "There is," says he, "near
Nanking, a famous fishery for shads, called She-yu, in the months of April and
May; and at another place, a good way from thence, there is such plenty of this
sort of fish, that they often carry them to a neighboring island, called
Tsong-ming, where they were sold exceeding cheap, at the time the missionaries
made the map of it."

Mystus, Osbeck, ii. p. 333. Sinensis, Osbeck, ii. p. 333. Lanatus, Osbeck, ii.
p. 333.
CYPRINUS. -- Auratus, see p. 156 of this volume. Cantonensis, Osbeck, ii. p.
333.



JAPAN.
JAPAN.
THE remainder of the north of Asia has been described in my ARCTIC ZOOLOGY,
what I have said in this, serves to give all I can collect respecting that vast
continent. The islands to the north of Formosa must now be added, the omission
would render this volume incomplete, for we should not only lose the account of
the important island of Japan, but break into the great chain, which extends
quite from the first of the Malayan to the Kuril isles, already described in
the above work.

THE islands, called by Mr. Arrowsmith the Tatpin, TATPIN ISLES.
form a numerous group of small isles dependent on those we are just going to
mention; they lie not remote from the eastern side of Formosa, with the tropic
of Cancer passing over the southern end.

THE isles of Liquejo, or as they are called by the natives Riuku, ISLES OF
LIQUEJO.
are the next; they are seventy leagues to the north-east of Formosa; the most
considerable, Kintschin, which lies north and south, between Latitudes 26 28,
and 25 45, is about fifty leagues long, and fifteen broad: the east side and
south end skirted by numbers of little isles and rocks; the inhabitants are
chiefly Chinese, who fled from the Tartars at the time of the last revolution.
They were well received by the natives, who speak a broken Chinese, which
argues their descent, so that the new comers were considered as countrymen.
They are principally husbandmen and fishermen, and are a most cheerful happy
people, diverting themselves, after the labor of the day, with a glass of rice
beer, and with their musical instruments, which they take into the field with
them. A few centuries ago, these islands were conquered by a prince of Satzuma,
a province of Japan, who governed them by his lieutenants; they still remain in
the same state of dependence, but are taxed with much gentleness. The
inhabitants also send annually to the emperor of China, a gift in token of
loyalty and submission. They carry on a commerce with Satzuma, and visit it
once a year; they have there a company of merchants, but are confined in their
commerce to that port, and limited to the value of their trade, but by the
connivance of the Japanese officers, they dispose of an infinitely greater
quantity than the law admits. They import into Satzuma all kinds of silks and
stuffs, and various Chinese commodities, which they carry over in their own
jonks, and some of their own produce, such as corn, rice, fruit, and pulse, and
a sort of brandy made from the remainder of their crops. They bring great
quantities of the Cypraeae Monetae, CYPRAEAE MONETAE.
or cowries, the same species which is found in the Maldive isles Outlines of
the Globe, vol. i. p. 151.
; from those shells is also prepared a white varnish, with which the boys and
girls paint their cheeks; they besides export a sort of large flat shells,
which when polished, are almost transparent, and serve the Japanese for glass
in their windows; to these add some articles of luxury, in various scarce
flowers and plants brought in pots, and a few other matters of a trifling
nature. Notwithstanding these people are really subject to the Japanese, they
do not allow the emperor's supremacy, yet, like them, they have a Dairi or
hereditary ecclesiastical governor, to whom they pay great respect, and suppose
to be lineally descended from the gods of their country; he resides at the isle
called by Kaempfer Hist. of Japan, p. 380.
(to whom we are indebted for all this account) Jajama, not remote from Osima,
an island of second magnitude.

THAT island, another larger, called Tanaasima, TANAASIMA ISLAND.
with several lesser, extend north and south to the north-east of the Liquejo
islands, and form the links between them and Japan. Between the isle of
Tanaasima, and that of Liquejo, are the streights of Van Diemen; that island is
the most southern of those which compose the great empire of JAPAN. and is the
smallest of the number; the latitude of the south end is 30 north, according to
Doctor Thunberg, and the most northerly of the Japanese islands extends to 40,
the longitude from 143 to 161 east. The coasts are rude and rocky; the
circumambient seas, raging with storms during nine months of the year, STORMY.
are shallow, filled with shoals and rocks, and extremely subject to frequent
shipwrecks. Off this coast are two whirlpools, dangerous, and not less
tremendous than those of the famous Maelstrom near the Norwegian shores; there
are frequent instances of ships being absorbed in the vortex, and their
shattered fragments slung up at the distance of many leagues. The poets of
Japan make constant allusions to these horrible phenomenon.

THE climate of the Japanese isles, like that of Great Britain, is very
changeable, and subject to frequent rains, fertilizing the ground, as they do
that of our island. Thunder is frequent, and earthquakes so common, as never to
be minded, unless attended (as has been often the case) with dreadful
consquences.

THE summer heat is very great, HEAT.
and scarcely tolerable, when not alleviated by the winds; it sometimes, in
July and August, raises Fahrenheit's thermometer to 100. The cold on the
contrary is excessive, and sinks the mercury many degrees below the freezing
point, especially when the winds blow from the north and the east; in the
northern parts there are mountains scarcely ever free from snow.

THE whole empire is mountanous, SOIL.
level meadows are unknown; the fields of the valleys consist of a clayey soil,
sometimes sandy, yet rendered fertile by the incredible industry of the
inhabitants; even the higher hills are cultivated to the very tops.

IN my account of the objects of their labor, BOTANY.
and the botanical productions, I shall follow that able naturalist and
traveller Doctor Thunberg, who visited this empire in 1775, and even had the
happiness of making a journey to its capital Jedo; as yet we have only been
favored by him with the Flora of the country A translation of his travels was
published in 1795, two years after this account of Japan was composed. E.
; I shall not pursue the brief account of the vegetable productionssy
stematically, but class them as Doctor Thunberg has done, according to their
uses. Japan has been fortunate in having been visited in 1699 by Doctor
Engelbert Kaempfer, one of the ablest naturalists and scholars of his time. His
Amoenitates exoticae, and his travels into this empire, render any other
eulogium superfluous. He will be frequently quoted in the ensuing pages, as
(ranking with Doctor Thunberg) my best authorities.

THE first class comprehends the vegetables of use in medicine. MEDICAL.


Rosmarinus officinalis, Flora Japonica, 22. Fl. Coch. 34. Sp. pl. i. 60.
Gerard, 1292, cultivated here, a native of Spain, Italy, and the Levant,
introduced possibly by the Portuguese.

N. B. -- Such species which are peculiar to Japan, have not the mark Sp. pl.
of Linnaeus affixed.

Urtica nivea, 71. Rumph. Amb. tab. 79. f. 1. Sp. pl. 4. 153. Fl. Coch. 683.
Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 891. A caustic oil is expressed from the seeds; the bark
is used to make ropes, and the strong threads for weaving.

Fagara piperita, 64. Sp. pl. i. 333. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 892. fig. p. 893.
Fl. Coch. 101. The bark, leaves, and berries aromatic, and used instead of
pepper; the leaves ground, mixed with rice flour, and formed into a poultice,
serve as a blister in rheumatisms.

Ipomoea triloba, 86. Sp. pl. i. p. 451. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 856.

Nicotiana tabacum, 91. Sp. pl. i. p. 502. The plant, as the name imports,
introduced by the Portuguese, also the use.

Sium ninsi, 118. Sp. pl. i. 694, Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 818. fig. p. 819. The
highest cordial in all Japan, and the dearest; the root is brought from Korea,
and used in most medicines pulverised; a pound costs six hundred imperials.

Lycium barbarum, 94. Sp. pl. i. 525. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 777. Fl. Coch. 165.
The leaves are administered to the sick as tea; physicians prescribe the eating
the fruit; the plant is used to enclose the segments of the Japanese gardens.

Chenopodium scoparia, 113. Sp. pl. i. 622. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 885. A famous
medicine, says Doctor Thunberg, according to Kaempfer, from whom he borrows
most of the medicinal virtues of the plants.

Aeorus calamus, 144. Sp. pl. 2. p. 92. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 912. Fl. Coch. 259.

Calamus aromaticus, Gerard, 63, still retained in our dispensatory.

Convallaria Japonica, 139. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 823. fig. p. 824. Lin. Suppl.
p. 204. The roots, preserved in sugar, are recommended both by the Chinese and
Japanese to sick people.

Smilax China, 152. Sp. pl. 4. 256. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 781. fig. p. 782.
Flor. Coch. 763.

Polygonum multiflorum, 169. The root eaten raw is esteemed a cordial; roasted
it has a bitter taste.

Laurus camphora, CAMPHOR.
172. Sp. pl. 2. p. 226. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 770, f. 771. Travels, i. 115.
Flor. Coch. 306. The camphor tree grows to a vast size in all parts of Japan,
and its islands; as yet it has only been figured by Kaempfer. The camphor is
extracted from the wood by the peasants, who cut it into small pieces, and
boiling them in water, obtain this drug, which they sell very cheap. The
Japanese value the camphor of Sumatra and Borneo much more than their own, and
will give eighty or a hundred Catti of their boiled camphor for one of the
Bornean; the last is native, and gathered on the stumps of the trees, or taken
from the interstices in small crystallized lumps. There is another kind found
fluid, which is called camphor oil, but never on the same tree with the
concrete; this seems another species, and is obtained by incision; a hole is
made in the trunk capable of holding about a quart, a lighted reed is placed in
it, which attracts the fluid to that part. Neither of the trees which yield the
Sumatran or Bornean camphors are yet ascertained; Kaempfer says, "ex Daphneo
Sanguine non est;" so it certainly is not even of the same genus as the
Japanese.

Thea Bohea, 225, Sp. pl. 2. p. 589. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 505. TEA.
817. Kaempfer's Travels, i. 115. ii. appendix, 2. tab. 38, 39. The tea
cultivated in Japan is the Bohea, the Tsjaa of the Japanese, the Theh of the
Chinese. The origin of it has its legend equal to any in the universe. Darma,
the son of an Indian king, who flourished about the year 519 of the Christian
era, arrived in China to preach his doctrine to the inhabitants. It seems he
was a sort of pope in India, the twenty-eighth in succession from the founder
of eastern paganism. He had vowed the greatest austerities, particularly a
perpetual watchfulness; nature, worn out, was obliged at length to submit to
the refreshment of sleep; on finishing his slumbers, he cut off both his
eyebrows, which had dared to close, and flinging them on the ground, each
became a shrub; Darma eat some of the leaves, and to his great surprise, found
himself invigorated, so as to undergo any labors or any watchings; he
communicated the virtues to his disciples, and tea became of universal use. It
is therefore styled by some the eyebrows of Darma; he is represented as a
horrid ugly fellow, with vast eyebrows, wrapped in a great cloak, and standing
on a reed, on which he had been wafted from region to region.

WE may be certain from this tale, that the tea plant was aboriginal of China.
It is cultivated by sowing, not in whole fields, but round the borders in rows,
so that it may not hurt the land; good farmers manure the plants with human
ordure. In seven years time it grows to the height of a man; its few leaves, at
that time are gathered, the shrub cut down, and the most plentiful harvest is
obtained from the vigorous shoots of the succeeding years.

THE leaves are gathered by laborers, peculiarly brought up to the business;
they must not be taken by handfuls, but pulled off one by one. The trees are
not stripped entirely, for there are three gatherings in the year. The leaves
are sorted into three parcels; the finest, the small, tender, primaeval shoots,
are reserved for princes and great men, and on that account called imperial.
They are next prepared by drying over the fire in an iron pan, and after that
rolled with the palm of the hand on a mat, in order to fold them. Public
laboratories are built for the purpose. All the processes are given at large by
Kaempfer See also Staunton's Embassy to China, vol. ii. p. 464.
.

TEA is in as universal use in Japan as in China, and taken two ways. The most
common is similar to the European, or rather the mode we learned from the
Orientalists; but the manner of taking it is attended with the utmost ceremony.
The art is called Sado and Tsianoi. We have our dancing-masters, etc. and in my
time M. Vestris gave lectures to our quality on the manner of eating gracefully
their soup. The Japanese masters are to instruct in the manner of behavior at
tea, how they are to make it, and how they are to present it in a polite manner.

THE qualities of tea are as much disputed in Japan as they are in Europe; but
such is the charming infatuation, that the use is still followed in defiance of
those who take the side of depretiation in the old controversy. Kaempfer gives
us an excellent figure of the plant, in vol. ii. tab. 38, and of the process of
the tea-table, and all its apparatus, in tab. 39, and of the teacup; nor is the
representation of its great founder Darma, forgotten, with his vast
over-hanging eyebrows.

Arum dracontium, 233. Sp. pl. 4. p. 68. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 786. Flor. Coch.
651. Has a hot and purgative quality.

Dracontium Polyphyllum, 234. Sp. pl. 4. p. 74. From the acrid root is prepared
the famous medicine Konjakf.

Illicium anisatum, 235. Sp. pl. 2. p. 624. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 880. seqq.
fig. p. 881. Flor. Coch. 432. The Bonzees believe this plant to be peculiarly
grateful to the gods; they strew the branches before their idols, and burn the
bark as incense to them. The leaves are used to increase the virulence of the
poison of the Tetraodon ocellatus.

Ocymum crispum, 248. Kaemp. Amoen. v. p. 784.

Bignonia catalpa, 251. Sp. pl. 3. p. 155. Kaemp. Amoen. v. p. 841. fig. p.
842. The leaves used in nervous cases, the pods in asthmas.

Sesamum Orientale, 254. Sp. pl. 3. p. 188. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 835. Flor.
Coch. 464. Useful for the oil expressed from it; constitutes in Japan an
article of food; and also a medicine, on account of its emollient virtues.

Clerodendrum trichotomum, 256. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 827. Children are often
made to swallow the larva of an insect bred on this plant, as a cure for the
worms.

Taxus nucisera, 275. Sp. pl. 4. p. 280. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 814. fig. p. 815.
The interpreters who are obliged to stand long at court eat the nuts, to enable
them to retain their urine for a great length of time.

Citrus Trifoliata, 294. Sp. pl. 3. p. 585. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 801. fig. p.
802. The live shrub is excellent for hedges, on account of its vast, strong,
and sharp spines.

Artemisia vulgaris, 310. Sp. pl. 3. p. 744. Kaempf. Amoen. v. 897. Fl. Coch.
600. Common mugwort, Gerard, 1103. Hudson. Fl. Angl. ii. 359. Flor. Coch. 600.
The famous ancient cau^^ic of the East, the moxa is made of the leaves of this
plant. Kaempfer's Travels, ii. App. 37.

Trichosanthes cucumerina, 322. Sp. pl. 4. p. 199. Flor. Coch. 722. The seeds
sometimes used to dissolve the viscid juices of the bowels.

Polypodium dichotomum, 338. The ashes used with alum pulverized, for ulcers
in the mouth and elsewhere.

Ficus Pumila, ESCULENT.
33. Sp. pl. 4. p. 368. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 803. Flor. Coch. 820.

Scirpus Articulatus, 36. Sp. pl. 1. p. 130. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 827.

Holcus sorghum, 42. Sp. pl. 4. 307. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 834. Grows naturally,
and also cultivated.

Panicum verticillatum, 45. Sp. pl. 1. p. 153. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 835. Its
flour is made into cakes.

Cynosurus Coricanus, 51. Sp. pl. 1. p. 200. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 835.
Cultivated on account of the seeds.

Avena Sativa, 54. Sp. pl. 1. p. 222. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 834. Common oats.

Hordeum vulgar, 55. Sp. pl. 1. p. 235. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 834. Barley
cultivated here and there.

Triticum aestivum et hybernum, 56. Sp. pl. 1. p. 238. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p.
834. Both species cultivated.

Trapa natans, 65. Sp. pl. 1. p. 341, Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 817.

Convolvulus edulis, 84. A not well-tasted vegetable, yet the black roots are
used in broths.

Solanum Aethiopicum et tuberosum, 92. Sp. pl. 1. p. 515. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p.
810. The berries of the former used in broths.

Potatoes are cultivated near Nagasaki, but do not prosper.

Hovenia dulcis. 101. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 808. fig. p. 809. The footstalk
eaten, are sweet like a pear.

Vitis vinifera, 103. Sp. pl. 1. p. 569. Flor. Coch. 192. Grapes do not ripen
here well.

Beta vulgaris, 113. Sp. pl. 1. p. 623. Flor. Coch. 217. The root in Japan is
red, in most other parts of India white.

Daucus carota, 117. Sp. pl. 1. p. 667. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 822. Flor. Coch.
222. Common carrot, every where cultivated.

Allia varia, 132. All the various kinds of leeks are cultivated in Japan.

Oryza sativa, 147. Sp. pl. 2. p. 113. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 834. Flor. Coch.
267. This grain is cultivated in all parts of Japan, on the mountains as well
as low grounds, and is esteemed the finest in the world.

Zca mayz, 37. Sp. pl. 4. p. 96. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 834. Flor. Coch. 272.
Mayz is cultivated near Nagasaki, supposed to have been introduced by the
Chinese.

Asparagus Ossicinalis, 139. Sp. pl. 2. p. 68. Cultivated at Jedo.

Dioscoreoe, 149. All the different sorts are cultivated or eaten wild.

Lilium bulbiserum, 134. Sp. pl. 2. p. 43. Kaemp. Amoen. v. p. 871. The root is
eaten.

Diospyros Kaki, 157. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 805. 806. 807. fig. p. 806. Flor.
Coch. 278. The fruit is preserved like figs; eaten before it is ripe, occasions
a diarrhaea.

Polygonum sagopyrum, 169. Sp. pl. 2. p. 212. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 835. Buck
wheat is made into round cakes, and sold to travelers at all the inns.

Quercus cuspidata, 176. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 816. A species of oak; the acorns
are eaten either dressed or raw.

Fagus caslanea, 195. Sp. pl. 4. p. 166. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 816. Flor. Coch.
699. The common chestnut.

Cactus sicus, 198. Sp. pl. 2. p. 470. Indian sig, common to Japan and South
America.

Punica granatum, 199. Sp. pl. 2. p. 480. Flor. Coch. 383. The pomegranate.

Amygdalus persica, et nana, 199. Sp. pl. 2. p. 481. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 798.
Flor. Coch. 386. Peach, and dwarf almond.

Prunus Armeniaca, cerasus, aspera et domestica, 200. 201. Sp. pl. 2. p. 485.
Flor. Coch. 388. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 798. The apricot, cherry, both the rough
and common plum, cultivated; the aspera a new species.

Mespilus Japonica, 206. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 800. A tree of vast height and
size, the berries as large as a cherry.

Pyrus communis, 207. Sp. pl. 2. p. 500. Kaempf. Amoen. 800. Flor. Coch. 393.
Common pear.

Pyrus baccata, 207. Sp. pl. ii. p. 502. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 800. Grows in the
Dutch hotel at Osakka; perhaps introduced from Sibiria.

Pyrus Japonica et cydonia, 207. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 844. Flor. Coch. 394. The
Japan pear and the quince.

Rubus trifidus et palmatus, 217. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 787. The fruits of these
two have a grateful taste.

Nymphaea nelumbo, 223. Sp. pl. 2. p. 579. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 880. Flor.
Coch. 416. A sacred plant; the flowers ornament the altars, and are painted as
the seat of the gods. The stalks eaten among other greens.

Arum esculentum, 234. Sp. pl. 4. p. 69. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 828. Flor. Coch.
654. The roots and stalks used in broths.

Cycas revoluta, 229. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 897. Titsjiu, Rumph. Amb. 1. 70.
tab. 24. The drupae are eaten; the sago, or pith, is beyond measure nutritive,
a small bit will support a man a very long time. It is forbidden, on pain of
death, to export any out of Japan.

Sagittaria Sagittata, 242. Sp. pl. 4. p. 155. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 827. Flor.
Coch. 698. The root esculent.

Brassica rapa, 261. Sp. pl. 3. p. 278. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 822. Rape, common
in England, used for oil, and the seeds for small birds. The root eaten in
Japan.

Raphanus Sativus, 263. Sp. pl. 3. p. 284. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 822. Raddish,
Gerard, 237. Flor. Coch. 481. The most common edible root in Japan; eaten raw,
dressed, and dried.

Phaseolus vulgaris, 278. Sp. pl. 3. p. 441. Flor. Coch. 527. Common kidney
bean, much eaten.

Phascolus radiatus, 278. Sp. pl. 3. p. 444. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 837. Flor.
Coch. 529. Also much used.

Dolichos polyslachyos, 281. Sp. pl. 3. p. 450. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 856. Often
cultivated.

Dolichos Soja, 282. Sp. pl. 3. p. 451. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 837. sig. p. 838.
Flor. Coch. 537. Also cultivated; used in soups; the commonest dish in Japan.
An exquisite sauce, called Soja, is prepared from its seeds. Bruised, it serves
the purpose of sea salt.

Pisum sativum, 283. Sp. pl. 3. p. 457. Flor. Coch. 539. Our common pea,
cultivated in most parts of Japan.

Vicia saba, 284. Sp. pl. 3. p. 475. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 836. Flor. Coch. 540.
Beans, much cultivated.

Citrus Japonica, 292. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 801. The Japan citron fruit is
quite diminutive, but sweet and grateful.

Citrus Aurantium, 293. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 801. Sp. pl. 3. p. 585. Flor.
Coch. 569. The orange in Japan excellent.

Citrus Decumana, 293. Flor. Coch. 571. Shaddock, introduced from Batavia by
the Dutch.

Lactuca saliva, 300. Sp. pl. 3. p. 625. Flor. Coch. 585. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p.
831. Common lettuce, cultivated and eaten in these islands.

Cichorium, 304. Sp. pl. 3. p. 665. Flor. Coch. 583. The C. endivia and
intybus, both much cultivated and eaten.

Cucurbita pepo, 323. Sp. pl. 4. p. 203. Flor. Coch. 728. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p.
811. The European gourd. The C. lagenaria used for bottles; but rather scarce.

Cucumis melo, 323. Sp. pl. 4. p. 205. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 811. Flor. Coch.
726. The melon often cultivated near Nagasaki.

Cucumis sativus, 324. Sp. pl. 4. p. 206. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 811. Flor. Coch.
726. Common cucumber.

Cucumis flexuosus et conomon, 324. Sp. pl. 4. p. 207. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p.
811. The twisted; esteemed very delicate. The fruit is preserved in the lees of
the Japanese rice beer, and constitutes a frequent dish; it is called Conomon,
and is sometimes imported into Holland.

Pteris Aquilina, 332. Sp. pl. 4. p. 396. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 912. The very
young shoots of the leaves are eaten, and often sold in bunches. The woody root
is bruised, and the water being expressed, in which it had been steeped, the
pulp is eaten by the poorest people.

Agaricus campestris et alii, 346. Sp. pl. 4. p. 597. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 832.

Fucus saccharinus, 346. Sp. pl. 4. p. 597. Kaempf. Amoen. v. 833. Flor. Scot.
ii. 940. Flor. Coch. 847. Eaten much in Japan, as it is in Iceland, Scotland,
and even on some of the English shores.

Lycoperdon tuber, 349. Sp. pl. 4. p. 623. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 832. Trufles,
Fl. Scot. ii. 1064. A well known vegetable; when salted, used in the Japanese
soups.

Betula Alnus, 76. Sp. pl. 4. p. 127. DYING.
The cones are used to dye black, and sold ready dried.

Rubia cordata, 60. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 912.

Lithospermum aruense, 81. Sp. pl. 1. p. 385. From the root is made a red dye.

Gardenia Florida, 108. Sp. pl. 1. p. 592. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 808. Flor.
Coch. 83. The fruit gives a yellow dye. Common also to Hindoostan, Amboina, and
the Cape of Good Hope.

Basella Rubra, 127. Sp. pl. 1. p. 748. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 784. The Japanese
use the berries to dye the silks and cotton, red.

Eurya japonica, 191. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 778.

Commelina communis, 35. Sp. pl. 1. p. 113. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 888. sig. p.
889. Flor. Coch. 48. Of the flower is made a blue, resembling the rich
ultramarine. Kaempfer gives the process at length.

Polygonia varia, 163. Of the leaves of the Chinense barbatum and aviculare,
Sp. pl. 2. p. 208, 209, 211, are made a dye that colors like Indigo.

Thea Bohea, 225. Sp. pl. 2. p. 589. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 817. The leaves of
this tree are sometimes used to dye the silk webs of a pale brown color.

Ocymum Crispum, 248. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 784. The Japanese use this plant to
give a full red color to the roots of raddishes, and several kinds of fruits.

Carthamus tinctorius, 307. Sp. pl. 3. p. 697. Flor. Coch. 587. Baslard
saffron, much cultivated in Spain, Egypt, and the East, and forms a great
article of commerce, as a yellow dye, see Hasselquist, p. 483. Common
prostitutes dye their lips with this plant.

Impatiens balsamina, 327. Sp. pl. 3. p. 971. The Japanese tinge their nails
red with its juice mixed with alum.

Osyris japonica, FOR SAUCES.
31.

Arundo bambos, 54. Sp. pl. 1. p. 227. Flor. Coch. 70. I am obliged to my
friend the reverend Mr. Dickinson, for the following curious account of the
Arundo Bambos, "which" says he, grows in the woods and mountains of Japan, and
produces many varieties, differing much in habit, and distinguished by
different names. Yet, amidst all this variety, Thunberg observes that he never
had the satisfaction of meeting with a single plant of it in the flowering
state. This is not to be wondered at, when we are informed by Reed, Mal. v. i.
p. 25. that it does not flower till it has attained the age of about sixty
years, and what is very remarkable, sheds its leaves a month previous to the
time of flowering, and immediately after having perfected its fruit, withers
and dies.

The small slender walking canes, so much admired for their elegant rings, are
obtained from young irregular suckers or shoots of the bambo, which spring from
the root, after the main stem has been repeatedly cut down. Nature has not
formed them precisely of the figure in which we receive them. They are
originally crooked and pliant, and much art is used, by suspended weights
attached to them, and the application of smoke, to render them strait and
stiff. It is farther necessary to retrench with a knife the fibers which adhere
to the rings, and were intended by nature to propagate the plant, in the same
manner as the Triticum repens (couch grass) multiplies its offsets by shoots
from the joints.

This species of walking stick is distinguished from the Rotang, or true cane,
not only by its singular protuberances, but also by a small perforation
extending through the center of the whole length of it, which is common to all
Bambus, and in their mature state enlarges into spacious cavities, rendering
this inestimable vegetable subservient to a thousand useful domestic purposes.
It is only in the island of Japan that the Bambu is thus artificially prepared
for the purpose of a walking cane: and constituting a lucrative article of
commerce, it is counterfeited at Surat (upon the Malabar coast) and a spurious
sort made of a different wood imposed upon the ignorant. The name of Bambu is
not Indian, but was given to this plant by Europeans, as expressive of the
violent explosion that comes upon committing its branches to the flames, the
report of which is said to equal that of the firing of guns, and is caused by
the rarefaction of great quantities of air, which had been imprisoned in its
numerous chambers. See an accurate description of the Japan walking-stick with
portuberant joints, Rumph. Amb. vol. iv. lib. 6. p. 18. sect. the last. The
minute perforation of the young shoots of the Bambu is noticed by Rheede, Hort.
mal. v. 2. p. 25. sect. 3. ' Stipites qui ex radice, etc.' So high a sense had
the Indians in ancient times of the multifarious benefits and blessings of this
vegetable, that they actually made it an object of divine worship, particularly
in the island of Amboina, Rumph. v. iv. p. 18. sect. 3. Ob multiplicia
arundinum, etc. Let me add, that of the germs which spring from the root is
made the fine pickle called Atsjaar, they are macerated in salt and vinegar,
with leeks, and capsicum pods added.

Fagara Piperita, 64. Sp. pl. 1. p. 333. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 895. Flor. Coch.
101. The bark, leaves, and aromatic fruit used in soups.

Menyanthes nymphoides, 82. Sp. pl. 1. p. 415. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 828. The
leaves are salted, and become a very glutinous substance; it is used in soups,
boiled in which it becomes very tender.

Capsicum annuum, 93. Sp. pl. 1. p. 521. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 826. Flor. Coch.
157. Cultivated every where.

Anethum faeniculum, 120. Sp. pl. 1. p. 722. Flor. Coch. 226. Common fennel;
the seeds are brought from China, and cultivated near Jedo.

Pimpinella anisum, 120. Sp. pl. 4. p. 724. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 825. Aniseed,
an eastern plant, rarely cultivated in Japan; introduced in our dispensatory.

Apium Petroselinum, 120. Sp. pl. 1. p. 725. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 825. Common
parsley, cultivated in many places.

Illicium anisatum, 235. Sp. pl. 2. p. 624. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 880. seq. fig.
p. 881. Flor. Coch. 232. Doctor Thunberg places this under the head of sauces,
the very plant which gives such additional power to the virus of the Tetraodon.
It reminds me of part of the Fryar's speech in Romeo and Juliet, in which he
describes the discordant powers resident in the same plant.

Sinapis cernua, 261. The Dutch use it as a mustard.

Lycium japonicum, 93. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 780. FENCES.
A low plant very full of branches.

Lycium barbarum, 94. Sp. pl. 1. p. 525. Kaemps. Amoen. v. p. 1. p. 577. Flor.
Coch. 165. see p. 213 of this volume.

Citrus trisoliata, 294. Sp. pl. 3. p. 585. Kaemps. Amoen. v. p. 801. sig. p.
802. A most excellent hedge, by reason of its long, strong, and horrid spines.

Gardenia florida, 108. Sp. pl. 1. p. 592. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 808.

Dolichos polystachyos, ARBORS.
281. Sp. pl. 3. p. 450. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 856. Used to form arbors.

Syringa suspensa, 19.

Buxus semper-virens, COMBS.
77. Sp. pl. 4. p. 128. Flor. Coch. 678. for making combs.

Pinus sylvestris, TUEL.
274. Sp. pl. 4. p. 172. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 883. Flor. Coch. 709. The Scotch
pine; many other trees used for fuel.

Morus papyrifera, PAPER.
72. Sp. pl. 4. p. 134. The great material for making paper. Doctor Thunberg
gives the process at length, as does Doctor Kaempfer, attended with a print of
the tree, vol. ii. appendix p. 21. tab. 40. The part applied to the manufacture
is the bark.

Celtis orientalis, 114. Sp. pl. 11. p. 4, 335. Kaempfer's Travels, ii. app.
26. tab. 40. Called by Kaempfer the Papyrus spuria. It is used for making the
coarser papers.

Hibiscus manihot, Oreni Japanor, Sp. pl. 3. p. 363. Alcea, etc. Kaempfer's
Travels, ii. app. 27. tab. 41. Contributes to the manufacture of paper, by the
admixture of the viscous matter produced from the roots.

Uvaria Japonica, 237. Sp. pl. 2. p. 628. Kaempfer's Travels, ii. 58. tab. 42.
The leaves and stalks likewise produce a viscous juice used for the same
purpose as the last. The ladies of Japan oil their hair with a crystalline
mucilage which exudes from the stalks, to make it shine and lie smooth.

Arundo bambos, 54. Sp. pl. 1. p. 227. Contributes also to the paper
manufacture.

Laurus camphorisera, 172. Sp. pl. 2. p. 226. Flor. Coch. 306. MECHANICS.
The camphor tree.

Pinus Sylvestris, 274. Sp. pl. 4. p. 172.

Cupressus japonica, 265. Lin. Suppl. p. 421. grows to a vast height, very
straight, and about the thickness of a man's thigh. It is cultivated, and also
grows on all the mountains.

Taxus macrophylla, 276. These five last species are of the greatest use in
Japan among mechanics, especially the cabinet makers.

Rhus vernix, 121. CANDLES.
Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 791. fig. p. 792. Sp. pl. 1. p. 728.

Rhus succedaneum, 122. Sp. pl. 1. p. 728. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 794. fig. p.
795.

Laurus Camphora, 172. Sp. pl. 2. p. 226. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 770. fig. p. 771.

Laurus glauca, 173. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 770.

Melia azederach, 180. Sp. pl. 2. p. 271. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 788. Flor. Coch.
239. The five last are greatly used in making candles.

Brassica orientalis, 261. Sp. pl. 3. p. 276. LAMP OIL.


Dryandra cordata, 13. 267. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 789. From the seeds of the two
last is expressed an oil useful in lamps.

Urticae variae. CORDAGE.


Cannabis sativa, 113. Sp. pl. 4. p. 251. Flor. Coch. 756. Both of the above
are much used in the rope manufacture.

Deutzia scabra, 185. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 854.

Prunus Aspera, 201. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 779.

Artemisia vulgaris.

Gnaphalium arenarium, 312. Sp. pl. 3. p. 754. Kaempf Amoen. v. p. 912.

Salix alba, 25. Sp. pl. 4. p. 234. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 908. The five last are
in much use for the polishing of wood.

Ricinus communis, INK.
270. Sp. pl. 4. p. 194. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 790. Flor. Coch. 716.

Bignonia tomentosa, 252. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 859. fig. p. 860.

Malva mauritiana, 271. Sp. pl. 3. p. 347. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 858.

Nymphaea nelumbo, IDOLATROUS.
223. Sp. pl. 3. p. 579. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 880.

Ocymum inflexum. 249. The two last are sacred to the idols, as is the Illicium
anisatum, used also for making musical instruments.

Thca bohca, TEA.
225. Sp. pl. 2. p. 589. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 817.

Camellia sasanqua, 273. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 853, both these used as teas. The
appearance of the shrub Sasanqua, is so like that of the tea as scarcely to be
distinguished. The leaves are mixed with the bohea tea to improve its flavor
Sir G. Staunton's Account of the Embassy to China, and the figure, vol. ii. p.
467. E.
.

Uvaria Japonica, A WASH.
237. Sp. pl. ii. p. 628. Is used as a wash for the hair, as are the Sasanqua,
and the Hibiscus Manibot.

Gossypium herbaccum, LINENS.
271. Sp. pl. iii. p. 355. Flor. Coch, 505. A vast manufacture of this plant
(cotton) is carried on in Japan for the clothing the inhabitants.

Morus papyrisera, 75. Sp. pl. 4. p. 134. A strong cloth is woven from parts of
this, and richly painted for clothing; used as handkerchiefs to wipe the nose,
etc. also for the packing of goods.

Cucurbita lagenaria, 323. Sp. pl. 4. p. 202. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 8. o. Flor.
Coch. 728. Serves instead of a bottle.

Fucus saccharinus, 346. Sp. pl. 4. p. 577. Fl. Scot. ii. p. 940. Eaten in
Japan, as it is in many parts of the north of Europe. The leaf of this plant
glued to paper, and edged with gold or silver thread, is used as a plate to
offer gifts on ceremonious occasions.

Mirabilis jalapa, 91. Sp. pl. i. p. 490. Flor. Coch. 123. PAINT.


Carthamus tinctorius, 307. Sp. pl. 3. 697. Flor. Coch. 587. The Japanese
ladies use the former as a white paint for their complexions; this to give a
ruddiness to their lips.

Rhus vernix, VARNISH.
121. Kaempf. Amoen. Ex. p. 790. and tab. 791. Sp. pl. i. p. 728, as a varnish
to their fine cabinet work. The Rhus succedaneum, 122. Kew Garden, i. 366, is
made use of for the fame purpose, but the quantity of juice it exudes is so
small, as scarcely to make it worth the gathering. The Japanese call it Urus,
Urus noki, and Sitz. That which grows at Jamatto is the best, but the Japanese
in general is far superior to that of other countries; great quantity of the
varnish is imported from Siam, Cambodia, Tonquin, and other places, and used in
the coarser works.

Chamaerops excelsa, 131. BRUSHES.
Brushes are made from the bark of the trunk, finely netted.

Juncus effusus, 145. Sp. pl. 2. p. 94. MATTING.


Oryza sativa, 147.

Morus papyrisera, 71. Sp. pl. 4. p. 134.

Morus alba, 71. Sp. pl. 4. p. 134. Of these four are worked carpeting for
floors, and hanging for the walls.

Arundinum culmi, 55. Sp. pl. i. 225. Of the stalks of various sorts of reeds
are made writing pens.

Lindera umbellata, 145. The Japanese clean their teeth with soft brushes made
of this wood, and also of the two former.

Salices, 24. Different sorts of willows.

Euonymus tobira, 99.

Celastrus alatus, PHILTRES.
98. Lovers place the buds of the flowers before the doors of parents, as
philtres, to conciliate the affections of the daughters.

Nyctanthes sambac, ORNAMENTAL.
17. Sp. pl. i. p. 15. Flor. Coch. 75.

Syringa suspensa, 19. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 907.

Rosmarinus officinalis, 22. Sp. pl. i. p. 60. Our well-known rosemary
cultivated and introduced from Europe.

Orchides, 25. Orchis sasannae. Sp. pl. 4. p. 4. Japonica, Falcata.

Limodorum striatum, 28, ensatum, 29. Sp. pl. 4. p. 32.

Epidendra varia, 30.

Irides, 33. The several sorts of Iris or fleur de lis, Squalens, Sp. pl. i. p.
106. Sibirica, Sp. pl. i. p. 108. Versicolor, Sp. pl. i. p. 108. Graminea, Sp.
pl. i. p 109.

Morea chinensis, 34. Ixia chinensis, Sp. pl. i. p. 98.

Ilex japonica, 79.

Primula cortusoides, 82. Sp. pl. i. p. 413.

Celastrus alatus, 98. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 796.

Convolvulus japonicus, 85. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 856.

Ipomaea triloba, 86. Sp. pl. i. p. 451. Kaemps. Amoen. v. p. 856.

Azalea Indica, 84. Sp. pl. i. p. 428. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 845. 847. fig. p.
846. The flowers of great elegance, and infinite variety of colors.

Bladhia japonica, 95. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 775.

Colosia argentca, 106. Sp. pl. i. p. 577. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 863. Flor.
Coch. 203.

Celosia cristata, 106. Sp. pl. i. p. 577. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 962.

The cockscomb is of various colors, red, yellow, and mixed; it grows here to
vast perfection, but degenerates when carried to other countries.

Gardenia florida, 108. Sp. pl. i. p. 592. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 808.

Gardenia radicans, 109. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 808.

Vinca rosea, 110. Sp. pl. i. p. 594. Flor. Coch. 146.

Nerium oleander, 110. Sp. pl. i. p. 594. Flor. Coch. 141. The Oleander grows
common in Spain, India, and Japan.

Viburna varia, 122. Five species, all peculiar to Japan.

Amaryllis sarniensis, 131. Sp. pl. 2. p. 27. Flor. Coch. 247. A most elegant
species, first introduced into England in 1659, by that accomplished gentleman
general Lambert, at his seat at Wimbleton. The root is poisonous.

Lilium candidum, 133. Sp. pl. 2. p. 43. Flor. Coch. 256. Our white lily. This
common species inhabits also Syria and Palestine.

Lilium japonicum, 133. Kaempf. Amoen. 879.

Lilium pomponicum, 134. Sp. pl. ii. 2. 44. Flor. Coch. 257. Native also of the
Pyrences and distant Sibiria.

Lilium Bulbiferum, 134. Sp. pl. 2. p. 43. also of Sibiria, Austria, and Italy.

Lilium Superbum, 134. Sp. pl. 2. 45. Trew's Ehret. tab. xi. The great yellow
martagon orange spotted with black. A rich flower, native of North America.

Lilium Canadense, 135. Sp. pl. 2. p. 45. Native of North America; yellow,
spotted with black, the flower grows in rich clusters.

Lilium Philadelphicum, 135. Sp. pl. 2. p. 46. Miller's plants, 110. tab. 165.
fig. i. Flowers purple, marked at the base with spots of the same more deeply
colored, native of Pensylvania. It is observable that many plants of Japan,
Sibiria, and North America, approximate each other.

Hemerocallis, 143. Three species, the H. fulva. Sp. pl. 2. 91. or copper
colored day lily. Gerard. Herb. 99. native also of China and Hungary.

H. Japonica and Cordata. The two last peculiar to Japan.

Nandina domestica, 147. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 776.

Scdum anacampseros, 186. Sp. pl. 3. p. 380. Flor. Coch. 353.

Scdum spinosum, 186.

Lychnis coronata, 187. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 873.

Euphorbia canariensis, 196. Sp. pl. 2. p. 435.

Eurya japonica, 191. Kaempf. Amoen. v. 778.

Rhododendron maximum, 181. Sp. pl. 2. p. 291. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 877.

Cactus sicus, 198. Sp. pl. 2. 470.

Punica granatum, 199. Sp. pl. 2. p. 480. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 800. Flor. Coch.
383.

Amygdalus Persica, 199. Sp. pl. 2. 481. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 798, Flor. Coch.
386.

Amygdalus nana, 199. Sp. pl. 677. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 799.

Mespilus Japonica, 206. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 800. A tree of vast size, and
very lofty.

Spiraeae plures, 209.

Rosae plures, 213. such as the Rugosa Gallica, Sp. pl. 2. p. 529. Canina, Sp.
pl. 2. p. 530, multislora.

Papaver somniferum, 222. Sp. pl. 2. p. 574. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 835.

Papaver rhoeas, 222. Sp. pl. 2. p. 572. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 910. often
cultivated in vases for ornament.

Corchorus japonicus, 227. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 844. Cultivated for the beauty
of its flower.

Magnolia glauca, 236. Sp. pl. 2. p. 626. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 845.

Melittis melissophyllum, 248. Sp. pl. 3. p. 91.

Volkameria japonica, 255. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 861. A tree of vast size, full
of branches, very smooth.

Thuia dolabrata, 266. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 884. A vast and lofty tree; the
most beautiful of ever-greens.

Alcea rosea, 271. Sp. pl. 3. p. 342. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 888.

Croton acutum, 269.

Malva mauritiana, 276. Sp. pl. 3. p. 347. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 858.

Hibiscus syriacus, 272. Sp. pl. 3. p. 361. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 978. Flor.
Coch. 511.

Camellia japonica, 272. Sp. pl. 3. p. 368. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 850. fig. p.
851.

Citrus omnis, 292. The four species of this country are cultivated for beauty
as well as use.

Hypericum patulum, 295.

Hypericum monogynum, 297. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 845.

Clchorium Intybus et endivia, 304.

Inula helenium, 317. Sp. pl. 3. p. 823.

Tagetes patula, 320. Sp. pl. 3. p. 840. Flor. Coch. 616.

Chrysanthemum Indicum, 320. Sp. pl. 3. p. 848. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 875. Flor.
Coch. 610.

Calendula officinalis, 321. Sp. pl. 3. p. 924.

Cucurbita lagenaria, 333. Sp. pl. 4. p. 202. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 810. Flor.
Coch. 728. cultivated for its singularity.

Impatiens balsamina, 327. Sp. pl. 3. p. 971.

Acrostichum lingua, 320. Kaempf. Amoen. v. p. 891.

Acrostichum hastatum, 331.

THE quadrupeds of these islands are not numerous. QUADRUPEDS.
The horses are small, but well shaped; and employed for riding, drawing, and
ploughing.

Cows are never used for the purposes of the dairy. The Japanese know nothing
of milk or butter. The oxen are of a vast size, with bunches on their
shoulders, and only used for the plough, or the conveyance of goods in great
cities.

ASSES, mules, camels, and elephants are not known here.

SHEFP, goats, and swine are not among the native animals; the Dutch and
Portuguese imported some, and the first still bring a few from Batavia, for
their own use. As to swine, the Japanese get them from China, but merely to
sell to the Chinese traders. They hold the Pythagorean doctrine so strongly as
to forbear eating any thing that has had life.

Japan has deer and wild boars. These, and hares, the followers of certain
sects are at one time of the year permitted to eat, contrary to their usual
rule of religion.

MR. Zimmerman, in his zoological chart, gives the Rupicapra, or Chamois, as an
animal of Japan.

NO country breeds more dogs; they have masters, DOGS;
but lie about the streets, and are very troublesome to passengers. In
Kaempfer's time there was an emperor so fond of these animals as to cause huts
to be built, MUCH RESPECTED.
and provisions to be found for them in every street; the utmost care was taken
of them during sickness, and when they died, they were carried to the usual
burying-places on the tops of the mountains. This attention to the canine
species at that time arose from its happening, that the reigning emperor was
born under the sign of the dog, one of the Japanese constellations. A poor
fellow who had lost his dog by death, sweating under his load in climbing the
mountain of interment, was heard by his neighbor cursing the plaguing edict at
a terrible rate. "Friend," said his neighbor to him, you should rather return
thanks to the gods that the emperor was not born under the horse, for what
would have then been your load.

WILD dogs, with large gaping snouts, are among the animals of the country.

THE cats are very beautiful; whitish, CATS.
marked with large yellow and black spots, their tails very short, as if they
had been mutilated. The ladies carry them about, and are perpetually caressing
them. As to mousing, they are quite useless.

HERE are some monkies, MONKIES.
by Kaempser's description, of the baboon class, and of the kind I describe
under the name of the dog-faced. Hist. Quad. No 103. They are of a dusky brown,
with naked red faces and buttocks.

A FEW small bears are found in the northern provinces. Foxes are very common.
Rats and mice swarm. The rats are taught several tricks, and serve for the
amusement of the common people. The animals called Tanucki, Pulor, Stutz, and
Tin, are unknown to me.

" Thunberg to the foregoing catalogue only adds the wolf, an animal confined
to the northern provinces." E.

THE birds of this empire are probably similar to those which inhabit the same
Asiatic Latitudes immediately to the west. BIRDS.
I find here cranes, Arct. Zool. ii. p. 141. and snowy geese, No 477. and
doubtlessly many others will be discovered as soon as Doctor Thunberg has
favored us with his Fauna Japonensis.

THE Japan peacock, Latham, ii. 672. Aldrov. av. ii. tab. 33. 34. Johnston. av.
tab. 23. may be a new species.

"DR. Thunberg, vol. iv. p. 99. of the translation of his travels, gives the
following unsatisfactory list:

Phasianus gallus, Latham, iv. 700. Corvus corax, raven, Latham, i. 367. Br.
Zool. i. No 74. Anas Anser, wild goose, Latham, vi. 459 Br. Zool. ii. No 266.
Galericulata, Chinese teal, Latham, vi. 548. Querquedula, Garganey, Latham, vi.
550. Br. Zool. ii. No 289. tab. 101. Ardea alba, great white heron, Latham, v.
91. Br. Zool. ii. No 175. Ardea major, Common Heron, Latham, v. 83. Br. Zool.
ii. No 173. Tetrao coturnix, quail, Latham, iv. 779. Br. Zool. i. No 97. Loxia
pyrrhula, bulfinch, Latham, iii. 143. Br. Zool. i. No 116. Loxia Oryzivora,
Latham, iii. 129. rice bird. Edw. tab. 41. 42. Columba oenas, stock dove,
Latham, iv. 604. Br. Zool. i. No 103. E.
IN respect to reptiles, we may inform the reader, TORTOISES.
that the Testudo Graeca, or common land tortoise, is found here; some sea
tortoises of enormous size; another species, with a long beak-like nose, called
Doogame, is figured by Kaempfer, tab. xiii. fig. 6.

A BLACK water lizard, with a red belly and pinnated tail, LIZARD.
is described by the same writer, p. 138. tab. xiii. fig. 2. as exceedingly
venomous.

A GREEN snake, with a flat head and sharp teeth or fangs, SNAKES.
is reputed to give a mortal bite. The name signifies the length of a day, for
people are supposed to die of the effect before the sun quits the horizon.
Kaempfer Hist. of Japan, p. 128.
says that it is also found in Malabar. The Boa, or at least some monstrous
snake, an amphibious kind, is found on the mountains and in the waters.

THE fishes are very numerous. Whales are frequent, FISHES.
and taken not only by harpooning, as in Greenland, but also by nets, in which
those huge animals are entangled, so that they become a ready prey to the
harpooners. Much oil is extracted from them; the flesh is a common food. Of the
tendons are made ropes and cords, chiefly for packing the bales of cotton; and
of the finer sort, the strings for musical instruments.

Kaempfer has given good outlines of several of the fishes; not a few are
common to our seas, such as the spotted shark, Br. Zool. iii. No 46. our
lampries, No 27, 28, eels, and several others. The famous Fu Rube, the
Tetraodon ocellatus, a luxury and a poison before described at p. 203 of this
volume, is frequent. Kaempfer Hist. of Japan, p. p. 134, 135.
mentions the fatal effects of this fascinating food.

THE few other fishes that I can enumerate from Linnaean authority are the
following: FISHES.
Callionymus Japonicus, Gm. Lin. iii. 1155. Uranoscopus Japonicus, 1157.
Coryphoena Japonica, 1195. Cottus Japonicus, 1213. Scorpoena volitans, 1217.
Pleuronectes Japonicus, 1239. Chaetodon Imperator, 1255. Chaetodon guttatus,
1256. Chaetodon collare, 1263. Chaetodon mesomelas, ibid. Sparus argentatus,
1272. Sparus boops, 1274. Sparus latus, 1276. Sparus virgatus, 1276. Sparus
notatus, 1272. Sparus suscreseens, 1279. Labrus hoops, 1291. Gasterosteus
Japonicus, 1325. Scomber Japonicus, 1329. Scomber auratus, 1330. Centrogaster
fuscescens, 1337. Cobitis Japonica, 1352. Silurus imberbis, 1361. Fistularia
tabacaria, 1387. Clupea Thrissa, 1406. Clupea Thunberg adds (vol. iv. p. 99).
Muroena nebulosa. Muroena picta. Muroena annulata. Muroena fasciata. Ophicthus
cinereus. All beautiful and singular species of eels.


THE following are extracted from Bloch's magnificent Icthyology: Scarus
viridis, vol. vii. p. 20. tab. 222. Bodianus Boenac, vol. vii. p. 31. tab. 226.
Bodianus maculatus, vol. vii. p. 35. tab. 228. Holocentrus ongus, vol. vii. p.
52. tab. 234. Holocentrus servus, vol. vii. p. 61. tab. 238. fig. 1.
Holocentrus quinque lineatus, vol. vii. p. 65. tab. 239. Holocentrus
calcariser, vol. vii. p. 80. tab. 244. Lutianus lutianus, vol. vii. p. 85. tab.
245. Lutianus hasta, vol. vii. p. 87. tab. 246. fig. 1. Lutianus erythropterus,
vol. vii. p. 93. tab. 249. Lutianus verres, vol. viii. p. 7. tab. 255. Sparus
fasciatus, vol. viii. p. 15. tab. 257. Sparus chlorourus, vol. viii. p. 21.
tab. 260. Sparus erythrouros, vol. viii. p. 23. tab. 261. Sparus vittatus, vol.
viii. p. 83. tab. 275. Sparus Japonicus, vol. viii. p. 87. tab. 277. fig. 1.
Sparus cynodon, vol. viii. p. 91. tab. 278. Labrus viridis, vol. viii. p. 104.
tab. 282. Labrus melapterus, vol. viii. p. 111. tab. 285. Labrus chloropterus,
vol. viii. p. 121. tab. 288. Labrus fasciatus, vol. ix. p. 6. tab. 290. Labrus
trichopterus, vol. ix. p. 21. tab. 295. fig. 2. Labrus mclapterus, vol. ix. p.
26. tab. 296. fig. 2. Perca argentata, vol. ix. p. 75. tab. 311. fig. 1. Perca
Japonica, vol. ix. p. 77. tab. 311. fig. 2. Anthias macropthalmus, vol. ix. p.
99. tab. 319. Anthias Vosmeri, vol. ix. p. 103. tab. 321. Anthias testudineus,
vol. ix. p. 104. tab. 322. Anthias bilineatus, vol. x. p. 1. tab. 325. fig. 1.
Anthias Japonicus, vol. x. p. 3. tab. 325. fig. 2. Anthias orientalis, vol. x.
p. 8. tab. 326. fig. 3. Epinephetus, merra, vol. x. p. 15. tab. 329.
Epinephetus, ruber, vol. x. p. 19. tab. 331. E.


CRABS of great variety inhabit these seas; and that greatest of insects, CRABS.
the Monoculus polyphemus, or Molucca crab, is not infrequent.

AMONG other insects is found the classical Cicada, CICADA.
Roesel, ii. tab. 25. Mousset 127.

Cantharides, or Spanish flies, are frequent here, but never applied to use.
Another very caustic fly is described by Kaempfer Kaempfer, i. 132. tab. x.
fig. 7.
, reckoned by the Japanese poisonous: it is of a blue and gold color, enriched
with scarlet spots and lines.

Japan is rich in minerals. GOLD.
Gold is found in various parts of the island, sometimes in grains washed out
of the sand; in other places it is extracted by fusion, from its matrix, or the
ores of copper. All the mines of this metal are claimed by the emperor, and
none dare work without his permission; when this is obtained, two thirds of the
produce are the portion of the emperor, the proprietor of the land receives one
third for his expenses.

SILVER mines abound. Copper is the most common of all the metals, SILVER.
COPPER.
and the greatest article of commerce with the Dutch factors. All the ore is
melted at Saccai or Osacca, and there only, where it is cast into cylinders,
about a span and a half long, and a finger thick. The finest ore is dug at
Seruga, from which the Japanese separate and refine a quantity of gold. The
coin of Japan is made either of gold, silver, or copper; COINS.
those of the two former are generally of an oblong shape, rounded at the ends,
and inscribed with letters, and the arms of the mint master, or the emperor, or
Dairo. The form of the coins is given by Kaempfer, i. tab. 19. and by
Tavernier, part ii. p. 9. tab. 9. p. 10. tab. 10.; in the last, the silver
coins are irregular at their edges. As to the copper coins, they are round, and
perforated in the middle, in order to string them for convenience of carriage.
Some of the gold coins weigh an ounce and six drams; and of the silver seven
ounces. Several of the silver Japanese coin are stamped with the image of
Daikos, the Plutus or god of riches of the country; he is represented seated on
two barrels of rice, with a sack in his left hand and a hammer in his right, by
a stroke of which he is supposed to produce, on any spot, money, food,
clothing, or whatever is useful to man Thanberg, iv. 116. E.
.

THE Japanese speak of two islands Kaempfer, i. 68.
one named Ginsima or the silver, GOLD AND SILVER ISLES.
the other Kinsima or the golden. Their situation is kept very secret; but
Philip III. having heard of them, and instigated by avarice, sent a ship with a
skilful pilot to find them out. The Dutch, urged by the same passion as the
Spaniards, made two attempts to discover them, one in 1639, the other in 1643,
but both were fruitless. They are said to lie to the E. N. E. of the coasts of
Japan, a hundred and fifty miles distant. All that I can find is, that they are
both put down in Mr. Arrowsmith's map; one in about Lat. 30 north, under the
name of Rica di oro or the gold island, and the other Rica di plata or the
silver, still farther north. Mr. Arrowsmith supposes it to be that stupendous
rock called Lot's Wife, a pyramid three hundred and fifty feet high, admirably
described and depicted by Mr. Meares, in p. 97 of his voyage. The Lat. says he,
was 29 50 north, the Longitude 142 23 cast of Greenwich. The waves broke
against its rugged front with a fury proportioned to the immense distance they
had to roll before they were interrupted by it. It rose almost perpendicular to
the height, according to the tables, of near three hundred and fifty feet. A
small black rock appeared just above the water, at about forty or fifty yards
from the western edge. There was a cavern on its south eastern side, into which
the waters rolled with an awful and tremendous noise. In regarding this
stupendous rock, which stood alone in an immense ocean, we could not but
consider it as an object which had been able to resist one of those great
convulsions of nature, that change the very form of those parts of the globe
which they are permitted to desolate.

SOME Kaempfer, i. 109.
tin is found in Japan of exquisite fineness, TIN.
almost equal to silver, but it is a metal very little used.

IRON abounds in the Japanese empire; IRON.
that likewise is fused into cylindrical forms; it is as dear as copper; most
sorts of instruments are composed of that metal and of brass; but they are wise
enough to make their culinary vessels of a composition of iron.

COALS abound in Japan, COALS.
but notwithstanding the severity of the weather in winter, the inhabitants
chiefly use charcoal, placed on ashes in a great pot, so prepared as to prevent
any noxious effect from the fumes.

THAT useful article, salt, is made from the seawater, SALT.
filtrated through sand, and then boiled to a proper consistence, and calcined
in earthen pots.

Naptha is frequent in one part of Japan. NAPTHA.
The natives collect and burn it in their lamps instead of oil.

Sulphur abounds in an island called Iwogasima or Sulphur isle, SULPHUR.
near the province of Satzuma. Kaempfer gives a curious account of the place.
It is, says he, not above a hundred years since they first ventured thither. It
was thought before that time to be wholly inaccessible, and by reason of the
thick smoke which was observed continually to arise from it, and of the several
specter, and other frightful uncommon apparitions, people fancied to see there
in the night, it was believed to be a dewlling place of devils, till at last a
resolute and courageous man offered himself, and obtained leave accordingly to
go and examine the state and situation of it. He chose fifty resolute fellows
for this expedition, who upon going on shore found neither hell nor devils, but
a large flat spot of ground at the top, which was so thoroughly covered with
sulphur, that wherever they walked a thick smoke issued from under their feet.
Ever since that time this island brings in to the prince of Satzuma about 20
chests of silver per annum, arising only from the sulphur dug up there, besides
what he gets by the trees and timber growing along the shore.

VULCANOES are to be found in many parts of the empire, VULCANOES.
which in general abounds with their great pabulum, sulphur and metallic
bodies. Some have burnt incessantly for ages; others have ceased, or only emit
flames periodically. The most noted is the mountain Fesi, in the province of
Surugu, equal in height to the pike of Teneriff, and capt with everlasting snow.

No country is more subject to earthquakes than Japan; EARTHQUAKES.
so frequent are they, that the natives regard them with as little terror as a
European would a storm; yet no annals can produce such tragical relations of
their sad effects. That in 1586, told by Father de Frocs, preserved by
Kaempfer, is one, but dreadfully surpassed by the earthquake of 1704, when the
whole city of Jeddo was destroyed, and two hundred thousand of its inhabitants
perished in the ruins.

IN many places are springs of water most intensely hot; HOT SPRINGS.
some boil up with such violence as to fling up the largest stones which are
laid over them; we are not told to what height. They are said to be periodical,
so I suspect them to be of the same nature with the Geysers of Iceland. Those
of a gentler heat are used as baths for several disorders. Those of the boiling
heat were formerly applied (as I shall have occasion to mention) for the most
cruel purposes.

THE empire of Japan consists of three greater islands; NIPON.
the largest, Nipon, which gives name to the whole, is of a curvated form, and
approximates at the southern end to the south-western extremity of Korea.
Between both are the streights of Korea, and within is the great gulf of the
same name, bounded on the eastern side by the concavity of Nipon. According to
M. D'Anvilles scale, that island is above six hundred miles in length.

THE next island is that of Sikokf, or the country of four, SIKOKF.
because divided into four provinces. It is irregular in its form, and lodged
between two large projections of Nipon; its length is two hundred miles.

BETWEEN its eastern end and the west of the salient part of Nipon, AWAD.
is a smaller island named Awad.

THE third, or more southerly island, is separated from the western part of
Sikokf by a narrow strait, and is named Saikokf, SAIKOKF OR KIUSIU.
or the western country, and Kiusiu, or the country of nine, because divided
into nine provinces.

AROUND most of these greater islands are innumerable small ones, inhabited or
uninhabited; among them Firando and Gesima are the most celebrated, as having
been the seat of European factories, and distinguished in history.

THE Japanese islands were certainly visited, VISITED BY MARCO POLO.
in the thirteenth century, by the famous Marco Polo. He describes the riches
of the country in high terms, and says that the emperor's palace was covered
with plates of gold, and that the seas abounded with fine pearls of a red cast.
He adds, that the inhabitants were idolaters, and worshipped monstrous images
with the heads of beasts, and with many hands; and that if they took any
foreigner who was able to ransom himself, they let him go; otherwise they
killed him, and with their friends made a feast on his body.

Marco Polo Travels, p. 125, 126.
gives a long account of the imprudent invasion of this island by the great
Tartarian emperor Kublai Khan (the Siu Tsu of the Chinese Du Halde, i. 214.
) about the year 1281, who sent there his general, Argas, with a most numerous
army and vast fleet. The greater part of his ships perished in a tempest, and
all the men who escaped to shore were massacred by the Japanese, so that very
few returned to give any account of the misfortune. The Chinese never more
attempted the empire of Japan.

THAT country cannot properly be said to have been discovered by the Europeans
till the year 1542, DISCOVERED BY THE PORTUGUESE.
by three Portuguese, named de Mota, Zeimoto, and Peixolo; these, as I have
before mentioned, in common with the rest of their countrymen, instigated by
avarice, had sailed from Malacca in search of an imaginary spot, called the
island of gold. Driven by a hurricane, they were wrecked on the shores of
Japan: The lord of the district received them with great humanity, and
signified an earnest desire of entering into a commerce with a nation which he
flattered himself would be so advantageous to him and his subjects.

IT was at this period that Francis de Xavier, FRANCIS DE XAVIER,
the great apostle of the Indies, was deeply engaged in his mission in the
peninsula of Malacca. His fame had reached Japan, when a native of the country
determined to make a visit to that part of India, to be satisfied of the truth
of the wonders reported to have been wrought by de Xavier. He came, attended by
two servants, was converted to Christianity, and adopted the name of Paul of
the Holy Faith; so zealous was he in his new religion, that he may truly be
called the Apostle of Japan. De Xavier determined to attend him to his native
country. He associated with him two Jesuits, sailed and landed in 1551 at
Kangoxima, in the kingdom of Satzuma, on the southern part of the island of
Kiusiu, and soon after passed to Firando, a small island, where he, assisted by
Paul, made converts innumerable. INTRODUCES CHRISTIANITY.
His zeal then determined him to visit the emperor, at the royal city of Miaco;
he arrived at the court, and was received with much respect. The multitude of
proselytes was incredible. The benevolence and humanity of our religion were
the principal instruments with which the missionaries operated on the minds of
the people, who compared the conduct of the Christian preachers with that of
their own Bonzees. The last suppose that all sick and infirm people are the
objects of the wrath of Heaven, and constantly leave them to perish. The
missionaries observed the precepts of our Savior; they fed the hungry,
clothed the naked, and administered to the sick. These irresistible proofs of
the superior excellency of our doctrine, gave success to their labors; for
near a century the true religion flourished, and spread more and more over the
empire. Other circumstances concurred to facilitate the reception of the gospel
in Japan. The Bonzees preached the necessity of mediators in their Xaca and
other gods; they underwent long and severe fasts and mortifications, and both
Christians and Japanese agreed in the worshipping of images, in the monastic
life, in beads, processions, praying for the dead, and even auricular
confession.

The Jesuits were followed, JESUITS, etc.
as occurred in China, by crowds of Dominicans, Franciscans, and Augustlines to
assist in the harvest. The holy men soon fell into the same error as in that
empire; they quickly began to quarrel with the Jesuits, accused them of
avarice, and of temporizing with the vices and superstitions of the Japanese.
Let the reader peruse p. 98 of this volume, and he will learn the imprudency of
all these religious adventurers.

THE vast profits resulting from the commercial and worldly spirit of the
Jesuits, were one cause of the toleration which the Christian religion
experienced for so great a length of time. The emperors saw the wealth the
Europeans brought into their country; and as long as the Christians did not
disturb the peace of the government, they permitted the conversion of their
subjects, and the exercise of our religion. The Portuguese settled at first at
the harbors of Bungo and Firando, and afterward at Nagasaki only. They carried
on immense trade; and in one year exported not less than three hundred tons of
gold from Miaco, the emporium, at that time, of all their commerce in this part
of the world. In the year 1636, when their trade was on the decline, they even
sent from that town 2350 chests of silver.

The Dutch introduced themselves into Japan about the year 1600, established
their first factory at Firando, and obtained from the emperor a patent for a
free commerce. The deep enmity between them and the Portuguese soon began to
show itself, and each nation took every possible means to supplant its rival.
In the year 1636 an opportunity offered. CONSPIRACY.
The Dutch happened to take a Portuguese ship, in which were found certain
letters from a captain Moro to the Portuguese ministry at Lisbon, wherein he
had laid a plan for murdering the emperor, and reducing the empire to the power
of his countrymen. Moro was a Japanese by birth, chief of the Portuguese in
Japan, and very zealous for the Christian religion. The letters were carefully
transmitted to the emperor. Moro was empaled, and burnt alive. After a little
time an edict followed, which entirely banished every foreigner from the
empire, with the most rigid prohibition of their ever entering it again. A
persecution was raised against the Christians, PERSECUTION.
perhaps the most horrid that ever was known; it lasted forty years, and
thousands perished by the most dreadful torments; it was computed that above a
third of the people of the empire were professors of Christianity. The
punishments those miserable creatures underwent are not to be related, the
inventions of Hell itself must have been put to the stretch. If any one has the
strange curiosity of being acquainted with them, he need only turn to Ogilvy's
History of Japan P. 253.
, which he will probably shut with the same horror as I did. Let me only add,
that the boiling water mentioned by me at p. 247 of this work, was one of the
instruments of torture, varied and lengthened by the most diabolical
inventions. Those of Singok were the most horrible; they flow with vast
violence and noise beneath a lofty precipice, and emit the most noisome
sulphurous vapor, which rises to a great height. Hither the Christians were
brought in multitudes; and in case they refused to renounce their religion,
were carried bound to the summit of the mountain, and precipitated into the
subjacent Phlegethon.

IN order to impress on every subject a detestation of the Christian religion,
TREADING ON THE CRUCIFIX.
and possibly to discover if there be any latent favorers of its doctrine, the
following annual custom is preserved throughout the empire: people of all ranks
and periods of life, even to children of a certain age, are assembled in the
different places, where they perform the ceremony of trampling upon the cross.
It was even said to have been a rite exacted from the Dutch, as the price of
their commerce with the Japanese. Swift, in his voyage to Laputa, is humorous
on the subject; for when Gulliver, under the character of a Dutchman, petitions
the emperor to be excused the ceremony, his majesty, much surprised, tells him,
that he was the first of his countrymen who ever made any scruple, and that he
suspected he must be a Christian, and not a Hollander. DUTCH.
In 1611 the Dutch sent a solemn embassy to the emperor, then resident at
Miaco, and were said to have at that time obtained an advantageous commercial
treaty; at length they fell under the general edict of expulsion; yet even
after that severe decree, procured readmission, under most mortifying
restrictions; they virtually are compelled to renounce their religion; they
must give up their prayer-books on first landing, and relinquish during their
whole confinement every mark of Christianity. But what will not a Dutchman do
for gain! They make from the factory an annual journey to the emperor's court,
which they dignify with the name of embassy; but it is no more than a
compulsory visit to present their gifts: their manner of traveling, both on
their way and on their return, is under a strict guard, more like that of a
parcel of convicts, than the merchants of a great commercial nation. One ship
only is permitted to trade with this empire annually, and that is confined to
the port of Nagasaki, in the little isle of Desima, on the west side of the
island Kiusiu. In fact, this is the only secure harbor in all the mighty empire
of Japan. As soon as a vessel arrives, a Japanese guard is put on board; the
number, size, age, and complexion of the crew noted down; every living creature
in the vessel is to be accounted for; a monkey died, and the coroner's inquest
sat on the body. The next thing done is to take an exact inventory of, and to
cause all the sails, masts, ropes, rudder, guns, arms, ammunition, etc. and all
the tackle of the ships, to be conveyed into the emperor's warehouse, there to
be kept under lock and seal till the time comes for their departure, when they
are restored, according to the inventory taken, of which both parties have an
exact duplicate Some of these precautions, Thunberg says, are now omitted. E.
.

THE factory is imprisoned in the little island the whole year, FACTORY.
excepting during the six weeks of open trade, when the Japanese come there
with their goods, erect booths, and have all sorts of amusements. SMUGGLING.
Smuggling, even of the most trifling articles, is forbidden under pain of
death; Kaempfer History of Japan, i. 330.
assures us, that three hundred were executed for that crime only in six or
seven years time; two were put to death while he was in the island, and the
factory obliged to attend; their crime was no more than smuggling one pound of
camplior.

THE articles imported by the Dutch, TRADE. IMPORTS.
are raw silk from China, Tonquin, Bengal, and Persia; and from the same
countries all kinds of stuffs, silks, and woollens, provided they are not
wrought with gold or silver; various sorts of the cotton manufactures of India,
but not painted; woollen cloths, stuffs, and serges from Europe; buffalo and
deer hides from Siam and Cambodia; tanned hides from Persia and Bengal; pepper,
sugar, cloves, and nutmegs from India, or the spicy isles; gum-lac,
sandal-wood, camphor, from Borneo; Catechu, Storax Liquida, saffron and Costus,
coral, cinnabar, antimony, lead, saltpetre, and borax, looking glasses, which
the Japanese break to make spying glasses, magnifiers, etc. files, needles, and
various sorts of iron ware, from Europe; large drinking glasses, spectacles,
toys, curiosities natural and artificial, and strange birds of all kinds. Once
the Dutch brought a Cassowary; it was considered as a bird of ill omen, and the
owner was obliged to send it back.

IN return the Dutch obtain, EXPORTS.
during the six weeks fair, gold, silver, and copper bullion, japanned cabinet
and other works, porcelain, tea, and Japanese camphor, and also copper in bars,
and other forms. These constitute the sum of the traffic, which on the whole is
far from considerable, ever since the abolition of Christianity in the empire.
The Abbe Raynal estimates the whole annual commerce at little more than
forty-five thousand pounds.

THE first time that the English traded directly with Japan, ENGLISH.
was in 1613, when captain Saris entered the port of Firando; he met with the
most courteous reception from the king of the island. Saris was charged with
letters and presents from our commercial pacific monarch James I. to his
imperial majesty of Japan. After a short stay at Firando, he proceeded on his
journey to Surunga, where the emperor at that time kept his court. A most
honorable answer was returned, and privilege of trade granted to the English
throughout the Japanese empire; Saris then made a visit to the emperor's son at
Jedo. The history of these transactions is given by Purchase Pilgrim, vol. i. p.
366-377.
, and is well worth consulting. Saris found at Firando, William Adams, an
Englishman, who by a strange chance was flung on this island, and detained
there Ibid, p. 125-132.
till his death. He was of no small use to Saris as an interpreter. Saris
established a factory at Firando, till the general expulsion of the Europeans,
the Dutch excepted.

THE French, in the time of Colbert, FRENCH.
were desirous of partaking of the advantages of the Japanese trade; that great
minister proposed sending a number of Huguenots, who might safely swear that
they were not of the same religion with the Portuguese; but the jealous
Japanese rejected the request.

THE Chinese had once prodigious commerce in this empire, CHINESE.
and came and settled in any numbers they pleased; but in time the jealous
Japanese took umbrage at the vast concourse of those foreigners, and at length
confined them to a certain precinct, near the same island with the Dutch. They
are allowed to have three sales in the year, one in spring, when they are
permitted to dispose of the cargoes of twenty jonks, a second of thirty jonks,
and a third in autumn of twenty. All above the number are obliged to return
without being suffered to unlade.

THE religion of the Japanese is idolatry: THEIR DEITIES.
their deities are amazingly numerous; tradition says that they had been men
eminent for their piety or mortification, deified after death for their several
virtues. They also hold that their earliest emperors were gods and demigods,
and that during the first period, they were governed by seven great celestial
spirits, each of which reigned a certain, but immense number of years. Their
temples are very numerous, dispersed not only over the cities, but even the
mountains and deserts. Their idols assume a thousand extravagant forms, and
colossal sizes; in one of their temples is an idol of copper gilt, the very
chair it sits on is seventy feet high, and the head so large as to be capable
of containing fifteen men; many of them work miracles, and bring abundance of
gain to the temple or monastery which possesses such a treasure.

A TEMPLE near Miaco takes its name from its number of idols, which amount to
33,333; Doctor Kaempfer gives us a view History of Japan, vol. ii. tab. 36.
of this vast repository, and in the following plate represents its celebrated
idol Quenwoa, sitting on the flower Tarate.

THE monastic life is much in vogue in Japan. MONASTIC LIFE.
The monasteries are filled with regulars and seculars, like those of the
church of Rome; some lead most austere lives; others indulge like the plump
Benedictines; others are accused of great irregularities.

THERE is one order of singular austerity, that of the Jammabos, i. e. the
mountain soldiers; they in one sense answer to our military religious, being
bound to fight for the gods and religion of their country, but never have
degenerated into the voluptuousness of the knights of the European orders. They
pass their time amidst the holy mountains, and practice the greatest
mortifications; the richer live more at their ease in their own houses. This
order is now divided into two sects, one called Jofanfa, the votaries of which
bind themselves to ascend once a year the great mountain of Fikoasan, a journey
of vast difficulty, by reason of its heights and dreadful precipices, but still
more tremendous on account of the penalty attending any impure person making
the attempt; he infallibly is possessed by the devil of the mountain, and
becomes stark mad. The other sect is named Fonsansa; this likewise is obliged
to make an annual pilgrimage to the summit of the Omine, a mountain not less
terrible than the other; but should any one presume to ascend it without being
duly prepared by purification, he is certain of being flung down the
precipices, or seized with a lingering illness, the penalties of his neglect.

THE Japanese religion is split into a multitude of sects; VARIOUS SECTS.
each differ in some tenets, yet all agree in five indispensible commandments.
1. They are not to kill, or eat of any thing that is killed; 2. they are not to
steal; 3. nor to lie; 4. nor to commit adultery; 5. nor to drink wine. Is it
not evident that they brought with them, on the dispersion of mankind, some of
the Mosaical laws, and in the last that they had adopted the rite of the
Rechabites?

Japan has its peculiar language, LANGUAGE.
different from all the Asiatic, and probably the primitive one, brought over
by the colonists who originally peopled the islands, and came directly from the
banks of the Euphrates, on the dispersion of mankind after the confusion of
languages. The Japanese have an opinion that the primoeval emigrants settled in
the province of Isje; numbers therefore make a pilgrimage annually to the
ancient spot, the place where their ancestors dwelt, and as such honor it with
peculiar acts of devotion. At Isje are two temples Kaempfer, i. tab. 17. 18.
; within that which they name the True Temple, nothing is to be seen but a
looking glass, and bits of white paper, emblems of truth and purity. They
probably brought with them a pure Monotheism, which was afterward converted
into Polytheism, by their intermixing with the several nations, which
subsequently contributed to the population of Japan, because it is reasonably
believed, that empire received a vast increase of inhabitants by the numerous
shipwrecks on its stormy coasts, and likewise by migrations from the
neighboring China and Korea. Whether the vast reverence which the Japanese pay
to their parents was copied from the Chinese, or whether it might not have been
introduced by the primoeval colonists, as a part of the first great code of
laws, the fifth commandment, I will not pretend to determine.

Japan is governed by two emperors; GOVERNMENT. SECULAR.
one called the Cubo, or secular monarch, who rules with absolute power; all
the princes and great lords of the empire pay him the most servile obedience.
Formerly the whole was divided into small independent states, the rulers were
styled kings and princes, many of which retain the names, and govern absolute
enough; but entirely under the direction of the emperor.

THE ancient title of the monarch was Dairo; he was also sovereign pontiff, and
like the pope the supreme head of the church. In that character his person was
held so sacred, that little short of divine worship was paid to him; for a long
period he governed by means of a prime minister, who was called the Cubo, a
dignity usually bestowed on one of his younger sons; the father, like other
eastern monarchs, devoting his whole time to indolence and sensuality. At
length a Cubo arose, who dethroned the Dairo, or rather usurped his more
important office, that of secular emperor; he permitted him to retain that of
pontiff. ECCLESIASTICAL.
The Cubo thus stripped him of all sort of power except ecclesiastical, but
preserves the farce of paying him all external respect, as much as if he had
enjoyed the ancient plenitude of authority; he renders him an imaginary homage,
and pretends to act only as his deputy, and to hold the empire from him.

THE Dairo was permitted to reside in the palace, in the old imperial city of
Miaco, and to keep up the ancient state, but that is now done with difficulty,
as the Cubos have successively lessened the revenues. Still he reigns supreme
over the church. The people pay him the utmost veneration, and the Cubo himself
is obliged to marry one of his daughters, in case he has any that are
marriageable. The first Cubo who usurped the empire, retired to Jedo, which is
the other great capital of the island.

THE laws of Japan, as is told of those of Draco, SEVERE LAWS,
may be said to have been written in blood. Montesquieu observes, that it is to
supply the great defect of the religion of the country, in its ignorance of the
doctrine of future rewards and punishment. Almost every crime is punished with
death, AND PUNISHMENTS.
and often attended with the most excruciating torments. Crucifixion is very
common; sometimes the malefactor is crucified erect, sometimes with the head
down. I have little doubt but that these punishments were unknown in the
empire, till the propagation of Christianity. The ideas were taken from the
crucifixes of the Christians, and from the pictures of the suffering of our
SAVIOR. The mode in which death was inflicted on the apostle St. Peter,
probably gave rise to that variation of cruelty in Japan.

THE punishment for gentlemen and soldiers is ripping open the belly. As a
peculiar favor, they are sometimes permitted to be their own executioners. The
emperor sends his mandate; the person whom he so favors, receives it with the
utmost respect; makes a great feast, and on the conclusion puts the imperial
order in execution, in the very presence of his friends and family.

FROM the variety of feature and form of body in the Japanese of the several
provinces, it is evident they are descended from different races of people, who
have migrated, or have been cast on the coasts at various times. "Thus," says
Kaempfer, i. 95. although the Japanese in the main, particularly the common
people of Nipon, be of a very ugly appearance, short-sized, strong,
thick-legged, tawny, with flattish noses and thick eyelids (though the eyes
stand not so deep in the forehead as in the Chinese), yet the descendants of
the eldest and noblest families, of the princes and lords of the empire, have
somewhat more majestic in their shape and countenance, being more like the
Europeans. The inhabitants of the provinces Satzuma, Oosijma, and Fiuga, are of
a middle size, strong, courageous, and manly, otherwise civil and polite. The
same is observed of the inhabitants of some of the northern provinces in the
great island Nipon, excepting those of the great province Osju, who are said to
be beyond others cruel and unmerciful. The inhabitants of some provinces of
Saikokf, particularly of Fisen, are short, slender, but well-shaped, of a good
handsome appearance, and extremely polite. The inhabitants of the great island
Nipon, particularly of its eastern provinces, are known from others by their
big heads, flat noses, and musculous fleshy complexion.

Kaempfer Hist. of Japan, i. 93.
relates, ISLE OF BLACKS.
that some centuries ago the Japanese discovered the island of Genkaisima,
situate to the north of Nipon, and inhabited by Owi, or black devils; and that
after extirpating them, they peopled the isle with a colony of their own. These
blacks are described in the ancient chronicles of Japan to have worn long hair
spread over their shoulders, and to have had strange household goods and
high-crowned hats. Kaempfer justly imagines them to have been Malayes wrecked
on that island. Those people are remarkable for wearing their hair of a great
length; and as to the hats, they most probably were European, and among the
articles imported into the Malaye islands, which in old times were brought over
land to Ormuz, and from thence dispersed by sea to the peninsula of Malacca,
Siam, and other places.

NOTWITHSTANDING the Japanese have for ages scarcely known the pest of war,
MANNERS.
yet they are endowed with the greatest heroism. If in any quarrel they have
been conquered by an enemy, and find they cannot revenge the insult, they will
put themselves to death: I speak of this, not in praise, but to describe a high
spirit, bordering on brutality. That spirit, exerted in a foreign land against
the treachery of Peter Nuyts, the Dutch governor, merits our admiration and
applause Univ. Hist. vol. x. p. 321. Kaempfer's Japan, vol. ii. app. 57.
. To fill the catalogue of their vices, they are distrustful, proud, cruel, and
destitute of benevolence; and from the doctrine of their Bonzees, are so
insensible to the wants of their fellow creatures, as to suffer them to perish
by denying them every sort of relief. To their intrepidity may be added their
patience under labor, their ability to undergo any hardships. Their other
virtues are numerous: they have great industry, great moderation in their
pleasures, are entirely free from luxury and intemperance; moderate in their
desires of wealth, just in their dealings, and true to their word; chaste in
word and action; religious, but apt to deviate into the grossest superstitions.

THEY are celebrated for the quickness of their apprehensions, and facility in
learning. Before the arrival of the missionaries, their acquired knowledge was
at a low ebb. What they attained after that period may possibly be lost. At
that time they were very ignorant astronomers, ASTROLOGY.
but much addicted to judicial astrology; they undertake nothing without
consulting some pretending impostor. GEOGRAPHY.
As to geography they made the world consist of three parts, China, Siam, and
Japan. We may see by their maps their extent in that branch of science; we have
one as a proof in the British Museum.

THEIR skill in physic is not less moderate; PHYSIC.
their great art is that of the pulse. The physicians first feel one arm and
then another, as if the impulse did not come from the same machine, the heart.
Their Aesculapius or Apollo, is the god Jakusi. They have very few remedies;
two form the principal, the one is the Acu-punctura, or pricking with the
needle, ACU-PUNCTURA.
in use for a dreadful species of colic common in Japan. The professors in the
art make use of certain needles; and form with much ceremony and superstition,
the punctures in three rows Kaempfer, ii. App. p. 29. tab. 43.
. But this operation is applied for the cure of other disorders A singular
coincidence with the Chinese-practice, mentioned by Dr. Gillan. Embassy, vol.
ii. p. 249. E.
.

THE other great remedy is the Moxa, MOXA.
a caustic applied in almost every distemper. It is made of the leaves of the
Artemisia vulgaris, and being set on fire, is placed on the part affected. The
flame is not visible, nor is the burning attended with any considerable pain.
The astrologers are consulted on the occasion, who have figures of the human
body drawn like the man in the almanac, with all its parts marked to which the
Moxa is to be applied Kaempfer, ii. tab. 44.
, for the physicians seem to act with peculiar reverence to the influence of
the stars.

THIS remedy is also in use in India, and other countries in Asia. It has even
been introduced into Europe as a cure for the gout, but I believe with such
little success, that the practice has long since been exploded.

THE Japanese have another medicine, A FAMOUS POWDER.
a powder to be taken internally in colicky diseases. The inventor had the art
to give out that it was communicated to him in a dream by Jakusi the god of
physic, which stamped such a veneration for this medicine, that he enriched
himself so greatly as to build a temple with part of his gains, and the family,
who keep the nostrum to themselves, have erected two or three more; the chief
ingredient is supposed to be the China root, great quantities of which, and
also of the Ginseng root, is imported into Japan for medical purposes.

BOTANY is much studied by the physicians of the empire, and many books are
composed on the subject. Dr. Thunberg met with two physicians at Jedo who had
great knowledge, not only in their own profession, but in botany, mineralogy,
and zoology.

THE famous Terra Japonica or Catechu is prepared chiefly at Odowara; CATECHU.
the principal ingredient is foreign, being an extract from the Mimosa Catechu
Woodville's Med. Bot. vol. ii. p. 183. tab. 86.
, a small tree which grows in great plenty on the mountains of Hindoostan, not
the Areca catechu, as had been long supposed; we were first favored with this
discovery by Mr. Ker, assistant surgeon in Bengal: Much is manufactured in the
province of Bahar; an ointment is composed from it of general repute throughout
India, being found a most useful astringent in that hot climate. It has for a
great length of time kept its place in our dispensatory as an efficacious
medicine in weakness of the bowels in general, and the consequential fluxes. It
has also been used with much success as an antiseptic, in cases of a putrid
dissolved state of the blood, by the great physicians Huxham and Pringle. In
Japan it is sold perfumed, and made up in various forms for the use chiefly of
the ladies, who hold it in great esteem to fasten their teeth, and give a
sweetness to their breath.

THE Japanese are fond of good paintings, PAINTINGS.
and the rich will give immense prices for pieces of merit. As to their own
artists they are on a level with those of the Chinese, but excel us greatly in
the beauty of their colors.

THEIR cabinet-works, JAPAN WORKS.
and the several things which go under the common name of Japan, are well known
for the excellency of the varnish, which surpasses that of all the world. The
black also is most intense, and the coloring or painting exquisite; as to the
brass furniture of the cabinets, it is very coarse and clumsy. But the Japanese
excel in iron manufactures; STEEL.
their metal is of the best quality; their arms are muskets, bows and arrows,
daggers, and scymitars. The last of a most remarkable temper; it is customary
to try the edge on the bodies of executed malefactors, which they cut to pieces
by way of experiment.

WHEN I am on the subject of arms, ARMY.
I may mention the military of the empire. It is computed that the standing
army consists of a hundred thousand foot and twenty thousand horse. In a
kingdom which can have no foreign wars, nor fears intestine tumults, this is
surprising; but since the conspiracy of the Portuguese, and the extirpation of
Christianity, the emperors have been in constant fears of plots and invasions
from the European powers.

LET me now return to the arts. PRINTING.
Printing has been among them from time immemorial; like the Chinese, they cut
the letters on blocks of wood, but excel them in neatness; they print and write
like that nation. In this art, and in several others, as well as in customs,
there is such an agreement that I cannot doubt but that the Chinese were their
original instructors in science; but, as is often the case, the scholar has
excelled the master.

THEY also claim the invention of gunpowder, GUNPOWDER.
but remain inferior to the Chinese in its uses, not only in artillery, but in
all species of fireworks.

THE architecture of the Japanese resembles in some degree that of the Chinese;
ARCHITECTURE.
it is much more plain, being not laden with ornaments as that of China. The
common houses are small, consisting of two stories; the upper of which is
seldom inhabited, and the rest is almost destitute of furniture, except mats,
and a small table to eat on. The cedar (Juniperus virginiana) fir, and the
bamboo, are the great materials for building. Their mirrors are made of metal,
but never used but at their toilets. The windows are covered with a white paper
thin enough to admit the light.

THE castles of the nobility consist of three different enclosures, CASTLES.
one round the other, and are defended by a deep ditch; but never by artillery:
they are usually at the skirts of large towns; the owners are bound to keep
them in repair.

THE temples are often very magnificent, TEMPLES.
and some are peculiarly remarkable for the height of the roof, the elegance of
the sculpture, and beauty of the gilding and painting.

HERE are considerable manufactures of silk and cotton, SILK AND COTTON.
the produce of their own country; but the Dutch are allowed to import a great
quantity of cloths, stuffs, chintzes and cottons.

THE dress of the better sort of people are silk, of the lower, HABITS.
cotton. Their habits are loose gowns with large sleeves. In summer they are
thin; in winter quilted; and often they put on one or more additional,
according to the severity of the season. The women's apparel resembles the
men's, only the gowns of the former are much longer, and trail on the ground;
men of rank also wear trowsers, and short black jackets placed over their
gowns. They use sandals, but do not wear stockings; and always go bare-headed,
except in a journey, when they put on a conical cap of straw; at other times
they protect themselves from the sun and rain by fans and umbrellas.

THE manufacture of porcelain is of great antiquity. PORCELAIN.


I CONCLUDE the account of Japan with a very brief mention of the two capitals,
of which Miaco is the most ancient, MIACO.
and the original seat of empire. The plan is given by Kaempfer Hist. of Japan,
vol. ii. tab. 27.
, copied from the original now deposited in the British Museum, by which it
appears most regularly built, the streets crossing each other at right angles.
It lies in about Lat. 35 40 north, in a large plain, surrounded with beautiful
verdant hills and mountains, and watered by numbers of small streams. Miaco is
the residence of the Dairo, or ecclesiastical emperor, and is full of
manufactures of all kinds, being the chief mercantile town in the empire. Here,
the richest stuffs with gold and silver flowers are woven; copper smelted; and
among the most trifling matters, are made the puppets with moving heads.

THE number of inhabitants in Kaempser's time was 529,726, of which 52,169 were
ecclesiastics.

VARIOUS streams unite and form a river which flows from hence to the great
commercial city and port of Osacca, on a fine bay; which last is said to be so
populous, that in case of need it could send forth an army of eighty thousand
men.

DOCTOR Kaempfer gives Hist. of Japan, vol. ii. p. 468. tab. 25.
a very good idea of the beauty and singularity of some of the coasts between
Miaco and Osacca, in his views of Simoasi, Morizu, and Muru, with the
semicircular hills with which those places are backed, most characteristically
cultivated to the very tops.

Jedo, JEDO.
the residence of the temporal, and in fact the real emperor, is built with far
less regularity Ibid. vol. ii. tab. 39.
, because built by degrees, and on no certain plan: It stands in Lat. 35 32
north. The palace is very large, and covers a vast extent of ground. The city
has great numbers of temples dedicated to Amida, and the various deities; the
ecclesiastics are of course prodigiously numerous. The houses are in general
small and mean, and liable to frequent fires; four thousand have been burnt by
a single accident. A large river runs through the city, and falls into the
harbor; one branch encompasses the castle, and divided into five streams,
unites with the other in the port.

THE naval force of the Japanese is very small, NAVY.
the emperors not having thought proper to maintain a fleet since the expulsion
of foreigners, presuming it impossible to have quarrels with nations with whom
they could have no intercourse. SHIPPING.
The merchant ships, which are built only for conveying goods from island to
island, are most clumsily made, and by the emperor's order, in such a form as
renders it impossible for them to go far to sea. They are commonly about
twenty-eight yards long, and eight broad. The stern is square, with a hole left
in the middle, expressly to increase the danger of distant navigation; both
stern and prow are very lofty. The ships have only one mast, and are
constructed for rowing as well as failing. The figures in Kaempfer Kaempfer,
Hist. of Japan, vol. ii. tab. 21.
will give the best notion of their form.

Korea, and certain other territories, KOREA.
have been long tributary to the Japanese empire. The neighboring Korea shall
be first mentioned. I refer the reader to a future volume for farther
particulars of that country. Here I shall briefly add its history as far as
concerns the Japanese. It had been conquered first by Mikaddo Tsiuu Ai, emperor
of Japan, and after that, Anno Christi 201, by his relict Dsin Ju, a princess
celebrated for her abilities and valor. The Koreans in time shook off the
Japanese yoke, and continued independent till Taiko, having usurped the secular
empire, in order to free himself from such of the nobility who were disaffected
to his government (and under pretense of reducing the Koreans) sent them at the
head of a potent army: they landed on the continent, obliged the Koreans (but
not without the bravest resistance) to become once more tributary to the
empire. Taiko died, the affairs of Korea were neglected, and the Japanese
driven down to the coasts, and of all their conquests left only in possession
of the maritime parts of the province of Tsiosijn, and two islands, one called
Iku, the other Tsussima, on which is kept a garrison of fifty men; but these
islands are neither remarkable for their size or their fertility.

THE articles brought from thence are cod, PRODUCE.
and other fish pickled, walnuts, rare medicinal plants, and flowers, and the
famous Gingseng roots, and before the imperial prohibition, certain earthen
pots made in the Tartarian provinces of Japii and Niuke.

THE other country dependent on Japan, ISLE OF MATMAY.
is the island of Matmay or Matsumai, part of the land of Jeso, divided from
the north end of Nipon by an incurvated straight, in the nearest place sixty
versts, or forty-five miles broad. According to Charlevoix, in his Fastes
Chronologiques, the first European who visited that island was father Jerome de
Angelis, a Sicilian jesuit, who went there by sea from Japan, and landed at the
capital. He reached it in the year 1620, and returned in 1621, but without
being certain whether it was an island or part of the continent, nor has he
left us any account, either of it or its inhabitants.

THE next Europeans who visited this country were the Dutch, LAND OF JESO.
who in 1643 sailed from the Cape Nabo in the ships Castricom, captain De
Vries, and the Breskes, on a voyage of discovery off the coasts of Tartary. In
Lat. 44 30 north, they fell in with what they call Eso or Jeso. Whether this
was the north extremity of Matsumai, or another land almost contiguous to it,
does not appear. By Mr. Arrowsmith's map it should seem that these discoverers
sailed along the eastern coast of a certain country from the most southern part
of Matsumai, as high as Lat. 49 30, and gave names to several bays or points of
lands. As to the western sides of the region, they probably are quite
undiscovered. In the map I am so partial to, not only that coast, but those of
the corresponding continent are left undetermined, noted only with dotted
lines, even as high as the south end of the island of Sachalin. The
intermediate space is the supposed straight of Jeso. Whether the land of Jeso
is, as Mr. Muller conjectures, any more than an archipelago, or whether it is
part of the Tartarian continent, at present remains extremely doubtful.
Matsumai alone seems to have been proved to be an island. The voyage of the
unfortunate de la Perouse, has thrown considerable light on the hitherto
undescribed land of Jeso, and the opposite shore of Tartary. After coasting for
some time the inhospitable isles of Japan, that able navigator traversed the
intervening sea, till he came in sight of the continent of Asia, in Lat. 42,
which he followed in a northerly direction, and in Lat. 45 13 landed at the
Baie de Ternai. Here he found a country of the most abundant vegetation, but
showing no signs of being occupied, except by wandering hunters, or occasional
visitants by sea. Game of all kinds were seen in quantities, and the sea
afforded a copious supply of cod, herring, and falmon. In an excursion inland,
some of the party discovered a tomb, in which were deposited two bodies clad in
the skin of bears, Chinese coin, and copper ornaments were attached to their
girdles, and near them lay silver earings, an iron hatchet, a knife, a wooden
spoon, a comb, and a small bag of rice.

Still pursuing the coasts of Chinese Tartary, the navigators touched at a bay
to which they gave the name of Suffrein, situated in Lat. 47 51; continual fogs
retarded their progress. In Lat. 48 35 they discovered to the east the
apparently rocky and barren shores of the nominal land of Jeso, part of the
vast island Tehoka or Sachalin, to which they sailed. They found the
inhabitants advanced to a considerable degree of civilization in consequence of
their intercourse with the Chinese, parts of whose dress they had adopted, and
with whom, and the Mantchew Tartars, they carried on a trade in dried fish and
oil. Leaving these intelligent islanders, who had traced on the sand with
almost geographical accuracy the object of his farther enquiry, de la Perouse
proceeded northwards, and touched at a spot he denominated Baie d'Estaing; the
channel between Tehoka and the continent narrowed to the distance of twelve
leagues; the soundings also became gradually less, and in Lat. 51 45 did not
exceed nine fathoms. The enterprizing spirit of a Cook or a Vancouver seemed
here wanting; de la Perouse, after a trial of a few hours, remained satisfied
that a bank of sand, over which boats only could pass, connected the shores and
closed the extremity of the vast gulf. He however draws the just conclusion,
that the island called Sachalin by the Russians, the northern extremity of
which has long been known, extends from the 46th to the 54th degrees of
latitude, and consequently includes a portion of the Yedzo, or Jeso of our
geographers. The straights which separate this island from that of Matsumay,
are ascertained with accuracy, and justly distinguished by the name of the
French navigator. -- On the return of the ships from their fruitless attempt to
penetrate into the sea of Ochotsk, they entered the Baie de Castries, on the
coast of Tartary. Here was situated a small village, inhabited by a race whose
high cheek bones and small eyes announced its origin; but it appeared only the
occasional residence of different tribes for the purpose of fishing, who carry
the produce of their labor to the Mantchew Tartars, living on the banks of the
great river Segalien or Amur, from whom they receive in exchange for their
dried salmon, grain, nanquin, and other articles probably brought from China.
The custom of leaving in their huts, during the long season of absence for the
purposes of commerce, their bows, arrows, nets, and such furniture as their few
wants require, constitutes an interesting proof of the honesty of this harmless
race of people; in several particulars they agree with the natives of
Kamchatka; and tombs far exceeding the proportion of the apparent population,
excited similar astonishment, and gives the same cause for investigation, as
the numerous memorials of the dead on the coast of America observed by
Vancouver.

De la Perouse, after doubling Cape Crillon, the southern extremity of the
island Sachalin, in Lat. 45 57, landed in a secure bay, inhabited by a tribe of
a darker complexion than those of the north, and more industrious; their
utensils and dress showed their intercourse with the Japanese. The distance
from hence to the northern shores of the isle of Matsamay, does not exceed
twelve leagues. The navigators here fell into the track, and had the
opportunity of rendering justice to the veracity, of the Dutch voyagers in
1643. E.


That all the tract which the Dutch saw to the west is that land of Jeso, there
can be no dispute; even Matsumai is comprehended under that name: that island
was early annexed to the Japanese empire, and is chiefly peopled with exiles.
We have two accounts of the inhabitants of this country; one is left us by
Captain Saris, the other by the Dutch Purchas's Pilgr. vol. i. p. 384.
, the former gives us the following information on the subject, which he
collected from a sensible Japanese who had actually visited the island of
Matsumai; we may collect from him that it was known to the Japanese by the name
of Yedso or Jeso. The relation beginning thus:

DESCRIBED.
THAT Yedso is an island, and lies on the north-west side of Japan, and
distant from thence ten leagues; that the people are white, and of good
condition, but very hairy all their bodies over like munkeyes. Their weapones
are bows and arrows poisoned. The people in the southernmost part thereof do
understand weight and measure, whereof within the land thirty days journey
they are ignorant. They have much silver and sand gold, whereof they make
payment to the Jappanners for rice, etc. Rice and cotton cloth of Japan, is
here well requested, iron and lead is brought to them from Japan. Necessaries
for the belly and back are most vendible to them; rice transported from Japan
to Yedso, has yielded four for one.

THE town where the Japanners have their chief residence and mart is called
Matchma, therein are five hundred household of Japanners, who likewise have a
fort there, the governor whereof is called Matchmadonna. This town of
Matchma, is the principal mart town of all Yedzo, whither the natines most
resort to buy and sell, especially in September for their provision for winter.
In March, they bring down salmon, and dried fish of sundry sorts, and other
wares for which the Japanners barter, which the Japanners rather desire than
silver.

THE Japanners have no settled being or trade in any other town then Matchma.
That further to the northward upon the same land, are people of very low
stature like dwarfes. That the Yedzos are people of the stature of the
Japanners, and have no apparel but what is brought them from Japan. That there
settleth a very violent current between Yedzo and Japan, which comes from
Corea, and sets to the east-north-east. That the winds are for the most
part, as usually they are in Japan, viz. that the northerly winds begin in
September, and end in March, and then the southerly winds begin to blow.

THE account given by the commander of the Castricom, concurs in a great
measure with the above. The author of the Recueil de Voyages au Nord, vol. iv.
has preserved the voyage. It appears that the captain had landed in several
places; that in Lat. 44 30, he found the country very mountanous and high,
covered with lofty trees, many of which were fit for masts; the soil very
clayey and wet, and near the shores covered with brushwood; it was reported
that there were several rich silver mines.

IN Lat. 45 10, ACQUIES.
at a place called Acquies, the land was very high, and covered with trees. The
soil clayey, but producing good fruits, such as mulberries, red and white
gooseberries, raspberries, etc. also oaks and other kinds of trees, and in the
valleys lilies of a vast height. The rivers are bordered by rushes, and also
with red roses.

IN Lat. 46 30, he fell into a great gulf abounding with salmon, the shore was
covered with vegetables, and had the appearance of the coasts of England; but
the natives neither cultivated the ground, nor made any advantage of their rich
soil. The most northern part of the range which he touched at on this coast,
was in Lat. 48 50, where he found the land rise into little hills clothed with
herbage; and met with good anchorage, in from 25 to 40 fathoms depth, with a
bottom of sand.

HE speaks in general of the inhabitants of the coast of Jeso as being strong
and square made, NATIVES OF JESO.
short and gross, their hair and beard long, and the last so thick as almost to
cover their whole face; their bodies likewise very hairy; the hair on the fore
part of the head is shaved. The features are tolerably good, their eyes black,
forehead flat, complexion yellow; both sexes wear rings in their ears and on
their fingers. Their dress is of the Japanese fashion; some is made of silk,
others of stuff, and others of the skins of animals.

THEIR houses are built against the slope of a hill, HOUSES.
constructed of planks, and covered with the bark of trees; they are supported
by the trunks, and have an hole at top to let out the smoke; their fireplace
is in the middle of the floor; their doors so low that they are obliged to
creep in. The only furniture is matting made by the women; to these add a cup
and a plate of varnished ware for each individual in the family. In some
respects the houses resemble those of Nootka Sound, and are in groups of
fifteen or twenty, each group about half a league distant from the other, and
each seems to be peopled with a kindred clan.

THE common food of the natives is the lard and oil of whales, FOOD.
fish, and all sorts of vegetables, especially the fruit of roses, which are as
large as medlars, and being dried, are considered as excellent winter
provision. Notwithstanding this, they often die of cold or famine. It is
customary with them to put their dead into a case, and cover them with
oyster-shells; these are supported by four posts, placed beneath huts neatly
made.

THE natives of Matsumai show very few signs of religion, RELIGION.
nor have they any idols. When they drink, if they are near the fire, they pour
a few drops into it; they also stick in their chambers some small rods with
little flags at the end. If a person falls sick, they cut long slips of the
wood, and tie them round the head and arms of the patient.

NOTWITHSTANDING the rude appearance of these people, MANNERS.
they are prudent and civilized in their manners, and among strangers pay them
the compliment of putting on their best clothes.

THEY are a very indolent race; never cultivate the ground, but pass much of
their time on the water in canoes, which they call praos, cut out of the trunk
of some great tree, raised on the side with planks. In these they go to the
chase of seals, which they shoot with arrows, or of whales, which they harpoon.
They beside catch other fishes with seines, in the manner done in Europe.
Several objects of chase are mentioned. Birds they catch in snares; and shoot
with arrows elks, roes, stags, bears, and other animals unknown to the Dutch
navigators. Besides the weapons I have mentioned, they wear a short cutlass
made of iron, which they procure from the Japanese.

HEMP grows wild in the country, HEMP.
the women spin it, I suppose by splitting it first; they then hold one end
between their teeth, and turn and twist it into thread on a distaff.

THE natives exchange with the Japanese the lard and oil of whales and fishes,
the dried tongues of whales, furs, and feathers of eagles, for winging of
arrows. The people of Japan pay them an annual visit, and bring in return rice,
sugar, silken clothes in the Japanese fashion, smoaking-pipes, tobacco, and
varnished cups and plates. The Japanese seem to have introduced civilization
among these people by their intercourse with them. The Chinese sometimes come
and trade with them. The capital of this chain of islands is called Matsumai,
and is the residence of the prince or governor, who annually makes a voyage to
Jedo, to do homage to the emperor. The Japanese once attempted to extend their
conquests from Matsumai northward; they succeeded at first, but after a revolt
of the inhabitants Kaempfer, i. p. 65.
, are now content to accept from the chieftain, whom they style prince of Jeso,
a tribute of very small value, which is annually paid at Matsumai.

WE now arrive at the southernmost isles of the long chain of the Kurils. KURIL
ISLES.
I have given an account of the most northern in my introduction to the Arctic
Zoology. The whole chain diverges to the north-east in a direct line, and
concludes very near to the cape of Lopatka, in Kamschatka. The Russians reckon
Matsumai among the number. Those next to the land of Jeso were discovered by
the Casticrom. Tschicota, Kounaschir, and Atorkou are the most southern; the
two first lie opposite to Matsumai, and at no great distance from its coasts,
and Atorkou a little to the north-east. Tschicota is a hundred and twenty
versts, or ninety miles long, and forty miles broad. Kounaschir is about a
hundred and twelve miles long, and about thirty-seven broad, and Atorkou, or
Etorpu, is equal in length and breadth, being two hundred and twenty-five miles
across, according to the Russian accounts in the Neue Nordische Beytrage Vol.
iv. 133.
. This island is the Staten-land of the Dutch, STATEN-LAND.
a name bestowed on it in their voyage of 1643.

Ouropi is the Company's land of the same voyagers; COMPANY'S LAND.
and they bestowed on the straight which separates it from Atorkou the name of
De Vries's, DE VRIES'S STRAIGHT.
in honor of their commander. No places have puzzled geographers so greatly.
D'Anville gives to Jeso, Josogasima, as it is sometimes called, the form of a
vast island; and to the Company's Land and Staten-land a figure possibly very
different from the reality. The editors of Cook's Voyage make them only small
islands. The Russians again, in their history of Kamschatka, give them another
form; and Mr. Arrow-smith very properly leaves it undecided whether Jeso is
continent or archipelago. This being mentioned, we hasten to the conclusion of
this volume, and give a brief account of the remainder of the Kuril isles.
Etorpu, the nineteenth in order, reckoning from Lopatka-noss, comes next. Most
of the islands of this long chain are volcanic. Raschotti, the tenth, has in
our days been so rent with an earthquake, as entirely to drive away the
numerous flocks of birds that used to frequent its cliffs; but the sea-lions
still keep their stations. VOLCANOES.
On Kounaschir, the twentieth, is one volcano; on Etorpu are two; on Amakutan
another; and on the lofty Poromoschir, the highest in the chain, remarkable for
its vast peaked mountains, is probably another. I have treated of these islands
so fully in my introduction to the Arctic Zoology, that I shall not tire my
reader with the repetition; I therefore will only say here, that many of them
have been conquered by the Russians, who, not thinking them worth the expense
of colonizing, content themselves with accepting a small tribute.

THE inhabitants resemble those of the land of Jeso, NATIVES.
and are equally hairy. By the accounts of the Russians who visited these
islands in 1777, they differ in some of their customs from the former. They
have multitudes of little household gods, like the Mongol Tartars, and they pay
a worship to the owl. The Mongols do the same, for the reason given in the
zoological part of the Arctic Zoology Vol. i. p. 272.
. This may direct us to the origin of these islanders. They bury their dead in
the earth, and believe in a future life, to be passed in certain subterraneous
regions.

END OF THE THIRD VOLUME.
APPENDIX.
A LIST OF ARTICLES IMPORTED FROM THE EAST INDIES.
ARRACK and Brandy. Aloes Socotrina. Epatica. from the Cape.
Amber. Ambergrease. Assasoetida. Arsenic. Amarus
BALSAM, artificial. natural, or Gilead.
Bdellium. Benjamin. Bezoar Stones. Blood Stones. Borax, refined. Borax,
unrefined, or Tincal
CAMBOGIUM. Cantharides. Camphire, refined. unrefined.
Cardamoms Cassia Fistula. Lignea.
Caliicoes, white. Candles. Wax. Carmenia Wool. Canes, walking, or Dragon's
Blood. Carpets, Persia. Cane Hats, under 22 inches diameter. China Ware and
Clay Figures. China Roots. Cinnamon. Carpets, Turkey, long. Cinabrum or
Vermilion. Coffee. Cotton Yarn. Coloquintida. Cocculus Indicus. Costus Dulcis.
Coral, whole, polished. whole, unpolished. in fragments.
Cotton. Cowries. Cloves. Cubeba. Cake Lack. Cortex Peru, or Jesuits Bark.
DIMITIES, white. Diagredrum or Scammony. Dragon's Blood.
ELEPHANTS Teeth. Ebony Wood. Earth Oil, from the Banks of the Ava.
FOLIUM Indiae.
GALBANUM. Gallinga. Garnets, rough. cut.
Galls. Ginger. Green.
Gum Oppoponax. Sarcocol.
Glass Bottles. Gum Sagapenum, or Serapinum. Amoniacum, or Ammoniac. Tragagant,
or Tragacanth. Lack, or Lump Lack. Animi. Ellemni. Senica, Senega, or Arabic.
Gold Plate, wrought.
HURS
INDIGO.
LAPIS Calaminaris. Lapis Contrayerva. Tutiac. Lazuli.
Lacquered Ware. Lead, White. Lignum Asphalthum.
MANNA. Mastic, White. Red.
Molasses. Mace. Mirabolanes, dry. Musk. Cods.
Muslin, plain or stitched. Madeira Wine. Myrrh.
NUTMEGS condited. Nutmegs. Nux Vomica.
OLIBANUM. Opium. Orpiment, or Auripigmentum.
PEPPER. long.
Paper, painted. Pictures.
QUICKSILVER.
RADIX Contrayerva. Rattans. Reeds, Bambo. Rhubarb. Rice.
SALT Petre. Sal Ammoniac. Sanders, Red. Yellow.
Sappan Wood. Seahorse Teeth. Seed Pearl, charged as a drug unmanufactured.
Senna. Seed Lack. Silk, raw. wrought.
Silver, wrought. Plate, gilt. Parcel, gilt.
Shell Lack. Spikenard. Squilla. Squinanthum, or Camels Hair. Stockings of
Cotton. Storax Calamita. Stick Lack. Sugar Candy, Brown. White.
Succades. Stags Horns, or Hearts Horns. Snuff. Skins, dressed, and China Paper,
White.
TAMARINDS. Tea. Tincal. Turbith Root. Ditto Thapsiae. Turmerick. Tortoise
Shell. Tobacco.
WAX of Bees. Worm Seeds.
ZEDOARIA.
GOODS MANUFACTURED.
ARRANGOES. Agates. Bamboe Achar. Cornelian Stones. China Ink. Cane Blinds.
Cherong. Copper enamelled. Fans. Fireworks. Handles for Knives. Vermicelli.
Cane Mats. Mother of Pearl Beads, Necklaces, etc. Kittisols. Mangoes. Mother of
Pearl Counters. Ivory Toys. Paper Prints. Rice Flowers, Images, etc. Rosewood
Furniture. Soy. Sago. Shawls. Wrought Copper, or Gold. Pickles. Curry Stuff.
Unrated Seeds. Leaves for making Curry Stuff. Chinese Musical Instruments.
Landscapes in Stone. India Glue. Succades. Butterflies and Insects preserved.
Artificial Flowers. Wood Frames, carved and gilt. Painted Bambo Sticks. Black
Wood Drawers. Sandal Wood Drawers. Walking Sticks, inlaid. Mocha and Cambay
Stones. Conchou Cloth.
GOODS UNMANUFACTURED.
TUTENAQUE. Tortoise Shells, rough. Paddy. Mother of Pearl Shells, rough. Birds
Nests. Sea Shells, rough. Tigers Teeth. Tigers Claws. Rough Pebbles. Cassue
Nuts. Ebony Wood. Sandal Wood. Chain Pepper in the Pod. India Weed. Bambo
Pieces. Rose Wood.
DRUGS MANUFACTURED.
GOA Sto. Oil, Cloves. Oil, Cinnamon. Oil, Castor. Oil, Nutmegs. Oil, Mace. Oil
Camphire. Fossil Alkali. Oils, Chemical. Unrated Tincture. Tincture of Rhubarb.
DRUGS UNMANUFACTURED.
Cassia Buds. Cassia Minea. Columbo Root. Rag Pearl. Seed Pearl. Aloes from the
Cape. Drugs unrated. Cardemom Seeds. Castor Seeds. Unknown Drugs. Jesuits
Beans. Jesuits Bark. Gum Copal.
INDEX TO QUADRUPEDS.
A.
ANTELOPE, Chinese Page 187 Ape, great black Page 189 gray ibid. yellow ibid.

B.
Badger, European Page 191 Bat ibid. Bear, brown Page 190 black ibid.
Boar, wild Page 237 Buffalo Page 47, 187
C.
Camel, two-bunched Page 188 Cat, domestic Page 190, 237 Angora Page 190
Cow Page 236
D.
Deer Page 47, 188, 237 Dog Page 189, 237
E.
Elephant Page 47, 65, 74, 189
F.
Fox Page 190
G.
Goat, domestic Page 187
H.
Hare, common Page 191 Hog Page 188 Horse Page 187, 236
L.
Leopard Page 190
M.
Manis, short-tailed Page 191 Marmot, earless ibid. Monkey, douc Page 66
dog-faced Page 238
Musk, Thibet Page 188
O.
Ox, Indian Page 187 Thibetian ibid.

P.
Porcupine, crested Page 191
R.
Rabbit, common Page 191 Rat ibid. Rhinoceros, one-horned Page 188 Roebuck
ibid.
S.
Sheep, broad-tailed Page 187 Squirrel, common Page 191 Stag Page 188
T.
Tiger Page 65, 190
W.
Weesel, civet Page 191 martin ibid.
Wolf Page 190, 238
INDEX TO BIRDS.
B.
BARBET, grand Page 194 Bunting, barred-tailed Page 199 mixed ibid. Chinese
ibid.

C.
Coot, common Page 202 crested ibid.
Creeper, gray Page 194 Crow, carrion Page 193 white-breasted ibid. rufous
ibid. purple-headed ibid. blue ibid. Macao ibid.
Cuckoo Page 194
E.
Eagle, Chinese Page 192
F.
Falcon, Asiatic Page 192 Flycatcher Page 200 green ibid. grey-necked Page 200
yellow-neeked ibid. orange-vented ibid. nitid ibid. greenish ibid. black-headed
ibid.

G.
Garganey Page 238 Grakle, mino Page 194 greater mino ibid. crested ibid.
Grosbeak, Padda Page 198 Chinese ibid. Malacca ibid. grey-necked ibid.
white-headed Page 199 Asiatic ibid. red-billed ibid. orange-bellied ibid. dwarf
ibid. dominican ibid. yellow ibid. Cyane ous ibid. brown Page 199 cardinal ibid.

H.
Heron, common crane Page 201, 239 Siberian crane Page 201 cinnamon ibid.
Malacca ibid. Chinese ibid. great white Page 238
Hoopoe Page 194 Hornbill, pied Page 192 Philippine ibid.

J.
Jay, little Page 193 red-billed ibid.
Jacana, Chinese Page 202 Vappi-pi ibid.

L.
Lark, Mongolian Page 200 white-winged ibid.
Loxia oryzivora Page 239
N.
Nut-hatch Page 194
O.
Oriole, golden Page 193 Chinese ibid.
Owl, Chinese Page 192 white barn ibid.

P.
Parrot, green and red locri Page 192 Alexandrine ibid. Cockatoo ibid.
Philippine Page 192 lesser white C. ibid. Cochin China ibid. grisled ibid.
sapphire crowned ibid.
Partridge, Chinese Page 197 common ibid. hackled ibid. green Page 197 pearled
Page 196
Peacock, crested Page 195 Iris ibid. Japan Page 238
Pelican, frigate Page 203 corvorant ibid. Chinese fishing shague ibid. lesser
gannet ibid.
Phasianus Gallus Page 238 Pheasant, Argus Page 195 common ibid. golden Page
196 silver ibid. superb ibid. pencilled ibid. fire-backed ibid.
Pie, short-tailed Page 40 Pigeon, Nicobar Page 22 crested Page 197 Chinese
ibid. queest ibid. collared ibid. striated ibid. barred ibid. blue-crowned
ibid. great turtle ibid. Chinese gray ibid.
Plover, long-legged Page 202
Q.
Quail, common Page 239
R.
Raven Page 238 Roller, Chinese Page 193 black-headed ibid.

S.
Shrike, jocose Page 192 white-wreathed ibid. fork-tailed ibid.
Sparrow, house Page 199 Chinese ibid. brown Page 200 green ibid. Chinese
siskin ibid. white-eared ibid. Ceylon ibid. brown-throated ibid. azure-headed
ibid. white-bellied ibid.
Stare, silky Page 198 green ibid. brown ibid.
Stock-dove Page 239 Swallow, chimney Page 201 esculent ibid. Chinese swift
ibid.

T.
Tanagre, Chinese Page 199 military Page 199
Thrush, white-wreathed shrike Page 198. Chinese ibid. crescent ibid.
black-faced ibid. violet ibid. white-headed ibid. black-necked ibid. chanting
ibid. yellow ibid. green ibid.
Titmouse, Chinese Page 201 Turtle, Quedah Page 23
W.
Warbler, nightingale Page 200 Luzonian ibid. black-hooded wheat-ear ibid.
white-crowned ibid. Chinese ibid. long-tailed ibid.
Woodcock, common Page 201 snipe ibid. Cape snipe ibid. green-shank ibid.
red-shank ibid.
Woodpecker, of Malacca Page 40 Bengal Page 194

INDEX.
A.
ACQUIES Page 274 Agollocha wood Page 63, 145 Aigun Page 185 Albusin, fort of
Page 184 Amur, river of Page 183 Amwy Page 148 Andaman, islands of Page 18
lesser Page 20
Anthropophagi ibid. Arabs, in China Page 99 Aracan, kingdom of Page 1 river
ibid.
Arches, triumphal Page 128 Archipelago of Mergui Page 17 Argali, or wild sheep
Page 112 Armor fish Page 139 Artillery in China Page 104 Asses, wild Page 180
Ava, kingdom of Page 5, 170 river Page 6 city Page 7
Aurea Chersonesus Page 28 Awad, isle of Page 247
B.
Barussae, Ins. Page 20 Bees Page 11 Berabonna Page 9 Birds of Ma'acca Page 39
Tonquin Page 74 China Page 192 Japan Page 238
Bocca Tigris Page 126 Bore, or head wave Page 13 Boundaries of China Page 122
Burmah, kingdom of Page 5
C.
Cachao, city of Page 77 Cambodia Page 52 productions of Page 53 city Page 54
the ancient Thinae and Sinae Page 55
Camphor Page 214 Camul Page 177 Canal, imperial Page 133 imperial ends Page 145
Cannibals Page 18 Cannon, cast by the Jesuits in China Page 97 Canton, very
populous Page 127 European factories at Page 128 river of Page 129
Cape Negrais Page 9 Carn Nicobar Page 20 Cashgur Page 176 Catechu Page 264
Cattigara Page 52 Cheduba isle Page 8 Chiamay, lake of Page 6 China Page 87
government of ibid. despotic Page 88
filial duties of Page 89 self-interest of its inhabitants Page 90 pride ibid.
antiquity of Page 91 Fo-hi founder of the empire ibid. religion ibid.
christianity, when introduced Page 93 convents Page 94 Jesuits Page 95
Dominicans in Page 98 Arabs in Page 99 last revolution of Page 100 form of the
inhabitants Page 101 little feet of ibid. arts of ibid. Seres, northern
inhabitants of Page 109 present trade of Page 117 imports and exports ibid.
boundaries of Page 122 coasts of Page 147 amazingly populous Page 87, 127 army
Page 100 birds of Page 192
Chittigong Page 8 Chusan, isle of Page 154 Ciampa Page 59 Civet, animal Page
38 Cochin China Page 61 inundated Page 62 rice cultivated at ibid. sugar ibid.
cotton Page 63 shipping of Page 65 elephants of Page 65 monkey at Page 66
edible nests at ibid. government of Page 69
Coco trees Page 21 Coins of Japan Page 243 Columba wood Page 63 Column,
memorial Page 183 Confucius, where born Page 144 Corvorants trained for fishing
Page 132 Cotton Page 63, 108 Country, elevated Page 175 Cowries Page 210
Coxinga Page 122, 141 Crabs Page 242 Crocodiles of Pegu Page 13
D.
Dammer pitch Page 56 Deserts of Shamo Page 175 Dominicans in China Page 98
their quarrels with the Jesuits ibid.
Ducks, tame Page 129 wild, how taken Page 131
Dutch settlement on the island of Formosa Page 122 outwitted by the Jesuits
Page 27 first trade with China Page 122

E.
Eagle wood Page 63, 145 Edible nests Page 66 Elephants Page 47, 65, 74
English, their intercourse with China Page 115 European factories at Canton
Page 128 Exports of Pegu Page 11
F.
Factories at Tonquin Page 78 Fair, great, on the water Page 134 Faunula of
China Page 187 Feet, little, of the Chinese ladies Page 101 Fishes of China
Page 131, 203 armor Page 139 whang-yu ibid. golden Page 156 of Japan Page 239
Five horse heads Page 137 Fo-hi, founder of the Chinese empire Page 91 Fo,
sect of Page 93 Foo-tchien Page 147 Form of the Siamese Page 47 Formosa, isle
of Page 149 natives of Page 150
Forster, J. Reinhold Page 111 Foy Foe port Page 64
G.
Ginseng, the famous plant Page 163 found in America Page 164
Glass manufacture in China Page 105 Gobi, desert of Page 179 Gold Page 30, 243
Golden fish Page 156 Government of Cochin China Page 69 of Japan Page 258
Great fair on the water Page 134 Gulf of Siam Page 32 Gunpowder in China Page
104 in Japan Page 266

H.
Hainan, island of Page 124 gold at ibid.
Haltar Gobi Page 179 Hangtchoo Page 156 Hastings bay Page 17 Heat of the
atmosphere in China Page 123 Hills, pierced Page 138 Hoko-nor Tartars and lake
Page 171 Hoton Page 176 Hoo tchoo Page 139
J.
Japan Page 209, 211 its stormy shores ibid. soil of Page 212 botany of ibid.
quadrupeds of Page 236 minerals Page 243 persecution of christians Page 251
Dutch embassy Page 252 deities of Page 256 language Page 258 laws, severe Page
259 manners Page 262 geography Page 263 painting Page 265 printing Page 266
habits Page 267 navy Page 268
Jax-Hinno Page 144 Jedo Page 268 Jerkin Page 176 Japanning Page 106, 265 Jeso,
land of Page 270 natives of Page 274
Jesuits in Japan Page 250 Imperial canal Page 133 Ink in China Page 103
Inoculation at China Page 102 Insulae bonae fortunae Page 18 Joerwoe Page 146
Johore, kingdom of Page 28 Islands of Andaman Page 18 of Hainan Page 124 of
Negrais or Siriam Page 10
Junkseilon, isle of Page 15, 22 Juthia, city of Page 43
K.
Kajutsui Page 143 Karakarin Page 177 Kiusiu isle Page 249 King te Ching Page
140 Korea Page 165, 269 natives of Page 167 government of ibid. productions of
ibid. trade of ibid. with China Page 168 Russia Page 169 Japan ibid. Manilla
Page 170

Kurile isle Page 277 Kyang river Page 138 Kyang nan province Page 158
L.
Lac Page 11 Ladrone isles Page 147 Lake Poyang Page 139 Si-hu Page 156
Liant river Page 48 Liau-tong kingdom Page 162 Ginseng plant found at Page 163
Lichi fruit Page 148 Ligore Page 41 Limpo Page 154 Lintsin-choo Page 145
Liguejo isles Page 209 Lop Page 177 Lower Siam Page 16 Loyes, a people Page 59
Lundsey Page 8
M.
Macao, isle and city Page 125 Magnum Promontorium, or Malaeucolon Page 29
Malacca, streights of Page 23 city Page 24 taken by the Portuguese Page 25

Malayes, of the Page 33 Mandeville, Sir John Page 112 Mangostan Page 40 Marco
Polo Page 111, 248 Marcura Metropolis Page 10 Martaban Page 15 Matmay, island
of Page 270 Meckley kingdom Page 5 Meinam river Page 42 Melory tree Page 21
Men, a large race of wild Page 39 Mergui, town of Page 16 archipelago of Page 17
Miaco Page 267 Missionaries sent to Siam Page 46 Tonquin Page 80
Monkey Page 66, 238 Mount Ophir Page 30 Moyes, a people Page 60 Mulberry trees
Page 72 in China Page 106
Mules, wild Page 180
N.
Nantchang foo Page 139 Nanhang city Page 137 Nangan Page 137 Nanquin Page 140
Natives of Formosa Page 150 Nations adjacent to the Chinese empire Page 170
Negrais, cape Page 9 isle, or Siriam Page 10
Nertshink, treaty of Page 180 oath of observance of Page 182
Nicobar islands Page 20 pigeon Page 22
Nieuhoff, John Page 134 his travels to Peking Page 136
Nieuhoff, H. Page 135 Ning-po or Limpo Page 154 Nipon isle Page 247 Notium
promontorium Page 53 Nyctanthes Sambac Page 117 Nymphaea Nelumbo, plant Page
138
O.
Oath of observance Page 80 Ophir, in Malacca Page 30 Oranges Page 148
P.
Pagoda, fine Page 144 Pahang Page 30 Paper manufacture in China Page 102
Paracels, the Page 71 Patani Page 32 Pe-che-li, province of Page 160 Pegu Page
9 exports of Page 11 imports of Page 12 river of ibid. city ibid. natives of
Page 15
Peking, water passage to Page 133 city Page 146
Pekkinsa Page 138 Pepper Page 31, 63 Persaim river Page 10 Peym Page 176
Phaulkon, history of Page 43 Pierced hills Page 138 Piperi Page 32 Pirates Page
31, 35, 82 Pitch, Dammer Page 56 Pliny, silk of Page 107, 160 Poivre, M. Le, of
Page 69 quoted, Page 33, 49, 69
Pongho, isles of Page 153 Ponteamas Page 49 M. Le Poivre's description of,
ibid.
Porcellane Page 109, 267 tower Page 141
Port of Foy Foe Page 64 Tawan Page 150
Portuguese expelled from Malacca by the Dutch Page 27 profligacy of the Page
155 first in China Page 113
Poyang lake Page 139 Printing in China Page 102 Prior quoted Page 83 Provinces
gained from the sea Page 153 Province of Tche-tchiang ibid. Pecheli Page 160
Psalmanazar, of Page 151 Pulo Pera Page 24 Aru ibid. Timon Page 29 Condore
Page 55 animals of Page 57 tortoises at ibid. English settlement there Page 58


Q.
Quadrupeds of China Page 133, 187 of Japan Page 236
Quedah, kingdom of Page 23
R.
Rachmi Page 55 Revolution, the last in China Page 100 Rhubarb, of Page 171
cultivated in Scotland Page 172
Rhus vernix Page 72 Ricci, father, the great Jesuit of China Page 96 Ridang
isles Page 31 River of Liant Page 48 Meinam Page 42 Tonquin Page 75
Roads, strange Page 136 Rocking stone Page 149 Romano, cape Page 29 Rubruquis,
a friar Page 110 Russians, their intercourse with China Page 113
S.
Sabaracus Ptolemei, the Ava Page 8 Sada civitas Page 9 Sagalin, isle of Page
186 Salt Page 153 Sanciam Page 125 Sangir isle Page 85 Sappan wood Page 74
Sauce, soya Page 75 Seres, northern inhabitants of China Page 109 Shamo,
deserts of Page 175 Siam, lower Page 16 gulf of Page 32 upper Page 41 account
of Page 45 fertility ibid. religion of ibid. form of the inhabitants Page 47
elephants at ibid. deer at ibid. other productions of Page 48
Sihu lake Page 156 Sikokf Page 247 Silk Page 106 of Pliny Page 107, 160 of
Virgil Page 109
Silver tree Page 178 Sincapour, streights of Page 28 Sindae, Ins. Page 20
Sitang river Page 15 Staten land Page 277 Stockings, silk, when first known in
Europe Page 108 Stone, rocking Page 149 Streights of Malacca Page 23 Sincapour
Page 28
Sultan Sujah, of Page 3 Swallows with edible nests Page 66 Sylveira, his sad
fate Page 14
T.
Tanaasima islands Page 211 Tanguth Page 179 Tartars conquer China Page 100
Tatpin isles Page 209 Taut-se, sect of Page 92 Ta-wan, port of Page 150 Tea,
bohea Page 215 Teal, Chinese Page 131 Te-tchoo Page 145 Teek woods Page 7
Teeth, black Page 82 Ten-choo foo Page 159 Thibet Page 170 Ttche tchiang Page
153 Tien sing so Page 145 Tian-sin, port of Peking Page 160 Tides in the bay
of Tonquin Page 76 Tiencienwey and Single Page 145 Tigris, Bocca Page 126
Tonglyu Page 140 Tong-tchoo foo Page 146 Tonquin, bay of Page 72 fruits of
ibid. mulberry cultivated at ibid. Rhus vernix ibid. soya sauce made at Page 75
birds of Page 74 river of Page 75 factories at Page 78 medicine Page 79
religion ibid. oath Page 80 extent of Page 81 natives Page 82
Topasses Page 54 Tower, porcelane Page 141 Trade of China Page 117 in women
Page 142 of Japan Page 254
Trangano Page 31 fruits of ibid.
Tree, silver Page 178 Tsong-ming, isle of Page 158 Turtle-dove Page 23 Typa
harbor Page 126 Typhons Page 76
V.
Vannunga Page 138 Verbiest, father Page 97 Vessels, singular Page 142 Upper
Siam Page 41 Volcanoes of Japan Page 246 Vries de, streights of Page 278
W.
Wall, great Page 161 second Page 162
Water passage to Peking Page 133 Whang-ho river Page 143, 159 Whay-ngan Page
143 Whang-yu fish Page 139 Whay, the king's court Page 68 Wild men Page 39
mules and asses Page 180
Women, trade in Page 142 Woods, Teek Page 7 Agollocha and Columba Page 63
Sappan Page 74
Woollens Page 109
X.
Xantsui Page 144 Xaochew city Page 136 Xavier, Francis St. de Page 95, 249
Y.
Yang-choo Page 142 Yellow fish Page 139 sea Page 159
Ypi Tartars Page 185
Printed by Luke Hansard, Great Turnstile, Lincoln's Inn Fields.


