THE ECONOMY OF HEALTH; OR, A MEDICAL ESSAY:

[Price Two Shillings.]

THE ECONOMY OF HEALTH, OR, A MEDICAL ESSAY: CONTAINING NEW and FAMILIAR
INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE ATTAINMENT of HEALTH, HAPPINESS and LONGEVITY: IN WHICH
THE NATURE OF THE HUMAN MIND IS ACCURATELY INVESTIGATED, AND ITS UNION and
CONNECTION with the BODY SYSTEMATICALLY EXPLAINED.

BY ANDREW HARPER, LATE SURGEON TO HIS MAJESTY'S GARRISON IN THE BAHAMA IS^ANDS.

-- medio tutissimus ibis.

OVID. PRINTED for the AUTHOR, And Sold by C. STALKER, STATIONERS-COURT,
LUDGATE HILL.

To the PUBLIC.
ANY attempt to instruct the bulk of Mankind in the Science of Medicine, by
endeavoring to discuss the Nature and Cure of Diseases, must, at first view,
appear equally absurd and impossible. But to explain the principal Causes which
affect Health and induce Disease, to illustrate so much of the Animal Economy
as this intention requires, and, by these means, to render people less
strangers to themselves, and more capable of preserving Health and Life, (as, I
believe, there is no other Treatise of the same Kind) seems to me a laudable
Endeavor, and consistent with every purpose of benevolence and humanity. Such
is the design of this Essay, and such the motives for its Publication. In this
little Production I have particularly studied to be concise, and to convey,
without entering into Detail, as much practical information as possible, on a
small, easy Scale. I have taken care not to introduce any groundless
theoretical speculation, nor have I even hazarded a single assertion, but what
my own inquiry and observation have repeatedly proved and confirmed to my
Satisfaction. If my Analysis and Explanation of the Mind be more compatible
with fair reason and sound philosophy, if it be a more accurate investtigation
of physical and moral analogy, and more clearly demonstrative of all the
Phenomenon of the human System, than any other that has yet appeared, it will
not, I hope, be deemed vague or delusive, because it wants the sanction of a
greater name.

CONTENTS.
DIVISION of the Subject Page. 1 Definition of Health Page. 2 Outlines of the
System Page. ib. Analysis of the Mind Page. 3 Nature of its Operations and
Passions Page. 5 Their Effects upon the Body Page. 7 Influence of the Body on
the Mind Page. 11 Rules for the Regulation and Management of the Passions Page.
10, 12. Effects of the different Qualities of Air Page. 14 Change, and
Purification of Air Page. 15 Benefit of Sea Voyages in Consumptions Page. 16 --
of a warm Climate in old Age Page. 17 Exercise Page. 18 Effects of different
Kinds of Exercise Page. 19 Errors in Exercise Page. 20 Cleanliness Page. 22
Bathing the Feet Page. 23 Clothes and Apparel Page. ib. Effects of Heat, with
Directions Page. 23 -- of Cold, with Directions Page. 24 Use of Flannel and
Friction Page. 26 Sea-Bathing and drinking the Mineral Waters Page. 27 Sleep
and Watching -- their Effects, with Directions Page. 28, 29, 31 Study Page. 30
Dreams, and the Night Mare Page. 31 Food or Nourishment Page. 32 Effects of
immoderate eating Page. 33 Abuse of Spirituous Liquors Page. 34 Effects of
Animal Food Page. 35 -- of low Diet, and abstemious Living Page. 36 Regimen
Page. 38 Tea and Coffee Page. ib. Porter and Tobacco Page. 39 Danger of eating
and drinking Things too hot Page. ib. Fasting -- Breakfast, Dinner and Supper
Page. 40 Water Page. 41 Influence of the Moon Page. 43 Influence of the Sun
Page. 44 -- of Music Page. 45 Infectious and contagious Diseases Page. 45, 47
Method of Prevention Page. 46 Treatment of Children Page. 48 Primary
Impressions Page. 49 Advantages of proper Management in Infancy Page. 50
Physiognomy Page. 51 The Female Constitution Page. 55 Quick Growth Page. 56
Effects of improper and proper Gratification Page. 57, 58 Celibacy Page. 59
Temperance, Indolence, and Irregularity Page. ib. Economy of the System in
regulating and resisting Diseases Page. 60 Signs of the Approach of Fevers
Page. 61 Nature of Chills Page. 62 Different Habits Page. ib. Corpulency Page.
63 Abuse of Blood-letting Page. 64 Power of Habit or Custom Page. ib. Method of
conquering it Page. 65 Dissipation Page. ib. Evacuations and Secretions Page.
66 Local Sympathy Page. 67 Mental Sympathy Page. 68 Antipathy Page. 69 Effects
of violent Shocks or Agitations Page. ib. Faculty of Imitation Page. 71 -- of
Imagination Page. 72 Influence of Imagination Page. 73 Volition or the Will
Page. 74
THE Diseases incidental to the human Body are correspondent, to the Number of
external, and internal Causes which are capable of affecting it, and to the
Nature and State of the Animal Structure.

All those Things which act immediately upon the Body, or make Impression on
it, at a Distance, through the Medium of the Senses, the Changes that happen in
the Atmosphere which surrounds us, and in the Air we breathe, constitute the
general, external Causes that affect Health.

The principal internal Causes may be reckoned Sleep, and the Quantity,
Quality, and Modification of such Things as are received into the Stomach.

The particular Causes of Diseases depend upon the State of the Animal Economy.

First, then, I shall make some general Observations, for the Purpose of
Elucidation, and afterward consider the Subject, as it naturally arises from
these three Heads.

The proper Standard of Health is that State, in which all the component Parts
of the Body (as a Machine) are equally firm to resist, pliant to yield, and
proportionable to be regular. This constitutes an Equilibrium or proper
Balance. To preserve, or restore this Balance is Health, and every
considerable Degree of Variation from it, is an equal Degree of Disease.

The human Fabric may be divided into two different Systems. The one is the
System of Vessels or Tubes, which performs the Circulation of the Fluids, and
is conducted on plain mechanical Principles: and the other is the Nervous
System, which consists of all those Parts that have Sensibility and Motion, and
whose Properties are more difficult to explain.

When these two Systems are happily balanced and proportioned, all the Powers
and Functions of the Body, as well as of the Mind, come nearest to a State of
Regularity and Perfection.

In all my Researches into the Nature and Principles of the human Mind, I must
confess that I can discern no one single Operation of it distinct from, and
unconnected with the Body.

That there most certainly is a prime Movement, general Sensory, or a
concentrated Power, which is the Origin of all the Faculties and Offices of the
Body, and that this Power resides, or begins, within the Brain, Anatomical
Dissections, and the Observations of common Sense unquestionably demonstrate.
To define the Magnitude, Quantity, or Proportion of this Power, is utterly
impossible, and to say that it is immaterial, or that it is something which has
no Parts, is, positively, to say that it is Nothing at all.

This Power is best known, and I think most happily described by the common
Terms, Mind, Life or Soul. Now, although I profess, and indeed must treat of
this Power or Mind as an essential and organic Part of the human Structure, I
am ready, at the same Time, to declare (least I should mislead the weak or
ignorant) that this Doctrine ought not, nor, by any Means, can be deemed
repugnant to the Belief of Immortality, or a future State of Existence. On the
contrary, it places human Nature in a rational Light, and will be found to
obviate and reconcile those Difficulties which occur in considering this nice
Point.

For where is the Objection, in Respect of Reason or Philosophy, against the
Opinion that this Power, Soul, Mind, or animating Essence of the Body,
immutable in its Properties, may, at the final Hour, sublime, as it were, from
the Caput-Mortuum, that is, soar aloft, and survive the grosser Materials,
which the Laws of specific Gravity fix to the Earth, and the Texture of Parts
subjects to Separation and Dissolution?

The first, and leading Feature in the Physiognomy of the Mind is a Quality,
Capability, or inherent Necessity of perceiving all Manner of Impressions
whatever.

From this simple Power of Perception, first, Similitude or Resemblance of
Things, then, Memory, Comparison, Reflection, Deliberation, and in short, all
the regular and progressive Operations of the Mind (by Means of an intrinsic,
or unceasing Movement) may be easily conceived to proceed.

The Passions, so called, form another Class of Operations, more energetic than
the former, because in them, the Impressions are external, immediate, and
impetuous, and the Perceptions, therefore, reciprocally, more vigorous.

Thus, Anger proceeds from violent Agitations, Fear is produced by such as are
strong and quick, Joy arises from vivid, and Grief from deep Impressions. Hope
is the Result of soft and agreeable Emotions. Which Circumstance proves in the
clearest Manner, that the Enjoyments of Life infinitely surpass the Miseries of
it, since Hope, by being constantly in Exercise, becomes habitual, and never
leaves the Mind, except for very short and almost imperceptible Intervals. This
Argument yields a good Lesson for Patience and Contentment in every possible
Situation. Love, the Mistress of the Mind, differs from all the rest. It is
closely interwoven with the Animal Frame, and draws its Impulse (of all others
the most irresistible) from Springs which act, within, as well as from Objects
that excite, without.

Images, which present to the Mind, Beauty, Harmony, and Symmetry, produce
pleasing Emotions; those, which convey the contrary Qualities, are accompanied
with painful Sensations. The former of these give a free and full Motion to the
Nervous Power; a short, quick, and contracted Movement is the Consequence of
the latter.

This Observation may be applied with more Force and Conviction than all the
elaborate and ingenious Arguments that can be adduced, (either in Favor, or in
Opposition to the Doctrine,) in Testimony of the natural Ascendency of moral
Virtue in the human Mind.

It shows that Beauty, Order, Dignity and Happiness are amiable to the Mind of
Man, and illuminate with congenial Rays the elevated Faculties of the Soul;
while Deformity, Turpitude, Vice, and Misery compose the horrid Contrast, that
disgraces Society, degrades the Mind, and brutalizes the Species.

None of the Mental Affections or Operations, as long as they continue to
create regular and pleasing Sensations, by any Means, injure, but on the
contrary, promote Health. The Passions or Affections of the Mind, therefore,
affect Health, and disorder the System, in Consequence of, and in Proportion to
the Impetuosity, Pain and Duration of the Impressions or Images which actuate,
or excite them, and in no other Way.

Anger, Fear, Hatred, Shame, Grief, Anxiety, Jealousy, Envy, Pride, Malice and
Revenge (to which I may add Study) possesses each of them, a certain
Modification of the characteristic Marks above described; and all of them
produce similar Effects upon the Animal System, different only, in Degree, and
in Point of Continuation. Love, Hope, and Joy must rank differently from the
other Passions, as their Effects are injurious to the System, only when they
are violent and excessive.

The Passions of the Mind then, (agreeable to the Limitations pointed out)
irritate the Nervous System, whose Tubes serve as Conductors from the Brain
throughout the whole Body, in such a Manner as to produce Spasm. Now Spasm is a
Motion or Oscillation (whether in the vascular or muscular Parts, it makes no
Difference) so extremely quick, in Point of Succession or Alternation, that the
Intermissions or Intervals become imperceptible to the Senses. This is a
seeming Paradox, an Excess, and at the same Time, an Interruption of the
nervous Influence.

The spasmodic Stimulus or Effort, thus produced by the Passions, particularly
affects the Head, the Lungs, and the Womb. Hence Madness, Fainting,
Convulsions, Hysterics, Asthma, etc. It disorders the Stomach and Intestinal
Canal, occasioning Colics, Flatulency and Indigestion. It constringes the
Surface of the Skin, and all the nervous Parts and Tubes, and thus blocks up
the Perspiration, and the other Secretions; and by these Means, brings Fevers,
Obstructions, Scurvy, Nervous Disorders, Melancholy, etc.

Vehement and sudden Passions, by means of Spasm, sometimes retard and check,
for a Moment, the progressive Motion of the Nervous Influence in the Brain
itself. Hence a general Relaxation, and involuntary Discharge of the Faeces and
Urine, a Circumstance which happens not seldom, in Cases of extreme Fright or
Terror.

The same Law paints the inward Feelings upon the Muscles of the Face, by
various Contractions and Relaxations, it gives the Pencil its finest Stroke,
and fullest Expression in the genuine Language of the Eyes, and thus confirms
the Face the Index, or Proxy of the Mind.

The immoderate or inordinate Passions and Agitations of the Mind are most
effectually prevented, by avoiding, as much as possible, every exciting Cause,
and cultivating Habits of Equanimity and Firmness, which, with every other
valuable Accomplishment of the Mind, are chiefly to be acquired from Education,
or, in other Words, an extensive, and well chosen Fund of Ideas.

This is a Resource which invigorates and exalts the Mind, expands the Reason,
furnishes the Aids of Philosophy, and supplies an inexhaustible Store of
different Thoughts and various Imagery.

But no particular Management, nor any Mode of Access or immediate Application
whatever to the Mind, can counteract the Disadvantages of an unhealthy and
infirm Habit of Body. Pain must necessarily sour the Temper, and make it hasty,
morose and irascible. Relaxation creates Peevishness and Imbecility, and
renders the Mind irritable, timid, too susceptible of every Impression, and
liable to Misconception; and Obstruction, which is generally the Companion of
Relaxation, adds Gloom, Melancholy, Anxiety, and a disordered Imagination to
the baneful Catalogue.

On the other Hand, in those Habits or Temperatures, in which the Powers and
Functions of the System rise above the Line of Mediocrity, or Standard of
Health, and occasion Irregularity only on that Account, the Disposition of the
Mind receives the Stamp, and wears the Colors of Pride, Restlessness, Vanity,
and Desire. These, moreover, have not so sad a Complexion, nor so sickly an
Aspect as the former, and besides are much more easily reduced to the proper
Equilibrium.

In all Cases where the Passions are once excited, the best Antidote is the
creation of new and opposite Impressions.

Change the Objects, shift the Scene, sooth the Mind, and compose the Body, and
if Need be, fortify it also.

These Rules are applicable in sudden Emotions, as Anger, Fear, etc. and are
equally apposite in the Passions of suspended Love, Grief, Jealousy, etc. where
there is always some Image permanently represented, and, in a Manner, settled
upon the Mind. But to conquer the latter will require Time and Perservance.

Grief ought to be amused, and supplanted by Hope, Fidelity and Consolation
must soften the edge of Jealousy, and Love should certainly be gratified, if
possible; or if that cannot be done, (since as I said before, it has a double
Claim) it must be allowed every reasonable Indulgence, and should undoubtedly
meet Returns of Sympathy and Tenderness, somewhere.

None of the Passions will admit of too sudden a Check. It is much better to
endeavor to supersede them, by Means of other, pleasant, Sensations, than to
attempt, all at once, to stifle and restrain them. The Irritation on the
Nerves, when once excited, must have some Play. It seeks a Vent through one
Channel or another, and if it burst out in a Flood of Tears, a Fit of Laughter,
or a Flow of Words, it may be reckoned a very favorable Termination.

The Air is an invisible, elastic Fluid, which covers and encloses the Earth,
and presses upon the Surface of all Bodies, with an amazing Weight.

The Air acts upon the Animal System, in various Ways. It stimulates, more or
less, in all Circumstances; it relaxes or braces according to the Degree of
Heat, or Cold, which pervades it; the Lungs are inflated and expanded with a
greater or lesser Force, adequate to its Elasticity or Purity; and it absorbs
and receives the diaphoretic Vapor from the Surface of the Skin as well as of
the Lungs, in Proportion to its Dryness and Warmth.

The Air, in general, is most salubrious, in high Situations, in those Places
where it has a free Circulation, and also near the Seacoast, and in the
Vicinity of Rivers, and flowing Water. Air, impregnated with foreign Particles,
overcharged with Moist^^^, or phlogist^^ated by the Heat of the Sun, the Action
of Fire, by sulphurous Vapors, the Breath of Animals, and suchlike, is most
unwholesome.

In Asthmas, Consumptions, and Nervous Complaints, the Temperature of the Air
is a material Consideration, and of great Importance. A light, dry, and warm
Air is best for weak, and diseased Lungs, and a dry and cold, or temperate Air
is fittest for relaxed, and nervous People.

The Benefit of Change of Air is known to every Body, and many People find, by
Experience, that a Change even to a more indifferent Air is sometimes attended
with Advantage. The Reason of which is manifest from what has been already said
concerning the Qualities and Effects of Air. The Changes of Air ought not, in
any Case, to be too sudden, or too much in the extreme; the more gradual they
are, the less Danger is incurred.

In all Fevers, but especially those of the putrid Kind, Ventilation, or the
Admission of fresh Air is highly necessary. In putrid Fevers, the Patient
should be removed, and the Apartments well washed with Plenty of warm Water,
and dried with a quick and strong Fire, keeping the Windows open, at the same
Time. This is a very safe and effectual Method of purifying noxious Air.

In the advanced, as well as in the earlier Stages of phthisical and
consumptive Diseases, it cannot he improper, after other Means have failed, to
try a Sea Voyage and a warmer Climate.

The Reaching and Vomiting occasioned by Sea sickness, which has been generally
accounted hazardous, ought not, by any Means, to intimidate. If the Disease be
seated in the glandular Parts of the Lungs, if it be of the scrophulous Kind,
or of an hydropic Nature, or if a general Infarction, or local Plenitude of the
Lungs give Rise to it, (and thus circumstanced indeed from one or more of these
Causes, the Disease is most frequently to be met with) in either of these
Cases, I say, Sea Sickness and Vomiting must be undeniably useful. If even a
Suppuration or Abcess be forming, or already formed, the Case is then so
exceedingly dangerous, that there still remain more Chances in Favor of, than
against the Patient. Besides there is a peculiar Kind of Relaxation prevailing
in the System from the vertiginous Nature of that Sickness, so that the Action
of Vomiting is performed with less Danger of rupturing any Vessels, and the
Ejections from the Stomach are more abundant than in Vomiting produced from any
other Cause.

It may likewise deserve Notice, in this Place, that aged People, who may
happen to be more solicitous to prolong their Existence, than concerned in what
Latitude their Ashes are to rest, certainly have it in their Power, coeteris
paribus, to add a few Years to the Period of their natural Lives, by removing
in the Decline of Life, to a hot, tropical Climate.

The Necessities of Nature, and the general Order of Things demand Action in
the human Species, and the Mechanism of the Body plainly shows that it is not
only well calculated for that Purpose, but also demonstrates that Exercise is
even indispensibly requisite to preserve Regularity in the Wheels of Motion,
and to fit them for the due Performance of their several Offices.

Exercise is like a Main Spring to the Machinery. It promotes the Digestion,
prepares the Blood for its various Destinations, distributes it through all the
Channels of Circulation, throws off the imperfect and offensive Parts of the
Fluids, braces the Nerves, gives a firm Tone to the Solids, and carries an even
Flow of Spirits throughout the whole System.

Exercise is hurtful immediately after a full Meal, and in the Morning, when
the Stomach is quite empty, much Exercise is injurious.

Frequent Walking relieves the Head, abates Rheumatic Pains, keeps the Bowels
open, is favorable to all the descending Evacuations, and has a Tendency to
prevent the Gout: It contributes to general Health, and by increasing the
Circulation and Secretion in the Legs and Feet, (since the Extremities are the
original Seat of the Gout) it may perhaps hinder the Formation and Assimilation
of those morbid Particles, which are found to exist, in a concreted State, in a
fixed or settled Gout.

Riding on Horseback is an excellent Exercise, and essentially beneficial in
obstructed and nervous Habits, and in all Affections of the Lungs: But when,
the Nerves or Bowels are very weak, the best Substitute is riding in an open
Carriage.

Those who labor under Obstructions and Nervous Disorders, should try the
Effects of some mechanical or domestic Work, and particularly such as requires
Flexion of the Body, as that Attitude tends, in some Measure, to give Motion to
the stagnant Fluids, in the Viscera. But when this is the customary Posture in
People's common Occupation, an Alteration in that Case is equally necessary, as
Obstructions and other Complaints, may arise from, and be much aggravated by
daily Contortion, or stooping.

Ploughing, and gardening are also very beneficial Exercises for those who are
in a cachectic, nervous, or valitudinary State, as there can be no Doubt but
the fresh opened Bosom of the prolific Earth must very copiously diffuse
salubrious Exhalations.

Moderate Dancing, occasionally, is a valuable Kind of Exercise. To the Powers
of Music, and elevated Festivity, it unites the Charms of refined Sociability
and Attraction, and inspires an Animation which moves the System in a more
pleasing and effectual Manner, and with happier Effects than the other common
Exercises can boast.

There are two prevailing Errors, in Regard of Exercise, which I must remark.
People of relaxed, delicate and nervous Habits, who should always avoid too
much Action, at one Time, often hurt themselves by over Exertion, because they
judge it advisable to take Plenty of Exercise. There are others, again, who,
being confined within Doors, and leading a sedentary Life, think to compensate
for the Want of regular Exercise, by a hard Ride, or Walk, once a Week. But
this is a mistaken Notion. The Nerves of such People, unaccustomed to bear so
great a Degree of Agitation, are overstrained and relaxed by it, while the
Circulation of their Fluids, which is, in general, very slow and languid, is
thrown into Disorder, from the same Cause, and thus a Foundation is laid for
those very Complaints which it was meant to prevent.

Hard Labor, and constant Exertion evaporates the Nervous Power, distends and
relaxes the Nerves and Vessels, (unless when Labor is habitual, and then
indeed it has a contrary Effect upon the Solids,) throws off the nutritious
Part of the Blood, and thereby wastes and weakens the System.

In all Cases whatever, let this be an invariable Rule, that real Weariness and
Fatigue should mark the precise Limits of every Species of Exercise and Labor.

Cleanliness is accompanied with as much Utility as Comfort, and should
therefore be practiced, as far as Circumstances will admit, by every one. It is
a Matter of no small Importance to keep the Skin clear and clean: both because
it is the most copious excretory Passage, of the whole Body, for the
superfluous Diathesis of the Blood, and also on Account of its being a fine,
sensible, nervous Expansion, holding a high Degree of Sympathy, with all the
principal Organs of the System. Hence the Skin is the principal Drain whereby
the Circulation maintains an equal Distribution, and the Nervous System
preserves its Equilibrium.

The Feet should be particularly attended to. The bathing of them in warm Water
helps to relieve the Headache, all Sorts of Colics, and nephritic Pains, and is
serviceable in Fevers, and recent Colds.

As to Clothes, it is always better, especially in this Climate, to wear too
many than too few. Emaciated People recovering from Illness should have Clothes
made to fit close. These would help to brace and restore them, whereas their
old loose Clothes tend to keep them relaxed, and, at the same Time admit too
much Air.

It is really extraordinary, that any Person, (yet one may meet such every Day)
either from Vanity or Ignorance, should fall into a Custom so repugnant to
common Sense, and his own private Feelings, as that of girding the Neck till
the Eyes start, or of wearing Apparel so very tight and fashionable, that he
can neither bend, walk, breathe, nor speak.

Heat relaxes the Nerves and Solids, and rarifies and volatilizes the Fluids,
it also generates Bile, and prepares the Body for Fluxes, intermittent, putrid,
and epidemic Fevers.

Those, who are much exposed to strong Fires, or to intense Heat of any Kind,
should wear coarse Linen, or Cotton next the Skin, should shift often, and
wash the Face and Hands with cold Water, and a little common Salt dissolved in
it, twice a Day.

In the Heat of Summer, a moderate Portion of Wine, or Spirits, is quite
necessary, both to supply the Consumption occasioned by the Increase of
Perspiration, and to recruit the exhausted Strength, and also to sharpen the
greater Quantities of diluting Liquors, which Thirst naturally requires.
Therefore, one Way with another, there ought to be consumed nearly as much
strong Liquor, in the Summer as in the Winter Season.

Cold gives Tension or Firmness to the Fibers, condenses the Fluids, compacts
the Texture of the Blood, and predisposes to inflammatory Diseases.

Warm Clothes, Motion, and sufficient Nourishment are the most proper and
effectual Preservatives against excessive Cold: And nothing is more
preposterous, or more dangerous than the Use of too much spirituous Liquors in
cold, severe Weather.

There is hardly any thing more common than to hear People express their
Surprise at having got Cold, because they are altogether at a Loss to account
for the Cause of it. They are not ignorant that damp Air, wet Clothes, the
drinking cold Liquors when the Body is very hot, or too warm Liquors when it is
cold, and such like, are the chief Causes; but do not consider that all sudden
Transitions from one Temperature, and one Extreme to another, are equally
conducive to the same Effect, though the Circumstances of it may not be so
obvious to them.

Colds bring on Fevers, Inflammations of the Throat and Lungs, Pleurisies,
Consumptions, Rheumatisms, Colics, Diarrhoeas, Piles, Palsy, etc. and are often
so serious in their Consequences, that no Body should venture to trifle with
Colds, even in a slight Degree.

In severe, recent Colds that affect the Breast, Bleeding should be almost
invariably resorted to, and the Perspiration restored by every Means, except
such as are of too heating a Nature: In Colds which attack the Head, the
Regimen ought not be too low, least the Complaint should descend upon the Lungs.

To wear soft Flannel next the Skin cannot be too strongly recommended to those
who labor under any Affection of the Lungs, or Weakness of the Bowels. The
same Expedient will be found serviceable in the Rheumatism, and in all
scorbutic, dropsical, hypocondriac and melancholic Complaints.

In each of the above Cases, strong Friction upon the Skin, especially the
Region of the Stomach and Bowels, and along the Spine, may be employed with
considerable Effect.

The Custom of Sea-Bathing, and of drinking the Mineral Waters, on every
Occasion, derives more Support, I doubt, from the powerful Sanction of Fashion,
than from any decided Testimony of their being always salutary and efficacious.

This much I may venture to say, that they should be either seldom recurred to,
or administered with much Discretion. Many of the Mineral Waters are
impregnated with very active Ingredients, and by too frequent Use, impair, and
wear out the Constitution; and Cold-Bathing is inimical to the Lungs, and in
many Instances, has paved the Way for bilious Complaints, and Obstructions of
the Viscera.

To dip regularly in cold Water, in Infancy, is highly proper. It checks
redundant Growth, strengthens the soft Fibers, and confirms the Stamina.

Sound Sleep, continued for seven or eight Hours, is, in general, quite
sufficient for the Purpose of Restoration, yet female, and delicate
Constitutions require rather more.

Too much Sleep weakens the Nerves, renders the Temper peevish, and predisposes
to Apoplexy and Palsy, it likewise creates a lethargic and indolent
Disposition, disqualifies for Action, and blunts the Energy both of the
intellectual and corporeal Faculties. On the other Hand, nothing can be more
pernicious than the Loss of Sleep, and Want of due Rest. Watching, by exciting
an artificial Fever, and by stimulating the nervous System, when its Powers are
already exhausted, effectually wastes the Strength, debilitates the Body, and
lays it open to every Attack, especially to nervous and phrenitic Fevers.

The Duration of Sleep must be proportioned rather to the Nature of the
Constitution, than to the Degree of Exercise, or Labor. In lax and tender
Habits, the natural Motion and Attrition in the System, exhaust and dissipate
the vital Strength much sooner than in those Constiutions which are hardy and
robust; consequently, the former require longer Sleep, to repair the Waste and
Consumption, than what is necessary for the latter. Besides, in those who have
much Exercise, or Labor, the Powers of Circulation being more complete, and
the Sleep more mature, the Business of Nature is sooner performed.

A Life of Labor, and constant Action is commonly accompanied with Vigor, and
good Spirits; but it must be considered, that, from the same Cause, the Fibers
grow rigid, and the fine Tubes become impervious and unfit for Motion and
Circulation, in a shorter Space of Time; hence the Period of Existence is
shortened, and yet the same Existence, deprived of the salutary Effects of
continued Exercise, might have been prematurely terminated, by the Invasion of
some Disease generated from Ease, Indolence, or Retirement.

Study, or intense Thought of any Kind, especially if fixed on some individual
and interesting Object, very speedily consumes the Nervous Power, within the
Brain, (while the rest of the System is destitute of its Influence) and
therefore requires as long, and indeed longer Sleep to recruit the Strength and
replenish the Spirits, than hard Labor does.

I have noticed that Animals of the opposite Gender thrive better when they
rest or sleep near each other, than those of the same Gender do. I shall not
make any Application, but only say, that, whatever that Circumstance may be
owing to, it is surely better to sleep alone than with an unhealthy and
disagreeable Companion.

Heavy Suppers, much Reading, Study, or any considerable Agitation, or
Application of Mind, near the Hour of going to Bed, all tend to prevent sound
Sleep, and to occasion Dreams. The drinking of Tea, Coffee, or any other thin,
weak Liquor will also retard Sleep.

Sound Sleep, properly speaking, is that State of perfect Quiet in the Mind,
which does not admit, or rather is not accompanied with any Perception whatever.

Dreams, therefore, may be termed a Kind of half Sleep, and may be occasioned
by any Irritation that excites the smallest Degree of Motion in the System,
beyond that Point of Tranquillity which constitutes, real or sound Sleep. If
there be any such Thing as preternatural Dreams, I confess myself entirely
unable to account for them.

Fullness and Flatulency in the Stomach, together with lying on the Back, in
Persons of relaxed Nerves, are the Causes of the Nightmare. Those,
accordingly, who are troubled with this unwelcome Guest, should strengthen the
Nervous System, lie upon the Side, and drink a Glass of Wine, or strong Spirits
and Water, going to Bed.

An Appetite for Food or Nourishment is an almost infallible Sign of Health:
but if the Digestion be not, at the same Time, regular and perfect, it is a
false Appetite, arising either from some preternatural Stimulus, or from
luxurious Living, hence the Stomach craves more than is necessary. The
Simplicity of Food has numerous Advocates, and there is no Doubt but, the more
Variety the Stomach is accustomed to, the more Dainties, and perhaps the larger
Quantities are needful. The Manner of Living should, therefore, be regulated
from the earliest Period. The Children of poor People, who are likely to live
hard, should, from the first, be accustomed to plain and substantial Food, and
seldom allowed many Rarities. They should learn to take whatever is offered
them, to prevent their Stomachs from being too nice; but nothing to which they
seem to have a fixed Dislike should be forced upon them: it is as dangerous as
it is unnatural.

The Practice of cramming Children with Materials of every Kind, countenanced
by some Gentlemen of the Faculty, with a View to strengthen and corroborate
their Stomachs, is too absurd, in my Opinion, to challenge Animadversion. Such
Treatment must load them with noxious and superfluous Humors, train them up
for Epicureans, and by over Distension of the Stomach, and Pressure upon the
Lungs, and the adjacent Bowels, it cannot but sow the Seeds of a Multiplicity
of Disorders, particularly of the nervous Kind. It must also contribute to
weaken their Intellects, and incur the future Danger of apoplectic, epileptic,
and paralytic Attacks.

Gormandizing, or immoderate eating, in grown People, is productive of similar
Consequences, Consequences proportionably more immediate, and destructive, as
the Effects of Repletion, in Maturity, are always more violent and fatal than
in Infancy.

Those who eat plentifully should drink liberally too, as that will promote the
Digestion, and accelerate Chylification, and Ex^retion.

Sleep may, in some Measure, supply the Place of Food, and strong Liquor
compensate for a ^c^nty Meal, but the last Alternative is, by far, the worst;
it is a Substitute that should, on no Account, be employed, especially as it
always does most Mischief, when the Stomach is most empty.

The intemperate Use of spirituous Liquors maintains a continual Fever,
destroys the Tone of the Nerves and Solids, and at length makes them callous;
it inflames the Blood, carries it through the Lungs, and toward the Brain,
with great Rapidity, ruptures the Mouths of the small Vessels, indurates the
Viscera, or Bowels, and erodes the Kidneys. Hence a Train of complicated
Maladies, too tedious to describe or enumerate.

If Liquor be recurred to, with a View to keep up the Spirits, it soon
evaporates with the increased Flow occasioned by it, if it be used to relieve
Anxiety of Mind, the transient Serenity is quickly succeeded by a still deeper
Gloom, and if it be admitted to exhilarate the social Hour of convivial
Enjoyment, Moderation should always fill the Cup, and not suffer one to affront
his Friend, destroy his Health, or stupify his Senses.

Animal Food is certainly too freely used in this Country. The usual Proportion
stimulates too much, gives a dense, or a putrescent Crasis to the Blood,
(according as the Habit is strong, or weak,) and induces Acrimony, and thus it
ultimately propagates the Causes of Obstructions, of putrid, and nervous
Diseases: It generates Bile, is the leading Cause of the Scurvy, and fosters
the Gout and Rheumatism. At the same Time it must be admitted, that the State
of the Air is such, in England, as demands a Diet rather warm and stimulating,
to counteract the moist, relaxing Quality of it.

Low and abstemious Living, and a thin, watery, vegetable Diet, robs the Body
of competent Nourishment, unbraces the Stomach and Nerves, dissolves the Blood,
diminishes the Action of the Vessels, and reduces the System below the Standard
of Health: Hence a Predisposition to all the Diseases which arise from Debility
and Relaxation. Yet a very slender Diet, if the Habit has been accustomed to
such, will preserve the Balance, give Spirits and Vivacity, and supply all the
Springs of Health: In short, it is Quantity rather than Quality that
replenishes the Waste, and affords the true Nutrition of Animal Life. Simple
Food (in sufficient Quantity) digests, circulates, and repairs, gradually,
smoothly, and with Certainty, whereas the rich, high seasoned Repast occasions
Perturbation, Heat, and Excitement, and thus very frequently dissipates and
carries off, by the different Discharges, a considerable Portion of nutritious
Juices, and leaves the Body weak, enervated, and collapsed, instead of
nourishing and recruiting the System, by its own Addition. Hence it is that
high Living demands Luxury to screw up the Nerves to their usual Pitch, and
hence it is also that, being over-strained, they soon wear out and break.

A Diet, consisting chiefly of Milk and Vegetables, has been found, in several
Instances, to renovate the Constitution, remove Sterility, and eradicate some
of the most obstinate, chronic Complaints.

Regimen, I am convinced, can produce the most salutary Effects, but it needs
particular Skill to direct it. A Patient, in passing from a higher to a lower,
or from a lower to a higher Regimen, must be carried, Step by Step, as
Circumstances will admit, with great Circumspection.

Tea and Coffee have long been Subjects of Reprobation with the Faculty; but I
am apprehensive that these Articles of Living have been too rashly condemned,
without proper Investigation, or good Grounds. I look upon them rather as
medicinal, than dietetic, and would, therefore, advise to use them sparingly.

Coffee is a warm, stimulating Cordial, and increases all the Secretions

Tea seems, in general, to be rather irritating on an empty Stomach, but is
very suitable, at a proper Interval after Dinner. It then dilutes, assists
Digestion, quenches Thirst, and exhilarates the Spirits. --

Porter, fortunately for this Metropolis, is a good, nutritious, wholesome
Liquor: yet I doubt there is something of a narcotic Quality added to it, which
ought not to be. It requires Exercise, and should not, I think, be drank too
new; it is doubtless more perfect, and more digestible, when moderately stale.

The excessive Use of Tobacco, in whatever manner it may be exhibited, heats
the Blood, hurts Digestion, wastes the finer Part of the Fluids, and relaxes
the Nerves. It is most beneficial to People of gross and corpulent Habits, who
have but little Exercise, and breathe foul Air.

Nothing can be more ridiculous, or more pernicious than the Practice of eating
and drinking Things very hot. It spoils the Teeth, brings on the Toothache,
weakens the Head and Eyes, ruins the Stomach, and does abundance of Mischief.

It is, at all Times, hurtful to fast too long, but more particularly in the
Morning. It admits a Redundancy of Air into the Stomach, and the whole Body
suffers by it.

It would be better, in my Opinion, if Breakfast were to become a more solid
Refreshment than it is, in this Country. An Addition would afford a more
durable Support through the fatiguing Part of the Day, and whether it were to
supersede the Custom of a Luncheon, or not, an equivalent Deduction would be
very properly subtracted from Dinner, which is generally more plentiful than
it ought to be, among those who are not limited by Economy.

Supper should be light, and proportionable to the Degree of Exercise that is
to succeed. The Quantity of Supper ought just to be sufficient to replenish the
Waste which the different Functions necessarily make. If any more be received
into the Stomach, too great a Portion of the Nervous Power is determined to
that Organ, and expended there in the Work of Digestion, while, at the same
Time, the Superfluity continues to excite an unseasonable Stimulus in the
System, which should remain, as much as possible, in a quiescent State, during
Sleep, and leaves an unnecessary Quantity of Materials in the Stomach, next
Morning, which ought, then, to be nearly empty, and to contain little more
besides the gastric or common Liquor of the Stomach.

Water, as being a Vehicle particularly connected with all the Departments of
Nourishment, deserves proper Attention. Pure, cold Water acts as a tonic or
corroborant, internally, in the Stomach, as well as applied externally. It
passes off gently by the different Excretions, it dilutes the saline, and
corrects the bilious Part of the Blood. Bad Water must be inimical to Health,
according to the Manner and Degree in which it happens to be impregnated with
heterogenous Matter. Snow Water, and Water that freezes most readily into Ice,
are found to be the purest of all; the next in Purity is Rain Water, which
falls in moderate Weather, and then River Water, which runs with a brisk
Current. Spring Water, in passing through the Strata of the Earth, often
imbibes mineral, and other Ingredients, and accordingly becomes more
objectionable: Nevertheless it is commonly and very properly used, because it
is more readily obtained in a pure State, than any of the former generally are.
The purest Water is that which has neither Taste, Color, nor Smell; that which
is lightest and most limpid; that which easily lathers with Soap: and that
which does not effervesce or bubble, nor form any Sediment when good Vinegar,
or Spirits of Sal Ammoniac is put into it. The most certain Method of purifying
Water is by Distillation, and the most commodious and easy, is by boiling. The
Influence of Fire destroys Animalculae, and by diffusing the component Parts of
Water, it affords an Opportunity for the fixed Air, and the too volatile
Particles to evaporate, and by the same Means, decomposes the Combinations, so
that the earthy and foreign Ingredients fall to the Bottom. Filtration, the
Mixture of Chalk or Sand, Exposure to the open Air, and allowing it due Time to
settle, are, individually, conducive toward the Purification of Water.

The Influence of the Moon, in her different Phases, upon the Earth, is a
Matter well known: And authentic Observations seem to confirm the Opinion, that
Commotions in the Animal System, and the Attack of febrile, epileptic, and
other Diseases, as well as periodical Alterations, are, in a certain Degree,
coincident with the Returns of the new, and full Moon. For my own Part,
although I have no Doubt about the Certainty of this Doctrine; yet my own
Observations have not been so accurate on this Point, as to establish any
invariable Rules which I could presume to offer as a Guide.

A Pendulum of any Kind, suspended in such a Manner as to receive no other
Motion except that conveyed to it by the Pulsation of some of the large
Arteries of a Person in Health, makes a certain Number of stronger Vibrations
than ordinary, corresponding to the Hour of the Day. If the Position be true,
(which I have often proved, by resting the Right Arm over a Cup, or common Beer
Glass, holding one End of a Piece of Thread, between the Thumb and Finger, with
a Ring, or such like fastened to the other End, which reached toward the
Center of the Cavity) the Inference must be, that there is a certain Number of
extraordinary Pulsations in the Arterial System, within the Space of every
Hour, varying with the Sun's Distance from the Meridian. This Experiment I only
mention as deserving further Investigation, as it might lead to the Discovery
of those Periods when the Paroxysms of Fevers, etc. may be expected; and thus
ascertain the most proper Time for the Exhibition of Medicines.

I have known In Instances where Music afforded effectual Relief in the most
violent Pain; and believe that its Powers might be so managed as to be
serviceable in some acute, and nervous Cases.

No virulent, infectious, or contagious Disease can possibly be communicated
but by Means of some of the morbific Particles coming in Contact with, and
finding Admission into the Body, which must also be, at the same Time, in a
State adapted for the Reception, and Nourishment or Assimulation of the
invading Particles.

Therefore the general Plan of Defense against every Species of Infection must
be, to avoid the Contact of its Effluvia, or to repel and dissipate them, when
in Contact.

In the Lues Venerea, and Itch, where the infectious Matter is palpably
deposited, washing and cleansing the Parts will often destroy the Infection.

In all infectious Diseases, such as the Small Pox, Measles, putrid,
pestilential, and epidemic Fevers, the Air is the Medidium, (except when they
are communicated by Means of infected Clothes, and such like,) and consequently
the Skin, and the internal Surface of the Mouth, Nose, Lungs, and Stomach, are
the Points of Contact, and all these Parts have Pores of Admission.

The best Method then, in these Cases, will be to chew aromatic and pungent
Substances in the Mouth, to impregnate the ambient Air with volatile and
correcting Particles, and to brace the Stomach with such Things as are
stimulating and antisceptic.

Almost every Year, and often at different Seasons of the same Year, there
happen prevailing Fevers, which are very perplexing to the Relatives of such as
labor under them. The natural Duties of Humanity constrain their Attendance,
their Appre hensions of Danger to themselves and Families excite their
Solicitude, and the Answers given by the attending Faculty to their anxious
Enquiries whether or not the Disease be infectious, are seldom satisfactory,
and perhaps not always quite judicious.

Let me then, in Regard of this Matter, observe, in few Words, that almost all
the Fevers that occur between the Months of April and November, if they do not
proceed from what is termed catching Cold; if they be not regular intermittent;
if they seem different from any of the known Class of common Fevers; and if
they be attended with peculiar Symptoms, such as an extraordinary quick Pulse,
extreme Debility, excessive Sickness at Stomach, violent Pain in the Head,
Sleepiness, Deafness, and Delirium; if Circumstances and Appearances be such, I
say, there is too much Reason to believe that the Fevers in Question are, more
or less, of an infectious and epidemic Kind. Indeed, it is to be remembered,
that morbid Effluvium of any Sort, whether infectious or not, when it comes in
Contact frequently, and in considerable Quantities, always carries Danger with
it. It has a procreative Power, or Power of generating something similar to
itself. No Wonder then, that those who are much exposed to the Breath and
Perspiration of diseased Persons should lose their Health: neither is it
strange that those Fevers, which have just been described, should spread
gradually from one Individual, and from one Family to another.

Besides the principal Causes already enumerated, there are many others which
affect Health and occasion Diseases. All the different Situations and
Employments in Life, especially of the mechanical Kind, are, more or less,
productive of Diseases peculiar to the Nature and Circumstances of each. But as
the Discussion of these would exceed my Plan, and perhaps be more tedious than
desirable, I shall satisfy myself with adding some promiscuous Observations on
the Animal Economy.

The Laxity of the Fibers and the Quickness of the Circulation in Children,
render them extremely susceptible of Irritation and Disorder from whatever is
heating, or stimulating. The chief Business therefore must be to keep them cool
and easy. They should undergo (those especially who are weak or ricketty) the
Cold-Bath, be exposed to the open Air, and live upon a light, cool Diet. How
pernicious then, must it be to habituate them to spirituous Liquors, which is
too frequently offered to Children, and to pamper them with whatever their
Fancy prompts them to ask!

The first Impression on the human System in all Cases, has the greatest
Effect, and the more it has been accustomed to Impressions of every Kind, the
less liable will it be to Agitation and Disorder, in future. The Advantage
then, of carrying Children through the Smallpox, Measles, and all the other
infectious and endemical Diseases which await them, as early as possible,
cannot but appear evident. They undergo these Complaints with less Danger
before their Fluids are contaminated, and also become less subject to the
Attack of other accidental Disorders, in Consequence of their Habit being
rather meliorated, and their Constitution, in some Measure, confirmed by
Emorbification, or the Abatement of morbid Tendency.

If the first juvenile Sensations be so impressive, of what infinite Importance
must not prudent and judicious Management be, toward forming the Temper,
inspiring the Genius, bending the Propensities, and directing the tender
impulsive Movements, during the soft, flexible Period of dawning Years! It is
true, the Miniature of the Frame is modelled by the Process of Nature, and
receives the Texture, Lines and Proportion, which particularize it, from the
same original Hand. This Basis or Ground Work, it must ever be impossible to
alter, with Regard to its first Principles of Structure and Organization.
Nevertheless, the ductile Fibers are easily capable of Inflexion and
Modulation, therefore the brightest Springs of the System may be moved,
cherished and augmented, and also the Exuberancy and Disproportion of Parts
suppressed, fashioned and amended. I do not conceive, that the Rudiments of a
Fool can be refined into the Luster of a Philosopher, nor that the natural
Endowments of Parts and Abilities can be debased and adulterated down to the
Level of the most common Materials, or the meanest Capacity, but I am very
certain that much Good, or Harm, may be done to the tender Plant of human Life,
when it first begins to vegetate.

In the same Path of Investigation may be traced the Laws of Physiognomy, so
far as they concord with solid Reason, and the Test of physical Knowledge.

It is sufficiently evident to common Understanding, that the Shape of the
Head, of indeed every Animal, corresponds with the Nature of the Intellect.
Hence it must follow, that a certain Conformation, Proportion or Extension of
Parts or Lines (as well as Texture and Principles) is indispensibly requisite
for the Performance of the Faculty of Perception, and the several progressive
and combined Operations that arise from it. For the same Reason it is, that a
square, or angular Form of the Brain will not answer the Purpose, and that a
circular or globular Figure is, consequently, necessary. The Face and Head are
the principal Physiognomical Parts, as they immediately show the true Mould and
Measure which circumscribe the prime Movement, or the Brain.

A flat Face or Features, most probably, will not admit, or carry on a Motion
in the Mind competently full and distinct, this therefore, may be the
Indication of Deficiency or Weakness of Intellect. Pointed, prominent, and
acute Lines, may, no Doubt, portend Excess, Depth, and Narrowness of
intellectual Motion; accordingly Ferocity and Obstinacy may result from the
former, Cunning and Sagacity from the next, and Malevolence and Peevishness
from the latter.

Elevation of Lines may bespeak Pride, and Irascibility; and Depression may
intimate Inequality or Fickleness of Temper. Protuberance of Lines, I would
also hope, may indicate an Extent of Talents, and Depth of Judgment, as well as
Strength of Impulse, and Propensity.

It is further obvious enough that the Faculties of the Mind cannot possess a
full Perfection and Congruity of Powers, unless there be a concomitant
Proportion and Symmetry in the corporal Organs. Therefore, any great Inequality
or Irregularity of external Parts must, in some Measure, diminish the
Uniformity and Harmony of the Whole. It must cramp and confine the Concordance
of Motion, if the Disparity of Parts be defective, and render the Movement
awkward and ungraceful, if the Disparity be superfluous.

There is also observed a Conformity and Alliance between different Parts of
the Body, considerably distant from one another, consequently the different
Parts must originally be proportioned, to each other, and likewise, to the
Whole. But it is charitable to believe, at the same Time, that a happy,
internal Compages may, sometimes, take Place, and counterbalance the
Disadvantages of unfavourable outward Signs.

Nevertheless, all these Congruities and Disparities must often be variable and
fallacious, if it were for no other Reason, but because Magnitude and Energy
are not always, though generally, correspondent.

Thus, Physiognomical Relation may be marked, and carried to a considerable
Extent, with tolerable Precision: But if one Fancy be built upon another, which
has nothing better than Fancy to support it, the airy Phantom may be raised to
a prodigious Height, and the Bubble suspended, till, at last, it burst,
invisible, in the romantic Wilds of metaphysical Delusion.

The Female Constitution, being of a more delicate Conformation, and having a
finer Texture of Nerves than the other Sex, gives Women a Quickness of
Sensibility, and great Promptitude of Expression; it softens their Manners,
refines their Ideas, and produces a lively Sensation of Pleasure and Pain. But
while they enjoy these Advantages, and are deservedly Objects of Affection and
Esteem, the Softness, and peculiar Construction of their Frame subject them to
many painful and critical Vicissitudes, which, as they affect both their Health
and Temper, fully entitle them to all possible Lenity and Indulgence.

When the important Period of Menstruation arrives, much depends upon proper
Management. A sedentary Life, Restraint, and Confinement, about that Time, are
very unfavourable, while moderate Exercise, the open Air, cheerful Society, and
Indulgence are highly requisite. Hard Work, and Exposure to much Cold, and to
damp Air, are too dangerous to be hazarded, even among the poorest People.

Equal Care, and similar Means must be employed, toward that critical Time of
Life, when the Tide of Circulation begins to ebb. The more slowly and gradually
this salutary Evacuation is diminished, the less is the Constitution exposed to
Disorder, on its final Termination. It is, therefore, always advisable (unless
it be in some relaxed Habits, where the Discharge has been too copious) to take
due Pains and proper Steps to prolong its Continuance, and thus secure the
System from the bad Consequences of an abrupt and hasty Departure.

It is a just Observation that those, who grow up very fast, are generally
sickly, and seldom live to a great Age. The Prime of their Life draws very soon
toward the Verge of Declension, which Stage, like their Youth, is equally
rapid in its Progress. The Case is this. Quick Growth draws out and elongates
the Fibers and Vessels to a greater Extension than the gradual Increase of the
vital Powers can nourish and support; hence the Constitution becomes weakly and
relaxed. This Error, in the Procedure of Nature, should be remedied, if
practicable, by the Cold Bath, and tonic Medicines.

The premature Indulgence of amorous Desires, in the early Bloom of Youth, is
productive of the most ruinous Consequences. At this Period, the Mind grows
warm and well adapted to imbibe a proper Fund and Connection of Ideas, through
the favorable Disposition of the Nerves; and the Body begins to germinate and
gather Firmness and Vigor from the Maturation of its Juices, especially those
of the Glands, which now unfold and afford a Repository, for the lymphatic and
nutritious Part of the Fluids, to answer the Emergencies of Nature. But the
unseasonable Pursuit of unripe Enjoyment blasts these promising Fruits, draws
off Health, and Genius from the System, through the Channel of Pleasure, and
inevitably shortens Life.

When the Constitution approaches its Zenith or confirmed State, if the social
Impulse occasion Disorder, and reject Control, its Effects are too important to
be neglected, as they often have the greatest Influence upon the whole Frame.
An exquisite Sensibility in the Nervous System united with sufficient Powers in
the Circulation, on the one Hand, and a full, and cold phlegmatic Constitution,
on the other, are the two Extremes of Temperament which particularly require
Indulgence; the former, in Order to diminish that Plenitude and Irritation,
which (if not removed) might produce Frenzy, Fevers, Inflammations, etc. and
the latter, on Purpose to create that Excitement and Action in the Nerves and
Vessels, which are necessary to prevent Obstructions, Consumptions,
Hypocondria, etc.

Continued Celibacy generally loads the Glands, retards the Circulation, and
occasions Fullness and Stagnation in the Vessels. In this State, the Mind,
unexpanded by the soft Fire of mutual Rapture, often becomes gloomy, selfish,
and contracted, and all its Faculties, being confined within the narrow Compass
of ordinary Gratifications, are devoted to Habits of parsimonious Care, and
contemplative Amusement.

Temperance is the best Pledge for Longevity, nevertheless, young People
should, by all Means, inure themselves to the Hardships and Asperities of Life.
Without some Share of these to temper the lethargic Effects of Indolence, the
Body sinks into a State of Effeminacy and Imbecility, and the Mind soon
becomes as feeble and insignificant as the Body.

Little Irregularities may, now and then, be committed with Impunity, perhaps
with Benefit, but frequent Shocks of Revelry and Debauch overstrain the System,
indurate the Solids, block up the fine vital Channels, and hasten the Approach
of rigid old Age.

The Animal Machine, from the Nature of its Organization, possesses a Power of
regulating itself, and is constantly exercising this Power; therefore all
Diseases, if fully understood, are curable in the Beginning. The most robust
Constitution cannot, at all Times, be equally healthy, but is rather in a State
of continual Variation; and when the Efforts of Nature are inadequate to the
Purpose of Regulation, Disorder, in a corresponding Degree, must ensue. Nature,
then, resists every Species of Disease; and it is at those Times, when the
Nervous System is relaxed and exhausted by Heat, Fatigue, Watching, Excess,
etc. or irritated by any of the ^ass^ons, that the Body is particularly
susceptible of the Cause of Diseases. Fear and Dread of any infectious
Distemper, accordingly, never fail to render a Person more liable to receive it.

In incipient, as well as in confirmed Diseases, the Calls of Nature should be
assiduously watched and regarded, since her Dictates and Indications are hardly
ever erroneous or improper, whether they point to Warmth, Coolness, Sleep,
Excitement, Abstinence, Nourishment, etc.

Any Part of the System, that is either naturally infirm, or has suffered any
Kind of Injury, is always most liable to the Invasion of Disease and Pain, and
should, on that Account, be more particularly guarded and defended.

The Approach of all febrile Diseases is marked with some extraordinary
Agitation in the System. Languor, Loss of Strength, flying Pains, hideous
Dreams, etc. indicate somewhat morbid acting on the Nerves; but if these be
attended with Nausea at the Stomach, Chills, and alternate Glows, or Sweats,
some acute Malady is much to be apprehended. Indeed Chills, (except after Meals
and Evacuations) as they come by a Constriction of the Skin, and a general
Spasm through the System, from Debility, or Irritation, always import some
Degree of Danger. From these Symptoms of acute Diseases, Caution ought to take
the Alarm, and as it is ever easier to prevent than cure, it would be most
advisable to arm and oppose their first Advances.

The Habit is that State of Body peculiar to each, and, according as it varies
from the Standard of Health, is, in an equal Measure, subject to Disease.

A strong and full Habit, (which is generally indicated by a full and hard
Pulse) in which the Quantity of Blood and Force of Circulation are greater than
ordinary, though it has a Tendency toward inflammatory Complaints, is still
infinitely less dangerous than the opposite Extreme, where the Habit is
relaxed, and all the vital Powers languid and imperfect. Under such
Circumstances the Body is open to all the Train of nervous Disorders, to
Obstructions, Dropsy and Scurvy, and exposed to the Attack of intermittent,
nervous, bilious and putrid Fevers: and if there be a superfluous Quantity of
half stagnant, in active Fluids in the System, at the same Time, the Danger is,
in all Respects, augmented by it.

A fat and gross Habit is always nearly allied to Disease. The contrary, or
rather the middle Temperament, is, by far the most healthy: It shows that the
Offices of Digestion, Circulation and Secretion are regular and effective.

If the common Exercises of Life, the Cold Bath, and moderate Living will not
prevent, nor reduce Corpulency, it would be better to try the Help of Medicine,
than be obliged to carry about so unpleasant a Burden as some People do.

It may not be improper here to give a Caution against frequent and unnecessary
Blood-letting, as being a very absurd and pernicious Practice. Some think it
diminishes Fatness, but I must assure them it has the contrary Effect, and that
Corpulency is increased by it, others imagine that it corrects bad Humors, but
that is likewise impossible, and many have Recourse to it as sovereign Remedy,
whenever they are any wise indisposed, but they should remember that they are
bringing themselves into a very bad Habit, a Habit which wastes the vital
Fluid, impoverishes the Blood and debilitates the Constitution.

The Force or Power of Habit is strikingly exhibited to such as accurately
watch its Influence. I have observed it as an almost invariable Rule, that all
Perceptions, whether of a pleasing or painful Nature, return pretty exactly at
stated, or equal Intervals; I mean that Anxiety, Desire, Fancy, Levity and
Pensiveness, as well as Sleep, Hunger, and the other common Solicitations of
Nature, make their Approaches nearly about the same Time that they have been
usually gratified and indulged.

Now as the Influence of such Perceptions must operate on the mental Faculties,
in the Way of Coincidence and Recollection, and on the corporal Organs,
agreeable to the Laws of the System, it must follow, that the surest Method
(when Resolution is inadequate to the Task) to subdue any Habit, or Custom, is
to present new Objects to the Mind, and provide different Impressions for the
Body. Yet, however proper this Remedy may be, it must be conducted with
Discretion, for Fear it should imperceptibly degenerate into a Course of
Dissipation, a most pitiable and unhappy Course, in which, the restless Mind,
warm in the Pursuit of new Gratification, becomes intoxicated with Pleasure,
and missing the Path of rational Enjoyment, loses itself, inextricable, in a
Labyrinth of Folly, Madness and Vexation. Wisdom should ever prescribe Bounds
to Desire, and still keep some Resource to satisfy the various Wants of feeble
old Age. If Youth and Maturity be spent in Excess and Dissipation, if all the
richest Stores of human Bliss be lavishly and prematurely exhausted, and the
Constitution sha^tered in the wild Career, what new Expedients can be devised,
what possible Means can be found to prop the tottering Fabric, or cheer the
dull Winter of declining Years.

The Regularity and Proportion, which is essential to Health, will not suffer
much Deviation, in any Respect, from the Track of established Custom. Hence a
Diminution, or Alteration in any of the common and habitual Evacuations,
Secretions, or even Perceptions, changes the Equilibrium of the System, and
very materially affects the Health and Constitution.

When Disorder is the Result of such Circumstances, the Balance must be
restored, by promoting the Excretions which are retarded, or have ceased; by
inviting the defective Circulation to the Parts which it has deserted, or
toward the Extremities, in general, by Means of Warmth, Friction, Exercise, or
Fomentation; and by renewing those Sensations and Incentives, which the Nerves
stand in Need of, to increase their Energy, and to give free Scope and previous
Impulse to their nice, progressive Motions.

But when the customary Evacuations and Emotions cannot be exactly restored,
they should be substituted by others as similar in their Nature and Effects as
possible.

The Nerves being the Medium of Communication between the different Parts of
the Body, those Parts, which possess the greatest Nervosity or Sensibility, as
the Head, Lungs, Stomach, Womb, and the Skin, have the closest Connection and
Sympathy with each other.

Those, therefore, who labor under nervous and hysteric Affections, should
carefully avoid whatever produces disagreeable Impressions on the Mind, and
every Kind of Irritation that may occasion unpleasant Sensations on any of
these susceptible Organs, and should particularly refrain from flatulent and
indigestible Food.

Intellectual Sympathy is one of the most refined Emotions of the human Mind.
It originates in some striking Congruity and mutual Harmony, and is excited by
fine concording Impressions made by some Object which creates Partiality and
Esteem, and is only perfect, when accompanied with an Idea that the attractive
Impression is reciprocal. This sympathetic Endowment ever deserves Cultivation
and Improvement. It renders one capable of all the Enjoyments of sincere
Friendship, and can give and receive Consolation in the Hour of Anxiety and of
Pain.

Antipathy proceeds from something that shocks the Imagination, or offends the
Senses: and when this happens to take Place in the tender Years of Infancy, and
the Impression has been forcibly received, the Antipathy frequently continues
through Life. Such Antipathies are extremely unpleasant, and, I should think,
might be corrected by gradually familiarizing the offending Cause, but if the
antipathetic Matter affect the Sense of Smell, it will probably be more
difficult to reconcile it.

Antipathy furnishes an Exception to the general Law of the System, which, it
was stated, did always receive secondary Impressions with less Effect than
primary ones. It is, therefore, necessary to remark that when Anger, Terror,
violent Fevers, deep Intoxication, or any other Cause, have once thrown the
System into vehement and excessive Agitations, (whereby the Nerves are
irrecoverably strained) the same, or nearly the same Cause, in but a very small
Degree, will produce similar Effects, in the highest Degree: and these Effects
will more easily take Place, in Proportion to the Frequency and Repetition of
the impelling Cause. From which Consideration may be perceived the Necessity of
guarding against all violent Shocks, and of obviating their Consequences, as
soon and effectually as possible. Children, and People of weak Nerves and
delicate Constitutions should be particularly careful in this Respect.

Nervous and hysteric Complaints, fainting Fits, Convulsions, Madness and such
like frequently spring from this Source, and in Time, become fixed, habitually,
or periodically.

The same Advice must also be extended to pregnant Women, whose Imagination, or
Passions, when violently excited, sometimes, mark and injure the Foetus. There
are so many incontrovertible Proofs of this Kind of Influence, that it is
impossible to doubt the Certainty of it: which appears to me nowise
questionable, since I can see no Difficulty to account for it, in a clear and
rational Manner.

Imitation is a very operative Faculty in the Animal System. It is a natural
and spontaneous Action, whereby, without Volition, or even Consciousness, one
Person imitates and resembles the Motions, Gestures, or Perceptions of another.
Silence, singing, coughing, Laughter, speaking, singing, walking and Credulity
which communicate, and pass from one Person to another, like Electricity, are
obvious Proofs that Similitude, or the imitative Faculty, is one of the
primary, leading Motions in the human Mind, and bring no small Evidence in
Confirmation of what has been already said on that subject.

Stammering, and other bad Habits, and even Convulsions may be contracted from
this Cause. Which Consideration suggests a Caution sufficient to induce People
to pay due Regard to such Companions and Objects as are suffered to have
Intercourse with Children, and Persons in a weak, nervous and irritable State.

Imagination is the Exercise of primary Perception, or Perception of the first
Forms and Colors, in which Images strike the Mind, unaccompanied with, and
consequently unaltered by the deliberative or reasoning Operations.
Imagination, therefore, considers Objects in the Light they first appear, which
Appearance does not always correspond with Intrinsicness or Reality; though
very frequently the first View of the Mind is as accurate and comprehensive as
several Reviews or Comparisons are. When Memory or uncompounded Reflection
represents Images to the Mind, these Images arise merely from the Power of
Recollection, which is only the Operation of the first Class of Similitudes:
but Images, which proceed from Judgment, are fashioned with all the Rays and
Shades of nice and minute Analogy; and these are often created without any
Assistance from Memory. Hence Versatility or Quickness of Imagination is often
found to be a superficial Quality, and on a Level only with the Depth of
Memory. But if a warm and teeming Imagination be united with Solidity of
Judgment, and profound Penetration, it bespeaks the happiest and noblest
Composition of the human System.

The Mind is exceedingly susceptible of the two opposite Perceptions, Hope and
Fear. They are the quick-born Offspring of Imagination, begotten by the Idea of
Pleasure, or Pain, whose Familiarity and Intimacy always afford them easy
Access to her Embraces.

It will then manifestly appear that the Influence of Imagination, so far as
regards the Cause and Cure of Diseases, is nothing but the Effect of Hope, or
Fear. But these Effects have been already explained in treating of the
Passions. It must, therefore, be obvious whence a healthy Man may be frightened
into a Fever, and a dying Person, in a Manner, quickened into Life, by the
Instillation and Continuation of either of these Influences upon the Mind.
Hence the Effect of Animal Magnetism, and of Nostrums, Charms and Enchantments,
in sometimes curing Agues, Fits and other Disorders, which, in Truth, have no
Value nor Utility but what they derive from this Source.

Volition, or the Will, Purpose, or Design, is either intentional, or actual;
that is, Design intended, or Design executed. Of which neither the one nor the
other is instantaneous, or immediately performed; they require both of them
several of the progressive Operations of the Mind. For no Man ever had an
Inclination or Will to do an Act, before he had first reasoned upon it, and
considered the End or Purport of such an Act. The Mind cannot p^ssibly direct
the Nervous Influence into the right Arm, in Preference to the left, (except in
the common and habitual Motions of Walking and Gesticulation) till it has first
poised itself or deliberated, and then it can give the voluntary Impulse. Hence
it is manifest beyond Contradiction, that every Person, of a sound State of
Body, is absolutely a free Agent, and may either commit, or not commit any
particular Act. But still the Exercise of Common Sense must be present in Order
to constitute Criminality. If a Person err from Passion, it is Madness, if from
Ignorance, or wrong Ideas, it is Mistake, Both Cases, are entitled to
Alleviation and Compassion, and should be weighed in the Scales of Humanity,
with the fair Balance of Candor, placed in the Medium of Excitement, to
ascertain the intrinsic Quality, and compute the true Degree of Right, or Wrong.

FINIS.

