THE POETICAL CALENDAR. VOL. IX. FOR SEPTEMBER.

THE POETICAL CALENDAR.

CONTAINING A COLLECTION Of scarce and valuable PIECES OF POETRY: With Variety
of ORIGINALS AND TRANSLATIONS, BY THE MOST EMINENT HANDS.

Written and Selected By FRANCIS FAWKES, M.A. And WILLIAM WOTY.

IN TWELVE VOLUMES.

THE SECOND EDITION.

LONDON: Printed by DRYDEN LEACH; For J. COOTE, at the King's Arms, in
Paternoster Row. MDCCLXIII.

THE POETICAL CALENDAR.
SEPTEMBER. AN ODE.
FArewell the pomp of Flora! vivid scene!
Welcome sage Autumn, to invert the year --
Farewell to summer's eye-delighting green!
Her verdure fades -- autumnal blasts are near.
The silky wardrobe now is laid aside,
With all the rich regalia of her pride.
And must we bid sweet Philomel adieu?
She that was wont to charm us in the grove?
Must Nature's livery wear a sadder hue,
And a dark canopy be stretched above?
Yes -- for September mounts his ebon-throne,
And the smooth foliage of the plain is gone.
Libra, to weigh the harvest's pearly store,
The golden balance poizes now on high,
The calm serenity of Zephyr over,
Sol's glittering legions to the equator fly,
At the same hour he shows his orient head,
And, warned by Thetis, sinks in Ocean's bed.
Adieu! ye damask roses, which remind
The maiden fair-one, how her charms decay;
Ye rising blasts, oh! leave some mark behind,
Some small memorial of the sweets of May:
Ah! no -- the ruthless season will not hear,
Nor spare one glory of the ruddy year.
No more the waste of music sung so late
From every bush, green orchestre of love,
For now their winds the birds of passage wait,
And bid a last farewell to every grove;
While those, whom shepherd-swains the sleepers call,
Choose their recess in some sequestered wall.
Yet still shall sage September boast his pride,
Some birds shall chant, some gayer flowers shall blow,
Nor is the season wholly unallied
To purple bloom; the haler fruits shall grow,
The stronger plants, such as enjoy the cold,
And wear a livelier grace by being old.
AN AUTUMNAL ODE*
TO MR. HAYMAN.
YET once more, glorious God of day,
While beams thine orb serene,
O let me warbling court thy stay
To gild the fading scene!
Thy rays invigorate the Spring,
Bright Summer to perfection bring,
The cold inclemency of Winter cheer,
And make the Autumnal months the mildest of the year.
Ere yet the russet foliage fall
I Will climb the mountain's brow,
My friend, my Hayman, at thy call,
To view the scene below:
How sweetly pleasing to behold
Forests of vegetable gold!
How mixed the many checkered shades between
The tawny, mellowing hue, and the gay vivid green!
How splendid all the sky! how still!
How mild the dying gale!
How soft the whispers of the rill,
That winds along the vale!
So tranquil Nature's works appear,
It seems the sabbath of the year:
As if, the Summer's labor past, she chose
This season's sober calm for blandishing repose.
Such is of well-spent life the time,
When busy days are past;
Man, verging gradual from his prime,
Meets sacred peace at last:
His flowery Spring of pleasures over,
And Summer's full-blown pride no more,
He gains pacific Autumn, mild and bland,
And dauntless braves the stroke of Winter's palsied hand.
For yet a while, a little while,
Involved in wintry gloom,
And lo! another Spring shall smile,
A Spring eternal bloom:
Then shall he shine, a glorious guest,
In the bright mansions of the blessed,
Where due rewards on virtue are bestowed,
And reaped the golden fruits of what his Autumn sowed.
AUTUMN. AN ODE.
ALas! with swift and silent pace,
Impatient Time rolls on the year;
The seasons change, and Nature's face
Now sweetly smiles, now frowns severe.
'Twas spring, 'twas summer, all was gay,
Now autumn bends a cloudy brow,
The flowers of spring are swept away,
And summer's fruits desert the bough.
The verdant leaves that played on high,
And wantoned in the western breeze,
Now trod in dust neglected lie,
As Boreas strips the bending trees.
The fields that waved with golden grain,
As russet heaths are wild and bare,
Not moist with dew, but drenched in rain,
Nor health, nor pleasure, wanders there.
No more, while through the midnight shade,
Beneath the moon's pale orb I stray,
Soft pleasing woes my heart invade,
As Progne pours the melting lay.
From this capricious clime she soars,
O! would some God but wings supply!
To where each morn the spring restores,
Companion of her flight, I Would fly.
Vain wish! me fate compells to bear
The downward season's iron reign,
Compells to breathe polluted air,
And shiver on a blasted plain.
What bliss to life can autumn yield,
If glooms, and showers, and storms prevail,
And Ceres flies the naked field,
And flowers, and fruits, and Phoebus fail?
Oh! what remains, what lingers yet,
To cheer me in the darkening hour?
The grape remains! the friend of wit,
In love and mirth of mighty power.
Haste, press the clusters, fill the bowl --
Apollo! shoot thy parting ray;
This gives the sunshine of the soul,
This God of health, and verse, and day.
Still, still the jocund strain shall flow,
The pulse with vigorous rapture beat;
My Stella with new charms shall glow,
And every bliss in wine shall meet.
AUTUMN.
BY MR. BREREWOOD.
Though the seasons must alter, ah! yet let me find
What all must confess to be rare,
A female still cheerful, and faithful and kind,
The blessings of autumn to share.
Let one side of our cottage, a flourishing vine
Overspread with its branches, and shade;
Whose clusters appear more transparent and fine,
As its leaves are beginning to fade.
When the fruit makes the branches bend down with its load,
In our orchard surrounded with pales;
In a bed of clean straw let our apples be stowed,
For a tart that in winter regales.
When the vapors that rise from the earth in the morn
Seem to hang on its surface like smoke,
'Till dispersed by the sun that gilds over the corn,
Within doors let us prattle and joke.
But when we see clear all the hues of the leaves,
And at work in the fields are all hands,
Some in reaping the wheat, others binding the sheaves,
Let us carelessly strole over the lands.
How pleasing the sight of the toiling they make,
To collect what kind Nature has sent!
Heaven grant we may not of their labor partake;
But, oh! give us their happy content.
And sometimes on a bank, under shade, by a brook,
Let us silently sit at our ease,
And there gaze on the stream, till the fish on the hook
Struggles hard to procure its release.
And now when the husbandman sings harvest home,
And the corn's all got into the house;
When the long wished for time of their meeting is come,
To frolic, and feast, and carouse;
When the leaves from the trees are begun to be shed,
And are leaving the branches all bare,
Either strewn at the roots, shrivelled, withered, and dead,
Or else blown to and fro in the air;
When the ways are so miry, that bogs they might seem,
And the axle-tree's ready to break,
While the waggoner whistles in stopping his team,
And then claps the poor jades on the neck;
In the morning let us follow the cry of the hounds,
Or the fearful young covey beset;
Which, though skulking in stubble and weeds on the grounds,
Are becoming a prey to the net.
Let Us enjoy all the pleasure retirement affords,
Still amused with these innocent sports,
Nor once envy the pomp of fine ladies and lords,
With their grand entertainments in courts.
In the evening when lovers are leaning on styles,
Deep engaged in some amorous chat,
And it is very well known by his grin, and her smiles,
What they both have a mind to be at;
To our dwelling, though homely, well-pleased to repair,
Let our mutual endearments revive,
And let no single action, or look, but declare,
How contented and happy we live.
Should ideas arise that may ruffle the soul,
Let soft music the phantoms remove,
For it is harmony only has force to control,
And unite all the passions in love.
With her eyes but half open, her cap all awry,
When the lass is preparing for bed;
And the sleepy dull clown, who sits nodding just by,
Sometimes rouzes and scratches his head.
In the night when it is cloudy, and rainy, and dark,
And the laborers snore as they lie,
Not a noise to disturb us, unless a dog bark
In the farm, or the village hard by.
At the time of sweet rest, and of quiet like this,
Ere our eyes are closed up in their lids,
Let us welcome the season, and taste of that bliss,
Which the sunshine and daylight forbids.
UPON MY HAIRS FALLING.
FEW and easy in your stay,
Never curled, and hardly gray;
Hairs, adieu! though falling all,
Blameless, harmless, may you fall.
Light and trifling though you be,
More deserving poetry
Than the dream of guilty power,
Than the miser's gathered ore,
Than the world's most serious things,
Murdering victors, haughty kings,
If your moral fall presage
Death, the certain end of age,
If a single hint you give,
Well to die, and soon to live.
AN EVENING ODE TO DELIA.
EVening now, from purple wings,
Sheds the grateful gifts she brings;
Brilliant drops bedeck the mead,
Cooling breezes shake the reed,
Shake the reed, and curl the stream,
Silvered over with Cynthia's beam:
Near the checkered, lonely grove,
Hears and keeps thy secrets, love.
Thither, Delia, let us stray
Lightly over the dewy way;
Phoebus drives his burning car,
Hence, my lovely Delia, far:
In his stead, the queen of night
Sheds around a lambent light;
Light that serves but just to show
Breasts that beat, and cheeks that glow.
Let us there, in whispered joy,
All the silent hours employ;
Silence best, and dusky shades,
Please the heart that love invades.
Other passions then at rest,
Love possesses all the breast.
REFLECTIONS ON A WATCH.
LET vain Philosophy hence learn to bind
The lawless operations of the mind,
And teach us to obey that Power unseen,
That framed, and first informed, our wise machine;
Then shall we know what schools have idly taught,
To guide each act, and regulate each thought:
Like this mechanic wonder shall we move,
Unvaried by ambition, anger, love;
Constant in each vicissitude of care,
Not urged by hope, nor yet repressed by fear;
Alike in health, disease, in age or youth,
Our equal judgment still will point at truth;
No longer shall we live whole years in vain,
Nor one sad hour be marked with grief or pain;
Freedom and joy our measured time will fill,
Guiltless, unerring, and assured our will,
'Till the last pulse shall beat, and life stand still.
AUTUMN.
I At my window sit, and see
Autumn his russet fingers lay
On every leaf of every tree,
I call, but Summer will not stay.
She flies, the boasting Goddess flies,
And, pointing where the espaliers shoot,
" Deserve my parting gift, she cries,
" I take the leaves, but not the fruit."
Let me the parting gift improve,
And emulate the just reply,
As life's short seasons swift remove,
Ere fixed in winter's frost I lie.
Health, beauty, vigor, now decline,
The pride of summer's splendid day,
Leaves, which the stem must now resign,
The mournful prelude of decay.
But let fair virtue's fruit remain,
Though summer with my leaves be fled;
Then, not despised, I Will not complain,
But cherish autumn in her stead.
THE FIRESIDE:
A PARODY ON THE SECOND EPODE OF HORACE.
BY ISAAC HAWKINS BROWN, ESQUIRE.
" THrice happy, who free from ambition and pride,
In a rural retreat, has a quiet fireside;
I love my fireside, thither let me repair,
And drink a delightful oblivion of care:
Oh! when shall I 'scape to be truly my own,
From the noise, and the smoke, and the bustle of town.
Then I live, then I triumph, whenever I retire
From the pomp and parade that the many admire:
Hail ye woods, and ye lawns, shady vales, sunny hills,
And the warble of birds, and the murmur of rills,
Ye flowers of all hues that embroider the ground,
Flocks feeding, or frisking in gambols around;
Scene of joy to behold! joy that who would forego,
For the wealth and the power that a court can bestow:
I have said it at home, I have said it abroad,
That the town is man's world, but that this is of God;
Here my trees cannot flatter; plants, nursed by my care,
Pay with fruit, or with fragrance, and incense the air;
Here contemplative solitude raises the mind,
(Least alone when alone) to ideas refined.
Methinks hid in groves, which no sound can invade,
Save when Philomel strikes up her sweet serenade,
I revolve on the changes and chances of things,
And pity the wretch, that attends upon kings.
Now I pass with old authors an indolent hour,
And, reclining at ease, turn Demosthenes over;
Now facetious and vacant, I urge the gay flask
With a set of old friends -- who have nothing to ask;
Thus happy, I reck not of France nor of Spain,
Nor the balance of power what hand shall sustain.
The balance of power! ha! till that is restored,
What solid delight can retirement afford?
Some must be content to be drudges of state,
That the Sage may securely enjoy his retreat.
In weather serene, when the ocean is calm,
It matters not much who presides at the helm;
But soon as clouds gather, and tempests arise,
Then a pilot there needs; a man dauntless and wise.
If such can be found, sure he ought to come forth,
And lend to the public his talents and worth.
Whatever inclination or ease may suggest,
If the state wants his aid, he has no claim to rest.
But who is the man, a bad game to redeem?
He whom Savoy admires, who has Prussia's esteem;
Whom the Spaniards have felt; and whose iron, with dread,
Haughty Lewis saw forging to fall on his head.
Holland loves him; nor less, in the North, all the powers
Court, honor, revere; and the Empress adores.
Hark! what was that sound? for it seemed more sublime
Than befits the low genius of pastoral rhyme?
Was it Wisdom I heard? or can fumes of the brain
Cheat my ears with a dream? ha! repeat me that strain;
Yes, Wisdom, I hear thee; thou deign'st to declare
Me, me, the sole Atlas, to prop this whole sphere;
Thy voice says, or seems in sweet accents to say,
Haste, and save sinking Britain -- Resigned I obey;
And, O! witness, ye powers, that Ambition and Pride
Have no share in this change -- for I love my Fireside!"
Thus the Shepherd; then, throwing his crook away, steals
Direct to St. James's, and takes up the seals.
THE DRYADS; OR WOOD-NYMPHS.
A PHILOSOPHICAL POEM.
BY MR. DIAPER.
Bacchum in remotis carmina rupibus
Vidi docentem (credit posteri)
Nymphasque discentes, et aures
Capripedum Satyrorum acutas.
Evae! recenti men's trepidat metu.
HOR.
FOrgive, ye Nereids, if I sing no more
The uncertain sea, but choose the safer shore,
And leave the restless waves for steady hills,
To sit on grassy plots, or dream by rills.
The wanton muse the meaner thorn prefers
To coral twigs, and amber's costly tears;
Again I may, when tired of leavy woods,
Haste to the sea, and court the rolling floods.
No loved amusement's here, but soon will cloy,
The dearest bliss becomes a worthless toy,
And we must shift our pleasures to enjoy.
Sick of the town, I left the busy place,
Where deep concern broods on the thoughtful face;
Where factious cits, with nods, and roguish leer,
Are whispering nothing in attentive ear;
Where knaves strange lies invent, and fools retail,
And home-made treason find in every mail:
Falsehoods their credit gain, though ill-contriv'd,
And scandals, often disproved, are still revived;
Imagined ills in frightful shapes appear,
While present evils we with patience bear;
Phantoms, and empty forms, are feared the most,
As those who scorned the man, yet dread the ghost.
No longer plagued with faction, spleen and noise,
How was I blessed, when first my ravished eyes
Sucked in the purer day, and saw unclouded skies?
How happy, when I viewed the calm retreat,
And groves o'erlook'd by Winchcomb's ancient seat?
Here the smooth A river in Barkshire.
Kennet takes his doubtful way,
In wanton rounds the lingering waters play,
And by their circling streams prolong the grateful stay.
Here good old Chaucer whilom cheered the vale,
And sootely sung, and told the jocund tale.
Bright was the moon, and her reflected beams
Spangled the dewy leaves with trembling gleams;
While stars, by conscious twinklings, seemed to know
What waking lovers acted here below.
Careless I walked, where prowling beasts had made
A path, that led through a lone silent glade.
The moon, with doubtful rays, deceived the sight,
And waving boughs gave an uncertain light.
When my chilled spirits sunk with sudden fear,
And trembling horror bid the search forbear;
My heedless steps had touched the hallowed ground,
Where airy demons dance the wanton round;
Where fairy elves, and midnight Dryads meet,
And to the moon the sylvan song repeat.
Tall rifted oaks, and circling elms had made
A central void amidst surrounding shade,
With hollow vaulted cells, and rising heaps,
In which by day the wearied badger sleeps.
Thick thorny brakes grew round the lonesome place,
And twining boughs enclosed the middle space.
Here Dryads in nocturnal revels join,
While stars through shaking leaves obscurely shine:
And here I saw (blessed with a kinder fate)
Where in a beauteous ring the nymphs were sat:
Well-pleased the Elfins smiled, but she, who guards
Pomaceous fruits, and orchard-cares rewards,
Down pensive leaned her head; no ruddy streaks
Mixed with the languid paleness of her cheeks:
Cast on the ground her withered garland lay,
Whose shrivelled leaves seemed conscious of decay.
Thyrsis, that much-loved youth, the goddess mourned,
Thyrsis, who once Silurian plains adorned;
The rural powers confessed their meaner lays,
When Thyrsis sung, and owned his juster praise;
He Ariconian swains industrious taught
To strain rich must, and press the racy draught;
Since he is gone, the trees are all decayed,
With moss bedight, and blossoms ill-array'd.
The pensive owner mourns the tedious weeks,
And wants the generous bowl, that paints the flushing cheeks.
Men led by sense, and partial to themselves,
Nor roving demons own, nor wandering elves:
But who can know the intelligible race,
Or guess the powers that fill the aerial space!
Often the tired horse is forced to scour the plain,
When Fairies ride, fixed in his twisted mane:
And I, ye Gods! have wondrous circles seen,
Where wanton sprites in midnight dance have been,
And pressed their rounding steps on every new-mow'd green.
Ye demons, who in lonely forests rove,
And friendly powers, that human arts improve,
Ye careful Genii, that over men preside,
Direct their counsels, and their actions guide;
The grateful Muse shall your assistance own,
And tell of heavenly forms, as yet unknown;
(Blessed beings, whom no earthy fetters bind,
Nor to the pressing weight of clay confined!
Of unmixt either formed, their beauty fears
No pale disease, nor change of coming years.)
Be kind, ye powers, and tune my artless tongue,
While I repeat the Dryads pleasing song.
Nape began; a nymph with careless mien,
Clad like autumnal leaves in yellowish green:
Her round plump cheeks a deeper purple died,
Such as ripe fruits boast on their sunny side:
A wreath of platted moss curled round her head,
Cheerful she smiled, and thus the Elfin said:
" Tall sycamores, the noisy insects love,
And buzzing round the leaves incessant move;
While the day lasts, the worthless creatures play,
And mourn the evening dusk, and wing their silent way.
But forest nymphs prefer the peaceful night,
When solemn gloom, and dewy seats invite.
While drowzy man in sleep unactive rests,
Not half so happy as the watchful beasts,
Who silent leave their dens, and secret home,
And, on the prey intent, through all the forest roam.
The raging sun, with his too scorching beams,
Burns up the herbs, and lessens all the streams;
But the kind moon reflects a milder ray,
And makes a night more lovely than the day;
Nor darts fierce flame, but innocently bright
Leaves all the fire, and gives the purer light;
No noisome vapor, or dark cloud exhales,
But gentle drops, fresh dews, and pleasing gales.
So woman is but rougher man refined,
Has naught of him that is fierce, but all that is kind.
Now falling drops like shining pearls are seen,
And dewy spangles hang on every green:
Refreshing moisture cools the thirsty mead,
Extends the stalk, and swells th'unfolded seed;
Restores the verdure of the tarnish'd leaves,
And every herb the ripening juice receives.
Day always is the same, but wanton night
Boasts a more grateful change of harmless light.
Below, the glowworms, wondrous orbs, are seen,
That stud with burnished gold the shaded green:
These little wandering comets never shed
Or baneful ill, or dire contagion spread;
Their shining tails foretell no falling state,
Nor future dearth, nor sad disease create.
Bright lambent flames, and kindled vapors rise,
Sweep glaring through the dusk, and strike the wondering eyes.
In oblique tracks the meteors blaze around,
And skim the surface of the marshy ground,
Unseen by day, when, tyrant-like, the sun,
Envious, admits no splendour but his own.
The liquid drops, that ooze from weeping trees,
And sparkling stones with star-like luster please;
Even sapless wood, improved by age, grows bright,
And, what it wants in moisture, gains in light.
While ripened fruits, and milder seasons last,
And only empty clouds the skies overcast,
Nymphs in lone deserts chant the rural lay,
'Till the winged Hours bring on returning day.
But when fierce wintery storms the forest rend,
And rattling hail, or fleecy snows descend;
When conscious birds, who know succeeding times,
Haste from the cold, and seek for milder climes;
The Elfin powers (who can at pleasure leave
Aerial bodies, and new forms receive)
Cast off their vehicles, and freed from sense,
Nor dread the storms, nor cold, when too intense.
The earthy Gnomes, and Fairy Elves are seen
Digging in lowest mines with busy men;
There labor, on the fruitless work intent,
While deeper snows the wonted dance prevent:
But foolish swains the blooming Spring prefer,
The infant glory of the budding year;
Nature, as yet, is but imperfect seen,
And her weak products show a rawish green:
The flowers look gay, but lovely Autumn treats
With ripened beauties, and substantial sweets;
Nor wants its flowers, while poppies grace the corn,
And azure cups the waving fields adorn.
Fruits loved by rustic tastes, of pleasing show,
On the wild hedge, and scented briar grow;
And yellow leaves, the fairy Elfin's bed,
Fly with the wind, and on the ground are spread.
The frisking Satyrs squeeze the clustered grape,
And the chaste Dryad fears the coming rape:
Ripe mellow heaps from every tree are shook,
And bending corn expects the sharpened hook;
Soon will the nodding sheaves be borne away,
And the drawn net enclose the unguarded prey.
The friendly powers, who laboring peasants aid,
Nymphs, and lightfawns, frequent the woody shade;
But often cursed fiends quit their infernal home,
And (hated guests) in gloomy forests roam,
With glaring eyes affright the howling beasts,
And little birds shrink closer in their nests.
Earth would be heaven, if we might here enjoy
Pleasure unmixt, and leave the base alloy.
The greatest good has its attending ill,
And doubtful bliss distracts the uncertain will.
So teeming Autumn boasts her luscious fruits,
And plants of grateful taste, and healing roots;
But ripens with like care the growing seeds
Of baneful aconite, and noxious weeds.
The deadly nightshade wanton youth deceives
With shining berries, and with spreading leaves;
The accursed fruit invites with pleasing show,
Fair as the damsen, or the sky-dy'd sloe;
But ah! not rashly trust the tempting ills;
Too well you know, that beauty often kills:
Swift through the bones the spreading venom flies,
A deadly sleep hangs on his closing eyes,
And the lost wretch in raging frenzy dies.
Now round its pole the spiral hop entwists,
Like Thyrsi, borne by Bacchus' ancient priests.
The husband elm supports the embracing vines,
And round its oak the ivy closer twines.
To Bacchus sacred all, and prone to love,
They show what fuel must the flame improve;
Love, blind himself, the mark would hardly know,
But Bacchus takes the aim, and sets the bow.
Autumnal days a constant medium boast,
Nor chap the ground with heat, nor dry with frost.
Nature on all her finished labor smiles,
And the glad peasant reaps the grateful spoils;
Winds shake the ripened seeds on parent earth,
And thus impregnate for succeeding birth.
The tufted cod with future harvest swells,
While weighty seeds fall from their native cells,
And near their mother-stem: but smaller kinds,
Far from their homes, are borne by sweeping winds;
The atoms fly, wafted on every breeze,
Hence mossy threads enwrap the tallest trees;
Herbs of strange forms on highest rocks are found,
And spreading fern runs over the barren ground.
But, Goddess, you neglect your wonted care,
(While blighted orchards mourn, the nymphs despair;)
Nor love (as once) to see the handed bowls,
When tippling rustics cheer their droughty souls,
And tread with faltring steps the unequal ground,
While humble cots with wayward mirth resound.
Succeeding bards, in rural secrets skilled,
Shall teach the swain to enrich the barren field;
The prophet's inspiration never ends,
But with a double portion still descends.
Poets, like rightful kings, can never die,
Heaven's sacred ointment will the throne supply,
And Tityrus, when he draws his latest breath,
Will to some darling youth the valued pipe bequeath.
So tuneful insects, fed by morning dew,
Who in warm meads the daily song renew;
(True poets they) laugh at approaching want,
And careless sing, and mock the laboring ant;
But soon bleak colds the wanton throng surprise,
And the whole race (ah! too unpitied) dies:
And yet returning heat, and sultry days,
Restore the species, and new songsters raise.
The Goddess will not long forget her care,
But loss of fruit with future crops repair.
No more shall blasting winds the harvest grieve,
Or blighted buds autumnal hopes deceive.
The youth, well-pleased, will daily thanks repeat,
While laden branches groan beneath their weight.
As from salt waves are drawn the sweeter rains,
And cheerful streams, that swell the fatten'd plains,
So from our griefs succeeding pleasures flow;
Grafted on crabs the fairest apples grow.
Bitters and sweets in the same cup are thrown,
And prickly thistles have the softest down."
Thus said the nymph, and Psecas thus replied,
Psecas, who gives the herbs their various pride:
She Nature aids, and is the sylvan power,
That shapes the leaf, and paints the woody flower:
She blanches lillies to their loveliest white,
Whose skin-like beauty pleases human sight:
Hence the blue vervains grace the humble shade,
And drowzy poppies are in scarlet clad:
Unerring forms the growing plant receives,
She rounds the stem, and points the indented leaves.
" Who (said the nymph) would sing of bleating flocks,
Or hanging goats that browze on craggy rocks?
When ancient bards have rifled all the store,
And the drained subject can afford no more.
Nor Cuddy now, nor Colin would engage;
Eclogue but ill becomes a warlike age.
In ancient times the shepherd's song would please,
When pious kings enjoyed the shepherd's ease,
And monarchs sat beneath the shadowing trees.
When those first happier ages were no more,
But cursed ambition still increased with power;
When crowded towns filled the deserted plain,
And craving passions a new life began,
The peaceful woods were not so soon forgot,
The uneasy soul her wonted pleasure sought:
Reason, when free and undisturbed, approves
The pleasing pensiveness of thoughtful groves:
Hence twisted bowers, and cooling grots were made
To imitate, at least, the rural shade.
But men, by furies urged, and cursed by fate,
All that is calm and inoffensive hate;
Guilt must prevail, and bloodshed never cease;
Nations are said to be undone by peace.
Too well you know, who often, unseen, repair
To whispering courts, enwrapp'd in finest air;
In closets sit, and unsuspected hear
What the great vulgar feign, the little fear.
By night, while swains dream of successful loves,
The Forest-Genii wanton in their groves,
And over the platted heath the Fairy-Demon roves:
But, when gray dawn awakes from pleasing rest
The yawning peasant, and disturbs the beast,
Through streets, and noisy crowds, they range unknown,
And mark the conduct of the factious town.
Britannia's sons, like those of monstrous birth,
When serpents teeth were sown in furrowed earth;
Enflamed with rage, and prone to mutual hate,
With baneful strife distract the endangered state.
War is now thought the panaceal good;
Quacks know no other cure but letting blood,
Even when the expiring wretch already faints,
And not a lancet, but a cordial wants.
Those who could wish all temples shut beside,
Never think the gates of Janus set too wide;
For endless slaughter, as a blessing pray;
Farewell the humble muse, and shepherd's peaceful lay!"
She said, and all the nymphs with sorrow heard,
When, clad in white, an heavenly form appeared;
A leavy crown adorned her radiant head,
Majestic were her looks, and thus she said:
" Unbodied powers are not confined to floods,
To purling rivulets, or to shady woods.
Kind demons on ungrateful man attend,
Observe his steps, and watch the hated fiend.
The same good Genii guard the harmless sheep,
When wearied Damon lies in thoughtless sleep;
The same, whose influence aids the unsettled state,
And gladly hastens on the work of fate.
Rome's second king enjoyed a fairy dame,
To lonely woods the royal pupil came;
To Numa's lessons, and the Elfin-Bride,
Rome all her grandeur owed, and future pride.
Blessed powers, and beings of the highest rank,
Nor love the flowing stream, nor flowery bank.
Clad in etherial light, the purer mind
Scorns the base earth, and was for heaven designed.
Inferior orders have a meaner home,
And here in wilds, and woody mazes roam.
To learned Magi we strange spells impart,
Mysteries disclose, and tell the secret art.
With sacred misletoe the Druids crowned,
Sung with the nymphs, and danced the pleasing round,
But vulgar thoughts confound celestial forms
With envious fiends, who raise destructive storms;
And harmless elves, that scuttle over the plain,
Are ranked with furies doomed to endless pain.
Mortals, to earth and mean delights inclined,
No pleasure in abstracted notions find:
Unused to higher truths will not believe
Aught can exist, but what their eyes perceive;
Though to good demons they their safety owe,
Few are those happy, who their guardians know.
But hear, ye nymphs; indulge no causeless fears,
I know the lasting joys of coming years.
I, Britain's kind Egeria, will protect
The loyal patriot, and his schemes direct.
All do not hate the plain, nor fly the woods;
Fields have their lovers, and the groves their gods.
If Bolingbroke and Oxford, with a smile,
Reward the song, nor scorn the meaner style;
Each bleeding tree shall tell the shepherd's flame,
And in its wounds preserve the growing name.
Swains to transmitted pipes shall long succeed,
And sort with artful hand the unequal reed.
The birds on every bough will listening throng,
And noisy, strive to drown the envied song.
Echo to distant rocks shall waft the tale,
And reach with borrowed sounds the lowest vale;
While the glad lambs pursue the circling round,
Frisk wanton, and over grassy ridges bound.
Would Prior.
he again the better choice approve,
Who once of Henry sung, and Emma's love;
Would he (a grateful guest) to woods repair,
And private ease prefer to public care,
The nymphs would learn his song, their own forget,
And little fawns the moving tale repeat.
Peace from neglected pipes will wipe the dust,
When useless arms are doomed to cankering rust.
No dreaded sounds shall scare the finny race,
Or fright the Triton from his loved embrace.
The busy Naiads cleanse polluted floods,
And nymphs frequent the long-deserted woods.
The river-gods hug the declining urn;
All to their streams, or to their shades return.
When civil wars disturbed the Roman state,
And Brutus hastened on his juster fate;
While false-nam'd liberty, and doubtful claim,
Madded the world, and fanned Alecto's flame;
The swain was injured, and his song forgot,
And Tityrus only by his flocks was sought.
But when Octavius had the nations freed,
And every realm its rightful lord obeyed;
The God looked down on the neglected groves,
And deigned to hear of peace, and softer loves;
Fields and their owners were with leisure blessed,
And Mantua's shepherd had his wrongs redressed.
So first the mountain tops are touched with light,
And from the gloomy vales the swain invite;
While mists below, and intervening clouds,
Cast a deep dusk on all the frowning woods.
The shaded meadows view, with envy, round
The distant splendour of the rising ground;
But soon the spreading rays, expanded, move,
And, streaming like a deluge from above,
Sweep over the gladsome field, and dart through every grove.
By foreign wars intestine factions thrive,
The dam destroyed, the imps not long survive;
Tumultuous hurry an advantage gives
Both to the little, and the greater thieves.
A guilty act is in confusion hid,
When busy times a nicer search forbid;
So crafty fish, of clearer streams afraid,
Lie hid in eddies, which themselves have made.
Touched with the rose, the jetty beetle dies,
And from the spicy hills the vultur flies;
So baser souls abhor the sweets of peace,
Whose private gains by public loss increase.
When noisy storms deluge the dropping leaves,
The pensive lark retires, and silent grieves;
But chattering birds joy at the expected flood,
And with mixed clamours watch the teeming cloud;
For then (a grateful prey) the horned snail,
And worms, over moistened clouds, their folding bodies trail.
Designing men the public welfare hate,
Who cannot rise but on a ruined state.
Base souls will always keep their native stain,
And rooted passions will the ascendant gain.
The worm, when once become a spotted fly,
And, borne on gaudy wings, it mounts on high,
Unchanged admires the ordure, whence it sprung,
And feeds with pleasure on its native dung.
But steady patriots will just schemes pursue,
Nor fear the rage of the discarded few,
Who, prone to causeless change, unwearied strive,
Old crimes repeat, and baffled plots revive.
Eternal infamy rewards their pains,
And, though the flame is out, the stench remains.
What specious-colour'd fraud, or secret snare,
Can St. John's prudence 'scape, or Oxford's care?
Diseases often prove fatal, when concealed,
But ripened sores, if lanc'd, are soonest healed.
Slow Lentulus, and rash Cethegus join,
And with ambitious Catiline combine;
Wretches who, only in destruction skilled,
Try to pull down, what they could never build;
But, when intent to spring the sudden mine,
One Cicero can blast the base design.
So when black storms cast up the boiling deep,
And envious winds disturb the Triton's sleep;
The shepherd, who the watery conflict hears,
Shuddering at distance, for his pasture fears;
Thinks with himself, when will the tumult cease,
Or what kind power can warring floods appease?
But the ocean-gods, roused from their oozy beds,
The trident grasp, and nod their reedy heads;
The waves rebuked, fear to approach the shore,
And all is hushed, and winds are heard no more.
Peace guides her steps, as St. John leads the way,
And all her little Loves around him play:
When he arrived, France (the first time) confessed
Her court eclipsed by a politer guest;
Unwilling owned Britannia has her charms,
And is as strong in eloquence, as arms.
When St. John speaks, who would refuse to hear?
Mars smooths his brow, and Pallas drops her spear:
A thousand graces on his lips are hung,
And Suada sips her nectar from his tongue.
When wild suspicions cause distracting hate,
And party-clamours sway the warm debate;
Such eloquence the tumult overrules,
Like falling drops, it softens, and it cools;
It calms th'enrag'd, and draws the stubborn minds,
And to the unwilling breast a passage finds;
Nervous, yet smooth, the heart it gently steals,
Like wine it sparkles, but like oil it heals.
He with his country shares one common fate,
All St. John love, but who Britannia hate.
Kennet of late neglects his broken urn,
And St. John's absence all the Dryads mourn.
Not Gallus once in woods was so beloved,
Whose luckless flame the nymphs to pity moved.
Heaven has its chosen favorites, and on those,
With partial hand, its doubled gift bestows:
While common souls, like coarser stuffs laid by,
Are not prepared to take the brighter dye.
The kingly oaks engross the honey'd dews,
Whose viscous sweets the meaner shrubs refuse;
And every neighboring tree neglected grieves,
But willing spreads in vain its tasteless leaves.
St. John the woods, and breezy forest loves.
Where Nature's pride presuming art reproves.
New beauties show themselves to nearer views,
And themes untouched expect the skilful muse;
The vegetable worlds neglected lie,
And flowers ungather'd fall, and nameless die.
Thousands escape, hid in the pressing throng,
Unknown to Macer's, or to Cowley's song.
You, Psecas, know, in seedy labor skilled,
What various herbage fatten'd pastures yield,
And what unnumber'd kinds adorn the field,
Whose fading beauties pass without regard,
While every drooping herb upbraids the bard.
What learned song will Nature's care impart,
By what kind instinct, and unstudied art,
The numerous natives of the sheltering wood
Avoid their dangers, or procure their food?
What verse has told, how smaller rivals wage
Unequal war, and with the toad engage?
They, Argus-like, are set around with eyes,
And, hung on silken threads, the foe surprise;
Spit on the poisonous wretch more deadly bane,
Who, deeply-wounded, feels the raging pain.
Swift up her pendent womb Arachne climbs,
While he scarce trails along his tortured limbs;
But careful will the healing plantain find,
(Plantain to undeserving creatures kind)
Whose sovereign herb the venomed juice expels,
And now the bloated wretch with innate poison swells.
Or how the speckled snakes their prey surprise,
And with hot fennel rub their weaker eyes;
They, when the bloom of warmer spring begins,
Cast off, as worn-out clothes, their sloughy skins;
With early youth, returning vigor blessed,
Brandish the tongue, and raise the azure crest.
Ants prudent bite the ends of hoarded wheat,
Lest growing seeds their future hopes defeat;
And when they conscious scent the gathering rains,
Draw down their windy eggs, and pilfer'd grains;
With summer's toil, and ready viands fill
The deepest caverns of their puny hill;
There lie secure, and hug their treasured goods,
And, safe in labored cells, they mock the coming floods.
A thousand kinds unknown in forests breed,
And bite the leaves, and notch the growing weed;
Have each their several laws, and settled states,
And constant sympathies, and constant hates;
Their changing forms no artful verse describes,
Or how fierce war destroys the wandering tribes.
How prudent Nature feeds her various young,
Has been, if not untold, at least unsung.
To the insect-race the Muse her aid denies,
While prouder men the little ant despise.
But though the bulky kinds are easy known,
Yet Nature's skill is most in little shown;
Beside that man, by some kind demon taught,
Has secrets found, that were of old unsought.
Labourious wights have wondrous optics made,
Whose borrowed sight the curious searcher aid,
And show, what heaven to common view denies,
Strange puny shapes, unknown to vulgar eyes.
So shadowy forms, and sportive demons fly.
Wafted on winds, and not perceived when nigh;
Unseen they sweep along the grassy plains,
And scud unseen before the whistling swains.
But to those seers, in northern isles confined,
Inured to cold, and hardened by the wind,
The indulgent powers have given a second fight,
That kens the airy sylph, and wandering sprite.
No flitting elf the subtle eye escapes,
When wanton genii sport in antic shapes.
Men Nature, in her secret work, behold,
Untwist her fibers, and her coats unfold;
With pleasure trace the threads of stringy roots,
The various textures of the ripening fruits;
And animals, that careless live at ease,
To whom the leaves are worlds, the drops are seas.
If to the finished whole so little goes,
How small the parts that must the whole compose!
Matter is infinite, and still descends:
Man cannot know where lessening Nature ends.
The azure dye, which plums in autumn boast,
That handled fades, and at a touch is lost,
Of fairest show, is all a living heap;
And round their little world, the monsters creep.
Who would on color dote, or pleasing forms,
If beauty, when discovered, is but worms?
When the warm spring puts forth the opening bud,
The wakened insects find their ready food;
But when the summer-days dilate the gem,
Stretch out the leaves, and fix the growing stem,
They die unknown, and numerous kinds succeed,
That bask in flowers, or eat the ranker weed;
Wanton in sultry heat, and keep their place,
'Till autumn-fruits produce a different race.
But though a thousand themes invite the Muse,
Yet greater subjects will from mean excuse;
They claim the grateful song, whose prudent care
Has quenched the wasting flames of endless war.
Late civil rage alarmed the trembling woods,
And bursting sulphur scared the sylvan-gods.
War felled the trees, and spreading havoc made,
The nymphs could hardly find a sheltering shade.
Now, with less frightful sounds the fields are blessed,
The swains have leisure, and the land has rest.
Faction, that Hydra, is no longer feared,
Her heads are lopped, and all the wounds are seared:
When innovating schemes successless prove,
They do but fasten, what they would remove.
So restless winds would fly without restraint,
Sweep down the corn, and bend the growing plant;
But taller trees withstand their giddy haste,
And break the fury of the coming blast;
They angry tear the leaves, and blight the fruit,
But strengthen while they shake, and fix the spreading root.
Be still, ye aspin-boughs, nor restless scare,
With busy trembling leaves, the listening hare;
And cease, ye insects, who, to plants unkind,
Or gnaw the root, or bite the softer rind;
Silent attend, while I Britannia bless,
And sing the future joys of lasting peace.
Victoria long her fruitless labor mourned;
Without effect her annual work returned.
One blow to Caesar gave the destined throne;
Philippi made the Roman power his own.
Swift as a ray, shot from the rising sun,
Pella's immortal youth his Persia won.
But conquest now is stopped by every fort;
Bloodshed is cheap, and war becomes a sport;
In vain the captains fall, the heroes bleed;
Fresh victims to the sacrifice succeed.
So doubtful hills the wearied pilgrim sees,
And flattering prospects give a fancied ease;
Delusive hopes compel his fainting feet
To climb the ascent, and pass the steepy height:
That summit gained, far distant mountains rise,
Whose towering ridges meet the sorrowing eyes,
And, pain renewed, the wished for rest denies.
Ten years could Hector coming fate retard,
And from the insulting Greek his Ilium guard.
Yet waving heaps, as ancient ballads tell,
The doubtful ruins of old Troy conceal;
Now ten campaigns, and battles yearly won,
Transfer no kingdom, and no king dethrone.
But pitying Anna ends the fruitless toil,
Blood shall no more enrich Flanderian soil.
From her the injured States expect redress;
She, who maintained the war, must make the peace.
She gives the power, whatever side prevails,
Wherever the balance is, she holds the scales.
To her they all commit their common cause,
She sets their limits, and confirms their laws;
Portions divides, and gives to each his share,
The right of birth, or the reward of war.
All must the just impartial hand acquit,
And those who causeless murmur -- will submit.
So when the Almighty, with an awful nod,
Made the rude Chaos own a greater God,
The blended elements, that long had strove,
Would not so ready join in mutual love:
But, first, the purer parts their places took,
And subtle fire the meaner mass forsook:
The war continued with the baser kind,
While seas were loath to be by shores confined,
Or earth to have the lowest place assigned.
Anna has long enriched the powers allied,
Their want of treasure, and of troops supplied;
Yet they, as wronged, with awkward state complain,
Insatiate thirst! and would new empires gain.
So wanton children sport in careless play,
And slumbering lie, or toy the hours away;
Heedless they live, nor sweat for daily bread,
Yet cry, and murmur, if they are not fed.
The Belgic states forget their former moan,
But, swollen with bloated pride, and mighty grown,
New conquests seek, and deem the world their own.
Nor ravished seas, nor India's spicy plants,
Content their wishes, or suffice their wants.
So when fierce rains wash down the lessened hills,
And redden'd floods increase the swelling rills;
The swift united streams haste to the plain,
And swampy meads the gathering waters drain.
Each neighboring hill, and every rising mound,
Barrens itself to enrich the lower ground:
No moisture can suffice the insatiate weeds,
Cresses, and filmy rush, and flaggy reeds.
Sunk in their slime, the marshy vales below
Scorn those, to whom their herbs such rankness owe;
Their subject state they confident deny,
And lowest fens will call themselves the High;
Cease, ye unthinking hills, and strive no more
To swell the ungrateful bogs with a too lavish store.
The foreign realms, whom Anna's arms sustained,
Now boast of power, as they before complained,
So he, who basely tempts the virtuous dame,
In softer words conceals the guilty flame;
The trembling suppliant her resentment fears,
And adds to moving words more moving tears:
But if the fair refuse with juster pride,
And prudent scorn, what ought to be denied;
The ravisher confessed resumes the sword,
And rudely threatens, whom he once adored.
But none will long the offered peace refuse,
Lest what was conquered, they as certain lose.
In vain the hireling troops their courage boast,
Victoria sees not there her favorite host.
The German chief retired, nor could pursue
The well-laid schemes his warlike fancy drew.
Men cannot guess the events of future time,
Ambition is the growth of every clime;
None can the rise or fall of empires know,
Where power now ebbs, it may as sudden flow.
Gallia has often, and often has haughty Spain,
Indulged their hopes of universal reign,
And in revolving years may often again.
The Gods awhile seem to deserve no less,
And, smiling, flatter princes with success.
By wondrous turns the heavenly powers are known,
And baffled schemes superior guidance own.
Heaven has set bounds to every rising state,
And kingdoms have their barriers fixed by fate.
An infant will the Gallic prince succeed,
The sword is sheathed; no more the nations bleed.
That kingdom hardly can itself defend,
Where children reign, and factious lords contend.
Once Gallia's shore to Albion's cliffs was joined,
'Till seas grew rough, and Nereus was unkind;
Though lengthened wars may some distrust create,
And sow the spreading seeds of vulgar hate;
Again they may a stricter union prove,
And join in mutual aid, and mutual love.
Nor shall the British line ensurance need,
Or Belgic powers determine, who succeed.
For monarchy is heaven's peculiar care,
But foreign aid is worse than civil war.
The promised succor is an handle made,
And a pretended reason to invade;
When crafty Hengist with his Saxons came
To aid the isle, and fix the doubtful claim;
The easy Britains the false friend believed,
And with fond joy the hostile troops received:
But Druids, taught by Nymphs, repining sat,
And saw the coming ills, and knew Britannia's fate.
And now the British fleets in southern seas,
With spreading sails the wondering Nereids please:
In havens, erst unknown, they proudly ride,
While the glad Tritons force the lazy tide:
Tossed with fresh gales the wanton streamers flow,
Nor dread the storms above, nor rocks below:
The powers protect, who rule the restless sea,
And winds themselves their steerage will obey.
The Nymphs shall hide no more from human sight
But with their loveliest forms the bard invite:
Swift Fawns in open view shall scour the plains,
And be, as once, familiar with the swains:
The harmless elves, in every meadow seen,
Will dance at midday on the public green:
Pan, and the shepherd-youth shall loving sit
Beneath one tree, and sport in rustic wit;
In the same shade alternate songs repeat,
While Aegle helps the maid to press the streaming tear.
But now the huntsman takes his usual round,
While listening foxes hear the unwelcome sound;
And early peasants, who prevent the day,
May hither chance unweening guide their way;
For see -- the grayish edge of dawn appears,
Night her departure mourns in dewy tears.
The goblins vanish, and the Elfin queen
Foregoes the pleasures of the trampled green.
Nature's unwilling to be roused so soon,
And earth looks pale on the declining moon;
The nimble hours dress out the impatient sun,
While rising fogs, and whispering gales fore-run.
The bats, a doubtful kind, begin their sleep,
And to their cells the darkened glowworms creep;
The coming day, the conscious insects grieve,
And with slow haste the grateful herbage leave,
Wreathe over the grass, and the moist path pursue,
Streaking with viscous slime the shining dew;
In some close shade a friendly covert find,
And parent earth receives the reptile kind.
Guilt, and the day disturb the wily snakes,
And urchins hide their theft in thorny brakes.
All fly the sun, and seek a cool retreat,
Nor envy swarms, who joy in scorching heat."
She said, and sudden all the Elfin Fair
Vanished unseen, and mixed with trackless air.
But thou, O Wyndham, who did never disdain
The shepherd's gift, nor scorn the rural strain;
(Though to no pompous sound the ear inclines,
While the mean sense is propt by stronger lines)
Accept the sylvan song --
With pleasing look the fearful bard receive;
You bad him first the humble cottage leave;
Ready to praise, and willing to excuse,
You gave assurance to the bashful Muse.
How would I now describe a generous mind,
Improved by study, and by courts refined?
But you (ah! too resolved) will not allow
The verse to tell, what men already know;
Envy itself their conduct must approve,
Whom the prince honors, and the people love.
Though you, in this, unkind deny the bard
The only subject can his pains reward,
You cannot make the tuneful Dryads cease,
For Goddesses will sing of whom they please;
Long will the grateful woods your name repeat,
And Wyndham be the theme, when next the Dryads meet.
1713.
THE OAK AND DUNGHILL.
A FABLE.
Et vincere inglorium, et atteri sordidum, arbitrabatur.
TACITUS.
ON a fair mead a dunghill lay,
That rotting smoked, and stunk away;
To an excessive bigness grown,
By nightmen's labors on him thrown.
Ten thousand nettles from him sprung;
Who ever came but near was stung.
Nor ever failed he to produce
The baneful hemlock's deadly juice:
Such as of old at Athens grew,
When patriots thought it Phocion's due;
And for the man its poison pressed,
Whose merit shone above the rest.
Not far from hence, strong-rooted stood
A sturdy oak; itself a wood!
With friendly height, o'ertopt the grove,
And looked the favorite tree of Jove.
Beneath his hospitable shade,
The shepherds all at leisure played;
They feared no storms of hail, or rain;
His boughs protected all the plain:
Gave verdure to the grass around,
And beautified the neighboring ground.
The gracious landlord joy'd to see
The prosperous vigor of his tree;
And often sought, when in distress,
This oak's oracular redress:
Sprung from the famed Dodonian grove,
Which told to men the will of Jove.
His boughs he often with chaplets crowned,
With azure ribbons wreathed them round;
And there, in golden letters wrought,
" Ill to the man, who evil thought."
With envious rage, the dunghill viewed
Merit, with honor, thus pursued:
The injustice of the times he moan'd;
With inward jealousy he groaned.
A voice at length pierced through the smoke,
And thus, the patriot dunghill spoke:
" If a proud look forerun a fall,
And insolence for vengeance call;
Do thou not fear, insulting oak!
The just, the impending hatchet's stroke?
When all the farmers of the town,
Shall come, with joy, to pull thee down;
And wear thy leaves, all blithe, and gay,
Some happy Restoration Day:
For it is reserved to those good times,
To punish all thy matchless crimes.
Beyond the Alps, my mind now sees
The man, shall fell such traitor trees.
To heaven, it is true, thy branches grow;
But thy roots stretch to hell below.
Oh! that my utterance could keep pace
In cursing thee, and all thy race!
Thou plunderer! grown rich by crimes:
Thou Wolsey of these modern times!
Thou cursed Sejanus of the plain!
Thou slave, of a Tiberian reign!
Empson and Dudley! -- Star and garter! --
A Knez! -- a Menzicoff! -- a Tartar!"
The astonished farmers all around
Stood gaping, at the impetuous sound;
The dunghill in high triumph lay,
And swore the oak had naught to say.
His work was done; -- the farmers all
Might gather round, and see him fall.
No^ so the event -- the oak was seen
To flourish more, in fresher green.
By scandal unprovoked he stood;
And answered thus, the heap of mud:
" When Folly, Noise, and Slander rage,
And Calumny reforms the age;
They, in the wise no passions raise;
Their clamours turn to real praise.
Yet sure, hard-fated is the tree
Reduced to spatter dirt with thee.
Soon should a branch, from off my side,
Chastise thine insolence and pride,
Did not the wise obtain their ends,
As well from enemies as friends.
Thus, some increase thy heap receives,
Even from the falling of my leaves;
Which, like false friends, when dropped from me,
Assimilate, and turn to thee.
But be they thine: -- New seasons spread
New honors over my rising head."
1728.
THE THEORY OF TEARS;
A FRAGMENT.
BY WILLIAM STEVENSON, ESQUIRE.
Sunt lachrymae rerum --

TEars, which the bar-rang'd orators command,
Are tears of pleasure for the fee in hand;
The greater this, the more abundant those,
Rated by price, as wine by measure flows.
But wines a due hilarity impart,
Their tears add gladness to the heavy heart.
Grief, when sincere, by no vain proof appears,
Too vast for the parade of formal tears.
So, in the skies when deep-charg'd thunders brew,
No clouds descend in rain, or melt in dew.
On Tully's words when listening senates hung,
Charmed by the living magic of his tongue,
Few tears sufficed; for tears then learned to flow
Less at the call of lucre than of woe.
Once from the offered hand your fee withdraw,
That key which opes the cabinet of law;
Tears then no more shall their full sluices break,
Nor eyes amid the dew of rhetoric -- speak:
Thus, when the sky a gloom of vapors shrouds,
Thunders would mutter words through watery clouds.
Alike so far, each here the verse confines,
That both are empty marks, and passive signs;
These, from the touch of flames etherial rolled,
Those, from the no less subtle touch of gold.
This maxim then how much the truth beyond,
" Hearts must with eyes for ever correspond:"
Reverse the adage, and behold it true,
If you mankind through no false optics view.
The doctor's tears, if doctors weep at all,
That soon his patient will recover, fall.
Each salient vein, that vibrates still to health,
Beats in repugnance to the pulse of wealth.
Each sign, that to a happy crisis tends,
A tear resistless to its orbit sends.
But here the pointed satire fain would stop,
Joy too, like sorrow, boasts her pearly drop.
From fleecy clouds, on which the sunbeam plays,
Often falls the dew-shower interspersed with rays:
Let Candor then, who scorns the partial plan,
Sometimes mistake the doctor for a man.
" All hope is gone! see how the doctor cries,
" His tears, ah! speak in silence from his eyes!
" Good, tender man! -- But say, dear doctor, say,
" Is it too certain what your looks betray?
" Has Physic now no last resource to try?
" And must the sweet, the lovely patient -- die?
" But sure the dire disease, in luckless hour,
" Over youth and strength can scarcely boast the power;
" Not yet attained the fever's wonted height,
" To make our noonday hopes all set in night."
" No! heaven be praised!" with fervor-lifted eyes,
" My tears are tears of joy," the doctor cries;
" No more the fever's heats internal burn,
" No more deliriums, big with fate, return.
" Mix those few cordials, and your fears abate,
" Our patient's in a convalescent state."
Short triumph! his lank purse so empty felt,
Each eye would fain from other motives melt.
Now certain hopes health's kind prognostics give;
So soon cured patients, how shall doctors live?
Men must debauch, take fevers, faint and rave,
Few hopes attend them, and late periods save;
Their fatal snares must wine and women spread,
Or doctors go a begging for their bread.
But useless is the hint, if meant as such,
Mankind are sure too complaisant by much,
To suffer those, who kindly them preserve
From fell disease, and death itself, to starve.
Now to the pulpit turns the muse's eye,
There, happily, tears from proper fonts to spy;
For sure, if such us any where overtake,
Although withheld for friendship's pressing sake,
Though rarely found in rostrums; it must be
Where God descends, and mortals bend the knee.
Where tears sincere, in heaven's pure eye, disclose
A finer twinkle than the diamond shows.
Where all confess, a tale that still begins,
How much Religion suffers by their sins.
Religion! that sublime and gracious plan,
By which for angel we exchange the man.
But hold -- all honor to the sacred gown,
Though less revered the gem-encircled crown.
A scoff contemptuous here, or laugh of scorn,
Were Virtue to decry, celestial-born;
Were to defame the volume of the skies,
Which, penned by hand divine, expanded lies:
Far more, for devils act less monstrous parts,
Were to eraze God's image from our hearts:
Degrade the gown, religion, and the text,
You must, dread thought! dethrone Jehovah next.
The person from the office we divide,
To shun the stigma, or of guilt or pride;
Pride, that betrays a littleness of mind,
And guilt, indeed, of an enormous kind.
Tears, gushing forth, the parson's sight bedim,
His eyes, like stars in mists, uncertain swim;
Nor wonder tears his cautious lids beguile,
For oh! the melting pathos of his style!
Who can behold him, and refrain from tears,
None, but the marble-hearted wretch who -- hears.
His head, his heart, his eyes, all correspond,
Like mutual friends, of one another fond.
But, had he been from self-complacence freed,
His head, his heart, his eyes, had disagreed.
Not joy, but grief, in tears had then indulged,
Expressed her feelings, and her doubts divulged.
This vain parade of partial tears is shown,
Because the preacher's to himself unknown.
In big effusive consciousness they run,
For what his pen, not wicked heart, has done.
His pen's the sinner; nor less oddly true,
His pen's the generous expiator too.
Yet, stranger still! dry eyes had shown his sense,
Had he surpised his pen in one offense.
What could he, all awake to feeling, more,
Had he himself been faulty over and over?
For acting ill (who can in all excel?)
Sure heaven will pardon him for writing well.
His sins, indeed, are multiplied he owns,
As are his flock's, which hourly he bemoans;
But say, ye adepts, how things fit to call,
Has not his quill all-potent cancelled all?
But this, not nature's, but the preacher's law,
No tears can once but sacerdotal draw:
Hence, though the rapt self-conscious parson weeps,
No social tear a well-bred cadence keeps;
Or, if a courteous drop with his consents,
The cheek alone, but not the heart, relents:
They weep, because they see, but listen not,
Or, if they heard, the substance all forgot.
Thus women's eyes abundant use to flow,
Ask them the reason why? -- they do not know.
But shall coarse satire quite engross the page,
And through the numbers spend its gloomy rage?
No; let some gentle subject close the song,
To the soft passions softer strains belong.
The muse increasing ardors too may feel,
And kindle onward like a chariot-wheel.
But not, as chariots raise the dust around,
Truth to obscure, or reason to confound.
Tears are the eye's pellucid dews, that fall
At Pity's summons, or at Mercy's call;
Though ruthless eyes oft-times affect them too,
As stones themselves distill a breathing dew.
As springs to earth, all-gently they impart
A kindly genial softness to the heart.
Tears, when the mind enjoys unruffled ease,
For form-sake shed, or from desire to please,
Are like those rains through sunshine often sent down
From partial clouds, when nature wears no frown.
Tears are the special messengers akin
To oracles, on errands from within;
To tell mankind, beyond conjectures vain,
Those secrets friendship only can explain;
What active passions rise in tender strife,
What soft affections touch the springs of life.
Tears are the silent language of the heart,
That more, far more, than empty sounds impart:
By which it loves, o'erburden'd, to complain,
When words would but offend, or prove in vain.
Tears ease the soul in anguish and despair,
Leaving a sadly-pleasing languor there.
Thus close-pent clouds dissolve in hasty showers,
By which the thunder loses all its powers;
By which the sky, far as the view unfolds,
A temperature serene and softened holds.
Tears are the gentle streams that off convey
Those floods that would overwhelm us by delay;
The heart's big swell, much by misfortunes grieved,
That heaving soon would burst if not relieved.
Tears are the tender proofs of love sincere,
In silence shed, whence no reports take air:
Shed, as the tribute of congenial minds,
While each a more than vulgar transport finds.
False eyes, indeed, may weep, if fame divulge,
But true affection only can indulge.
Tears are the debt in pearly drops conveyed,
But more than pearls in price, to merit paid;
In which none act the base insolvent's part,
But those whom Nature formed without a heart.
Tears wait on vice, and often on virtue too,
As winter-clouds dissolve in summer-dew.
Tears, though the cheek a partial mark retain,
Wash out, if shed aright, a fouler stain;
Which, as it fainter and more faint appears,
Makes angels envy human-kind their tears.
Tears are the silent arguments to tell
That man's immortal, though at first he fell.
Immortal -- for he weeps for joy oft-times,
Free from the sting of recollected crimes.
And what can Nature's law thus counteract?
What thus sensation's springs reversed affect?
O! thought sublime! strong proofs inculcate hence,
How much inferior to the mind the sense;
Dissolved in tears, that feebly it reflects
Back to the soul what rapturous she expects.
As Cynthia, though in full-orb'd glory bright,
But faintly represents her parent light:
Thus men infer, the soul superior must
Exist apart, when dust returns to dust.
For if the body impotent withstands
Those transports she to infinite demands,
Reason dare promise her desires immense,
As virtue's long-expected recompense;
But when, or where, it is not for man to know,
That full enjoyment sense can never bestow;
When matter lives in various forms no more,
And all the farce of human life is over.
ON THE ILLNESS OF DR. TURNER, PRESIDENT OF C. C. C. OXFORD.
BY DR. BASIL KENNET.
HOW venerable Turner's silver hairs!
How comely vigor crowns him at his prayers!
With pleasing sanctity his wisdom shines,
Mellows each gift, and every grace refines.
Learned and well-bred his virtues easy sit,
Truth dwells with Love, and Candor tempers wit.
The prophets sons are honored with his choice,
Formed by his hand, and guided by his voice:
With reverence we our father's years explore,
Nor count them many, while we wish them more.
Born on accession to the Martyr's cause,
He sees the world at peace by Anna's laws:
For Peace and Anna scarce his vows he paid,
His next important health our joys allayed:
In the sweet calm a sudden storm appears,
And with our gratitude excites our fears.
Even I, by pining fevers melted down,
Struck with his danger, well forgot my own.
Each private loss is by his care supplied;
And Fate can only wound us through his side.
Yet thus, with sickness proved, new palms he gains,
His soul has raptures; while his body pains.
Often his learned charge is to his comfort brought,
And often his college rises to his thought.
More charms his conduct than his bounty yields,
He Is more a founder in the youth he builds.
So good Antonius placed his life's extreme,
(For classic sense may suit a Christian theme)
Looks over the faithful volume of his age,
Studies himself, and dwells on every page.
There Is not one day that clouds his blissful view,
One scene, but what he wishes to renew --
He most extends his life, who most employs,
And he lives twice, who his past life enjoys.
TO THE REV. MR. FITZGERALD, RECTOR OF WOTTON, SURRY, MDCCXXXV.
WHile you enjoy a calm and cool retreat,
Not vexed by autumn's wind, or summer's heat,
Entrenched within the bosom of the vale,
You catch the morning sun, or evening gale;
Then trip the verdant lawn, and pensive muse,
Or moralize within the gloom of yews:
'Till something starts to blame or to commend,
To please, surprise, and to instruct a friend.
The sands then lose their barrenness, for they
Produce a cheerful song, or moral lay.
The villa, garden, mountain, meadow, rill,
Rise all-spontaneous to the fertile quill;
Grow in your verse, and grow to fair renown;
While others property you make your own.
Forgive me, if the long-neglected lyre
I touch, to warble lays thy lines inspire:
If I the tender notes of friendship raise,
Yet greatly envy what I fondly praise.
As humble as thy heart I view thy vill,
Thy song as lofty as yon chalky hill.
I view thy mind, and, undeceived, can tell
How taste with true simplicity can dwell:
How the calm dictates of thy mind dispense
Mirth to reserve, and solitude to sense.
See the great world, see all its busy strife
Is but to wander through the maze of life:
Tired, from the down of Pleasure's pampered bed,
They rise, they yawn, are dressed, fatigued, and fed:
And, in the chase of one laborious day,
A thousand errands make, or visits pay.
Ask, for what all this bustle? They must own
They hate to think, and dread to be alone.
Ask old and young, the giddy girls and wives?
Frolick's the important business of their lives.
Soldiers, divines, the sprightly and the sad,
All must rush headlong, fashionably mad.
Paint thy own heart, thence draw the instructive plan
To teach the Christian how to mend the man.
You, placed in happier climes, can truly tell,
To live with pleasure is with Truth to dwell:
Where gay Content with healthy Temperance meets,
And Learning intermixes all its sweets;
Where friendship, elegance, and arts unite
To make the hours glide social, easy, bright:
There taste the converse of the purest mind,
Though mild, yet manly; and, though plain, refined;
There, through the moral world, expatiate wide;
Truth is thy end, and Evelyn is thy guide.
POEM ON A PIN.
BY MR. WOTY.
FOR once, ye critics, let the sportive Muse
Her fool's-cap wear, spite of the shaking head
Of stern-eyed Gravity -- for, though the Muse
To frolic be disposed, no song she chants
Immoral; nor one picture will she hold,
But Virtue may approve it with a smile.
Ye sylvan deities! awhile adieu!
Ye curling streams! whose banks are fringed with flowers,
Violet and hare-bell, or the king-cup bright,
Farewell! for I must leave your rich perfumes
To sing the Pin in ever-sounding lays:
But not that Pin, at whose circumference
Rotund, the strong-nerv'd rustic hurls the bowl
Ponderous and vast: nor that which window bars
From thief nocturnal: nor that other called
A skittle; chiefly found where alehouse snug
Invites mechanic to the flowing cup
Of Calvert's mild, o'er-canopied with froth.
No -- it is the Pin so much by ladies used;
Without whose aid, the nymph of nicest taste,
Of neatest mould, a slattern would appear.
Hail then, thou little useful instrument!
Though small, yet consequential. For by thee
Beauty sets off her charms, as at the glass
Lucy, or Phillis, best adapts thy point.
Without thy service would the ribband flaunt
Loose to the fanning gale, nor on the head
Of belle would stand her whimsical attire.
The kerchief from her neck of snow would fall
With freedom bold, and leave her bosom bare.
How would the sempstress trim thy want regret
As she her apron forms! And how the man of law, sagacious, with his spectacles
On nose reverted! frequent does he want
Thy prompt assistance, to connect his scraps
And notes obliterated over. Thee often
In alley, path, wide square, and open street,
The miser picks, as conscious of thy use;
With frugal hand, accompanied with brow
Of corrugated bent, he sticks thee safe,
Interior on his coat; then creeps along,
Well judging thy proportion to a groat.
Through all thy different storehouses to trace
Thy presence, either in the sculptured dome,
Or tenement clay-built, would ask a pen
With points almost as various as thy heads.
Wherever thou art, or in whatever form,
Magnificent in silver, or in brass,
Or wire more humble, nightly may thou lie
Safe on thy cushion'd bed, or kiss the locks
Of Chloe, sleeping on the pillow's down.
THE NEEDLE. A POETICAL ESSAY.
BY J.E.W.
INSCRIBED TO MR. WILLIAM WOTY.
CANTO I.
Rem acu tetigisti.
PLAUTUS.
WHile others sing of high imperial states,
Their jarring interests, or impending fates,
Terpsichore, do thou inspire my song,
To thee, gay Muse, delightful strains belong.
Accept, dear Woty, madrigals of glee,
I sing the needle -- and I sing to thee;
Nor thou refuse the incense which I bring,
Singing to thee, I shall the sweeter sing:
For thou delightest too in jocund themes,
Though every Muse has visited thy dreams;
But chief thou bathest in that silver wave
Where blithe Anacreon's Muse was wont to lave,
Where all-facetious Flaccus wont to sport,
Where Humor reigns, and Comus keeps his court.
But what shall I, a poor pretender, win?
Since all my sonnets are not worth thy The Pin, a poem written by mr. Woty.
See p. 63.
Pin.
The pole-enamour'd Needle pass we here,
By which the mariners are taught to steer:
Nor mean we now that death-denouncing The Needles.
straight,
Where often the merchant trembles for his freight;
The Spanish Needle, a new theme, we sing,
And to our friend the shining tribute bring.
Need we the process of its birth admire,
Or trace it from the tempered bars to wire?
How first the Rounder gives the graceful form,
Beneath the hammer while he keeps it warm;
Or how the Polisher, with smoothing file,
Bids the rich toy in silver luster smile:
Need we to sing the Pointer's curious art,
Which makes it keen as Cupid's fatal dart:
How next the Piercer's punching tools supply
The little Cyclops with a single eye,
'Midst of the forehead, where it takes in light,
And forms a pleasing visto to the sight:
Through this small sky-light (may we use that name?)
With spectacles often pores the ancient dame;
And when the casement plain appears to view,
Laboring to introduce the flaxen clue,
Raptured she smiles, if she the pass attain,
And reaps the pleasure, which she bought with pain.
So have I seen a Philomath explore
The windings of a problem over and over;
Turn it, and twist it round, a thousand ways,
Lost and bewildered in the endless maze,
'Till instantaneous, on a sudden thought,
Happy at last the great solution's caught;
With extacy, too high to be expressed,
The Eureka inspires his glowing breast;
Filled with the raptures of approaching fame,
To the New Almanac he sends his name,
Enjoys the bright discovery in his mind,
And ranks himself the foremost of mankind.
But leave we terms mechanic, since the muse
Now soars ambitious to sublimer views,
To lead the Needle to its worthiest plan,
Its ultimate design -- the use of man.
Its use imply we from its early want,
Ere Wisdom's voice could charm, or Art inchant;
Ere petticoats were made, or breeches worn,
To sew his fig leaves Adam used a thorn;
Sharp poignant emblem of each future bride,
To prove a thorn in every husband's side!
'Twas in the days of yore, when Time was young.
If we may credit bards, and ancient song,
Ere Solomon was seated on his throne,
Or ere the birth of Needlework was known,
That young Needilla, fair and chaste as snow,
Lived with her grandsire on the Needles were first made there, and discovered
from the Needle-fish.
banks of Po,
Beyond the river's mouth, where Ocean roars,
Whose briny wave salutes the sedgy shores,
Guiltless of love, unconscious of his fire,
She gathered shellfish for her helpless sire;
His sole support, and pillar of his age,
For him she frequent risk'd the billow's rage;
Spurred by parental duty -- lo! the tide,
Once furious, hemmed her in on every side,
This, Algaret, a fisherman, in view
Anxious beheld, and rowed his swift canoe,
Timely he snatched her from the dashing wave,
And clasped the prize, which he was doomed to save;
The lovely damsel from the deep he bore,
And after wedded on the friendly shore.
Three moons had scarce elapsed, to close their wane,
It chanced she spied her husband on the main;
'Twas on an evening mild, the sky serene,
Heaven shed its softest splendors on the scene,
Hushed every breeze, and every wave asleep,
Needilla risk'd her beauty on the deep,
With Algaret, to seek the scaly prey,
Perfidious winds! and more perfidious sea!
The sail was torn, their little vessel tossed
On barren rocks, far-distant from the coast,
When, in a moment, every wave subsides,
And leaves the prospect of the silver tides,
Long was the space to gain the distant shore,
Their cordage broke, and shattered every oar --
What can they helpless? -- lo! Needilla spies
A pointed shellfish, pierced with argent eyes,
A heap of sea-weed on the rocks was cast,
Which through the eyes with eager haste she past,
With these her ready fingers tacked the sail,
Which Algaret unfurled to catch the gale;
Safe they arrived -- hence, from Needilla's name,
The Needle-fish has filled the trump of fame:
Hence the The Venetians improved needles, and after them the Tyrians and
Sidonians.
Venetians took the hint to form
Needles of steel -- discovered from a storm!
Such is the work of chance, which often prevents
Our deepest projects, and our best intents;
Thus, since those days, has gravity been found
By a bare apple's dropping on the ground.
Art thus grop'd on, bewildered in the dark,
'Till from the flint of genius, like a spark,
Issued the Needle, with a newborn light,
And struck improvement's beam upon the sight.
CANTO II.
OLD Nature smiled to see this child of art
From her own womb, like some bright meteor, start:
Well-pleased she gave the seeds of flax to spread,
And hence the Needle's soft companion -- Thread:
A corresponding amity began,
And both were wedded by the care of man,
When long they lived in amorous friendship joined,
The Thread grew rotten, and the Needle blind!
For who can rule the uncertain chance of life?
So fares it in the end with man and wife!
Our froward dames are often out of joint,
And husbands, like the Needle, lose their point.
The Silkworm next her curious weft displayed,
And wrought her lines along the mulberry shade;
The Needle soon another mistress found,
A softer bride, more elegant and round,
Of firmer texture, and of glossier hue,
Needles, like men, are fond of all that is new:
For now the blade a libertine is grown,
Like man, his maker, quickly tired of one;
Yes! bigamy still tempts the lawless crowd,
But thank the laws, ye wives -- it is not allowed.
What! a third wife -- ay! tremble at the word
Ye former wives -- the Needle weds a third!
He weds the daughter of old Farmer Fleece,
Even such a dame as Jason brought from Greece;
A bride full coarse, and recreant to his love,
But once united -- supple as a glove --
Hairy, and rough, of Esau's rustic breed,
Who mocked her rivals of the worm, and weed;
For her the Needle must his size enlarge,
And the third wife still brings a heavy charge;
Her name was Lady Worsted, and she came
From Lady Wool -- a matron of high fame;
She boasted blood, and blood of tincture deep,
Descended from the lineage of a -- sheep.
And thus, while dear polygamy prevailed,
The Needle still with wind and current sailed;
Yet, like Sultanas, though they wooed their Turk,
Each wife was skilled, and constant to her work,
For joint, or separate, they maintained their vows,
And never left the drudgery to poor spouse;
Each had her own department -- Lady Silk
Decked the white glove, for hands as white as milk;
She claimed the mantua-making, as her trade,
Here Is was the jantee trolloppee and shade,
From the smirk lady to -- my lady's maid;
'Twas she set off the milliner so gay,
From humble satin to proud padesuay --
She trimmed the bonnet, and the flaming hat,
Proportioned to the face, or lean or fat.
Fair Lady Thread professed the sempstress' art;
In the fine shirt, or shift, she warmed the heart:
Sometimes she wantoned in the linen gown,
From Lady Bab to Dolly of the town,
While Gammar Worsted wrought the humbler stuff
Of various colors, for her work was rough.
Like these, did women lead industrious lives;
What halcyon-days were in the gift of wives?
Vain rovers then would envy what they hate,
And only fools reject the married state.
But here, my Muse, the homespun theme must change,
Over the sad field of elegy to range;
To sing the dire misfortune of the dame,
Who died a victim to the Needle's fame;
So home the puncture, that she bled to death,
And through some artery resigned her breath;
The industrious finger sudden felt the smart,
And quick conveyed it to her throbbing heart,
The crimson streams precipitately move
To guard their fort -- the citadel of love;
In vain -- for Death too close a siege had laid,
And took by storm the miserable maid --
Here draw the veil -- let fancy paint the rest,
And share that grief which cannot be expressed.
CANTO III.
TO man the sway of nations was assigned;
The Needle's empire fell to womankind,
Bright as her form, and taper as her waist,
Like her refined, and polished as her taste,
With eye of light, with poignant fancy crowned,
Keen as the Needle to impart the wound,
Like the sharp weapon, she, with pointed wit,
Can sting the heart of noble, or of cit,
With mazy clue, and Daedalean skill,
Can lead through winding labyrinths at will,
Arachne-like, within her nets can lie,
Quick to surprise the proud entangled fly.
Ye tailors, glovers, staymakers, beware!
Nor still usurp the province of the fair;
Ye sadlers too, ye male-embroiderers, yield
The Needle to the woman -- as her field;
It Is here is to bear this spear of softer war,
And here is to drive the Amazonian car.
When did a woman labor in the forge
To form the bolt for Jupiter -- or George?
Or when did Mars, or Vulcan intervene
To walk the paths of Beauty's Sovereign Queen?
Despise we not great Hercules, who bore
The female distaff on the Lydian shore.
And look we not with proud fastidious eyes
On Peleus' son, who wore the female guise.
With pain we read of Sampson, when he gave
His giant-strength to be a woman's slave:
These paid the forfeit for their want of pride,
And the three heroes for a woman died.
Emasculated man, be wise in time,
Or meet their fortunes, as you shared their crime.
Come, Woty, will thou deign to climb with me
Old Pindus' top? -- or shall I follow thee?
Thou take the lead, and, like Elisha, I
Will catch thy mantle to the Muse's sky:
Will thou, with me, the Needle's toil pursue,
And laugh at Mother Griffith's poor Review;
Come, leave law-quirks and precedents awhile,
For thy own native tongue -- the Muse's style:
Close by thy own Parnassus' shrubs we'll stray,
And from dull business steal one happy day:
But mark the Muse -- for she proceeds to sing
The Needle's labors on sublimer wing.
The sacred veil sequestered females chose,
And left the world for solitude's repose;
Here Eloisa mourned her Abelard,
While Love inspired the nun to be a bard;
'Twixt grace and nature struggling, soft desire
Prompted her tongue, and tuned her silver lyre;
Not Lesbian Sappho sung a sweeter strain,
Nor half so sweet does Philomel complain,
For Abelard had tutored her, when young,
In Wisdom's lore, and in the Muse's song;
So Ovid his Corinna did inspire
With love, with learning, and Apollo's lyre;
To fill the vacant intervals of time
Fair Eloise beguiled the hours with rhyme;
But rhyme not always, though its numbers charm,
Can sooth a lovesick bread with passion warm;
Her glowing fancy to the Needle flies,
And first, behold! the works of Nature rise;
Deep-read in sage philosophy, her hand
Bids a creation dawn at her command,
Here the bright sun emerges from a cloud,
There thickening mists his golden luster shroud,
At distance Cynthia shines amid her train,
In full-orb'd glory, through the heavenly plain;
His glowing car there Sol in Ocean laves,
And the horizon stoops to drink the waves;
And now the Needle to our earth descends,
Where the tall forest to the tempest bends,
Here valleys sink, and hoary mountains rise,
The lark, obsequious, in light either flies,
In liquid lapse a river winds below,
Here bleat the sheep, and there the oxen low;
Vision has ears, can see the torrent roar,
And ears can see the billows lash the shore:
Who has not heard the forked lightning fly,
Or seen the thunder crack along the sky?
In picture, fancy every organ sways,
We hear the painted shepherd tune his lays;
Such is the force of mimic art which draws,
Amphion-like, even quarries to her laws!
Painting and Poetry, twin-sisters, vie
Through fancy's ear, to charm the ravished eye.
Beneath the plastic hand of Eloise
The timorous aspin trembles at the breeze,
Clear flows the brook beneath the shining toy,
Which seems to work for Eloise with joy;
Here skuds the trout through shades of finest lawn,
There, over the velvet parks, the bounding fawn.
Here blooms a garden -- there a fountain flows,
Here the pale lilly weds the crimson rose;
Now twisted woodbines form a proud alcove,
Beneath whose arch she raised a shrine to Love,
Amid the graceful forms, which decked the shrine,
Large as the life, young Abelard, was thine;
And in the train of beauteous nymphs, which shone
Resplendent, Eloise had wrought her own;
She first in tap'stry, ere the curious loom
Taught trees to wave their tops, and flowers to bloom,
Gave the bold figures to the ravished sight,
Where shepherds sport, or warlike heroes fight;
Hence, emulous, the fair sequestered maid
Still guides the Needle through the rich brocade;
Or, when warm love is prevalent over grace,
Breathes her fond passion on a piece of lace;
For, ere the intermingling bobbins toiled,
The brighter needle all their glories foiled;
No supplemental patterns then were known,
For Love or Fancy was the guide alone;
In rich embroidery Cupid tipped his dart,
While sage Minerva dignified the art.
CANTO IV.
THUS, from the essays of a lovesick heart,
Mechlin and Brussels stole their mimic art;
Hence lace, with all its gay creation, rose,
Essential ornament of belles and beaux,
Ally of beauty -- supplement of sense,
And, next to snuff, the orator's defense;
Graced with this armor, if he wave his hand,
Say, what plain shirt his prowess can withstand?
Not half so strong the brilliant's shining aid,
When on the finger in full light displayed.
So when the flag of Britain waves on high,
And gives its streaming glories to the sky,
All other flags submit, and strike their pride
To the known empress of old ocean's tide.
Nor pass we here the knitting-needle's aid,
Once the delight of each industrious maid:
In days of yore, near Nottingham's fair town,
Ere the wove stocking to the leg was known,
Young Leius, a Cantab, of learned fame,
Sighed for Kinnetta with a virtuous flame,
With unavailing passion, long he strove
To win the icy virgin to his love;
In vain he sung, in vain he touched the lyre,
Or boasted sage Apollo as his sire,
Apollo's self, in vain, to Daphne proved
The high deserts, through which he fruitless loved,
Like her, Kinetta fled the amorous swain,
And he, like sage Apollo, wooed in vain;
Though often the laws of motion he explained,
And why velocity its end attained,
How the quick needles formed the oblong squares,
Or what proportion time to motion bears,
Why the diameter of calf, and small,
By due gradations, cause the threads to fall,
Or, why the seam behind was like the Line,
Parting each segment of the fair design.
Often on his knee, imploring, would he beg
To tell, why Italy was called the leg;
Or, why some sages held a fond dispute,
Affirming it was rather like -- a boot.
Deaf to his learning, on her work intent,
She sought the safe retreat of winding Trent,
Or often to Sherwood's forest bent her way,
And to her knitting sung the sprightly lay.
Enraged, his philosophic heart was turned
To proud disdain, and whom he loved, he scorned;
Within a wooden frame, by art divine,
Assisted by Apollo, and the Nine,
In order ranged a thousand needles shone,
A shuttle through the woof was taught to run
With expedition, thus divinely taught,
With disappointed love and passion fraught,
He first, the stocking wove within a loom,
Glorious discovery! in his peaceful room,
His peaceful room the future scene of war,
Whose arts ten thousand female hands debar
From honest bread -- so Thracian women tore
Harmonious Orpheus, in the days of yore.
With hasty step, full to Kinetta's eyes,
Just-finish'd, he displayed the newborn prize:
" Now, scornful maid, he cries, to wisdom's lore
" Dare to prefer thy Knitting Needles more;
" Thine and thy sister females arts, proud fair,
" For love despised, shall vanish into air;
" From an unhappy, but an injured maid,
" I learned the secret to destroy thy trade;
" I spied Arachne's web through optic glass,
" And saw where lines over lines transversely pass,
" Enraged like her, she taught me first to know
" The happy item of thine overthrow."
Stung to the heart, superior merit awed
Kinetta's mind, and Leius seemed a god,
The work stupendous in the frame appeared
Like magic, or as if divinely reared;
Now to Love's altar she submissive bowed,
Nor blushed to own the newborn flame aloud,
With softened look the blooming youth she eyed,
Her brow unarmed with supercilious pride,
Conscious he felt the sympathetic heat
Glow in his breast, and at his bosom beat.
" I know thee by myself, Oh nymph divine,
" I feel thy heart's warm passion kindle mine,"
Young Leius cried -- and clasped her to his arms,
Then from the town he bore her vanquished charms,
To Cambridge safe conveyed his happy prize,
Ere the dread females should tumultuous rise,
Too well he prophesied the dire event,
Lo! to his chamber, with a fell intent,
Forth rushed in haste the Amazonian bands,
Rage in their looks, and broomsticks in their hands;
First fell the victim of their ire, the loom,
And next the chamber met its fated doom,
Him too they sought for, author of their woe,
Fatidic Phoebus saved him from the blow,
He, with a beam of his all-seeing light,
Had warned young Leius to a sudden flight,
Else had they torn him piecemeal in their rage,
As Thracian dames once served the Orpheus.
vocal Sage.
Maugre their fury, Leius perseveres,
His labors flourished with his growing years;
Ten thousand looms the happy texture wove,
One reached the stars -- a monument of love!
A thousand shining needles, light arrayed,
Near See Poet. Call. Vol. 3. p. 101.
Granby's hat, effulgent, are displayed;
Hence mariners the well-known term assume,
Who cry -- how large the distant vessels loom!
Here, 'mid the heavens, the Loom shall ever shine,
A constellation sacred to the Nine!
And, when we see a star glide cross the skies,
Sage bards well know it is the shuttle flies;
And when pale streamers gild the midnight air,
These are the threads -- like Ariadne's hair.
CANTO V.
REsume we now the theme, historic Maid,
Where we digressive broke the homespun thread,
Though every Muse in episode delight,
Subject and episode are shade and light.
Ere the gay thimble claimed its later birth,
Ere gold and luxury had stained the earth,
Long had the taper finger felt the smart,
Sharp as the wound which thrills from Cupid's dart,
Whose arrows dipped in honey, and in gall,
With softer puncture Chloe's heart enthrall:
Various expedients were applied in vain,
To guard the fair-one from the stinging pain,
Thick leaves subsidiary were often bound
On folded paper, to prevent the wound,
Until the blue-eyed Maid's indulgent care,
Full often invoked, took pity on the fair,
She, from the regions of eternal day,
To Paphos on a visit winged her way.
The queen of beauty saw, with wondering eye,
Wisdom, bright regent, and her chariot, nigh,
When thus aside -- "What cause can Pallas move,
" That Prude divine, to grace the court of Love?
" Why this high honor from the imperial dame,
" Whose cold virginity defies our flame?"
She rung the bell -- a thousand Cupids hear,
A thousand Cupids at the porch appear,
Vying they seem to wage a sportive war,
Who first shall help the Goddess from her car.
" What favor can Minerva ask from Love?"
Said Venus to the head-sprung child of Jove,
" Since Wisdom solemnly disowns his sway,
" And rarely deigns to trifle time away."
" Oh! Goddess, you mistake, Minerva cried,
" Apollo's self the pleasing smart has tried,
" Fair Daphne's name in capitals he wears,
" The posy of the ring which binds his hairs;
" A sprig of laurel in his bosom too,
" For Love the power of Wisdom can subdue;
" But not for man Minerva sues your grace,
" I beg a favor for the female race;
" A boon, which Cupid and his Loves may grant,
" Your son never frowned upon a woman's want.
" The maids of industry, whom I protect,
" And next to wisdom's sons esteem my sect,
" Have long implored me to remove a pain
" From fingers wounded with a guiltless stain,
" Not reputation's wound, which few can bear,
" Is half so painful to my darling fair:
" An implement there is, a female toy,
" Sharp as the arrow of your one-eyed boy,
" With this the sisters of my art have led
" Long-time, with pleasing toil, the ductile thread,
" But pleasing toils are mingled still with pain,
" Such is the checkered lot of human gain --
" The useful toy, fallacious to its trust,
" Ost at the head has through the finger burst,
" Whence trickling ichor issues from the wound,
" Though guarded well with leaves, or paper round --
" This is the implement -- behold the head!
" From which the purest virgin blood is shed;
" I had, myself, to Mulciber applied,
" But toys, like these, are more to Love allied;
" Vulcan, on sight, would take it for a dart,
" And, seen, refer me to young Cupid's art:
" Therefore to Love I supplicate alone,
" And at his footstool beg the gracious boon,
" That, corresponding to the needle's head,
" A guard be formed, which should the finger wed,
" To shield the industrious fair from future harm."
To whom Love's Queen, with glowing friendship warm,
" Be thine to think how Venus to oblige,
" Who highly honors Wisdom's sovereign liege,
" Be here is to speak, and Venus shall attend
" To every mandate of her lovely friend."
Scarce had she spoke, when empty-quiver'd came
The potent God of every softer flame,
" Mama, he cried -- I Have emptied all my store,
" And now am come to forge ten thousand more.
" In Mecklenburg I Have lodged a golden dart,
" And left its fellow in Augusta's heart;
" And, laughing, ran away -- the last I shot,
" Not easily the sting will be forgot,
" Hymen shall celebrate their nuptials soon,
" Or else my bow and arrow's out of tune."
Here interrupted Love's imperial queen,
(For shy Minerva ran behind the skreen)
" Who do you think, you wanton, claims your power?
" No less than wisdom's Goddess, and this hour --
" This precious hour bright Wisdom claims your aid,
" Appear, Minerva, from behind yon shade;"
At sight of Wisdom Cupid scraped a bow,
Half smile, half frown, contending on his brow,
" My dear, Minerva cried, my dimpled boy,
" For what you told Mama, I give you joy,
" And honor you for those well-chosen darts
" Infix'd so wisely in two royal hearts,
" There may I safely with thy conquests join,
" Their heads belong to me -- their hearts be thine --
" I Am come to beg a boon -- you will not deny?
" It Is for your favorite women I apply;" --
She then produced the needle to his view,
Alas! the well-known instrument he knew.
" And what am I to do with this?" says Love,
" Is it a doughty thunderbolt of Jove,
" With which, when you first started from his brain,
" You sagely thought man's vices to restrain?"
He jesting spoke -- Minerva understood,
And, spite of wisdom, anger flushed her blood.
" Nay, be not angry, bright, sagacious dame,"
Sly Cupid cried -- "my Psyche has the same,
" Ten thousand of such toys my art has formed
" Long since -- when in my forge the steel I warmed;"
" No," -- smiling answered the all-sapient queen,
" I want a guard, or shield, to intervene,
" To save the finger from the poignant smart,
" No shield but mine, I know, can turn thy dart."
To whom young Cupid -- stifling here a laugh,
" You over-rate my wisdom, now, by half:
" Myriads of shields, adapted to the use,
" Long since for women did my skill produce;
" Thimbles you mean, well known to every maid,
" Long since my forges formed the bright parade,
" Wisdom not always knows what Love has done,
" Though bright Minerva mocks at Beauty's son,
" Secreted still be all her wiles from me,
" And Love's arcanas be concealed from thee,
" Just vengeance for Arachne's wretched doom!
" For Love now guides the needle and the loom;"
He laughed -- a thousand Loves the banter join,
Which half abash the Goddess, though divine,
Her car precipitate she mounts, and flies
To seek her own dominion in the skies;
Foiled by the God, to him she left the care
Of every toy, which decorates the fair;
And Love shall reign in spite of Wisdom's rules,
And Love shall prove her wisest sages -- fools.
FIRE, WATER, AND REPUTATION.
BY THE SAME.
NICE to the touch, as ermine chaste,
Sweet reputation soon is lost,
Before detraction's beam 'twill waste,
And prove us bankrupts to our cost.
How strictly then should prudence guard
This rich, invaluable gem?
Whence honor sprouts, the bright reward,
Full-blowing from so frail a stem.
To prove my moral staunch and true,
Three travelers once took the road,
Each had a separate point in view,
And each, no doubt, his own abode.
One was the element of Fire,
A right, choice spirit of the age,
The boon companion of desire,
And well adapted to engage.
Water, a smooth deceitful spark,
Walked with, him -- and you will say that is strange,
But, stranger, met in Noah's ark --
And any novelty for change.
The third was Reputation, sweet
As violet, or damask rose,
They talked of Britain's conquering fleet,
And who were friends, and who were foes.
At length three roads appeared in view,
Alas! the dearest friends must part;
A future commerce to renew,
They asked each other's trade, or art;
By what sure tokens each may find,
Upon enquiry, one another,
If, happily, each were so inclined,
On meeting, to salute his brother.
Warmest in converse, Fire began,
" My friends, I part with you in pain,
" By country, I Am an African,
" And, sometimes, traffic to New Spain.
" In Nature's works I range at large,
" A tyrant-master, unconfined;
" The servant's duty I discharge,
" When due restraints, compulsive, bind.
" I Am often produced from flint and steel;
" For smiths I heat the tempered bar,
" For cooks I dress the splendid meal,
" And roar, like thunder, in the war.
" In faction's voice I Am loud and high,
" In love, I kindle chaste desire,
" When smoke appears, suspect me nigh,
" Though frequently I prove false fire.
" From heaven Prometheus stole my ray,
" To man imparted as a gift,
" I Am gently lambent when I Am Gay,
" But keen, and brightest when I Am Swift.
" You cannot miss me by these marks,
" Such are the characters I bear,
" Like Beauty, I have many sparks,
" Most apt to catch, if tinder's near."
" My varied shape, a thousand ways,
" Says Water, may be soon mistook,
" When winter's freezing fetters glaze,
" It Is hard to know me in the brook.
" Changed in my nature, now in snows
" I fall -- now murmur in the rill,
" In hail or fleet, as Boreas blows,
" I drop -- and yet I Am Water still.
" I stand unmoved in stagnant pool,
" In crystal lakes have little motion,
" In baths I Am warm -- in fountains cool,
" Seldom at quiet in the Ocean.
" Whenever you spy the willow green,
" Believe my banks are very near;
" Or where the waving flag is seen,
" Suspect my Naiads to be there.
" I Am known to all by different names,
" Of high distinctions vainly fond,
" I Am called a river, in the Thames,
" In pleasure-gardens, I Am a pond.
" I Am salt, or sweet, in sea, or stream,
" I Am often muddy, often clear,
" And vary, like the poet's theme,
" As Dullness, or the Muse is near.
" You Will know me sirs -- by Adam's wines,
" My stages too are worth recounting,
" You Will find me at two constant signs,
" Well known -- the rainbow, and the fountain."
" Alas! sweet Reputation cries,
With folded hands, and candid air,
" Unlike you both in shape, or size,
" I Am sought with pain, and found with care.
" Ah me! if I but go astray,
" Or miss my path, on fairy-ground --
" If Reputation lose her way,
" It Is ten to one she is never found."
A DIALOGUE IN THE SENATE HOUSE AT CAMBRIDGE.
BY THE LATE NICH. HARDINGE, ESQUIRE.
STRANGER. WHose is this image?

BEADLE. Academic Glory.

S. Is she a maid or matron, Whig or Tory?
What quarry could produce so huge a block?
What engines heave her from her native rock?
What vehicle the ponderous marble bear?
Who bought her, who transformed, who placed her there?

B. Who placed her there! A mason.

S. Whose design
Contrived her statue's architecture?

B. Mine.

S. Who thus her pedestal with Latin graced?
Who taught her thus to speak in words unchaste?
" Come all, come all, partake my ample treasure,
" Who best deserve the palm!" Cuncti adsint, meritaeque expectent proemia
palmae.
Is that her pleasure?
Her youths invites she thus?

B. The line, they say,
Is borrowed, word for word, from Virgil's lay.
Poems I study not; I seek, I own,
Vitruvian art, Vitruvian style alone;
But to my Johnian friends I give due credit,
And they in Virgil or in Maro read it:
Virgil unchaste! Is yours a true translation?
You differ surely from the congregation!

S. The congregation, Sir! Did Alma Matter
A deity by solemn grace create her?
And place her opposite to George's view,
Fixed in the place to George the second due?

B. Some mysteries, from curious eyes concealed,
To clerks alone and churchmen are revealed.
Though Whigs and Wits her origin suspected,
And still enquire by whom she stands erected,
Faction to shake her base conspires in vain;
A Deity she is, and shall remain.
What though her brawny limbs, and stately size,
Taste, and virtu, and elegance despise,
To us her shape unzon'd, unclasp'd by boddice,
And more than virgin stride, declare the Goddess.

S. To Dian's image thus, with pomp arrayed,
Their ardent vows Ephesian zealots paid;
Though conscious whence the fusile ore was brought,
What craftsman's skill the ductile figure wrought,
The work divine, with transport they commended,
Which, as they feigned, from Jove himself descended.

B. What Glory was, why seek her sons to know?
See what alluring gifts she proffers now!
Caps to the learned, a mitre to the sleek
And white-glov'd chaplain, who forgets his Greek;
To heads, repose; to bards, Parnassian bays;
To all, or worthy or unworthy, praise.

S. What mean those types that lurk beneath her feet,
Emblems ill-hid by ignorant deceit?
What means that civic crown? Are these rewards
For sage divines, philosophers, and bards?

B. Nor smiles on these alone the Goddess; she,
Propitious queen! some boon reserves for me.
If Annesley's friend, Bishop Gooch, master of Caius college, was vice
chancellor when Dr. Bentley was degraded.
who learning's giant slew,
A convert deemed, preferred to honors new,
Laughs in his sleeves of lawn, and shakes his sides,
Eats, drinks, and marries, age and care derides,
Why may not I, by her caress inspired,
By jovial port, and just ambition fired,
Claim from her patroness an equal grace,
And for a Headship change the Beadle's mace?

S. Her gifts I envy not; but wonder more
So partially she deals her bounty's store;
Hardinge, whose merit friends and foes confessed,
By her repulse defeated, sinks oppressed. Mr. Hardinge, of King's college,
(author of this poem) had a dispute with the university about the
nonperformance of some divinity exercise.


B. So perish all, who insolently dare,
Snatched from our champion's crest, a plume to wear!
Our frantic foes, who, late with towering pride,
The Church, the Prince, and Rutherforth defied,
Now in luxurious ease supinely sleep,
Nor discipline retain, nor vigils keep:
We, in firm phalanx joined, a chosen few,
With scattered troops successful war renew;
Rise by defeat, and, from the victor's brow,
Steal the fresh garland of his Delphic bough,
Triumphal wreaths around our temples twine,
And consecrate our spoils at Glory's shrine.

S. But what if Granta, roused by honest shame,
Should happily wake, and vindicate her fame;
Precipitate this Demon from her throne,
And vengefully eject this load of stone!

B. Urged by unjust reproof, I shall unfold
A tale, perhaps not lawful to be told.
Her from the solid substance, vast and rude,
First into Fame a painful sculptor hewed;
Her head a trumpet, wings her shoulders bore,
This wrinkled robe thus channel'd then she wore;
Decked with fit attributes in front and rear,
Exposed to view, she charmed a gazing Duke of C -- s.
peer;
Who only disapproved her wings and trump,
And made some small objections to her rump.
These faults corrected, strait at C -- s reared,
Mixed in a grove of statues she appeared;
There Marlborough's form she lovingly beheld,
And, wreathed for him, a civic chaplet held:
But when, invoked by Cock's enchanting tone,
As at Amphion's call, each sculptured stone
Obsequious trembled at his hammer's sound,
And fled, so summoned, that unhappy ground,
A youth, Peter Burrel, esquire. of St. John's.
to Phoebus and the Muses dear,
To Granta's voice, who lent a filial ear;
For her a destined gift this idol bought,
And, pleased, to her his votive image brought:
Doubtful at first what Nymph's, what Heroine's
What Queen's was best adapted to the dame;
At length, by vote unanimous, we made her name,
A sovereign Goddess, and as such displayed her:
But fearing lest the Senate should disown,
As George's friends, his adversary's stone,
Inscribed with bits of verse, and scraps of prose,
(The verse at least is classical) we chose
To make and call her Academic Glory,
Still in disguise a queen, and still a Tory.

S. Approved the Senate this transfiguration,
Or licensed by decree the consecration?

B. Not by decree; but when malignant A gentleman of Queen's college.
W --,
Eager in hope, impatient of delay,
A dapper, pert, loquacious, busy elf,
More active for the public than himself,
Ran to and fro with anxious looks, and prated,
And moved that hence she might be soon translated,
Dissenting from their friends, a wise majority
Supported us, and her, by their authority:
And who shall now remove her from the scene,
Or dare to drive her from the Muses?

S. Keen. Vice chancellor in 1751. and bishop of Chester.

So when the father of his country fled,
By fear of tribunitial rage misled,
On exiled Cicero's devoted floor
Clodius uprais'd his Tanagraean whore:
The indignant Senate saw, with patriot eyes,
A harlot clothed in Liberty's disguise:
But, when again to Latian skies restored,
Her joy and guardian grateful Rome adored,
Their ancient seat, by her abode profaned,
His household gods with dignity regained.

WRITTEN AT CLARE HALL IN CAMBRIDGE, UPON OCCASION OF THE DEATH OF THE REV. DR.
CHARLES MORGAN, MASTER OF THAT COLLEGE, WHO DIED APRIL XX, MDCCXXXVI.
WHere free from sense, entrenched in earth no more,
The soul unbodied gains its native shore:
Where Truth's uncloying banquet, ever new,
Opens the depths of science to its view;
No longer on the verge it darkly strays,
But mystic Nature from within surveys;
Nor wants the telescopic glass to trace
God's power, and wisdom, through the boundless space;
Where doubts no more, nor mysteries confine
Its powers enlarged, its nature all divine, --
He Is gone -- and there erects his deathless head --
How vain our sorrows which lament him dead!
Where Clarke, Boil, Newton, -- each exalted mind --
Each, while on earth, who dignified their kind --
Immortal now, with full fruition blessed,
See Truth in native beauty stand confessed.
While some contemplative their charms admire,
The Good Supreme their rational desire:
Others, as erst, in sweetest converse join;
For purest friendship dwells in breasts divine:
Sudden, a venerable Shade is seen
Of mildest dignity, and front serene:
The august assembly rise -- See Clarke attend,
Joyful, to welcome first his much-loved friend:
Hail Thou! whose presence joys the sons of God,
Who, pious, have the paths of science trod.
Behold for Thee, on Newton's own right hand,
For Thee prepared, that throne of glory stand:
'Twas thine, exalted Genius! to disclaim,
With just contempt, the breath of mortal fame;
To nobler beings are thy praises known,
Where Truth and Newton worlds unnumber'd own.
THE MINISTER OF STATE.
A PANEGYRIC.
OCCASIONED BY READING A LATE POEM, ENTITLED, THE MINISTER OF STATE, A SATIRE.
BY P. P -- S.
" UNgrateful Rome!" -- the generous Scipio said,
And in retirement's shade concealed his head.
Ungrateful Britain! -- might the Patriot say,
Or, if he will not speak it, others may:
Say, will thy generous heart the Muse permit
Merit and Thee to sing, exalted Pit;
While, fired with honest rage, she sighs to see
Base Scandal dart her venomed tongue at thee?
She must; she dares the attempt, however new,
To give her warmest praise, where praise is due;
She burns -- indeed unfashionably fired,
She burns to praise the minister retired.
Here needs not fiction gild the face of truth,
Thy voice inspirited our generous youth,
That bad at once their glittering falchions glow,
And cast a dreadful gleam upon the foe.
Ere this Britannia hung her drooping head,
And inly mourned her ancient spirit fled,
Ere this how idly did her navies sweep,
In useless pageantry, the silent deep?
And, as they sailed along, the insulting foe
Smiled at the scene, and mocked the harmless show;
But when on thee the sovereign fixed his choice,
With joy reviving, Britons heard thy voice,
Winged at thy word the conquering navy flies,
And shouts of victory rend the echoing skies,
Fresh schemes of honor every bosom fill,
While Expectation holds Attention still;
The trembling French dread every deep-laid plan,
And, while they curse the foe, admire the man.
Ere this, see France, vain, insolent, and proud,
With hostile threats distress the timid crowd;
Fear seized each trembling breast, the alarm began,
Through every heart the mean infection ran;
To save that land they called a foreign friend,
Which Britons were unable to defend.
Days of disgrace! which call the scalding tear
Down the pale cheek, and wound the tingling ear;
Oh be the deed forgot! -- with honest rage
May history from her annals rend the page,
When thus no bosom seemed with ardor fired,
And Britain's courage -- only not expired!
Say, shade of Wolf, on that ensanguin'd plain,
Which ever shall thy memory retain,
Where, while thy bosom poured the purple tide,
Fair Victory stood weeping by thy side,
Glowed not thy heart with Pitt's august design,
('It Was his to form, to execute was thine)
That gave proud Gaul Britannia's strength to know,
Which fell with mighty ruin on the foe?
I see, I see the sacred shade advance,
Bright flash his lightning eyes, quick gleams his quivering lance,
How stern the Hero's awful form appears,
While these indignant accents pierce my ears:
" Youth, how lamented on these plains I fell,
" Let Britain's voice, that wept in triumph, tell;
" Let the same voice, which gratitude once fired,
" Speak the strong joy which patriot-worth inspired!
" But oh the change! -- If gratitude be dead,
" In vain the Patriot planned, the Hero bled; --
" No, not in vain: -- for benefits will last,
" However faction rage, or malice blast.
" Ungrateful land! if thus his godlike mind
" The mean return of tainted slander find,
" My generous ardor may have found the same,
" And courage may be sunk in folly's name;
" I bless, when such ingratitude I see,
" The death that snatched me from a land like thee."
He said; and vanished into empty air,
The sounds yet murmuring on the attentive ear:
Oh much-lamented Shade! though just thy rage,
While scandal taints the venal poet's page,
Yet grant a gracious smile, if one remains
Who pours his honest, though his humble strains,
To pay the important debt, though all unfit,
The debt of gratitude, to thee and Pit.
Thy heart, great George, with virtue's lore enlarged,
This generous debt of gratitude discharged;
Then sure the sons of slander must agree,
Who wound Pitt's merits, glance the dart at thee.
Who but remembers, (ah, who can forget?)
When faction's rage distressed the tottering state,
When discontent through every bosom spread,
And, torn by parties, Britain's vitals bled?
A hateful scene! -- the Patriot then arose,
At once the wounds of fell division close;
On Britain's shore fair Union took her stand,
And wide diffused her blessings over the land,
Ere scandal lay dispirited and dead,
And murmuring faction hid her horrid head:
Blessed days! -- O much-loved Britain still it is mine
To wish such halcyon days be ever thine!
Why need I paint the virtues of his heart,
Where rigid honor fills the largest part?
The virtues of his heart are not unknown --
These his disgusted enemies will own: --
And let not Falshood's voice my verse defame,
And stain fair Truth with Flattery's odious name;
When place and power obeyed the Statesman's will,
The generous Muse never tried her trembling quill;
For though each action heartfelt joy inspired,
Each action still in silence she admired.
And now no statesman's character I blast,
Nor blame the present, though applaud the past,
Exalted merit still to praise be mine,
******, to blast bright characters be Thine.
When rolling time has bid our passions cease,
And hateful faction shall be hushed to peace,
Then future ages shall his virtues know,
And wonder such a Statseman found a foe;
In honor's fane (a noble group!) shall sit
Immortal Tully, Walsingham, and Pit;
While History shall raise her trump on high,
And spread his praises round the vaulted sky,
Shall on her fairest page inscribe his name,
And give the roll to everlasting fame.
A JOURNEY TO DONCASTER, OR A CURIOUS JOURNAL OF FIVE DAYS, WROTE WITH A PENCIL
IN A CHAISE.
DEAR ANNE,
IN prose I Have wrote you many a journal
Of travels, which I hope you will burn all,
And now for once I write in rhyme
To tell you how I spend my time,
And what adventures may ensue
While I am hasting down to you.
On Sep. the second day I went
To London from my house in Kent;
And, as good luck would have it, found
A friend for shire of Ebor bound:
It proving temperate, pleasant weather,
We soon agreed to go together,
And for our ease, over turnpike-ways,
To travel down in my post-chaise.
By learned men it is agreed,
Poets should ride the winged steed;
And therefore, thus says Betty Martin,
" Thou art no poet, that is most certain."
Through Kentish-town, up Highgate-hill,
Our horses move -- against their will;
And, while they snuff the wholesome wind,
We cast a parting look behind,
Pleased to have left yon sable cloud,
That buries millions in its shroud;
Alas! they toil, the sons of care!
And never breathe the purer air.
Thy common, Finchley, next we measure,
Whose woodland views would give us pleasure,
But that they many a wretch exhibit,
Too near the high road, on a gibbet;
Hence men may guess, without much skill,
Here have been rogues -- and may be still.
High-Barnet passed, we reach the plain,
Where Warwick, haughty earl, was slain:
So perish all, as Warwick fell,
Who against their lawful liege rebel!
Ah! passing strange, that one sweet flower
Should kindle all the rage of power!
Yet England often has wail'd her woes,
And wept the colors of the rose.
With hungry appetites we hie on,
Where Hatfield shows the Silver Lion;
But, lo! nice steaks from rump of beef
Will soon afford us kind relief;
Of good old Port we drink a quart,
Discharge our reckoning, and depart.
Through sandy lanes, and deep defiles,
Where ray of Phoebus never smiles,
(Save on that beam-illumin'd dwelling,
Where Young delights the Muse at Welling)
We march as gently as we can,
And reach at Stevenage the Swan:
A well-fed pullet, roasted nice,
And of high-season'd ham a slice,
Of suppers could not prove the worst --
Warm negus gratified our thirst:
At ten the welcome down we pressed,
And wooed the kindly Power of rest. --
With early dawn we mount the chaise,
And Phoebus smiles in friendly rays:
Over finest turnpike-road we bowl,
The wheels, the numbers gently roll,
Speed swift to Baldock down the hill,
Where lived sweet Polly of the Mill,
But now the lovely Polly's gone,
Rival of Venus! -- so drive on.
Through villages, over plains we ride,
Where Ouze conducts his silver tide;
So slow his winding waters stray,
He seems to linger on his way,
As loath to leave the pleasing scene
Of woods, cornfieldsd, and pastures green:
Thus man, low-grovelling, like the river,
Would loiter in this life for ever;
So beautiful these scenes appear,
He thinks it better to be here,
Than try that country, from whose bourn
No pale-eyed travelers return.
At Eaton next, by twelve a clock,
We bait our horses at the Cock:
Then leave awhile the public road,
To take with friends a night's abode:
This visit comes in due succession,
And therefore deem it no digression.
Thence cross cornfieldsd our way explore,
Where chariots never went before;
Through rushy swamps, and bogs we past,
And came to The name of a small hamlet.
Beggary at last:
Even then we did not know our doom,
For worse misfortunes were to come:
Fain would we through the pastures ride;
Our entrance gates and locks denied:
Through that deep lane, where many a slough
Would spoil a horse, or hide a cow,
Pass on we must, if we intend
To pay our visit to a friend:
True friendship has a bias strong,
It drove us through the mire along,
Over banks and ridges, till, at last,
It fairly set the carriage fast --
What Is to be done? -- with might and main
We haul'd it on the land again:
At length, with fear and wild amaze,
We crawled through safely with the chaise;
Now on the precipice's edge,
Now bounc'd against a quickset hedge,
And, by a wondrous kind of fate,
By four arrived at P -- 's gate;
Whose entertainment, neat and kind,
Soon put these dangers out of mind:
With social friends we past the day,
And gaily laughed our cares away --
At six we march, but first provide,
To shun bad roads, a faithful guide;
And shortly, over the rising steep,
We saw the spire of Bugden peep:
At breakfast near an hour we waste,
'Twas coffee, grateful to the taste,
With dulcet cream, and nut-brown toast;
Then bid a Valeas to our host.
Over level roads we drive amain,
Roads as the well-roll'd terrace plain,
And soon reached Stilton safe and well --
We chose the inn that bears the Bell.
On mutton, charming food! we dine,
And cheer our hearts with generous wine;
But long, alas! we must not stay --
Life flies with rapid wing away;
It Is but a march that we must make;
It Is but a journey we must take:
Here we can fix no firm abode,
Nor loiter long upon the road;
But must, with vigilance, attend
Still to our journey, and its end.
At Stamford next, with spirits light,
The Bull receives us for the night;
Smelts and a rabbet was our food;
The bill was cheap, the wine was good.
Our wheels next morning early sound
Over rough, through truly Roman ground;
The immense Vestigia, still complete,
Prove that the Romans once were great:
By ten, at Grantham we admire
The noble church, the lofty spire;
Sarum's alone is two feet higher.
Here, what before I never had seen,
I saw fair Venus, Beauty's Queen;
Sweetly she smiled with graceful look,
In shape of Lady Mary C --.
Our breakfast done, in haste we went
To Newark on the banks of Trent;
There staid a little to regale
On cold roast-beef and humming ale.
Thence through a tedious, sandy way
We labored, and at Carlton lay:
With friends we drained the cheerful bowl,
And supt on mutton and broiled fowl,
And eels that gave us much content,
Delicious eels -- the eels of Trent.
Next morn through wretched roads we steer,
Yet pay at turnpikes devilish dear:
The purple heath we traversed over,
And stopped at Barnby on the Moor;
Thence into honest Yorkshire ventured,
Which first we at fair Bawtry entered:
By three to Doncaster we came,
A town polite, of ancient fame;
There will the Muse awhile unbend,
And there this tedious journal end,
Wrote, dearest Anne, at your commands,
And now it flies to kiss your hands.
Sep. 6, 1759.
SONNET.
BY THE LATE MR. EDWARDS.
TO THE REV. MR. LAWRY, PREBENDARY OF ROCHESTER.
LAwry, whose blissful lot has placed thee near
To Wisdom's house, where thou may rightly spell
Of the best means in virtue to excel,
Science, which never can be prized too dear;
Where thy Dr. Herring, archbishop of Canterbury.
great Patron, though in life severe,
Is candid and humane, in doing well
Constant and zealous, eager to repel
Evil by good, in word and deed sincere;
In this fair mirror see thy duty clear,
Practice enforcing what his precepts teach,
This great example study night and day;
If faithful thus thy Christian course thou steer,
Though such perfection thou should fail to reach,
The generous effort sure rewards will pay.
THE SENTIMENTS OF TRUTH; AN EPISTLE.
ADDRESSED TO THE SONS OF BRITAIN.
BY MR. P -- Y.
YE generous Britons, sons of fair renown,
With mute attention deign to lend an ear:
As late reclined beneath a spreading oak,
Musing intent on Albion's happy isle;
A sudden slumber gently sealed my eyes,
And wrapped my wearied limbs in soft repose;
Excursive Fancy winged her agile flight
Through the aerial mansions of the world;
Instant appeared, portray'd upon my mind,
The fair Urania, clad in candid robe;
And bright around; in beauteous order ranged,
A crowd of Britons rising to my view;
A gentle murmur, first, distinct was heard --
The Goddess waved her wand -- a pause ensued --
Silent in expectation now they sat,
When thus her sentiments she mildly spoke:
" Famed Albion's sons, whose rock-encircling coast,
" Emblem of virtues in your noble race,
" Repels each boisterous billow of the deep,
" And stands triumphant over the bounding main:
" You who, to vindicate your regal right,
" That right divine by every kingdom claimed,
" In dreadful thunder shook the distant poles,
" While trembling regions heard the horrid sound;
" Let not Contention, hell's destructive fiend,
" Excite commotion, and your peace destroy;
" Let not Ambition's vile, ignoble train,
" The grovelling arts of dark dissimulation,
" Pride, pique, or interest, ever delude your steps;
" But let benevolence your souls command,
" Your darling passion by your foes confessed.
" Can you, who brave repelled the insidious foe,
" And nobly humbled their imperious crest;
" Can you, so high-renown'd for martial deeds
" And fair emprise, to discord fall a prey?
" Instant renounce each stupor of the soul,
" And virtuous dare the famed Britannia's weal.
" Remember Rome, august, imperial Rome --
" She long in virtue's cause resplendent shone:
" Fragrant she bloomed, and flourished wondrous fair,
" Till pomp, vile luxury, corruption fell,
" And Hydra Faction, with malignant breath,
" Tumbled, with cumbrous fall, her eagle-head!
" This world's dread empress, renowned for learning;
" For arms, arts, virtuous deeds, without compeer.
" Now how inglorious! how supinely sunk!
" Fallen from her high estate, and grovelling in the dust.
" Since reason's lamp illuminates the mind,
" And cogent proves eternity to man;
" Since justice too, eternal, will require
" Strict retribution for offenses past;
" Serious reflect on God's supreme decrees,
" And learn obedience to his great commands:
" For what avail earth's pageant pomp and joys
" In that dread hour when death terrific comes, --
" The gaudy title, silken dalliance,
" And life too gaily spent, will but torment,
" Not calm the mind, in that tremendous moment!
" Let then your civil broils and discord cease;
" Enjoy the fruits of your well-earn'd renown;
" Cast off each vice, each poisonous dreg of life;
" Fly fell corruption, taint of generous minds,
" Lest her corroding hand your frame dissolve,
" And bury in the dust your ancient toil:
" But if, unheeded, exhortation pass,
" Britannia, now so famed, will sure imbibe
" A deeper stain than Afric's tawny sons!"
She said; then instant vanished into air,
When Morpheus soon his guardian post resigned,
And memory, faithful, stamped upon my mind
The sage instructions of the meek-eyed fair.
ON THE NUPTIALS OF LORD GRAY, AND LADY HARRIOT BENTINCK.
BY MRS. P -- Y.
HYmen (neglected God) this day appears
In blaze of glory, as in earlier years;
When innate worth alone the affections swayed,
Nor wealth the youth, nor pomp allured the maid;
Titles and grandeur, "trifles light as air,"
Were not essentials to the well-match'd pair;
But when indulgent heaven benignly joins
To title, virtues that even wealth refines;
When noble birth adorns a nobler heart,
Which joys the entrusted blessings to impart,
Copies the great Commander of the sky,
And wipes Affliction's tear from Virtue's eye?
How fair's the lot? -- we see, and wondering trace
These glowing virtues stamped on Stamford's race:
A bright compeer in worth and noble fame,
Hark! radiant Truth re-echoes Bentinck's name.
Auspicious morn! for ever gay appear,
Clad in the brightest livery of the year;
Joyful may circling hours thy ides relate,
Which saw united Gray and Bentinck's fate;
Long be their years, to grief and pain unknown,
And may each parent virtue be their own.
A NUPTIAL-CARD, SENT TO A YOUNG COUPLE ON THEIR WEDDING DAY, JULY XXIII,
MDCCLXIII.
BY THE SAME.
GLadly the call of friendship I obey,
And gratulating hail your nuptial day.
May life's small circle ever bright appear,
Fair as the morn that gives you all that is dear;
May tender friendship (guardian power of Love)
Attendant wait you, and each act approve;
Scan both your merits with a partial eye,
And, if a fault should rise, each pass it by:
Would you with joy still view your wedding day,
Not only both must love, but both obey.
HORACE, ODE XIV. BOOK II.
IMITATED BY JOHN, EARL OF CORK.
HOW swift, alas! the rolling years
Haste to devour their destined prey!
A moth each winged moment bears,
Which still in vain the stationers
From the dead authors sweep away;
And troops of canker-worms, with secret pride,
Through gay vermilion leaves, and gilded covers glide.
Great Bavius, should thy critic vein
Each day supply the teeming press,
Should thou of ink whole rivers drain,
Not one octavo shall remain,
To show thy learning and address:
Oblivion drags them to her silent cell,
Where brave king Arthur and his nobles dwell.
Authors of every size and name;
Knights, 'squires, and doctors of all colors,
From the pursuit of lasting fame,
Re-living, there a mansion claim:
Behold the fate of modern scholars!
Why will you then, with hope delusive led,
For various readings toil, which never will be read?
With silver clasp, and corner-plate,
You fortify the favorite book:
Fear not from worms or time your fate!
More cruel foes your works await:
The butler, with the impatient cook,
And pastry-nymphs, with trunk makers, combine
To ease the groaning shelves, and spoil the fair design.
HORACE, ODE XXX. BOOK I.
IMITATED IN THE PERSON OF GENERAL CH -- LL.
BY DR. BROXHOLM.
O Venus! Joy of men and gods,
Forsake, for once, thy blessed abodes,
And deign to visit my land;
Quit Paphos and the Cyprian isle,
On thy fond votary kindly smile,
And come to my Duck Island.
Thee, Goddess, thee, my prayers invoke,
To thee alone my altars smoke;
O treat me not with rigor:
Thy wanton son bring with thee too,
My dying embers to renew,
And give me back my vigor.
Bring, too, the Graces to my arms,
Girls that are prodigal of charms,
Of every favor lavish:
Yielding and melting let them be;
Consider, I am sixty-three,
And that is no age to ravish.
Let jocund Health attend thy train,
Much wanted by thy crazy swain;
And, gentle Venus, pr'y thee,
To crown thy gifts, and ease my pain,
(Since Ward has labored long in vain)
Let Mercury come with thee.
A SUBURBIAN PREACHMENT.
A Reverend doctor, preaching in the suburbs,
About whose debts arose some plaguey hubbubs,
Thus, for his text, these pleasing words let fall,
" Have patience with me, and I Will pay you all."
With joy-prick tears the rough Burroughnians stand,
And deemed the day of ballancing at hand:
On his first Head his reasons were so strong,
They sat with patience, though he preached so long:
" And now, says he, I come to "pay you all" --
" Great is your patience, and my merit small --
" TO abuse that noble virtue were a crime --
" So I Will defer it to -- another time."
TO THE MEMORY OF THE LATE DUKE OF BRIDGEWATER, MDCCXLVIII.
BY N. COTTON, M.D. OF ST. ALBAN'S.
PAtient to hear, and bounteous to bestow,
A mind that melted at another's woe;
Studious to act the self-approving part,
That midnight music of the honest heart;
These silent joys the illustrious youth possessed,
This cloudless sunshine of the unsullied breast:
From pride of peerage, and from folly free;
Life's early morn fair Virtue gave to thee.
The tear no longer stole from Sorrow's eye,
And Poverty rejoiced, when he was nigh;
Like Titus, knew the value of a day,
And Want went smiling from his gates away.
Titles and rank are borrowed from the throne:
Those honors, Egerton, were all thy own.
EPITAPH ON KING THEODORE BARON NEUHOFF, IN ST. ANN'S CHURCHYARD, WESTMINSTER.
Near this place is interred
Theodore, king of Corsica,
Who died in this parish, Dec. 11, 1756.
Immediately after
Leaving the King's Bench prison,
By the benefit of the act of insolvency:
In consequence of which
He resigned his kingdom of Corsica
For the use of his creditors.
THE grave, great teacher, to a level brings
Heroes and beggars, galley-slaves and kings;
But Theodore this moral learned, ere dead;
Fate poured its lessons on his living head,
Bestowed a kingdom, but denied him bread.
CONTENTS.
SEptember. An ode, Page 1 An autumnal ode, 3 Autumn. An ode, 5 Autumn. By
Brerewood, 7 On my hairs falling, 10 Evening ode, 11 Reflections on a watch, 12
Autumn, 13 The Fireside. By I. H. Brown, esquire. 14 The Dryads, or Wood-Nymphs,
17 The oak and dunghill. A fable, 47 The theory of tears, 51 On the illness of
Dr. Turner, 59 To the rev. Mr. Fitzgerald, 61 Poem on a pin, 63 The Needle. A
poetical essay, 65 Fire, water, and reputation, 88 Dialogue in the senate house
at Cambridge, 92 On the death of Dr. Morgan, 98 The minister of state, 100 A
journey to Doncaster, 105 Sonnet. By Mr. Edwards, 112 The sentiments of truth,
113 On the nuptials of lord Gray and lady Bentinck, 116 A nuptial-card, 117
Horace, ode xiv. book ii. imitated, 118 Horace, ode xxx. book i. ditto, 119 A
suburbian preachment, 121 To the memory of the duke of Bridgewater, 122 Epitaph
on Theodore king of Corsica, 123
END OF VOL. IX.

