THE POETICAL CALENDAR. VOL. XII. FOR DECEMBER.

THE POETICAL CALENDAR.

CONTAINING A COLLECTION Of scarce and valuable PIECES OF POETRY: With Variety
of ORIGINALS AND TRANSLATIONS, BY THE MOST EMIMENT HANDS.

Written and Selected By FRANCIS FAWKES, M.A. And WILLIAM WOTY.

IN TWELVE VOLUMES.

LONDON: Printed by DRYDEN LEACH; For J. COOTE, at the King's Arms, in
Paternoster Row. MDCCLXIII.

THE POETICAL CALENDAR.
DECEMBER.
LAst of the months, severest of them all,
Woe to the regions where thy terrors fall!
Hail to thy tempests, which the deep deform,
Thrice hail thy ruthless hurricane and storm!
Now Eolus, let forth thy mightiest blast,
By land to rock the spire, by sea the mast;
Let earth and ocean feel thy potent sway,
And give thy blasts their full impetuous way:
For lo! the fiery horses of the sun
Through the twelve Signs their rapid course have run,
Time, like a serpent, bites his forked tail,
And Winter on a Goat bestrides the gale;
Rough blows the north wind near Arcturus' star,
And sweeps, unrein'd, across the polar bar,
On the world's confines, where the sea-bears prowl,
And Greenland whales, like moving islands, roll:
There, through the skies, on brooms, are seen to ride,
The Lapland wizzard, and his hellish bride;
There, on a sledge, the rain-deer drives the swain
To meet his mistress on the frost-bound plain:
Have mercy, Winter! -- for we own thy power,
Thy flooding deluge, and thy drenching shower;
Yes -- we acknowledge what thy prowess can,
But oh! have pity on the toil of man!
And, though the floods thy adamantine chain
Submissive wear -- yet spare the treasured grain:
The peasants to thy mercy now resign
The infant seed -- their hope and future mine:
Not always Phoebus bends his vengeful bow,
Often in mid winter placid breezes blow,
Often tinctured with the bluest transmarine,
The fretted canopy of heaven is seen;
Girded with argent lamps, the full-orb'd moon
In mild December emulates the noon;
Though short the respite, if the sapphire blue
Stains the bright luster with an inky hue;
Then a black wreck of clouds is seen to fly,
In broken shatters, through the frighted sky:
But if fleet Eurus scour the vaulted plain,
Then all the stars propitious shine again;
Like Myra's face appears the vivid scene,
And, like her mind, free, open, and serene.
ODE TO WINTER.
BY A GENTLEMAN OF CAMBRIDGE.
FRom mountains of eternal snow,
And Zembla's dreary plains;
Where the bleak winds for ever blow,
And Frost for ever reigns,
Lo! Winter comes, in fogs arrayed,
With ice, and spangled dews;
To dews, and fogs, and storms be paid
The tribute of the Muse.
Each flowery carpet Nature spread
Is vanished from the eye;
Wherever unhappy lovers tread,
No Philomel is nigh.
(For well I ween her plaintive note,
Can soothing ease impart;
The little warblings of her throat
Relieve the wounded heart.)
No blushing rose unfolds its bloom,
No tender lillies blow,
To scent the air with rich perfume,
Or grace Lucinda's brow.
The indulgent Father who protects
The wretched and the poor;
With the same gracious care directs
The sparrow to our door.
Dark, scowling tempests rend the skies,
And clouds obscure the day;
His genial warmth the sun denies,
And sheds a fainter ray.
Yet blame we not the troubled air,
Or seek defects to find;
For Power Omnipotent is there,
And 'walks upon the wind.'
Hail! every pair' whom love unites
In wedlock's pleasing ties;
That endless source of pure delights,
That blessing to the wise!
Though yon pale orb no warmth bestows,
And storms united meet,
The flame of love and friendship glows
With unextinguish'd heat.
TO WINTER.
BY MR. WOTY.
WHat! though thou come in sable mantle clad,
Yet, Winter! art thou welcome to my eye:
Thee here I hail, though terrors round thee wait,
And winds tempestuous howl along the sky.
But shall I then so soon forget the days
When Ceres led me through her wheaten mines!
When Autumn plucked me, with his tawny hand,
Empurpled clusters from ambrosial vines!
So soon forget, when up the yielding pole
I saw ascend the silver-bearded hop!
When Summer, waving high her crown of hay,
Poured over the mead her odoriferous crop!
I must forget them -- and thee too, O Spring!
Though many a chaplet thou have weaved for me:
For, now prepared to quit the enchanting scenes,
Cold, weeping Winter! I come all to thee.
Hail to thy rolling clouds, and rapid storms!
Though they deform fair Nature's lovely face:
Hail to thy winds, that sweep along the earth!
Though trees they root up from their solid base.
How sicklied over is the face of things!
Where is the spice-kiss of the southern gale!
Where the wild rose, that smiled upon the thorn,
The mountain flower, and lilly of the vale!
How gloomy it is to cast the eye around,
And view the trees disrobed of every leaf,
The velvet path grown rough with clotting showers,
And every field deprived of every sheaf!
How far more gloomy over the rain-beat heath,
Alone to travel in the dead of night!
No twinkling star to gild the arch of heaven,
No moon to lend her temporary light:
To see the lightning spread its ample sheet,
Discern the wild waste through its liquid fire,
To hear the thunder rend the troubled air,
As time itself and nature would expire:
And yet, O Winter! has thy poet seen
Thy face as smooth, and placid as the Spring,
Has felt, with comfort felt, the beam of heaven,
And heard thy valleys and thy woodlands ring.
What time the sun with burnished locks arose,
The long lost charms of nature to renew,
When pearls of ice bedecked the grassy turf,
And tree-tops floated in the silver dew.
Father of heaven and earth! this change is thine:
By thee the Seasons in gradation roll,
Thou great omniscient Ruler of the world!
Thou Alpha and Omega of the whole!
Here humbly bow we down our heads to thee!
It Is ours the voice of gratitude to raise,
Thine to diffuse thy blessings over the land;
Thine to receive the incense of our praise.
Pure if it rises from the conscious heart,
With thee for ever does the symbol live:
Though small for all thy love is man's return,
Thou ask'st no more, than he has power to give.
ON THE FIFTH OF DECEMBER, BEING THE BIRTHDAY OF A BEAUTIFUL YOUNG LADY.
HAil! eldest of the monthly train,
Sire of the winter drear,
December, in whose iron reign
Expires the checkered year!
Hush all the blustering blasts that blow,
And, proudly plumed in silver snow,
Smile gladly on this blessed of days:
The liveried clouds shall on thee wait,
And Phoebus shine in all his state
With more than summer rays.
Though jocund June may justly boast
Long days and happy hours,
Though August be Pomona's host,
And May be crowned with flowers;
Tell June, his fire and crimson dies
By Harriot's blush, and Harriot's eyes,
Eclipsed and vanquished, fade away:
Tell August, thou can let him see
A richer, riper fruit than he,
A sweeter flower than May.
DEATH. A POEM.
BY THE LATE CHARLES EMILY, ESQUIRE.
THE festive roar of laughter, the warm glow
Of brisk-eyed joy, and friendship's genial bowl,
Wit's seasoned converse, and the liberal flow
Of unsuspicious youth, profuse of soul,
Delight not ever; from the boisterous scene
Of riot far, and Comus' wild uproar,
From folly's crowd, whose vacant brow serene
Was never knit to wisdom's frowning lore,
Permit me, ye time-hallow'd domes, ye piles
Of rude magnificence, your solemn rest,
Amid your fretted vaults and lengthening isles
Lonely to wander; no unholy guest,
That means to break, with sacrilegious tread,
The marble slumbers of your monumented dead.
Permit me with sad musings, that inspire
Unlabored numbers apt, your silence drear
Blameless to wake, and with the Orphean lyre
Fitly attemper'd, sooth the merciless ear
Of Hades, and stern Death, whose iron sway
Great Nature owns through all her wide domain;
All that with oary fin cleave their smooth way
Through the green bosom of the spawny main,
And those that to the streaming either spread,
In many a wheeling glide, their feathery sail;
And those that creep, and those that statelier tread,
That roam over forest, hill, or browsed dale;
The victims each of ruthless fate must fall;
Even God's own image, man, high paramount of all.
And ye, the young, the giddy, and the gay,
That startle from the sleepful lid of light
The curtain'd rest, and with the dissonant bray
Of Bacchus, and loud Jollity, affright
Yon radiant goddess, that now shoots among
Those many window'd isles her glimmering beam;
Know, that or ever its starr'd career along
Thrice shall have rolled her silvery-wheeled team,
Some parent breast may heave the answering sigh,
To the slow pauses of the funeral knell;
Even now black Atropos, with scouling eye,
Roars in the laugh, and revels over the bowl,
Even now in rosy-crowned pleasure's wreath
Entwines in adder folds all-unsuspected Death.
Know, on the stealing wing of time shall flee
Some few, some short-lived years; and all is past;
A future bard these awful domes may see,
Muse over the present age as I the last;
Who mouldering in the grave, yet once like you
The various maze of life were seen to tread,
Each bent their own peculiar to pursue,
As custom urged, or wilful nature led;
Mixed with the various crowds inglorious clay,
The nobler virtues undistinguished lie;
No more to melt with beauty's heaven-born ray,
No more to wet compassion's tearful eye,
Catch from the poet raptures not their own,
And feel the thrilling melody of sweet renown.
Where is the master-hand, whose semblant art
Chissel'd the marble into life, or taught
From the well-pencill'd portraiture to start
The nerve that beat with soul, the brow that thought!
Cold are the fingers that in stone-fixt trance
The mute attention rivetting, to the lyre
Struck language: dimmed the poet's quick-eyed glance,
All in wild raptures flashing heaven's own fire*
Shrunk is the sinew'd energy, that strung
The warrior arm: where sleeps the patriot breast
Whilom that heaved impassioned! Where the tongue
That lanc'd its lightning over the towering crest
Of sceptered Insolence, and overthrew
Giant Oppression, leagued with all her earth-born crew!
These now are past; long, long, ye fleeting years
Pursue, with glory winged, your fated way,
Ere from the womb of time unwelcome peers
The dawn of that inevitable day,
When wrapped in shrouded clay their warmest friend
The widowed virtues shall again deplore,
When over his urn in pious grief shall bend
His Britain, and bewail one Patriot more;
For soon must Thou, too soon! who spread'st abroad
Thy beaming emanations unconfined,
Doomed, like some better angel sent of God,
To scatter blessings over humankind,
Thou too must fall, O Pit! to shine no more,
And tread these deathful paths, a Faulkland trod before.
Fast to the driving winds the marshalled clouds
Sweep discontinuous over the etherial plain;
Another still upon another crowds,
All hastenihg downward to their native main.
Thus passes over through varied life's career
Man's fleeting age; the Seasons as they fly
Snatch from us in their course, year after year,
Some sweet connection, some endearing tie.
The parent ever-honour'd, ever-dear,
Claims from the filial breast the pious sigh;
A brother's urn demands the kindred tear;
And gentle sorrows gush from friendship's eye.
Today we frolic in the rosy bloom
Of jocund youth -- The morrow knells us to the tomb.
Who knows how soon in this sepulchral spot,
Shall heaven to me the drear abode assign!
How soon the past irrevocable lot
Of these, that rest beneath me, shall be mine!
Happily, when Zephyr to thy native bourn
Shall waft thee over the stormed Hibernian wave,
Thy gentle breast, my Tavistock, shall mourn
To find me sleeping in the senseless grave.
No more the social leisure to divide,
In the sweet intercourse of soul and soul,
Blithe or of graver brow; no more to chide
The lingering years impatient as they roll,
Till all thy cultured virtues shall display,
Full-blossom'd, their bright honors to the gazing day.
Ah dearest youth! these vows perhaps unheard,
The rude wind scatters over the billowy main;
These prayers at friendship's holy shrine preferred
May rise to grasp their father's knees in vain.
Soon, soon may nod the sad funereal plume
With solemn horror over thy timeless hearse,
And I survive to grave upon thy tomb
The mournful tribute of memorial verse. --
That leave to Heaven's decision -- Be it thine,
Higher than yet a parent's wishes flew,
To soar in bright pre-eminence, and shine
With self-earn'd honors, eager to pursue
Where glory, with her clear unsullied rays,
The well-born spirit lights to deeds of mightiest praise.
It Was she thy god-like Russell's bosom steeled
With confidence untamed, in his last breath
Stern-smiling. She, with calm composure, held
The patriot axe of Sidney, edged with death.
Smit with the warmth of her impulsive flame,
Wolfe's gallant virtue flies to worlds a-far,
Emulous to pluck fresh wreaths of well-earn'd fame
From the grim frowning brow of laurell'd war.
'Twas she, that on the morn of direful birth,
Bared thy young bosom to the fatal blow,
Lamented Armytage! -- the bleeding youth! --
O bathe him in the pearly caves below,
Ye Nereids: and ye Nymphs of Camus hoar,
Weep -- for ye often have seen him on your haunted shore.
Better to die with glory, than recline
On the soft lap of ignominious peace,
Than yawn out the dull droning life supine
In Monkish apathy and Gowned ease.
Better employed in honor's bright career
The least division on the dial's round,
Than thrice to compass Saturn's livelong year,
Grown old in sloth, the burden of the ground;
Than tug with sweating toil the slavish oar
Of unredeem'd affliction, and sustain
The feverous rage of fierce diseases sore
Unnumber'd, that in sympathetic chain
Hang ever through the sick circumfluous air,
All from the drizzly verge of yonder star-girt sphere.
Thick in the many-beaten road of life,
A thousand maladies are posted round,
With wretched man to wage eternal strife
Unseen, like ambush'd Indians, till they wound.
There the swollen Hydrops stands, the watery Rheum,
The northern Scurvy, blotch with leperous scale;
And moping ever in the cloistered gloom
Of learned sloth, the bookish Asthma pale:
And the shunned hag unsightly, that ordained
On Europe's sons to wreak the faithless sword
Of Cortez, with the blood of millions stained,
Over dog-eyed Lust the torturing scourge abhorred
Shakes threatening; since the while she winged her flight
From Amazon's broad wave, and Andes' snow-clad height.
Where the wan daughter of the yellow year
The chattering Ague chill, the writhing Stone,
And he of ghastly feature, on whose ear
Unheeded croaks the death-bird's warning moan,
Marasmus; knotty Gout; and the dead life
Of nerveless Palsy; there on purpose fell
Dark brooding, whets his interdicted knife
Grim Suicide, the damned fiend of hell.
There too is the stunned Apoplexy pight Placed.
,
The bloated child of gorged Intemperance foul;
Self-wasting Melancholy, black as night
Lowering, and foaming fierce with hideous howl
The dog Hydrophoby, and near allied
Scared Madness, with her moon-struck eye balls staring wide.
There, stretched One huge, beneath the rocky mine, Alluding to the earthquake
at Lisbon.

With boiling sulphur fraught, and smouldering fires;
He, the dread delegate of wrath divine,
Ever while that stood over Taio's hundred spires
Vindictive; thrice he waved the earth-shaking wand,
Powerful as that the Son of Amron bore,
And thrice he raised, and thrice he checked his hand.
He struck the rocking ground, with thunderous roar
Yawn'd; here from street to street hurries, and there
Now runs, now stops, then shrieks and scours amain,
Staring Distraction; many a palace fair,
With millions sinks ingulpht, and pillar'd fane;
Old Ocean's farthest waves confessed the shock;
Even Albion trembled conscious on his steadfast rock.
The meagre Famine there, and drunk with blood
Stern War; and the loathed monster, whom of yore
The slimy Naiad of the Memphian flood
Engendering, to the bright-hair'd Phoebus bore,
Foul Pestilence, that on the wide stretched wings
Of commerce speeds from Cairo's swarthy bay
His westering flight, and through the sick air flings
Spotted Contagion; at heels Dismay
And Desolation urge their fire-wheel'd yoke
Terrible; as long of old, when from the height
Of Paran came unwrath'd the Mightiest, shook
Earth's firm fixed base tottering; through the black night
Glanced the flashed lightnings: heaven's rent roof abroad
Thundered; and universal Nature felt its God.
Who on that scene of terror, on that hour
Of roused indignation, shall withstand
The Almighty, when he meditates to shower
The bursting vengeance over a guilty land!
Can thou, secure in reason's vaunted pride,
Tongue-doughty miscreant, who but now did gore
With more than Hebrew rage the innocent side
Of agonizing mercy, bleeding sore,
Can thou confront, with steadfast eye unawed,
The sworded Judgment stalking far and near?
Well may thou tremble, when an injured God
Disclaims thee -- guilt is ever quick of fear --
Loud whirlwinds howl in Zephyr's softest breath;
And every glancing meteor glares imagined death.
The good alone are fearless -- they alone,
Firm and collected in their virtue, brave
The wreck of worlds, and look unshrinking down
On the dread yawnings of the ravenous grave:
Thrice happy! who the blameless road along
Of honest praise has reached the vale of death;
Around him, like ministrant Cherubs, throng
His Better Actions; to the parting breath
Singing their blessed requiems: he the while,
Gently reposing on some friendly breast,
Breaths out his benizons; then, with a smile
Of soft complacence, lays him down to rest,
Calm as the slumbering infant: from the goal
Free and unbounded flies the disembodied soul.
Whether some delegated charge below,
Some much-loved friend its hovering care may claim,
Whether it homeward soars, again to know
That long forgotten country whence it came;
Conjecture ever, the misfeatur'd child
Of lettered arrogance, delights to run
Through speculation's puzzling mazes wild,
And all to end at last where it begun.
Fain would we trace, with reason's erring clue,
The darksome paths of destiny aright;
In vain; the task were easier to pursue
The trackless wheeling of the swallow's flight.
From mortal ken himself the Almighty shrouds
Pavilion'd in thick night, and circumambient clouds.
THE DAY OF JUDGMENT.
A CAMBRIDGE PRIZE POEM IN MDCCLVII.
BY R. GLYNN, M.D.
THY justice, heavenly King, and that great day,
When virtue, long abandoned and forlorn,
Shall raise her pensive head; and vice, that erst
Ranged unreprov'd and free, shall sink appalled;
I sing adventurous. -- But what eye can pierce
The vast immeasurable realms of space,
Over which Messiah drives his flaming car
To that bright region, where enthroned He sits,
Firstborn of heaven, to judge assembled worlds,
Clothed in celestial radiance! Can the Muse,
Her feeble wing all damp with earthly dew,
Soar to that bright empyreal, where, around,
Myriads of angels, God's perpetual choir,
Hymn hallelujahs; and, in concert loud,
Chant songs of triumph to their Maker's praise? --
Yet will I strive to sing, albeit unused
To tread poetic soil. What though the wiles
Of Fancy me enchanted never could lure
To rove over fairy lands; to swim the streams
That through her valleys weave their mazy way,
Or climb her mountain tops; yet will I raise
My feeble voice, to tell what harmony
(Sweet as the music of the rolling spheres)
Attunes the moral world: that virtue still
May hope her promised crown; that vice may dread
Vengeance, though late; that reasoning pride may own
Just, though unsearchable, the ways of heaven.
Skeptic! whoever thou art, who say the soul,
That particle divine, which God's own breath
Inspired into the mortal mass, shall rest
Annihilate, till duration has unroll'd
Her never-ending line; tell, if thou know,
Why every nation, every clime, though all
In laws, in rites, in manners disagree,
With one content expect another world,
Where wickedness shall weep? why Paynim bards
Fabled Elysian plains; Tartarean lakes,
Styx and Cocytos? tell, why Hali's sons
Have feigned a paradise of mirth, and love,
Banquets, and blooming Nymphs? or rather tell,
Why on the brink of Orellana's stream,
Where never Science reared her sacred torch,
The untutored Indian dreams of happier worlds
Behind the cloud-topt hill? why in each breast
Is placed a friendly monitor, that prompts,
Informs, directs, encourages, forbids?
Tell why, on unknown evil, grief attends;
Or joy on secret good? Why conscience acts
With tenfold force, when sickness, age, or pain,
Stands tottering on the precipice of death?
Or why such horror gnaws the guilty soul
Of dying sinners; while the good man sleeps
Peaceful and calm, and with a smile expires?
Look round the world! with what a partial hand
The scale of bliss and misery is sustained!
Beneath the shade of cold obscurity
Pale Virtue lies; no arm supports her head;
No friendly voice speaks comfort to her soul;
Nor soft-eyed Pity drops a melting tear:
But, in their stead, Contempt and rude Disdain
Insult the banished wanderer: on the goes
Neglected and forlorn: disease, and cold,
And famine, worst of ills, her steps attend:
Yet patient, and to heaven's just will resigned,
She never is seen to weep, or heard to sigh.
Now turn your eyes to yon sweet smelling bower,
Where, flushed with all the insolence of wealth,
Sits pampered Vice! for him the Arabian gale
Breathes forth delicious odours; Gallia's hills
For him pour nectar from the purple vine;
Nor think for these he pays the tribute due
To heaven: of heaven he never names the name;
Save when with imprecations, dark, and dire,
He points his jest obscene. Yet buxom Health
Sits on his rosy cheek; yet Honor gilds
His high exploits; and downy-pinion'd Sleep
Sheds a soft opiate over his peaceful couch.
See thou this, righteous Father! see thou this,
And will thou never repay? shall good and ill
Be carried undistinguished to the land
Where all things are forgot? -- Ah! no; the day
Will come, when Virtue from the cloud shall burst
That long obscured her beams; when Sin shall fly
Back to her native hell; there sink eclipsed
In penal darkness; where nor star shall rise,
Nor ever sunshine pierce the impervious gloom.
On that great day the solemn trump shall sound,
(That trump, which once, in heaven, on man's revolt,
Convok'd the astonished seraphs;) at whose voice
The unpeopled graves shall pour forth all their dead.
Then shall the assembled nations of the earth
From every quarter at the judgment seat
Unite; Egyptians, Babylonians, Greeks,
Parthians; and they who dwelt on Tyber's banks,
Names famed of old: or who of later age,
Chinese, and Russian, Mexican, and Turk,
Tenant the wide terrene; and they who pitch
Their tents on Niger's banks; or, where the sun
Pours on Golconda's spires his early light,
Drink Ganges' sacred stream. At once shall rise
Whom distant ages to each others sight
Had long denied: before the throne shall kneel
Some great Progenitor, while at his side
Stands his descendant through a thousand lines.
Whatever their nation, and whatever their rank,
Heroes, and patriarchs, slaves, and sceptred kings,
With equal eye the God of All shall see;
And judge with equal love. What though the great
With costly pomp, and aromatic sweets,
Embalmed his poor remains; or through the dome
A thousand tapers shed their gloomy light,
While solemn organs to his parting soul
Chanted slow orisons? say, by what mark
Do thou discern him from that lowly swain,
Whose mouldering bones beneath the thorn-bound turf
Long lay neglected? -- All at once shall rise;
But not to equal glory: for, alas!
With howlings dire, and execrations loud,
Some wail their fatal birth. -- First among these
Behold the mighty murderers of mankind;
They who in sport whole kingdoms slew; or they
Who to the tottering pinnacle of power
Waded through seas of blood! how will they curse
The madness of ambition! how lament
Their dear-bought laurels; when the widowed wife,
And childless mother, at the judgment seat
Plead trumpet-tongu'd against them! -- Here are they
Who sunk an aged father to the grave:
Or, with unkindness hard, and cold disdain,
Slighted a brother's sufferings: -- Here are they,
Whom fraud and skilful treachery long secured;
Who from the infant virgin tore her dower,
And eat the orphan's bread: -- who spent their stores
In selfish luxury; or, over their gold
Prostrate and pale, adored the useless heap. --
Here too who stained the chaste connubial bed; --
Who mixed the poisonous bowl; -- or broke the ties
Of hospitable friendship; -- And the wretch,
Whose listless soul, sick with the cares of life,
Unsummon'd, to the presence of his God
Rushed in with insult rude. How would they joy
Once more to visit earth; and, though oppressed
With all, that pain or famine can inflict,
Pant up the hill of life? vain wish! the Judge
Pronounces doom eternal on their heads,
Perpetual punishment. Seek not to know
What punishment! for that the Almighty Will
Has hid from mortal eyes. And shall vain man,
With curious search refined, presume to pry
Into thy secrets, Father! no: let him
With humble patience all thy works adore,
And walk in all thy paths: so shall his meed
Be great in heaven; so happily shall he 'scape
The immortal worm, and never-ceasing fire.
But who are they, who, bound in ten-fold chains,
Stand horribly aghast? this is that crew
Who strove to pull Jehovah from his throne,
And, in the place of heaven's eternal King,
Set up the phantom Chance. For them in vain
Alternate seasons cheered the rolling year;
In vain the sun, over herb, tree, fruit, and flower,
Shed genial influence, mild; and the pale moon
Repaired her waning orb. -- Next these is placed
The vile blasphemer; he, whose impious wit
Profaned the sacred mysteries of faith;
And against the impenetrable walls of heaven
Planted his feeble battery. -- By these stands
The arch-Apostate: He with many a wile
Exhorts them still to foul revolt. Alas!
No hope have they from black despair, no ray
Shines through the gloom to cheer their sinking souls.
In agonies of grief they curse the hour
When first they left Religion's onward way.
These on the left are ranged: but on the right
A chosen band appears, who fought beneath
The banner of Jehovah, and defied
Satan's united legions. Some, unmoved
At the grim tyrant's frown, over barbarous climes
Diffused the gospel's light: Some, long immured,
(Sad servitude!) in chains, and dungeons pined:
Or, racked with all the agonies of pain,
Breathed out their faithful lives. Thrice happy they
Whom heaven elected to that glorious strife! --
Here are they placed, whose kind munificence
Made heaven-born Science raise her drooping head;
And on the labors of a future race
Entailed their just reward. -- Thou, amongst these,
Good The gentleman who, by will, left an annual premium to the author of the
best poem on some divine subject, who must be M.A. of Cambridge.
Seaton! whose well-judg'd benevolence,
Fostering fair genius, bad the poet's hand
Bring annual offerings to his Maker's shrine,
Shall find the generous care was not in vain. --
Here is that favorite band, whom mercy mild,
God's best loved attribute, adorned; whose gate
Stood ever open to the stranger's call;
Who fed the hungry; to the thirsty lip
Reached out the friendly cup: whose care benign
From the rude blast secured the pilgrim's side;
Who heard the widow's tender tale; and shook
The galling shackle from the prisoners feet:
Who each endearing tie, each office knew,
Of meek-eyed, heaven-descended Charity. --
O Charity, thou Nymph divinely fair!
Sweeter than those whom ancient poets bound
In Amity's indissoluble chain,
The Graces! how shall I essay to paint
Thy charms, celestial Maid; and, in rude verse,
Blazon those deeds thy self did never reveal?
For thee nor rankling Envy can infect,
Nor rage transport, nor high o'erweening Pride
Puff up with vain conceit: never did thou smile
To see the sinner, as a verdant tree,
Spread his luxuriant branches over the stream;
While like some blasted trunk the righteous fall,
Prostrate, forlorn. -- When prophecies shall fail,
When tongues shall cease, when knowledge is no more,
And this great day is come; thou by the throne
Shall sit triumphant. -- Thither, lovely Maid,
Bear me, Oh bear me on thy soaring wing;
And through the adamantine gates of heaven
Conduct my steps; safe from the fiery gulf,
And dark abyss, where Sin, and Satan reign!
But, can the Muse, her numbers all too weak,
Tell how that restless element of fire
Shall wage with seas and earth intestine war,
And deluge all creation? Whether (so
Some think) the comet, as through fields of air
Lawless he wanders, shall rush headlong on
Thwarting the ecliptic, where the unconscious earth
Rolls in her wonted course: whether the sun,
With force centripetal, into his orb
Attract her long reluctant: or the caves,
Those dread volcanos, where engendering lie
Sulphurous minerals. from their dark abyss
Pour streams of liquid fire; while from above,
As erst on Sodom, heaven's avenging hand
Rains fierce combustion. -- Where are now the works
Of art, the toil of ages? Where are now
The imperial cities, sepulchers, and domes,
Trophies, and pillars? -- Where is Egypt's boast,
Those lofty pyramids, which high in air
Reared their aspiring heads, to distant times
Of Memphian pride a lasting monument? --
Tell me where Athens raised her towers? -- Where Thebes
Opened her hundred portals? -- Tell me, where
Stood sea-girt Albion? -- Where imperial Rome,
Propt by seven hills, sat like a sceptred queen,
And awed the tributary world to peace? --
Show me the rampart, which over many a hill,
Through many a valley stretched its wide extent,
Raised by that mighty monarch, to repel
The roving Tartar, when, with insult rude,
Against Pekin's towers he bent the unerring bow.
But what is mimic Art? even Nature's works,
Seas, meadows, pastures, the meandring streams,
And everlasting hills, shall be no more.
No more shall Teneriff, cloud-piercing height,
O'er-hang the Atlantic surge. -- Nor that famed cliff,
Through which the Persian steered with many a sail,
Throw to the Lemnian isle its evening shade
Over half the wide Aegaean. -- Where are now
The Alps, that confined with unnumber'd realms,
And from the Black Sea to the Ocean stream
Stretched their extended arms? -- Where Is Ararat,
That hill on which the faithful Patriarch's ark,
Which seven long months had voyag'd over its top,
First rested, when the earth, with all her sons,
As now by streaming cataracts of fire,
Was whelmed by mighty waters? -- All at once
Are vanished and dissolved: no trace remains,
No mark of vain distinction: heaven itself,
That azure vault with all those radiant orbs
Sinks in the universal ruin lost. --
No more shall planets round their central sun
Move in harmonious dance; no more the moon
Hang out her silver lamp: and those fixed stars
Spangling the golden canopy of night,
Which often the Tuscan with his optic glass
Called from their wondrous height, to read their names,
And magnitude, some winged minister
Shall quench: and (surest sign that all on earth
Is lost) shall rend from heaven the mystic bow.
Such is that awful, that tremendous day,
Whose coming who shall tell? for as a thief
Unheard, unseen, it steals with silent pace
Through night's dark gloom -- Perhaps as here I sit,
And rudely carol these incondite lays,
Soon shall the hand be checked, and dumb the mouth
That lisps the faultering strain -- O! may it never
Intrude unwelcome on an ill-spent hour;
But find me wrapped in meditations high,
Hymning my great Creator! "Power supreme!
" O everlasting King! to Thee I kneel;
" To Thee I lift my voice. With fervent heat
" Melt all ye elements! and thou, high heaven,
" Shrink, like a shrivelled scroll! -- But think, O Lord,
" Think on the best the noblest of thy works;
" Think on thine own bright image! think on Him,
" Who died to save us from thy righteous wrath;
" And 'midst the wreck of worlds remember man!"
TO FAME. AN ODE.
WRITTEN IN THE YEAR MDCCXXXIX.
LO! on yon promontory's pendent brow,
That threats the shadowed gulf below,
In the dun air sublime;
Fame spreads her hasty pinions wide,
Disdaining Britain's sluggish clime,
And, in a moment's flight,
Determines to alight
On active Gaul's more formidable side --
-- Stay, Goddess, I conjure thee, stay!
And, ere irrevocably soared away,
Thy piercing trump apply,
And pour so vehement a blast,
As shall alarm earth, sea, and sky,
Amaze the present age, and echo to the last! --
-- She hears the Muse's call!
And, with obedient breath
Inspires the mystic strain! --
Hark! hark! the swelling sound
Tempests the air around;
Rouses the sleeping main,
Shakes earth's remotest bound;
Pierces the very center of the ball,
And almost wakens death!
Again! again the upbraiding peal renew!
Make courtly Deafness hear,
Make tyrant Power and base Corruption fear;
The Furies close their guilty steps pursue!
Again, again it rushes loud,
As thunder from a bursting cloud!
The distant Russians catch the fierce alarm!
And, fired with martial flame,
Luxurious Persians arm,
And bravely emulate the Greek and Roman name.
But, death to honest eyes!
Britannia's Genius slumbering lies,
Effeminately soft on carpets spread;
Deaf to the honorable sound,
That kindles virtue through the world's vast round;
Numbed with inglorious peace,
Enervated with sloth and ease,
And to all sense of emulation dead!
Her useless shield is hurled aside;
And her neglected lance,
The terror once of trembling France!
Disdainful Cupids wantonly bestride:
Unmoved she feels her idle hands
Fettered with golden bands;
The victor-laurel too
Drop withered from her brow;
While, in its stead, sarcastic Humor ties
A rose-wreath, emblem of a victim doomed for sacrifice!
Oh, where are all her ancient honors flown?
Her senators of high renown;
Her patriots, such as dared withstand
The frowns of power, the charm of gold;
Made proud Oppression quit her greedy hold,
And from the jaws of ruin snatched their parent-land?
Alas! the monumental bust
That guards their awful dust,
And the historian's faithful page,
(...) the sole relics of that nobler age!
Unless then, Goddess, thy awakening strain
Can rouse the mighty dead again,
Give, give thy fruitless labor over,
And quit for ever this degenerate shore!
For, where all vices make their joint abode,
^^me's to be feared as heaven's severest rod,
(...) night-begot Oblivion worshipped as a God.
AD ORNATISSIMAM PUELLAM.
BY DR. LOWTH.
VAnae sit arti, sit studio modus,
Formosa virgo; sit speculo quies;
Curamque quaerendi decoris
Mitte, supervacuosque cultus.
Ut fortuitis verna coloribus
Depicta vulgo rura magis placent,
Nec invident horto nitenti
Divitias operosiores:
Lenique fons cum murmr pulchrior
Obliquat ultro praecipitem fugam,
Inter reluctantes lapillos, et
Ducit aquas temere sequentes;
Utque inter undas, inter et arbores,
Jam vere primo dulce strepunt aves,
Et art nulla gratiores
Ingeminant sine lege cantus:
Nativa sic te gratia, te nitor
Simplex decebit, te veneres tuae:
Nudus Cupido suspicatur
Artifices nimis apparatus.
Ergo fluentem tu male sedula,
Ne saeva inuras semper acu comam;
Neu sparsa odorato nitentes
Pulvere dedecores capillos;
Quales nec olim vel Ptolemaeia
Jactabat uxor, sidereo in choro
Ut cunque devotae refulgent
Verticis exuviae decori;
Nec Diva Matter, cum similem tuae
Mentita formam, et pulchrior aspici
Permisit incomtas protervis
Fusa comas agitare ventis.
THE SAME TRANSLATED.
BY WILLIAM DUNCOMBE, ESQUIRE.
NO longer seek the needless aid
Of studious art, dear lovely maid!
Vainly, from side to side, forbear
To shift thy glass, and braid each straggling hair.
As the gay flowers, which nature yields,
Spontaneous, on the verdant fields,
Delight the fancy more than those
Which gardens trim arrange in equal rows:
As tho pure rill, whose mazy train
The prattling pebbles check in vain,
Gives native pleasures, while it leads
Its random waters winding through the meads;
As birds, the groves and streams among,
In artless strains the vernal song
Warbling, their wood-notes wild repeat,
And sooth the ear, irregularly sweet:
So simple dress and native grace
Will best become thy lovely face!
For naked Cupid still suspects,
In artful ornaments, concealed defects.
Cease then, with idly-cruel care,
To torture thus thy flowing hair;
O! cease, with tasteless toil, to shed
A cloud of scented dust around thy head.
Not Berenice's locks could boast
A grace like thine; among the host
Of stars, though radiant now they rise,
And add new luster to the spangled skies;
Nor Venus, when her charms divine,
Improving in a form like thine,
She gave her tresses unconfined,
To wave around her neck, and wanton in the wind.
THE FACULTIES OF THE SOUL, AN ARGUMENT OF ITS IMMORTALITY.
BY THE SAME.
INSCRIBED TO DR. THOMAS HERRING, LORD ARCH. OF CANT. MAY, MDCCL.
SO often indulged, the philosophic Muse
Again, my lord, for your protection sues;
Small her pretensions, who no merit knows,
But what the importance of her theme bestows.
Oh! could her verse attain that happy art,
Which charms, persuades, and melts the human heart;
That grace, that warmth, that energy divine,
Which in your language, looks, and gesture shine,
When truths sublime you cloth in radiant dress,
And heaven's commands on listening crowds impress,
Smooth then would flow each modulated strain,
And every heart entire conviction gain.
Pleased with the honest praise of meaning well,
Your candid censures prompt us to excel:
Your steady friendship, nothing can impair;
Who share your love, your love for ever share!
THE FACULTIES OF THE SOUL.
THE active soul, by which man lives and move;
By her high faculties her lineage proves;
Her faculties, so variously bestowed,
Display the source divine from which they flowed,
And of his creatures rational require,
A hymn of praise to their all-gracious sire.
To tame the barren earth by toil and skill,
Raise the low stream, and sink the lofty hill,
The soul first taught; and over the mounting tide,
Borne by the winds, in floating forts to ride;
From various climes to bring their various store.
Silver and gold from rich Peruvia's shore;
Spices and pearls from realms of dawning day,
While Persia's costly silks our limbs array.
By letters we converse with every sage,
That graced the Grecian or the Roman age:
Hence in the sacred academic grove,
With Plato and with Xenophon we rove;
At Tusculum attend to Tully's tongue,
Of truth and virtue while he reasons strong.
By letters, with our knowledge we adorn,
And teach our arts to nations yet unborn.
Thus foremost in the learned train shall stand,
Newton and Clarke in each politer land.
The mind, with numberless ideas fraught,
Exerts by memory each latent thought,
Till her frail casket moulders into clay,
And every fair impression fades away.
To pleasing objects boundless fancy roves,
And, charmed with cooling springs or shady groves,
With ready pencil paints each rural scene,
The mossy fountain, or the level green.
Thus Eden's bowers in Milton gaily bloom:
Here fragrant gales the balmy air perfume;
There the great artist's lively tints have drawn
The tufted thicket, and the verdant lawn;
Hill, dale, and shady woods, and sunny plains:
Joy here, unmixed with cares and sorrows, reigns;
Warble the birds; along the flowing stream
The bounding fish reflect the golden beam.
Here shines each lovely flower, there fountains play;
Or gliding rivers in meanders stray,
And to each plant refreshing streams dispense,
While fruits and blossoms charm the various sense;
The boughs at once both fruits and blossoms bear;
With flavor please the taste, with fragrance (...) the air
The fleeting race of flowers, not wholly dead,
Revive in spring, and wave the dewy head;
In spring once more the virgin lillies blow,
Whitening the vales with vegetable snow;
In spring the varied tulips paint the field,
Though to the rigor of the year they yield,
Bound up by winter's frost; and must this span,
This dream of life, comprise the whole of man?
For better ends the Almighty, wise and good,
With such high faculties the soul endued.
The steady judgment's penetrating eye
Into the abyss of future times can pry;
And some have made the prophet's praise their own,
For things to come by past and present known.
Tiresias thus, and Phineus, sages old,
The secrets of futurity foretold;
Their outward eyes, though closed in endless night,
Were amply recompensed by mental light.
Raised by philosophy from narrow earth,
The soul, heaven-born, asserts her heavenly birth;
On Contemplation's wing she boldly flies,
And claims acquaintance with her native skies;
Can there each sun, each peopled world behold,
Through space immense, with course unerring rolled;
Their periods, distance, size, eclipses knows,
And why the sea alternate ebbs and flows:
Can measure even the speed of solar light,
Than which thought only boasts a swifter flight;
Soars, like a seraph, unconfined by sense,
To grasp the wonders of Omnipotence!
But higher still ascends the moral soul;
Nor can corporeal forms her search control:
By this the Almighty's attributes we trace,
And ponder time, eternity, and space;
By this are taught our follies to restrain,
To curb our passions with a streighten'd rein,
And imitate the bounteous power above,
In justice, goodness, purity, and love!
But will the wise Creator throw away
Such talents on the creature of a day?
A creature, which to virtue's heights can soar,
And, drinking deep of knowledge, thirsts for more.
Shall he! cut off from life, no more to bloom,
For ever sleep forgotten in the tomb?
Or may we not, with humble hope, conclude,
That since, with such prerogatives endued,
Our heavenly Sire will bid his image rise
To happier seats, an inmate of the skies.
DR. SAMUEL BARROW'S LATIN VERSES, PREFIXED TO MILTON'S PARADISE LOST,
TRANSLATED.
BY THE SAME.
WHO reads Lost Paradise, the fall
Of wretched man, what reads he less than all?
All Nature's works, from whence they rose,
Their fates and ends, these lofty lines disclose.
Whatever in the womb of night
Lay hid before, here stands revealed to sight.
The land, the sea, the skies around,
And Erebus, with flaming gulf profound;
All that in earth, in sea, or hell,
Or in high heaven's enlightened regions dwell;
Whatever is by space confined,
Unbounded Chaos and unbounded mind,
And (could ought else more boundless prove)
To man, in Christ, God's reconciling love!
This If we wished, whose hope so bold,
So fond a wish accomplished to behold?
Yet this Britannia's sons now read,
And find the work their fondest wish exceed.
Chieftains in war how great he sings!
With what shrill notes his swelling trumpet rings!
See Satan stalk! how vast his might!
To Michael's self almost a match in fight!
What strength by each archangel shown,
To seize, or vindicate, the Almighty's throne!
While these, the mimic thunder throw,
And those, with mountains whelm the boasting foe.
In deep suspense which host should sway,
All Nature fears to fall that dreadful day.
But see, to end this impious war
Ordained, Messiah's ensigns blaze from far!
Self-mov'd his rushing chariot rolls,
And shakes, with whirlwind sound, the eternal poleo.
From living wheels true lightnings fly,
Ten thousand thunders bellow through the sky,
Launched by his arm -- with terror tossed,
" Exhausted, spiritless, afflicted, lost,"
Stop short the apostates! -- Pale affright
Unnerves their hands, and withers all their might.
Headlong from heaven themselves they throw,
And plunge into the abyss of endless woe.
Romans and Grecians yield the bays,
Yield, all ye bards of old or modern days!
Who reads this nobler work will own
Homer sung frogs, and Virgil gnats alone.
SONNET TO HIS GRACE THO. HERRING, ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY.
BY MR. THO. EDWARDS.
PRelate, whose steady hand, and watchful eye
The sacred vessel of Religion guide,
Secure from Superstition's dangerous tide,
And fatal rocks of Infidelity;
Think not, in this bad age of obloquy,
When Christian virtues Christians dare deride,
And worth by party-zeal alone is tried,
To 'scape the poisoned shafts of calumny;
No -- though the tenor of thy blameless life,
Like His, whose flock is to thy care consigned,
Be spent in teaching truth, and doing good;
Yet, amongst the sons of bigotry and strife,
Thou too, like him, must hear thy good malign'd,
Thy person slandered, and thy truths withstood.
AN EPISTLE OF M. DE VOLTAIRE, UPON HIS ARRIVAL AT HIS ESTATE NEAR THE LAKE OF
GENEVA, IN MARCH, MDCCLV.
FROM THE FRENCH.
O Take, O keep me, ever blessed domains,
Where lovely Flora with Pomona reigns;
Where Art fulfils what Nature's voice requires,
And gives the charms to which my verse aspires;
Take me, the world with transport I resign,
And let your peaceful solitude be mine!
Yet not in these retreats I boast to find
That perfect bliss that leaves no wish behind;
This, to no lonely shade kind Nature brings,
Nor Art bestows on courtiers, or on kings;
Not even the Sage this boon has ever possessed,
Though joined with wisdom, virtue shared his breast;
This transient life, alas! can never suffice
To reach the distant goal, and snatch the prize;
Yet, soothed to rest, we feel suspense from woe,
And though not perfect joy, yet joy we know.
Enchanting scenes! what pleasure you dispense
Wherever I turn, to every wondering sense!
An The lake of Geneva.
ocean here, where no rude tempest roars,
With crystal waters laves the hallowed shores;
Here flowery fields with rising hills are crowned,
Where clustering vines empurple all the ground;
Now by degrees from hills to Alps they rise,
Hell groans beneath, above they pierce the skies!
See the proud summit, white with endless frost,
Eternal bulwark of the blissful coast!
The blissful coast the hardy Lombards gain,
And frost and mountains cross their course in vain;
Here Glory beckoned mighty chiefs of old,
And planted laurels to reward the bold;
Charles, Otho, Conti heard her trumpet sound,
And, borne on victory's wings, they spurned the mound.
See, on those banks where yon calm waters swell,
The hair-clad epicure's luxurious cell!
See famed Ripaille, where once so grave, so gay,
Great Amedeus Amedeus the Pacific, first duke of Savoy, in 1434 retired to the
priory of Ripaille, where he affected to live like an hermit, and suffered his
beard to grow to an enormous length; but he kept a mistress in his cell, and in
other respects lived in great luxury; yet he joined with a faction against Pope
Eugenius IV. and being elected to the sea of Rome, he was crowned Pope by the
name of Felix V. but afterward resigned at the request of Charles VII. king of
France.
passed from prayer to play:
Fantastic wretch! thou riddle of thy kind!
What strange ambition seized thy frantic mind?
Prince, hermit, lover! blessed through every hour
With blissful change of pleasure and of power,
Could thou, thus paradis'd, from care remote,
Rush to the world, and fight for Peter's boat?
Now by the Gods of sweet repose I swear,
I would not thus have bartered ease for care,
Spite of the keys that move our fear and hope,
I never would quit such penance to be Pope.
Let him who Rome's stern tyrant stooped to praise,
The tuneful chanter of sweet georgic lays,
Let Maro boast of streams that Nature pours
To lave proud villas on Italia's shores;
Superior far the streams that court my song,
Superior far the shores they wind along:
Blessed shores! the dwelling of that sacred power
Who rules each joyful, and each glorious hour,
Queen of whatever the good or great desire,
The patriot's eloquence, the hero's fire,
Shrin'd in each breast, and near the tyrant's sword
Invoked in whispers, and in sighs adored,
Immortal Liberty, whose generous mind
With all her gifts would bless all human-kind!
See, from Morat Morat is a little town in the canton of Fribourgh in
Switzerland, famous for a battle which the Switzers gained against Charles the
Rash, duke of Burgundy, by which they recovered and established their liberty.
Charles himself was wounded, and left 18,000 Austrians dead on the spot.
she comes in martial charms,
And shines like Pallas in celestial arms,
Her sword the blood of boastful Austria stains,
And Charles, who threatened with opprobrious chains.
Now hostile crowds Geneva's towers assail,
They march in secret, and by night they scale;
The Goddess comes -- they vanish from the wall,
Their lances shiver, and their heroes fall,
For fraud can never elude, nor force withstand
The stroke of Liberty's victorious hand The duke of Sivoy once attempted to
surprise Geneva, and take it in the night escalade, but the first man that
mounted the wall was discovered by a woman, who courageously knocked him down,
and alarmed the Genevese, who drove off the assailants, and sallying after
them, made a great slaughter.
.
She smiles; her smiles perpetual joys diffuse;
A shouting nation where she turns pursues;
Their heartfelt Paeans thunder to the sky,
And echoing Appenines from far reply:
Such wreaths their temples crown as Greece entwined
Her hero's brows at Marathon At Marathon Miltiades, with 10,000 Athenians,
defeated an army of more than 100,000 Persians, and delivered his country from
a foreign yoke.
to bind;
Such wreaths the sons of freedom hold more dear,
Than circling gold and gems that crown the peer,
Than the broad hat which shades the Pontiff's face,
Or the cleft mitre's venerable grace.
Insulting grandeur, in gay tinsel dressed,
Shows here no star embroidered on the breast,
No tissued ribbon on the shoulder tied,
Vain gift implored by vanity from pride!
Nor here stern Wealth, with supercilious eyes,
The faltering prayer of weeping want denies;
Here no false Pride at honest Labor sneers,
Men here are brothers, equal but in years;
Here heaven, O! Liberty, has fixed thy throne,
Filled, glorious Liberty! by thee alone.
Rome sees thy face, since Brutus fell, no more,
A stranger thou on many a cultured shore:
The Polish lord, of thy embraces vain,
Pricks his proud courser over Sarmatia's plain;
Erects his haughty front in martial pride,
And spurns the burgher, grovelling at his side;
The grovelling burgher burns with secret fires,
Looks up, beholds thee, sighs, despairs, expires.
Britain's rough sons in thy defense are bold,
Yet some pretend at London thou art sold,
I heed them not, to sell too proud, too wise,
If blood must buy, with blood the Briton buys.
On Belgic bogs, it is said, thy footsteps fail,
But thou secure may scorn the whispered tale;
To latest times the race of great Nassau,
Who raised seven altars The Union of the Seven Provinces.
to thy sacred law,
With faithful hand thy honors shall defend,
And bid proud factions to thy fasces bend.
Thee Venice keeps, thee Genoa now regains;
And next the throne thy seat the Swede maintains;
How few in safety thus with kings can vie!
If not supreme, how dangerous to be high!
O! still preside wherever the law's thy friend,
And keep thy station, and thy rights defend;
But take no factious League's The author alludes to the famous League formed
against (...) of France.
reproachful name,
Still prone to change, and zealous still to blame,
Cloud not the sunshine of a conquering race,
Whom wisdom governs, and whom manners grace;
^ond of their sovereign, of subjection vain,
They wish no favors at thy hands to gain,
Nor need such vassals at their lord repine,
Whose easy sway they fondly take for thine.
Through the wide east less gentle is thy fate,
Where the dumb murderer guards the sultan's gate;
Here pale and trembling, in the dust o'erturn'd,
With chains dishonored, and by eunuchs spurned,
The sword and bow-string placed on either side
Thou mourn'st, while slaves of life and death decide.
Spol'd of thy cap through all the bright Levant
Tell William Tell was the means of restoring liberty and independance to
Switzerland by killing Grisler, the tyrant who governed it for the emperor
Albert.
gave thee his, and well supplied the want.
O! come my Goddess, in thy chosen hour,
And let my better fortune hail thy power;
Fair friendship calls thee to my green retreat,
O! come, with friendship share the mossy seat;
Like thee she flies the turbulent and great,
The craft of business, and the farce of state;
To you, propitious powers, at last I turn,
To you, my vows ascend, my altars burn;
Let me of each the pleasing influence share,
My joys now heightened, and now soothed my care;
Each ruder passion banished from my breast,
Bid the short remnant of my Days be blessed.
CONCORD.
A POEM INSCRIBED TO THE RIGHT HON. THE EARL OF RADNOR.
BY JAMES HARRIS, ESQUIRE.
WRITTEN IN THE YEAR MDCCLI.
THE deeds of discord, or in prose or rhyme,
Let others tell. It Is mine (the better theme)
Concord to sing; and thus begins the song:
Congenial things to things congenial tend:
So rivulets their little waters join
To form one river's greater stream: so haste
The rivers, from their different climes, to meet,
And kindly mix, in the vast ocean's bed:
So earth to earth down goes; and upwards slies
To fires etherial, each terrestrial blaze,
Such elemental Concord. -- Yet not here
Confined the sacred sympathy, but wide
Through plant and animal diffusely spread.
How many myriads of the grassy blade
Assemble, to create one verdant plain?
How many cedars towering heights conspire,
Thy tops, O cloud-capt Lebanon! to deck?
Life-animal still more conspicuous gives
Her fair examples. Here the social tie
We trace, ascending from the ignoble swarms
Of insects, up to flocks and grazing herds;
Thence to the polities of bees and ants,
And honest beavers, bound by friendly league
Of mutual help and interest. -- Cruel man!
For love of gain, to persecute, to kill,
This gentle, social, and ingenious race,
That never did you wrong. -- But stop, my Muse,
Stop thy sad song, nor deviate to recount
Man's more inhuman deeds; for man too feels
Benign affection, nor dares disobey,
Though often reluctant, Nature's mighty voice,
That summons all to harmony and love.
Else would to Nature's Author foul impute
Of negligence accrue, while baser things
He knits in holy friendship, thus to leave
His chief and last work void of sweet attract,
And tendence to its fellow. But not so,
Not so, if truly sings the heaven-born Muse:
And she can tell; for she the limpid fount
Of truth approaches; rumors only reach
Our earth-born ears. Then mark her tale divine.
Ere yet creation was, ere sun and moon
And stars bedecked the splendid vault of heaven,
Was God; and God was Mind; and Mind was Beauty,
And Truth, and Form, and Order: For all these
In Mind's profound recess, and union pure
Together dwelt, involved, inexplicate.
Then matter (if then matter was) devoid,
Formless, indefinite, and passive lay;
Mysterious Being, in one instant found,
Nor any thing, nor nothing; but at once
Both all and none; none by privation, all
By vast capacity, and pregnant power.
This passive nature the active Almighty Mind
Deeming fit subject for his art, at once
Expelled privation, and poured forth himself;
Himself poured forth through all the mighty mass
Of matter, now first bounded. Then was beauty
And truth, and form, and order, all evolv'd,
Was opened all, that lay enwrapp'd and hid
In the great mind of Godhead. Forth it went,
Forth went the pure quintessence far and wide
Through the vast whole; nor did its force not feel
The last of minim atoms. So (great things
It we compare with small) in sable cloud
Invelop'd, lies the lightning: mortal men
Look up, and dread the event: When, lo! illum'd
All in a moment, the small nitrous seeds
Expanding, fill heaven's mighty vault, and quick
From pole to pole the fiery terror flies.
Thus Mind through all things passed, essence and worth
Giving and limiting to each in bounds
Proportioned to its kind. To clods and stones
It gave cohesion; to things vegetant
Nutrition, and the power of growth; to brutes,
Sense, appetite, and motion: but to man
All these it gave, and joined to these the grace,
The chosen grace, of reason, beam divine!
Hence man, allied to all, in all things meets
Congenial being, effluence of mind.
And as the tuneful string spontaneous sounds
The answer to his kindred note; so he
The secret harmony within him feels,
When aught of beauty offers. This the joy,
While verdant plains and grazing herbs we view,
Or ocean's mighty vastness; or the stars,
In midnight silence as along they roll.
Hence to the rapture, while the harmonious bard
Attunes his vocal song; and hence the joy,
While what the sculptor graves, the painter paints,
And all the pleasing mimickries of art
Strike our accordant minds. Yet chief by far,
Chief is man's joy, when, mixed with human kind
He feels affection melt the social heart;
Feels friendship, love, and all the charities
Of father, son, and brother. Here the pure
Sincere congenial, free from all alloy,
With bliss he recognizes. For to man
What dearer is than man? say you, who prove
The kindly call, the social sympathy,
What but this call, this social sympathy,
Tempers to standard due the vain exult
Of prosperous fortune? what but this refines
Soft pity's pain, and sweetens every care,
Each friendly care, we feel for human kind?
O Gomez! gives thy pelf such bliss? or ye,
Who wade through blood to fame, and worse than wolves,
Prey on your kind, can your vain triumphs give
Such solid happiness? like giants old,
Ye fight against Nature, Nature's order spurn,
And would o'erthrow. But she, be well assured,
Will baffle all your efforts vain, and plant
Fell daggers in your hearts, terror and guilt,
Heart-burning hate, and dreary black remorse.
When Rome her last of heroes lost (ever since
The wretched nurse of Caesar's, and of Monks,)
When Brutus, urged by faction, and a mob
For basest servitude now ripened, sled
From Latian soil, then, to attend her lord,
Fled to the faithful partner of his bed,
The wise, the virtuous Portia. Much she feared;
For much she loved. He, godlike man, inspired
Not with less love, though with superior strength
Of reason, thus her anxious thoughts relieved:
" O Portia, best of wives, grateful thy sight,
" Grateful thy converse. Yet, whenever we part,
" (And soon we must) then do not, Portia, thou,
" Like other women, sink; but bravely rouse
" Thy mighty sire's remembrance. His firm deeds
" May steel thy soul to sufferance. Me the fates
" Over distant seas to hostile arms compel.
" Should we succeed, then is thy lot and mine
" Fortunate virtue; should we fail, it is still,
" Still, Portia, virtue: think on that; then turn
" Thy mental eye to every worst event:
" And, by premeditating, learn to bear
" Whatever befalls of ill. Joys will not come
" The less for this; and each joy unforeseen
" With doubled energy will bless thy soul."
Thus he with balmy words the laboring pain
Within her bosom soothed, and she was cheered:
Steadfast she traveled, steadfast she arrived
To the sea-brink, where many a vessel lay
With fails expanded, Brutus to receive.
Now were they lodged in hospitable house,
The tender scene of their long last farewell:
Yet steadfast still she was; steadfast she saw
The mariners prepare. When lo! by chance
A picture meets her wandering eye. It showed,
In living lines, brave Hector's last embrace,
When from his weeping long-lov'd spouse he went,
Never to see her more. Ah, Portia! then
Where fled thy courage? where thy steadfast heart?
Thou look, thou feel'st: The sad moving scene
Too near resemblance bears. Forth gush thy tears,
Thy spirits sink, thy limbs forget their strength,
And thou forgettest all thy Brutus said.
Yet he forgives -- forgives? yet still he loves,
Loves thee, that thou forgettest all he said;
For well he knows the cause: 'twas faithful love,
By faithful love affected, like by like;
Congenial by congenial. --
But thy song
It Is time, my Muse, to end. This verse, O thou,
Radnor! who prov'st a secret sympathy
With all that is fair; patron and judge of arts;
Studious of elegance in every form,
Radnor! this verse be consecrate to thee.
TO THE AUTHOR OF A PANEGYRIC ON MRS. GRACE BUTLER, WHO DIED AGED LXXXVI.
BY MR. POPE.
The spirit of Mrs. Butler is supposed to speak. Stripped to the naked soul,
escaped from clay,
From doubts unfettered, and dissolved in day;
Unwarm'd by vanity; unreach'd by strife;
And all my hopes and fears thrown off with life,
Why am I charmed by friendship's fond essays,
And, though unbodied, conscious of thy praise?
Has pride a portion in the parted soul?
Does passion still the formless mind control?
Can gratitude out-pant the silent breath?
Or a friend's sorrow pierce the glooms of death?
No, -- it is a spirit's nobler taste of bliss!
That feels the worth it left, in proofs like this;
That not its own applause, but thine, approves;
Whose practice praises, and whose virtue loves!
Who liv'st, to crown departed friends with fame;
Then, dying late, shall all thou gav'st reclaim.
INSCRIPTION ON A GROTTO OF SHELLS AT CRUX-EASTQN, THE WORK OF NINE YOUNG
LADIES.
BY THE SAME.
HEre, shunning idleness at once and praise,
This radiant pile nine rural sisters raise;
The glittering emblem of each spotless dame,
Clear as her soul, and shining as her frame;
Beauty which Nature only can impart,
And such a polish as disgraces art;
But fate disposed them in this humble sort,
And hid in deserts what would charm a court.
VERSES BY MR. POPE, ON READING A POEM, ENTITLED "A FIT OF THE SPLEEN," BY DR.
IBBOTT See Dodsley's collection, Vol. V. p. 202.
.
WHat are t^^ falling rills, the pendent shades,
The morni^^ bowers, the evening colonades,
But soft recesses for (...) uneasy mind,
To sigh unheard in to the passing wind?
So the struck deer, in some sequestered part,
Lies down to die -- the arrow in his heart;
There hid in shades, and wasting day by day,
Inly he bleeds, and pants his soul away.
VERSES LEFT BY MR. POPE, ON HIS LYING IN THE SAME BED WHICH WILMOT, EARL OF
ROCHESTER, USED AT ATTERBURY, A SEAT OF THE DUKE OF ARGYLE'S, IN OXFORDSHIRE,
JULY IX, MDCCXXXIX.
WIth no poetic ardor fired,
I press the bed where Wilmot lay;
That here he loved, or here expired,
Begets no numbers grave or gay.
But in thy roof, Argyle, are bred
Such thoughts as prompt the brave to lie,
Stretched out in honor's nobler bed,
Beneath a nobler roof, the sky.
Such flames as high in patriots burn,
Yet stoop to bless a child, or wife;
And such as wicked kings may mourn,
When freedom is more dear than life.
TO HIS GRACE THE DUKE OF ARGYLE, UPON READING THE PREAMBLE TO THE PATENT
CREATING HIM DUKE OF GREENWICH. BY THE SAME.
MIndless of fate, in these low vile abodes,
Tyrants have often usurped the style of Gods:
But that the Mortal may be thought Divine,
The Herald strait new-modell'd all his line;
And venal Priest, with well-dissembled lie,
Preambled to the crowd the mimic Deity.
Not so great Saturn's son, imperial Jove,
He reigns, unquestioned, in his realms above;
No title from descent he need infer,
His red right arm proclaims the Thunderer.
This, Campbell, be thy pride, illustrious Peer,
Alike to shine distinguished in thy sphere.
All merit but thine own thou may disdain,
And Kings have been thine ancestors in vain.
A MORNING ELEGY This and the three following poems are by Mr. Abr. Portal.
.
HAil, bright-eyed harbinger of sacred light!
Nature, refreshed, beholds thy cheering ray,
At thy approach the gloomy shades of night,
And all its dreary horrors, pass away:
Yet not to him, within whose manly breast
Reason, with olive-twined scepter, sways,
I there in darkness aught that can molest;
But nights serene succeed to virtuous days.
Unlike that Lucifer whose baleful reign
Excites to every deed of foulest dye,
Repine and Lust, and all the savage train
Retire, abashed, before thy holy eye.
With silver hair, bright-flowing in the east,
And ruby-tinctur'd mantle, lightly spread,
With pearl-bestudded girdle bound her vest,
Aurora rises from her coral bed.
I feel her sweet breath in the balmy gale,
Purging from noxious fumes the humid air,
Shedding fresh odours on the flowery vale,
And genuine roses on the village fair.
I see the dappled fleece, her favorite woof,
And golden-fringed clouds adorn the sky,
Skimming with light wing over its azure roof,
And softening every object to the eye.
While yet the mind retains her tranquil ease,
From day's perplexing cares and passions free.
While Nature's charms are best arrayed to please,
And Health and Pleasure join in amity,
Often let me rove beneath thy gentle beam,
Ere sultry Phoebus mounts his burning throne,
And to the soaring sky-lark's grateful theme,
In numbers less melodious join my own:
And as I range the ambrosial fields along,
Or climb the verdant hills unshaded height,
Pause on those blessings that inspire my song,
And gather thence instruction and delight.
Springs not a blade upon the spacious plain,
Bends not a flower beneath the crystal tear,
Chirps not an insect of the turf in vain;
But Contemplation Wisdom's voice can hear.
See! yonder feathered parent, skimming round,
Sudden she darts upon her humble food:
Yet, nobly scorning hunger, spurns the ground,
And soars aloft, to serve her callow brood:
Sweet moralist! to reason-vaunting man
Thy generous lesson teach; often, in thy place,
Despising Nature's all-instructive plan,
He feeds his follies, and neglects his race.
What sudden burst of oriental rays
Disturbs the peaceful musings of my breast,
Involves the ample firmament in blaze,
And shoots its glories to the distant west?
How bright the scene! magnificent and large,
The orb of light reveals his glorious face,
Rejoicing in his high Creator's charge,
To spread his bounties through the realms of space.
Fitted to mortal eye, thy splendors mild
More great appear than at meridian height;
So shone the holy Virgin's heavenly child,
Disclosing grace divine to human sight.
In prime advancing, now the jocund day,
Laughs in the fullness of unclouded joy,
Fresh-springing flowrets strew his radiant way,
The woodland harmonists their notes employ:
From hill to dale, from grove to verd'rous spring,
Sweet sounds, responsive, fill the ambient air,
Sweet sounds, responsive, make the valleys ring,
And banish thence the family of care:
Nor cheerless is the herd's majestic low,
Loud-calling for the milk-maid's easing hand,
Or white slocks bleating on the mountain's brow,
Or plowman's whistling over his furrowed land.
Ye blessed inhabitants of fields and shades,
Elysium soft of undisturbed repose!
No artificial want your breast invades,
No painful foretaste of succeeding woes:
By simple instinct led, to you unknown
The tender throb of exquisite desire;
The wealth of Avarice, and Ambition's throne,
No raging wish, no discontent inspire:
To you sufficing, that the genial beam
Of day's enlivening planet wakes to joy,
Satiate, ye quaff the pure untainted stream,
And feast on dainties that can never cloy.
O! to my heart your sacred lore convey,
Let Nature be my wealth, my joy, my guide,
And be the business of each rising day
To check my wants, my passions, and my pride.
AN EVENING ELEGY.
WElcome thou sober evening, calm and gray,
Now Phoebus' rage, and every blast is laid,
Now fost'ring clews descend, and turb'lent day
Retires beneath the halcyon wing of shade.
Now lucid Venus, graced with beamy hair,
To dance nocturnal tempts the starry train,
Commanding toil to cease, and anxious care
From vexing mortal bosoms to refrain.
Yet will not Avarice, cursed fiend! forbear
To break wise Nature's best-appointed law,
She pensive-plodding sits, with downcast air
Refusing rest, her fraudful plan to draw.
Pursuing which, nor Themis' righteous lore,
Nor precious relatives blood-binding tie,
Nor all that heaven for virtue has in store
Can draw aside her Mammon-fixed eye:
Over rocks and seas unheeded bounds she flies,
Explores the cold extreme of either Pole,
Dares the fierce heats of equinoctial skies,
Nor slacks her race, till Death's unwelcome goal.
Far from my breast, kind heaven, such lust remove,
At every grateful, tranquil eve's return,
Let me, while doubtful Cynthia cheers the grove,
With naught but love, or pious ardor burn.
And as along some placid stream I range,
Viewing the wild flowers close their gaudy bloom,
Or birds the free expanse of either change,
To seek the shady covert's inmost gloom,
Ah! let me tread with cautious step and slow,
Where thick-set hawthorns shed their odours wide,
Where intermingled roses sweetly blow,
And rambling woodbines cling on every side;
Perchance, within the fragrant thicket hid,
Some tuneful warbler rests his wearied throat,
Who, ere the sun beneath the horizon slid,
Had soothed my bosom with his dulcet note:
Perchance, close-perch'd aside his brooding mate,
With bill to bill inclined, in silent joy,
He cheers her lonely hours, and watchful state,
And cares lest aught should her repose destroy.
Sweet harmonists! your tender vigils keep
Secure for me, I will not do ye wrong,
The rustling boughs my garments shall not sweep,
And ye shall pay me with your future song.
But hark! what voice the sacred stillness breaks?
Softer than silence are those melting strains,
Or lover's sighs, when pleading Nature speaks;
It Is sadly-pleasing Philomel complains.
Long let me drink the magic of thy lay,
Nor humming chafers baulk my thirsty ear,
The time insensibly shall wear away,
Till night approach, and every star appear:
Then as my lagging feet I homewards draw,
My passions all in heavenly concord bound,
The solemn scene shall fill my soul with awe,
And God Omnipotent my tongue resound.
Methinks, when clad in beaming glories mild,
Full and majestic shines the queen of night,
Around her throne innumerous squadrons filled
Of hosts celestial, ministers of light,
It should remind us of that holy hour,
When heaven and earth's all-gracious Judge shall come,
In the full splendour of his Father's power,
With guard seraphic, to pronounce our doom.
May I, when life's short day begins to close,
The star of age pale-glimmering over my head,
Unvex'd by troublous blast my mind compose,
Nor fortune's frowns, nor sacred vengeance dread:
From every anxious busy scene retired,
Let me the world's mad tumult view from far,
Smile at what erst each raging passion fired,
Nor deem short pleasure worth unceasing care.
Within some humbly-decent rural shed,
There let my sun of life in radiance set,
Through smiling hope, when Death's black night is sled,
A course more glorious shall its orient wait.
FRIENDSHIP.
ATTEMPTED AFTER THE MANNER OF COWLEY.
FRiendship, how sweet! how comely do thou seem!
But art thou aught indeed, besides a dream?
A pleasing dream, where mines of wealth we own;
But, by distress awaked, we find our comfort flown:
Yet have I read amongst the poets tales
What mighty things have been by friendship done;
Or if the world of fiction naught avails,
View Israel's royal youth and Jesse's son:
Their love above the love of women rose,
Etherial flame, purged from each grosser fire,
Their bosoms throb'd with the same joys and woes,
Like notes accordant from the harmonious lyre.
Barometers alike thus rise and fall,
Elate with sunshine, or by clouds deprest,
The same sublime affection moves on all;
So friendship acts upon the social breast.
But most, like pasteboard figures, seem to agree,
Which when the sky is neither foul nor fair,
At neighboring doors, in kindly amity,
Partake the common privilege of air;
But if, perchance, the brightening sky should clear,
And Phoebus spread his shining tresses wide,
Or threatening cloud drop some foreboding tear,
Far as they can the former friends divide.
And some there are, I ween, who, like the sun,
Cheer the fair opening bud with friendly gleam;
But, when expanded wide, its beauties shun,
Or envious wither with oppressive beam.
Others, like wanton dames, exhaust their charms
On all alike, nor heed the intrinsic worth,
And lose, within a thousand different arms,
What one alone had fostered into birth.
Some, like the tuneful tenants of the shade,
A fond and close, but short alliance make,
The purpose served which first their union made,
A long farewell the future strangers take.
Others (whom fortune blast) with smooth-tongued guile,
The unsuspecting social heart betray,
Like treacherous Sirens murdering with a smile,
Like comets blazing with malignant ray.
Amid this threatening deluge, far outspread,
Where shall the faithful dove of friendship rest?
Return, sweet bird, to thy domestic shed,
The poets age, and miracles are ceased.
Ah, yet return not! spread thy pinions wide,
No labor spare; encompass land and sea;
Let naught the inestimable jewel hide,
Find me a friend, if any friend there be:
Nay, better thou should suffer fair deceit,
Than solitary to my breast return;
Who dreams of pleasure is not so complete
A wretch, as he who only wakes to mourn.
ELIZA'S WEDDING DAY. AN ECLOGUE.
INTRODUCTION. O Could my Muse, with gentle Gay,
Upon the boxen hautboy play,
Or, with sweet pipe of shepherd's boy,
Make Windsor's shades resound with joy,
Maria's beauties still should live,
And mournful Strephon cease to grieve;
Eliza's love, Eliza's truth,
Unfading bloom in endless youth,
And every bright delicious charm
The barbed hand of Time disarm;
But ah, poor Colin! vain thy lay;
Yet do thy best, and pipe away.

COLIN. While from on high the flaming sun displays
The scorching fury of his noontide rays,
And, at the foot of this oak-shaded hill,
Our browsing cattle seek the cooling rill,
Let us beguile the time with pleasing song,
And stretch our languid limbs at ease along.

STREPHON. What boots it, Colin, that our limbs are laid,
Composed, beneath the oak's refreshing shade,
Or that around us, on the yellow plain,
The fertile ground is stocked with plenteous grain?
What though the meadows smile with cheerful green,
And waving copses ornament the scene,
Can shades or plenty, or delightful views,
Over wounded minds the smiles of joy diffuse?
When fond Maria fled her shepherd's arms,
Plains, meads, and copses, lost their wonted charms.

C. Though just the cause, ah! what avails your grief,
Since the pale Tyrant is to pity deaf?

S. Though from my bosom Death has rudely torn
The fragrant rose, he left the pointed thorn.
Well may you, Colin, blithesome strains compose,
Happy in love, and stranger to my woes,
Those blessings which your life with transports crown,
Four moons agone I boasted as my own;
But now, though vigor, youth, and love remain,
The charming object I lament in vain.

C. And who that knew the lovely nymph forbears
The willing tribute of condoling tears?
Bright was her form, with graces richly decked,
Commanding love, attemper'd with respect;
Sweet Modesty, with social Freedom joined,
Her manners formed, and wit adorned her mind:
How kind! how courteous she to every swain!
My wounded memory recollects with pain;
But be all sorrows laid aside this day,
To Colin's joys, let Strephon's griefs give way.

S. As soon the hare shall quit the sheltering brake,
And linnets gray the yellow furze forsake:
As soon shall British nymphs lose power to charm,
And Afric' maids the shepherds bosoms warm,
As I from this afflicted breast remove
The sad remembrance of Maria's love.
Weep skies, sigh gales, droop all ye fading woods,
Die every flower, and murmuring mourn ye floods;
Ye gay-plum'd warblers, cease your tuneful strains,
Bats, ravens, screech-owls scream along the plains;
In pity to my woes, ye swains around,
Strip off the honors from the loaded ground,
And let the fields, deserted and forlorn,
Three dismal months my lost Maria mourn:
Then shall returning Spring their bosoms cheer;
But ah! in mine, it is Winter all the year.

C. My dear Eliza loved Maria more
Than bees the fragrance of the gaudy flower:
Then, while her praise I sing, your woe suspend,
And lose the lover in the generous friend.
Ye hills, ye dales, ye streams, and shady groves,
To distant plains resound our mutual loves.
Twice three revolving happy years and one,
Since sacred wedlock joined our hands are flown;
Seven times the shifting seasons went and came,
The seasons change, our hearts remain the same.
Ye hills, ye dales, ye streams, and shady groves,
To distant plains resound our mutual loves.
Of every hue of every blossom dyed,
The gay carnation is the garden's pride;
So every beauty bright Eliza wears,
Blessed Colin's pride, and softner of his cares.
The fragrant clove in sweetness most excels,
The lilly's fairest of the flowery belles;
More sweet than cloves, than spotless lillies fair,
In Colin's eyes, Eliza's beauties are.
Ye hills, ye dales, ye streams, and shady groves,
To distant plains resound our mutual loves.
Tell every nymph, that mourns her swain's deceit,
The loved Eliza is as good as sweet;
When they, like her, each social virtue prove,
Their swains, like Colin, shall return their love.
Guiltless of anger, harmless lambkins rove,
The loving turtles coo within the grove,
My constant Tray never quits his master's side,
The prudent ants unthinking swains deride,
And bees beneficent, with pleasing pains,
Collect sweet honey to enrich the swains;
Lambs, turtles, Tray, and ants and bees may find
Their virtues blended in Eliza's mind:
Ye hills, ye dales, ye streams, and shady groves,
To distant plains resound our mutual loves.
Ye witless clowns, who marriage joys deride,
Nor know the comforts of a faithful bride,
Attentive listen to my tender tale,
Nor to your loss let prejudice prevail.
By Winter's false inclement skies betrayed,
A burning fever on my vitals preyed;
My fleecy charge Eliza's care supplied,
Respondent to each groan Eliza sighed;
Twelve sleepless nights sharp anguish racked my breast,
Twelve sleepless nights Eliza banished rest,
With care unwearied watched aside my bed,
And with fond arm sustained my restless head,
Each cooling herb applied to sooth my pain,
Nor were her tender labors wrought in vain;
Kind symptoms of returning health appeared,
And Love's rich cordial my weak spirits cheered;
My strength renewed, joy sparkled in her eye,
And filled my soul with grateful ecstasy.
Ye hills, ye dales, ye streams, and shady groves,
To distant plains resound our mutual loves.
Ye mantling vines that form the conscious bower,
Where often we pass the soft endearing hour,
Whilst you, to imitate our joys divine,
In wanton folds your amorous branches twine,
A thousand kisses whisper from your leaves;
But barren of those sweets Eliza gives:
For not the mingling arms, or frequent kiss,
But souls united cause the heartfelt bliss.
Ye hills, ye dales, ye streams, and shady groves,
To distant plains resound our mutual loves.
Eliza's presence with supreme delights
Shortens the summer's days, and winter's nights:
No irksome toil shall Colin ever regard,
Her happiness and love the rich reward.
Blessed be the day, at each return thrice blessed,
That gave Eliza to my raptured breast:
This day, may no misfortune vex the swains,
No ripened corn be laid by furious rains;
No luckless reaper meet with painful wound,
Or tread the stinging adder on the ground;
No nipping blasts the hopeful grapes assail,
Or make the downy peaches withering fail;
But may propitious Love excite to mirth,
And Ceres' honors grace the teeming earth;
With golden fruit the loaded trees be crowned,
And purple clusters on the vines abound.
Now cease, ye hills, ye dales, ye streams, and groves,
To tell the distant plains our mutual loves.

S. Well have thou, Colin, tuned the oaten reed,
Thy songs the songs of nightingales exceed;
Unable to withstand thy powerful lay,
The melancholy fiend is hied away;
To fate resigned, I feel returning rest,
Sweet friendship, now, has all my soul possessed,
And Colin young, with his Eliza fair,
Shall equal portions of my bosom share:
Long may succeeding years their love renew,
A pattern for each nymph and shepherd true,
And may Eliza fair, and Colin young,
To distant times by happy pairs be sung:

This, and as far as page 96 inclusive, by the same gentleman.
PROLOGUE.
BY E.R.
LAdies, the ends for which we meet tonight,
Are social good, and innocent delight,
Past scenes of mirth, by present, we restore,
And thanks return for honors dealt before.
These too aloud for gratitude shall call,
Whenever your presence cheers a future ball.
The voids of life are often unsupplied
From awkward shame, or ill-consider'd pride:
Still of our talents diffident or vain,
We dread as vassals, or as kings disdain;
Diseased with spleen, or impotence of mind,
Skulking, sad fugitives, from human-kind.
Converse, no doubt, an institute divine,
Corrects our manners, bids our virtues shine;
For still imperfect was the Maker's plan,
Till this improved the savage into man.
Yet ill by friendship man with man, we strive
To keep the soul of social bliss alive:
Friendship among ourselves is seldom true,
But always proves more faithful made by you.
Fired by your sex it vies with joys above,
It mounts, it glows exalted into love.
Say, then, ye tender, and ye truly fair,
Since heaven has formed you with distinguished care,
And made a parent lavish of his store,
In Nature's blessings rich, in Virtue's more;
Say, could such gifts be ever meant the lot
Of the pert coxcomb, or the stupid sot?
Oh, if impartially you dart your frowns
On well-bred Fribbles, and on ill-bred Clowns;
If men from honor, as from shame exempt,
The false and venal share your just contempt;
When the smit youth of spirit, and of sense,
Attacks your hearts, forbear a long defense;
Dire fruits of Smithfield-sales let truth avert,
And bless with beauty, where you find desert.
POMPILIA. AN ODE.
WRITTEN BY THE SIDE OF A FOUNTAIN WHOSE WATERS MIX WITH THE RIVER VANDAL.
FAir crystal fount, whose peaceful bed
Unnumber'd pebbles hide,
From whence, by Nature's bounty fed,
Perennial waters glide.
What Nymph, by Satyrs hot pursued,
Attempting swift escape,
Did, to thy streams transformed, elude
The meditated rape?
'Twas she, Pompilia, virgin pure,
Of chaste Diana's train,
By Vandal loved, but ah! secure,
By Vandal loved in vain.
Now toward his banks, her only trust,
Fear gave her footsteps wing;
She swoon'd, she fell, deformed with dust,
To rise a silver spring.
Then, Vandal, first thy longing arms
The passive fair sustained,
And owed to lawless lust the charms,
Thy love had never gained.
Yet coy, as when a maid of old,
Though bright as noontide ray;
She trembles still, and, icy-cold,
In silence steals away.
A DIALOGUE, BETWEEN A GENTLEMAN AND A LADY, AT A BALL AT CROYDON.
BY E.R.
LADY. GET along, sir -- I hate you, that is flat --
Let me go then -- Lord bless me -- be quiet --
If you wont keep your hands off, take that --
Do You think I came here to a riot?

G. Why, madam, -- how now? do you scratch?
In short, miss, I wont bear this usage --
You're a little, unthinking cross-patch --
And yet you're of miss I know who is age.

L. Of this, or of that miss's age,
What business have fellows with me, sir? --
Put yourself into never such a rage,
I care not three skips of a flea, sir --

G. Lord, madam, I hope no offense; --
My words seldom bear any meaning: --
Besides, you're a lady of sense,
And anger would scorn to be seen in.

L. Such rudeness would ruffle a saint --
I wish you would learn to be civil. --

G. One kiss, and I will, I Will maintain't --


L. Well! sure you're an impudent devil --
There! -- now are you satisfied?

G. No:


L. How can folks be so mortally teazing?


G. While your lips so much sweetness bestow,
Your nails can do nothing displeasing.

AN APOLOGY FOR RUNNING AWAY.
Whenever superior force defies,
It Is good the battle to decline;
Grotius himself would so advise,
And I may make his motives mine.
Who roams, a stronger foe to seek,
Is sure unhappily employed;
Retreat's the wisdom of the weak;
It Is often a triumph to avoid.
Mackheath, on either side attacked,
With artless honesty, affirms,
Opposed by odds, he cannot act,
And fights not, but on equal terms.
That, therefore, conquest may accrue,
Your corpse should half its strength detach;
What fool would make attempt on two,
When one may prove above his match?
SONG
TO A TUNE IN THE PARTING LOVERS.
AND must thou leave us, Nancy,
And quit thy conquests round?
Ah! can no necromancy
To bring thee back be found?
Thou Venus' smock were wrapped in,
Who gave those charms, we see,
So fatal to the captain,
Thy zealous devotee.
What though thy father cruel
Decrees thy triumphs over,
Soon absence heaps with fuel,
The love that blazed before.
Thy blade, to change the sentence,
Shall summon force and skill,
And thou, by Dad's repentance,
Revisit Dupper's Hill.
SONG.
TEll me where the weakness lies,
You who seem above it,
Whence we joys in hand despise,
Whence remote we covet?
If, when objects distant move,
Still they can allure us,
Will that nigh they worthless prove
Not suffice to cure us?
Strange! our will perverse and blind
Schemes of peace opposes;
Strange! we look aloft to find
What Is beneath our noses.
Go, ye anxious fools, and stun
Heaven with vain addresses;
He obtains your vows in one,
Who content possesses.
TO NANNETTE.
TIme flies, Nannette, to seal our doom,
Nor backward turns his head,
But sweeps with unremitted plume
The living to the dead.
Alas! those eyes, which warm the soul,
But gild a summer's day,
Too soon in vain their orbs shall roll,
And soon their fires decay.
Those dimples, where the Loves reside,
And mock the dread of sin,
In wrinkles must their glories hide,
As if they never had been.
Nor this alone; for age will prey
A vulture on the mind,
And, stealing brilliant thoughts away,
Leave naught but cares behind.
Thee black Reflection shall surprise
Neglected, and uncouth,
All passions lost, but what suffice
To curse thy pride of youth.
Prevent the ills these notes foretell,
Be kind, lest men complain,
That Nature has but trifled well,
And formed thee fair in vain.
TO A LADY, ON HER OBTAINING A PRIZE IN THE LOTTERY.
MAdam, to you since Fortune proves so kind,
Sure, ill they paint who represent her blind:
At least, it is plain, that, destitute of sight,
She needs no eyes to place her favors right.
WRITTEN AT VENLO DURING THE LATE WAR: ON A BEAUTIFUL CHILD BEING KILLED BY THE
FALL OF A STONE FROM THE STEEPLE.
ONE summer's day, invited by the shade,
As near a time-shook tower an infant played,
From the high summit, whence a pigeon fled,
A severed fragment crushed his blameless head.
Ye ruthless hosts, whose desolating skill
Makes lightnings slash, and mimic thunders kill;
Destructive engines need your rage employ,
When time can temples, doves can life destroy?
EPITAPH ON AN INFANT.
HEre, doomed the sabbath of the grave to keep,
In peace, dear child, (so pray thy parents) sleep;
Sleep till the God of Nature bids thee wake;
And of thy raptures may they then partake.
AN INSCRIPTION DESIGNED FOR THE STATUE OF EDWARD THE SIXTH IN ST. THOMAS'S
HOSPITAL.
ON Edward's brow no laurels cast a shade,
Nor at his feet are warlike spoils displayed;
Yet here, since first his bounty raised the pile,
The lame grow active, and the languid smile:
See this, ye chiefs, and, struck with envy, pine,
To kill is brutal, but to save, divine.
THE DEATH OF OTHO.
FROM MARTIAL.
WHen fierce Bellona doubtful held the scale,
And yet in arms soft Otho might prevail,
Shocked at the bloodshed civil strife must deal,
Deep in his breast he plunged the fatal steel;
Cato was greater living none deny,
But say, than Otho did he greater die?
ON A LATE PARRICIDE.
DEtested deed! what rites shall purge the land,
Where dies the parent by the Miss Blandy.
daughter's hand?
Fell tigers rend the lamb and sportive kid,
Yet hold the slaughter of their race forbid.
O grant me instinct! if from reason flows
A fierceness more than savage nature knows.
THE ROMAN CHARITY, IN CONTRAST TO THE FOREGOING.
THE Latian dame, a prison's nightly guest,
To sat a father's hunger drained her breast;
No less could filial piety confer,
Than cherish life in him who gave it her.
EPIGRAM.
CAssandra from her spark received
The gift of prophesying,
Yet so, that all who her believed
The wench was given to lying.
Thy gift of midwifry, O G -- n,
Thy looks alike disparage,
Preventing often a lying-in,
By causing a miscarriage. --
ANOTHER.
OLD Airs subpoenaed to the grave,
The world consents to call a knave:
This, G -- n, of thee is seldom said;
The cause is plain -- Thou art not dead. --
EPITAPH ON A MAN WHO DIED SUDDENLY AT CHURCH.
HEre lies a man (behold what faith can do!)
At once found righteous, and rewarded too.
Whose spirit, mounting on the wings of prayer,
Scaled heaven's blessed seats, and craved acceptance there.
God, pleased the soul so high essayed to soar,
Approved its zeal, and gave it back no more.
ON ONE WHO DIED OF THE HYP.
DEath, by a conduct strange and new,
Proved here the effect, and motive too:
Ned met the blow he meant to fly,
And died, because -- he feared to die.
EPIGRAM ON THE FALSE REPORT OF MRS. H -- Y'S DEATH.
ON wings of winds his journey Rumor sped,
Proclaiming wide illustrious H -- y dead:
Suspended tears stood big in every eye,
Till Truth's fair aspect chased the recent lie:
Slow moved the tears to sorrow's sad employ,
But gushed a torrent in the cause of joy.
EPITAPH INTENDED FOR MY OWN TOMBSTONE.
THat Power supreme who taught me first to breathe,
Now bids my clay augment the dust beneath:
Enough to sense, that, formed of human kind,
I filled that space for which I was designed;
Enough to Nature, if I filled it well --
This the great day of final doom shall tell.
GRATITUDE. A POEM.
BY WILLIAM THOMPSON, M.A. LATE FELLOW OF QUEEN'S COLLEGE.
SHall foreign lands for Pomfret wake the lyre,
And Tyber's more than Isis' banks inspire?
Let Isis' groves with Pomfret's name resound;
Not Rome alone can boast of classic ground.
Ye sons of harmony, the wreath prepare,
The living laurel wreath, to bind her hair.
Hail, fair exemplar of the good and great,
The Muses hail thee to their honored seat,
And never, since Anna with her presence blessed,
They sung a nobler, more auspicious guest.
Behold our youth, transported at the sight;
Behold our virgins, sparkling with delight;
Even venerable age forgets its snow,
The splendour catches, and consents to glow.
Ye youths, with Pomfret's praises tune the shell;
Ye virgins, learn from Pomfret to excel:
For her let age, with fervent prayers and pure,
The blessings of all-bounteous heaven secure.
Their breathing incense let the Graces bring;
Their grateful Paeans let the Muses sing.
If praise be guilt, ye laurels, cease to grow,
Oxford to sing, and Seraphims to glow.
No altars to an idol-power we raise,
Nor consecrate the worthless with our praise,
To merit only, and to goodness just,
We rear the arch-triumphal and the bust.
Sprung from the The Pembroke family have been remarkable for genius. Mary,
countess of Pembroke, sister to Sir Philip Sidney, for whose entertainment he
wrote his Arcadia, published a tragedy called Antonius. Ann, countess of
Pembroke, had Daniel for her tutor, and erected to Spenser the monument in
Westminster Abbey. Wil^iam, earl of Pembroke, printed a volume of poems.
Shakespeare's and Fletcher's works, in their first editions, are dedicated to
the earl of Pembroke: and Thomas, who ought particularly to be mentioned on
this occasion, made the largest and finest collection of statues of any
nobleman in Europe.
Pembroke race, their nation's pride,
Allied by science, as by blood allied,
Illustrious rare! sure to protect or please
With patriot freedom, or with courtly ease;
Blessed with the graceful form, and tuneful mind,
To Oxford dear, as to the Muses kind!
Thy gifts, O Pomfret, we with wonder view,
And while we praise their beauties think of you.
Who but a Venus could a Cupid send,
And who a Tully but Minerva's friend?
A speechless Tully, lest he should commend.
The praise you merit you refuse to hear;
No marble orator can wound your ear.
Mere statues, worse than statues we should be,
If Oxford's sons more silent were than he.
Scarce silent, and impatient of the stone,
He seems to thunder from his rostral throne:
He wakes the marble, by some Phidias taught,
And, eloquently dumb, he looks a thought.
With hopes and fears we tremble or rejoice,
Deceived we listen, and expect a voice.
This station satisfies his noble pride,
Disdaining, but in Oxford, to reside.
Here safely we behold fierce Marius frown,
Glad that we have no Marius, save in stone,
So animated by the master's skill,
The Gaul, awe-strucken, dares not -- cannot kill.
The sleeping Cupids happily expressed
The fiercer passions foreign to thy breast.
Long strangers to the laughter-loving Dame,
They from Arcadia, not from Paphos, came.
Whenever his lyre thy kindred Sidney strung,
The flocking Loves around their Poet hung:
Whenever he fought, they fluttered by his side,
And stiffen'd into marble, when he died.
Half-drop'd their quivers, and half-seal'd their eyes,
They only sleep: -- for Cupid never dies.
" A sleeping Cupid!" (cries some well-drest smart,)
" It Is false! I feel his arrows in my heart."
I own, my friend, your argument is good,
And who denies, that is made of flesh and blood;
But yon bright circle, strong in native charms,
No Cupid's bow requires, nor borrowed arms:
The radiant Messenger of conquest flies
Keen from each glance, and pointed from their eyes.
His heart, whom such a prospect cannot move,
Is harder, colder, than the Marble-Love.
But Modesty rejects what Justice speaks:
-- I see soft blushes stealing over their cheeks. --
Not Phidian labors claim the verse alone,
The figured brass, or fine-proportion'd stone.
To make you theirs the Sister Arts conspire,
You animate the canvas or the lyre:
A new creation on your canvas flows,
Life meets your hand, and from your pencil glows:
How swells your various lyre, or melts away,
While every Muse attends on every lay!
The bright contagion of Hesperian skies,
Burned in your soul, and lightened in your eyes,
To view what Raphael painted, Vinci planned,
And all the wonders of the classic land.
Proud of your charms, applauding Rome confessed
Her own Cornelias breathing in your breast.
The Virtues, which each foreign realm renown,
You bore in triumph home, to grace your own.
Apelles thus to form his finished piece,
The beauteous Pomfret of adoring Greece,
In one united, with his happy care,
The fair perfections of a thousand fair.
Though Virtue may with moral luster charm,
Religion only can the bosom warm.
In thee Religion wakens all her fires,
Perfumes thy heart, and spotless soul inspires.
A Cato's Daughter might of virtue boast,
Nobly to vice, though not to glory, lost:
A Pomfret, taught by Piety to rise,
Looks down on glory, while she hopes the skies.
Angels with joy prepare the starry crown,
And Seraphs feed a flame, so like their own.
One statue more let Rhedicina raise,
To charm the present, brighten future days;
The sculptured column grave with Pomfret's name,
A column, worthy of thy temple, Fame!
Praxitiles might such a form commend,
And borrow graces which he used to lend;
Where ease with beauty, force with softness meet,
Though mild majestic, and though awful sweet.
Of gold and elephant, on either hand,
Let Piety and Bounty, graceful, stand;
With fillets this, with roses that entwined,
And breath their virtues on the gazer's mind.
Low at her feet, the sleeping Cupids placed,
By Marius guarded, and with Tully graced:
A monument of gratitude remain
The bright Palladium of Minerva's fane.
MORE NIGHT THOUGHTS.
BY MR. W.
O Night, dark Night! wrapped round with Stygian gloom,
Thy riding-hood opaque! wove by the hands
Of Clotho and of Atropos: -- Those hands
That spin my thread of life, -- how near its end!
Ah wherefore, silent Goddess, should thou thus
Awake my terrors? silence sounds alarms
To me, and darkness dazzles my weak mind.
Hark! -- it is the death-watch! -- posts themselves can speak
Death's language! -- stop, O stop, insatiate worm,
I feel thy summons; to my fellow-worms
Thou bidst me hasten! -- I obey thy call; --
For wherefore should I live? -- vain life to me
Is but a tattered garment, a patched rag,
That ill defends us from the cold of age.
Cramped are my faculties, my eyes grow dim,
No music charms my ear, no meats my taste;
The females fly me, and my very wife --
Poor woman! -- knows me not. --
Ye flattering, idle vanities of life,
Where are ye flown? the birds, that used to sing
Amidst my spreading branches, now forsake
This leafless trunk, and find no shelter there,
What Is life? -- what is death? thus coveted and feared? --
Life is a fleeting shadow -- death's no more: --
Death's a dark lantern; life a candle's end,
Stuck on a save-all, soon to end in stench --
Foh! death's a privy; life the alley green,
That leads to it; where, perchance, from either side
A sweet briar hedge, or shrubs of broader leaf,
And more commodious, breathe their treacherous sweets.
Death follows life, and stops it ere it reach
The topmost spoke of Fortune's envied wheel! --
Wheel! -- life's a wheel, and each man is the ass,
That turns it; often receiving in the end
But water and rank thistles for his pains.
And yet, Lorenzo, if considered right,
A life of labor is a life of ease!
Pain is true joy, and want is luxury!
Vain mirth's an opera tune, a tortured sigh,
The breath of eunuchs; it dismembers bliss,
Makes man not man, and castrates real joy.
Would you be merry? -- seek some charnel-house
Where death inhabits, give a ball to death,
A doomsday ball, and lead up Holben's dance.
How weak? how strong? how gentle? how severe
Are Laughter's chains, that gall a willing world!
The noisy Idiot shakes her bells at all,
Not even the Bible, or the Night-Thoughts 'scape --
Fools spare not Heaven itself, O Y --! nor thee.
ODE ON THE DEATH OF MR. JAMES THOMSON.
BY MR. WILLIAM COLLINS The scene of the following stanzas is supposed to lie
on the Thames near Richmond. This ode and the subsequent account of the author
were, by an unlucky accident, omitted in our last number.
.
IN yonder grove a Druid lies
Where slowly winds the stealing wave!
The Year's best sweets shall duteous rise
To deck its Poet's sylvan grave!
In yon deep bed of whispering reeds
His airy harp The harp of Aeolus, of which see a description in the Castle of
Indolence.
shall now be laid,
That he, whose heart in sorrow bleeds,
May love through life the soothing shade.
Then maids and youths shall linger here,
And while its sounds at distance swell,
Shall sadly seem in Pity's ear
To hear the Woodland Pilgrim's knell.
Remembrance often shall haunt the shore
When Thames in summer-wreaths is dressed,
And often suspend the dashing oar
To bid his gentle spirit rest!
And often as Ease and Health retire
To breezy lawn, or forest deep,
The friend shall view yon whitening Richmond church.
spire,
And 'mid the varied landscape weep.
But thou, who own'st that earthy bed,
Ah! what will every dirge avail?
Or tears, which Love and Pity shed
That mourn beneath the gliding sail!
Yet lives there one, whose heedless eye
Shall scorn thy pale shrine glimmering near?
With him, sweet Bard, may Fancy die,
And Joy desert the blooming year.
But thou, lorn Stream, whose sullen tide
No sedge-crown'd Sisters now attend,
Now waft me from the green hill's side
Whose cold turf hides the buried Friend!
And see, the fairy valleys fade,
Dun Night has veiled the solemn view!
-- Yet once again, dear parted Shade,
Meek Nature's Child again adieu!
The genial meads assigned to bless
Thy life, shall mourn thy early doom,
Their hinds, and shepherd-girls shall dress
With simple hands thy rural tomb.
Long, long, thy stone and pointed clay
Shall melt the musing Briton's eyes,
O! vales, and wild woods, shall he say,
In yonder grave your Druid lies!
The following character of Mr. Thomson, in his poem called the Castle of
Indolence, is said to be written by Lord L --.

A Bard there dwelt, more fat than Bard beseems,
Who void of envy, guile, and lust of gain,
On Virtue still, and Nature's pleasing themes,
Poured forth his unpremeditated strain,
The world forsaking with a calm disdain:
Here laughed he careless, in his easy seat,
Here quaff'd encircled with the joyous train;
Oft-moralizing Sage his ditty sweet!
He loathed much to write, ne cared to repeat.
SOME ACCOUNT OF THE LIFE AND WRITINGS OF MR. WILLIAM COLLINS.
MR. William Collins was born at Chichester in Sussex, in the year 1721: in
which city his father was a reputable tradesman. He was admitted a scholar of
Winchester college, Feb. 23, 1733. where he spent seven years under the care of
the learned Dr. Burton. In the year 1740, in consideration of his merit, he was
placed first in the list of those scholars who are elected from Winchester
college to New college in Oxford: but no vacancy happening at the latter, he
was entered, the same year, a commoner of Queen's college, Ox. and July 29,
1741. was elected a demi, or scholar, of Magdalen college in the same
university. At school he began to study poetry and criticism, particularly the
latter. The following epigram, made by him while at Winchester-school,
discovers a genius, and turn of expression, very rarely to be met with in
juvenile compositions.

TO MISS AURELIA C -- R, ON HER WEEPING AT HER SISTER'S WEDDING.
CEase, fair Aurelia, cease to mourn;
Lament not Hannah's happy state;
You may be happy in your turn,
And seize the treasure you regret.
With Love united Hymen stands,
And softly whispers to your charms;
" Meet but your lover in my bands,
" You Will find your sister in his arms."
His Latin exercises were never so much admired as his English. -- At Oxford he
wrote the epistle to Sir Thomas Hanmer, and Oriental eclogues, which were first
published in 1742, under the title of Persian eclogues. About the year 1743, he
left Oxford, having taken the degree of bachelor of arts, weary of the
confinement and uniformity of an academical life; fondly imagining that a man
of parts was sure of making his fortune in London; and struck with the name of
author and poet, without consulting his friends, he immediately removed to
town, and rashly resolved to live by his pen, without undertaking the drudgery
of any profession. Here he soon dissipated his small fortune, to compensate for
which, he projected the history of the revival of learning in Italy, under the
pontificates of Julius II. and Leo X. His subscription for this work not
answering his expectations, he engaged with a bookseller, to translate
Aristotle's Poetics, and to illustrate it with a large and regular comment.
This scheme also being laid aside, he turned his thoughts to dramatic poetry,
and being intimately acquainted with the manager, resolved to write a tragedy,
which however he never executed. In the year 1746 he published his odes; and
shortly after went abroad to our army in Flanders, to attend his uncle, colonel
Martin, who, dying soon after his arrival, left him a considerable fortune;
which however he did not live long to enjoy, for he fell into a nervous
disorder, which continued, with but short intervals, till his death, which
happened in 1756. and with which disorder his head and intellects were at times
affected.

For a man of such an elevated genius, Mr. Collins has wrote but little: his
time was chiefly taken up in laying extensive projects, and vast designs, which
he never even begun to put in execution.

We have been favored with the following account of Mr. Collins by a
gentleman, deservedly eminent in the republic of letters, who knew him
intimately well.

Mr. Collins was a man of extensive literature, and of vigorous faculties. He
was acquainted not only with the learned tongues, but with the Italian, French,
and Spanish languages. He had employed his mind chiefly upon works of fiction,
and subjects of fancy; and, by indulging some peculiar habits of thought, was
eminently delighted with those flights of imagination which pass the bounds of
nature, and to which the mind is reconciled only by a passive acquiescence in
popular traditions. He loved fairies, genii, giants, and monsters; he delighted
to rove through the meanders of enchantment, to gaze on the magnificence of
golden palaces, to repose by the waterfals of Elysian gardens. This was however
the character rather of his inclination than his genius, the grandeur of
wildness, and the novelty of extravagance, were always desired by him, but were
not always attained. But diligence is never wholly lost: if his efforts
sometimes caused harshness and obscurity, they likewise produced in happier
moments sublimity and splendor. This idea, which he had formed of excellence,
led him to oriental fictions, and allegorical imagery; and, perhaps, while he
was intent upon description, he did not sufficiently cultivate sentiment: his
poems are the productions of a mind not deficient in fire, nor unfurnished with
knowledge either of books or life, but somewhat obstructed in its progress, by
deviation in quest of mistaken beauties.

His morals were pure, and his opinions pious. In a long continuance of
poverty, and long habits of dissipation, it cannot be expected that any
character should be exactly uniform. There is a degree of want by which the
freedom of agency is almost destroyed, and long association with fortuitous
companions will at last relax the strictness of truth, and abate the fervor of
sincerity. That this man, wise and virtuous as he was, passed always
unentangled through the snares of life, it would be prejudice and temerity to
affirm. But it may be said, that at least he preserved the source of action
unpolluted, that his principles were never shaken, that his distinctions of
right and wrong were never confounded, and that his faults had nothing of
malignity or design, but proceeded from some unexpected pressure, or casual
temptation.

The latter part of his life cannot be remembered but with pity and sadness. He
languished some years under that depression of mind which enchains the
faculties without destroying them, and leaves reason the knowledge of right,
without the power of pursuing it. These clouds, which he found gathering on his
intellects, he endeavored to disperse by travel, and passed into France, but
found himself constrained to yield to his malady, and returned: he was for some
time confined in a house of lunatics, and afterward retired to the care of his
sister in Colchester, where death at last came to his relief.

After his return from France, the writer of this character paid him a visit at
Islington, where he was waiting for his sister, whom he had directed to meet
him: there was then nothing of disorder discernable in his mind by any but
himself, but he had then withdrawn from study, and traveled with no other book
than an English testament, such as children carry to the school; when his
friend took it into his hand, out of curiosity to see what companion a man of
letters had chosen, "I have but one book," says Collins, "but that is the best."

GENERAL INDEX.
*The numerals refer to the volumes, and the figures to the pages.

A
ABelard to Eloisa, by Pattison, iv. 27 Ditto to ditto, by Mr. Cawthorn, iv. 47
Accident, a pastoral elegy, v. 112 Advice to an author, v. 123 African prince
to Zara, iv. 13 Alcove, verses in one, vi. 9 Amanda, ode to, xi. 12 Amoret, on
her recovery from sickness. iii. 116 Amoroso, vii. 100 Anacreon, ode xxviii.
imitated, ii. 73 -- Imitated, vi. 62 Anacreontic on the spring, iv. 12 Aningait
and A jut, by mrs. Penny. vii. 81 Apology for running away, xii. 86 Arachne, on
the death of, iii. 33 Atheism, the folly of, v. 122 Atterbury, bishop, poems
by, viii. 74 -- on his funeral, viii. 79 --, bishop, on his preaching, by d.
Wharton, xi. 7 Author, further advice to one, vi. 121 Autumnal ode, ix. 3
Autumn, by Brerewood, ix. 7 -- The decline of, x. 5
B
Bacchanalian, ii. 95 Barreaux's sonnet translated, viii. 65 Barrow, his verses
on Milton translated, xii. 43 Belisarius, on seeing the picture of, x. 64
Birthday, to a lady on here is, April the first, iv. 7 -- ode, vi. 112 -- by
Whitehead, vii. 120 Bramston, James, to capt. Hinton, viii. 94 Breach of the
rivers, v. 105 Bridgewater, duke, to his memory, ix. 122 Byng, admiral, on his
return from Minorca, vi. 74
C
Carnation, verses sent with one, vi. 6 Charity, to, iii. 84 Charles I. on a
quiet conscience, viii. 66 C -- d, lord, on the duchess of R -- d, iii. 111
Chloe's soliloquy, vi. 117 Cicero, on the banishment of, by the d. of Whirton,
xi. 5 Cit's country-box, iv. 102 Cleanthes, his hymn to God, i. 72 Colin and
Lucy, a fragment, iii. 119 Collins, William, poems by, Oriental eclogues, xi.
17 Twelve odes, xi. 31 Epistle to Sir Tho. Hanmer, xi. 67 Song from
Shakespeare's Cymbeline, xi. 74 Ode on the death of Thomson, xii. 104
Comparison, vii. 123 Complaint, a pastoral elegy, iii. 86 Concord, xii. 53
Congreve, his epistle to lord Cobham, iii. 108 Contemplation, an ode, vi. 7
Contraste to mrs. Carter's ode to wisdom, iv. 91 Copernican system, a poem,
iii. 67 Copper farthing, x. 48 Country churchyard, soliloquy in, ii. 49
Cunningham, poems by, iv. 81. vii. 109
D
Daughter, to the memory of one, iv. 73 Death, a poem, xii. 9 Deity, a poem, by
S. Boyse, ii. 9 Denis, mr. fables by him, ii. 97 Fables by ditto, i. 97
Devil-painter, vi. 118 Dialogue in the senate house, ix. 92 -- at Croydon, xii.
84 Doubt, origin of, iv. 60 Dryads, a poem, by mr. Diaper, ix. 17 Dryden, mr.
on the old bust of, ii. 119 Duncombe, mr. John, poems by him, vii. 17, 34, etc.
By ditto, x. 65, etc. Dyer, his epistle to a friend in town, iii. 112
E
Elegy, vi. 68 -- on a pile of ruins, vii. 10 Elegies, four, morning, noon,
owning, midnight, viii. 20 Elegy, written among some ruins, viii. 88 -- on a
drowned shepherd, xi. 85 Eliza's wedding day, xii. 75 Enquiries, on
theological, iv. 63 Epigram, on cutting down some college-trees, iv. 111 -- on
the passage of the Israelites, vi. 67 -- on a glass, viii. 18 -- on mrs.
Collier's dedication, xi. 97 -- on some dull verses, xi. 102 Epigrams and
epitaphs, several by E. R, xii. 90, etc. Epistle to a lady, iv. 97 -- from Mary
the cook-maid, xi. 98 Richard's answer, xi. 100 Epitaph, by mr. Gray, viii. 121
-- on general Wolf, viii. 122 Epitaph on Theodore, king of Corsica, ix. 123
Epitaph, written in the vapors, xi. 97 Essex, earl of, verses by, vii. 113,
etc. Evadne to Emma, vii. 71 Eupolis, his hymn to the Creator, i. 66 Evening
contemplation in coll. a parody on Gray, vii. 34 -- ode, ix. 11 -- hymn, by Sir
Tho. Brown, xi. 121 -- elegy, xii. 60
F
Fables for grown gentleman, x. 17 Fame, an ode, xii. 31 Farewell hymn to the
country, by Potter, v. 51 -- to summer, x. 7 -- to the country, x. 11 Father's
advice to his son, xi. 76 Feminead, a poem, by mr. Duncombe, vii. 17 Fireside,
by I. H. Brown, esquire. ix. 14 Fire, water, and reputation, a fable, ix. 88
Fitzgerald, to the rev. mr. ix. 61 Fog, on that in London, vi. 57 Force of
love, by mr. Cowley, viii, 80 Forester, on captain, traveling in the
Highlands, i. 10 Friendship and Love, a dialogue, vi, 107 Friendship, xi. 118.
--, in imitation of Cowler, xii. 71
G
Garden inscriptions, by mr. Thompson, viii. 97, etc. Genius of Britain, to mr.
Pit, vi. 102 -- ode to, vii. 7 George II. physical cause of his death, iv. 80
George II. on his death, by Warton, ii. 81 God is love, vi. 64 Granby, on the
marquis of, losing his hat, iii. 101 Gratitude, a poem, xii. 97 Griffiths, on
mother, iv. 123 Gymnasiad, an epic poem, viii. 45
H
Hairs, on the falling off, ix. 10 Harvest-scene, vii. 6 Health, hymn to, iii.
97 -- ode to, iv. 116 -- ode to, vi. 10 Hedges, mr. to Sir Hans Sloane, viii.
91 Henry to Rosamond, by Pattnon, iv. 45 Hervey, James, pieces by, viii. 83
Hope, ode to, iii. 44 --, a pastoral ballad, xi. 93 Horace, ode iv. book 1.
imitated, ii. 8 -- ode xiv. book ii. ditto, ix. 118 -- ode xxx. b. i. ditto,
ix. 119 -- part of sat. vi. b. ii. translated, x. 113 -- a parody on his city
and country mouse, x. 116 -- epist. v. b. i. imitated, x. 119 Horse, on the
death of a favorite, vi. 60 Hours of love, in four elegies, vi. 90 Howard,
doctor, his preachment, ix 121 Hughes, mr. to the memory of, iii. 29 --, his
verses on the wandering beauty, iv. 112 Hymn to the Creator, by mr. Merrick, i.
75 -- occasioned by psalm 65th, i. 79 -- from psalm 8th, i. 80
I
Inconstancy, the cause of, xi. 111 Indifference, a prayer for, vi. 76 Inn,
reflections at one, iii. 99 Inscription for an hermitage, iv. 11 -- on the tubs
in Ham-walks, v. 87 -- on a pedestal near Richmond ferry, v. 89 -- for an oak,
vi. 111 -- for General Wolfe's monument, vi. 115 Inscription by Gib. Weft, esquire
viii. 102 Jourdan, the fall of Chloe's, by J. Philips, iv. 107 Journey to
Doncaster, ix. 105 Irby, Sir William, on his being created a peer, viii. 17
Judgment, day of, xii. 20
K
Kent, man of, vii 111 The kite, an heroic-comic poem, iii. 49
L
Labor in vain, a song. v. 110 Lady and linnet, a tale, vi. 15 Ladies
lamentation, xi. 91 Lady, advice to one who intended to turn nun, xi. 107 Lass
of Isleworth mill, a ballad, xi. 80 Layng, to mr. on his sermon, v. 118 Leaf,
on the fall of, x. 3 Life, for and against, from the Greek, ii. 66 Life, an
ode, iii. 41 Lock, mr. poems by, viii. 71 Lotteries, a few thoughts on, xi.
105 Love-elegy, ii. 113 -- at Oxford, v. 119 Love-verses, in two elegies, v. 65
Love-elegies, two, v. 76 Lucian, epigram by, translated, ii. 72
M
Marloe, Christopher, poem by, ii. 53 --, imitation of, ii. 59 Marriage, verses
before, vii. 97 -- eight years after, vii. 98 Materials for a monody, v. 111
May, hymn on the approach of, iv. 113 Melcolme, lord, to doctor Young, viii. 16
Melpomene, an ode, vi. 37 Metastasio, imitation of, vii. 77 Milton, sonnet by
him, viii. 67 --, a fragrant by, viii. 68 --, to him on Paradise loft, viii. 69
--, on Bentley's emendations of, viii. 70 Minister of state, xi. 100 Moonlight
night, v. 32 Moonlight, ode by a lady, vii. 68 Morgan, doctor, on the death of,
ix. 98 Morning, hymn to, in summer, vii. 3 Morning, elegy, xii 65
Mulberry-garden, viii. 5
N
Needle a poem in five cantos, ix. 65 Newmarket, a satire, x. 54 Nothing, a
poem, xi. 9 Nuptials, on the royal, by mrs. Penny, i. 169 -- on ditto. by mr.
Spence, iv. 93 -- on those of lord Gray, and ix. 116 -- card, ix. 117
O
Oak and dunghill, a fable, ix 47 Oblivion, ode to, vi. 52 Obscurity, ode to,
vi. 46 Ode to pleasure, iii. 47 -- on darkness, i. 117 -- on the new year, by
Whitehead, ii. 86 -- on Ranelagh, a parody on Grey's ode, v. 93 -- to evening.
vi. 13 Ode, written before a college vacation, vii. 106 -- to solitude, viii.
19 -- four by mr. Hudson, vi. 22 Oldfield, mrs. on her death, ii. 116 Orrery,
written on his remarks on Swift, iv. 120
P
Parne, doctor, on the death of, x. 14 Pastor Fido, imitation of, vii. 76
Pastoral hymn, from the 23d psalm, xi. 113 -- the same, by doctor Byron, xi.
115 Peace, on occasion of, i. 112 Petronius, passage from, translated, ii. 70
Petrach and Laura, xi. 109 Pin, a poem on one, ix. 63 Pinnell, mr. poems by
him, i. 81, etc. Pit, Christopher, imitations of Horace, and poems by him, x.
81 Pleasure, the man of, ii. 92 Podisippus, parody on, by lord Verulam, ii. 68
Pompilia, an ode, xii. 83 Pope, poems by, xii. 60 Poyntz, mr. on his birthday,
ii. 120 Progress of poetry, by mr. Maden, iii. 71 Prologue to the Grateful
Fair, by C. Smart, iv. 123 -- to the Distressed Mother, xi. 119 Prologue, xii. 81
Prospect, on an extensive one, vii. 5 Psalm, 104th imitated, by Blacklock, iii.
78 Puellam, ad onnatissimam, xii. 34
R
Raleigh, Sir Walter, poems by, ii. 55, and vi. 55 Rattle, a song, xi. 14
Recantation, an ode, v. 73 Redbreast, to one, viii. 58 Resignation, hymn to,
vii. 74 Rival-beauties, a poem, v. 98 Robin, a pastoral elegy, ii. 75 Rosamond
to Henry, by Pattison, iv. 34
S
Salt Water condemned, x. 121 -- celebrated, xi. 103 Seasons, a poem, by
Mendez, v. 35 Sensibility, ode to, xi. 95 Shaw, on the death of a lady, i. 81
Silent lover, by Sir Walter Raleigh, vi. 55 Sneerers, the two, xi. 16
Somerville, mr. to lady Anne Coventry, iii. 103 -- his epistle to mr Thomson,
iii. 106 Song for the Park at high mall, iv. 118 -- to Cleora, vi. 12 -- when a
nymph at her toilet, vii. 122 --, by Akenside, vi. 110 -- to Chloe, xi. 83
Songs, xii. 87, etc. Sonnets, from the Italian, vii. 78 -- by Edwards, ix. 112
-- xii. 45 Sonnet, xi. 110 Sorrow, the man of, ii. 89 Soul, the faculties of,
xii. 39 Spring, a rural song, by Brerewood, iii. 9 -- in London, v. 30 --,
stanzas on a forward, ii. 3 --, on the approach of, iii. 5 --, stanzas on, iv.
9 Stockings, to a lady with a pair, x. 45 Summer, a rural song, by Brerewood,
vii. 5 Supplication, by a lady before marriage, i. 95 Sweet William, at the
christening of, v. 117
T
Tame and Isis, on the marriage of, iii. 115 Tears, theory of, ix. 51
Theocritus, idyllium 3d, translated, ii. 61 -- 19th, ditto, ii. 65 -- 30th,
ditto, iii. 113 Thompson, William, his hymn to May, v. 1 Thought in a garden,
vii. 96 -- from Marcus Antoninus, viii. 96 -- at waking, xi, 122 Thunder-storm,
a sacred lyric on, i. 76 Tickell, poems by him, i. 18. -- iii. 117 Trust in
God, a poem, i. 81 Truth at court, iii. 96 --, the sentiments of, xi. 113
Turner, doctor, on his illness, ix. 59
V
Valentine's-day, to a lady on, ii, 79 Vernal ode, iii. 3 Violet, a poem, iii.
13 Virtue and Fame, by lord L -- n, viii. 11 Voltaire, an epistle by him, xii.
46
W
Warburton, to bishop, vii. 63 Watch, reflections on one, ix. 12 Water-mills,
on the invention of. ii. 71 Wine, a poem, by mr. Gay, viii. 35 Winter, a
pastoral-ballad, by Brerewood, i. 5 Woman's age, v. 103 Woman, song in praise
of, vi. 116 Wreight, mrs. poems by, vi. 79, etc. Winter, doctor, to doctor
Cheyne, etc. viii. 86
Y
Yalden, mr. to sir Humphry Mackworth, iv. 65 York and Kent, or the contest,
xi. 107 Young lady, on the death of one, iv. 100 Young gentleman, an the drath
of one, vii. 71 Young lady, on the birth of one, viii. 59 --, on the death of
one, viii. 62
Z
Zara to the Arican prince, iv. 20 Zelis to Ibrahim, xi. 87
FINIS.

