LIBERAL OPINIONS, UPON ANIMALS, MAN, AND PROVIDENCE.

In which are introduced, ANECDOTES OF A GENTLEMAN.

Addressed to the Right Hon. Lady CH***TH*

FROM GAY TO GRAVE, FROM LIVELY TO SEVERE. Pope. By COURTNEY MELMOTH.

VOL. I.

LONDON, Printed for G. ROBINSON, and J. BEW, in Paternoster-Row; and Sold by
J. WALTER, Charing Cross.

MDCCLXXV.

PREFACE.
IT was not till I had read this book in print that I thought about a Preface;
but on reviewing it, prior to publication, I am convinced that a Preface is
absolutely necessary: a single period, however, will comprize it.

In the course of these volumes, it is possible the reader may meet with some
sentiments, which, at first sight, seem unfavourable to the interests of
virtue, and to the laws of moral life. As the direct contrary is all along
intended to be strongly inculcated, the author begs those who think proper to
turn over his pages, will not abruptly decide on any particular passages, which
appear liable to objection, but have patience enough to go calmly on, and
forbear to pass judgment till they have fairly seen the whole of his arguments.

Having thus briefly invited from the reader a candid perusal, I will only
detain him a moment longer, to hear a short account of the work. The
miscellaneous matter here offered, is the result of various efforts, submitted,
at various opportunities, to the author's literary friends: the drudgery of
correction has been obligingly undertaken by those friends, to whom he
confesses himself indebted, not so much for the ardour of particular
compliment, as for the frankness of general criticism.

The poetical parts, when first written, were each designed to stand alone,
particularly the Elegy of a Nightingale, and the Epistle from an Unfortunate
Lady to her Family. The Anecdotes of a Gentleman, are extracted from a larger
work, of which what is now presented is little more than the introduction. The
primary pages treat of Animals, and this part of the performance consists of
moral Fancy-pieces, from which we proceed to the investigation of Facts. In
short, though I have been somewhat immethodical, I have not been totally
unconnected, and that I might not tire by symstematic sameness, I have varied
my style, as often as I varied my subject.

Notwithstanding these kind corrections, however, a very ingenious and
well-known gentleman (whose acquaintance with the author is unluckily of later
date) has still discovered some things, which the writer wishes had not escaped
the eyes of others. Perhaps they did not escape: there is a coy reluctance to
find fault, and a dread of being too honest, in cases of private criticism
often fatal; and a writer's reputation is frequently forfeited by literary
conceit on the one hand, and a scrupulous delicacy on the other.

These volumes were ready for publication when the gentleman, of whom I last
spoke, drew a judicious pen over such sentences as he thought might still gain
a grace from alteration: but it was too late to avail myself of his taste and
sincerity, or the reader would have received a more finished amusement.
However, should the performance thus -- sent to its account With its
imperfections on its head, have merit enough to please the public, the
indulgence shall be repaid by the author's care to correct his errors, in a
future edition.

LIBERAL OPINIONS, etc.
I Am more obliged to you, madam, than I can find language for acknowledgment.
A sentiment of your ladyship's has revived a train of ideas in my mind, which I
have at length determined to indulge -- Be not alarmed. The sentiment, like the
subject, is full of humanity. Ill fare the heart, whose tender bias is
circumscribed by the paltry trammels of self-love, and can withold its
benevolence from the minutest part of animated life. There is a deplorable
illiberality in the affections of the vulgar: narrowly bigoted to one mean set
of notions, and confirmed by the ungenerous maxims that have been inculcated in
the early periods of life, they seldom, or never, rise to a single sentiment,
which reflects dignity either on the head or heart; and the feelings of above
half mankind are totally guided by the most contracted, and partial prejudices.

In contradiction of these limited rationals, and in defiance of customary
impositions, I have the fortitude to think, and judge for myself -- I look on
the animal world as very nearly connected with me; and thus publicly declare
myself the sincere wellwisher of every living thing. I am now going to address
your ladyship upon some very interesting subjects: but, as they may possibly
lengthen my enquiries beyond the limits of my present design, I shall beg leave
to divide my letter into several parts; both for the relief of your attention,
and to afford an opportunity to pause, till it is agreeable to your ladyship to
resume the book.

THE TITLE.
I have called this treatise -- Liberal Opinions, upon interesting Subjects;
the principal of which relate to men, Providence, and animals. I chose this
miscellaneous title to give myself a free scope, and to receive a sanction for
indulging speculations, not absolutely tied down to the rules of writing. By
this, however, I do not mean to run riot in the wilderness of modern digression
-- but if, (by turning a little out of the beaten path,) I can catch an
observation, or pick up a sentiment, neglected by such literary travelers as
set out, like a plodding mechanic, with an inflexible resolution to jog strait
forwards, though they might enjoy the most beautiful prospects by the slightest
deviations -- at the same time, that an obstinate attachment to the old track,
presents nothing to the eye which has any novelty to recommend it, nor any
thing to the mind that can give varied gratification. -- There is a sad
insipidity in those compositions, which are fettered by the chains of
criticism. Like the gardens of a citizen, we have regularity without beauty,
and uniformity without taste. The images stand immodestly staring upon each
other in exact lines -- the busts are placed skulking like q's in a corner, as
equidistant as the rule can measure their spaces; while their trees, alcoves,
and hedges, (smug as their master's wigs) are cut in the most preposterous
manner, and excite the ridicule of every sensible passenger. Among the
countless quantity of books in our language, there are very few, madam, that
abound in original thought. The multiplication of copies is infinite, and yet
it seldom happens that the reader is presented with any fresh instruction, or
unhackneyed entertainment. I mention not this, because I would have you believe
I have hit upon a new vein in the mine -- but as it serves my purpose of making
a remark or two on

THE PREJUDICES OF WRITERS AND READERS.
The power of education is as strong, madam, as the appetites of nature, and in
nothing more than the habits of writer and reader. Most of those who publish
their sentiments, have spent their lives rather in turning over volumes, than
in tracing accurately the shifting scene, with intent to enrich themselves with
original ideas -- rather in reading than in thinking. On the other hand the
majority of those who are most eager after the perusal of books, are directed
by their tutors to read a certain class, on the faith and credit of which, they
are to form their future maxims, opinions, and behavior. Thus both readers and
writers go in leading-strings. The one re-print what has been printed by others
(with some slight alteration) -- the other consider those tenets incontestible,
which they have found in their favorite authors, or heard from the lips of
friends or masters, probably under equal prejudices. There are, indeed, certain
self-evident propositions, the truth of which, like the sun at noon, strike
unobstructed light upon the mind. To cavil or conjecture against these, would
be to war with demonstration, and combat with truth and heaven. There are also
a variety of opinions, rendered awful by the general belief of men, which have
been adopted as maxims out of the reach of confutation. Upon this account, if
at any time a man has dared to oppose any notion, which has been handed down
from father to son with the same care as the rent-rolls of the family estate --
which was put into our mouths with the milk of our mothers, and pinned upon our
understandings as early as the bibs on our bosoms -- what is the consequence?
-- He is condemned as a dangerous innovator, -- as one who would overset the
established system of things -- a system which antiquity and truth have made
venerable and decisive -- Strange bigotry -- it is a dependency, madam, beneath
the natural freedom of the mind. An intellectual obligation is as servile as a
pecuniary one -- one would not, indeed, like Mandeville, oppose every thing,
from the obstinate tenacity of founding a new system upon the ruins of the old
-- for that were as absurd as setting fire to one's house, because some flaws
and errors were perceptible through the building -- but it would, methinks, be
an act of wisdom to do one's best to repair it. I have said thus much as an
excuse for some peculiar sentiments which will be distributed through this
letter. It is likely that I may advance opinions, not wholly correspondent to
the general imitation of thinking -- for, I am sorry to say, that our usual
ideas are derived from a very silly and servile imitation -- the most sensible
people are frequently parrots -- they think as they are bid to think, and talk
the dull dialect of their teachers, from the cradle to the coffin. A man of
original contemplation, is a prodigy; and (like a prodigy) the eyes of every
body are upon him the moment he appears -- even the few which are pleased with
his fortitude, admit the very conviction they feel with some reluctance -- for
we part from nothing we have any length of time been accustomed to venerate --
without pain. -- Thus, many people who have talents for speculation, check the
impulse to speculate through a dislike of being particular. Genius, therefore,
rusts in inactivity, and men content themselves with going on, in the old road,
to avoid the charge of singularity, and the smiles of derision. I have
ventured, however, madam, to give the rein to my inclination, and shall ramble
from the beaten way of literary traffic, as often as it seems necessary to the
discussion of topics, which will at least afford an ample field of liberal
inquiry, and innocent investigation. --

SKETCH OF AN ANIMAL SOCIETY.
I have, as your ladyship will remember, already declared myself the friend of
all the inhabitants which wing the air, or crawl upon the earth: and, although
I have the tenderest attachment to my own species, and glory in the name of man
and christian, yet -- if in my travels through the world, I happen (as is
sometimes the case) to meet in the brute, the insect, or reptile, those
endearing qualities, which I look for amongst men, in vain, I hesitate not to
strike a bargain on the spot -- form a strict alliance with the more rational
animal, and only lament that it is possible for those who have dominion over
the creation to be outdone by beings of an inferior order in the scale of life.

Having said thus much, your ladyship will not wonder if, in this letter, I
should say something in defense of those gentle domestics which accompany us in
our retirements. But of all creatures that are accommodated with four feet, I
am most enamoured of lap-dogs -- yet, I admire almost every sort of dumb
companions, amongst which I have now lived with little of other society for
five years. Will your ladyship please to hear a description of my family.

Suppose me, madam, at my own house, (if I presume not in calling that a house,
which consists of a single story) -- be it then in my cottage (for that is the
term which humility would give it); you behold me sitting before a frugal fire,
with my little partakers of the blaze around me -- that cat, which sits sage
and thinking on the edge of the form, is not more remarkable for her beauty of
person, than for the uncommon accomplishments of her mind. I say mind, because
I am persuaded, and out of doubt as to that particular -- the trick-trying
kitten, which is busied in chasing her shadow round the room, inherits all the
genius of her mother -- but has a small spice of the coquette in her temper;
yet this is so common to pretty young females, and so naturally wears off when
they arrive at the gravity of cat-hood, besides it being graceful in
kitten-hood, that it were a needless severity to check it: the activity and fun
of the creature, as she skips sidelong in wanton attitudes and antics, is now
and then so pleasantly burlesque, that the inflexible muscles of you, old
wretch of a pointer stretched in slumber along the hearth, almost relax into a
grin, and sometimes the veteran is so inspired by the mimickry of little puss,
that he raises his paw -- gives her a pat of encouragement, and discovers all
the playfulness of a puppy. -- There is in this place so fair an opportunity of
trying my skill as a writer, that I cannot resist making

A COMPARISON.
Did you never take notice, madam, of two people of different ages suddenly
attracted to each other by the sympathy of ideas. Nothing but the power of
pleasant thoughts can effect an association -- the old man sits a long time
smothered up, in the mist of his own melancholy -- he hangs his head upon his
breast, fixes his eyes over the fire, and seems to be employed in some profound
speculation: the fatigue, however, of thinking, proves too laborious, and he is
at length rocked to sleep, in the cradle of his reflections. In the mean time,
his favorite boy is left to cater for himself. The eye of a child converts
every trifle into an object of entertainment, and every pretty unimportance is
esteemed, a joyful acquisition. The father, after the refreshments of his nap,
(that nepenthe of age) awakes -- the stripling is acting, the kitten on the
floor, and ingeniously exerts a thousand little efforts, to vary its amusement.
Age, surveys the picture, and recalls ideas which bring to mind the moments
when he was himself the happy harlequin of the carpet -- a tear drops
involuntarily, which is succeeded by a smile. At length the distance of ages is
forgotten; the veteran is caught in the charm of cheerful retrospection,
forgets awhile the decrepitude of the last stage, and mixes in the whimsical
and puerile gratifications of the first.

You see, madam, here were too many flowers to remain uncropt. It would have
been unpardonable for a young writer to let them wither -- and Waste their
sweetness on the desert air.

I have made up my nosegay -- and am now ready to return with your ladyship to

MY FAMILY.
Scampering up that shelf, sports an animal of peculiar pleasantry. It is
Trimbrush, my squirrel, madam -- a very ingenious, sprightly, and whimsical
fellow -- the macaroni of animals, full as mischievous -- full as coxcomic, and
a great deal more witty than many a sine gentleman, whose advantages have been
greater. His many entertaining conceits, and the laughable manner in which he
sometimes amuses himself, have acquired him the name of the Humourist.

Apes, monkies, pies, and parrots, I have none. They were so assuming, and so
saucy a set of domestics, and so arrogantly tyrannized over the pacific, and
meek-minded part of my family, that I even discarded them from the society.
They now reside with characters, for whom they are very proper companions. My
apes are in the possession of certain Mimics, which caricature the excellence
and talents of others, because they have neither talents or excellence of their
own -- and it is expected that the eldest maleape will make his first public
appearance next winter, in the character of a modern Lecturer -- to which will
be added, a farce of burlesque imitations. My monkies I have presented to a
beau, and they are supposed to furnish him with hints, which enable him to lead
the fashion -- so that your ladyship perceives the bon ton are not a little
indebted even to the excommunicated part of my family -- as to my parrots,
pies, and birds of speech, they are all the property of an unmar ried maiden
gentlewoman, who is so extremely celebrated for volubility of conversation, and
so unfatigued a continuer, that nothing human could ever come in for a word;
and yet she loves to hear nonsense, as well as talk it. I am told by a friend,
that my dumb orators are -- almost -- a match for her. Must it not be a
charming concord of sounds, when every instrument is in tune? -- I was once at
the concert myself -- and the confusion of tongues must have been order and
intelligence to it. Poll screamed -- mag chattered -- the monkies squeaked, and
the lady (with a note above them all) labored hard for that charter of her
sex, the last word. The day of their departure was celebrated by my creatures,
as a jubilee -- my cats purred -- my dogs gamboled -- my squirrel danced a new
cotilion on the occasion, and my birds (which you hear, are no bad musicians)
whistled a fresh overture.

I beg your ladyship will honor that owl (blinking on his perch in the corner)
with particular attention. He is known in my family by the name of the
Feathered Philosopher; and that fair creature, uxoriously nestling under his
left pinion, is his spouse, and a Poetess of no mean character -- shall I let
your ladyship into

A SECRET?
The sage personages above mentioned, were some time since in London, and the
intimate companions of some town owls -- and it has been seriously averred to
me (by some of the trade,) that several poems -- a collection of essays --
several medical compositions, and a very large bundle of political papers,
under a variety of signatures, together with sixteen volumes of sermons --
warranted to be originals, and published from authentic manuscripts, now in the
possession of many right reverend owls -- were the joint-labours, of this
literary, and ingenious, but unfortunate couple. In what incidents consist
their misfortune, your ladyship will see, when I come to communicate their
secret history -- which history will abound, I trust, with as miraculous
escapes, surprising adventures, mavelous turns of fortune -- providential
deliverances, -- entertaining transitions, and accurate delineations of life
and character, as were ever related -- and in this presumption -- I am so
certain of the fact, that I shall not give up the point, even to the wonderful
Robinson Crusoe himself. And now, madam, I beseech you to cast a kind eye on
that exquisite little thing ruminating on his rug -- it is my

HISTORIAN,
The Isaac of dogs -- the Benjamin of animals. Never sure in man or beast,
resided more gratitude, or more sensibility. Behold his bosom is grown gray in
my society. Many a time, when the storms of the world have blown hard upon my
head, even till the violence of the shock assailed my heart -- when the eye of
friendship became inverted, by ill success, and when I looked in vain around me
for the benevolence of sympathy, and the consolations of human attachment -- in
those destitute moments (to the shame of man) came that affectionate adherent
-- and (with an officiousness of love, which wanted not the eloquence of words
to be understood) taught me to take refuge in resignation, and in his company
set at defiance the malice of vicissitude. That very creature has made the
grand tour, and returned at last in a good old age, to his chimney corner, and
household gods, fraught with wisdom and experience. He was tutor to the puppy of
a nobleman, who was indeed but a dull dog himself. Tripsea, however, (for so is
my favorite called,) though he could make no wise impressions on the young
heir, did not neglect to enrich himself with all the policy, maxims, manners,
government, and constitution of every country through which he passed. His
thirst of foreign knowledge was, indeed, so remarkable, and his inquiries so
minute, that he can bark upon those subjects with as much fluency, as any
traveller upon earth -- and this it is which makes him, one or another, the
most entertaining animal that ever crossed the Atlantic. It was this creature
which confirmed me in the belief, that the partition betwixt instinct and
reason was totally transparent; and that the animal and rational saw through
very similar mirrors. Tripsea is the delight of my society -- nay, he is at
this time president of a canine club, of which he is the life and soul -- for
they, being a set of ignorant country-bred dogs, he plays his own game with
them; and, to say the truth, he does sometimes so bamboozle the creatures with
touches of the stupendous -- as travelers, you know, madam, are apt to use a
long bow -- that he makes every particular hair to stand an end upon their
backs. -- Yet the veriest cur of the county is open-mouthed to swallow the
news, and, all to a dog, admire his parts, and confess the power of travel. I
believe Tripsea is at this very time preparing a journal for the press, in
which the public may expect a collection of remarks, not inferior to any
extant, with notes critical and explanatory, on the errors and abuses of other
historians. As for the right honorable and drowsy whelp, who was the companion
of Tripsea, his business abroad was pretty much like his business at home -- he
straggled about the streets -- lifted up a naughty leg against the public
buildings -- kept a mistress in a corner -- intrigued with a lady of the court
-- had an affair of honor with the poor dog of a husband -- got worried by a
bravo -- seized by an officer of justice -- whined out six days in prison --
and wrote a fawning letter to the animal of a minister to release him -- but at
length, as destitute of wisdom, as of every thing else that is valuable, he is
returned -- the hopeful and eldest son of the ancient family of the Jolters --
and his present employment is to talk highly of the great advantages of
finishing one's education abroad, in order to persuade other puppies to follow
his example. -- But the improvements of Tripsea, madam -- the harvest of exotic
instruction, which that dear serious-looking creature has in store -- but --
hush -- he barks. Artful animal, I know the reason -- see, madam, he leaps upon
my lap. Aye, aye, I thought so. -- I hope your ladyship will pardon him -- as
he is in treaty with a bookseller about his Authentic Memoirs, and has almost
disposed of the copy-right -- he whispers me his opinion, that it would be
ungenteel to publish any anecdotes beforehand, and might, hurt the sale. For
your ladyship will be pleased to understand, that there has been of late a
surprising revolution in the world of literature -- brains, however,
manufactured, sell now for little or nothing; for the longest and wisest heads
in the nation have discovered that there is nothing within, (and consequently
nothing that come out), which can reasonably be considered, as property. It Is
all a caput mortuum; and past any sort of doubt, that the inside even of a
privy counsellor's skull is not worth half the value of the wig that covers it.
This being the case, Tripsea is certainly in the right to make the best of his
manuscript.

My family then, madam, briefly stands thus: 1. A tabby cat. Descended from Mr.
Gray's Selima. 2. A tortoise-coloured kitten. 3. A pointer, -- of Spanish
extraction. 4. A philosophical-medical-metaphycal-political-critical owl. 5. An
essayical-poetical-epigrammatical owless. 6. A social squirrel. A humourist. 7.
An historical-geographical lapdog -- third son to Pompey the Little.
To which may be added a chorus Of larks, linnets, and finches. --

Your ladyship would very justly accuse me of ingratitude, were I to neglect my
out-of-door connections, whether footed or feathered -- at the end of my garden
you observe a beehive, inhabited by small, but industrious people; and, though
their little city swarms again, I do not think there is a single drone amongst
them -- and this is no very usual circumstance attending a populous place --
there is not, however, what can be called a lazy creature in the whole
commonwealth, for the crowned head labors with his subjects, and every
individual collects something in to the general treasury. -- A still minuter
community possess the empire of that sunny hillock; and are likewise animals of
so commercial a turn, that the buz of eternal business resounds through the
neighborhood. -- Your ladyship will likewise take notice of some familyhens,
and fir Chanticlear at the head of them, strutting and gallanting it in all the
pride of passion and of conquest -- it is the custom of the country to allow
him many wives, madam; and therefore I do not interfere in his amors: on this
charter he enjoys the privilege and vanity of his feathered seraglio as
uncontrouled as a sultan; and, for the same reason, as I said before -- for
were it otherwise -- by the chastity of the moon I swear, madam! that I would
wring off the wretch's neck for the horrid crimes of polygamy and incontinence
-- notwithstanding the creature might plead the force of custom, and hope to
find an excuse in the illustrious examples of the human race.

A few anecdotes relating to one thing more, I must recommend to your ladyship.
I mean

MY ROBIN-RED-BREAST.
Him, however, I claim not as private property, but rather as my friend -- he
has been my occasional how-doye visitor for many years -- the bloom of his
bosom is a little faded, you see, madam. -- At our first acquaintance, he was
somewhat shy -- but he is at length so infinitely domesticated, that he eats
from my hands, drinks out of the same fountain with my linnets, and, in cold
weather, is seldom out of my cottage -- my animals are all upon very good terms
with him. The finches and he sing to each other: and the very cats (through
habit and discipline -- such is the force of a happy education) spare his life
-- though, to say the truth, this does sometimes go desperately against the
grain -- for now and then as he hops upon the floor, hunting the food that has
escaped the eyes of the family, -- they look wistfully at him, and are ready,
as it were, to seize him as natural prey. --

I would not, however, insinuate to the discredit of my poor Bob, that by
leaving the house in the warm seasons, he acts the ingrate, and forgets the
hand that protected him in the hour of cold and hunger -- no, madam. He has not
mixed enough with the vicious part of the world to adopt a baseness which is
almost peculiar to the human species. So far otherwise, that I am certain the
little thing would share with me the last crumb -- nay, in a case of extremity,
he would resign the whole meal, though it had been the labor of the day to
hunt it in the hedges. In the summer, Bob will, indeed, make excursions -- just
to stretch his wings, and visit a few redbreasted neighbors -- but he ever and
anon flies back to his favorite spot -- pecks at my window, as much as to say
-- how go you on, sir -- and then -- sits whistling under the currantbush. I
have also the pleasure of a nightingale's acquaintance -- but, as some
misfortune presses on the poor thing, she seldom comes nearer my cottage than
yonder thicket; where, embowered among the bushes, she fixes her residence upon
a solitary branch beneath the umbrage of an elm -- yet, having a sweet pipe,
she sings me a song at a small distance (that only serves to send it more
meliorated to the ear), almost every evening -- Her note, indeed, is always in
the penseroso -- but, there is melody in her sorrow; and every variation in the
harmonious melancholy, works its way into the heart. I have frequently stood
listening to her pathetic warblings, till the tears have started to my eye --
and thus I totally gave myself up to the tenderness of sympathy. It was in one
of these periods, just as the last beams of light were reddening in the
hemisphere, that, standing in my garden, I heard the voice of Philomela jurgle
from the copse. There was a more than usual plaintiveness in her song, and, as
I profess to understand precisely the language of birds, I could not but attend
particularly to my feathered friend -- I sat myself down in that little bower,
(the awkward architecture of a pastoral hour) and soon perceived that my
musical neighbor had chosen that evening to recapitulate the history of her
misfortunes. As soon as she ceased -- which happened, indeed, before she had
concluded the story, owing, I presume (by the abruptness of her breaking off),
to the inquisitive impertinence of some chattering bird, which invaded her
sanctuary -- perhaps, to teaze her with the irksome chirup of condolence,) I
retired into my cottage, and put together as well as I was able, a translation
of those touching sentiments I had heard. As often as I am inclined to be
serious -- (and pensive pleasures are particularly dear to me) I turn over the
narrative of my poor nightingale, and draw from her misfortunes the most
exquisite reflections. Without supposing your ladyship remarkably anxious to
search into secrets, I must naturally have excited your curiosity to see the
story. You shall not be disappointed. You will instantly read the

ELEGY of a NIGHTINGALE.
I.
For Elusino lost, -- renew the strain,
Pour the sad note upon the evening gale;
And as the lengthening shades usurp the plain,
The silent moon shall listen to the tale.
II.
Sore was the time -- ill fated was the hour,
The thicket shook with many an omen dire!
When from the topmost twig of yonder bower,
I saw my husband -- tremble and expire.
III.
'Twas when the peasant sought his twilight rest,
Beneath the brow of yonder breezy hill;
'Twas when the plumy nation sought the nest,
And all, but such as loved the night, were still.
IV.
That -- as I sat with all a lover's pride,
(As was my custom when the sun withdrew)
Dear Elusino, sudden left my side,
And the cursed form of man appeared in view.
V.
For sport, the tube he levelled at our head,
And, curious to behold more near my race,
Low in the copse the artful robber laid
Explored our haunt, and thundered at the place.
VI.
Ungrateful wretch -- he was our shepherd's son --
The harmless, good old tenant of yon cot! --
That shepherd would not such a deed have done! --
'Twas love to him that fixed us to this spot.
VII.
Often as at eve his homeward steps he bent,
When the laborious task of day was over,
Our mellowed warbling footh'd him as he went,
'Till the charmed hind -- forgot that he was poor.
VIII.
Ah -- could not this, thy gratitude inspire?
Could not our gentle visitations please?
Could not the blameless lessons of thy sire
Restrain thy barbarous hand, from crimes like these?
IX.
Oh cruel boy -- thou tyrant of the plain!
Could thou but see the sorrows thou have made,
Or did thou know the virtues thou have slain,
And view the gloomy horrors of the shade.
X.
Could thou -- behold -- my infant younglings lay,
In the moss cradle which our bills prepared,
Babes as they were -- the offspring of the day --
Their wings defenseless, and their bosoms barred.
XI.
Surely, the mighty malice of thy kind, Thy power to wrong, and readiness to
kill;
In common pity, to the parent's mind, Would cease the new-made father's blood
to spill.
XII.
Happily -- the time may come, when heaven may give
To thee, the troubles thou have heaped on me.
Happily -- ere well thy babes begin to live,
Death shall present the dart of misery.
XIII.
Just as the tender hope begins to rise,
As the fond mother hugs her darling boy;
As the big rapture trembles in the eyes,
And the breast throbs with all a parent's joy;
XIV.
Then may some midnight robber, -- skilled in guile,
Resolved on plunder, and on deeds of death;
Thy fairy prospects -- tender transports spoil,
And to the knife -- resign thy children's breath.
XV.
In that sad moment shall thy savage heart,
Feel the keen anguish, desperate, and wild,
Conscience forlorn, shall doubly point the smart;
And justice whisper -- this is child for child. --
XVI.
Rest of their sire -- my babes, alas, must sigh --
For grief obstructs the widow's anxious care;
This wasted form -- this ever-weeping eye,
And the deep note of destitute despair;
XVII.
All load this bosom with a fraught, so sore,
Scarce can I cater for the daily food!
Wherever I search -- my husband searched before --
And soon -- my nest, will hold -- an orphan brood!
XVIII.
For Eleusino, lost, then pour the strain,
Waft the sad note on every evening gale;
And as the lengthening shades --
The interruption, madam, put an end to her complaint -- perhaps, your good
sense may here express some surprise that, (as birds have one language to show
their misery, and another to mark their happiness --) Philomela should whistle
out her calamity -- If this should not be thought quite in nature, I beg she
may find an apology in the Italian and English

OPERA.
The definition of this composition is, -- a miscellany of the most monstrous
contradictions, -- not in, but -- out of human nature! -- it is -- part ballad,
and part dialogue -- half poetry, and half prose -- part tragedy, and part
comedy -- but all together -- it is in every sense of the word, a complete
farce. As they are all manufactured upon the same principle, a specimen of one
will serve as a specimen of every thing that has been produced in this way.
The curtain draws, and discovers two young people: the one a lady in love --
the other her friend and considante -- the lady tells her companion, she doats
upon a pretty fellow: this is first talked over in prose, and then set to music
in poetry: upon this, the pretty fellow enters -- tells you his history -- and
then, gives you his most serious reflections thereupon in a tune -- the young
lady and he meet with many disappointments -- these make them very serious;
upon which they sing desperately one against another -- discover all along
their passion and their despair -- quaver out their feelings to exact time;
and, after an infinite deal of musical labor, make their exits in an air that
closes in the clapping of hands. The fathers, and relations next advance, and
bluster out their objections to the match, agreeable to the notes of the fiddle
-- song combats with sentiment -- nonsense jostles probability, and the whole
concludes with the universal applause of a British Audience. Such, madam, is
the skeleton of a modern burletta -- pray pardon Philomela for adopting the
passion of so refined a nation -- we will now return, madam, to

THE COTTAGE.
In which, amidst my agreeable and innocent society I sit as the Lord
Protector; and it were, indeed, shameful if I did nothing myself -- I do a
great deal -- as much, indeed, as one pair of hands can well master; for your
ladyship must know that nothing which bears a greater resemblance to the human
face, than nature has thought proper to bestow upon my owls, do I ever suffer
to come near me. My reasons for this oddity are not unworthy your notice, and
shall be briefly communicated presently. --

It is now more than time I should explain myself as to another oddity. It must
have surprised you not a little, to receive a public address from a perfect
stranger -- a stranger to every thing but your character; and an idea even of
that, was obtained from the lips of very poor people, whom your judicious
benevolence has made happy with a little.

Be it known to your ladyship, that my sentiments upon behavior are not less
peculiar, than my method of living. Many, now, would have prefaced,
dedicationized, and introductionized these volumes, with all possible parade of
apology. I have at this moment in idea the very language a modern author would
use on this subject. As it ever appeared to me, one of the most unnatural
crimes in the world to bury a thought which is but just created, and begotten
-- and by such means, smother the intellectual embrio, in the womb of the brain
-- I beg you will allow me to deliver myself of that with which I now labor.
The only midwife which we writers call in, upon these occasions, is simply, the
feather of a goose, and I am concerned for the dignity of my fraternity to
inform your ladyship, that after all the pains of the birth, and trouble of
dressing, the brat very often -- even at full growth -- wants the sense of a
gander.

DEDICATION.
To the Right Hon. worthy, and beautiful, The Lady -- * Viscountess of -- *
Lady of the -- * And one of her Majesty's * -- * * -- *
MADAM,
I must humbly beg permission to throw this trifle at your ladyship's feet: and
deeply conscious as I am of its unworthiness -- of its inaccuracy, and of its
incapacity to stand before so bright and penetrating an eye as your ladyship's
-- I should not presume even to hope pardon for my temerity, were I not
consoled by reflecting, that your taste, (infinite as it is,) meets a powerful
competitor in the immensity of your goodnature. But I have long wished an
opportunity to approach so sacred and distinguished a character; and I now come
forwards on my knee, with the profoundest humility of those creatures, which
form a part of my present subject. As your illustrious birth defies the
ambition of mere human words on the one hand, so your unparalleled virtues
annihilate the force of terrestrial compliments on the other: I shall therefore
on those heads observe a religious silence. Yet so far I must implore liberty
of doing violence to your delicacy, as to remark that you are at once the
pattern, and paragon of the age -- that your beauty, wit, graces, and taste,
are the envy of one sex, as your judgment and genius are the astonishment and
motives of despair in the other. People of fashion in other ages, have
undoubtedly possessed some admirable qualities. One woman may perhaps have been
almost as handsome; a second may have been almost as agreeable; a third may
have possibly possessed equal sensibility; and a fourth may have been nearly as
liberal. But the grand consolidation, and concentration -- the universal
assemblage of bewitching accomplishments, each collected together, ray by ray,
and blazing to a point, like a July sun, were reserved for that curiosity of
providence the amiable lady * * * *

I humbly implore forgiveness for this intrusion, which I will only lengthen by
beseeching your grace -- I mean your ladyship -- though a duchess you ought to
be -- will permit me to assure you

How sincerely I am, And Eternally will be, Your ladyship's Most obliged, Most
obedient, Obsequious, Devoted slave, And very zealous servant, * -- * -- * * --
* -- *
Your ladyship will observe, that the above address will equally suit all ages,
characters, sexes, and conditions. The secret of writing dedications -- or in
other words -- of drawing characters, is simply this. Produce a pamphlet (which
is frequently written on purpose to introduce the dedication); as soon as it is
finished, cast about for a person of rank, whom you never saw, and taking a
quire of gilt paper, transcribe the performance therein, and send it in
manuscript to the patron; whom it is proper to compliment with all the virtues
that ever entered into the heart of man. Now in this transaction it is not
necessary that the party complimented should actually possess any of the said
virtues, nor is that a matter of scrupulous enquiry with the author. It is
sufficient for him, that he can obtain a purse of money, in return for a page
of compliment; and a skilful writer will always proportion his quantity of
praise to the quantity of cash which he expects. So much flattery for so much
profit. There are dedications of all prices, from five guineas to five hundren,
though I could afford the above for fifty; and yet I believe it contains as
pretty flights, as round-about metaphors, as bombastic circumlocution, as was
ever sent from a little man in obscurity, to a great man in the gay world -- I
should have said woman, but, as I observed before, it will do as well for one
sex as the other. Many are the noblemen and noblewomen, who would be highly
pleased with this prostration of soul and sentiment; but I will not insult your
ladyship's understanding with such dishonest nonsense. There is a sensation in
the good mind which beggars the loftiest flight of poetical adulation. I am
superior to the arts of a mercenary dedicator -- if I did not think your
ladyship above the punctilios of a formal introduction, I should myself be
above writing to you; and if I did apprehend these sheets would be novel,
entertaining, and not destitute of moral, I should justly deem myself a
blockhead, to send them to a woman of sense. -- This premised, I beg you will
suffer me to discard the absurd flattery of the times, and give you, in five
lines, both a preface and dedication.

To Lady C * -- *
MADAM,
An acquaintance of mine -- a man of business, tells me of having transferred,
to your care, a fresh favorite of the canine breed. -- Your sentiment on the
occasion was this -- I will love it -- spoil it and make it happy. To that
sentiment I am indebted for the idea which induced me to begin this letter. It
is upon so innocent a subject, that I am pleased at requesting you will favor
it with a reading.

I am, Your ladyship's Most obedient servant, * -- * * -- *


The force of imagination, is as omnipotent in writers, as in longing ladies. I
am at this very moment whispered, that your ladyship smiles upon this
undertaking, and that you sit down by your sire-side rather curious and
inquisitive than reluctant to see the end of so peculiar (...) speculation.
Thus encouraged, my labor is lightened, and I go chearily on. --

But before I advert to the affairs of my own family, it were but a proper
courtesy to attend the domestics of your ladyship -- and more especially the
little creature that is just come into your house. It is promised the honor of
your protection. --

As I profess myself very tenderly the admirer of lap-dogs -- nay -- as I
profess, most heartily to rejoice and sympathise with every atom in the circuit
of animated nature, from the Camel to the Caterpillar -- it is not on this
occasion, consistent with the affections of my heart, to avoid a word of
congratulation. Will your ladyship suffer me to pay the respects of a moment to
the favorite itself. The nature of the present work, madam, allows these
little digressions -- they are the episodes of our performance, and in
historical productions there is nothing to be done without them. At the same
time I flatter myself, that I have connected -- and, to use a more scientific
word -- shall continue to concatinate this history surprisingly. Every part
will form a link; and although they may be irregularly worked off, yet the
artificer will put them together in the end, so as to produce -- a complete
chain. -- But now, madam, for



THE CARD.
TO A LAP-DOG.
Twice -- thrice, and four times hail, thou happy creature! -- A friend to thy
race compliments thee on thy transition! -- Welcome -- thrice welcome to the
downy carpet -- the velvet cushion -- and the gay apartment. Delicate --
endearing, and envied are now the perquisites of thy distinguished station. --
The gentle pat, the fond embrace, the tender stroke -- the tortoise comb, and
the most exquisite viands. Long may the hand that cherishes, protects, and
feeds thee, continue its indulgence. -- As long may thou deserve it. Be
grateful, and be happy. -- But, ah! beware of the common vice of prosperity --
beware of luxury. Lap-dogs, lords, and ladies, have been equally the victims of
voluptuousness. The plenitude of unexercised ease has been often fatal; and
the bills of mortality are swelled with the luxurious, rather than with the
indigent. Consider, dear creature, that there is a pestilence in plenty, as
well as in famine. -- Take heed therefore, that this sudden elevation, brings
not upon thee plethoric diseases of indolence -- a languid love of sleeping by
the fire -- a dropsical corpulence, and a vitiated refinement of appetite. --
Anticipate not by sloth and inactivity the stroke of dissolution -- but should
the attenuated thread of thy existence by untimely cut -- should thou pant,
in resignation to the decisive blow, which neither Pompey the Great, nor the
Little could resist -- should that eloquent face -- that intelligent eye --
that polished skin -- (often purified in the snowy suds) -- those velvet feet,
all yield to the blow, which is impartially levelled at merit and beauty in
every form -- let those who survive to lament thy exit, inscribe upon the
monument (which thy affectionate mistress will cause to be erected) the
following honest tribute to thy memory. And the ensigns of excellence shall be
embellished in lively figures above it -- while Fame shall blow her trumpet
into the ear of every spectator; and future artificers take the hint of
ornament from the trophies on thy tombstone. --

EPITAPH.
On FLORIZEL, the only son of DELIA, Who departed this life In the year of our
Lord, * -- * * * -- * Anno Aetatis. * -- * * * -- *

INSCRITION. Whether thou art bird, beast, or man, Stop, Traveller, And pay
that Great duty of sensibility To A fellow creature, For Beneath this marble
Lie buried SPACE FOR EMBELLISHMENTS.
Del.

Sculp.

THE MOST EMINENT MASTERS WILL BE EMPLOYED ON THIS SOLEMN OCCASION.

The mortal Remains Of A four-footed Favorite, Whose Virtues Were Many and
illustrious, yet Ask no Aid From Funereal Flattery.

Worthiest of his kind!

The Glory of a numerous Family!

An Ornament to His Species!

He was An honest Dependent, A gentle Companion, A grateful Friend, Of
Integrity inflexible --, For Toast could not tempt him to Steal: Of Manners
incomparable, For Plenty could not tempt him to Pride: Of Veracity unsuspected,
For Worlds could not tempt him to Lie.

Go, Passenger, Imitate his Virtues, And Mourn his Fall. --

To courts accustomed, yet to cringe ashamed,
Of person lovely, and in life unblam'd;
Skilled in each gentle, each prevailing art,
That leads directly to the female heart;
A soft partaker of the quiet hour,
Friend of the parlour, partner of the bower:
In health, in sickness, ever faithful found;
Yet, by no ties, but ties of kindness, bound --
Of instinct, -- nature, -- reason --, what you will,
(For to all duties he was constant still)
Whatever the motive, the event was good,
And spoke the gon'rous tenor of his blood.
Such was the being underneath this shrine; --
Study the character, and make it THINE.
We will now proceed, madam, in our observations on the animal creaation. I
promised to assign some reasons for the preference I give to the society of
birds and beasts, rather than to the society of my own species. Those reasons
now wait your ladyship's attention. You will find them related in the following

FRAGMENT OF -- Adventures.
-- Born with one of the tenderest hearts, BENIGNUS, at a very early period,
began to search for a friend: from the age of fifteen to the age of thirty-two
were his labors unwearied -- and unrewarded. At length, having wasted his
fortune and spirits, he gave up the endeavor in despair, and retiring to a
forest on the banks of the -- he spent the latter days of his life in animal
society -- No human being was invited to his hut -- no human form was
solicited to approach it. In view of the smoke of the metropolis he lived as
an hermit; and resolved never more to see the face of man. It happened,
however, that in the year 1768 he fell sick, and having laid till his distemper
had got beyond the reach of medicine, and till his collection of creatures were
wasted to the bone, he crawled, by painful efforts, from his bed to the door of
his cottage, and fastening thereto a written label, with these words, THE
PROPERTY OF THE FIRST TRAVELLER, he staggered back again to his couch. I was,
at this crisis, madam, upon my return to town from a rural excursion; and as I
always loved to explore the most unfrequented paths, in order to diversify the
prospects of my journey, I beheld, through the obstructions of a great number
of trees, something like the abode of a fellow creature. I hung my horse at the
next hedge, and resolved to satisfy my desire to know what man had chosen so
pastoral a situation, in an age when the ideas of Arcadia are treated as the
fables of the brain. It was with some toil I tore my way through the bushes --
for footing saw I none -- at length I arrived at the structure, and read the
sentiment on the label. Fear now operated as strongly as curiosity -- I knew
not whether to go forward, or to retreat. It might possibly be the refuge of a
robber, and the inscription on the door might be a trap for the incautious
wanderer. I gave way, however, to my favorite inclination, and pulled the
latch that admitted me into the cottage. --

The furniture of the apartment struck me dumb with astonishment -- for the
groans of the dying, and the situations of the dead, resembled rather a
charnel-house, than the cottage of simplicity -- birds of various sort were
laying dead in their cages -- dogs and squirrels were writhing in the last
agony -- the master of the mansion was just expired, and one poor solitary cat
empress of the dominion, seemed to eye the dead as her natural property. --

In a christian country -- nay, in a forest so near to, I was doubly amazed at
these shocking circumstances -- what measure to pursue I knew not. Upon casting
my eyes round the room, I saw a small trunk, and at the end of that several
small sacks. Upon looking into the box, I found it full of manuscripts, which
immediately commanded my attention, and upon examination of papers, I soon
found the secret of this extraordinary person's birth and connexions. I sought
out his relations by the clue his letters and memorandums had given me, -- they
were people of rank, and as he absconded from every body suddenly, they judged
him to have been either drowned or murdered. However, the dead body was
restored to the family, and now sleeps with its ancestors in * * * *.

To this very enterprise, however, I am indebted for something that I value,
madam, beyond every other worldly possession. I found it wrapped curiously up in
a small bag of crimson velvet, in a little private drawer at the bottom of the
trunk which contained the manuscripts; and it was afterward given to me as a
rewarding present by the relations of Benignus, for the discovery. It accounts,
for every peculiarity in the conduct of the unhappy man in whose cottage it was
found; and although it cannot defend his total desertion of society, in the
opinion of the world, yet it has so endeared his memory to me, that I have in
some measure followed his example, and adopted many of his sentiments ever
since.

But as it would be unpardonable for me to lead you into the gloom, without
endeavoring to reward you for it, I will now unlock my darling treasure, and
transcribe, from the original manuscript, a few anecdotes from

THE LEGEND OF BENIGNUS.
PREFACE.
-- As some explanations may be thought necessary for leaving the world after
having mixed in it for a number of years, -- and for not transmitting any
account of myself since the first hour of my sequestration, I will now throw
together the principal heads of my history, and shall leave it behind me, as an
apology for my conduct -- if happily either I, or this shed which I have erected
with my own hands, shall at any future time be discovered. But as I shall write
down these matters at my hours of leisure, when they interfere not with the
duties of my domestic family, I shall divide the adventures into separate
chapters, that I may take up or lay down the pen, as I think proper.

CHAP. I.
The history of my very babyhood is peculiar -- I was certainly born to be the
sport of fortune. -- The day which gave me to the world, took my mother out of
it; and a month afterward my father caught a fever, -- sickened and followed
her. Thus was I an orphan in the nursery -- I soon discovered a love of society
-- My guardian (who was a clergyman) provided me with books, and little
companions, and put out my fortune (which consisted of twelve thousand pounds
in specie) at interest. The books which he put into my hands were the
Spectators. -- They first put me upon speculation, and my young friends led me
into relaxations of amusement. I had not the general objections of a boy to
school, because I was eager after every sort of knowledge. I took my
instructions in proportion to my application -- but in all my readings and
researches, the attachment to my fellow creatures was my first and favorite
passion. Benevolence was the leading principle of my life. I considered myself
as born to the great duty of making every body happy around me. A virtuous
sentiment warmed my heart, a tender story wetted my eye -- my hand was open to
distress in every form, and I was always ready to give the allowance of my
childhood to the alleviation of misery -- the Spectators which were all the
private library I had at this time -- with Virgil, Homer, Sallust, and other of
my school books, were all full of expressions which encouraged me, in my
generous principle: they one and all declared, that To be good, was to be happy.

CHAP. II.
Upon this noble principle I resolved to begin -- continue -- and end my
exstience -- I wrote concerning my resolution to my guardian -- he confirmed
and established the maxim, and concluded by assuring me that the only way To be
happy, was to be good.

There are few situations in life, more pleasing, than the contemplations of a
young mind, upon the subject of universal happiness. The theory of these ideas
is delightful -- the practice is sometimes a little mortifying especially to
young people. I began to put in force my system immediately: I entered into the
common pleasure of a schoolboy, and tried every possible method to endear
myself to my companions. Whenever they committed a childish fault, I took the
blame upon myself -- whenever any disputes arose, I endeavored to compromise
the matter to the general tranquillity; and whenever they broke any of their
toys, I privately repaired the loss with new ones. But some how or another,
these efforts did not turn out quite satisfactorily. I got several severe
whippings for fathering errors which were not my own; I was stigmatized by the
lads as a busy body, for interfering with quarrels which did not concern me;
and I was accused of partiality for making presents to one playmate in
preference to another. And thus my benevolence was in the very first outset,
rewarded with severity, and contempt. However I was too well grounded in the
truth of my grand principle, and had indeed naturally too tender an heart, to
suffer a few slight mortifications to relax the vigor of my virtue. The
morning of life is the meridian of generosity, and though I was a little
miserable at my disappointment, I made myself certain, that if I continued To
be good, I should certainly be happy --

CHAP. III.
-- A number of the boys had one day formed a party to rob the orchard of a
neighboring farmer, and from the orchard had pre-determined to march to the
hen-roost, and then return with their spoils to their several chambers.
Intelligence of this was communicated to me by a boy who was piqued at being
unengaged in the adventure. The shock I felt at the news is indiscribable. The
next evening was to be the time fixed for the perpetration of the fact. It was
altogether a business so repugnant to all the precepts I had read, and so
immediately combated my notions of benevolence that I trembled at the idea -- I
turned over the Spectators -- every paper was flat against it. I knew not what
to do. The most anxious state of the mind, is the agitation of divided and
irresolute reflections. I was bewildered betwixt two measures, unknowing which
to choose or which to reject. The questions to be debated were these: Shall I
prevent this bad action by expostulating with the boys, or by acquainting the
master of the design to commit it? -- the tenderness of my heart represented a
general flaggellation, as the reward of the latter; and I therefore chose the
former. When once a scheme of this kind is formed by a set of boys, there is a
sort of inflexible attachment among the conspirators, that has all the
solemnity of a plot upon the government: every lip is sealed, and every eye is
wary -- I found the banditti (a part from the rest of of the boys) gathered
together in the true circle of consultation -- head within head, and arm within
arm -- I introduced the subject so as to soften its atrociousness. Endeavored
as a friend -- a school-fellow and a companion -- to dissuade them from so
dishonest an attempt: argued with them as from play-mate to play-mate, and
conjured them to desist, -- promising at the same time to purchase the very
objects of their present machinations out of my own pocket -- they heard me out
without any other interruption, than stifled titterings -- winks, nods, and
knocks against the elbows of each other -- but at the conclusion, the general
pleasantry was no longer to be disguised, and they burst out into a downright
laugh. As soon as they had satisfied their appetite of derision, they assumed a
more serious air, called me a listner, a poor, cowardly brat, without spirit
for glorious enterprise -- bid me stick to my books, and at last set up a great
shout, and fairly hissed me from their society.

CHAP. IV.
-- I retired to my chamber, and burst into tears: a train of reflections
pressed hard upon my heart, and (in spite of all my belief in the rectitude of
my favorite maxim) I could not help arguing with myself -- What (said I) is it
necessary that in the effort to do good to others, I must make myself
miserable? Well, well, no matter: these little miscarriages are but so many
trials of my integrity. As the gold comes purified from the fire, so, no doubt,
shall my happiness come augmented from trifling anxieties, magnanimously
sustained. I will go on in the strait road, and not faulter at the thorns,
briars, or impediments, which I meet in the journey, even though their points
and prickles draw blood from my heart: To be good is, to be happy.

The dusk of evening began at length to fall upon the earth, under cover of
which, the young robbers were to sally forth -- I could no longer smother up
the secret in my breast. The anxiety of suppression had already half-distracted
me. I saw my master reading in the garden, and immediately ran to him. An act
of real fraud must be done or prevented within half an hour; I loved my
play-mates, but I loved my principles yet more -- after many hesitations, and
begging their only punishment might be a falutary lecture of reproof, I
unsolded the whole scheme. The master looked extremely solemn, while I was
speaking, but how was I amazed at the conclusion, to see half a smile prevail
over the habitual wrinkles of his forehead. He bid me "not be so much concerned
-- that boys would be boys -- that robbing orchards and hen-roosts, were a sort
of pettylarceny, which the little pilferers would commit in defiance of the
rod; and that, though he should not encourage theft, yet that such small
depredations, upon apples and poultry, were always among the adventures of
every lad of spirit, and that it would not be political in a master to whip
them violently away, lest it should hurt their future courage to combat the
adversities of life -- observing, (in the close of his harangue,) that in
general those children made the best men, which were foremost in such puerile
archievements" -- I bowed, and withdrew. Fresh thinking brought on fresh
perplexity -- I fell again to soliloquy. He that steals a chicken, said I, at
ten years old, may be tempted to take a purse at twenty -- I rambled very far
in the labyrinth of reflection -- I could make nothing of it -- I gave up the
point with the following remark -- The master and the boys are both wrong -- I
have done my duty, and my conscience is discharged of a very great load. --
Without dispute To be good, is to be happy.

The next morning -- for my master did not think fit to flog for an intended
error -- but suffered the fact to be first committed -- the next morning, a
charge was produced against the offenders, and I was pointed out as their
accuser. In this, however, the master was disingenuous, for my evidence was
utterly unnecessary -- the proofs being found on the very persons of the
parties, as their waistcoats, and coats and stockings, were covered with the
down and the feathers of their trophies, and the pockets of every delinquent,
like the panniers of a fruiterer, stuck preposterously out from each side, and
betrayed the prog and vegetable spoils within. However, I stood forth, being
called upon, in defense of my veracity. The culprits were by no means hardened
in the habit of error, and the deep blush of every cheek betrayed silent
confession -- The bill was found against them, and the sentence of whipping was
executed on the spot -- The cry was piercing, and went to my heart -- how
readily would I have partaken the anguish. -- As soon as this exercise was
over, my master went out of the school -- before his back was well turned, the
very objects of his discipline began to mimic, and make faces at him, and as
soon as they judged him to be out of hearing, the whole school was up in arms
against me, who they aspersed as a little paltry puppy, which ought to be
knocked on the head for telling tales out of school. News was now brought in,
that as the master was seized with an headache, and could not attend school,
the chief boy must go through the business of the morning in his stead. The
boys took advantage of this hour of security, and instantly revenged the
discipline they had received for my information, tenfold upon me. They buffeted
me with their hats, spurted ink upon my clothes, spit in my face, kicked me in
the breech, and loaded me with every insult, that a set of barbarous brats
could possibly inflict upon the cat which they had tied to the stake. In
conclusion -- not a boy would sit near me -- I was avoided as a pestilence, and
some of the smartest actually made verses on my TREASON, as they called it, and
sung them about the yard to ludicrous tunes. -- My sensations at these insults,
were a mixture of ten thousand feelings, at the same moment.

For a long time after this transaction, I scarce exchanged ten words with any
one, but wandered up and down the yard, in a sad, solitary manner, like a
distempered sheep, discarded and beaten from the flock. -- Sometimes indeed an
arch wag would tell me a sorrowful history of his losses, -- the breaking of a
hoop or the demolition of a top; but as soon as he had obtained his end, he
would sidle off to his old companions, and putting out his tongue, tell how
cleverly he had taken in the INFORMER.

Thus was I cussed, mocked, hooted at, and deserted, for endeavoring to
prevent an action, which I thought, on all hands, unlawful, and unbenevolent. I
again took up my dear Spectators, and in those inestimable volumes, I found
that the only way to felicity was to PERSEVERE in well doing. -- This sentiment
was like a cordial to a fainting man. -- I shut the book, walked cheerfully
across my chamber, and resolving to persevere, concluded as usual, that To be
good, was to be happy.

CHAP. V.
-- At the end of about two months, the severity of my fate began to remit of
its rigor. Perpetuated malignity is not often the vice of a schoolboy. As I
was altogether of a social turn, I even went so far as to purchase a
reconciliation, at the price of a few concessions. But the greatest progress
toward a reunion betwixt me and the boys, was made by a skilful distribution
of presents and promises -- for (however strange it may seem) the influence of
money is not greater in the state, than in the schools. A penny judiciously
bestowed, will secure the heart of a child, as firm as a bank note can possibly
secure the voice and interest of a man. Children learn very early to be venal;
and though few are misers, a very great number are mercenary. I was at length
pretty well re-established in their graces, and really began to think they
repented of their treatment to me. This idea so softened my heart, that I
actually invoked the Muse upon the occasion, and yielding to the friendly
impulse, composed a Poem in praise of youthful affection. This was read in open
senate, and the sentiments highly approved. I now thought myself blessed, for I
supposed I had persuaded my school-fellows to Be good,
And therefore I,
Was happy.


-- A friend of our master, and a father to one of the boys, obtained us an
holiday -- the school was emptied in a moment, and its inhabitants dispersed
into several parties, agreeable to their respective passions and pursuits. It
was however soon resolved nem. con. to make it a day of bird-nesting. The idea
of game once started by an experienced boy, like a pack of hounds, the whole
follow his trail -- they were civil enough to invite my company -- that I might
not offend them by refusal, I agreed to accompany them, though I detested the
diversion -- we immediately betook ourselves to the fields, and enclosures,
which resounded with the notes of passion, the calls of courtship, and the song
of satisfaction. The boys inspected narrowly into every hedge, and tore their
fingers and hands in the scrutiny. It was the middle of the summer, when animal
nature teems almost universally with life. Every bush therefore inspired
expectation. They soon found eggs in abundance. Some formed them into a string
of beads -- others smashed them against the ground to see the embrios within,
thus prematurely hatched and murdered in the shock -- while some, at all
events, broke them at one end, and sucked out the contents -- as yet however no
young were found, and being wearied with search they suspended it awhile, and
agreed to lie down and rest under a large cluster of maples, which afforded an
agreeable shade, at a small distance. Thither they repaired, and as they
appeared to be in a less noisy disposition than usual, I thought proper to take
advantage of the moment and endeavor to impress them with a sense of my own
PRINCIPLE -- the retreat was so comfortable that few of them were willing to
forsake it, at least till the sun abated his fervor, as he descended to the
west. To sill up the interval, I proposed, to tell them a story. A story is a
very acceptable matter to the extreme curiosity of a young mind, and my offer
was immediately caught at. A general silence prevailed through the little
incumbent audience, and I addressed it, in the following manner.

CHAP. VI.
-- IN TIMES OF OLD there lived a man near a great forest. He was a keeper of
sheep, and had, (as the story goes,) a very large family. -- Some of his
children were grown up and some were infants. One was in the cradle and two
were upon the lap. The mother was a noted spinner, and she set all the girls to
work, as soon as they could hold the wool in their hands, and had streagth
enough to turn round the wheel: while the father took care to find out-ofdoor
business for the boys -- some were herdboys, and some that were too weak for
hard work, scared the birds from corn -- now it is reported by the neighbors
of the adjacent village that the old shepherd was a mighty odd character, and
that he bred up his family in a very different manner from the maxims of his
poor neighbors. As he was unable to give them the advantage of an education
like ours, and teach them Latin and Greek, he was resolved to educate them in
such accomplishments as his situation permitted. He was a man of tenderness and
simplicity, and often said to his children -- "Do all the good you can, boys,
but be sure you do no harm. You must all labor for a livelihood, but you may
always get your bread innocently; and the bread that is honestly earned, will
be always sweet -- I am myself obliged to attend a flock -- your mother is
compelled to spin -- to the poor sheep therefore we are all indebted -- they
furnish us with food and raiment; I therefore love the harmless creatures, and
would not hurt them for all that they are worth: let this teach you to behave
properly to poor dumb animals, and to use them as they deserve, and may thy
father's curse overtake thee, if at any time ye do wrong to those, which do no
wrong to thee: for be assured, wanton cruelty will always be returned upon the
tormentor. The whole family listened to the old man's argument, and it would
have been well for them if they had always obeyed the precepts of their father.
But now comes the cream of the story -- pray therefore attend. -- The eldest
son had one day taken the nest of a robin, which consisted of five young ones,
and a sixth just bursting from the shell -- he carried them home to his
brothers and sisters, to each of which he gave a bird; but the little nestling
he gave to one of the children in the lap, who wrapping it up in a piece of
flannel, put it into a small wicker basket, and set it to the fire. -- The boy
that found the nest, tied a string to the leg of his bird, and cruelly dragged
it after him -- the second son run pins through the eyes of his bird, and took
a delight in seeing it bleed to death. -- The third gave his to the cat, or
rather, pretended to give it, for he held it first pretty close to puss's
whiskers, and then pulled it away from her, but at last, she pounced upon it,
and carried off one of the legs. -- The eldest daughter intended to have taken
care of here is, but one of her brothers having murdered his own, seized upon her
property, and both pulling the poor wretch different ways, betwixt compassion
and cruelty, it died in the contest -- and the younger girl, now in possession
of the only bird that was left, put here is into a cage, and covered it over with
wool. At this crisis the mother, who had been gleaning, and the old shepherd,
returned home. The limbs of the dead birds were seen upon the floor, and the
cat was busily employed in a corner, at clearing them away. The old man
insisted upon the truth. The trembling boy confessed it. -- Barbarous wretches!
cried the shepherd -- is this the return for my care and instruction -- but I
will punish ye for it -- the eldest son he tied by the leg and did to him as he
did to the bird -- the second son he scratched with pins till his hands were
all over blood -- at the third he set his dog, who caught him by the leg as he
was used to catch the sheep -- the eldest daughter who had lost her bird he
pitied -- he kissed the second daughter, which had put her poor thing into the
cage, but he hugged to his very heart the little creature that had placed the
nestling in a warm basket. -- Now IT PLEASED GOD, that about six or seven
months after this, the eldest son (which had been the cause of all this
mischief) fell sick, and died; and many people are now living who say, that as
he was going to be put into the ground, the ravens, rooks, kites, and other
vast birds, all flew over his coffin, screamed, and could by no means be got
away, nor could he rest in his grave for them; because the animals were always
digging up the earth under which he lay, as if they were resolved to eat him up
-- and some declare, he is actually gone. I beg pardon, school-fellows, for
this long story, but I shall finish directly. I cannot help mentioning to you
the different fate of the good little girl that treated the poor animal
tenderly. A year after the death of her brother she died herself of the small
pox, and I do assure you, it has been told to me for fact, that her grave is a
perfect garden, for the robins do not suffer a single weed to grow upon it, and
GOD ALMIGHTY has adorned it with wild field-flowers, as innocent as the baby
which they cover.

CHAP. VII.
-- Though this story was universally attended to with great earnestness, yet
it failed, upon the whole, of producing the effect desired. Some few, indeed,
were attracted by its moral, but the far greater number were satisfied with
saying it was a pretty story, only that they disliked the conduct of the
father, whom they censured as a cruel old fellow, which deserved to be hanged.
They now got up, and renewed their sport with a vigor, which my poor story
seemed to have redoubled. -- Nay, some of them carried the matter so far as to
wish they could hit upon a robin's nest, that they might try what sun could
possibly lie in the experiments related in the narrative. -- Perceiving this I
began to re-persuade -- they laughed -- I protested that I would go without
pleasure for ever, rather than derive it from the pain of innocence. -- They
jested on my gravity, even to clamor -- I conjured them to listen to the
general notes of loss and lamentation which echoed from the parents whose young
they were seeking to destroy. -- They vowed that they wished they had all the
birds of the air in a net -- and as to me (whom they called a squeamish
milksop), if I did not like the amusement, I might go home, and play at
pat-ball with my sister; -- adding -- for their part, they intended each of
them to bring home a hatfull of creatures -- then return and dispose of their
spoil as they thought proper.

CHAP VIII.
Once more, mortified, and disappointed in my benevolent endeavors, I sought
the road that led to the school; and in walking along, I could not but indulge
some mysterious ruminations.

-- Surely, said I, there is something very strange in all this? My efforts to
Be good,
seem to counteract my efforts, to be Happy!
At the time my good nurse told me the story, which I told to the boys, I
remember it made me both weep and tremble; and I believe I never killed or
injured a fly in my whole life -- nay, I feel for the very brute that suffers
to support me, and sometimes shed a tear to the necessity that condemns it to
destruction. -- My school-fellows, on the contrary, delight in slaughter,
death, and massacre. I have seen them exert upon a bird, a bat, a wasp, or a
worm, more tortures than I thought any thing that had life could support. I
tell them it is cruel, -- and they treat me with derision -- nay, several grown
up people join the laugh against me, and say, that I was designed for a girl. I
must write to my guardian on the subject -- certainly, To be good, must be to
be happy.

And yet, how is it, that (though I do all the little good in my power) I am
still miserable! -- How is it that on those days in which I only do no harm, I
am less insulted, than on those in which I labor to do good. Yet, in one case,
my merit is negative -- in the other, actually agreeable to all that I have
read in the Scriptures, and Spectators, and all that I have heard from the lips
of my guardian. What a number of indignities have I already suffered, for the
very things from which I expected happiness. -- It Is very distressing, and I am
determined to know the the cause of it --

By this time I had got into a green lane, pretty near the house of my master;
and turning my head aside, to see what occasioned a flouncing I heard close by
me, I saw a creature hanging by the horns at the edge of the ditch -- it was a
sheep, either thrown there by some boys, or caught amongst the briars by chance
-- the poor creature was half smothered in the mud -- at the price of a great
deal of toil and dirt, I disentangled the animal, but it was so weary with
former efforts, that I had still to drag it from the ditch -- I did so, and
when it came out, it was difficult to tell, which was the more shocking
spectacle, for it was one of those ditches that (on account of its gloomy and
humid situation) even the warmth of the summer could not dry up --

-- I sat by the creature till it recovered strength to stagger away, and I
must own had no small inclination to carry it with my own hands into the next
grass enclosure; but I desisted from this, because I thought I might trespass
on the property of some one to whom the sheep did not belong: though I was now
scarce fifteen, reading, thinking, and observation had taught me such habits of
sentiment.

At this crisis a man on horseback passed me, and seeing the sheep in such a
condition, and me in as bad, suspected that I had been its tormentor -- he said
that I deserved to have the skin whipped over my ears -- so I should think so
too, said I, if I had been guilty of so barbarous an action -- come, come,
don't tell a lie into the bargain, you young rascal, that is worse than the
other, said the man; and spreading the thong of his whip, hit me a violent blow
in the face, that set my nose a bleeding, and rode on -- and yet while I was a
talking with this merciful man, I happened to cast my eye under the girth of
his saddle, and found almost every vein in the horse, from one flank to the
other, gushing with blood -- his spurs, and the heel of his boot, were clogged.
--

-- Notwithstanding this treatment, I felt some pleasure in the rich reflection
of having rescued a dumb animal from misery -- but my nose spouted so
obstinately that I was obliged to make the best of my way to the school;
especially as I had been detained rather late by my adventure. The bird-nesters
had returned before me, and they, with the rest of the scholars, were in the
sitting-room with the master at supper.

-- I did not, till I entered the apartment, reflect, that my figure was at
present likely to excite both ridicule, and enquiry -- but the moment I opened
the door, the whole society were in an uproar -- my face was covered with gore
-- my nose swelled with the lash of the horseman's whip, and my clothes were of
the same hue with the poor sheep's back -- the master was so exasperated at the
sight, that he would not hear a word about the story, but caned me severely for
spoiling my things, made me a public example before the very boys whom I had
been advising to be tenderhearted, -- pushed me from his presence, and sent me
supperless to bed. --

-- My private meditations were not pleasant -- I had no light to look into my
Spectators, nor do I suppose I should have derived at that time any relief from
them had it been funshine. -- I had no inclination for sleep, and yet got into
bed -- the birdnesters came into my chamber, before they retired for the night
into their own, and with an air of exultation, told me, they had rare sport,
but supposed I had still better -- called me raw head and bloody-bones, and
bade me good night --

After lying silent above three hours --

-- Good God, cried I, for what have I been thus chastised -- fretted, and
insulted -- Is it for my benevolence --? If To be good is to be happy,
wherefore are all my best designs thus frustrated? -- The first rays of the
morning light broke in upon my reflections -- I arose and taking out ink, and
paper, sat myself down at the window to write. --

CHAP. IX.
-- I threw together an explicit account of my various sufferings, actions, and
apprehensions; and sent them away to my guardian, as soon as I was allowed the
privilege of walking again amongst my play-mates. The clergyman, to whom my
father thought proper to leave the direction of his affairs, was as honest, and
inoffensive a priest, as ever harangued from a pulpit. He was esteemed by his
parishioners profoundly learned, insomuch, that scarce any business was done in
the village without his knowledge. From his wisdom and friendship I expected
great satisfaction, and anticipated the return of the post, with all imaginable
pleasure.

Anticipation of pleasure however is the very destruction of it. The returning
post came, and brought me a BLACK SEAL -- my guardian had died of an apoplexy,
an hour after the receipt of my letter, which he was preparing to answer. I was
summoned suddenly away to take possession of his papers, for the good man
having no family, nor any connexions, which were dearer to him than the son of
the friend of his youth, had, in the fondness of his heart, made his last
sentiments in my favor, and indeed left me sole excutor. The suddenness of the
circumstance, at first stunned me -- I put the letter of death into the hand of
my master -- begged he would suffer me to set out directly, and flung myself
into a chair -- the tears came at last. I loved the deceased beyond expression
-- without attending to what was said to me -- I got into a chaise, and drove
to * * * *.

CHAP. X.
To young men of a serious complexion, the chamber of death is inexpressibly
terrible, especially when the body of a benefactor is extended on the bed. --
At a proper time, I trusted him to the bosom of the earth, with every mark of
decency, and affection: and at length I ventured to read over his will, and
take account of his effects -- my youth, and experience unsitting me for these
affairs, I called in the assistance of an attorney who resided at a market town
three miles from the village, who had indeed drawn up the testament for my
guardian. To the judgment of this gentleman, who bore a fair reputation, I
trusted. Till he came indeed the house might very properly be termed an house
of mourning, for a great concourse of sable looking people were crowding
together into every room. The whole village was actually emptied into the
vicarage: I found they came upon two distinct errands. To condole, and to
congratulate. They were vastly sorry their good pastor was gone, but they were
extremely glad that I was come, and heartily wished me many happy years. I
returned them thanks for the latter part of their business, and wept with them
for the first. The lawyer appeared. They fled. Mourners of this kied detest an
attorney -- perhaps because he knows them better than a raw schoolboy. My
house was cleared in a moment. It is not without very peculiar propriety I make
use of the word cleared, for I soon found that those very weepers and wailers,
were no other than some of those birds of prey, that watch the mortality of an
human body, scent the carcass from afar, and vulture like immediately proceed
to plunder. They cried indeed with their eyes, but not choosing to hold up an
handkerchief to wipe them, their pickers and stealers were at liberty, to
secret certain portable movables, which perhaps they might take a particular
fancy to Poor wretches, they did not know that To be good, was to be happy!

Upon inspection into matters, it appeared that the good clergyman had died
worth three thousand pounds, besides his dwelling house (which he built), a
large garden, a small paddock adjoining his garden, and a considerable quantity
of furniture. (His living fell again into the hands of the patron.) The whole
of the above he had given to me, subjected to the payment of a small legacy of
100l. to a very distant relation, and twenty pounds to the poor of the village,
to be distributed amongst the properest objects, on the second Sunday after his
decease -- By the will of my own father, it was requested, that my guardian,
would nominate a second in case of his own death during my infancy. This
appointment my father neglected to do himself, perhaps because he wished to pay
a compliment to the good clergyman. But being himself an hearty man, he had not
made over the trust, and as he died suddenly, the sole disposal both of the
fortune left by my father, and the fortune left by my guardian, came naturally
to my discretion. I expressed a surprise at this -- the attorney said it was
certainly an oversight in my guardian -- we were both a good while silent. The
lawyer submitted it to me as an act of prudence, whether I would choose myself
to appoint a trustee, till I came of age, and there was I remember an egotism
in his looks, which seemed to ask me what I should think of him for that
office? I told him I would take a day to deliberate upon it, and consult with
him again.

CHAP. XI.
Now of all the things upon earth, I knew the least how to manage money, and
yet I was in possession of near twenty thousand pounds, including the
accumulated interest of the twelve thousand, left by my father -- a thought
came suddenly across me, which determined me at once -- the power of a pleasant
idea when the soul is gloomy, operates like an unexpected sunbeam, darting
through an hemisphere of clouds -- the sky and the face, the element and the
whole machine of man, are in those cases equally bright and delightful -- 'twas
so with me. As I am now master of twenty thousand pounds, said I, I shall be
able to make many of my good fellow creatures happy, -- I will neither return
to school nor attend lethargic universities, but instantly step into life, and,
mixing with mankind, indulge at once my curiosity, and my benevolence. --
Without more ado I wrote to the attorney, that I intended to travel, and should
therefore want my ready money left by my guardian; and that, the sum which was
already invested in the funds, might remain. The lawyer did not seem to like
the measure, but for the first time in my life, I ran the risque of disobliging
another, to gratify myself: 'twas not perhaps strictly benevolent, yet as it
was the first petulance I ever indulged, the idea of the error came softened
upon my understanding -- happy had it been for me, if instead or stepping into
life, and putting money in my purse, I had sat quietly down in the
chimney-corner, and, like the virtuoso in the comedy, traveled only in my
Books. --

-- Amongst the furniture of the house which now decended to me, was a small
walnut-tree book-case, at the opening of which my foolish heart, bigoted to
sentiment, leapt for pleasure: and it was a dearer treasure to my heart at that
time, than all the money I had in the world. It contained the following books:

Works of Jeremy Tailor. -- of Thomas a Kempis. B -- Burnet's Pastoral Care.
Practice of Piety. St. Chrysostom. The Tragedy of Cato. Annotations on the
Scriptures, Quarles's Emblems. Pilgrim's Progress. Passion of Christ. Sermons,
in 23 Volumes (selected) Prayers for Private Houses. Baxter, on the Soul. And
Drelincourt on Death.
To these were added, a collection of discourses in manuscript, which my poor
old friend, used ex officio, with every passage of which his parishioners were
made repeatedly acquainted. I wanted extremely to read all the volumes in my
possession, and would have begun the task directly, but for one of those
interruptions which are immediately attendant upon people in prosperity.

CHAP XII.
I was now condemned to that sort of drudgery, which custom and complaisance
have imposed upon men just stepped into a fortune. -- The gentry of the
neighborhood came upon the commerce of visitings; and the poor of my parish,
and all the parishes adjacent, were at my gate, upon the subject of charity. I
have since found out, that these were pickpockets of different kinds. At that
time, however, I thought of them very differently -- the rich I received with
cordiality, and the poor never went away empty-handed; and yet by some strange
waywardness and perverseness of my stars -- my ill-luck -- or whatever else
influenced the events of my life, I had never the good fortune to satisfy
either. Benevolence was still the motive, but felicity was not the effect. My
heart was one of those, which might be supposed to reside in the breast of a
stripling, impressed in the nursery, with a sense of that great social duty,
extending from earth to heaven -- the duty which beginning with GOD, descends
to man, and terminates in brute. With a natural inclination to gentleness, I
soon acquired from the Bible and Spectators, an habit of thinking, as well as
feeling right. Never indulging myself in those boyish feats which sow in
children the first fatal seeds of cruelty, injustice, and ingratitude, I in
some sort acquired a degree of primitive purity in my ideas, that carried me
into that line of action, which I then thought the road to happiness, but which
I now perceive the certain path to indignity and disgrace. With such a heart,
and with such propensities and principles belonging to it, I loved all --
thought well of all -- embraced all. With the sad I sympathized -- with the
happy I exulted; and to such as had none to help them, but he who bids the
primrose spring modestly round my present retreat, I gave the comforts which
even the economy of nature demanded. Perhaps no man was ever accoutered with
weapons of worse defense, to struggle through the warfare of life, than the
principles and propensions I have mentioned.

After all the fretful labors of an active though short existence, I am now
writing the heads of my history in the depth of an unfrequented forest. From
man I have nothing to expect, since I have abjured his society -- I am provided
with water from the spring, and I have taken care to supply myself with stores
which were brought to the skirts of the wood, by a mule whom I have now turned
adrift to him that should find him -- I eat but little -- much still remains in
my storebox -- the tugs of heart, and strokes of anguish that I met in society,
assure me that I shall not long continue in solitude alive. I have ascended the
hill, and though I am yet but in the middle of man's life, I feel myself at the
very verge of the declivity. The ravages of misery, are even greater than those
of time. There is nothing in my fight but a few dumb domestics, which I have
summoned together, as the substitute of man, and which soothe me when the
broken heart requires consolation: nor do I hear any thing in my forest but the
innocent language, and animated variety, of such creatures, as are formed to
inhabit the wood. The moment of fate, which must carry me from earth, cannot be
long delayed -- I am writing these passages of my life, under the immediate eye
of a GOD, whom I expect shortly to see -- I expect therefore at the same time,
that whenever my history is read, (if it be ever found,) that the startling
sentiments in this chapter, may be very particularly attended to -- not
condemned as the hasty effusions of a splenitic refugee, who (disappointed in
his expectations) prefers the society of beast, to man; but as a mournful fact,
the force of which will be always felt in proportion to the experience of the
reader. -- If however my sentiments should as yet appear irreconcilable, as I
confess they clash with most of the common systems of the age, let the objector
read on; and he will find them exemplified in the future periods of a narrative
written by a a dying man. --

CHAP. XIII.
The last chapter contains the assertion which I pronounced would startle a
great many people, notwithstanding what has been advanced to corroborate it, in
the former part of this manuscript -- I have ventured to assert that an extreme
tender and good mind, ardently pursuing its propensities, is the most improper
mind in the world to produce TERRESTRIAL felicity. Objectible as this may seem,
I must take upon me (in the full enjoyment of a sound mind, and perfect memory)
to push the point farther; and add, that in nine instances out of ten, those
propensities, are utterly against him in this world: and often bring their
master, to discredit, poverty, and shame.

The world will be up in arms against me, and my bones will be hunted for, and
gibbetted -- What!

Is not -- to be good -- to be happy? --

The answer is given in a sentence. In this world, generally speaking No.

Nor, in the world to come?

Yes.

Are not men therefore

To be good?

Yes.

Wherefore --

For the sake of God, and our conscience.

But is goodness then against our worldly interest?

Nine times out of ten.

Is not that the fault of God --?

No.

Whose then.

Man's.

Impossible!

Suffer me to prove it.

READ ON.

CHAP. XIV
About this time happened the Sunday on which the legacy of twenty pounds was
to be divided amongst such objects, as more immediately stood in need of the
donation. After morning service, I had requested the clerk to summon all those
mendicants into the vestry, which he knew to be particularly indigent and
deserving. It is almost impossible to do things privately in a village: it was
soon known to the whole parish, that the favor of their benefactor was on this
day to be distributed, and accordingly, the church was on this day crowded with
more poor people than had been known there for many years.

Too many of them were led thither by the hand of hope rather than of religion.
The money was divided by the curate of the next parish, who officiated at both
that and my guardian's, since the death of the latter. He was an upright
character, knew every inhabitant, and was therefore a proper person for such an
office. -- The people assisted, went satisfied away, and I was truly of opinion
that To be good, was to be happy. At the porch of the church, as the curate,
the clerk, and I were going home, we were intercepted, by the sight of a pretty
large multitude, every member of which seemed to be visited by all the
afflictions of Lazarus. Lameness, blindness, filth, and nakedness, were here in
the most formidable array: Their numbers baffled computation, and every one's
business appeared to be, how he could most effectually appeal to my compassion.
The hospital at Chelsea, could scarce have produced such a congress of
invalids. The clerk was for driving them away with his wand -- I prevented
this, and enquired for what they assembled. In the true key of complaint, they
God-blessed my honor, and said, it was for money. The curate replied, the most
needy were already relieved. -- The beggars displayed their tattered garments,
lean looks, and imperfect limbs. I did not know what to do. The clerk bid them
go home to their own parishes, for that they did not belong to us. I put my
hand into my pocket -- my purse was empty -- I bid them come to my gate within
an hour -- they came, and I desired the clerk to divide 20l. more upon them, a
sum which I very luckily happened to have in halfs crowns, a kind of pieces
which my guardian was always fond of hoarding. In ten minutes after the clerk
disappeared, I heard a violent noise at at my gate: the beggars, dissatisfied
with his bounty, or rather with his manner of distribution, had all fallen upon
him, and bruised the poor fellow unmercifully: they said the men in the vestry
had right to no more money than they -- they drove the clerk about till he was
glad to find shelter in the house -- I threw up the fash, to expostulate --
they muttered before my face, and upon the clerk threatening to have them set
in the stocks, several of the most audacious of them, in token of defiance,
broke my windows with pebble-stones. About eight o'clock in the evening another
mortifying circumstance fell out; for the people in the yard having spent their
respective modicums at the alehouse, to the great annoyance of many sober
disposed people of the parish, they at length fallied out in a body, and
encountered the people of the vestry, by whom they esteemed themselves robbed
of their right. A war of words (as usual) began the contest -- a fierce and
bloody battle ensued. The farmers left their houses to still the riot by
authority, but they were obliged to retreat with many a broken head, -- the
wives and daughters came next, and abused me for throwing away my money, and
encouraging a set of lazy vermin that did not belong to the parish -- they said
that I might be ashamed of myself for turning the sabbath day, into a day of
drunkenness, when every good body ought to have the Testament in their hands;
and concluded by observing, that there did not use to be such goings on in
their poor dead minister's time; but indeed what better could be expected from
a mad-brain harum-scarum bit of a boy. --

This was but a bad prognostic of future felicity -- I protest that I meant all
for the general satisfaction -- twenty pounds was to be given away to the
poorest of the parish, and I took great pains to have the poorest selected and
relieved -- a party of unexpected necessitous creatures invited my charity; and
that no complaint of partiality might prevail either against the memory of my
guardian, or against myself, I directed an equal quantity of money to be
divided amongst those who were not included in the bequeathed bounty -- the
mercenary part of the mob made head against me -- abused my agent, and struck
the glass out of my windows: instead of carrying in their hands the comforts I
had given them to their pining families they steal into an alehouse and pour
the bounty -- down their throats -- they next pick a quarrel with their
fellow laborers, break the sconces of their masters, and then I am to bear the
blame of the whole. I am always treated in this manner I think. 'Twas just thus
with me, at school. -- I must some how or another have a strange method of
going about benevolent actions, -- or I have peculiar ill-luck -- or else my
ideas of happiness must be dreadfully confused, or -- or --

CHAP. XV.
-- The curate (who generally reserved all his language for his Sunday duty)
was at this very time twirling round his band with one hand, and holding his
pipe up to his mouth with the other -- but feeling the wind attack him through
the broken casement, he had entrenched himself behind a large screen, which
extended from one end of the room to the other -- not a word said he to the
complaints either of widows, wives, husbands, or daughters; and yet rolled his
eyes up and down, and seemed to listen to every body --

Doctor, said I -- who could have supposed that from so innocent an action,
such distressing consequences should arise -- who could suppose it, I say?

Nobody -- said the priest. --

Might not one have reasonably expected to receive the thanks and tears, rather
than the reproaches of these poor people --?

Certainly -- said the priest --

Have you, my friend, ever met these hard returns?

Frequently -- said the priest, shaking his head.

Don't they make you very unhappy?

No doubt -- said the parson.

How do you get over them, doctor?

Smoke -- said the priest, pointing to his pipe.

Is that a specific for the anxieties, which arise from ungrateful treatment?

I never smoke, doctor -- have you no other remedy for me more in the road of
your profession?

Surely, said the priest.

Name it, my dear friend, for I am truly miserable --

PATIENCE, said the priest -- If a man has patience, no crosses, nor any
misfortunes -- nor any accidents -- nor any distresses -- nor any --

The good priest was now set in for it. I drew my chair opposite to his, and
hoped now for great improvement -- the doctor took the pipe from his lips -- a
spark fell from it upon his leg -- Patience sir, said the doctor, (exalting his
voice,) is that blessed, beatific, divine, caelestial -- zounds and the devil,
cried the priest, I Have scorched the calf of my leg to pieces. -- He rubbed the
part affected -- skipped about the room like a madman, threw the pipe in the
sire, and ran out of the house.

Go thy ways, said I -- neither from thee nor thy patience will my perplexity
of mind be relieved. -- I unlocked my book-case, and read without intermission
till twelve o'clock at night -- the volumes were all set to the same tune: Be
good, and be happy -- be happy, and be good -- I took up Cato, and my bosom
bounded when I came to this couplet, It Is not in mortals to command success;
But we'll do more, Sempronius -- we'll deserve it.


I applied the sentiment to my own case, and found that it fitted me to a hair
-- I repeated it over and over -- and I admired it more at every reception --
the clerk knocked at my door, and told me that one of the drunken beggars, in
staggering home, had tumbled into a ditch, and was drowned, and that a wife to
a principal farmer was frightened into an untimely labor by the riot, and not
expected to get over it -- Honest man, replied I -- I am heartily sorry for it,
but how could I possibly help it --? I meant well, the thing has fallen out ill
-- remember Mr. Clerk -- remember what the poet says, It Is not in mortals to
command success;
But we'll do more, Sempronius -- we'll deserve it.


Sempronius, sir, said the clerk! -- I don't know for that -- but I tell you
the fact. He walked off, and I believe suspected the sanity of my intellect. --

CHAP. XVI.
I set in for a week's close reading -- 'twas still the same maxim, multiplied
and modified into different expressions, through different volumes -- To be
good is to be happy.

I was determined to try the virtue of the expression, beyond the limits of the
village. I set out for London, and in that city I arrived in the sixteenth year
of my age, after having desired the attorney to give an eye to my affairs at
the village, during my absence -- at my first entrance into the metropolis, new
sensations took root in my heart. Every street was full -- every shop was busy
-- and every foot was in motion -- this, said I -- is certainly the place to
bring every principle and every sentiment to the test -- I took up my lodging
at the house of a gentlewoman to whom I was distantly related -- she received
me politely.

And now came on a train of trials, and a series of events, which shall be
related as they recur to my memory. --

-- But before I proceed to set down my transactions in the metropolis, it is
impossible for me to pass a few circumstances, that fell out upon the road. The
social turn of my temper made me prefer a journey in the stage, to the solitary
luxury of going post. I had three miles to ride to the machine, in which my
fellowpassengers were seated sive minutes before I reached the inn: nor did
this small delay pass unnoticed by the driver, who was rubbing his hands
together and blowing his fingers upon account of the cold; declaring at the
same time, that he had waited for me till his horses were starved to death.
Notwithstanding which, he thought proper to ask for something to drink my
health, thereby detaining us a quarter of an hour longer; then having given the
hostler his perquisite -- without which he would certainly have held the
coach-door in his hand, at least another quarter of an hour -- we found
ourselves in motion. My fellow-travellers were not only muffled by the darkness
of the night, but were so enveloped in their great coats, that though (by the
intermixture of legs) I supposed myself amongst human creatures, yet I received
no other assurances of the matter, till (after tossing for about five hours,)
we made a full sick stop to refresh ourselves with breakfast.

CHAP. XVII.
This house had as unfriendly an appearance as ever hung out to the eye of the
traveller, a signal of welcome, that is, in other words, an invitation for him
to spend his money. Not a creature was up, though every body knew the exact
time in which the coach would come in. In a garret window indeed glimmered a
malancholy candle, and after the coachman had smacked his whip about twenty
times, and reinforced the reports by a pretty considerable number of oaths
(peculiar to gentlemen of the whip) from that garret, with the candle between
his fingers, came the hostler, rubbing his eyes, and crawling his way to the
stable, rather by instinct, than a consciousness of knowing what he was about.
About ten minutes after this the trusty chambermaid (whose business was in have
every thing in readiness, against the arrival of the coach) came blinking to
the door like a buzzard, and conducted us to so dark, dismal, and damp a room,
that if we had requested the good man of the mansion for the charity of a
breakfast, it would have been difficult to have deposited our miserable
carcases in a more unfortable apartment. -- And now it was, that my fellow
passengers began to convince me they were capable of moving their tongues, of
which they one and all made use to express the same complaint; viz. that it was
a most shameful thing for travelers to be treated in that manner upon the road
-- that if they expected a coach and six with my lord L -- or my lady M --, the
whole house and stables would be illuminated, and, perhaps, half the village at
the wheels to gape at their honors; but that people who jumble to town in a
stage, and have a couple of hundred miles to go upon business, can neither get
sire or candle in the first stage.

For my part these things were new to me, and therefore I contended myself with
begging Mrs. Betty to bestir herself, and get us a dish of tea as expeditiously
as she could -- In a little time, the faggot began to blaze -- the kettle began
to boil, and those little domestic comforts made at last their appearance,
which removing our disappointments, put the company into a better humor -- and
presently we had leisure and opportunity to contemplate the countenances of one
another. --

CHAP. XVIII.
Our society consisted of three persons besides myself, and all were men; one
was dressed in a suit of plain light brown with buttons of the same -- the
brims of his hat were of immense circumference, and there was a primitive
nicety in the tie of his neck-cloth that spoke his character. -- Another had a
suit of black, somewhat faded; and the third, who was habited in a coat of
snuff color, with waistcoat and breeches of black velvet, had the air of a
shop about him so palpable, that I could almost have sworn to his trade at the
first glance. When the heart is happy and satisfied, the tongue is generally
voluble and communicative. About the third dish we became sociable, and at the
entrance of the second plate of toast, we knew of what we were each in pursuit
of. The man in black indeed was extremely reserved, said little, and sipped his
tea, or rather played with his tea-spoon, as if he thought society an
interruption. -- The gentleman in brown was of the number of people called
quakers, traveling upwards, to attend a solemn meeting of friends upon the
marriage of a preacher: the man in snuff-colour, was an inhabitant of the
market town from whence we came, and was going to visit his daughter. The most
difficult matter remained, and that was to disclose my business in the capital.
I told them that mine was a business of benevolence, and that I was actually
upon the road to London in search of happiness. The passengers looked upon each
other, and smiled, but every smile was different. The coachman came now to
acquaint us our half hour was expired, and the horses were ready; and after
passing through the usual ceremonies with the hostler (who insisted on his
customary six pence notwithstanding his idleness in being found in bed) and
something for Mrs. Betty (for the trouble of rising up when she was called) we
again set forward on our journey -- as soon as we were pretty well settled, the
quaker opened the conversation.

CHAP. XIX.
-- I could not help smiling friend (said he, looking sagaciously at the broad
flaps of his beaver) to hear thee say thou were journeying toward the great
city, in search of happiness, and yet, I, as well as thou, and these other good
brethen at our side as well as we -- and indeed all the fellow-men upon the
earth, are engaged in the like vain pursuit; we are all travelers bound for
the same place, though, peradventure, we take different roads thereto; and yet,
such is the frail nature of the flesh, that we are for ever jogging onward, and
shift about from place to place, dissatisfied with our road -- disgusted with
our journey, till we put off the old man, and reach the gloomy gate that leads
to the city of the Savior --

Vanity of vanities, says preacher wisely, all is vanity.

-- Here the quaker spread his chin upon his chest (upon which it descended to
the fourth button of his waistcoat) and, twirling one thumb round the other
with his fingers folded together, communed with the spirit about the vanity of
searching for happiness in a world where happiness was not to be found.

Surely, sir, (said I) there is a great deal of happiness in the world
notwithstanding this -- the quaker Groaned inwardly -- Happiness! -- cried the
grocer (for such was the calling of the man whose exteriors smelt so strong of
the counter -- happiness in the world -- aye, certainly there is -- I Will answer
for that, and a great deal of happiness too -- I am the happiest man upon earth
myself; -- if any man says he is happier, I say he is -- no matter for that --
the Quaker lifted up the ball of one eye to survey him -- I am worth five
thousand pounds every morning I rise, aye, and more money -- I have got every
shilling by my own industry -- I have a set of good customers to my back -- my
wife knows how to turn the penny in the shop when I have a mind to smoke my
pipe in the parlour; and I make it a rule never to lend a six pence nor borrow
a six pence.

For what were thou born, friend, said the quaker, drily? Born! why to live --
aye and to die too, said the quaker. -- pish! replied the grocer, who does not
know that; but what does that there argufy, if I can but live merrily and bring
up my family honestly -- keep the wolf from the door and pay every body their
own? I have only one child, and her I Am now going to see -- she is 'prentice to
a mantua-maker in the city. If she behaves well, and marries to my thinking --
(and I have a warm man in my eye for her) why so -- If she is headstrong, and
thinks proper to please herself rather than please me, why she may beg or
starve for what I care.

Good GOD! (exclaimed I with vehemence) and is it possible -- don't swear
interrupted the quaker, young man -- then turning his head deliberately round
toward the grocer -- and so thou art very happy friend, art thou? Never was
man more so -- quoth the grocer; so that if you are looking for mertiment and
hearts-ease come to to the Sugar loaf, I Am your man -- here he begun to hum the
fag end of a ballad -- "For who is so happy, -- so happy as I." -- Thy sort of
happiness, friend (returned the quaker) I shall never envy -- thou art happy
without either grace or good works to make thee so -- Good works, said the
grocer, what do you mean by that? I don't owe a penny in the world -- I pay lot
and scot -- I go to church every other Sunday, and I never did a wrongful thing
in my life, -- Thee may be very unserviceable in thy generation for all
that, said the quaker -- I am afraid by thy own account, thou take too much
care in cherishing thy outward man, yet art slow to cherish thy poor brethren.
Why in what pray does thy happiness consist? says the grocer archly -- In
turning the wanderer into the right way, rejoined the quaker -- in feeding the
hungry penitent with the milk of brotherly love, and in clothing the naked,
soul with the comfortable raiment of righteousness. -- Pshaw! cries the grocer;
you had better feed the poor devils with a pennyworth of my plumbs. How many
pennyworth of plumbs may thou give away yearly in thy parish? (said the
quaker.) I tell thee, said the grocer, I never pretend to give away any thing
-- things are too dear, and taxes are too heavy for that -- besides about
seventeen years ago, I was poor myself and wanted a dinner as much as any body
-- but I never found solk so ready to give me any thing -- no, not so much as a
bit of bread -- not so much as this, snapping his singers.

Surely (cried I, greatly agitated) that ought to be a strong argument to
stimulate your benevolence -- Benevolence, said the quaker, young man is not
consined to the mere act of throwing away money -- I never give any money
myself, but then I give store of spiritual food -- I preach in the house and
tabernacle of the Lord, and I travel far and near to bestow religious
consolation of the spirit gratis -- whereas that man on the contrary spends
his substance amongst vain companions or hoardeth it up to swell the pomps of
the flesh -- verily, I fear his transgressions are mighty. -- The quaker paused
and the grocer winked waggishly upon me with one eye, and kept looking
ironically at the quaker with the other. -- Here now (thought I) are two very
opposite characters -- the quaker, for aught I see, is as mercenary as the
grocer, though their avarice is differently modisied according to the different
prejudices of their education.

CHAP XX.
Pray gentlemen give me leave to ask you a few questions, said I. Is not to be
good to be happy -- there can be no doubt of it, said the quaker -- Is not
benevolence the way to goodness -- certainly -- would not you then be happier,
sir, if you were to add a few corporeal comforts to the religious consolations
you bestow -- for instance, if to the milk of brotherly love (which is perhaps
a delicious diet for the soul) you were to add the wholesome milk of a cow, to
satisfy the natural cravings of the body -- and would it not increase your
happiness, Mr. Grocer, if, not contented with the negative merit of having done
no wrong, you would now and then condescend to do something absolutely good --
such as bestowing, from the over-slowings of your plenty, something to those
which cannot but look up to your successful circumstances with a little envy --
and suppose, instead of choosing for your daughter, you were, in a point so
important to her, to leave the choice to herself -- for my own part gentlemen I
have a good fortune, which I design to dedicate to the service of my
fellow creatures, and though I should be sorry to waste my bounty upon the
undeserving, yet I had rather hazard such a mistake than not indulge the
liberal propensities of my heart -- Thou talkest like a young man, said the
quaker: I I am sure he knows nothing of trade, said the grocer, and if you hold
in that mind long, I Would lay ten to one you will not have six pence to bless
yourself. Benevolence, indeed -- its very well to talk of in the pulpit, as
master Holdfast says -- and its very well in your history books, and your
sermon books, but it will not do in the world -- not at all -- a man may give away
all he has, and be never the nearer -- people will only laugh at you, when all
is said and done. While you have got money in your pocket to pay the butcher's
bill, you may always have a hot dish every day, aye, and sauce into the
bargain; but if you do all the good in the world and come at last to want, you
may pass by a whole market full of meat, and I Would lay ten to one the man whom
you set up in business, will hardly give you a marrow-bone. -- Here the quaker
groaned bitterly -- and the grocer taking a paper full of biscuits out of his
pockets, eat away without offering to distribute his refreshment, and then
proceeded. --

CHAP XXI.
You talk of benevolence, and goodness, and such like -- for my part, as I said
before, I never knew any thing but mischief come of any thing but trade. Now
I Will tell you a story -- at this instant a poor tattered wretch, with a bundle
of threadbare rags on his back -- a wooden leg -- half an hand, and a tenth of
an eye, came stumping toward the coach, to solicit our commiseration. -- The
driver no sooner beheld him rising from the bank on which he was resting, than
-- probably to save his passengers the trouble of hearing a dismal story -- he
began to spirit up his horses, in that kind of language which defies spelling,
and which the animals understand as perfectly, as the greatest philologist in
the world. It is a dialect peculiar to the stable, and not inserted in any
dictionary extant. In this dialect the driver now harangued his steeds: and as
a convincing proof, they took the hi^t, we felt the wheels spring under us, by
which means the poor lame fellow was soon thrown far behind, and the grocer
declared it was very well done in the coachman, whom he should remember at the
next stage to dram for his civility. The quaker observed, the highways and
hedges were now so lined with vagrants, that sober people could not pass
unmolested by such naughty children of hypocrisy -- the person in brown put his
hand as if involuntarily, upon his breast, and sighed -- upon looking through
the windows, I saw the poor beggar at a considerable distance, halting on his
crutch, and giving up the pursuit in despair. The coach now arrived at the foot
of a steep hill, and there stopped awhile, and the humane driver, (who had
galloped away from his fellow creature) came to acquaint us how much he would
be obliged to us, and how charitable it would be, if our honors would please
to walk up the hill, and give the poor jades a bit of a holiday. I ordered him
immediately to open the door, and alighted; the gentleman in mourning did the
same -- the grocer swore he paid for horseslesh, and would have it, that he
would not stir a foot till he came to the dining-place -- that he had walking
enough at home, and that he would always have his pennyworth for his penny;
adding, he did design to wet the whistle of Mr. Whipcord, but that he would now
put the money to a better use. The quaker bid the coachman shut the door, and
proceed in his journey: the fellow muttered between his teeth, they were a
couple of Hottentots, and did not know what belonged to a christian to behave
in that manner to dumb creatures. He then conversed very pathetically with his
horses, stroked them on the neck, and gradually gained the summit. By this time
the lame man seeing the carriage make a dead stop, and gathering fresh hope, or
perhaps urged by extreme hunger approached within a few paces of us. I beckoned
him to make the best of his way. He shook his head, as much as to say he
apprehended the thing was not practicable. I went to him, but the asthma was so
heavy on his lungs, and his breath was so laboriously exerted, that he could
only testify his necessity by dropping on the only whole knee he had, and
holding out his hat in his only whole hand. I put something in it, raised him
up, and with some difficulty got him to the side of the coach, which had made a
second pause, at the center of the hill. He bowed to the gentleman in black who
put sixpence into the hat, and dropped a tear into the bargain. I bid him to try
his luck in the coach. -- The fellow looked into his hat, and a little
suffusion of red, rambled over his cheek, as much as to say, he had been
already nobly used -- I insisted upon his paying his respects to my
fellow-passengers. He did so -- the grocer (seeing so much money in the hat)
protested, that nothing could exceed his impudence, except the extravagant
folly of those who had taken so much pains to encourage a vagabond -- that he
had more in his hat than enough to set up a shop in the country, and that he
ought to go home to his parish, and be whipped into workhouse; the quaker said,
he was a naughty beggar, and desired he would move away from the vehicle. The
poor man said nothing -- there was no reproach in his eyes, but when he limped
again toward us, to make a farewell bow, they were so full of tears, that he
turned about as quickly as he decently could, to conceal them.

CHAP. XXII.
-- And now we were at the top of the hill (which was indeed one of the
cloud-capt kind) and the coachman desired us to get in, as the Angel was hard
by, where we should have the best attendance upon the road. A dispute now arose
upon the subject of giving alms to common beggars -- the quaker said they were
ungodly brethren, and deserved no assistance either spiritual or pecuniary --
the grocer, observed that they always made him sick to look at them, and that
if they were to hanker about the Sugar Loaf, he would dite them for a nuisance.
The silent gentleman -- for such he might be almost called -- said, it was
sometimes hard to tell whether itinerant mendicants, merited assistance or not,
but when a poor wretch without either limbs, or clothes, presented himself
before the eye, there could be neither doubt nor dissiculty in the case --
where there is doubt said I, I had rather run the risque of misplacing bounty,
than by not being, bountiful through a cool and political caution, and dread of
being wrong -- the grocer closed the whole dissertation by that excellent and
new observation -- that charity, begins at home, and that it behoved every man
to take care of his family. --

CHAP. XXIII.
The sign of the Angel, upon which the sunbeams were sporting, now displayed
itself, beside the road, and the coachman (delighted with the prospect and
resolving to impress us with a proper idea of his dexterity) resounded the
whip, and drove us upon the full trot up to the door. After we had swallowed
our meal, a fresh driver observed to us that as the road to the next stage was
heavy, and dragging, and that as it was winter time -- though in fact it was
only the fall of the leaf -- dark came upon us sooner than if it was summer, he
therefore hoped we would make haste. The grocer declared he did not like to be
benighted, though he had nothing to lose even if he should be stopped -- the
quaker turned white -- though his natural complexion was rosy, -- at the idea
-- the gentleman in mourning said that he was ready, and I -- (holding out a
glass to the driver, who tossed it off without any other testimony of
gratitude, than scraping a dirty boot along the floor -- for which the waiter
cast an evil eye at him) led the way to the machine. As soon as we had got into
the road, I reminded the grocer of his promise to oblige us with a story. He
said he was but a bad hand at that sort of work, but that if we were inclined
to hear the thing rough as it run, we might. I told him I should thankfully
attend -- the quaker nodded assent, and the grocer after once more assuring us
he had no knack at storytelling, and that Tim Slade the exciseman was twice a
match for him, thus began:

Why, as I was going to tell you, there was young Bob Blewitt, of our parish,
as fine a scholar, and as comely a man as you shall see 'twixt this and London.
He was one of your benevolent chaps. One man he put into a farm -- another he
set up in a shop; another he gave a potion to marry; and to several fatherless,
and motherless girls, he gave dowries. As to beggars, and sick folk, and such
like, he sent them broth and broken victuals -- to lying in women, (whether
they had been before parson or not) he sent bottles of wine, and possets and
potecaries; and at the end of town he purchased a piece of ground, upon which
he built a bit of an hospital, which I think he called a cradle for old age,
and people past labor. In short, and to come at once to the point without
running round about my story -- how confoundedly the coach jolts says the
grocer, and what a d -- d noise it makes -- I cannot hear myself -- the quaker
bid him not be profane -- The silent gentleman pulled up one window -- I
pulled up the other. The grocer went on --

-- In short, as I said before -- whew whew -- whereabouts was I? -- at the
hospital, said I -- aye -- aye, right, continued the grocer -- this hospital,
cost him a pretty round sum -- he wanted indeed to build by subscription, -- no
-- no, said the gentry of the neighborhood, that will bring all the vagrants of
the country upon us, and we have poor enough of our own, and for them we have a
workhouse. Mr. Blewitt said he did not mean to build a workhouse, but a
comfortable -- sylum, I think he called it -- for such as can work no longer.
Howsomdever not a souse could he get, only the old curate (who has five or six
and twenty pounds, per year) was fool enough to give five pounds toward the
scheme -- so Blewitt carried on his building alone, and cursed was the hour in
which he dipped his fingers in mortar and laid the first brick --

How so, said I eagerly, sure this was rearing for himself a monument, which
ascended (figuratively speaking) into heaven -- I don't know for that -- but
figure or no figure, master Bob Blewett cut but a bad figure in the end. In
fine, you shall seldom here of such a man -- ever doing sommit for somebody or
another. The upshot was, that he was teazed from morning to night with beggars
and imposters, and vagabonds, and bastards -- one went with a sorrowful face to
beg one thing -- another to beg another thing -- in short every body wanted
something -- now you shall hear what come of this. Come of it, sir, said I,
what could come of it, but congratulation of heart, and universal gratitude?
the quaker began to hum -- the grocer smiled, and the cheek of the gentleman in
mourning was wet

CHAP. XXIV.
-- Now mind (cried the grocer), mind what tricks were played, upon the founder
of the feast. The laborers pretended to be sick that they might get food for
nothing, so that the farmers could not get their fieldwork done -- many people
got into trouble, purpose that he should get them out again -- the young
forward husseys of the parish got big-bellies, purpose that he should see the
brats provided for, so that this made the justice grunt a little -- he must
needs put a large parcel of money into the hands of lawyer Limbo -- every body
knows him -- I Would as soon build churches with my money, as trust he with it --
well, one night, off went master Limbo and got beyond sea -- and several other
things about the same time ran cross and crooked with poor Bob, so that in
short he found matters sadly altered. --

Alas? said the gentleman in black -- alas? I love and pity him.

I worship him, said I, -- I respect him, said the quaker.

That Is more than other folk did, rejoined the grocer. He was now next to
penniless. As sure as you are alive he stayed till all was gone, and his bones
came well nigh through his skin before he complained, and then he tried to
borrow a trifle of folk he had made -- not a six-penny piece could he get in
the parish. At length the old curate, after a deal of persuasion, prevailed on
him to go and live with him, though the old fellow could scarely buy a neck of
mutton to make sabbath day broth for himself. --

But GOD, said the gentleman in mourning, will make him amends yet. -- He may
be in heaven now for aught I know to the contrary cried the grocer -- I am sure
of it said I -- very like proceeded the grocer, for he died about six weeks
after this, and put the parish to the charge of opening the ground for him at
last. Not a doit did he leave behind him, except a few old books, and picture,
-- two old fashioned blackish coats, and a bit or two of a shirt; as to
nonicals he could not afford they, and so he preached in sarplus -- as soon as
he was buried and put into the grave which we thought Blewitt would never leave
-- affairs were worse than ever. Bob was as bad off as a beggar. The bettermost
people lifted up their shoulders and gave him a bit of dinner, first one, then
another; and this they say hurt him, for at last the rich made no ceremonies,
but bid him step down and get a morsel in kitchen. After this -- he never held
up his head; the poor folks said 'twas a thousand pities such a good gentleman
should come to want: his kin told him 'twas just what they expected; his
friends said he deserved it, and the world at first whispered, then openly
declared that nothing but a madman, or a person never brought up to any
business, would have acted in that manner. Here the quaker groaned louder than
ever, and holding up his hands as high as his shoulders, shook them in a
horizontal descension, till they fell again with great method and solemnity
upon the flaps of his coat. The grocer began to yawn and stretch himself; and
where think you, continued he, gaping -- where is Mr. Blewitt now -- why in one
of the dirtiest wards in his own hospital -- seldom or ever sees any body --
now and then crawls out at dead night and goes into churchyard to visit the
grave of the old curate -- sometimes is quite aside himself: and is mashiated
to a perfect ottomey: and all this is true as sure as you are in this coach. --

CHAP. XXV.
-- How far are we come? said I hastily, -- The last stone, said the grocer,
was sixty-six -- I have a great mind to go back, replied I -- I would give any
money to see Mr. Blewitt -- however I will not forget to send my compliments to
so excellent a character. Aye, quoth the grocer, but while the grass grows --
you understand me -- spare your reproof, fir, said I, no time shall be lost --
did he ever taste thy bounty friend, cried the quaker -- aye has he, many a
time, said the grocer. I have given him the offal of plumbs, currants, raspins
of a loaf and such like. Dainty diet, returned the quaker, truly! -- I cannot
express my anxiety for him said I -- Xiety, replied the benefactor of raspins
-- what signifies talking of that -- stick to the main chance. Go to church,
and hear good sermons, and read good books, and take good advice, and keep your
money in the till, and put the key in your pocket, and keep yourself out of
debt -- but above all, mind this -- neither lend a sixpence, nor borrow six a
pence, for that is the only way to live, take my word for it. -- Here he
finished, with the selfimportant air of a man, who, having the world before
him, did not care six pence for the interest of any person in it except the
concern he took in the welfare of one worthless individual, -- namely --
himself.

Thy story, friend, said the quaker, is too exact a picture of this wicked
world. I pray thee, young friend, have the fate of brother Blewitt in thy
remembrance. If thou have abundance, take care thereof, for no man knows what
shall happen tomorrow, and I have myself seen, strange things in my time.

The shadows of the night now prevailed over the day, and the light of some
candles at a small distance led me to suppose we were pretty near our
destination for the evening -- however I was mistaken; the lights were in a
village through which we were to pass, and we had many a long mile to travel to
the place of our repose.

CHAP. XXVI.
At length we reached our inn, where being shown into a small but comfortable
room, I proposed to order a supper. The quaker declared he never eat any --
that the fraility of his mortality weighed down his spirit, and he found
himself inclined to slumber. So saying, he rang the bell for a candle, folded
himself up in his surtout, and in less than ten minutes forgot, I doubt not,
the fate of Mr. Blewitt, and even the holdingforth which he should give before
the brother and sister, who became helpmates in the flesh, and yoke-fellows
after God's holy ordinance. The grocer wished him a good night, protesting
nevertheless, that for his part, supper was his best meal; upon which
declaration I shall only observe, that if he meant to deposit more into his
belly than he did at dinner few people would choose to board him, at the usual
rates. The gentleman in black declined eating, but observed it would be right
to order something. I declared that I had supped upon Mr. Blewitt. The grocer
thought proper to show his -- want of wit; saying, (it would, he believed,) be
no easy matter to make a meal out of poor Bob, as he was certain there was not
an ounce of flesh upon his whole carcass: upon this sally, (at which he laughed
heartily,) he applied to a bell which hung in the center of the room, and after
the waiter had repeated the promise of Coming! -- coming! -- about ten times,
he actually made his entrance, and was as pert perpendicular an appearance as
could be well conceived. The grocer ordered a most plentiful and solid banquet,
wisely considering that, as the charges were to be divided into three equal
shares, and as it was likely there would in reality be no great occasion for
more than one knife and fork, which knife and fork would be nearest to the
sides of his own plate, the expense, upon the whole, could not be greater to
himself than if he had purchased singly a very moderate supper. While the
supper was dressing, I could not but take a review of the grocer, who, instead
of drooping under the fatigues of his corpulence, or the natural lassitude
which succeeds a journey, was all hope, eagerness, and expectation. He began to
handle the knife, called for a whetstone, tucked a towel under his chin,
smacked his lips in echo to the cork -- bad us take notice of the stains in the
bottle, and set the wine before the fire. In this situation he sat and filled
an elbowchair -- as fine a figure for the pencil of Hogarth, or for Reynolds
(if Reynolds chose to astonish in the ludicrous,) as ever presented itself to
the imagination of genius. He was a squat, thick, -- disproportioned, puffing
rotundity; his face had that jolly plumpness, which buries every natural mark
of meaning in greasy vacuity. In the middle of that face were set two eyes,
which swam in a stupid fluid, that seemed to be a distillation from tallow; and
at the bottom was a chin which unusually broadened from the under jaw
downwards; so that instead of terminating in a peak, was rolled up at the
bottom into a round pellet of flesh under which hung those collops that
distinguish men of his habit. The thickness of his hands were by no means
proportioned to their length, nor was there any space from the ear to the
shoulder, for a cord, had it been his fate to be elevated: such was the
personage that now waddled -- I will not venture to say walked into the
kitchen, with a resolution to hasten the cook, for having waited near half an
hour, he declared that if he stayed five minutes longer, he should out wait his
appetite and then should not be able to eat a morsel -- though he was, he must
own, vastly fond of fish, loved roast fowl beyond any thing that was spitted --
doated upon cold ham -- admired veal cutlets, had no objection to pigeon pie,
and thought minced-veal very tolerable. He had not disappeared more than tea
minutes before the kitchen was in an uproar, and the waiter came skipping into
the room to acquaint us that our friend would certainly be murdered if we did
not immediately carry him off. We bustled into the kitchen which now presented
a scene of caricature and confusion, so truly ridiculous, that it requires the
pens of the immortal Fielding and Smollete to do it justice. -- It demands a
chapter to itself. --

CHAP. XXVII.
-- The grocer was standing in his shirt offering to box with the best in the
place, the cook was brandishing the baster, the landlord was threatening to
destroy the carcass of the grocer, an half-pay officer with one arm, was
clapping our host upon the back, the house-dog held the grocer by the breeches,
and the hostess was encouraging Tiger to keep his hold. It was some time before
we could learn the occasion of the fray, for the combatants rather grew more
violent than tranquil, especially when the grocer ostentatiously swore that he
could buy the whole house, and afterward have more money to spare than any man
in company. This touched the son of the sword, whose face became immediately
regimental, and marching up to the grocer snaped his fingers against that
prominent piece of flesh which nature had given him for a nose; and which,
unused to that rigid and soldier like salutation, spouted a copious stream,
which bepainted the prodigious breadth of linen which covered his carcass. The
grocer however by no means sickened at the sight of blood, but grew more
sanguine in his resentment, for he now dashed his fists, about like a fury, --
his blows were indeed given at random, because he was obliged to hold his head
down to prevent drinking his own blood -- In one of these blows it happened,
that his tremendous paw fell upon the jaws of the landlady, who catching him by
the ear, overset his wig, and discovering a fat newshorn pate, did so decorate
it with the crimson marks of her delicate nails, that in less than three
minutes, his head resembled a new ploughed field, only that the surrows were
red instead of being earth-colour. The landlord had now an opportunity to
reinforce his wife -- the captain gave the word of command, Tiger roared out
mainly in the midst, and the cook emptied the dripping-pan upon the back of the
miserable grocer, whose life was now so critically circumstanced that had not
the officer by declaring the victory was completely gained, put an end to the
contention, he must assuredly have given up the ghost. This dreadful fracas (as
is often the case) arose from a very trifling beginning: upon the grocer's
entering the kitchen, he thought proper to assume the authority of a man of
very considerable consequence, and began by acquainting the cook, that though
he chose to travel in a stage he was not to be trifled with, as he could pay
for a coach and six if he thought sit, adding, he believed few that traveled
the road knew better what good usage was -- he then found fault with the
cutlets which he said were too thick, and too red -- complained that the fowl
was an old hen, for that her legs were as well guarded as a sighting cock's,
and that the fire was abundantly too fierce and would scorch before it warmed
through: upon this, he sallied to the salt box, and was proceeding to empty the
contents upon the coals, when the (landlady, though not an ill-tempered woman,)
thought her province of scolding her own servants so cruelly invaded that she
desired him, in no very gentle voice, to desist; and on his refusing the
request the host himself interposed, till at last the grocer (recollecting how
well he had secured the mainchance, and taking from thence a pride of heart,
which frequently emanates from a full purse,) he told the landlord he was an
ill-bred saucy rascal, and that he was a better man than ever stood in his
house. This being a censure that involved every one present, the aforesaid
armless officer thought himself aggrieved, and approaching the grocer, chucked
him under the chin; but unluckily the grocer's mouth being then opened by
anger, those two ranges of bony fortification caught his tongue, till he almost
sunk to earth with the violence of the pain. And this it was that made him
disrobe himself and stand in the posture we at first found him; which, though
heroic, was rather unfortunate, as somebody, (in the hurry and heat of battle,
perhaps to prevent their being made bloody,) had moved off with his
snuff-coloured coat, and black velvet waist coat. The engagement was however at
length over, and we led our champion (not indeed in triumph, but leaning upon
the arm of me, and the gentleman in mourning) into the room, with such a
burlesque alteration of figure, that benevolence itself must have smiled, as
she pitied him.

The idea, even of supper, was now his last idea -- his first was that of
water, to wash away his stains; his second, was a bed to soothe his bruises.
The landlady was now rather appeased, and permitted the chamberlain to show the
poor devil to bed, vowing however that she would make him pay smartly for it in
the morning. As soon as the grocer was gone, the gentleman in mourning observed
to me, that people of low education, and little minds, were always capable of a
silly ostensibility, that sooner or later brought them into disgrace. Having
spent a few minutes more in contemplating the vanity of this odd and disgusting
character, and promising to rise early to pursue our journey, we parted for the
night.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Our rest was interrupted at the dawn. The quaker, however, complained that he
was ill -- The grocer was tolerably mended, but swore he would not stir a foot
till he recovered every thing he had lost, from the biscuits in his pocket to
the minutest hair in his peruke. As this message was brought us, a chaise and
four, which had been traveling all night, came rattling into the yard, before
which came two servants, and one was at the tail of it. The whole house, (early
as it was,) got out of their beds and hurried to the chaise-door -- the bells
rang as if the house was on fire, and his honor was serenaded into the best
room, by about a dozen domestics. The gentleman in black said he knew the
traveller. Heavens! said I, what a bustle is here about an individual indeed --
aye, sir, replied my friend, (for such I began to wish he was) there is an
invariable rule for these things -- a chaise and pair commands attention -- a
chaise and four enforces homage, but a chaise and six claims adoration. Nor is
this obedience paid so often to the personages within, as to the idea of the
thing itself -- we travel in a common stage; it is so mechanical a conveyance,
that as the waiter and landlords expect little, they let us come in, and go
out, as peaceably as if we were the passengers of a wagon. If we were to go
post we should be used in a different style, and it is ten to one if the
postilions, (who have a vanity in sitting before their superiors,) do not
transmit a lie from one to another, that we are princes in-cog. -- To tell you
the truth (said I) I am heartily tired of my old companions, from whom I have
already gained as much knowledge, as if I were to travel with them to the
world's end, and for once -- (if you will bear me company,) I will purchase a
little attention upon the road, by performing the rest of our journey in
chaises. With all my heart, said the gentleman. --

After drinking a glass of warm wine, and having taken leave of our former
fellow-travellers, we got into a neat carriage, which rolled away briskly on
the road to London; but not before we had run the gauntlet through a new set
of impostors, and satisfied the demands of all those who hang round the wheels
of an hackney chaise. At this additional charge I expressed my surprise; Be not
alarmed, replied the gentleman, but think yourself very well off, for if you
had clapped another pair of horses to the carriage the expectations of the
servants would have been raised in proportion. Aye, and I can tell you, the
person we saw step out of the chaise and four paid something extra, for his
gold binding upon the saddlecloths, and even for the trimming upon his
waistcoat -- though that last circumstance has lost its pristine dignity in a
great degree, since our barbers, tailors, and other crasts, have of late years
belaced themselves from top to bottom, whenever they make an excursion into the
country. Yet gold, either in or out of the pocket, will always have an
influence. Then respect of this kind is really to be bought, said I -- not only
of this kind, rejoined the gentlemen, but of almost every other. The
interchange of all ordinary civilities, is a mere verbal traffic, and as to
compliments upon gay appearances, they are so extremely marketable, that the
bargain and sale at Smithfield is not more in the way of business.

CHAP. XXIX.
-- Whenever the gentleman in black spoke, there was so much serenity and good
sense in his remarks, shaded, and as it were softened by some latent anxiety,
that I own my curiosity was extremely excited to know more about him. His
person was tall and spare; his complexion extremely pale, and somewhat tinged
with a faintish yellow: there was a pathetic pensive cast in his eyes, that
rather denoted the languors of incessant uneasiness, than the deadness of
dissipation; and the ruins of a smile, which appeared to be constitutional,
gave a philanthropy to his face, which defied the depredations of sorrow and
time.

The sun now had risen above the clouds, and promised us an agreeable day; and
the face of nature, even in the decline of the year, appeared bright and
beautiful. There are few calamities so great, and few fates so severe as to
leave us totally insensibleto the magic of a fine morning. A warm sun, a clear
sky, the charm of vegetation, -- the melody amongst the branches, -- the
refreshment from the night's repose, -- and the prospects of surrounding
plenty, are sufficient to relax the woe of the most melancholy traveller. Such
were their force at present that every feature of my companion underwent a
cheerful alteration. He always spoke before in a plaintive voice, but (as he
now bid me observe how fortunate we were in our weather,) there was a degree of
that sort of pleasure in his accent, which appears to be inspired by any sudden
satisfaction of the heart. I improved this humor by turning our discourse into
an entertaining channel: and it will be soon seen that this gentleman (whose
name I found to be Greaves) was master of every subject, had thought much and
rightly, and had contemplated every point deserving contemplation, with an
accuracy, a taste, and an elegance, peculiar to men which have caught
instruction from lessons of life, a sober exercise of the understanding, and a
judicious course of study.

CHAP. XXX.
The satisfaction, sir, said I, that I feel, from our favorable weather, is
much heightened by finding myself relieved from the nonsense of my former
companions -- pray what do you think of them? -- I think of them, replied Mr.
Greaves, as of men, possessing that kind of knowledge which confers the
happiness suited to their coarse, and -- I had almost said invulnerable
feelings -- each is happy according to the habits of his life -- they are a
fresh, and by no means a weak instance, of a great truth, I have long
maintained, aye, and at the expense of many a warm argument.

Pray what is it? -- Why, simply this, -- Education is all in all. --

I scarce compre -- Give me leave, sir, -- said Mr. Greaves, putting his two
fore-singers lightly on my breast. I have seen this world (and that is a bold
word to say) from top to bottom; and have now past upwards of forty-three years
-- I might have said forty-six -- in a situation which threw me amongst all
ranks of people, and the result of my whole experience is this -- but my
meaning is so prettily expressed by one of our present dramatic poets, that --
though I am no friend in general to quotations, I cannot resist it in this case
-- I think it is in the sentimental play of Zara -- to the best of my memory
these are the words, which are intended as an apology for apostasy: I see too
plainly, custom forms us all:
Our thoughts, our morals, our most fixed belief,
Are consequences of our place of birth:
Born beyond Ganges -- I had been a P^g^^^;
In France a Christian -- I am here a (...).
It Is but instruction all! Our parent's hand
Writes on our hearts the first faint characters,
Which time retracing, deepens into strength
That nothing can efface, but death, or heaven.
In these lines there is not more poetry than truth, and truth which extends
from pole to pole. A mind unaccustomed to remark, or inexperienced in life,
cannot possibly conceive how surprizingly all people are influenced by custom
and early instruction. It is indeed a proverb with us, which proverb is in
every mouth, that "use is second nature" -- but thousands search no farther
into this matter, than just to repeat the expression, and there leave it. Every
one knows and feds the fact, and that is sufficient to convince us of its
universality: but I, who have occasionally delighted in philosophic studies,
have taken some pains -- but they were extreme pleasing ones -- to trace the
point, countained in the lines I have just spoken, very minntely; and from the
closest, and the coolest investigation I am led to believe, that an insinite
quantity of that which passes in the world for vice, and virtue -- observe I
speak not of natural good or evil -- is totally the operation of habit, and
custom, and education.

CHAP. XXXI.
-- I am quite a child, sir -- said I -- in such speculations -- I cannot
clearly -- I will endeavor to explain myself, (rejoined the gentleman with
great goodnature.) Mr. Pope observes -- that as the twig is bent, the tree's
inclined. How beautiful and how justly was it said. The color of our future
fortune greatly depends upon a few slight circumstances, that attend us in our
nursery -- exceptions you know are admitted. But pray call to mind your
acquaintances -- some are in business -- others are trained to pleasure.
Suppose a child born under every favorable event of temporal prosperity -- the
father is rich -- the mother is beautiful: its cradle is soft and downy, its
pap is made of the whitest bread, and every accommodation that the little
stranger demands, is in the highest perfection -- It will not be long before
these softnesses will have so great an influence upon the body, that the infant
will imbibe from these blessings, an idea of luxury -- suppose on the other
hand a child which is the offspring of laborious and indigent parents -- its
birth is effected upon the straw, or on sacking without curtains, the wind
blowing hard through the casement -- the mother lies down contented with her
small beer caudle, and on the third or fourth day, she is up, and dandling the
babe upon het knee, or dancing it in her arms -- about the time that the rich
child begins to know the delicacy of its condition, he poor one would find
itself promising and hardy, and in some degree i^^^ed to the storms of life --
let them he at this period each five years old; the one has acquired a
sensation of (...), the other an habit of hardihood -- suppose then, about this
time, it were possible for them to change situations. The pennyless lad shall
go into the warm villa -- the rich stripling into the cold cottage -- what
would be the consequence? exactly the same as if the two mothers and fathers
should exchange. All would be distress, dilemma, confusion, and aukwardness --
the pampered youth would crowd over the wretched bit of a blaze made by two
sticks, laid across a brick, and the lad who was bred in a tempest, and
seasoned to wind and weather, would very probably toss his plaything against
the fine sash-window to let in the air, and prevent suffocation. Thus far I
have spoken with respect to the influence of early habits upon the body. Let us
now see what effect they have upon the mind. The connection betwixt our mortal
and immortal part, is far closer than betwixt man and wife. Nothing can befall
the one that is indifferent to the other: sympathy implanted by nature is
universally reciprocated, and the tie is at once tender, and forcible.
Consequently the minds of those two boys, must be affected very sensibly by
their respective educations and customs. As they grow up those customs will so
strengthen, that nothing but "death or heaven" can reconcile them to an
innovation, either in thought, word, or deed. The poor boy, having heard
nothing but unpolished language, eat nothing but coarse food, and passed his
day amongst clowns, and cattle, will for ever continue in the track, and if by
any unlucky stroke of chance, he is called to new pursuits, his misery must be
dated from the day in which he deserted the spade, the ploughshare, or the
flail. The rich boy in the mean time rises into man, amidst the clash of
carriages, the comfort of couches, and the luxuries of laziness. His ears are
accustomed to music, flattery, and fashion; and his eyes are daily charmed with
objects of dissipation or delight. No possible accident could be more fatal to
his peace, than a sudden deprivation of these pleasures. Take him again into
the hut, like a fish upon land, he finds himself instantly out of his element:
the greatest transports of the peasant, are agony to him, and every thing
around, and within him, is as strange as if he had stepped into a new world. Why
is all this? -- merely because they have been taught to think, and feel and act
differently -- on the other hand -- but I must tire you, fir -- I am concerned;
returned I, Mr. Greaves should think an apology necessary for bestowing upon me
the greatest pleasure upon earth. -- Mr. Greaves paused a little, bowed and
proceeded.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

