PERSIAN ECLOGUES. Written originally for the ENTERTAINMENT OF THE Ladies of
TAURIS. And now first translated, etc.

Quod si non hic tantas fructus ostenderetur, and si ex his studiis delectatis
sola peteretur; tamen, ut opinor, hanc animi remissionein humanissimam ac
liberalissimam judicaretis. CIC. pro Arch. Poeta. LONDON: Printed for J.
ROBERTS, in Warwick Lane. 1742. (Price Sixpence.)

THE PREFACE.
IT is with the Writings of Mankind, in some Measure, as with their Complexions
or their Dress, each Nation has a Peculiarity in all these, to distinguish it
from the rest of the World.

The Gravity of the Spaniard, and the Levity of the Frenchman, are as evident
in all their Productions as in their Persons themselves; and the Style of my
Countrymen is as naturally Strong and Nervous, as that of an Arabian or Persian
is rich and figurative.

There is an Elegancy and Wildness of Thought which recommends all their
Compositions; and our Genius's are as much too cold for the Entertainment of
such Sentiments, as our Climate is for their Fruits and Spices. If any of these
Beauties are to be found in the following Eclogues, I hope my Reader will
consider them as an Argument of their being Original. I received them at the
Hands of a Merchant, who had made it his Business to enrich himself with the
Learning, as well as the Silks and Carpets of the Persians. The little
Information I could gather concerning their Author, was, That his Name was
Mahamed, and that he was a Native of Tauris.

It was in that City that he died of a Distemper fatal in those Parts, whilst
he was engaged in celebrating the Victories of his favorite Monarch, the Great
Abbas. As to the Eclogues themselves, they give a very just View of the
Miseries, and Inconveniences, as well as the Felicities that attend one of the
finest Countries in the East.

The Time of the Writing them was probably in the Beginning of Sha Sultan
Hosseyn's Reign, the Successor of Sefi or Solomon the Second.

Whatever Defects, as, I doubt not, there will be many, fall under the Reader's
Observation, I hope his Candor will incline him to make the following
Reflections:

That the Works of Orientals contain many Peculiarities, and that through Defect
of Language few European Translators can do them Justice.

ECLOGUE the FIRST.
SELIM; or, the Shepherd's Moral.
SCENE, a Valley near Bagdat. TIME, the MORNING. YE Persian Maids, attend your
Poet's Lays,
And hear how Shepherds pass their golden Days:
Not all are blessed, whom Fortune's Hand sustains
With Wealth in Courts, nor all that haunt the Plains:
Well may your Hearts believe the Truths I tell,
It Is Virtue makes the Bliss, wherever we dwell.
Thus Selim sung; by sacred Truth inspired;
No Praise the Youth, but here is alone desired:
Wise in himself, his meaning Songs conveyed
Informing Morals to the Shepherd Maid,
Or taught the Swains that surest Bliss to find,
What Groves nor Streams bestow, a virtuous Mind.
When sweet and odorous, like an Eastern Bride,
The radiant Morn resumed her orient Pride,
When wanton Gales, along the Valleys play,
Breathe on each Flower, and bear their Sweets away:
By Tigris' Wanderer Waves he sat, and sung
This useful Lesson for the Fair and Young.
Ye Persian Dames, he said, to ye belong,
Well may they please, the Morals of my Song;
No fairer Maids, I trust, than ye are found,
Graced with soft Arts, the peopled World around!
The Morn that lights you, to your Loves supplies
Each gentler Ray delicious to your Eyes:
For ye those Flowers her fragrant Hands bestow,
And yours the Love that Kings delight to know.
Yet think not these, all beauteous as they are,
The best kind Blessings Heaven can grant the Fair!
Who trust alone in Beauty's feeble Ray,
The Gulf of that Name, famous for the Pearl-fishery.
Balsora's Pearls have more of Worth, than they;
Drawn from the Deep, they sparkle to the Sight,
And all-unconscious shoot a lust'rous Light:
Such are the Maids, and such the Charms they boast,
By Sense unaided, or to Virtue lost.
Self-flattering Sex! your Hearts believe in vain
That Love shall blind, when once he fires the Swain;
Or hope a Lover by your Faults to win,
As Spots on Ermin beautify the Skin:
Who seeks secure to rule, be first her Care
Each softer Virtue that adorns the Fair,
Each tender Passion Man delights to find,
The loved Perfections of a female Mind.
Blessed were the Days, when Wisdom held her Reign,
And Shepherds sought her on the silent Plain,
With Truth she wedded in the secret Grove,
The fair-eyed Truth, and Daughters blessed their Love.
O haste, fair Maids, ye Virtues come away,
Sweet Peace and Plenty lead you on your way!
The balmy Shrub, for ye shall love our Shore,
By Ind' excelled or Araby no more.
^ost to our Fields, for so the Fates ordain,
^he dear Deserters shall return again.
O come, thou Modesty, as they decree,
The Rose may then improve her Blush by Thee.
Here make thy Court amidst our rural Scene,
And Shepherd-Girls shall own Thee for their Queen.
With Thee be Chastity, of all afraid,
Distrusting all, a wise suspicious Maid;
But Man the most; not more the Mountain Do
Holds the swift Falcon for her deadly Foe.
Cold is her Breast, like Flowers that drink the Dew,
A silken Veil conceals her from the View.
No wild Desires amidst thy Train be known,
But Faith, whose Heart is fixed on one alone:
Desponding Meekness with her down-cast Eyes,
And friendly Pity full of tender Sighs;
And Love the last: By these your Hearts approve,
These are the Virtues that must lead to Love.
Thus sung the Swain, and Eastern Legends say,
The Maids of Bagdat verified the Lay:
Dear to the Plains, the Virtues came along,
The Shepherds loved, and Selim blessed his Song.
The END of the First ECLOGUE.
ECLOGUE the SECOND.
HASSAN; or, the Camel-driver.
SCENE, the Desert. TIME, MIDDAY. IN silent Horror over the Desart-Waste
The Driver Hassan with his Camels past.
One Cruise of Water on his Back he bore,
And his light Scrip contained a scanty Store:
A Fan of painted Feathers in his Hand,
To guard his shaded Face from scorching Sand.
The sultry Sun had gained the middle Sky,
And not a Tree, and not an Herb was nigh.
The Beasts, with Pain, their dusty Way pursue,
Shrill roared the Winds, and dreary was the View!
With desperate Sorrow wild the affrighted Man
Thrice sighed, thrice struck his Breast, and thus began:
Sad was the Hour, and luckless was the Day,
When first from Schiraz' Walls I bent my Way.
Ah! little thought I of the blasting Wind,
The Thirst or pinching Hunger that I find!
Bethink thee, Hassan, where shall Thirst assuage,
When fails this Cruise, his unrelenting Rage?
Soon shall this Scrip its precious Load resign,
Then what but Tears and Hunger shall be thine?
Ye mute Companions of my Toils, that bear
In all my Griefs a more than equal Share!
Here, where no Springs, in Murmurs break away,
Or Moss-crown'd Fountains mitigate the Day:
In vain ye hope the green Delights to know,
Which Plains more blessed, or verdant Vales bestow,
Here Rocks alone, and tasteless Sands are found,
And faint and sickly Winds for ever howl around.
Sad was the Hour, etc.
Cursed be the Gold and Silver which persuade
Weak Men to follow far-fatiguing Trade.
The Lilly-Peace outshines the silver Store,
And Life is dearer than the golden Ore.
Yet Money tempts us over the Desert brown,
To every distant Mart, and wealthy Town:
Full often we tempt the Land, and often the Sea,
And are we only yet repaid by Thee?
Ah! why was Ruin so attractive made,
Or why fond Man so easily betrayed?
Why heed we not, whilst mad we haste along,
The gentle Voice of Peace, or Pleasure's Song?
Or wherefore think the flowery Mountain's Side,
The Fountain's Murmurs, and the Valley's Pride,
Why think we these less pleasing to behold,
Than dreary Deserts, if they lead to Gold?
Sad was the Hour, etc.
O cease, my Fears! all frantic as I go,
When Thought creates unnumber'd Scenes of Woe,
What if the Lion in his Rage I meet!
Often in the Dust I view his printed Feet:
And fearful! often, when Day's declining Light
Yields her pale Empire to the Mourner Night,
By Hunger roused, he scours the groaning Plain,
Gaunt Wolves and sullen Tigers in his Train:
Before them Death with Shrieks directs their Way,
Fills the wild Yell, and leads them to their Prey.
Sad was the Hour, etc.
At that dead Hour the silent Asp shall creep,
If ought of rest I find, upon my Sleep:
Or some swollen Serpent twist his Scales around,
And wake to Anguish with a burning Wound.
Thrice happy they, the wise contented Poor,
From Lust of Wealth, and Dread of Death secure;
They tempt no Deserts, and no Griefs they find;
Peace rules the Day, where Reason rules the Mind.
Sad was the Hour, etc.
O hapless Youth! for she thy Love has won,
The tender Zara, will be most undone!
Big swelled my Heart, and owned the powerful Maid,
When fast she dropped her Tears, as thus she said;
" Farewell the Youth whom Sighs could not detain,
" Whom Zara's breaking Heart implored in vain;
" Yet as thou go, may every Blast arise,
" Weak and unfelt as these rejected Sighs!
" Safe over the Wild, no Perils may thou see,
" No Griefs endure, nor weep, false Youth, like me."
O let me safely to the Fair return,
Say with a Kiss, she must not, shall not mourn.
Go teach my Heart, to lose its painful Fears,
Recalled by Wisdom's Voice, and Zara's Tears.
He said, and called on Heaven to bless the Day,
When back to Schiraz' Walls he bent his Way.
The END of the Second ECLOGUE.
ECLOGUE the THIRD.
ABRA; or, the Georgian Sultana.
SCENE, a Forest. TIME, the EVENING. IN Georgia's Land, where Tefflis' Towers
are seen,
In distant View along the level Green,
While Evening Dews enrich the glittering Glade,
And the tall Forests cast a longer Shade,
Amidst the Maids of Zagen's peaceful Grove,
Emyra sung the pleasing Cares of Love.
Of Abra first began the tender Strain,
Who led her Youth, with Flocks upon the Plain:
At Morn she came those willing Flocks to lead,
Where Lillies rear them in the watery Mead;
From early Dawn the live-long Hours she told,
'Till late at silent Eve she penned the Fold.
Deep in the Grove beneath the secret Shade,
A various Wreath of odorous Flowers she made:
That these Flowers are found in very great Abundance in some of the Provinces
of Persia; see the Modern History of the ingenious Mr. Salmon.
Gay-motley'd Pinks and sweet Junquils she chose,
The Violet-blue, that on the Moss-bank grows;
All-sweet to Sense, the flaunting Rose was there;
The finished Chaplet well-adorn'd her Hair.
Great Abbas chanced that fated Morn to stray,
By Love conducted from the Chase away;
Among the vocal Vales he heard her Song,
And sought the Vales and echoing Groves among:
At length he found, and wooed the rural Maid,
She knew the Monarch, and with Fear obeyed.
Be every Youth like Royal Abbas moved,
And every Georgian Maid like Abra loved.
The Royal Lover bore her from the Plain,
Yet still her Crook and bleating Flock remain:
Often as she went, she backward turned her View,
And bad that Crook, and bleating Flock Adieu.
Fair happy Maid! to other Scenes remove,
To richer Scenes of golden Power and Love!
Go leave the simple Pipe, and Shepherd's Strain,
With Love delight thee, and with Abbas reign.
Be every Youth, etc.
Yet midst the Blaze of Courts she fixed her Love,
On the cool Fountain, or the shady Grove;
Still with the Shepherd's Innocence her Mind
To the sweet Vale, and flowery Mead inclined,
And often as Spring renewed the Plains with Flowers,
Breathed his soft Gales, and led the fragrant Hours,
With sure Return she sought the sylvan Scene,
The breezy Mountains, and the Forests green.
Her Maids around her moved, a duteous Band!
Each bore a Crook all-rural in her Hand:
Some simple Lay, of Flocks and Herds they sung,
With Joy the Mountain, and the Forest rung.
Be every Youth, etc.
And often the Royal Lover left the Care,
And Thorns of State, attendant on the Fair:
Often to the Shades and low-roof'd Cots retired,
Or sought the Vale where first his Heart was fired;
A Russet Mantle, like a Swain, he wore,
And thought of Crowns and busy Courts no more.
Be every Youth, etc.
Blessed was the Life, that Royal Abbas led:
Sweet was his Love, and innocent his Bed.
What if in Wealth the noble Maid excel;
The simple Shepherd Girl can love as well.
Let those who rule on Persia's jewell'd Throne,
Be famed for Love, and gentlest Love alone:
Or wreath, like Abbas, full of fair Renown,
The Lover's Myrtle, with the Warrior's Crown.
Oh happy Days! the Maids around her say,
Oh haste, profuse of Blessings, haste away!
Be every Youth, like Royal Abbas, moved;
And every Georgian Maid, like Abra, loved.
The END of the Third ECLOGUE.
ECLOGUE the FOURTH.
AGIB and SECANDER; or, the Fugitives.
SCENE, a Mountain in Circassia. TIME, MIDNIGHT. IN fair Circassia, where to
Love inclined,
Each Swain was blessed, for every Maid was kind!
At that still Hour, when awful Midnight reigns,
And none, but Wretches, haunt the twilight Plains;
What Time the Moon had hung her Lamp on high,
And past in Radiance, through the cloudless Sky:
Sad over the Dews, two Brother Shepherds fled,
Where wild'ring Fear and desperate Sorrow led.
Fast as they pressed their Flight, behind them lay
Wide ravaged Plains, and Valleys stole away.
Along the Mountain's bending Sides they ran,
Till faint and weak Secander thus began.
SECANDER. O stay thee, Agib, for my Feet deny,
No longer friendly to my Life, to fly.
Friend of my Heart, O turn thee and survey,
Trace our sad Flight through all its length of Way!
And first review that long-extended Plain,
And yon wide Groves, already past with Pain!
Yon ragged Cliff, whose dangerous Path we tried,
And last this lofty Mountain's weary Side!

AGIB. Weak as thou art, yet hapless must thou know
The Toils of Flight, or some severer Woe!
Still as I haste, the Tartar shouts behind,
And Shrieks and Sorrows load the sad'ning Wind:
In rage of Heart, with Ruin in his Hand,
He blasts our Harvests, and deforms our Land.
Yon Citron Grove, whence first in Fear we came,
Droops its fair Honors to the conquering Flame:
Far fly the Swains, like us, in deep Despair,
And leave to ruffian Bands their fleecy Care.

SECANDER. Unhappy Land, whose Blessings tempt the Sword,
In vain, unheard, thou call'st thy Persian Lord!
In vain, thou court'st him, helpless to thine Aid,
To shield the Shepherd, and protect the Maid,
Far off in thoughtless Indolence resigned,
Soft Dreams of Love and Pleasure sooth his Mind:
'Midst fair Sultanas lost in idle Joy,
No Wars alarm him, and no Fears annoy.

AGIB. Yet these green Hills, in Summer's sultry Heat,
Have lent the Monarch often a cool Retreat,
Sweet to the Sight is Zabran's flowery Plain,
And once by Maids and Shepherds loved in vain!
No more the Virgins shall delight to rove,
By Sargis' Banks or Irwan's shady Grove:
On Tarkie's Mountain catch the cooling Gale,
Or breathe the Sweets of Aly's flowery Vale:
Fair Scenes! but ah no more with Peace possessed,
With Ease alluring, and with Plenty blessed.
No more the Shepherds whit'ning Seats appear,
Nor the kind Products of a bounteous Year;
No more the Dale with snowy Blossoms crowned,
But Ruin spreads her baleful Fires around.

SECANDER. In vain Circassia boasts her spicy Groves,
For ever famed for pure and happy Loves:
In vain she boasts her fairest of the Fair,
Their Eyes' blue languish, and their golden Hair!
Those Eyes in Tears, their fruitless Grief must send,
Those Hairs the Tartar's cruel Hand shall rend.

AGIB. Ye Georgian Swains that piteous learn from far
Circassia's Ruin, and the Waste of War:
Some weightier Arms than Crooks and Staves prepare,
To shield your Harvests, and defend your Fair:
The Turk and Tartar like Designs pursue,
Fixed to destroy, and steadfast to undo.
Wild as his Land, in native Deserts bred,
By Lust incited, or by Malice led,
The Villain -Arab, as he prowls for Prey,
Often marks with Blood and wasting Flames the Way;
Yet none so cruel as the Tartar Foe,
To Death inured, and nursed in Scenes of Woe.

He said, when loud along the Vale was heard
A shriller Shriek, and nearer Fires appeared:
The affrighted Shepherds through the Dews of Night
Wide over the Moonlight Hills, renewed their Flight.
The END of the Fourth and last ECLOGUE.

