BRITISH ZOOLOGY.

ILLUSTRATED BY PLATES AND BRIEF EXPLANATIONS.

LONDON, Printed: And Sold by B. WHITE in FLEET STREET.

MDCCLXX.

TO WILLIAM CONSTABLE, Esquire OF BURTON-CONSTABLE.
DEAR SIR,
AS you have quitted your philosophic retirement, give me leave to wish every
felicity may attend you, and that you may soon be enabled to resume those
beloved Studies, and all the agreeable amusements of which you have so fully
learnt the true enjoyment. May the tour through the different parts of EUROPE you
propose visiting, be prosperous and entertaining; and to ensure that, may your
primary object, the re-establishment of your health, meet with the most perfect
success. May you return with the same inclinations you set out with, with that
munificent disposition, and that benignity which a retreat from the world,
instead of impairing, (as is too often the case) has exalted and improved.

To the last it is possibly owing that you have entertained such a favorable
opinion of my labors, in a science we are both so enamoured of; to you
therefore I address this little supplementary work; it may perhaps overtake you
on the road, and if it does not afford you a transient amusement, will at lest
give you a proof, that absent or present, at home or abroad, I remain
unalterably, and with the truest esteem,

Dear Sir, Your affectionate friend, And obedient humble Servant, Thomas
Pennant.
Downing, Jan. 1, 1770.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THIS publication is intended to illustrate the Zoology of Great Britain, and
particularly to supply the deficiency of plates in the three first volumes; and
to correct any errors that may have crept into them. Every defect of that
nature which can be discovered, and introduced with propriety into this work,
will be fairly confessed, it being far from the editor's design to conceal any
mistakes which through his own fallibility, through misinformation of others, or
too great confidence in preceding writers, have found a place in the arduous
task he has undertaken.

The few subjects engraved in this volume which have been before inserted in
the folio edition, are such only as have been ill expressed in the great book;
or are intended to exhibit some very different variety; or in a few instances
merely to fill the plate: a very few must be excepted, which are repeated in
order to give here a series of birds of every British genus; and this will
apologize for regraving the Cuckoo, Wryneck, and a few others; there being only
a single species of each in these islands, as a representative of those genera.

I FALCON GENTIL.

EXPLANATION.
PLATE I. FALCON GENTIL.
Falco gentilis. F. cera pedibusque flavis corpore cinereo, maculis fuscis,
cauda fasciis quatuor nigricantibus. Lin. syst. 126. Falk. Faun. suec. No. 58.
Kram. austr. 328. Falco gentilis. Brunnich. No. 6.
A Species highly esteemed by Falconers; those of Germany search for them in
the Dalecarlian Alps, those of Denmark in Jutland and Norway, and those of our
countrymen, who still pursue the diversion, find them in the N. of Scotland
Last summer I saw one at his grace the Duke of Gordon's, taken in Glenmore.
.

Cere and legs yellow; irides pale yellow; pupil large and of a full black.
Head light rust color, with oblong black spots; whole under side from chin to
tail white, tinged with yellow; each feather marked with heart-shaped dusky
spots, pointing downwards. The back brown; quill feathers dusky, barred on the
outward web with black, on the lower part of the inner web with white. Coverts
of the wings and scapulars brown, edged with rust color; wings reach only one
half of the length of the tail. The tail barred with four or five broad bands
of black, and the same of cinereous, the edges of the first bounded by narrow
lines of dull white. The tips of the feathers white.

II.
PLATE II. Is a variety, a young bird not arrived at its full plumage, with
transverse bars of brown on the breast instead of cordated spots.

III. SPOTTED FALCON.
TWO of these were killed in different years, near Longnor, in Shropshire.

Size of a buzzard: bill black: cere and legs yellow: irides pale yellow: crown
of the head, and hind part of the neck, white: spotted with light reddish
brown: back, and scapulars of the same color, edged with white: quill feathers
dusky, barred with ash color: under side of the neck, breast, II FALCON GENTIL.
III SPOTTED FALCON.
IV LANNER.
V MOOR BUZZARD.
belly, and thighs, white: the first of these, likewise the beginning of the
breast, marked with a few rusty spots: rump white: middle feathers of the tail
barred with deep brown and white; the rest with a lighter and deeper brown: the
legs strong.

IV. LANNER.
The Lanner. Br. Zool. I. 138. sp. ix.

V. MOOR BUZZARD.
Moor Buzzard. Br. Zool. I. 146. sp. xiv.

THIS exhibits a singular variety, with a yellowish white head and chin; and
the hind and lower part of the neck, and the coverts of the wings blotched with
the same color. Isle of Man.

VI. EAGLE OWL.
Bubo maximus nigri et fusci coloris. Sib. Scot. 14. Great horn, or eagle owl.
Will. orn. 99. Raii syn. av. Strix bubo. Lin. syst. 131. Uff. Faun. suec. No.
69. Berg-uggle, Katugl-hane. Strom. Hist. Sondmore, 222. Buhu. Kram. Austr.
323. Le grand Duc. Brisson av. I. 477.
SIR Robert Sibbald says it is found in the Orknies: it has been once shot in
Yorkshire; another time in the county of Fife. It inhabits inaccessible rocks
and desert places; and preys on hares, and game of all kinds. Its appearance in
cities was deemed by the Romans an unlucky omen; Rome Pliny. lib. x. c. 12. who
calls it Noctis monstrum.
itself once underwent a lustration, because one of them strayed into the
Capitol. The ancients had them in the utmost abhorrence, and thought them, like
the screech owl of the moderns, the messengers of death.

Solaque culminibus ferali carmine BUBO,
Saepe queri et longas in fletum ducere voces.
Virgil. Perched on the roof, the bird of night complains
In lengthened shrieks, and dire funereal strains.
In size it is almost equal to the eagle: the irides bright yellow: the head,
and whole VI. EAGLE OWL
VII. BUTCHER BIRD.
VIII TURTLE
ROCK PIGEON.
body, finely varied with lines, spots, and specks of black, brown, ash color,
and ferruginous: the wings long: the tail short, marked with dusky bars: the
legs thick, covered to the very end of the toes with a close and full down, of
a pale yellowish brown: the claws great, much hooked, and dusky.

VII. GREAT BUTCHER BIRD.
Br. Zool. I. 161. sp. 1. the female.

DISTINGUISHED from the male by semicircular brown lines across the breast. It
breeds in the North of England; makes its nest of heath, and moss, lines it
with wool and gossamer; and lays six eggs, of a dull olive green, spotted in
the thickest part with black. It is said to kill the young of small birds in
their nests.

VIII.
TURTLE.
Br. Zool.. 222. sp. 3.

ENGRAVEN to give a better figure than that in the folio edition, which was
taken from a young bird.

ROCK PIGEON.
Br. Zool. I. 217. in the note.

IX.
SWALLOW.
Br. Zool. II. 242. sp. I. App. 502.

TO strengthen the two opinions in regard to the disappearance of these birds,
a few other evidences in support of each are added to those before given.

My ingenious correspondent, the Rev. Mr. White Of Selborn, near Alton, Hants.
, on Michaelmas day, 1768, had the good fortune to have ocular proof of what
may reasonably be supposed, and actual migration of swallows. Traveling that
morning very early between his house and the coast, at the beginning of his
journey he was environed with a thick fog, but on a large wild heath the mist
began to break, and discovered to him numberless swallows, clustered on the
stunted bushes, as if they had roosted there; as soon as the sun burst out,
they were instantly on wing, and with IX SWALLOW.
SWIFT
an easy and placid flight proceeded toward the sea. After this he saw no more
flocks, only now and then a straggler In Kalm's voyage to America, is a
remarkable instance of the distant flight of swallows; for one lighted on the
ship he was in, September 2, when he had passed over only two thirds of the
Atlantic ocean. His passage was uncommonly quick, being performed from Deal to
Philadelphia in less than six weeks, and when this accident happened he was
fourteen days sail from Cape Hinlopen.
.

This rendezvous of swallows about the same time of year is very common on the
willows, in the little isles in the Thames. They seem to assemble for the same
purpose as those in Hampshire, notwithstanding no one has yet been witness of
their departure. On the 26th of September last, two gentlemen who happened to
lie at Maidenheadbridge, furnished at lest a proof of the multitudes there
assembled; they went by torchlight to an adjacent isle, and in less than half
an hour brought ashore 50 dozen, for they had nothing more to do than to draw
the willow twigs through their hands, the birds never stirring till they were
taken.

The northern naturalists will perhaps say, that this assembly met for the
purpose of plunging into their subaqueous winter quarters; but was that the
case, they would never escape discovery in a river so perpetually fished as the
Thames, some of them must inevitably be brought up in the nets that harass that
water.

Other witnesses crowd on us to prove the residence of those birds in a torpid
state during the severe season: First, In the chalky cliffs of Sussex; as was
seen on the fall of a great fragment some winters ago.

Secondly, In a decayed hollow tree that was cut down, near Dolgelli, in
Merionethshire.

Thirdly, In a cliff near Whitby, Yorkshire, where, on digging out a fox, whole
bushels of swallows were found in a torpid condition.

These are doubtless the lurking places of the latter habitations of those
young birds, who are incapable of distant migrations. There they continue
insensible and rigid; but like flies may sometimes be reanimated by an
unseasonable hot day in the midst of winter, for very near Christmas a few
appeared on the moulding of a window of Merton College, Oxford, in a remarkable
warm nook, which prematurely set their blood in motion; having the same effect
as laying them before the fire at the same time of year.

SWIFT.
Br. Zool. I. 245. sp. iv.

THE fabulous history of the Manucodiata, or bird of Paradise, is here in a
great measure verified. It was believed to have no feet, to live upon
celestial dew, to float perpetually on the Indian air, and to perform all its
functions in that element.

The Swift actually performs what has been in these enlightened times disproved
of the former, except the small time it takes for sleeping, and what it devotes
to incubation; every other action is done on wing. The materials of its nest it
collects either as they are carried about by the winds, or picks them from the
surface in its sweeping flight. Its food is undeniably the insect tribe: its
drink the dew: even its amorous rites are performed on high. Few persons who
have attended to them in a fine summer's morning, but must have seen them
making their aerial courses at a vast height, encircling a certain space with
an easy steady motion. On a sudden they fall into each others embraces, then
drop precipitate with a loud shriek for numbers of yards. This is the critical
conjuncture, and no more to be wondered at than that insects (a familiar
instance) should discharge the same duty in the same element.

X.
SEDGE BIRD.
Lesser reed sparrow. Will. orn. 144. Passer arundinaceus minor. Raii syn. av.
47. Motacilla salicaria. Lin. syst. 330. Faun. suec. No. 249. La Fauvette
babillarde. Brisson av. III. 384.
FREQUENTS the fens of Lincolnshire, but not peculiar to that part of the
kingdom. It sits on low bushes, on reeds or sedges, and has a most hasty
jarring note.

It is a small slender shaped bird: its bill black: over each eye a white line:
the crown of the head, hind part of the neck, and upper part of the back,
cinereous, marked with dusky spots: the lower part of the back and rump, tawny;
coverts of the wings, and quill feathers, dusky; the first edged with pale
brown: the tail deep brown: the feet, as Mr. Ray well observes, remarkably
large for the size of the bird.

TREE SPARROW.
SEDGE BIRD.


XI YELLOW HAMMER.
SNOW-FLAKE.


TREE SPARROW.
Mountain Sparrow. Br. Zool. II. 308. sp. iv.

COMMON near Lincoln, Spalding, etc. is conversant among trees, but does not
frequent houses. It is less than the common sparrow: the bill thick and black:
the crown of the head, hind part of the neck, and lesser coverts of the wings,
bright bay; the first plain; the two last spotted with black; just above the
greater coverts is a row of feathers, black, tipped with white; the greater
coverts black, edged with rust color: quill feathers dusky, edged with pale
red: lower part of the back olive brown: tail brown: legs straw color.

Behind each ear is a large black spot; on the chin another: cheeks and whole
under side of the body whitish.

XI.
SNOW FLAKE The name they are known by in Scotland, from their appearance in
hard weather, and deep snows.
.
Greater Brambling. Br. Zool. II. 321. sp. iv.

THESE birds appear in hard weather on the Cheviot hills, and in the Highlands
of Scotland, in amazing flocks: a few breed on the summits of the highest
mountains, in the same places with the Ptarmigans, but the greatest numbers
migrate from the north: they appear first Bishop Pocock's journal, M. S. the
stages or resting places of these birds in their passage to Scotland, are
probably these, Greenland, Iceland, Faroe, Shetland, Orknies, Caithness.
in the Orkney isles, and multitudes of them often fall, wearied with their
flight, on vessels in the Pentland Firth. Their appearance is a certain
forerunner of hard weather, and storms of snow, being driven by the cold from
their summer retreats, Spitzbergen, Greenland, Hudson's bay, and the Lapland
alps, into less rigorous climates: they visit at that season all parts of the
northern hemisphere, Sweden, Prussia, Austria, Siberia Bell's travels, I. 198.
Kramer Aust. 372. the last says they are taken and fed with millet, and like
the Ortolan, grow exceffively fat.
: they arrive lean and return fat: in their flights keep very close to each
other, mingle most confusedly together: and fling themselves collectively into
the form of a ball, at which instant the fowler makes great havoc among them.

I had opportunity of examining several in North Britain; some were of the
colors of that described p. 121, others were black and white, vide p. 322,
paragraph 2. I am not certain, but suspect the former to be young; but possibly
they may vary according to the season, as is common with arctic birds.

The weight of one I call an old bird, was 1 oz. one-fourth: the bill and legs
black: the forehead and crown white: hind part of the head black; and some
mixture of black on the hind part of the neck; the rest of the neck, and whole
under side of the body white: the back of a full black: the rump marked with a
white spot: the bastard wing, and the ends of the greater coverts black; the
others white: the base of the quill feathers white; the remaining part black:
the secondaries white, with a black spot on their exterior web: the middle
feathers of the tail black; the three outmost white, with a dusky spot near
their ends This bird was killed amidst the Grampian hills, in the center of
those vast mountains not distant from Invercauld, the seat of Mr. Farquharson,
whose hospitality I experienced in my late tour, and under whose conduct I saw,
with the greatest pleasure, the august scenery, which that secluded part of the
world affords. Invercauld lies in a fertile vale, through which flows the Dee, a
large and rapid river: nothing can be more beautiful than the different views
from the several parts of it: on the northern entrance, immense ragged and
broken crags bound one side of the prospect, over whose gray sides and summits
is scattered the melancholy green of the picturesque pine, which grows out of
the naked rock, where one would think that nature had denied vegetation.

A little lower down, is the castle of Braemar, formerly a necessary curb on
the discontented chieftains; for this country was once the property of the
family of Mar; but now happily serves for little more than to adorn the
landscape.

The views from the skirts of the plain, near Invercauld, are very great; the
hills that immediately bound it are clothed with trees, particularly with
birch, whose long and pendent branches, waving a vast height above the head,
surpass the beauties of our weeping willow.

The southern extremity is particularly magnificent; the mountains form there a
vast theater, the bosom of which is covered with extensive forests of pines;
above, the trees grow scarcer and scarcer, and then seem only to sprinkle the
surface; after which vegetation ceases, and naked summits of a surprising
height succeed; many of them topped with perpetual snow: and as a fine contrast
to the scene, the great cataract of Garval bourn, which seems at a distance to
divide the whole, foams amidst the dark forest, rushing from rock to rock for a
vast distance.


.

YELLOW HAMMER.
Br. Zool. II. 319. sp. ii.

XII.
WOODPECKER.
Picus major. P. albo nigroque varius, crisso pileoque rubris. Lin. syst. 176.
Faun. suec. No. 101.

A Bird that seems only a variety of my greater spotted woodpecker.

LITTLE SPOTTED WOODPECKER.
Br. Zool. I. 180. sp. iii. the female,

DIFFERS from the male, in wanting the crimson mark on the head: the vent
feathers in both sexes are of a dirty light yellowish brown.

XII MIDDLE and LITTLE SPOTTED WOODPECKERS.


XIII F. GROUS. PTARMIGAN.


XIV REDSHANK
WOODCOCK.


XIII.
GROUS.
Br. Zool. I. 204. sp. iii. the female.

PTARMIGAN.
Br. Zool. I. 206. sp. iv.

ONE that I weighed last summer, in the county of Breadalbane, was nineteen
ounces My account of the weight of this species in the Br. Zool. was taken from
Mr. Willoughby, for at that time I had no opportunity of examining a fresh bird.
. They inhabit the very summits of the highest of the Highland mountains,
amidst the rocks, perching on the gray stones, the general color of the strata
in those lofty situations: they seldom take long flights, but fly about like
pigeons; are very silly birds, and so tame as to suffer a stone to be flung at
them without rising. It is scarce necessary to have a dog to find them. They
taste so like a grous as to be scarce distinguishable. They are found from
Breadalbane. in the county of Perth, to the vast naked hill of Scaraben, in the
county of Caithness.

XIV.
WOODCOCK.
Br. Zool. II. 348.

RED SHANK.
Br. Zool. II. 368. sp. vi.

XV. RUFF AND REEVE.
Br. Zool. II. 363. sp. iii.

RUFFS lose their long feathers in moulting season, nor do they recover them
till spring. At the same time the pimples break out about the bill; and the
older the birds the larger and more numerous are these marks, and the longer
the neck feathers.

Soon after their arrival in the fens in spring, they begin to hill, i. e. to
collect on some dry bank near a flash of water, in expectation of the Reeves,
which resort to them; each male keeps possession of a small piece of ground,
which he continues running round till he has formed a naked circle on the spot.
If a female lights the Ruffs immediately fall to fighting.

When a fowler discovers one of these hills, he places his net over night,
which is of the same kind with those called day or clap nets, only it is
generally single, and about fourteen yards long and four broad. The fowler
resorts to his stand before daybreak, XV REEVE.
RUFF
XVI PURR
SANDPIPER
at the distance of one, two, three, or four hundred yards from the nets,
according to the season, for the later it is, the shyer are the birds. He then
makes his first pull, taking as many as have happened to light within reach
during the night. After that he places his stales or stuffed birds to entice
those that are continually traversing the fens. An old fowler told me, that he
once caught forty-four birds at the first hawl, and in all six dozen that
morning. When the stales are set, seldom more than two or three are taken at a
time.

There is a great difference between the weight of a Ruff and Reeve, the first
being 7 oz. the last only 4 oz. Besides the fens they visit annually a place
called Martin Moor in Lancashire, the latter end of March, or beginning of
April, but continue there scarce three weeks.

XVI.
PURRE.
Br. Zool. II. 374. sp. xiii.

SANDPIPER.
Br. Zool. II. 373. sp. xi.

XVII.
GREBE.
Br. Zool. II. 395. sp. ii.

LITTLE BLACK AND WHITE GREBE.
Br. Zool. II. 397. sp. iv.

XVIII. GREAT AUK.
Br. Zool. II. 401. sp. i.

XIX.
COMMON AUK.
Br. Zool. II. 403. sp. ii.

LITTLE AUK.
Br. Zool. II. 409. sp. iv.

THE variety mentioned by Mr. Edwards, I met with it in the cabinet of Doctor
David Skene, at Aberdeen, shot on the coast about twenty miles north of that
city, in the spring of the year.

XVII BLACK and WHITE. GREBE.
GREBE.


XVIII GREAT AUK.


XIX. LITTLE AUK.
AUK.


XX. LESSER GUILLEMOT.
POTTED GUILLEMOT.


XXI LUMME. M. and F.


XXII ARCTIC GULLS.


XX.
SPOTTED GUILLEMOT.
Br. Zool. II. 412. sp. viii.

A Variety of the same species with the black guillemot, shot on the same coast
as the former.

LESSER GUILLEMOT.
Br. Zool. II. 411. sp. vii.

XXI. LUMME.
Br. Zool. II. 415. sp. iii.

LINNAEUS observes very justly, that they are monogamous, and that their cry
forebodes a tempest. I saw a pair on the coast of Caithness, flying wildly high
in the air, with a horrible croaking.

XXII. ARCTIC GULLS.
Strundt-jager, i. e. Coprotheres. Raii syn. av. 127. Br. Zool. II. 420. sp. iv.

THE Faskidar of Martin, hist. west. isles, p. 73. and the dirty aulin of the
Firth of Forth, from its filthy manner of life.

XXIII.
KITTIWAKE.
Larus albus major Belon? Raii syn. av. 129. Larus Rissa. Lin. syst. 224.
Islandis Ritsa, incolis Christiansoe, Lille Solvet, Rotteren. Brunnich, No.
140. La petite mouette cendree. Brisson, av. vi. 178. tab. xvii.
INhabits the romantic cliffs of Flamborough head; Where it is called Petrel.
; the Bass isle, and the vast rocks near the castle of Slains, in the county of
Aberdeen, the elegant and hospitable seat of the Earl of Errol, placed like a
falcon's nest on the edge of a precipice washed by a wild ocean. These and
various other sorts of gulls scream perpetually over the head, while the waves
roar beneath.

The young of these birds are a favorite dish in North Britain, being served up
roasted, a little before dinner, in order to provoke an appetite, but from
their rank taste and smell, seem much more likely to produce a contrary effect.
These proved to be the Cornish Tarrock, Br. Zool. II. 425, or the Kittiwake,
before its first moulting.

When arrived at full age, the head, neck, belly and tail are of a snowy
whiteness; sometimes behind each ear is a small dusky spot: the back and wings
gray: the exterior edge XXIII. KITTIWAKE
GULL.
WILD DUCKS. XXIV
XXV. SHAG.
of the first quill feather, and the tips of the four or five first, are black:
the bill yellow, tinged with green: inside of the mouth, orange: legs dusky,
with only a knob instead of the back toe.

GULL.
Br. Zool. II. 424. sp. viii.

HAS a great resemblance to the former, in respect to colors; but sometimes the
head and hind part of the neck is marked with pale brown spots, as Mr. Ray
describes it.

XXIV. WILD DUCKS.
Br. Zool. II. 462. sp. xiii.

XXV. SHAG.
Br. Zool. II. 478. sp. ii.

ARE found in small flocks of five or six, on Flamborough Head, and on other
rocks on the coast of Britain; but this variety with a crest is very rare.

XXVI. SMOOTH HOUND.
Br. Zool. III. 91. sp. x.

XXVII-VIII. THORNBACK.
Br. Zool. III. 69. sp. v.

XXIX.
LUMP FISH.
Br. Zool. III. 103. sp. i.

FIG. I. shows it on its back, in order to give a view of the part by which it
adheres so strongly to the rocks. These fish are found in vast numbers during
spring on the coast of Sutherland, near the Ord of Caithness, a vast
promontory, with a road over it much more tremendous than our Penmaenmawr. The
seals which abound beneath, feed greatly on these fish, leaving the skins,
numbers thus emptied floating at that season ashore. Erratum, p. 104. lower
lege upper.

SEA SNAIL.
Br. Zool. III. 105. sp. ii.

FIG. II. The adhering part. These fish are full of spawn in January, and their
bellies at that time vastly prominent.

XXVI SMOOTH HOUND.


XXVII. THORN-BACK.


XXVLII. THORNBACK.


XXIX. I LUMP FISH.
II
III
IIII SEA SNAIL.


XXX. DRAGONET.


XXXI. I LESSER DRAGONET.
II WEEVER.


XXXII LESSER HAKE.
COAL FISH.


XXX. DRAGONRT.
Br. Zool. III. 130. sp. i.

IS taken by bait in 30 or 38 fathom water; and is very often found in the
stomach of cod fish.

XXXI.
LESSER DRAGONET.
Br. Zool. III. 133. sp. ii.

WEEVER.
Br. Zool. III. 134. sp. i.

XXXII.
LESSER HAKE.
Br. Zool. III. 158. sp. xi.

COAL FISH.
Br. Zool. III. 152. sp. vii.

TWO Specimens of the same size, and caught at the same time, proved the
fallibility of the characters of species, taken from the number of rays, for in
the two were these differences in the several fins: P. Dors. 14 17 21. Pect.
20. Vent. 6. An. 22 22. P. Dors. 13 19 21. Pect. 19. Vent. 6. An. 25 20.


The same variation is sometimes observed in the rays of other fish; and in the
squamae and scuta of serpents.

XXXIII.
WHISTLE FISH.
Br. Zool. III. 164. sp. xv.

BROWN WHISTLE FISH.
Br. Zool. III. 165. sp. xvi.

XXXIV. BLENNY.
Br. Zool. III. 169. sp. iii.

XXXV. FATHER LASHER.
Br. Zool. III. 179. sp. iii.

XXXVI. WRASSE.
Br. Zool. III. 207. sp. iv.

XXXVII.
WRASSE.
Br. Zool. III. 208. sp. v.

XXXIII. BROWN WHISTLE FISH.
SPOTTED WHISTLE FISH.


XXXIV. SMOOTH BLENNY.


XXXV. FATHER LASHER.


XXXVI. STRIPED WRASSE.


XXXVII. GIBBOUS WRASSE.
TRIMACULATED WRASSE.


XXXVIII. GRAY GURNARD.


XXXIX. TUB FISH.


XL. SAMLET.
TROUT.


WRASSE.
Br. Zool. III. 206. sp. iii.

XXXVIII. GURNARD.
Br. Zool. III. 231. sp. i.

IS fond of sporting near the top of the water. Is sometimes taken above two
feet and a half long.

XXXIX. TUB-FISH.
Br. Zool. III. 235. sp. iv.

XL.
TROUT.
Br. Zool. III. 250. sp. iv.

SAMLET.
Br. Zool. III. 253. sp. v.

XLI.
RUD.
Br. Zool. III. 310. sp. vi. Rothauge. Meyer An. II. tab. 53. Scarf? Faun.
suec. No. 366.
FREQUENT opportunity has occurred since the publication of the history of the
British fish, of examining this more attentively. It is found in the river
Charwell, near Oxford; in Holderness; and in the Witham in Lincolnshire. Our
former description is in part erroneous, being confounded with the next
species: the rays of the fins of this were, P. D. 11. P. 17. V. 9. A. 13.
Linnaeus makes the Orf, figured by Meyer, II. 94. a synonym of our fish; but
the last gives the print of one widely differing from the Rud, which in form
has much resemblance to the roach: the Orf is less deep, and comes nearer the
shape of the dace.

CRUSIAN.
Karass. Gesner pisc. Paralip. 16. Karauschen. Meyer An. II. 54. Ruda? Faun.
suec. No. 364.
IS a deeper and thicker fish than the last, and of a deeper yellow color: the
dorsal fin extended further along the back, and XLI. CRUSIAN.
RUD.
XLII. STICKLEBACKS. I
II
III
XLIII. TUNNY.
consisted of eighteen or twenty rays; the two first strong and serrated.

This species is not uncommon in the ponds near London; whether it is native,
or brought out of Germany originally, as many suppose, is unknown to me.

XLII.
STICKLEBACK.
Fifteen spined, S. back. Br. Zool. III. 120. sp. iii.

STICKLEBACK.
Br. Zool. III. 217. sp. i.

STICKLEBACK.
Br. Zool. III. 219. sp. ii.

XLIII. TUNNY.
Br. Zool. III. 223. sp. ii.

THE magnificent environs of Inveraray receive no small improvement from the
busy scene during the herring-fishery on Lough Fine, an arm of the sea, which
from its narrowness, and the winding of its shore, has all the beauties of a
fresh water lake. Every evening several hundreds of boats in a manner cover the
surface: on the week days the cheerful noise of the bagpipe and dance echoes
from on board: on the sabbath each boat approaches the land, and psalmody and
devotion divide the day; for the common people of the north are disposed to be
religious, having the example before them of a gentry untainted by luxury and
dissipation, and being instructed by a clergy who are active in their duty, and
who preserve respect amidst all the disadvantages of a narrow income.

Each morning the capture of the night is brought on shore: the herring is too
common a fish to attract the attention of a stranger, but the size and form of
the tunny is what immediately catches his eye.

This fish is the follower of the herring, on which it preys, and often, during
night, strikes into the nets and does considerable damage. When the fishermen
draw them up in the morning, the tunny rises at the same time toward the
surface, ready to catch any fish that drop out; a strong hook, baited with a
herring, and fixed to a rope, is immediately flung out, and the tunny seldom
fails taking it; but as soon as hooked loses all spirit, and after very little
resistance, submits to its fate.

They do not come in shoals like the tunnies of the Mediterranean, for not
above two or three are taken in a night, which are dragged on shore and cut up,
either to be sold fresh to the people who carry them to the country markets, or
else are salted in large casks.

The flesh when fresh cut looks exactly like raw beef; but when boiled looks
very pale, and has something of the flavor of salmon.

One that I saw Sept. 6.
was 7 feet 10 inches long, the greatest circumference 5-7; the lest near the
tail 1-6; the distance between one point of the tail, and the other, 2-7: The
first dorsal fin consisted of thirteen strong spines, which when depressed,
were so concealed in a deep slit in the back, as to be quite invisible till
very closely inspected: it had six branchiostegous rays; above were eleven;
beneath, ten spurious fins of a fine yellow color: eyes large: irides pale
green: the skin on the back smooth, black, and thick: on the belly the scales
were visible, strong, compact, and white.

This fish was cut up without being weighed; but another taken the same day,
(which I did not see) and weighed for my information, was 460 lb.

They are known on this coast by the name of Mackrel Sture, mackrel, from some
resemblance they have to that fish, Sture from the Danish, Stor, great.

XLIV.
FLYING FISH.
Br. Zool. III. 282. sp. i.

THE upper figure represents it in front; the lower sideways. It is found in
all warm climates; this is the most northerly I ever heard of its being seen in.

ANCHOVY.
Br. Zool. III. 296. sp. iv.

TAKEN April 21, 1769, in the Chester channel, near my house. Length 5 inches:
under jaw much shorter than the upper: teeth small, a row in each jaw, and
another in the middle of the tongue: eyes great: scales large, and very
deciduous: back green, and semipellucid: sides and belly silvery and opake:
edge of the belly smooth. This is the same with the Italian anchovy, having
compared it with one which I procured last summer in spirits from Leghorn.
XLIV. FLYING FISH.
ANCHOVY.
XLV. II.
II.
I WARTY LIZARD.
XLVI SEALS
This is no new discovery, for Mr. Ray mentions them in a letter to Doctor
Lister, May 7th, 1669 Praeterea Encrasicholos pisces, seu Anchovas non procul
inde (Cestriae) in mari captos vidimus. Philosoph. Letters. p. 47.
.

XLV. LIZARD.
Br. Zool. III. 15. sp. ii.

THE two small ones are Larvae, with their branchial fins, which drop off when
they quit the water.

XLVI. SEAL.
Br. Zool. I. 71. sp. i.

THE lower figure is the common species; the upper are two white seals, taken
from a painting in the Museum at Oxford, and probably are young ones.

Seals are found in great numbers on the north coast of Scotland; and are seen
floating amidst the waves near the foot of the rocks. They prey entirely on
fish, never molesting the birds, which swim with great composure amongst them:
they eat their prey beneath the water, and if they are devouring any very oily
fish, the place is known by a certain smoothness of the waves immediately above.

On the coast of Caithness are immense caverns opening into the sea, and
running some hundreds of yards beneath the land: these are the resort of seals
in the breeding time, where they continue till their young are old enough to go
to sea, which is in about six or seven weeks. The first of these caves is near
the Ord, the last near Thrumster: their entrance is so extremely narrow as only
to admit a boat; their inside very spacious and lofty. In the month of October,
or the beginning of November, the seal-hunters enter the mouths of the caverns
about midnight, and rowing up as far as they can they land, each of them being
provided with a bludgeon, and properly stationed, light their torches and make
a great noise, which brings down the seals from the further end in a confused
body with frightful shrieks and cries; at first the men are obliged to give way
for fear of being overborn, but when the first crowd is past, kill as many as
straggle behind, (chiefly the young) by striking them on the nose; a very
slight blow on that part dispatches them. When the work is over, they drag the
seals to the boat, which two men are left to guard. This is a most hazardous
employ, for should their torches go out, or the wind blow hard from sea during
their continuance in the cave, their lives are lost. The young seals are most
esteemed, yielding more oil than their emaciated dams, above eight gallons
having been got from a single whelp: the oil sells from 6 d. to 9 d. per
gallon; the skins from 6 d. to 12 d. The growth of the seals is very sudden;
the seal-hunters say that after nine tides from their birth (54 hours) they are
as active as their parents: this is certain that a whelp which yields that
great quantity of oil is not above five or six weeks old.

On this coast, and on the rock Hiskyr, one of the western isles, is the
species of seals (as I conjecture) described by Doctor Parsons, Ph. Tr. No. 469.
and mentioned by M. de Buffon; Le grand Phoque, xiii. 341.
; it resembles the other in all respects but in size: a gentleman told me he
once killed one near 12 feet long; the common kind seldom exceeds ceeds six
feet.

XLVII.
ALPINE HARE.
ON the very top of the highest Scottish Alps, with the Ptarmigans and
Snowflakes, natives of the loftiest situations, is found a small species of
hare, gray in summer, white in winter; which never descends to the sides of the
hills, never mixes with the common brown hare, notwithstanding the last abounds
in its neighborhood. It is inferior in size to that species, weighs about 6
lb. has very slender legs, and shorter ears and tail. It does not run fast, and
when pursued is very apt to take shelter under stones, and in clifts of rocks.
It is very easily tamed, and soon becomes much more familiar than the common
hare; is exceedingly sprightly and full of frolic, and shows great agility in
its boundings round a room: is very fond of honey and carraway comfits, and is
commonly observed to eat its own dung before a storm. The hair is soft and
full; the predominant color gray, mixed with a little black and tawny: this is
its summer's dress.

In winter it entirely changes to a snowy whiteness, except the edges and tips
of the XLVII WHITE HARE. RABBET
ears, which retain their blackness; the alteration of color commences in
September, and first appears about the neck and rump; in April it again resumes
its gray coat. This kind is found on the Alps, in Norway, Sweden, and Russia
These countries seem unacquainted with our brown hare, for Linnaeus,
Pontoppidan, and Strahlenberg, all speak of that as gray in summer, white in
winter.
, and like this is subject to the same changes; but in the extreme cold of
Greenland never varies from white, the eternal color of the country.

RABBET.
Br. Zool. I. 90. sp. ii.

A Gentleman long resident in the Orkney isles informed me, that abundance of
rabbets were found there, and that their skins formed a considerable article of
trade; but that no hares, foxes, snakes or toads were to be seen in the country.

XLVIII.
ARGENTINE.
Br. Zool. III. 276.

FROM a drawing of a fish of this species, taken in the sea near Downing, in
April last. The figure is as big as life.

ATHERINE.
Br. Zool. III. 277.

THESE are found in high season near Southampton, from the latter end of March
to the latter end of May, or beginning of June, in which month they spawn: they
never entirely desert the place, and are taken in every month, except when
there is a hard frost.

XLIX.
DOREE.
Br. Zool. III. 181.

SMEAR DAB.
Br. Zool. III. 189.

L. HORSE.
THE representative of this species is a native of Yemine, in Arabia felix; the
property of Lord Grosvenor, taken from a picture in possession of his Lordship,
painted XLVIII ARGENTINE
ATHERINE
XLIX SMEAR DAB.
DOREE
by Mr. Stubbs, an artist not less happy in representing animals in their
stiller moments, than when agitated by their furious passions; his matchless
paintings of horses will be lasting monuments of the one, and that of the lion
and panther of the other.

This horse, by its long residence among us, may be said to be naturalized,
therefore we hope to be excused for introducing it here, notwithstanding its
foreign descent. From its great beauty it may be presumed that it derives its
lineage from Monaki Shaduhi, of the pure race of horses, purer than milk Vide
the Arabian certificate in a following note for the meaning of this phrase.
.

Arabia produces these noble animals in the highest perfection; first, because
they take their origin from the wild unmixed breeds that formerly were found in
the deserts Leo Africanus, who wrote in the time of Leo X. says, that in his
days great numbers of wild horses were found in the Numidian and Arabian
deserts, which were broke for use. He adds that the trial of their swiftness
was made against the Lant, or the Ostrich; and if they could overtake either of
those animals, they were valued at a hundred camels. Hist. Africa, 339.
, which had as little degenerated from their primaeval form and powers as the
lion, tiger, or any other creature which still remains in a state of nature
unchanged by the discipline of man, or harvested provision.

The Arabs place their chief delight in this animal; it is to them As a proof
of this, receive the following lamentation of an Arab, obliged, through poverty,
to part with his mare: My eyes, says he, to the animal, my soul, must I be so
unfortunate as to have sold thee to so many masters, and not to keep thee
myself? I am poor, my ANTELOPE. You know well enough, my honey, I have brought
thee up as my child; I never beat nor chid thee; I made as much of thee as ever
I could for my life. God preserve thee my dearest; thou art pretty, thou art
lovely; God defend thee from the looks of the envious. To understand the first
part of this speech, it must be observed, that it is usual for many Arabs, of
the poorer rank, to join in the purchase of a horse, the original owner
generally retaining one share. This, as well as most of the other particulars
relating to the Arabian horse, are taken from M. D'Arvieux's curious account of
Arabia, p. 167. London, 1732.
as dear as their family, and is indeed part of it: men, women, children,
mares, and foals, all lie in one common tent, and they lodge promiscuously
without fear of injury.

This constant intercourse produces a familiarity that could not otherwise be
effected; and creates a tractability in the horses that could arise only from a
regular good usage, little acts of kindness, and a soothing language, which
they are accustomed to from their masters; they are quite unacquainted with the
spur; the lest touch of the stirrup sets these airy coursers in motion; they
set off with a fleetness that surpasses that of the For an account of its
speed, vide Adanson's vay. 85.
ofstrich, yet they are so well trained as to stop in their most rapid speed by
the slightest check of the rider: there are sometimes instances of their being
mounted without either bridle or saddle, when they show such compliance to
their rider's will, as to be directed in their course by the mere motion of a
switch Tavernier's5 travels. I. 63.
.

Paret in obsequium lentae moderamine virgae,
Verbera sunt praecepta fugae, sunt verbera fraena Nemesiani Cyneg. 267.
.
Several things concur to maintain this perfection in the horses of Arabia,
such as the great care the Arabs take in preserving the breed genuine, by
permitting none but stallions of the first form to have access to the mares:
this is never done but in the presence of a witness, the secretary of the Emir,
or some public officer; he asserts the fact, records the name of the horse,
mare, and whole pedigree of each, and these attestations The reader is here
presented with an original attestation, some of which M. D' Arvieux says have
been preserved for above 500 years in the public records. Taken before
ABDORRAMAN KADI of ACCA.
The Occasion of this present Writing or Instrument is that at ACCA in the
House of Badi legal established Judge, appeared in Court Thomas Usgate the
English Conful and with him Sheikh Morad Ebnal Hajj Abdollah, Sheikh of the
County of Safad, and the said Consul desired from the aforesaid Sheikh proof of
the race of the Gray Horse which he bought of him, and He affirmed to be Monaki
Shaduhi, These are the Names of the 2 Breeds of Arab Horses, which are reckoned
pure and true, and those which are of both these breeds by Father and Mother
are the most noble and free from Bastardy.
but he was not satisfied with this but desired the Testimony of the Arabs, who
bred the Horse and knew how he came to Sheikh Morad, whereupon there appeared
certain Arabs of Repute whose Names are undermention'd, who testified and
declared that the Gray Horse which the Consul formerly bought of Sheikh Morad,
is Monaki Shaduki of the pure Race of Horses, purer than Milk, A Proverbial
Expression.
and that the beginning of the Affair was, that Sheikh Saleh, Sheikh of
Alsabal, bought him of the Arabs of the Tribe of al Mohammadat, and Sheikh
Saleh sold him to Sheikh Morad Ebn al Hajj Abdollah, Sheikh of Safad, and
Sheikh Morad sold him to the Consul aforesaid, when these Matters appeared to
us, and the Contents were known, the said Gentleman desired a Certificate
thereof, and Testimony of the Witnesses, whereupon we wrote him this
Certificate, for him to keep as a Proof thereof. i. e. 29 Jany. 1722.
Dated Friday 28 of the latter Rabi in the Year 1135.

Witnesses. Sheikh Jumat al Falibau of the Arabs of al Mohammadat. Ali Ebn
Taleb al Kaabi Ibrahim his Brother Mohammed al Adhra Sheikh Alfarifat, Khamis
al Kaabi.



are carefully preserved, for on these depends the future price of the foal.

The Arabs, whose riches are their horses, take all imaginable care of them;
they have it not in their power to give them grass in their hot climate, except
in the spring; their constant food is barley, and that given only in the night,
being never suffered to eat during the day.

In the daytime they are kept saddled at the door of the tent, ready for any
excursion their masters may make; the Arabs being fond of the chase, and living
by the plundering of travelers. The horses are never hurt by any servile
employ, never injured by heavy burdens, or by long journies, enjoy a pure dry
air, due exercise, great temperance, and great care.

Every horse in Arabia (except those which by way of contempt are called
Guidich, or pack horses) has a degree of good qualities superior to those of
other places; but it is not to be supposed but that there are certain parts of
that country, which have attained a higher perfection in the art of management
than others.

Thus we find by some late information Wall on horses, 74.
, that Yemine, in Arabia Felix, is at present in great repute for its breed;
for the jockies of that part have acquired such a superior name, as to be able
to sell their three year old horses for two or three hundred guineas a-piece,
and when they can be prevailed on to part with a favorite stallion, they will
not take less for it than fifteen hundred guineas. It is from this country that
the great men in India are supplied with horses, for India itself is possessed
of a very bad kind. These noble animals being much neglected there, from the
constant use of the Buffalo, not only in tillage, but even in riding.

It may be allowed here to give some account of the horses of other countries,
which derive their origin, and at lest receive their improvement from the
Arabian kind, for wheresoever the Saracens spread their victorious arms, they,
at the same time, introduced their generous race of horses.

Those of Persia are light, swift, and very like those of Arabia, but formed
very narrow before: they are fed with chopped straw, mixed with barley, and
instead of soiling, are fed with new-eared or green barley for about fourteen
or twenty days Tavernier's Travels. I. 145.
.

Aethiopia has with some writers the credit of having originally furnished
Arabia with its fine race of horses; but we believe the reverse, and that they
were introduced into that empire by the Arabian princes, whose lineage to this
day fills that throne. The horses of that country are spirited and strong, and
generally of a black color: they are never used in long journies, but only in
battle, or in the race, for all servile work is done by mules: the Aethiopians
never shoe them, for which reason, on passing through stony places, they
dismount, and ride on mules, and lead their horses Ludolph. hist. Aethiop. 53.
; so from this we may collect, that this nation is not less attached to these
animals than the Arabs.

Egypt has two breeds of horses, one its own, the other Arabian; the last are
most esteemed, and are bought up at a great price, in order to be sent to
Constantinople; but such is the discouragement arising from the tyranny of the
government, that the owners often wilfully lame a promising horse Univ. modern
hist. quoted from Maillet and Pocock.
lest the Beys should like it and force it from them.

Barbary owes its fine horses to the same stock, which in general are far
inferior in point of value; and for the same reason as is given in the last
article, the great insecurity of property under the Turkish government. The
breed was once very famous: M. D'arvieux D'arvieux. 173.
says, that when he was there in 1668, he met with a mare that he thought
worthy of the stud of his grand Monarque, when in the height of his glory; but
Doctor Shaw informs us, that at present the case is entirely altered Shaw's
travels. 238.
.

Notwithstanding Spain has been celebrated of old for the swiftness of its
horses, yet it must have received great improvement from those brought over by
their conquerors, the Saracens. According to Oppian Cyneg. lib. I. v. 284.
, the Spanish breed had no other merit than that of fleetness, but at present
we know that they have several other fine qualities.

To sum up the account of this generous animal, we may observe, that every
country that boasts of a fine race of horses, is indebted to Arabia, their
primaeval seat. No wonder then, that the poetic genius of the author of the
book of Job, who not only lived on the very spot, but even at a time when the
animal creation still enjoyed much of its original perfection, should be able
to compose that sublime description which has always been the admiration of
every person of genuine taste Job chapter XXXIX. v. 19 to 25.
.

LI. SEA EAGLE.


LII. PEREGRINE FALCON.


LI. SEA EAGLE.
Br. Zool. I. 126.

THE largest of this species inhabits Greenland, where they are strong enough
to take a young seal out of the water: It is strange that writers should give
the name of Nisus to the sparrow-hawk, when the poet expressly mentions the
bird into which the father of Scylla was transformed.

Quam pater ut vidit (nam jam pendebat in auras
Et modo factus erat fulvis Haliaeetos alis.)
Ibat, ut haerentem rostro laniaret adunco.
LII. PEREGRINE FALCON.
Br. Zool. I. 136. Br. Mus.

THIS engraving was taken from a dark colored and very beautiful specimen
preserved in the British Museum. These birds breed in the north of Scotland,
and are sometimes trained for falconry, being an excellent species. They never
quit their prey as long as it is in sight, but dash through the thickest woods
after it. This is the species Book of St. Albans, first printed by Wynken de
W^rde, 1486.
which Dame Juliana Barnes, says, is by the best judgments bequeathed to an
Earl.

LIII. BUZZARD.
Br. Zool. I. 143. Falco Buteo. Carniol. Kaine, Scopoli An. I. No. 4.

LIVE.
CROW.
Br. Zool. I. 167. Corvus vulgaris. Carniol. oru, Scopoli No. 36.

VERY few crows in the highlands of Scotland, the Royston, or as it is called
there the hooded crow, being much more numerous.

JACK-DAW.
Br. Zool. I. 175. Br. Mus. Scopoli No. 38.

JACK-DAWS sometimes breed in hollow trees, near a rookery, and will join the
rooks in their foraging parties. LIII. BUZZARD.
LIVE. JACKDAW.
CROW.
LV. F. CUCKOO.
WRYNECK.
They also breed in the interstices between the upright and transome stories of
stone-henge, a proof of the prodigious height of that stupendous antiquity, for
their nests, are placed beyond the reach of the shepherds boys, who are always
idling about the place: but in the neighboring country of Hampshire, these
birds affect as humble a situation to breed in as the other is lofty, laying
and bringing up their young in the rabbet burrows.

LV.
CUCKOO, FEMALE.
Br. Zool. I. 182. Carniol. Kukautra, Scopoli, No. 48. Br. Mus.

JUVENAL Satyr. vi. 275.
very properly transfers the disgrace of cuckoldom to the bird in whose nest
the cuckoo leaves its offspring.

Tu tibi tunc Curruca places. WRYNECK.
Br. Zool. I. 181. Carniol. Tschudesch, Scopoli, No. 50. Br. Mus.

BOTH these birds migrate in the winter from Carniola. This feeds on ants, as
we found on opening the stomach of one recently killed. Its note is like that
of a Kestrel, a quick repeated squeak.

LVI.
NUTHATCH.
Br. Zool. I. 185. Carniol. Barless, Scopoli, No. 50. Br. Mus.

LAYS up against winter a considerable provision of nuts in a hollow tree.

KINGFISHER.
Br. Zool. I. 187. Alcedo Ispida Scopoli, No. 64. Br. Mus.

LVII.
CREEPER.
Br. Zool. I. 193. Certhia familiaris. Scopoli, No. 59. Br. Mus.

HOOPOK.
Br. Zool. I. 195. Smerda kaura, Smerduch Scopoli No. 62.

FEEDS on infects which it picks out of ordure of all kinds, carries them to
its young, which seems the reason why LVI NUTHATCH.
KINGFISHER.
LVII. CREEPER.
HOOPO.
LVIII. CHOUGH.
LIX. BUSTARD.
its nest is so excessive foetid. Is found far S. as Ceylon: also found in
Egypt, where it is called Tir Chaous, or messenger bird, from its crest
resembling the plumes worn by the Chaous or Turkish messengers Shaw's Trav.
Suppl. 72.
.

LVIII. CHOUGH.
Br. Zool. I. 197. Gracula Pyrrhocorax. Italis Zaola, Zola. Scopoli No. 46, Br.
Mus.

SCOPOLI says that in Carniola and Carinthia, it devours the locusts, is very
fond of juniper berries; and that the feet of some turn black in autumn.

LIX. BUSTARD.
Br. Zool. I. 214. Otis Tarda. Scopoli, No. 159.

DRAWN in all its insolence from a most beautiful bird in the menagery of her
grace the Duchess Dowager of Portland.

LX. BLACKBIRDS.
Br. Zool. I. 228. Carniol. Koss, Scopoli No. 197. Br. Mus.

LXI.
RING-OUZEL.
Br. Zool. I. 229. Turdus Torquatus Scopoli No. 198. Br. Mus.

THE Rev. Mr. White of Selborn, favored me with the following observations on
this species; that these birds regularly visit his neighborhood in flocks of
twenty or thirty, about the middle of April, and again about Michaelmas: that
they seem to make it only a resting place from some other country; in their
spring migration they continue there scarce a week, in the autumnal, about a
fortnight; that they fed on haws, or for want of those, on yew berries. That in
a certain spring he shot a male and female, both plump and in high condition;
and that he found in the female very small rudiments of eggs, which proves them
to be very late breeders; for the other birds of the thrush kind which LX. M.
and F. BLACKBIRD.
LXI. RING OUZEL.
STARE.
continue here, have fledged young before this time, and that these ring-ouzels
are never seen in his neighborhood at any other season of the year.

To this account I must add, that these migratory flocks seem to be on their
passage to some other kingdom; for as far as I could learn, that this species,
which is found plentifully in the mountanous parts of Wales and in the
highlands of Scotland It is also said to inhabit Dartmoor in Devonshire.
, resides in both places the whole year: it breeds in the hills, and comes down
from the highlands in flocks to eat the berries of the wicken trees. I have
seen these birds disturbed in the breeding season, when they flutter for some
time about, and make a harsh chattering noise.

STARE.
Br. Zool. I. 231. Carniol. Starl. Scopoli, No. 189. Br. Mus.

DURING winter assemble in myriads in the fens of Lincolnshire and do great
damage to the fenmen, by breaking down the reeds by roosting on them; the reeds
being the thatch of that country, and harvested for that purpose with great
care.

LXII.
SKY LARK.
Br. Zool. II. 233. Carniol. Lauditza. Scopoli No. 184. Br. Mus.

YELLOW WAGTAIL.
Br. Zool. II. 276. Italis Squassacoda d'acqua Scopoli No. 225. Br. Mus.

THIS species migrates during winter from our country. A few of the gray, and
of the white wagtails continue with us.

WHITE WAGTAIL.
Br. Zool. II. 275. Carniol. Pliska, Pasteritza. Scopoli No. 224. Br. Mus.

LXII. WHITE WAGTAIL.
YELLOW WAGTAIL.
SKY LARK.


LXIII. M.andF. GOATSUCKERS.


LXIV F. CROSS BILL.
M. GREAT BULFINCH.


LXIII. GOATSUCKER.
Br. Zool. II. 246. Caprimulgus Europeus. Scopoli No. 167. Br. Mus.

MALE, and female. The error of their sucking the teats of goats and other
horned cattle, prevalent from the time of Aristotle Hist. An. lib. ix. c. 30.
to the present: for Scopoli seems to credit the report. In fact their food is
only moths and nocturnal insects; perhaps Dorrs, or canthari, for which reason
Charlton calls them Cantharophagi Charlton ex. 79.
.

LXIV.
PINE BULL FINCH.
Loxia enucleator. L. Linea alarm duplici alba, rectricibus totis
nigricantibus. Lin. Syst. 299. Suecis Tallbit, Swansk Papgoja. Wbothnis
natt-waka. Faun. Snece. No. 223. Coccothrausies canadensis Brisson av. III.
250. Pl. Enl. 135. Greatest Bull-Finch Edw. 123, 124.
INHABITS the pine forests of Invercauld in the county of Aberdeen and perhaps
other parts of Scotland. Found also in the north of Europe and of America;
feeds on the seeds of the pine and fir: Linnaeus says they sing in the night. I
have seen them flying in the forests of North Britain, August the fifth, so
suppose they breed there.

Length nine inches three quarters. Bill strong, dusky, hooked at the end;
head, back, neck, and breast of a rich crimson; the bottom of the feathers of a
deep ashcolor; back and head spotted with black; lesser coverts of the wings
dusky edged with orange crossed with a white line, and the greater coverts with
another; quil feathers and tail dusky; the exterior edges of the feathers
whitish; lower belly and vent ash-color; legs black.

The female is of a dirty green; the quil feathers and tail dusky.

CROSS-BILL:
Br. Zool. II. 279. Loxia curvirostra. Scopoli. No. 200.

The female.

LXV. M. and F. SPARROWS.


LXVI SISKIN. M. and F.
TWISTE. M. and F.


LXVII. GREATER AND LESSER RED POLIS.


LXV. SPARROWS.
Br. Zool. II. 300. Carniol. Grabetz, Scopoli. No. 220. Br. Mus.

SPARROWS sometimes make their nests in trees that are near buildings.

LXVI.
SISKINS.
Br. Zool. II. 309. Carniol. Saisl, Scopoli. No. 212. Br. Mus.

TWITE.
Br. Zool. II. 315. Br. Mus.

IS very soon tamed; is almost incessantly uttering a weak low note.

LXVII.
GREAT RED-POLL.
Br. Zool. II. 312. Br. Mus.

LESS REDPOLL.
Br. Zool. II. 313. Br. Mus.

LXVIII. TITMICE.
1. GREAT.
Br. Zool. II. 334. Carniol. Snitza, Scopoli. No. 242. Br. Mus.

IS very destructive to bees; watches those insects at the door of the hive,
and catches them as they go in and out: If the bees are not inclined to stir
out, the titmouse will strike against the hive with its bill in order to force
them abroad.

2. BLUE.
Br. Zool. II. 325. Carneol. Blava snitza, Blau-mandltz. Scopoli. No. 244. Br.
Mus.

3. COLE.
Br. Zool. II. 326. Scopoli. No. 246.

4. Marsh.
Br. Zool. II. 326. Scopoli. No. 245. Br. Mus.

LXVIII. 1 GREAT
2 BLUE
3 COLE
4 MARSH TITMOUSE.


LXIX. RED GODWIT.


LXX WHIMBREL.


LXIX. RED GODWIT.
Br. Zool. II. 354. Br. Mus.

DR. BUCKWORTH, of Washenborough, Linconshire, informed me, that a few of these
birds breed in the fens, near his house.

LXX. WHIMBERL.
Br. Zool. II. 347. Kleiner Goisser. Kramer. 350.
I Received one from Invercauld, shot on the Grampian hills, where they breed:
it differed from that described in the British Zoology, and perhaps might have
been of another sex.

The length was sixteen inches; the bill two; the head round, black on the top,
divided lengthways by a white line; chin white; cheeks, neck, breast, and upper
part of the belly of a whitish brown, marked with streaks of black, pointing
downwards: the streaks on the neck narrow, on the belly broader; lower belly
and vent white. Back and coverts of the wings dusky; the sides of each feather
spotted with reddish white. Lower part of the back white. Rump white, barred
with black. Tail barred with dusky and white; quil feathers black, with large
white spots on the inner webs only; the secondaries spotted on both webs. Legs
black.

These birds are called at Spalding, curlew knots: appear in that neighborhood
in April, continue there a month, and never revisit the place till the year
following, and about the same time.

LXXI.
SNIPE.
Br. Zool. II. 358. Carniol. Kositza, Scopoli. No. 138. Br. Mus.

JACKINIPE.
Br. Zool. II. 350. Carniol. Pokerl, Scopoli. No. 139. Br. Mus.

LXXI. JACK SNIPE.
SNIPE.


LXXII. RED SAND-PIPER.
GREEN PLOVER.


LXXII.
RED SANDPIPER.
Tringa Icelandica. Tr. rostro pedibusque fuscis, corpore subtus ferrugineo,
remigibus secundariis margin albis. Lin. syst. inter addenda. Tringa
ferruginea islandis Randbrislanger Brunnich. ornith Boreal. No. 180.
HAVE appeared in great flocks on the coast of Essex, on the estate of Col.
Schutz.

Crown of the head spotted with black and ferruginous. The lower side of the
neck, the breast, and belly of a full ferruginous color. Back marked with black
and rust color. Coverts of the wings ash color; legs black. Bill strong, an
inch and a half long: the whole length of the bird ten inches.

GREEN PLOVER.
Br. Zool. II. 379. The variety with a minute back toe, mentioned Br. Zool. II.
380.
GREEN plovers breed on the Cheviot hills, in Northumberland, and in the
highlands of Scotland. The bellies of the young birds are black.

LXXIII.
DOTREL.
Br. Zool. II. 381.

APPEARS near the sea side at Meals, in Lancashire, the beginning of April,
frequents the barley fallows, and continue there about three weeks; from thence
remove northward to a place called Leyton Haws, where they stay only a
fortnight. From the account I received of certain birds that breed in the
Highlands, I suspect that lofty tract to be one of the summer retreats of the
dotrel.

SANDERLING.
Br. Zool. II. 384.

THESE birds vary much in their marks, some being much whiter than others.

LXXIV.
WATER-RAIL.
Br. Zool. II. 385. Rallus aquaticus Scopoli. No. 155. Br. Mus.

LXXIII. SANDERLING.
DOTTEREL.


LXXIV. WATER-RAIL.
LAND-RAIL.


RED AND GRAY SCOLLOP TOED SAND-PIPER.


LAND RAIL.
Br. Zool. II. 387. Carncol. Rostz, Scopoli. No. 154.

LXXV. SCOLLOP TOED SANDPIPERS.
GRAY.
Br. Zool. II. 391.

RED.
Br. Zool. II. 391.

SHOT on the banks of a fresh water pool in the Isle of Stronsa, one of the
Orknies, May, 1769 Doctor Ramsay, Pr. not. hist. t Edenburg was of obliging as
to communicate this bird.
.

Size of a purr. Bill an inch long, strait to near the end, which bends a
little downwards. Crown of the head, hind part of the neck, back, scapulars,
and coverts of the wings of a deep lead color; the back and scapulars striped
with dirty yellow. Cross the greater coverts is a line of white. Throat white;
under part and sides of the neck of a bright ferruginous; breast of a deep
cinereous; belly white; tail short and cinereous; legs black.

LXXVI.
WATER-HEN.
Br. Zool. II. 388. Fulica Chloropus, Scopoli, No. 153. Br. Mus.

COOT.
Br. Zool. II. 392. Carniol. Liska. Scopoli, No. 149. Br. Mus.

A Few years ago a white coot was shot near Spalding. I have been credibly
informed that the common coots will lay fourteen Eggs.

LXXVII.
LITTLE GREBE.
Br. Zool. II. 398.

IN the male birds the chin is black; the feathers on the cheeks, over the
ears, bright ferruginous. These breed as far north as the isle of Tirey, one of
the western isles of Scotland.

LESSER CRESTED GREBE.
Br. Zool. II. 396. Colymbus auritus. Scopoli, No. 100, Br. Mus.

VERY common in the fens of Spalding, where it breeds: lays four or five LXXVI.
WATER HEN.
COOT.
LXXVII. LITTLE GREBE.
EARED GREBE.
small white eggs, and makes its nest not unlike that of the great crested
grebe, Br. Zool. II. 394.

Length to the rump one foot; extent of wings twenty-two inches. Bill turns up
a little; lorum naked and black; irides red. Behind each eye a long tuft of
ferruginous feathers, pointing backwards; feathers on the head, cheeks, and
throat full and black; neck, back, and quil feathers black; secondaries white;
sides under the wings as far as the rump of a bright serruginous color. Belly
white and glossy; outside of the legs dusky, inside greenish.

LXXVIII. AVOSETTA.
Br. Zool. II. 399. Scolopax avosetta Scopoli, No. 129. Br. Mus.

ARE found in considerable numbers during the breeding season, near Fossdyke
wash, in Lincolnshire, called there Yelpers, on account of their noise; and
sometimes Picarinis. Like the lapwing when disturbed, fly about and have a
shrill note (twit) twice repeated; and carry their long necks and legs quite
extended during their flight.

LXXIX.
HERRING GULL.
Br. Zool. II. 421.

WAGEL.
Br. Zool. II. 422.

LXXX:
WINTER MEW.
Br. Zool. II. 423.

BLACK TOED GULL.
Br. Zool. II. 419.

A Variety that in color nearly approaches that described by doctor Lysons, in
the 52d volume of the Phil. Trans. p. 135.

LXXXI.
GREAT TERN.
Br. Zool. II. 428. Br. Mus.

LXXVIII AVOSETTA.


LXXIX. GULLS.


LXXX. WINTER MEW.
BLACK TOED GULL.


LXXXI LITTLE and GREAT TERN.


LXXXII. LITTLE PETREL.
FULMAR.


LXXXIII. M.andF. RED-BREASTED GOOSANDER.


LXXXIV. WILD GOOSE.


LESS TERN.
Br. Zool. II. 429. Br. Mus.

LXXXII.
FULMAR.
Br. Zool. II. 431.

STORM FINCH.
Br. Zool. II. 434.

LXXXIII. RED BREASTED GOOSANDER.
Br. Zool. II. 437. Edw. 95, Br. Mus.

MALE and female: the first rarely migrates farther south than the Firth of
Forth; the female is often seen in the southern parts of this island.

LXXXIV. WILD GOOSE.
Br. Zool. II. 447.

BREEDS in such numbers in Harris and Vist, two of the western isles, that the
inhabitants are obliged to watch their corn to prevent it from the attacks of
these birds. In autumn they begin to migrate southward: some species of wild
goose (I could not learn which) breeds in the fens of Lincolnshire, which they
leave in October, and go to the rye grounds.

Head of the white fronted wild goose, Br. Zool. II. 450. Branta Albifrons
Scopoli, No. 87.

LXXXV. VELVET DUCK.
Br. Zool. II. 456.

Male and female.

LXXXVI. SWALLOW TAILED SHIELDRAKE.
Br. Zool. II. 469. Anas hiemalis Brunnich. ornith. Boreal. No. 76.

DIFFERS from that described in the Br. Zoology; the crown of the head is
dusky, rest of the head white; all the neck; breast and back of a chocolate
brown; scapulars edged with tawny; belly white.

LXXXV. M.andF. VELVET DUCK.


LXXXVI. SWALLOW TAILED SHIELDUCK.
WHITE THROATED DUCK.


LXXXVII. GARGANEY.
LITTLE BROWN DUCK.


The lower figure is a duck taken in a decoy in Lincolnshire, seems only a
variety of the common kind.

LXXXVII.
GAROANEY.
Br. Zool. II. 474. Anas Querquedula Scopoli No. 75. Br. Mus.

A Few breed in the fens of Lincolnshire, called there the summer duck or teal.

BROWN DUCK.
LESS than the last above, the whole plumage is brown and cinereous, some parts
clouded with a deeper shade; coverts of the wings cinereous. No speculum or
spot on the wings; quil feathers dusky; belly white: from the furthest corner
of the eye is a whitish line, extending almost to the hind part of the neck;
bill dusky and flattish.

I found two of these in Leaden-ball market. Whether the females of the
Garganey?

LXXXVIII. LAMPRIES.
1. LAMPREY, Br. Zool. III. 58. 2. LESSER L. Br. Zool. III. 60. 3. PRIDE L Br.
Zool. III. 61.
LXXXIX.
STURGEON.
Br. Zool. III. 96.

THE drawing is taken from a young fish; which have the tubercles much larger
in proportion than old fish, and also much closer together; the number of
tubercles on the back differ in different fish, is therefore no specific
character.

SUN FISH.
OBLONG. Br. Zool. III. 100.

LXXXVIII. 1 LAMPRIES.
2
3


LXXXIX. SUN-FISH.
STURGEON.


XC. SWORD-FISH.


XCI. GILT HEAD.
OPAH.


SHORT. Br. Zool. III. 102. Tetrodon mola Brunnich pisc. massil. No. 16.

MR. BRUNNICH informs us, that between Antibes and Genoa, he saw one of this
species lie asleep on the surface of the water, and adds, that a sailor jumped
overboard and caught it. Perhaps the name is derived from its thus basking on
the top of the water.

I took the liberty of borrowing the figures of these two species from doctor
Borlase's history of Cornwall; the sword fish from Klein's hist. pisc. and the
opah from the pbilosophical transactions, as I could not possibly procure the
originals for my limner to paint.

XC. SWORD-FISH.
Br. Zool. III. 126. Xiphias gladius Brunnich, pisc. massil, No. 27.

XCI.
GILT-HEAD.
Br. Zool. III. 197.

ORAN.
Br. Zool. III. 201. Zeus cauda cauda bifurca, color argenteo, purpureo
splendens Strom Sondmor. 323.325. tab. I. fig. 20.
A Fish inhabiting the Norwegian and North British seas; to be placed in the
genus of zeus, in the Artedian system; and to be removed into that of doree in
the Br. Zool. III. 181.

XCII.
PERCH.
Crooked Perch, Br. Zool. III. 213. phil. trans. LVII. 204. Faun. suec. No.
332. p. 118.

A Variety with a very hunched back, and the back bone near the tail laterally
distorted; found in Great Britain in the water of Llyn Raithlyn in
Merionethshire; some have been taken of two pounds weight; but they are most
commonly much smaller. In some parts of Caernarvonshire, are also found trouts
with the same curvature, which likewise never attain the size of the common
sort.

XCII. PERCH.
SEA PERCH.


XCIII. SALMON.
LOCHE.


SEA PERCH.
Une perch de mer, Belon. 163. Perca marina, Salvian. 225. Rondel. 182. Will.
Icth. 327. Raii syn. pisc. 140. Perca lineis utrinque septem transversis,
nigris, ductibus miniaceis, coeruleisque in capite et antica ventris, Arted.
syn. pisc. 68. Perca marina. P. pinnis dorsalibus unitis radiis xv spinosis,
xiv muticis, corpore lituris variegato, Lin. syst. 483.
TAKEN in the sea near Scarborough, but omitted in the British Zoology; grows
to the length of a foot; the head large and deformed; irides yellow; on the
gill covers two large spines; body deep; back fins united: the rays next the
head spiny, the others soft; tail slightly forked; color on the head and fore
part of the belly red and blue disposed in stripes; the rest of the body and
fins red tinged with yellow.

XCIII.
LOCHE.
Br. Zool. III. 239.

SALMON.
Br. Zool. III. 239.

ALL fishermen agree that they never find any food in the stomach of this fish;
it is likely that many neglect their food entirely during the time of spawning
and melting; as sea lions Leonine seal, No. 272.
and sea bears Ursine seal, No. 271 of my synopsis of Quadrupeds, printed for
Benjamin White, Bookseller, Fleet street.
are known to do for months together during their breeding season: and it may
be observed, that like those animals the salmons return to the sea lank and
lean; and come from the salt water in good condition. It is evident that their
food is both fish and worms, for the angler uses both with success, as well as
a large gaudy colored artificial fly, which probably the fish mistakes for a
gay libellula, or dragon fly.

Otters are said to hunt this strong and active fish, in concert; one stations
itself above, another beneath the place where the fish lies, and continue
chasing it incessantly from one to the other, till the salmon quite wearied,
becomes their prey I think myself much indebted for these observations to Mr.
Robert Harrison, teacher of mathematics at Newcastle upon Tyne.
.

XCIV. MULLET.
PARR.


XCV. PIKE.
SEA PIKE.


XCIV.
MULLET.
Br. Zool. III. 278.

PAR.
A Small species never exceeding eight inches and a half in length; but very
rarely reaches that size: the sides marked with eight or nine large oval spots,
lying transversly; and of a bluish color; the side line marked with red spots;
and above them in old fish are some black spots; tail forked.

Common in the rivers of Scotland; the river Levin that washes Dunbarton,
during the month of May, is animated with their fry: are perhaps a variety of
the samlet. Br. Zool. III. 253.

XCV.
PIKE.
Br. Zool. III. 270.

SIA PIKE.
Br. Zool. III. 274.

XCVI.
GATTORUGINE.
Br. Zool. III. 168.

CRESTED.
Crested Blenny, Br. Zool. III. 167.

SPOTTED.
Spotted Blenny, Br. Zool. III. 171.

XCVII. WRASSES.
THESE three species were sent to me from the coast of Cornwall.

The first was of a slender form; the back, fins, and tail red; the belly
yellow; the sides marked beneath the side line with a smooth, even stripe from
the gills to the tail of a silvery color; the tail rounded at the end. P. D.
20. spiny, 11. soft. Pect. 14. vent. 5, an, 3 spiny, 7 soft. caud, 14. perhaps
the COMBER, Br. Zool. III, 210.

XCVI. GATTORUGINE.
CRESTED. BLENNY
SPOTTED BLENNY.


XCVII: WRASSES. 1
2
3


XCVIII. SCAD.
MACKREL.


The second, a deeper species, of a red color, striped with yellow about the
head; the tail rounded; the red on the fins and tail more brilliant than the
body.

P. D. 16 spiny, 9 soft. Pect. 14, vent, 5. an. 3 spiny, 9 soft, caud, 13.

The third, the colors of this were much faded, but seemed to have been olive
or greenish; was marked with a black spot near the tail; another about the
vent. Goldsinny, Br. Zool. III. 209.

P. D. 16 spiny, 9 soft. Pect. 14. vent. 6. an. 3 spiny 11 soft. caud. 15. tail
almost even.

XCVIII.
SCAD.
Br. Zool. III. 225.

MACKREL.
Br. Zool. III. 221.

MACKREL appear very late on the coasts of Scotland, I think not till August,
and are small and lean in comparison son of what they are in the south of Great
Britain. It is a common opinion among fishermen, that at a certain season of
the year, these fish are blind, and they assert they have taken them with a
film over their eyes. Martin relates something to this purpose, in his voyage
to Spitsbergen, p. 121, he says he took June 27.
some mackrel near the isle of St. Kilda that were half blind, occasioned by a
black skin which grows over their eyes in winter and comes off the beginning of
summer.

XCIX. GOAT.
Br. Zool. I. 29.

O senior! cui saepe tuis in montibus hirci
Prolixam invident barbam.
C.
OTTER.
Br. Zool. I. 67.

XCIX. GOAT.


C. OTTER.
BADGER.


CI. WEESEL.
ERMINE.


CII. MOUSE.
WATER SHREW MOUSE.


BADGER.
Br. Zool. I. 64.

CI.
ERMINE.
Br. Zool. I. 84.

TAKEN in the winter of 1770, in Whiteford parish, Flintshire, at a time when
it had undergone only a partial change of color.

WEISEL.
Br. Zool. I. 82.

CII.
WATER SHREW-MOUSE.
Mus araneus dorso nigro ventreque albo Merr^^ Pinax. 167. La musaraigne d'eau
de Buffon. viii. 64. tab. Sorex fodiens. Pallas ined.
FOUND in the fens of Lincolnshire, May, 1768, where it is called, from the
smallness of its eyes, the blind mouse: the Germans call it Groeber, or digger.
I imagine it is the same which the inhabitants of Sutherland name the water
mole; and those of Caithnes the Lavellan. Inhabits the banks of ditches and
other wet places; brings, according to M. de Buffon, nine young at a time.

Length from the nose to the tail is three inches three quarters; tail two
inches; eyes very small; nose long; color of the head and upper part of the
body black; belly white, or very pale ash-color; beneath the tail is a
triangular dusky spot.

MOUSE.
Common mouse Br. Zool. I. 105.

CIII.
BATS.
Long eared bat, Br. Zool. I. 116.

NOCTULE.
La noctule de Buffon. viii. tab. XVIII p. 128.

A Species first discovered by M. de Buffon, in Burgundy; since that in
Flintshire, and in other parts of England; ranges high in the air for food;
retires early in summer.

CIII. LONG EARED BAT.
GREAT BAT.


Is the largest kind in Great Britain; its length being four inches 6/10 tail
inclusive; that of the tail one 7/10 ears small and rounded; eyes small; nose
bilobated; on the chin a little verruca; color of the fur ferruginous.

These bats collect in great numbers in some places, if I mistake not the
species; for doctor Buckworth informed me, that at Queen's College, Cambridge,
in one night were taken in a net placed against the eaves 185, the second night
63, the third night 2, and in two or three years after 95 were taken in one
night, each measuring fifteen inches in extent.

END of the four first Classes of BRITISH ANIMALS.
CATALOGUE OF The European Quadrupeds, Birds, and Reptiles Extra-Britannic.
SINCE the great use of Mr. RAY'S Sylloge stirpium EUROPAEARUM extra Britannias
Stirpium Europoearum extra Britannias nascentium Sylloge, 1694.
has been so fully approved by the traveling Botanist, it is thought a similar
enumeration of the Species of certain classes of the animal kingdom would be
equally agreeable and serviceable to the traveling Zoologist. It comprehends
the extra-Britannic Quadrupeds, Birds, and Reptiles of Europe, formed from the
works of the general Naturalists, from the Fauna of different countries and
from my own observations. The arrangement of the subjects are according to the
excellent method of our countryman Mr. RAY, a little altered, or reformed. As
there are not at this instant English names for most of the articles, we have
been obliged to substitute those used by Linnoeus and other foreign writers;
but to gratify the English reader's curiosity, who may wish for fuller accounts
of the quadrupeds in his own language, we refer him to the second column to out
own synopsis of Quadrupeds, speedily to be published: and in respect to the
birds, to the English edition of Mr. WILLUGHBY'S Ornithology.

CLASS I. QUADRUPEDIA. QUADRUPEDS,
I. Lin. Syn. nost. No. Place. I Bos Urus 99 4 Lithuania Bubalis ibid. 5 Italy
II Ovis Strepsiceros 98 8 B. Hungary Laticauda Calmuck country III Capra
Rupicapra 95 10 Alps, Pyrenees Ibex ibid. 9 Alps Ammon 97 11 Corsica, Sardinia
Tatarica ibid. 30 Ukraine IV Cervus Alces 92 35 N. of the Baltic Tarandus 93 36
ibid. V Sus Aper Sylvestris 102 54 Germany, France, etc. II. VI Canis Lupus 58
111 Almost-all the continent Lagopus 59 113 Lapland VII Felis Lynx 62 135 Many
parts of Europe VIII Ursus Arctos 69 138 ibid. Maritimus 70 139 Nova Zembla
Luscus, et 71 Mustela Gulo 67 140 N. of the Baltic IX Viverra Genetta 65 171
Spain Zibellina 68 156 Lapland Perouasca P. 233 Note, Poland X Lutra Mustela
Lutreola 66 174 Sueden XI Castor Fiber 78 190 N^ of Europe Moschatus 79 192
Russia XII Hystrix Cristata 76 193 Italy XIII Marmotta Mus Marmotta 81 197
Alps, Poland Cricetus 82 200 Germany Souslik 201 S. of Russia Lemmus 80 202
Lapland Citellus 80 203 S. of Europe Zemni 204 Poland XIV Sciurus Volans 88 221
Poland Glis 87 217 S. of Europe Mus quercinus 84 218 ibid. XV Jerboa Mus
Jaculus 85 223 Calmucks country XVI Mus Gregarius 84 234 Germany, Sueden III.
XVII Trichechus Rosmarus 49 263 Within the polar circle IV. XVIII Vespertilio
Serotina 288 France Pipistrilla 289 ibid. Barbastella 290 ibid. 286 ibid.

CLASS II. AVES. BIRDS.
I. ACCIPITRES. RAPACIOUS.
Will. orn. Place. II Vultur Vultur Briss. I. 453 66 Alp, Italy Percnopterus
Raii. syn. 10 64. 67 Spain, Minorca North Countries the other side the Baltic.
III Falco Leucocephalus Lin. 124 Melanaeetos ibid. 61 Morphno congener Raii.
syn. 7 63 Rusticolus Lin. 125 Sweden St. Martini Briss. I. 443 France
Islandicus Brunnich No. Iceland Lagopus No. Vespertinus Lin. 129 Ingria Minutus
131 Malta Subfurcatus Kiamer 326 No. 5 Castaneus Kiamer 327 -- 6 Austria
Ferrugineus Kiamer 328 -- 7 Cinereus Kiamer 329 -- 12 III Strix * Scandiaca
Lin. 132 North Scops Lin. ib. ** Nyctea Lin. 132 North Sylvestris Scop. No. 13
Carniola Funerea Lin. 133 North IV Lanius Infaustus Lin. 138 197? North? Major
Gesneri 581 Briss. II. 146 88 Germany

II. PICAE. PIES.
Will. orn. Place. V Corvus Caryocatactes Lin. 157 132 Germany. N. Pyrrhocorax
-- 158. Alps VI Coracias Garrulus Lin. 159 131 Eur. passim Those with this word
refer to all the continent, except the extreme north, Lapland, etc.
VII Oriolus Galbula -- 160 198 ibid. VIII Cuculus Glandarius -- 169 Spain IX
Picus Martius -- 173 135 Europe pass^^ Tridactylus -- 177 Norway X Merops
Apiaster -- 182 147 Ita. S. of Eu. Icterocephala Bris. IV. 537 148 ibid. XI
Certhia Muraria -- 184 Italy

III. GALLINAE. GALLINACIOUS.
Will. orn. Place XII Tetrao * Nemesianus Sco. No. 171 Caraiola Betulinus No.
172 ibid. Lagopus Bru. No. 199 Norway Bonafia Lin. 257 175 Europe passim **
Rufus -- 276 167 S. of Europe Francolinus -- 275 174 ibid. Alchata -- 276 167
No. 5 Pyrenees Graeca (Perdix) Briss. I. 241 169 S. of Europe Montana 224
Tridactyla Shaw's t. 253 Spain XIII Otis Tetrax Lin. 264 179 France, Italy

IV. PASSERES. SMALL BIRDS.
Will. orn. Place. XIV Stur^^s Collaris Sco. No. 192. Carniola XV Turdus
Arundinaceus Lin. 296 143 Europe passim Roseus 294 194 Italy Saxatilis 294 197
Cyanus 296 191 Italy, Spain Caeruleus Belon 192 Alps XVI Al^uda Cristata Lin.
288 209 Europe passim Spinoletta 288 209 Italy Calandra 288 Italy, Spain
Alpestris 299 Poland Lusitanica nova Portugal Crassirostris nova ibid. XVII
Emberiza Hortulanus Lin. 309 270 S. of Europe Cia 310 271 ibid. Cirlus 311 269
zivolo ibid. Barbata Sco. No. 210 Carniola Brumalis No. 213 ibid. XVIII
Fringilla Lapponica Lin. 317 North Lulensis 318 Sueden Citrinella 320 265 S. of
Europe Serinus 320 265 ibid. Petronia 322 267 ibid. Passer Campestris Briss.
III. 82 251 Friquet ibid. Torquatus 85 250 No. 7 ibid. Stultus 87 249 -- 2
ibid. Bononiensis 91 250 -- 4 ibid. Albicilla 92 250 -- 5 ibid. Passerculus 93
252 -- 13 ibid. Sclavonicus 24 250 -- 6 Dalmatia Argentoratensis 146 Strasbourg
Grau-fink Frisch I. 3 Germany XIX Motacilla Schaenobanus Lin. 329 Italy Curruca
329 Sueden Ficedula Lin. 330 S. of Europe Stapazina 331 Strapazino 233 ibid.
Dumetorum 334 Austria Erithacus 335 3tia Aldr. 218 Sueden Suecica 336 North
Curruca minor Bri. III. 374 Borin. Will. 216 Italy cineraria 376 Italy, etc.
rufa 387 Germany naevia 389 Boarina 217 Italy Ruticilla Gibraltar 407 S. of
Europe Phaenicurus torqua. 411 ibid. Ruhecula bononien. 422 Spipola 234 Bologna
Curruca grisea naev. App. VI. 112 Tithys Sco. No. 233 Carniola Zya -- 234 ibid.
Muscipeta -- 236 ibid. Lusitanica nova Portugal Hispaniea nova Spain XX Parus
Cristatus Lin. 340 242 Germany Pendulinus 342 Austria Ignotus Brun. p. 73 North
XXI Hirundo Melba Lin. 345 Spain Rupestris Sco. No. 167 Spain, and Carniola

V. AQUATICAE FISSIPEDES. CLOVEN FOOTED WATER FOWL.
Will. orn. Place. XXII Platalea Leucorodia Lin. 231 289 Europe passim XXIII
Ard^a Grus -- 234 274 Ciconia 235 286 Nigra ibid. ibid. Nycticorax ibid. 279
Purpurea 236 S. of Europe Garzetta 237 280 ibid. Grisea 239 Minuta Lin. 240
Candida minor Briss V. 438 280 Torquata 440 282 Botaurus major 455 283 Botaurus
minor 453 Botaurus striatus 454 Botaurus rufus 458 283 Botaurus naevius 462
Cancrophagus 466 281 No. 9 Italy Cancroph. castaneus 468 ibid. Cancroph. rufus
469 281 -- 7 Cancroph. naevius 471 Cancroph. luteus 472 281 -- 8 Italy Viridis
Belgica nova Holland Ardea alba Sco. No. 127 Carniola XXIV Tantaius Falcinellua
Lin. 241 295 Germany XXV Numenius Danicus novus? Denmark Passerinus novus
Holland XXVI Scolopax Fusca Lin. 243 Australis Sco. No. 94 Carniola XXVII
Tringa Gambetta Lin. 248 Striata? Calidris Helvetica Varia Minuta nova Totanus
naevius Briss. V. 200 Cinclus torquatus 216 Calidris grisea 233 Calidris naevia
229 Bononiensis major 110 Erythropus Sco. No. 146 Undata Brun, -- 183 XXVIII
Pratincola Krameria Kramer 381 L. 345 No. 12 Austria XXIX Charadrius
Alexandrinus Lin. 253 Apricarius 254 Luteus novus France XXX Gallinula Grinetta
Will. orn. 315 Italy Serica ibid. ibid. Major 313 Porphyrio Balearicus novus
Minorca

VI. PEDIBUS PINNATIS. WITH FINNED FEET.
Will. orn. Place. XXXI Phalaropus Platyrhynchus Brunnich Mo. 172 North

VII, PEDIBUS PALMATIS, WITH WEBBED FEET.
Will. orn. Place. XXXII Phoenicopterus Rube^ Lin. 230 320 S. of France XXXIII
Corrira Longipes Raii syn 118 231 Italy XXXIV Mergus Castor Aethiops Scopoli
No. 90 Carniola XXXV Larus Albus Scopoli No. 106 ibid. Merulinus 108 ibid.
Bicolor 110 ibid. XXXVI Sterna Cinerea Briss. VI. 210 Naevia 216 XXXVII Anas
Niveus (anser) Briss. VI 288 North Moscoviticus? 277 360 Spectabilis Lin. 195
North Glaucion 201 367 Histrionica 204 North Rufa Fau. su. No. 134 Sueden
Muscaria Raii syn. 146 375 Ferroensis Briss. VI. 466 Ferroe isles Subterranea
Scopoli No. 83 Carniola Cinerea K. 341 No. 14 Austria XXXVIII Pelecanus
Onocrotalus Lin. 215 327 Danube, Po.

CLASS III. REPTILIA. REPTILES.
* PEDATA: WITH FEET.
Place. Rana Bombina Lin. 355 Sueden Arborea 357 Raii syn. qua. 251 Germany
Lacerta Chamaeleon Lin. 364 Raii syn. qua. 276 S. of Europe Salamandra 371 273
ibid. Orbicularis 365 264 Naples Marmorata 368 S. of Europe Aurata ibid. ibid.
Umbra? 367 ibid. Seps 363 ibid. Chalcides 369 Raii syn. qua. 272 ibid. Testud^
Coriacea Lin. 350 Mediterran. Corticata Rondel pisc. 445 ibid. Orbicularis Lin.
351 S. of Europe Graeca 352 Raii syn. qua. 253 ibid. Lutaria ibid. 254 ibid.

** APODIA. WITHOUT FEET.
Place. Serpents Anguis Aesculapii Plinii lib. xxix. c. 4 Raii syn. qua. 291
Italy Coluber Chersea Lin. 377 Wulff. Boruss. 10 Sweden Aspis Lin. 378 Strom
Sondm. 193 Fr. Norway Jaculus Wulff. Boruss. 13 Prussia

INDEX.
A
A Berdavine vide Siskin Anchovy XLIV 36 Argentine XLV 42 Atherine ib. ib. Auk,
greater or Penguin XVIII 24 common XIX ib. little ib. ib.
Avosetta LXXVIII
B
Badger c Bat, long eared CIII noctule ib. gregarious in their retreats
Black-birds LX Blenny, Gattorugine XCVI crefted ib. spotted ib. smooth XXXIV 30
Bustard LIX Butcher bird, great VII II Butter fish, vide spotted Blenny
Buzzard, common LIII moor V 9
Bulfinch, pine LXIV
C
Cepphus, vide blacktoed Gull Chough LVIII Coal Fish XXXII 29 Cole Mouse LXVIII
Coot LXXVI Creeper LVII Crossbill LXIV Crows, few in the Highlands Crucian KLI
3^ Cuckoo, female LV
D
Didapper, vide little Greble Diver, red throated or Lumme XXI 25 black
throated ib. ib.
Doree XLVI 42 Dottrel LXXIII Dove, Turtle VIII II Dragonet XXX 29 lesser XXXI
ib.

Duck Wild XXIV 27 little brown LXXXVII


E
Eagle, Sea LI Ermine CI
F
Falcon gentle I 7 peregrine LII spotted III 8
Father Lasher XXXV 30 Flying Fish XLIV 36 Fulmar LXXXII
G
Garganey LXXXVII Gattorugine XCVI Gilt-head XCI Goat XCIX Goatsucker LXIII
Godwit, the red LXIX Goldsinny XCVII Goosander red breasted LXXXIII Goose,
wild, where it breeds LXXXIV white fronted ib.
Grebe XVII 24 black and white ib. ib. little LXXVII eared ib. ib
Grous, female XIII 21 Guillemot, lesser XX 25 spotted ib. ib.
Gull arctic XXII ib. black toed LXXX brown and white LXXIX herring ib.
kittiwake XXIII 26 common ib. 27
Gurnard, gray XXXVIII 3^ Tub XXXIX ib. yellow, vide Dragonet

H
Hake, lesser or forked beard XXXII 29 Hare, alpine or white XLVII 40 Hoopoe
LVII Horse Arabian L 43 Persian 48 Ethiopian ib. Egyptian 49 Barbary ib.
Spanish 50
Hound Smooth, a shark XXVI 28
I
Jack Curlew, vide Whimbrel Jack-daw LIVE Jack-snipe LXXI Invercauld, its
magnificent scenery 19
K
King-fish, vide Opah Kingfisher LVI Kittiwake Gull XXIII 26
L
Lamprey common LXXXVIII Lampern ib. Pride ib.
Lanner IV Lark, Sky LXII Lavellan, vide Water Shrew Mouse Linnet, red headed
LXVII lesser ib.
Lizard warty XLV 37 Loche XCIII Lumme XXI 25 Lump Fish XXIX 28
M
Mackrel common XCVII horse ib. Spanish XLIII 33
Mallard XXIV 27 Martin black IX 15 Mew, winter LXXX Migration of Swallows 12
Mouse common CII
N
Nuthatch LVI Noctule, Bat CIII
O
Opah XCI Otter c Ouzel, ring LXI Owl, Eagle VI 10
P
Parr XCIV Penguin XVIII 24 Perch, crooked XCII sea ib.
Petrel or Storm Finch LXXXII Fulmar ib.

Pigeon, rock VIII 12 Pike XCV sea, or sea needle ib.

Plover green LXXII Pride LXXXVIII Ptarmigan XIII 21 Purre XVI 23
R
Rabbet XLVII 40 Rail, land LXXIV water ib.
Ray, or Thornback XXVII 28 Razor Bill or Auk XIX 24 Red game viae Grous
Redshank XIV 21 Reed Sparrow lesser X 16 Ring Ouzle, its migrations LXI Rud XL
32 Ruff and Reeve XV 22
S
Salmon XCIII Samlet XL 31 Sandpiper XVI 23 scollop toed

Scad XCVIII Sedge Bird X 16 Seal, how taken in Caithnes XLVIII 27 great 39
Shag XXV 27 Shielduck, swallow tailed LXXXVI Shrew Mouse, water CII Siskin
LXVI Smeardab XLVI 42 Snail, sea XXIX 28 Snipe LXXI Jack ib

Snow-fleck XI 17 Sparrows common LXV mountain, or tree X 17
Stare LXI Sticklebacks XLII 33 Stint or Purre XVI 23 Stoat CI Storm-finch
LXXXII Sturgeon LXXXIX Swallow, its migration IX 12 Swallow sea, vide Tern
Swift IX 15 Sword-fish XC
T
Tarrock, vide Kittiwake Tern, greater LXXXI less ib.
Thornback XXVII 28 Titmouse, great LXVIII blue ib. marsh ib. cole ib.
Trout XL 31 Tub-fish XXXIX 31 Tunny XLIII 33 Turtle Dove VIII II Twite LXVI
U
Velvet Duck LXXXV
W
Wagel LXXIX Wagtail white LXII yellow ib.
Water Hen, common LXXVI Weesel CI Weever XXXI 29 Whimbrel LXX Whistle Fish,
brown XXXIII 30 spotted ib. ib.
Winter Mew LXXX Woodcock XIV 21 Woodpecker greater spot. XII 20 lesser ib.
Wrasse striped XXXVI 30 gibbous XXXVII ib. trimaculated ib. ib. Goldsinny XCVII
Wryneck V
Y
Yellow Hammer X 20
BOOKS sold by BENJAMIN WHITE, at HORACE'S HEAD, Fleet Street.
BRITISH ZOOLOGY, with 132 Plates of the most curious Quadrupeds and Birds,
elegantly colored, Imperial Paper. II. BRITISH ZOOLOGY, or a complete
systematic History of the Quadrupeds, Birds, Reptiles, and Fish of this
country, illustrated with 139 Plates, complete, in 4 Volumes 8vo. by THOMAS
PENNANT, Esquire III. INDIAN ZOOLOGY, Part I. with 12 Plates, 4to. Imperial, finely
colored, by the same. Speedily will will be published by the same, a
Systematic Synopsis, of Quadruped, illustrated with Figures of 50 Animals
omitted by M. de Buffon, 1 vol. 8vo.

