LIBERAL OPINIONS, UPON ANIMALS, MAN, AND PROVIDENCE.

In which are introduced, ANECDOTES OF A GENTLEMAN.

Addressed to the Right Hon. Lady CH***TH.

FROM GAY TO GRAVE, FROM LIVELY TO SEVERE. Pope. By COURTNEY MELMOTH.

VOL. II.

LONDON, Printed for G. ROBINSON, and J. BEW, in Paternoster-Row; and Sold by
J. WALTER, Charing Cross.

MDCCLXXV.

LIBERAL OPINIONS, etc.
CHAP. XXXII.
THE ardour of your sentiments, sir, becomes your age, and I am pleased with
your compliment, because I perceive it is the effervesence of a sincere heart
-- I was going to say, that if -- but we will proceed to our more familiar
illustrations! -- Imagine that when these children were five weeks old, the
mother of the poorest, reduced to extreme necessity, puts her infant in a
basket, and lays it at the door of a person equally celebrated for wealth and
benevolence -- the gentleman takes it into his house, clothes, feeds, and
educates it as his own -- that very infant which with the parent would be the
lout I have described, would with its protector be as different a creature as
could exist. His pains, passions, pleasures, and ideas, totally reversed --
imagine likewise that some gypsey steals, or kidnaps, as it is called, the rich
child from the cradle, and strolls with it up and down the country: it will
have its education in the open air, its lodging in a barn, and its dirty diet
under a hedge. Probably it will imbibe the craft and subtlety of the gypsey,
and limit its utmost ambition to trick the traveller out of sixpence, cross the
palm with silver, and tell the events which have happened (or are still to be
brought forward) by the line of life. Thus, in every other instance, (with a
few peculiar exceptions, that have nothing to do with general rules,) habit and
education form the mind, and color the human character. --

But how does this influence, what we call virtue and vice? said I -- Virtue
and vice, (rejoined the gentleman,) are as dependent upon external as internal
circumstances: they are properties not more hereditary than adventitious and
artificial: nor do they issue more from the heart than from habit. -- You
astonish me, I replied. -- You are now, (cried he,) at the period of human
life, when curiosity is often caught in surprises. Experience will teach you to
hear what now seems strange, without emotion I have said nothing but what will
too soon be intelligible. --

Pray go on, sir -- pray go on --

CHAP. XXXIII.
-- There are, doubtless -- resumed the gentleman -- some constitutions so
adapted by nature to virtue, that no troubles, situations, or temptations, can
subdue, or extirpate, their amiable propensities -- but ninety-nine times out
of a hundred, a character takes its bias and bearing from mere tuition, and the
line it is either led or thrown into, in the first stage of the human journey.
If there are no innate ideas, sir, it follows that the mind of every newborn
babe is equally pure -- If there are those infantine seeds of the understanding
and little embrios of intellect -- they are easily turned into what channel the
parent thinks proper -- so that I cannot but think the father of a family one
of the most aweful charges upon earth: -- -- -- our parent's hand
Writes on our hearts the first faint characters,
Which time retracing deepens into strength.


After which, Nothing can efface them, but death or heaven. Yet we behold said
I, many children unlike their parents, both good and bad. It is admitted, said
Mr. Greaves: yet you will, at the same time, observe, where the notions of
parents and children are dissimilar, the dissimilitude arises rather from
difference of ages, or improper culture, than any thing else; in general
children are not liker in features than habits, and I do assure you family
minds are as often transmitted as family- faces. There is a tractability in
youth which receives like snow, every impression -- and it is almost as
difficult to erase the impression of one as the other: nothing but heaven can
effect it. -- If a son is trained up early to decency of manners, and has the
example of dignity living and moving before his eyes (unless his temper is
particularly untoward) he will turn out an elegant character -- If he is
trained up in different principles, he will act accordingly. -- The Hoyden and
the Prude, amongst the other sex, take not their tint of character one time in
ten from nature, but from a neglect early to give them a proper idea of
deportment. But yet, said I, very sedate women have romping, runaway daughters,
and very prudent fathers have very perverse sons. -- I mean, (replied Mr.
Greaves,) to say no more than this, that, generally speaking, men and women act
and think as they are taught whilst they are only able to lisp out their
meaning -- that education will have some influence on the most abandoned; and
that, upon the whole, virtue and vice depend very essentially on our primary
sentiments and examples; which, whether good or ill, will externally attend us
in some measure, through all possible transitions from the time we leave our
cradles, to the time we shall be deposited in our coffins -- If I have not
wearied you, we will now see how far habit, influences our judgments in the
great and important article of reputation.

CHAP. XXXIV.
I listen to you, sir, (said I) with joy, and only lament that I am
contributing to your fatigue, at the time that I am receiving such a fund of
entertainment. --

-- Habit, my young friend, said the gentleman, operates with equal energy upon
man and beast. I could easily produce evidences of the fact, by casting an eye
upon the very horses now engaged in the dutiful drudgery of dragging us along,
and upon the herds and flocks which are grazing or sporting beside us: but we
will confine ourselves to our own species, which are certainly the most
interesting objects of speculation. I was about to observe, that Custom has
much to do with our moral characters. There are certain actions, so naturally
and palpably, good, or evil, that neither sophistry, nor slander, nor address,
can either injure, mend, or mar them. To question the light at noon day, or the
dark in the zenith of the night, would argue a malady beyond madness: so in
like manner to dispute, whether downright wickedness is wickedness, and evident
excellence is excellence, would be a lunacy in ethics, so absurd, that the
poetical frenzy of poor Lee would be cool argument to it -- on the other hand,
my good sir, if you live and mix long with mankind, you will find many of your
fellow creatures, pining away existence under the lashes, -- the bleeding
lashes of reproach, merely because it is the custom to call one thing right and
another wrong, without tracing either to the bottom. It is a maxim that the Vox
Populi, is the Vox Dei -- that (as you know it is translated) "what every body
says must be true." I know nothing so deserving refutation as a collection of
those old saws and proverbs, which, acquiring force from antiquity, and
estimation from rust -- for there are virtuosos in letters, as well as in coins
-- are at length considered as utterly incontestible. Now, certain I am, that
upon an examination into those very maxims we put so much credit in, some will
turn out futile, some disputable, and many unfaithful -- for minute scrutinies
we have not time: it will be sufficient to look into that I have just
mentioned, and there is none more implicitly believed. "What every body says
must be true" -- I have myself seen many instances to disprove this; but I
shall beg your acceptance of one which is now uppermost in my memory. -- A
young gentleman of my particular acquaintance, has for some time been deserted
by his old companions, and branded as a man of unsteady principles, whose heart
I know to abound with all those sensibilities which have hurried him as it were
into the vortex of liberality, till he is become an object of liberality
himself. He has those glowing feelings, and sentiments, which do at once honor
and service, to human-nature: notwithstanding which, like poor Mr. Blewitt
(whose history was recited by the grocer) embarrassments have beset him, and
the world sets him down an undone man. The world gets hold of a prejudice and
then it is called Vox Dei. The Vox Populi, is given as the sentiment of
everybody, and thus many reputations are mistaken and misrepresented, which
deserve a better fate. There are various persons likewise now particularly
reprobated for a few indelicate concessions, to which necessity may, in
violence of their better judgments, have constrained them to yield, who (had
they possessed happier circumstances) would have made a much more respectable
figure than those which now mark them with insamy. Many an unfortunate female
too, at this time wandering up and down the streets -- many an insulted and
deserving character -- But I am rambling too miscellaneously -- I feel myself a
little weary -- Heigho --

Here the gentleman stoped abruptly -- His countenance became suddenly clouded
-- his lip quivered -- his eye remained fixed; and clasping his hands forcibly
together, he at length burst into tears -- After he a little recovered himself
-- he caught me hold by the arm, and exclaimed -- Oh! sir -- my daughter! my
daughter! -- my Almeria!

CHAP. XXXV.
I am now composed, my young friend -- the idea of a domestic misfortune
obtruded itself upon me, and I could not help feeling the stroke of humanity --
of nature, and a father -- Heaven! cried I, -- you distract me. I was about to
take notice, replied Mr. Greaves -- of one cruelty in the Vox Populi, which is
certainly against every notion of the Vox Dei. It Is the custom, sir, to abandon
the weakest part of our species, for that ruin which the artifices of our sex
have perpetrated; nor can any future repentence remove the sense of their
error, or restore them to the bosoms of more fortunate women: They set like
stars to rise no more. -- I had a wife, sir, with whom I have mourned many
years, -- though I buried her but six weeks ago -- She died of a broken heart,
and there was, I assure you, -- a woe in the family big enough to break it. --
About eleven years ago, sir, an only child was taken from me -- I was robbed of
her by a man whom I held the nearest to my heart -- and for five years it has
been my incessant business to recover my darling, but in vain. My wife fell
into a deep and rapid consumption, and I was obliged to reside with her in the
country -- She grew worse and weaker every hour -- but two days before she
resigned her last breath -- we received (by a special messenger) a packet --
how shall I speak it -- from -- from my beloved -- misguided -- repenting
wanderer! -- The poor thing had (the better to persuade) thrown the pathetic
parts of her story into poetry. -- But that which delighted me more -- far more
-- than all the rest -- and which would have more magic for a parent's heart,
than the poetry of a Milton -- was an attested account from a man of
reputation, that my child was actually at last under the protection of that
noble institution which offers an asylum to insulted penitence. -- In the first
transport, I could not conceal the news from my wife, but she had only power to
press the paper, trembling to her bosom, and feebly lifted up her eyes to
heaven -- the rest -- you must spare me, sir, upon the tender subject -- she is
dead! -- she is in heaven! --

The poor gentleman covered his face in his hankerchief, and I have no words to
describe my own feelings --

CHAP. XXXVI.
-- When Mr. Greaves could again lift up his head -- he told me, that having
trusted to the ground the remains of his wife, he was now going to visit his
long-lost daughter, who was in -- he stopped -- and I was unwilling to enlarge
upon the subject, though I desired most ardently to see the poetry he spoke of
-- But for the present we dropped the matter, and a profound silence ensued till
we again changed horses. At last, however, Mr. Greaves perceiving my anxiety,
and guessing the cause, put his hand into his pocket, and produced a small
bundle of papers, fastened by a piece of red tape -- from these he took a
manuscript, of which he thus declared his intentions, as he held it in his hand.

Here it is -- here is that unhappy girl -- my poor Almeria's petition -- read
it, young gentleman -- read it, and pity the daughter -- and the father. -- If
it should particularly strike you, take a copy, and if you continue long in
London, perhaps you may see it in print -- If you should not, and you should
chance to survive me, (as it is most probable you will) -- publish it -- and at
the same time, publish with it this Letter of Gratitude -- there are reasons
why -- I would not choose (being but too much interested in the contents) to
appear in the business -- take it therefore, and give it to the world at your
best leisure -- There, sir, -- it were improper to suppress it -- perhaps it
may fall into the hands of the young and dissipated -- perhaps it may find its
way into the closets of the chaste and beautiful -- The libertine may snatch it
up in the intervals of his gay career; and the parent, afflicted by the loss of
his child, may be induced to read it from affection and curiosity -- In all, or
in any of these cases, it will afford some salutary reflections, and the heart,
the conscience, and the understanding will point them out immediately -- He put
the paper into my hand -- I reminded him of the pleasing prospect of seeing his
restored daughter -- He did not seem insensible of my wishes to dissipate his
melancholy, but said nothing -- As I knew it must be some time before he could
collect himself, and perceiving he began to close his eyes, as if he desired
silence, I left him to his reflecions (which it would have been impertinent to
interrupt after the hint he had given me) and began to open my papers, which
melted me so many times into tears during the perusal, that I was heartily glad
the poor gentleman affected slumber. -- As I have now had the performance so
long by me I shall set it down in my journal in this place, where (though it
somewhat interferes with my further connection with Mr. Greaves) it properly
belongs, because I would not disjoint the subject from the sentiments which
introduced it to my knowledge -- So that if ever my history is found, the
history of this unhappy lady will be found with it; and in so publishing an
age, they can fall into few hands, which will not send them to the press.

CHAP. XXXVII.
The Letter of Gratitude directly follows; and was, I believe, designed as a
short dedication to the work. It was written by the father.

TO THE REVEREND * -- * * -- * * -- *
SIR,
To whom should the penitent daughter address the sentiments of reformation but
to him who has had the greatest share in promoting it? -- To whom should the
father (who hence derives the felicity of his last moments) pay the tribute of
gratitude, but to that fountain from whence he traces his blessings to their
source? -- The restored ALMERIA, sir, attributes to the force of your
arguments, and to the tenderness of your admonitions, much of that abhorrence
for vice, and dignity of amendment, that now inspire her. There are hundreds of
daughters, no doubt, under the same obligation, and hundreds of fathers whose
prayers and tears repay you for it. For this -- I had almost said -- heavenly
eloquence, may you long be distinguished, and may you bestow thereby, upon many
other parents (now mourning for their children), the serenity and the hope
which has been conferred upon

THE FATHER OF ALMERIA.


CHAP. XXXVIII.
ALMERIA; OR, THE PENITENT.
Being a Genuine Epistle from an Unfortunate Daughter in --, to her Family, in
the Country.
WITHDRAWN from all temptations that entice,
The frauds of fashion, and the snares of vice,
From all that can inspire unchaste delight,
To my dear-bleeding family I write;
But oh! my pen the tender task denies;
And all the daughter rushes to my eyes.
Often as the paper to my hand I brought,
My hand still trembled at the shock of thought;
Sighs interrupt the story of my woe,
My blushes burn me, and my tears overflow;
But nature now insists upon her claim,
Strikes the fine nerve, and gives me up to shame;
No more the anxious wish can I restrain,
Silent no longer can your child remain;
Write, write, I must, each hope, each fear, declare,
And try, once more, to win a father's care:
Scorn not, ah scorn not then, the mournful verse,
Revive my blessing, and recall my curse;
Give to a daughter's wrongs, one parent-sigh,
Nor let a mother my last prayer deny.
Yet where, oh where, shall I the tale begin,
And where conclude the narrative of sin?
How each dire circumstance of guilt disclose,
Unload my breast, and open all its woes?
How, to an injured parent, shall I tell
The arts by which I strayed, by which I fell?
No common language can the scenes express,
Where every line should mark extreme distress;
Mere human words, unequal all, we find
To paint the feelings of a wounded mind:
It Is not the scribbler's vein, the songster's art,
Nor the wild genius of a vacant heart,
It Is not the lines that musically flow
To mark the poet's well -- imagined woe;
Nor all the frolicks of the tuneful tribe,
Can such a mighty grief as mine describe.
Full often has scorpion FANCY to my view
Imag'd each anguish that a parent knew;
At midnight's still and searching hour she came,
Glar'd round my bed, and chilled my soul with shame,
Crowded each black idea in my sight,
And gloom'd a chaos on the balmy night,
"Behold, -- she said, -- on the damp bed of earth,
Behold the unhappy man, who gave thee birth;
In dust he rolls his sorrow-silver'd-hair,
And on each muscle sits intense despair;
See how the passions vary in his face,
Tear his old frame, and testify disgrace;
Retired from home, in silence to complain
To the pale moon, the veteran tells his pain;
Now sinks oppressed, now sudden starts away,
Abhors the night, yet sickens at the day.
And see, thou guilty daughter! see, and mourn
The whelming grief that waits the fire's return!
Beneath some black'ning yew's sepulchral gloom,
Where pensive Sorrow seems to court the tomb,
Where tenfold shades repel the light of day,
And ghostly footsteps seem to press the way,
Bent to the ground by misery, and by years,
There view thy bleeding mother bathed in tears;
Her look disordered, and her air all wild,
She beats the breast that fed a worthless child:
And oh! she cries --
Oh had the fostering milk to poison turned,
Some ague shivered, or some fever burned;
Had death befriended on the fatal morn,
In which these eyes beheld a daughter born;
Or, had the ETERNAL sealed its eyes in night,
Ere it the barrier knew 'twixt wrong and right,
Then had these curses never assailed my head --
Why spring such torments from a lawful bed! --
Now, melted, softened, gentler she complains,
Rage ebbs away, the tide of love remains:
Then how the affecting tears each other trace,
Down the dear furrows of her matron face;
But still the anxious mother brings to light,
Scenes of past joy, and innocent delight;
Calls to remembrance each infantine bliss,
The cradle's rapture, and the baby's kiss;
Each throbbing hope, that caught the embrace sincere,
With every joy that rose in every tear;
The beauteous prospect brightning every day,
The father's sondling, and the mother's play,
Yet soon she finds again the sad reverse,
Till harrass'd nature sinks beneath its curse;
Again more fierce -- more mad she rends her frame,
And loudly brands Almeria with her shame!"
Here paused, and shrunk, the VISION from my view,
But Conscience colored, as the shade withdrew:
Pierced to the heart, in agony I lay,
And all confusion, rose, with rising day,
But ah! what hope could morning bring to me,
What, but the mournful privilege, to see,
To view the pleasures which I could not share,
And waste the day in solitude and care?
More clearly shone the sun on my disgrace,
And marked more plain the blushes on my face.
Then all enraged I cursed the abandoned hour
When honor yielded to the traitor's power,
When rash, I scorned the angel voice of truth,
In all the mad simplicity of youth:
When from a father's arms forlorn I strayed,
And left a mother's tenderness unpaid;
While nature, duty, precept, all combined
To fix obedience on the plastic mind.
Stung at the thought each vengeance I designed,
And wearied heaven to desecrate mankind;
From room to room distractedly I ran,
The scorn of woman, and the dupe of man.
Alcanor, cursed Alcanor! first I sought
(And as I past a fatal dagger caught)
The smiling villain soon, my Fury, found,
Struck at his heart, and triumphed in the wound:
"A rained woman -- gives -- (I cried) the stroke!" --
He reeled he sell, he fainted as I spoke.
But soon as human blood began to flow,
Soon as it gushed, obedient to the blow,
Soon as the ruddy stream his cheek forsook,
And death sat struggling in the dying look,
Love, and the woman, all at once returned;
I felt his anguish, and my rashness mourned;
Over his pale form I heaved the bursting sigh,
And watched the changes of his fading eye,
To stop the crimson tide, my hair I tore,
Kissed the deep gash, and washed with tears the gore.
'Twas love, -- 'twas pity -- call it what you will;
Where the heart feels, -- we all are women still,
But low I bend my knees to pitying heaven,
For his recovery to my prayers was given;
He lived -- to all the rest I was refign'd,
And murder racked no more my tortured mind:
He lived -- but soon with mean perfidious stealth,
Forsook his prey, and rioted in wealth.
Yet think not now arrived the days of joy;
Alcanor flattered only to destroy;
Alike to blast my body, and my mind,
He robbed me first, then left me to mankind;
Soon from his Janus face the mask he tore,
The charm was broke, and magic was no more:
The dreadful cheat awhile to hide he strove,
By poor pretenses of a partial love,
Awhile disguised the surfeits of his heart,
And top'd, full well, the warm admirer's part;
Till tired at last, with laboring to conceal,
And feigning transports which he did not feel,
He turned at once so civilly polite,
Whatever I said, indifference made so right,
Such coldness marked his manners, and his mien,
My guilt -- my ruin -- at a glance was seen.
In vain, I now assumed a chaster part,
In vain I struggled with a broken heart,
In vain I tried to purify my stain,
Correct my life, and rise (reformed) again;
Pleased at the hope, from savage man I flew,
And sought protection from each friend I knew;
Each friend at my approach shrunk back with dread,
And bade me hide my pestilential head:
Even for the meanest servitude I sought,
But nice suspicion at my figure caught,
My dress too flaunting, or my air too free,
And deep reserve betok'ning mystery;
Some frailty raised a doubt wherever I came,
And every question flushed my cheeks with shame;
Conscious of guilt, overshadow'd by pretense,
'Twas hard to act the farce of innocence.
Often as I begged the servant's lowest place,
The treacherous color shifted in my face;
The fatal secret glowed in every look,
Trembling I stood, and stammering I spoke.
Next came the views of home into my mind,
With each dear comfort I had left behind;
Pardon, and pleasure, started to my thought,
While Hope inspired forgiveness of my fault;
But soon, too soon, the sweet ideas sled,
And left me -- begging at each door for bread.
Yet poor indeed was this support to me,
(Ah, had I starved on common charity!)
Far other woes and insults were in store,
My fame was lost, and I could rise no more;
Driven to the dreadful precipice of sin,
My brain swam round the gulf, and hurled me in.
And now no pen could picture my distress,
'Twas more, much more than simple wretchedness;
Famine, and guilt, and conscience tore my heart,
And urged me to pursue the wanton's part.
Take then the truth, and learn at once my shame:
Such my hard fate -- I welcomed all that came.
But oh! no transport mingled in my stains,
No guilty pleasure ever soothed my pains;
No vicious hope indelicately gay,
Nor warmer passions lulled my cares away;
The flattering compliment fatigued my ear,
While half-afraid, I half-conceal'd a tear:
Whole nights I passed insensible of bliss,
Lost to the loathed embrace, and odious kiss;
Nor wine nor mirth the aching heart could fire,
Nor could the sprightly music ought inspire;
Alive to each reflection that oppressed,
The more I gained, the more I was distressed;
Even in the moment of unblest desire,
Often would the wretch complain I wanted fire;
Cold as a statue in his arms I lay,
Wept though the night, and blushed along the day --
Ah think what terrors ever could equal mine!
Ah think, and pity -- for I once was thine!
The sweet society of friends was over,
For happier women dare invite no more;
And they, at noon, would meet me with alarms,
Who stole at midnight to my venal arms.
My own companions no sweet comfort brought,
A shameful set, incapable of thought;
Their wanton passions never could touch my heart,
For all was looseness, infamy, and art;
No modest maxims suited to improve,
No soft sensations of a chaster love,
No generous prospects of a soul refined,
No worthy lessons of a noble mind,
Ever touched their bosoms, hardened to their state:
Charmed at their arts, and glorying in their fate;
Some stroke of frolic was their constant theme,
The dreadful oath, and blasphemy extreme,
The affected laugh, the rude-retorted lie,
The indecent question, and the bold reply;
Even in their dress, their business I could trace,
And broad was stamped the Harlot on each face;
Over every part the shameful trade we spy,
The step audacious, and the rolling eye;
The smile insidious, the look obscene,
The air enticing, and the mincing mein.
With these, alas! a sacrifice I lived;
With these the wages of disgrace received:
But heaven, at length, its vengeance to complete,
Drove me -- distempered -- to the public street.
For on a time, when lightning fired the air,
And laid the sable breast of midnight bare;
When rain and wind assailed the unshelter'd head,
That sought in vain -- the blessing of a bed,
Distressed -- diseased -- I crawled to every door,
And begged, with tears, a shelter for the poor!
My knees, at length, unable to sustain
The force of hunger, and the weight of rain,
Fainting I fell, then stagg'ring rose again,
And wept, and sighed, and hoped, and raved in vain.
Then (nor tell then) overwhelmed by sore distress,
To my own hand I looked for full redress;
All things were apt -- no flatterer to beguile,
'Twas night -- 'twas dark -- occasion seemed to smile: --
Wherever I turned, destruction rose to view,
And, on reflection, rising frenzy grew. --
From foolish love, the knife, concealed, I wore,
That, in my rage, Alcanor's bosom tore;
Thought pressed on thought -- the unsettled senses flew,
As from my breast the fatal blade I drew;
Still the stained point with crimson spots was died,
cried! "And this is well -- it is blood for blood," I
Then did I poise the instrument in air,
Bent to the stroke, and laid my bosom bare:
But ah! my crimes that instant rose to view,
Disarmed my purpose -- my resolves o'erthrew;
Fear shook my hand, I flung the weapon by,
Unfit to live -- I was not fit to die! --
Ah! wretch'd woman, she, who strays for bread,
And sells, the sacred pleasures of the bed;
Condemned to shifts, her reason must despise,
The scorn and pity of the good and wise;
Condemned each call of passion to obey,
And in despite of nature to be gay;
To force a simper, with a throbbing heart,
And call to aid the feeble helps of art;
Obliged to suffer each impure caress,
The slave of fancy, and the drudge of dress;
Compelled to suit her temper to each taste,
Scorned if too wanton, hated if too chaste;
Forced with the public whimsy to comply,
As veers the gale of modern luxury;
And often the afflicted creature must sustain
Strokes more severe, yet tremble to complain:
The felon bawd, a dreadful beast of prey,
Rules over her subjects with despotic sway,
Trucks for the human form, with fatal power,
And bargains for her beauties by the hour.
But should some female in her dangerous train,
Attend the altar of her shame with pain,
Dispute at length the monster's base control,
And dare assert the scruples of her soul;
Should she reluctant yield to the disgrace,
And show the signs of sorrow in her face,
The imperious abbess frowns her into vice,
And hates the sinner that grows over-nice.
But hear, yet hear, your hapless daughter's plea,
Some little pity still is due to me.
If to have felt each agony of mind,
To bear the stings which Conscience leaves behind;
If at each morn to shudder at the light,
Dread the fair day, and fear the coming night;
If, like the thief, of every eye afraid,
Anxious I sought, the blush-concealing shade;
If my sad bosom, bursting with its weight,
Bled and bewailed the hardships of my fate;
If to have known no joys, and known all pains,
Can aught avail to purge my former stains,
Judge not your child, -- your suppliant, -- too severe,
But veil her frailties, and bestow a tear. --
Yet has Almeria now a juster claim,
To seal her pardon, and to close her shame,
Each early tresspass nobler to remove,
And hope again the sanction of your love.
THESE holy mansions, sacred to our woes,
To screen from scorn, and hide us from our foes:
Gradual, the fallen woman to retrieve,
Reform the manners, and the mind relieve
From barbarous man to shield his hapless prey;
Expunge the spot, and chase the blush away;
To sooth each sorrow by the power of prayer,
And half supply a parent's pious care;
To lull the fluttering pulses to repose,
Each pang to soften, and each wish compose;
Wean us from scenes that fatally misguide,
And teach the breast to glow with nobler pride;
These holy mansions have received your child,
And here she mourns each passion that beguiled
Thrice has the sun his annual beams bestowed,
And found me here, determined -- to be good;
Already feels my heart a lighter grief,
And each white minute brings me fresh relief;
Or if by chance my sorrows I renew,
Half claim my crimes, and half belong to you;
Here then for ever, secret and resigned,
Here for its GOD will I prepare my mind;
Here pass, concealed, my penitential days,
And lead a life of piety and praise.
Come then, thou lovely patroness of fame,
Thou bright restorer of a ruined name,
Come, fair REPENTANCE, over each thought preside,
Patient I follow such a heavenly guide;
To all thy laws implicitly I bend,
And call thee sister, savior, genius, friend!
Oh! let me breathe the solemn vow sincere,
Oh! let Religion consecrate each tear!
Then, should long life be mercifully given,
The soul, (repaired,) may dare to think of heaven;
Then cleans'd from every dark and Ethiop stain,
VIRTUE, that dove of peace, shall come again,
With smoothest wings re-settle on my breast,
And open prospects of eternal rest.
And yet, before that golden hour arrive,
Oh! would my injured relatives forgive,
Oh! could they see this happier turn of fate,
And view their Magdalen's far chaster state,
Then would they fondly close her fading eye,
Bless her last breath, and bid her peaceful die.
Deep in her ward's most venerable gloom,
Late was a contrite sister, from her room,
Where long the blushing, pious vot'ress lay,
And sought a shelter from the shame of day,
In words half-smother'd, by the heaving sigh,
And voice that spoke despair, -- thus heard to cry. --
"Oh! injured CHASTITY, thou heavenly dame,
Thou spotless guardian of the cherub Fame,
Who arm'st fair Virtue against the insulting foe,
And in her cheeks commands the rose to blow:
Thou, whose resistless shield protects the fair,
Who falls not, willing, in the traitor's snate:
Had I, oh! had I still thy rules obeyed,
Despised the treacherous town, and walked the shade;
Had I each villain stratagem defied,
And scorned the flatt'rer with a decent pride;
Had I withstood his arrows at my heart,
Opposed cach trick, and baffled every art,
Then liberal truth might every hour employ,
Each thought be rapture, and each hope be joy;
Then loved, revered, as mother and as wife,
Blessed had I been, in the pure vale of life.
Happily my Edward -- Oh! lamented name,
Once my high boast, before I plunged in shame;
Happily my Edward, yielding to my charms,
(Oh! my smote bosom, whence these new alarms?
Why spring the conscious drops into my eye?
Why feels my heart the love-impassion'd sigh?)
I dare not speak my promised happiness --
Yet, Edward, could thou witness my distress,
Witness the firm unviolated mind,
Seduced by vice, but not to vice inclined;
Could thou behold the constant-falling tear,
My prayers attest, my self-reproaches hear;
Ah! could thou think how deeply I bewail,
How thick enshrowd me in the friendly veil;
How, in the sacred solitude of night,
The care of heaven unceasing I invite,
Breathe the warm wish, and pour the fervent prayer;
Now dare to hope, and now expect despair:
Could thou but see these changes of my grief,
Surely thy pity would bestow relief.
My Edward's virtue, (for I know his heart,)
The balms of soft compassion would impart,
His breast would mitigate each stern decree,
And judgment yield to mercy's milder plea;
But he is lost -- fond wretch, thy plaint give over --
The dear, the injured Edward, is no more,
Or, if he lives -- he recollects thy shame,
Scorns thy false vows, and hates the unworthy flame." --
Scarce had the pensive child of sorrow spoke,
When from a neighboring ward these accents broke:
"'It Is she! -- it is she! -- the unfortunate is found,
My pulse beats quick -- Ah! save me from the ground,
Support me -- help me -- some assistance lend,
And my faint footsteps to the mourner bend;
She lives! -- she lives!" -- The unhappy woman heard,
Shook in each nerve, and trembled at each word,
Then swooning sunk at length upon the floor,
Just as the afflicted stranger reached the door:
Tottering he entered -- caught the afflicted fair,
And raised her fluttering frame, with tenderest care.
"Ah drooping lily! rise to life and me,
And in this faded form thy Edward see;
Recall the luster in thy sparkling eye,
And bid for ever all thy sorrows fly;
Long have I sought thee with a lover's zeal,
For thee alone I weep, for thee I feel:
Come then, fair penitent, forget each woe,
And every pleasure, every transport know;
Lost be the memory of thy former stain,
Thy powerful prayers have washed thee white again;
Buried be every anguish in this kiss,
Wake then, oh wake, to virtue and to bliss!" --
This said, he pressed her in a soft embrace,
And the warm blood came flushing to her face,
Now pale retired, now ran a deeper red,
Till cheered at last the sweet disorder fled;
A thousand tender questions now succeed,
They smile alternate, and alternate bleed.
Edward, the chaplain's long tried friend had been,
And hence arose the late propitious scene;
The sacred chaplain gave her to his care,
Joined their kind fates, and left them with a prayer.
CHAP. XXXIX.
Before I proceed to set down other matters which fell out to chequer the
adventures of my journey, I cannot but observe that about two years after this
period I met Mr. Greaves in the Park, with a beautiful young creature under his
arm; and some time afterward I paid him a visit, when he took me cordially by
the hand, and spoke to me as follows.

My dear BENIGNUS, where have you been buried since our last interview? When I
told you upon the road the occasion of that melancholy you detected through my
efforts to conceal it, you may remember I told you the motive of my journey.
Upon my arrival in London, and taking leave of you, I called an hackney coach,
and drove directly to *** -- In one word -- I found my daughter. -- I felt the
fainting penitent in my arms. I received of her with an anxiety of joy -- a
tremor transport -- Oh! BENIGNUS, think for me -- color the scene in the paint
of youthful ardour -- do justice to nature, and imagine the delicacies which
were never spoken. You have seen my daughter -- I never walk without her -- and
yet, sir, all this joy is dashed with an ingredient of sorrow. The prudes
(untouched by the pathos of her penitence) carry an air of ceremonious civility
toward my child. -- The faded virgins who have never passed the fiery trial of
temptation, and a set of haughty matrons, who have every other vice that
disgraces the sex, but that of which even nature predetermined they should
never be guilty -- treat my Almeria with a coy and insulting reserve, which
goes too near her heart -- an heart, BENIGNUS, generous and gentle as --

Here our discourse was interrupted by ALMERIA herself, who came to inform us
the chocolate waited for us in the little saloon. -- Grace was in all her steps,
In every action, dignity and love.
Her own epistle has so pathetically described the misery of her situation,
that she has not left room for any thing but pity. -- And yet who that
considers such a creature has been, as it were, public property -- that
reflects, how many are at this very moment chained down to a necessity equally
sore; many of them exposed to the want of that daily bread, which even nightly
impurity cannot supply -- some of them beating through the streets by the
barbarity of their betrayer -- some hunted from one hiding place to another, by
the vigilance of the bailiff; and all of them liable to contempt, indignity,
and distemper -- who, I say, that collects together these facts in his mind,
can be content with expressing barren compassion? -- Who can forbear mixing
relief with their tears, and blessing the benevolence which first suggested,
and still continues, their Asylum. --

I have a little violated chronology, by placing these transactions somewhat
out of the order of time, but as my history is written at a venture, and may
never visit the world, I have been less cautious of observing critical rules.
However, as I by no means design to make a book of digressions, I shall now
turn back to Mr. Greaves, who having sat with his eyes closed, was, when he
opened them again, much more fitted for society. There are, in truth, certain
moments when the music of the spheres would be discordant, and when the
condolence of our dearest acquaintances is an unwelcome interruption. The human
soul settles on her darling subject, descends into herself, and indulges in a
luxury, which, be like, extracts honey from the poison of calamity. In one of
these dispositions was Mr. Greaves, when he counterfeited repose: he had now
reconciled himself to the events he had contemplated, (for he was both a
philosopher and a christian) and with an affability peculiar to well-bred
people, begged my pardon for his reveries.

CHAP. XL.
We were now just stepping into our last stage but one, and though the glories
of the sun were over, his departing beams were extremely agreeable. Mr. Greaves
resumed a look of complacency, and I being willing to keep as clear of the only
subject that could perhaps again discompose it, asked what sort of sensations
were created in his mind by the story of Mr. Blewitt. Though his history was
related (answered my companion) in unpolished language, it contains a folio of
valuable facts. But what a pity it is, repeated I, that such mercenary hearts
as are lodged in the bosoms of the Quaker and Grocer, should be, in general,
more undisturbed through life, than such as guided the feelings of the generous
Mr. Blewitt. Alas! returned the gentleman, you are yet an infant in terrestial
events. I dare swear you have an excellent heart, and I am sure a good
understanding, yet you know but little of life. -- You profess to be traveling
in pursuit of happiness, and to dedicate your fortune to the service of
society. From hence I should conclude that you are flying from misery. I
related my adventures at the village. He said if I could not find Contentment
in the shade, it was doubtful whether I should meet her in the city. But I
fear, continued he, you expect from the world more than it can bestow; you
have, perhaps, placed the standard of felicity too high, or your ideas of it
are probably a little romantic.

All I want upon earth, replied I, is comprised in three things, friendship,
fidelity, and gratitude. -- At your age, resumed Mr. Greaves, (smiling,) I
entered the world, animated by the same hopes, and fascinated by the same
notions. My head -- my hands, and my heart, were busy to derive a reflected
blessing to myself, by having promoted the blessedness of others. To this end I
continued in the world till that agonizing accident I have already related. --

At this crisis our chaise having just ascended a hill arrived at a very
beautiful spot indeed. It was an eminence that topt an extensive prospect, and
commanded the scene below, which was composed of intermingled towers, and
spires, woods and waters, the verdure of fields, and the variegation of valleys
-- I could not help ejaculating with some energy -- Is it not strange that a
world like this, so fitted for the reception and happiness of every being which
inhabits it, with such noble capacities of pleasure adapted to each, should
nevertheless be the seat of general torment and fretfulness, disaster and
distress. -- Is it not strange that -- that --

The gentleman took hold of my wrist, and fixing his eyes very seriously upon
me, spoke in a tone of unusual dignity.

CHAP. XLI.
Never allow amazement to hurry you into expressions unbecoming the character
of a christian; nor let either the insults or miseries you see or feel in the
world, make you charge Heaven with the shadow of injustice. Take my word for
it, God is not, nor ever was in fault -- You see before you, this moment,
enough to convince you, that he has done every thing on his part -- the sun
warms us -- the moon in his absence sets off the face of the earth, in a sort
of shady majesty -- the rain descends to bless us -- the ground feeds and
entertains us, and the ample intentions of universal nature are universally
kind and beneficent. MAN has perverted the system -- the invention of coins,
the passion for negotiation, and the love of barter have extended an ambition
of the lowest kind amongst all classes of people. The motive of commerce is no
longer rational; and business, which was originally designed to promote health,
and circulate interchanged conveniences, is now for the most part avariciously
carried on, to swell the coffers of the individual by impoverishing the
species; nay, the mercenary spirit of the times extends to nations and climates
divided by the remotest part of the ocean. But if you please we will trace this
evil ab origin. The Almighty created a world, then peopled it, and afterward
found that it was good. The management of it was put into the hands of man --
not, however, to be too minute, let us take notice, that every thing was once
indiscriminately enjoyed. The earth was a common property, and it was fertile
without labor -- the error of our first parents considerably changed the
system, and tillage and druggery became necessary to subdue a soil, that no
longer produced plenty spontaneously. No absolute right however or
proprietorship was yet ascertained, and every one fixed on, and cultivated the
spot he chose: this miscellaneous participation soon created disorder; for, as
the bad passions were now let loose upon the world, indolence seized upon the
comforts which had been acquired by industry; and hence sprang domestic contest
and civil dispute, and half mankind were at war. Those that obtained the
victory held the conquered as his slave; and from hence originated those
distinctions, which, obtained by rapacity, and kept by force, were after
sanctified by political institutions: for upon this (finding men were to be
restrained from violence and invasion only by compulsion, terror, and
authority,) the laws came in to the assistance of the stronger party: the
difference betwixt meum and tuum was soon understood, and every individual
maintained himself upon that which was now secured to him by certain compacts,
to violate which was henceforth to be considered as a punishable crime. By this
time an idea of property became sacred and general, and by these means the
civilized part of the earth was said to belong, not as formerly, to all alike,
but to a third part of its inhabitants. Subordination therefore of necessity
took place. The pride of power gained ground every day, and one human creature
usurped dominion over another, because the distinction was now known betwixt
master and servant. From master and servant rose notions of great privileges,
and poverty dropped submissive at the knee of riches. Pastorals and Arcadia were
no more. Instead of every man dressing the glebe, and turning up the soil in
common, such as had now dominion over the acres, insisted upon having the
essential drudgery they required, performed by those whose fathers might
probably possess the spot upon which they were to toil. --

CHAP. XLII.
-- Affairs once settled on these partial principles, resisted every effort of
revocation -- for who that could eat his bread without sweating his brow, would
give up the advantages he had gained. Centuries are now behind us, since things
were thus regulated, and every year has given force and venerableness to the
establishment. Every man has given up the point, and makes the most of his
situation: the clown rises early to the task of cultivation, and the master
looks indolently on, and receives the profit. Luxury was introduced under these
auspices -- the beverage of the field -- the sallad of the brook, and the water
of the spring -- with the homely apparel that decently veiled and warmed the
body, were rejected, and Voluptuousness turned Simplicity blushing away. The
moment in which man became possessed of more than was necessary to the wholesome
purposes of life; the moment in which his industry became nerveless, and his
love of labor to slacken; pride soon taught leisure, to misuse abundance, and
the passions to wanton with authority -- Hence, some revelled in the riots of
dissipation, others found a pleasure in accumulation, and some better spirits
had a bliss in distribution. At length through the natural chain of
consequences, we are arrived at the crisis. We are polished, populated, and
resined in the extreme. Distinctions are so minute, property so tenacious,
splendour so superior, and trade so jealous, that no distresses you observe
should surprise you. Money has acquired a universal ascendency, property has
"subdued all things under her feet;" and luxury sickens in despair, because
novelty is wanting to give an edge to the blunted appetites. Had the use of a
metal-currency been restricted by any reasonable rule of moderation, it might
have settled the system upon a noble principle, for it is equally convenient to
the great purposes of benevolence and business. But the lucky and fortunate
have run into two extremes so egregiously absurd, that the one opens upon us a
fountain of poisoned pleasures, and the other a source of sordid maxims. The
passion for wasting on the one hand, and of hoarding on the other, have not
only involved the world in confusion, and thrown the passions into an uproar
but have actually left almost one half of the human species naked and starved,
to cloth and accommodate the other.

CHAP. XLIII
You have discovered to me Mr. Greaves, said I, a train of observations of
which I had no idea -- but you are preparing to speak -- and I would not
interrupt you for the universe --

The observations I have made, (continued Mr. Greaves,) have been no doubt
made, (and much more sagaciously,) by many others, for contemplation,
philosophy, and science, have now gone very far; our discoveries in letters and
in lands, may perhaps have been pretty equal. There may be yet unknown tracks
in speculation; the intellect may still abound with new reserves of wisdom.
There is still, it is presumed, a terra incognita; there may be still an undug
mine of knowledge -- To explore this, must be the labor of some literary
Columbus -- I pretend not to such skill; and indeed can only assure you, that I
offer you frankly, on this subject the unadorned facts which I have collected
from early readings and practical observations. -- You run your eye hastily
over the world, and then complain that it abounds with misery. After what has
been said, should you not be surprised to find a great deal of happiness: and
yet, distributed up and down the various parts of it, there really is a very
considerable share. That the infelicity grows out of all proportion still more
considerable cannot easily be determined -- for though the fate of thousands
can only be made supportable, by the cheerful expectation of a better, and
though the human heart is in general blinded by temporal prejudices, yet coarse
as the mass of gratifications are that endear life to the multitude, they are
nevertheless gratifications, and receive attachment from custom. The joys of
more delicate minds are indeed less extended, and lie in a small compass, being
confined to the little circle of the few, whose feelings are softened by
nature, and refined by art. But were the agonies of existence, still greater
and acuter than they are, the DEITY is not the author of it -- he made the
world -- survey it, sir, (even through the shadings of the evening) and tell
me, if it is not worthy of a divine artificer. He made man to inhabit it -- has
he not bestowed amiable and ample faculties upon him -- fitted him equally to
enjoy society and solitude -- given him a power to derive a pleasure from the
freshness of the gale, or from the convivial glass -- has not he bestowed upon
him eyes to see missortune, an heart to feel it, and arms to remove it? Has he
not implanted in the mind a sympathy between the sexes, so attractive, that by
a kind of magnetic power, we are irresistibly drawn to each other, that life
may be perpetuated while love is unpolluted? Has he not given us early ideas of
more disinterested attachments, and inspired us with dispositions, to
philanthropy and friendship! has he not seated in the bosom a monitor, to
compliment us for every thing that is becoming, and accommodated the taste with
endless variety, -- is not the ear enchanted by the harmonies of nature -- and
the smell gratified with perfume; and to crown the whole, has he not placed
certain intimations in the soul, which assure it that however agreeable the
Deity may have rendered the present slate, it is but a passage; and upon the
easy terms of our acting properly to him, and each other, will lead us gently
along, till it terminates in eternity?

CHAP. XLIV.
-- This, my young friend, is a saint sketch of the works and intentions of the
Deity -- that those works and intentions are abused, can never be imputed to
their all-kind Author, but to man.

If the beauties and benefits of nature are perverted; if the faculties of the
mind and body are obstinately bent to actions evidently contradictory to the
purposes for which they were given; if love and friendship are overborne by
their opposite passions; and, if -- as has been before hinted, interest carries
away the palm from earth and heaven -- who but man is chargeable with the
consequences of this general inversion of blessings? --

The fact is indisputable, sir, said I -- I tremble, and I adore; but as Mr.
Blewitt seemed always to perform the purposes for which he was born a man, how
is it, that he, and others like him, should not pass smoothly through the sea
of life. Because, said the gentleman -- to carry on the metaphor -- when the
storm is violent, and the hurricane extreme, it is certain the good and bad
sailors will be wrecked alike. Is not that strange, said I -- "Shall
gravitation stop as you go by, replied Mr. Greaves? -- no, sir. The chain of
causes and consequences is irrefragable -- that innocence should suffer in a
world of guilt is morally inevitable, but depend upon it, the suffering will
not be ultimately in vain.

As to Mr. Blewitt, I compassionate and admire him, but he is one of those
characters, whose amiable weaknesses expose him to almost certain poverty. The
poor man was kind, to a fault -- the world would call him, a good-natured fool
-- Indeed he was wrong, sir, to indulge the tenderness of his feeling in the
extreme; though this cannot be owned, without its implying at the same time a
very cutting satire against the depravity of human nature -- a depravity I have
all along taken notice of, as the source of so much disaster, and calamity. --

Mr. Blewitt did not reflect that -- as money is the property by which every
passion is gratified, man will naturally idolize it as the golden calf; and
that, to adopt a few saving maxims, in relation to keeping a part of such
property always at command, would be favorable even to his generosity; because
it must needs be a deep misfortune to find the hand, accustomed to liberallity,
compelled to contract, when it can give no more. -- In a country where
appearances of wealth, can claim veneration, where money acquires the chymic
quality of turning every thing it approximates into gold, and where that gold
is moreover able to array insamy in the robe of integrity, and lead the
judgments of the wisest blindfold as it pleases -- In such a country, every
apparent want of this property, will be liable to neglect and ill treatment --
and every degree of indigence will meet desertion, for this plain reason,
because indigence has nothing either to procure or excite the idea of
authority, nor to observe those rules which externally distinguish the master
from the servant. You will say perhaps, all this sort of distinction is
ridiculous. No doubt of it; but as more than fifty, out of sixty have adopted
such distinctions, -- as they are actually the general standards of conduct, --
as they are also more than two thousand years old -- it is in vain to dispute
their propriety -- one might as well dispute the customs of a country -- tell
the Indian, it is indecent to go naked, or that a Toledo dangling by the side
of the Spanish peasant, must be extremely inconvenient. Economy therefore is
now almost the only security from contempt, and though it were too narrow a
line to tread in the track of the grocer, as no real joy could arise from such
a rigid policy, neither to lend sixpence, nor borrow sixpence, yet I (and I
think my heart not an unfeeling one) -- have always found it sound prudence, to
keep a friend in my pocket, and on no terms to lie at the mercy and compassion
of another. --

CHAP. XLV.
-- It was now night, and we were in the middle of Finchley Common -- The
driver bid us secure part of our money, if we had any great quantity about us,
for that he saw a fellow lurking by the side of the road, at a little distance.
-- In five seconds we were up with the man, who was groaning piteously upon a
grassy hillock. Mr. Greaves, (who knew the arts of his own species) suspected
this to be an imposition, and opposed my desire to have him lifted into the
chaise -- But these ideas were presently removed, for the stranger got up, and
coming to the window, presented not a pistol, but -- a purse. The chaise stopped
--

Half an hour ago, gentlemen -- said the man -- a horseman came by me, and I
was tempted, (to supply the wants of a large family) to demand his money -- He
put into my hand this purse. -- I conjure you, gentlemen, if by any stroke of
happy chance he should be any part of your company -- take it, and return it to
him just as I received it -- It is my first violation of the laws, either of
hospitality or my country -- I might possibly return home undiscovered, but I
feel that I cannot bear it. My conscience is victorious even over my
necessities If you should not know the traveller I have plundered -- it is
still in your power to do my bleeding soul some service -- Upon your arrival in
London advertise the circumstances of the robbery -- take the property and
redeliver it, upon the first application. -- This I cannot do for myself,
without throwing myself into the arms of justice; and the situation of a wife,
(whom I dote on, with the fate of my poor little ones,) forbid my desertion --
so saying -- he threw the purse into the chaise and was going to retire. --

There was something so very unusual in this new mode of attacking, that it was
some time before Mr. Greaves could speak. -- For my own part I was in a state
of mind betwixt trembling and crying. -- At length Mr. Greaves, who could no
longer doubt of the offender's sincerity, invited him to accompany us in the
chaise, if he was going to town, pledging himself at the same time, as a man of
honor, not to betray him. -- The poor man after the deliberation of a minute
-- sighed and ascended -- though the postilion muttered that we might be
transported for harboring robbers, and might repent it before we got over the
common yet. --

Our conversation on the way was such as might have touched the hardest heart.
-- As soon as we were upon the pavement, the gentleman got out, but not before
we had obtained the secret of his address -- The driver seeing him escape --
said -- he had a great mind to cry stop thief, for that he was sure 'twas
hanging matter -- and he was not certain whether he should not come to the
gallows for it himself, seeing as how he was aiding and abutting. In this
conjecture he was perfectly prophetic, for upon my traveling the same road in
my way to the village, about six months after, I understood that this very
identical niceminded driver, had actually mounted, some little time before, for
being detected in confederating with a gang of highwaymen, to whom he gave
intelligence, what company had made appointments to pass by his master's house,
in their return to town. -- The poor man insisted upon leaving the purse, but
we did our best to alleviate his miserable condition, by an equal present of
five guineas -- I was going to give ten, but Mr. Greaves geatly plucked me by
the button, observing to me afterward, that five, at another opportunity,
would very likely double their utility.

CHAP. XLVI.
As soon as the man was gone -- There, said Mr. Greaves, is another reason why
money should be cautiously parted with -- What a noble soul must that gentleman
possess, and yet to what deplorable shifts is he reduced -- He is a man of
education -- but it is a custom to shun decayed gentlemen, or at best to assist
them in a way that must pierce them to the quick -- A beggar who has served a
long apprenticeship to the business of whimpering and wailing -- who lies down
at the door in despite of denial, and who is, in short, a master of his
calling, feels slightly, the neglect and abuse of his fellow creature; and if
the footman hunts him from one haunt, he hobbles on toward another: but an
unfortunate man of breeding -- a poor creature whose education shines through
his rags and dirt, feels the acumen of every insult that is cast upon him -- by
the random sons of success -- in its utmost bitterness, and cannot help
reflecting severely on the inhumanity of mankind -- Take care therefore, my
dear sir, what you do -- You are now, I suppose, for the first time, in London
-- a place of various danger to all men, but more especially to those of your
complexion. -- Pleasure and business seem to lie upon the surface -- and at the
first glance neither misery or imposture will be discovered -- When you rise in
the morning, every object will be gay; and curiosity will pay the debt to
surrounding splendour; but you will be soon convinced that the fronti nulle
fides was never more proverbially applicable than to this great city. Proceed,
therefore with di^^idence, and step with caution -- Your simplicity and
kindness of heart have made me take an interest -- almost paternal -- in your
welfare; and I could rejoice to pass some time with you -- but you already know
the irresistible -- pathetic cause which draws me to town -- when that is over,
I shall be at your service -- In the mean time -- (taking my hand with a soft
pressure, which brought the water into my eyes) -- once again, let me conjure
you to be circumspect. Beware that your bounty, like fire, does not burn itself
out, by its own force -- Husband the blaze, and be sure some sparks remain to
warm yourself -- I give a great deal, to a great many -- but, as I have happily
a great deal yet to bestow, I pass the muster of my friends, whose severest
censure is a prophecy that I shall not die rich. But certain it is, if I were
to divest myself of every thing, and give the last penny to a starving
creature, I should be the jest of men, the tittletattle of women, and the pity
of mankind. -- Mr. Greaves gave me his direction -- stept'd into an hackney
coach, and bade me farewell. -- Some time after this, I paid a visit to the
highwayman, who at my departure gave me the following manuscript, which
contains some reflections he made upon the transaction at Finchley Common. --
But before I introduce this into my Legend, I think proper to take notice that
I had an opportunity to return the purse, to the person from whom it was taken,
and that person forms no inconsiderable character in the remaining part of
these Memoirs.

CHAP. XLVII.
A FRAGMENT. CONTAINING SOLILOQUIES OF A HIGHWAYMAN.
AH! family forlorn!
The sport of fortune, famine, and mankind;
Compose thy griefs, Louisa -- stop those tears;
Cry not so pitcous -- spare, oh spare, thy sire,
Nor quite distract thy mother, -- hapless babes!
What shall I do? -- which ever way I turn,
Scenes of incessant horror strike my eye:
Bare, barren walls gloom formidably round,
And not a ray of hope is left to cheer;
Sorrowing and sick, the partner of my sat
Lies on her bed of straw, -- beside her, sad
My children dear, cling to her breast, and weep;
Or pressed by hunger, hunt each nook for food,
And, quite exhausted, climb these knees -- in vain.
How every asking eye appeals at once!
Ah looks too eloquent! -- too plainly marked,
Ye ask for bread -- I have no bread to give.
The wants of Nature, frugal as she is,
The little calls and comforts which support
From day to day the feeble life of man,
No more, alas! thy father, can supply! --
To me, the hand of heaven-born Charity
Hard, as the season, gripes -- the neighborhood,
Busied or pleased, o'erlook a stranger's woe;
Scarce knows the tenant of th'adjoining house,
What thin partitions shield him from the room
Where Poverty has fixed her dread abode.
Oh fatal force of ill-timed delicacy,
Which bade we still conceal the want extreme,
While yet the decent dress remained in store,
To visit my Eugenius like myself;
Now shame, confusion, memory unite
To drive me from his door. --
-- Ah cruel man!
Too barbarous Eugenius -- this from thee?
Have I not screen'd thee from a parent's wrath,
Shared in thy transports, in thy sorrows shared?
Were not our friendships in the cradle formed,
Gained they not strength and firmness as we grew,
And do thou shift with fortune's veering gale?
Do thou survey me with the critic's eye?
And shun thy friend, because -- (oh blush to truth,
Oh stain, to human sensibility!)
Because his tattered garments, to the wind
And every passenger, more deep betray
The extremity severe -- then, fare thee well!
Quick let me seek my homely shed again,
Fly from the wretch, who triumphs over my rags,
On my Louisa's faithful bosom fall,
Hug to my heart my famished fondlings round;
Together suffer -- and together die. --
-- What piles of wealth,
What loads of riches glitter through each street?
How thick the toys of fashion crowd the eye!
The lap of luxury can hold no more;
Fortune, so rapid, rolls the partial shower,
That every passion sickens with excess,
And nauseates the banquet meant to charm --
Yet, what are all these golden scenes to me,
These splendid modish superfluities;
What are these bright temptations to the poor?
Sooner, alas, will Pride new gild her coach,
Than bid the warming faggot blaze around
The hearth where chill Necessity resides --
But must Louisa, then -- our tender babes, --
Must they untimely sink into the grave;
Must all be victims to a fate so fore?
The world will nothing give but barren frowns:
What then remains -- There stands the wretched hut
I dare not enter -- Heaven befriend them all!
What then remains -- The night steals on apace;
The sick moon labors through the mixing clouds:
Yes -- that were well -- O dire necessity! --
It must be so -- Despair, do what thou will!
-- I faint with fear,
With terror, and fatigue -- This forest gloom,
Made gloomier by the deep'ning shades of night,
Suits well the sad disorders of my soul:
The passing owl shrieks horrible her wail,
And conscience broods over her prophetic note,
Light springs the hare upon the withered leaf,
The rabbit frolicks -- and the guilty mind
Starts at the sound, as at a giant's tread --
Ah me! -- I hear the horse along the road --
Forgive me, Providence -- forgive me, Man!
I tremble through the heart -- the clatt'ring hoof
Re-echoes through the wood -- the moon appears,
And lights me to my prey --
-- Stop, traveller! --
Behold a being born like thee to live,
And yet endowed with fortitude to die,
Were his alone the pang of poverty;
But a dear wife, now starving far from hence,
Seven hapless hungry children at her side,
A frowning world, and an ungrateful frien^*
Urge him to actions which his heart abhors*
Assist us -- save us -- pity my despair,
O'erlook my fault, and view me as a man.
A fellow-mortal sues to thee for bread,
Invites thy charity -- invites thy heart:
Perhaps thou art an husband, and a father;
Think if thy babes, like mine, dejected lay
And held their little hands to thee for food,
What would thou have me do, were thou, like me,
Driven to distress like mine -- oh! then befriend,
Make our sad cause your own -- I ask no more,
Nor will I force what bounty cannot spare;
Let me not take assassin-like the boon
Which, humbly bending at thy foot, I beg.
Never till this night --
-- God speed thee on thy way,
May plenty ever fit within thy house!
If thou have children, angels guard their steps!
Health scatter roses round each little cheek,
And Heaven at last reward thy soul with bliss!
He Is gone -- and left his purse within my hand;
Thou much-desir'd, thou often sought in vain,
Sought while the tears were swimming in my eye,
Sought, but not found -- at length, I hold thee fast.
Swift let me fly upon the wings of love,
And bear the blessing to my fainting babes,
Then, gently take Louisa in my arms,
And whisper to the mourner, happier tidings.
-- Hark! what noise was that?
'Twas the dull bittern, booming over my head;
The raven follows her -- the dusky air,
Thickens each form upon the cheated fight:
Ha! something shot across the way, methinks!
It Is but the shadow of this stripling tree,
That throws its baby-arms as blows the gale.
Each object terrifies Guilt's anxious heart!
The robber, trembles at --
-- What have I said?
Robber! -- well may I start -- O heaven!
What have I done?
-- Shall then Louisa live on spoil?
Shall my poor children eat the bread of theft?
And have I, at the peaceful hour of night,
Like some maligant thing, that prowls the wood,
Have I -- a very felon! -- sought relief
By means like these? And yet the traveller
Gave what I asked, as if in charity:
Perhaps his heart, compassionately kind,
Gave from an impulse it could not resist:
Perhaps -- 'twas fear -- left murder might ensue
Alas, I bore no arms -- no blood, I sought!
How knew he that? -- yet sure he might perceive
The hardened villain spoke not in my air;
Trembling and cold, my hand was joined with his,
My knees shook hard, my seeble accents failed,
The father's -- husband's -- tears bedewed my face,
And virtue almost triumphed over despair!
Yet strikes the thought severely on my heart,
The deed was foul! -- soft -- Let me pause awhile!
Again, the moon-beam breaks upon the eye,
-- Guilt bears me to the ground -- I faint -- I fall!
The means of food should still be honest means,
Else were it well to starve! --
--
-- Cetera desunt. --
At this place, madam, we must stop -- after Benignus reached London, he met
with a great variety of adventures, all of which, were strongly calculated to
fix the assertions and hypothesis in the 12th and 13th chapters, beyond any
sort of doubt -- those adventures, are of the most interesting nature -- some
of them are pathetic -- all are full of that agonizing knowledge, which is
usually purchased at the price of a broken heart -- The manuscript in my
possession is not large, but it is in so small and close a character, that it
would yet furnish out at least six window-feat, fashionable volumes -- As I
have already got beyond the limits of a letter, (unless it had been written
upon one of those leaves, which travelers assure us, will cover, an acre of
ground) I must reserve the remainder of his Legend, till another opportunity --
at present I can only spare my unfortunate hermit, a few more pages for an
extract or two from the record.

THE LEGEND, Continued from the 685th Chapter.
I was now in the 37th year of my age, -- as emaciated -- unhappy -- desolute a
creature as ever reluctantly crawled on the bosom of the earth, -- the greatest
part of my fortune was gone -- the remainder was in bad hands -- my reputation
was ruined -- my wife was dead -- and my health was totally destroyed. The
friend, whom I most loved, and most trusted, deceived me; and yet it was the
constant aim and center of all my views to derive happiness from goodness. One
solitary 20l. bank note, which was paid me in full for a debt of 500l. was all
I have left -- prisons, crosses, aspersions, and cruelties, had driven me to
the point of death -- society became dreadful to me, and indeed my consumption
had taken such hold of me, that I became dreadful to society. I bought a sorry
mule, -- twelve sacks of common biscuit -- wrapped up my exhausted limbs in a
horseman's coat -- left the detested town, and took the road to this forest.

The ideas of a despairing mind are generally wild and violent. Mine were the
direct contrary -- I was not desperate, but I was dying; and I was unwilling to
lay my bones, where my body and my mind had been equally lacerated -- at the
edge of the wood I stopped -- every part was almost inacessible, and appeared the
more so, as the moonbeam threw a shade deeper on it -- I knew not at what part
to enter. --

Here, madam, we must make a second gap in the history, and continue it from

CHAP. DCCLXX.
Being the last of the LEGEND.

I have now been an inhabitant of the forest only five weeks -- I have got a
few birds -- my old dog, so frequently mentioned in the latter part of my
history -- a cat that strolled one day into my cottage, which is nothing better
than a collection of sticks closely compacted, sodded at the top, and carpetted
with sacks at the bottom -- I am at the extremity, -- God has permitted me to
finish my adventures, wherein every thing that happened to me in the world, or
in the wood, is accounted for -- I find I am no longer able to hold the pen --
farewell then that which has been my chief amusement -- farewell writing -- the
hand of death is upon me -- I will now hang my label on the door. --

--

-- I have been at the point of death three days -- I am too weak to rise -- My
store box is empty -- my poor brutes are falling famished around me -- the pen
(which I laid by the head of my sack) is held so faintly, that I can scarcely
mark the fate of my last moments -- I make random efforts on the paper -- and I
die -- a fatal example -- that no sorrows -- no disappointment -- no
barbarities, -- should at any time have power to drive a man totally from his
species -- the silver chord that tied the soul, to the body, is broken -- I am
-- *

* * * -- * * *

This history, madam, together with other adventures in the world (with which
at some future period, that world may be made acquainted) -- have led me to a
seclusion almost as retired from the bustle and intrigue of life, as the
unhappy author of the Legend. I intend my memoirs shall serve as the
counterpart of his; and both will indisputedly prove and validate, the peculiar
truth of these singular sentiments.

That, nine times out of ten, a life of benevolence is a life of insult and
pain.

That an unwearied attention to the pleasure and comfort of others, is
generally repaid by ingratitude from the world.

And that (in a terrestrial sense) -- tracing the fact through all classes of
life, from the nobleman in his villa to the beggar in his shed -- goodness is
not often, in this world, rewarded by such returns from our fellow creatures,
as constitute those sensations, which are included in our ideas of happiness.

The result of the whole, madam, will be,

First, To be good, would, to all intents and purposes, be to be happy, had not
man degenerated in the extreme; and had not his worldly interest prevailed over
the prospects and promises of futurity.

Secondly. That the world is permitted to exist, for the same reasons it was
spared in years which are far behind, when the Omnipotent declared with his own
facred voice that -- if ten, or even five, just people could be found, the city
(over which the almighty arm of vengeance, was raised in suspension) should be
spared.

Thirdly. That, the perversion of money, and the abuse of riches, has
contributed more to the corruption of human nature, over every part of the
habitable globe, than any other thing, since the invention of a commerce with
it.

Fourthly. That, this world (and more particularly the polished and voluptuous
parts of it) would be intolerable, to a truly good mind, and, of all possible
places of torment, the most severe, (to men engaged in society, but unengaged
in its general aims) were it not for two reasons, which will not only be fully
given in the promised histories -- but may be briefly seen in the conclusive
parts of these volumes.

But before we pursue subjects of so grave a nature, I shall beg your
ladyship's leave to offer some lighter amusement -- I fear I have made you
gloomy -- let us then instantly return to our fancy-pieces -- amongst these I
must number a little piece of poetry, wrote a year after leaving school. I
shall present your ladyship with this with all the marks of juvenility about it
-- poor Benignus thought much of robbing an orchard. His idea might be right,
but I must confess to you, that for my part, though I had a pretty early
knowledge of meum and tuum, I was not quite so scrupulous, as to this
particular. Benignus was likewise frequently insulted for this benevolence --
now I avoided insult, by the only way to escape it, either in a school or in
the world -- for I was one of their own sort, -- did as they did, and was as
thoughtless, and as trickful as the best, or rather -- the worst of them -- the
evils of life, did not seize me so soon, as they seized Benignus -- When your
ladyship, at a future day, shall read my memoirs, you will perceive too many
reasons for an alteration in sentiment.

ODE.
TO A SCHOOL-FELLOW.
HAIL to the harmless seats of happy youth!
To the smooth hours of genuine pleasure, hail!
Hail to transport -- hail to truth,
When jocund health blew fresh in every gale,
And reckless pastime spread the frolic sail! --
Backwards, dear Youth -- a little cast thine eye,
Let pregnant Fancy paint each early scene,
And pencil fair our boyish days,
The lively hope that crowned the revel reign:
Our thousand pleasures -- thousand plays! --
If these thou have forgot -- forbear to sigh:
But if thou call'st to mind -- bestow thy sympathy.
Recall the hour that set us free
From gerunds, pronouns, prosody,
Recall the bliss that throbb'd the heart,
When the glad summons bade us freely start,
'Twas heaven, and holiday --
And every little soul was in its May!
It Is true, we dealt in trifles then,
But trifles catch more mighty men;
Cheap were the baby-toys we chose,
Blithe as the ruddy morn we rose,
And slept at night, with -- all a boy's repose.
We knew not man's amusements wild,
Our wishes were the wishes of a child.
What though (for we are heirs of pain,
Even from cradle, sore we sigh,
And as the hill of life we gain,
More rugged is the road -- more sharp the misery).
What though some vexing troubles chose
Our sports to discompose;
What though the lightning of the master's eye,
The threatening tone, the brow austere,
Bespoke disaster near,
And pedagogal tyranny:
Though knotty points of learned lore distressed,
Puzzled the head, and throbb'd the breast;
Though the keen scourge -- of dreadful size!
Acutely whipped to make us wise;
The fleeting anguish never reached the heart,
But the faint cries were transient as the smart.
Soon as the sense of pain was over,
Suspended happiness returned,
The passing tear was seen, no more.
The birchen scepter lost its power,
For mirth resumed the vacant hour,
And the gay stripling laughs at what he mourned!
The soldier thus, in heat of wars,
Sunk by the sudden blow to ground,
Still covered over with various scars,
Ever well the anguish leaves the wound,
Soon as he gains the strand
That girds his native land,
With triumph he recounts the hardy fray,
Shows the deep mark, where many a bare bone lay;
And smiles at all the bloodshed of the day.
Can thou, my friend, recall these joys,
Yet cease to wish we still were boys
Think on the deep complottings of our crew,
Scheme upon scheme, some arch exploir in view,
The merry moonshine-pranks we played,
The little thefts at evening's fall;
The truant rambles we adventurous made,
When bold we scaled the orchard wall.
Where as we reach the ruddy bough,
On which the fair temptations grow,
One plucks the fruit, -- and one receives below!
Ah miniature exact of man!
Nature's full-length, is still on childhood's plan.
But brighter colors deck the youth,
Rapture and health, vivacity and truth,
Soft too are then the shades of care,
And art wants time to paint
The figures of despair!
Your ladyship will now perhaps pay a visit with me to my animals -- poor
creatures, they have been a long time neglected -- to this end we must return
to my cottage -- there it is, madam! -- very properly situated for a page of
description -- a fancy-piece of itself. -- There is so much poetry to edge the
borders of prose in this little subject, that for the soul of me I cannot enter
the doors, without indulging the vanity, of drawing

A PICTURE OF THE PREMISES.
Did ever your ladyship behold the slope of any wood more beautiful than that,
which rises by soft gradations, from the spot which my cottage occupies, to the
warm boundary of hills, which form a vegetable screen for the valley? -- every
bush is blooming with perfume, and every tree is pendent with blossoms -- the
hand of nature has woven me a carpet, so diversified in colors, and so
fantastically figured, that the utmost pride of Turkey droops even to dullness,
on the comparison -- and hark! madam -- the note of pleasure affords for the
ear, as fair a banquet as the prospects of summer afford for the eye. Murmuring
along the brake, (intercepted in its passage by the pebbles) a small rill of
water winds its way along the grove, and at last is heard, bubbling into the
brook at the bottom -- the river rolls majestically slow at a little distance;
and a stately swan (the empress of the tide!) sails selfimportant on its bosom.
On the left hand is a flock at feed, while some of the lambkins are slumbering
in the sun, and some frisking round the bushes -- on the right, the musicians
of the season are warbling in the concert, and the pauses of harmony are
supplied by the sonorous splash of the neighboring water-mill. The green sod
embellishes the seat round my hut -- the woodbine comes nodding into my
casement, and vegetation goes smiling, even to my door -- such is the outside
of my little place. --

And now I submit the matter to your ladyship -- could I, with any fort of
justice to myself, or it, have passed into the sweet hut, without pulling you
one moment by the ruffle, to show you how prettily I stood; and that neither I,
nor my society, left the town without being decently provided for in the
country. --

-- Upon reading over the description of my cottage a second time, I cannot
help thinking it would make a smart morsel for the magazines or for the next
poetical nosegay Mr. Dodsley shall think fit to gather from the fugitive
flowers of this literary land -- but as I was fearful of detaining your
ladyship, I have spoken of the matter hastily, and yet I do not think, a single
thing wanting to complete -- (when turned into verse) -- a pastoral poem --
nay, I am farther satisfied that, what with the title, the advertisement -- the
preface, the dedication, the argument, and the introduction, it would be quite
large enough for a half-crown pamphlet -- especially when your ladyship takes
two points into consideration -- first, that four lines of prose will, at any
time, make fourteen of poetry; and secondly, that the present taste of printing
is so extremely white and delicate, that a very few lines, will go a great way;
insomuch, that upon a pretty nice calculation it would be found, that
sixpenny-worth of sense, and twelve pennyworth of paper, (allowing for
fashionable margins) will, when properly manufactured, produce half a dozen
pocket volumes, at the moderate price of three shillings per volume. We will
now, madam, step into

THE HUT.
Oh force of animal gratitude! how the creatures crowd around us! we have left
them but a few hours, and they are ready to devour us with their fondness --
even the superanuated pointer bestirs himself on this occasion -- poor fellow,
he is the son of an unhappy sire, whose story goes (I verily think,) as near to
the heart as any that was ever recorded -- and yet I am afraid I shall hurry
your ladyship too quickly back into the region of gloomy sentiments, should I
relate it -- but there is a pleasure even in the anxieties of sympathy; and as
the story is now fresh in my memory, and my letter drawing to the end, 'twere a
pity to suppress it.

PASSAGES of a TRUE STORY.
-- Oh Romeo, -- Romeo, what a creature were thou! -- how courteous -- how
sagacious -- how well tempered! --

He was descended, madam, from a glorious line -- the son of a noble stock --
venerable from his pedigree -- royal in his extraction, and, to crown his
character, he was the favorite companion of a dear friend of mine who is now
-- no more. --

In one of the sharpest days, and yet one of the fairest that winter could
produce, the youthful Flavian prepared, with his gun and his Romeo, to take the
diversions of the field -- happiest of men -- happiest of dogs -- They were
particularly lucky, and it was a day of eminent success -- this pointed the
game -- that brought it to the ground -- the net was soon crowded with the
spoil, -- but as Flavian was returning --

Notwithstanding the elevation of your rank, your ladyship must have had
frequent occasion to deplore the capricious uncertainty of sublunary enjoyments
-- must have seen the eye that in the present moment sparkled with hope, in the
next rolling with despair -- and tears usurp the features which an hour before
were dimpled by joy -- this is indeed so hackneyed and universal a fact, that I
should beg your pardon for digressing into a parenthesis about it.

As Flavian was returning to his house, and Romeo was ranging the skirts of
acopse, rather in the way of wantonness than industry -- knowing perhaps, that
the business of the day was already done -- just as the winding of the thicket
meander'd into an elbow that jutted into the field, -- Romeo broke short his
step, and stood fixed in an attitude, which put Flavian on his guard. In the
next instant an hare started from the bushes, and ran trembling to the opposite
hedge-row; on the other side of which, was a shaded lane, that led to Flavian's
villa. -- There is an enthusiasm, which seizes the sportman at the sight of
sudden game. With that sort of inspiration was Flavian now seized, who,
levelling his gun to the mark (with an aim too fatally erring) deposited the
charge into the bosom of -- * -- *.

-- Mighty God, -- I want fortitude to go on! --

Flavian, madam, had -- a wife -- unhappily for him, she was tempted by the
brightness of the morning, and the report of his fowling piece at no great
distance, to strole from her house, and -- as was sometimes her tender custom
-- intended to hasten his return, not only to enjoy his society, but to put an
end to the depredations of the day. -- The sound of the gun had scarcely died
upon the air, when a sound of a different kind saluted the ear: Flavian dashed
through the hedge, and saw his Maria extended along the pathway, which was
over-hung by the bushes, and her bosom was bathed in that blood, which she now
found had been shed by her husband. In pursuing the game, Romeo first
discovered his mistress, and with his four-feet upon her lap, was mourning over
her wounds: the agony was so legible in his countenance, that if he had the
power of speech -- it would have been impossible to describe it.

The husband -- ah, madam! In these cases, as I have just remarked -- the brute
and the man are alike; since both must deliver over to the dumb sensations of
the heart, a language neither science nor instinct can teach them to articulate
-- all that can be said or done is dull painting, -- he struck his breast --
cast an eye of astonishment at heaven, and fell speechless by her side -- the
poor woman saw his agony -- madean effort to embrace him, but sunk exhausted on
his breast.

A servant of Flavian's, who had been on a message, now appeared upon the road
in the lane -- Romeo ran to him, -- leaped round his horse, -- looked up to the
man -- and led the way to the scene of death -- The servant rode away on the
spur, to alarm the family at the mansion house -- in the mean time, the last
endearments were faintly interchanged betwixt Flavian and Maria -- to the
latter, articulation was soon denied -- but she; by some means, got her husband
in her arms, and in that situation expired -- the distress of Flavian affected
not even yet his tongue -- the dear body, mangled as it was, could not be torn
from him, and both he and the unhappy lady, were carried to that apartment,
from which they had parted a few hours before, in the highest gaiety of wedded
hearts, and in the warmest ardours of youthful expectation. And now comes on
the business of poor Romeo -- Flavian fell sick -- Romeo was the very sentinel
of his door, and the nurse of his chamber -- a fever followed, which at length
touched Flavian on the brain, and in the violence of the delirium he struck his
poor attendant Romeo, who so far from resenting the blow, licked lovingly the
hand that gave it -- madness shifted into melancholy -- Romeo was still by the
side of the bed, fearful to step even on the carpet -- after this -- the fever
returned, and burning its way to the heart, in a few days desied physic, and
united his ashes to those of his beloved Maria -- from the room in which he
died no force or contrivance could seduce Romeo, till the moment in which he
was put into the coffin, and the people concerned in his funeral began to deem
it necessary to destroy the dog, which resisted all their measures, but
especially their carrying him away; at length he suffered it -- but followed
them close, and was perhaps the most sincere mourner -- as soon as Flavian was
committed to the earth, his faithful Romeo took dominion of the spot, and was
the sentry of his grave -- grief and hunger had exhausted every thing -- but
his attachment -- yet he never was heard to whine -- but, after laying till
nature could do no more, he was at length found dead at the foot of the tomb --
thus the master expired, and the servant found it impossible to survive him. --

-- Methinks I see your ladyship shed a tear to the complicated misfortunes of
this family -- I congratulate you upon it -- Fie upon the heart that is ashamed
to feel -- and withered be the cheek, that (in defiance of the impulses of
nature) is kept dry, by the maxims of fashion! -- but neither the above story,
madam, nor any other, in the present volumes, were introduced merely to excite
sensibility -- It finds a place amongst these pages, as a suitable vehicle for
some

MORAL OPINIONS.
In the few anecdotes of Benignus, were briefly shown that, nine times out of
ten -- To be good, in this world Was not the way -- To be happy.

That is -- not to be happy, if our behavior, and its consequences, were to
take their rewards from the returns of our fellow creatures in general -- The
reason assigned for this, is the only true reason that can be assigned -- The
degenerate state of maxims, and manners. --

All the evils therefore which are of a malignant nature -- all such as arise
from the perversion of money -- or turbulence of passions, are totally to be
imputed, to human sources -- but there are other evils (and some extremely
sore) that fall out, to make goodness no security for worldly happiness --
These -- (I mean such as absolutely are placed beyond the reach, or prevention
of man,) are certainly the acts of the Deity, -- we call them, under the vague
name of accidents -- they light equally on man and beast, and every thing that
has an existence; and (for ought we can tell) they may possibly affect
vegetation, and carry the distress beyond the scale that is animated. As great
proportions of that misery which cloggs the path of life therefore is caused by
the bad propensities of men -- so it must of necessity be admitted, that the
road which leads from this world to the next, is made additionally wearisome
and heavy, by the permission of some power superior to theirs. It is peculiar
to the most rational animal (as he is called), to perceive this, though he
cannot adequately account for it -- to account for it indeed has been the
labor of the most shining understandings! -- divines -- moralists --
theologists -- philosophers -- metaphysicians, and poets, have exerted every
nerve, in every age upon the subject. The most pions and industrious of these
all concur in their sentiments, and conclude with the same ideas, -- They say

That, though to be good may not be rewarded in general with the gratitude of
our fellow creatures, and that virtuous characters are commonly insulted by the
multitude (who are creatures of ignorance and interest) yet a man is
sufficiently rewarded for his rectitude (even in this world), by the endearing
society of men like himself -- besides which, -- the comforts of conscience are
more than a counterbalance for the severest sufferings -- to which are added
the cheerful prospects of futurity. --

That with respect to all those numberless disasters which fall out in despite
of human sagacity -- the answer always has been and still continues to be this
-- They are trials -- etc. -- etc. --

There is indisputably a great deal of consolitary truth in both these
conclusions. Some part of the argument however is liable to objection -- zeal
will very often run away with the powers of reflection. The system of men of
religious moderation is comprised in the short passages above. More intemperate
people, who call themselves free thinkers, have under that title assumed a
privilege, to argue very boldly on the other side of the question. Some have
contended that if vice is natural to the heart of man, it must be an effort as
ridiculous as impossible to resist it -- the shocking inference is, that God is
the sole origin of evil, and that he certainly would not punish his creatures
for yielding to a necessity in their nature -- others, madam, of our own nation
(the very soil of free-thinking) say, it would be an act of benevolence to
withdraw evil from every part of the globe -- another asserts, that vices and
miseries of all kinds are peculiar benefits, and that, to a trading nation
especially, they are the very main-spring in the political machine. There have
also been (and still are,) a set of loose pens, which (skilled in the trick of
sophistry) exculpate every wickedness in man at the blasphemous risque of
lodging the cause and fault of the whole upon the Deity; and a celebrated
Frenchman (whose genius is the pride of that polite nation) has written a book
in the seventieth year of his age, to prove, that of all possible systems, the
system under which we are governed is the worst. These deserve and meet the
indignation of every honest man. A much anmired countryman of our own, madam,
has, in a composition that contains the most poetical philosophy in our
language, advanced seriously an opposite sentiment, and terminates the whole by
declaring, whatever is, is right. -- My own opinions on this important subject
are, I dare say, like those of your ladyship -- I think every work of God
vindicable; but I do not think, some of them reconcilable to reason, by the
beaten mode of defending them. There are at this instant, thousands of our
amiable fellow creatures in the world (bad as it is) -- struggling with the
storms of fate, without finding relief in the society of men like themselves;
for it will be easy to prove, that even the tenderest and worthiest connexions
of a man fly off in the hour of necessity; nor will it be more difficult to
show -- (if it could possibly need an instance beyond the reach of any one's
experience) -- that poverty (in the extreme) is often accompanied with the loss
of reputation. Those are yet babies in the world, who suppose half the bad
reports they hear of men, are the consequences of their ill conduct: for the
fact is, that there are a pretty equal number of wretches deserted by their
friends (because their unworthiness unsitted them for what is called virtuous
society) and of wretches deserted, because their ill-luck in life drove them
too often against the purses of their acquaintance -- for I must once again
repeat, that the abuse of riches has made avarice the ruling vice -- and there
is sometimes the highest degree of avarice even in dissipation -- self still
settles at the bottom. Nor are even the comforts of conscience, always
sufficient to bear a man up, against the insults of mankind: for many of our
species are so pelted by the tempests of life, that the purest integrity, and
the sweetest reflections resulting from that integrity, are obliged to give way
to the misfortunes which crowd incessantly upon them. Sorrow treads fast upon
sorrow, calamity strikes upon calamity, and accident comes stumbling so rapidly
upon accident, that the whole business of the soul is to shift for the
necessities of the body; or to try the force of its religion, to accommodate
itself with proper patience, to bear its allotment, without plunging into the
errors of despair. Instances of this kind are extremely numerous. Men indeed
who are plumped by prosperity and indolently loiter out an unserviceable
existence, in the easy chair of voluptuousness; and women who are tied down to
a peculiar set of amusements, ideas, and pursuits, may see this matter in the
light, which their contracted teachers have taught them to see it. But the sons
and daughters of luck and luxury, are the worst judges of the sons and
daughters of misfortune. The grand amulet -- the only effectual remedy of
sorrow remains behind, and that is a universal one -- ample enough for the cure
of misery, even though misery was universal -- the prospects of futurity -- when
friends forsake us -- foes oppress us -- and conscience is cowed, by constant
adversity -- those, madam, and those only, prevent despair, and point to
felicity. -- With regard to the evils of accident, nothing but those can
reconcile them with the line of our most natural notions of eternal goodness;
and those do reconcile them to the sublimest idea that ever was conceived of
it. -- But let us turn aside from argument, and look upon life for exemplary

PROOF OF THIS MATTER.
Among other accidents that could only be reconciled by the prospects of
futurity, is the story and fate of Flavian, and his family -- how agrees it --
might we argue -- ( but for those prospects) with the beneficence of the
Creator to asslict so much morality and goodness, without any apparent cause.
In short, madam, the human soul ebbs and flows like the ocean, though not with
the same regularity. There is no purity, nor any devotion, but sometimes wavers
for a moment: believe me, there are periods when the most apostolic faith
staggers -- aye, and that upon principle; for the better the mind, the greater
is its occasional agitation. Divines tells us, it is sinful. I insist, it is
unavoidable, and I will in this case be so bold to enter a caveat against all
the cassocks in the kingdom. There is an intricacy in the events of the world
which will on the first view constantly appear mysterious. They frequently put
the human intellect upon the puzzle. We want not books, or arguments, to teach
us ambiguities; for every rational sense about us presses the whys and
wherefores spontaneously and irresistibly upon us. It Is not, madam, the vanity
of penetration: it is merely the curiosity and inquiring propensity of nature.

It was, with a propriety peculiar to the classic genius of Mr. Addison, that
he called these labyrinths of providence, that so frequently cross the lines of
life -- "a regular consusion." Let us examine that celebrated expression, and
it may perhaps lead us into a train of thought, which may throw new light on
our present subjects, both with relation to man and brute. The eye of God, (and
possibly the eyes of his angels) may see the regularity, unintangled in the
confusion. But what proves this more, than that finite can by no means, measure
with infinite? To man's imperfect vision, many events already hinted at in this
letter, and many more which might be brought into the catalogue of instances,
are not only repugnant to every moral, natural, or conscientious law (were we
to decide of them by the narrow line of human justice) but are utterly opposite
to our own ideas of common compassion. Still farther. I beg leave to advance
the matter much farther. It is a fact, (attested by the tears and agonies of a
mournful multitude) that the horrid variety of miseries which attack the
attention on all sides, would tempt the soberest head, and the devoutest heart,
in the world, to suspect that the affairs of that world were totally eclipsed
in confusion, without a single ray of apparent regularity: judging, (as was
observed above) and faintly guided through the dark, only by the twilight
glimmerings of natural reason, and natural equity.

To prove this, there arise at once so many instances, that choice is perplexed
in variety. Let us quit the fireside, madam, for half an hour, and, turning
our eyes on the active world, walk leisurely along to survey the great scenes
that are slecting before us. If it is agreeable to your Jadyship, we will make

A MORAL, AND SENTIMENTAL EXCURSION.
And London shall be the boundary of our ramble. That stupendous mass of
building, contains every thing for our purpose: perhaps, there never was more
happiness and misery crowded together, upon the same space of ground, since the
foundations of the world! In the first place (for your ladyship must suppose
yourself endowed with a power of stepping into whatever places you think
proper, during this tour) -- we will pay a visit to that wretched looking
house; and though I am taking you into those sad retreats, which are very
uncustomary to people of fashion, yet we will walk up the broken stairs, and
open the door of that chamber. Pray survey it with a critical eye. The spectre
Famine has usurped the seat of Plenty. There are seven small children, without
any symptoms of the health, and rosy hilarity, which usually attends the most
untroubled period of life -- the pale young woman, whose arm is round one of
the youngest, with one (still smaller) which she is dandling on her knce, is
their mother; and that tottering phantom of a man, whom age has rendered
fecbler than the feeblest of the children, is the father of that mother -- I
beg pardon: I have overlooked a personage, of no small consequence. At the side
of the broken lattice you behold, one of the king's officers. He has a paper in
his hand, a pen in his mouth, and his eyes are running up and down the room, in
the most eager dispatch. For once, we will dispense with fashionable
ceremonies, and peep over his left shoulder. This method has enabled us to
read, what he entitles

AN INVENTORY.
One table -- split in the left lid, and two of the joints wanting. One cradle.
A small stool. An oyster-barrel. One go-cart. Three chairs, -- two without
backs, the rush rotten. One child's chair, -- the bottom almost gone. Four
knives. -- One without a haft. Do forks -- two of the tongs broken. One fifth
of an iron poker. A box-iron. One cinder sifter -- terribly battered. And one
wooden fender -- burnt in six places.
N. B. A small tea-chest -- lock lost

-- the canisters bruised. --

December 12th.

To be carried off or sold the 18th inst.

-- Sold! Heavens! Hush, madam, -- I perceive you are prepared with many
questions. The answers are melancholy to every thing you can say. See, madam,
the good man has discharged his duty (in which we must bear testimony he was
conscientiously particular) and is going out of the room: we will follow his
example -- ah -- madam, the tears are swimming round your eye, and your hand is
in your pocket. There then -- God prosper you with it, poor woman: see if one
of the infants, is not quite taken with the flowers upon your ladyship's gown,
another faintly plucks me by the skirt of my coat, and is paying strong court
to my buttons -- the mother is upon her knees to you -- she thinks and looks
the gratitude she is unable to speak -- let us hurry away before the scene
becomes too interesting -- even the smoky air of one of the most smoky streets
of the suburbs is cheerful, and salubrious, to the oppression I felt in the
chamber we have just left -- A coach will carry us to a more agreeable part of
the town inhabited by different sort of people -- in this square we will stop,
for here is breathing-room. Hark, how the roll of the chariots, the report of
the horses feet, and the echo of the doors prepare us for the magnificence of
fashion. We are now in the very region of finery. As sudden transitions have
always a great effect -- I will now take your ladyship into a very splendid
apartment -- these foldingdoors will admit us, because we shall not look as if
we had no doors of our own; for in all cases of that sort, there is a peculiar
difficulty in getting on the other side of the knocker, which, for the most
part, is supported in the jaws of some monster, that seems to say to every
necessitous crawler, or even to every shabby gentleman -- come if you dare --
approach, and be devoured. Luckily for us, madam, there is always another
monster appears, the instant the door opens, and as he constantly acts upon the
liberal principles of Cerberus, we will give him, a sufficient sop; upon which
he will become immediately so tame that he will make the hinges echo again,
even though we were come to dun his keeper. The arts of opening a door, and
delivering a message, are sciences that would very well fill a volume -- I
shall therefore certainly stand excused for having scribbled only a page upon
the subject.

We are now walking up the geometrical stairs -- that door opening upon another
door, will lead us to another green door, which will lead us to the apartment,
where the family are assembled at breakfast. How beautifully and warmly the
whole room is carpetted, and cushioned -- We perceive at the table three hearty
children -- a lady of an elegant figure, and a gentleman in his nightgown and
slippers. Bless me! -- how the servants bow -- what a profusion of gilding and
plate! and see, madam, the youngest boy is actually tossing an handful of
guineas up and down the floor by way of amusement. I heartily wish the poor
children we have just left, had the trouble to pick them up for my young
master. If your ladyship will please to retire, I will tell you something, as
you go along, worth hearing, of this family.

The gentleman, madam, whom you saw in the morning-dress, is one of those human
beings Providence has for some wise end permitted to hold the happiness and
comforts of a great many other human beings in his possession. In the English
language he is known by the name of a creditor, the moral definition of which
term is simply this; -- a man who having the good things of this life in great
abundance, distributes a small portion of those good things to such as are
destitute; a kind of benevolence, that would reflect dignity upon the author
were it not liable to a trifling circumstance, which some will think a drawback
upon it -- for the benefactor commonly chooses to take in return a small slip
of paper, by virtue of which he can torment, and have the person benefitted, as
it were, on the hip, at a moment's warning; and in fault of payment, acquires
full authority, either to seize the body, and deposit it in a jail; or take
possession of the goods, and turn the body into the street. In some parts of
the future history of Benignus, will be delineated the whole and extensive
science of man-catching, wherein will be shown, that the slave trade flourishes
surprisingly in Great Britain, and that the traffic of buying and selling the
human species is daily gaining ground, through every part of his majesty's
dominions: and this is esteemed so curious and original a part of the
manuscript, that I expect a prodigious consideration for the copy -- In the
above work however, a proper and nice distinction is made, as to the nature and
contraction of debts, insomuch that it will infallbily prove a sure guide to
creditor, debtor, and bailiff, for those, madam, are the principal agents in
this humane and excellent art. I cannot quit this subject without presenting
your ladyship, with a slight specimen of the above sort of merchandise. The
business is frequently transacted thus: one man in distress, borrows (in an
humble tone, with his hat under his arm, and in all the confusion of want) of
another man, in no distress whatever, value fortyshillings: (as misfortune is
apt to expect a sunshiny day, even in the midst of hard weather,)
disappointment trips up the heel of hope, and the day of restitution runs by,
in which the said forty shillings remains, like the handwriting on the wall,
against him. From that moment the bargain is struck -- the purchaser demands
his property, and as the transaction is sanctified by the laws of the land, the
carcass is at his discretion: it is dragged from its friends, and so cautiously
prevented from taking cold in the open air, that it is put very tenderly under
lock and key, and bar and bolt, that it is in a perfect cage: here a parcel of
crows are suffered to peck at it, which are a kind of guarantees to the
purchaser of the body. --

And now we will go on with our story -- the gay spark who is the subject of
our present enquiry, became a creditor to the poverty-struck family whom we saw
in the suburbs of the town, by being landlord or possessor of a range of ruins,
among which is the uncomfortable hut we described. The master of that hut, (who
is at present out of the way) is amongst the number of those against whose
tranquillity the dark events of this life were perpetually pointed. -- The
consequence of this (which is pretty frequently the case) was the desertion of
acquaintances, and the distance of friends, and he was often accused of
obliquity, though in truth he seldom deviated into those crooked paths, which
justly excite agony and shame. He was unable to answer the inclinations of his
heart, and was two years in arrear for the rent. One morning the poor man's
wife waited at the door of Sophron (for so will we call him) and delivered an
apology: by great chance the porter thought fit to deliver it immedately, and
by a chance still greater, the young woman was admitted into the prefence
chamber, where Sophron was indulging the surfeiting luxuries of his situation.
Distress had not, at that time, wholly destroyed the beauty which was naturally
extraordinary in her -- she caught the fancy of the present moment. Sophron
proposed an immediate treaty, and offered moreover a purse for the relief of
her starving family. -- Generous as this might be, she flatly refused it. As
Sophron was not much accustomed to the language of denial, and thought besides,
his offer not only an honor but a liberality, he ordered her hastily to
depart. She did so, and in going home felt one of those sensations, which for a
moment relieves the sense of the worst condition, by the triumph of the
conscience. She told the whole to her husband, and in his rewarding embrace she
felt those sensations revived. But where misery is constantly shifting from one
sorrow to another, the pleasures of reflection can seldom have leisure to play
-- What was the result of this matter! -- withdraw a moment, madam, to that
gloomy-looking pile -- the common receptacle, -- the promiscuous deposit of
distress and infamy for a length of years -- we will wind up the dreadful
stairs -- alas! how does novelty give force to objects, which custom has
rendered unnoticed! the grating of the bars -- the jingle of the keys, and the
clank of the chains, I see, terrify your ladyship -- pray stop awhile, -- in
that dismal cell, behold the consequence of a wife's unseasonable chastity, and
virtue -- there lies the husband -- Sophron had once risqued, as he called it,
the loan of ten guineas; for that sum he was arrested -- and for the rent his
goods will shortly be sold.

And here, madam, let me pay a compliment to the justice, sagacity, and
christianity of our lawmakers, -- lawmakers of the most refined, and polished
nation under heaven -- who have assigned to unfortunate men, who owe and have
the least money, a residence of the greatest gloom, hardship, and discredit,
amongst wretches who have broken at midnight into our houses -- assassins who
have shed the blood of our species, and robbers who commit hostilities upon the
road. Encircled by such associates is Sophron -- his children are famishing at
home -- his wife is condemned to see the necessity every moment increase -- his
house has suffered a distress -- their next migration must be into the street
-- the plain reason is this -- the wife was virtuous -- the husband unfortunate
-- while the oppressor revels in his plenitude, though his fortunes were
obtained by fraud, and are dissipated in every kind of debauchery. Behold,
madam, the wife is herself entering the cell -- she has brought the poor
creature a share of that refreshment your ladyship's bounty has enabled her to
procure.

Heavens, what a shout is there! -- See, they are bringing in a fresh prisoner.
-- How the old inhabitants cluster round the new comer, as they would say,
Welcome to Newgate, brother! -- Pray, Mr. Jailer, what is his crime? -- murder!
-- a man was executed yesterday se'nnight under a public gallows, upon strong
suspicion of committing that very murder, which this prisoner has confessed.
There is a confusion in the innocence of some people, and a cross concurrence
of illlooking circumstances, very like the blushing evidences of guilt. Such
was the present case -- appearances were strong against him, human sagacity was
baffled, and the victim was given up to the laws -- he had a large family, his
wife is in a fever -- his son is burying reflection in the dreadful opiates of
the bottle, and his connexions are in deep and disgraceful mourning.

Yonder, madam, lies a miserable object -- unnatural parents have driven her
from home -- she is too honest to steal -- she is ashamed to beg, and being,
from the pecularity of her fate, under a necessity to borrow -- she is at last
provided for by the bounty of government, that humanely allows the wretched
just food enough, to perpetuate the sense, and lengthen out the period of
calamity. But now, we will leave the sufferings of our own species, and in our
way home, cast an eye upon the sufferings of

THE ANIMAL WORLD.
Take notice how you team groan under the burden. They are laboring in this
severe weather for the service of man. But observe their driver! hark how the
knotted whip sounds on their sides -- The blood gushes at every stroke -- the
poor things labor in the extremity and when they have surmounted the
difficuly, the sanguinary master pats them on the neck, not a little pleased
with the triumphant vigor of his arm. If it could possibly be supposed that
brutes deserved a state of perpetual punishment, a large city were surely their
hell. A few lap-dogs, spaniels, and other favorites excepted -- the general
treatment of animals is savage beyond all comparison of barbarity -- There
stands a cruel wretch who has beaten out the eye of the fore-horse for
presuming to stir, while the car is unloading; he then curses himself for the
exploit, and concludes the matter by a second blow, because the creature threw
its eye in the way of the first; and see, madam, you fellow, in passing,
carelessly drives his carriage against another that is going a different road;
and in order to extricate the intertangled harnesses both drivers apply to the
old remedy, and instead of calmly setting things right, put the animals on
their spirit, and every thing is at length torn in pieces: a fresh beating now
ensues, and the poor devils are to suffer again for what, at first, could not
on their part be avoided. Such are the general lives of horses, and such the
discipline practiced upon them almost every hour.

It is an happiness peculiar to the softness of your sex, and consistent with
the delicate prosperity of the female nature and situation, madam, that their
pursuits and pleasures entirely lay in such parts of the town, as make shocking
spectacles not very frequent, if we compare them with the more busy parts of
the city. -- There is -- I cannot but perceive -- a civilization of address, an
urbanity of demeanor amongst the very chairmen of St. James's, which we shall
in vain look for in the messengers of Whitechapel, and the porters of
Thames Street. The politesse of the court ever influences in some degree the
places that surround it: but in the city, the spirit of humanity is too often
trod under feet by the spirit of trade: and the laws of trade have, indeed, so
very little in general to do with the laws of benevolence, that in the full,
and I might say, the overflowing tide of commercial success, a man of business
seldom regards any life, but such as is necessary to push the point of gain
to the extremity! --

I must once more draw your ladyship out of the way, to take a view of
Smithfield. -- There, madam -- it is high market, and the distemper which some
time since, raged amongst the horned cattle, even to the alarm of the nation,
was mercy and providence to the usage which the poor creatures sustain in this
place. -- All that sticks, stones, and iron-goads can effect, is here effected
against those inoffensive animals, by which plenty is procured, riches
circulated, and even life supported. --

Here, madam, we have selected a few of those innumerable instances, which rise
up to alarm us. That such have often happened cannot be denied; and if we were
to take a closer survey of the world, with a view to collect a more accurate
journal of calamity; -- if we were to bring into the black account, the
miseries, both of the rich and poor -- the thousand dreadful casualties which
no innocence can help, with the tens of thousands of fatal operations of
passion, which deform existence, and agonize our hearts -- if we were to
consider likewise, the plagues, the disgusts, the cares, the contests -- the
depredations of war, and the voluptuousness of peace -- if we were to look into
the prodigious mass of miscellaneous mischiefs branching out from avarice,
prodigality, gaming, swearing, lawsuits, robberies, chagrines, murders, and
every other profanation -- or if we were to dive still further, and mention
the distressful situations occasioned by fire, famine, pestilence, earthquakes,
inundations, public tumults, and domestic inquietude -- observing at the same
time, that thousands of every race of beings are frequently pining away life,
inch by inch, and are whole years in dying; adding to this eventful catalogue,
the pangs of sickness, the loss of limbs, the deprivation of intellect, the
undeserved loss of character, the disobedience of children, and the cruelty of
parents; with the horrid havoc of those detestable appetites of the heart,
revenge and inordinate desire -- what madam -- but for the cheerful promises of
an hereafter -- what should we think -- what should we say? --

That there is much happiness, many blessings, and many people who deserve
them, cannot be disputed -- the world is in itself a paradise -- but passions
perverted, accidents permitted, -- mischiefs perpetrated, and money turned into
the wrong channel, have so destroyed its serenity, that the soul distressed in
the world, is obliged to seek frequently for a retired corner, and argue with
itself. -- These reflections, naturally lead us to the

CONCLUSION.
It has been the constant design, of the author of this letter, to examine
several facts relating to men -- animals -- and things, in a new manner, --
with this ultimate view -- to vindicate the ways of God not only to man, but to
every other living creature! -- The limits I proposed to allow myself are more
than exceeded, and the length of my letter (swelled into volumes) seems to
demand an apology. The utmost that I can venture more, is to present your
ladyship with a few inferences drawn from the whole of our ramble amongst the
fields of unusual speculation.

As the innocent man, madam, has often lost his life, and disgraced his
relations on suspicion of guilt -- as the hardness of a creditor frequently
tightens the cord of the law, till it pinches the bowels of a numerous family
-- as there are actually parents in the world which not only desert their
offspring, but sear up that strong attachment which is generally the vital
principle of nature -- as modesty, ingenuity, and honesty, are often harrassed
by innumerable cares and perplexities; to soothe which even the compliments of
the conscience are not always adequate -- and as -- on the other hand, -- those
to whom fortune has been fuller-handed, frequently disturb the good order of
society, and use their adventitious acquisitions to promote oppression and to
extend luxury. -- As those who address the Deity in fervor of heart, are often
destitute of a comfortable proportion of food -- wander naked and forlorn
through life -- and others that have food, want appetite to eat it -- while
those who never mention the Deity, but to enforce an oath, and give poignancy
to blasphemy, enjoy every temporal good -- as even the unblemished state of
childhood, when power is wanting to perpetrate intentional guilt -- as the
newborn babe frequently struggles with various distress, at a time when its
weakness calls for peculiar supports -- wanting which its future existence is
sometimes wasted under the languors of an unsound constitution -- as these,
with every other calamity I have recapitulated, or advanced, through this
letter -- and as many more than can be possibly suggested at a single view,
have, and do, actually light upon the human race -- notwithstanding all the
comforts and all the blessings in the world -- some astonishing source of
consolation is absolutely necessary to reconcile these facts to the mind. -- To
decide upon the matter (as was hinted before) agreeable to our ideas of
rectitude, we should pronounce it, without hesitation, a monstrous system,
which confounds right and wrong, innocence and error. Natural reason would
condemn it as inconsistent -- Pagan philosophy would reject it as barbarous --
pedantry would call it unfit -- poetry would declare it unjust -- common sense
would pronounce it absurd.

Here then, madam, the two comfortable reasons I have promised to give, as the
only reconciling ones, that can possibly make life supportable, or the strange
intricacies of it consistent, deserve to be mentioned. They come to us, under
the cherubic forms of FAITH and RELIGION -- just as we are sinking under our
doubts, they come forward to dispel them -- they give strength to reason --
force to philosophy, and illumination to conscience -- the wretched insulted
heart listens to their arguments, and finds them decisive -- revelation herself
steps into our relief -- she confesses, with the poet, there is apparent
confusion in the regularity of Providence, -- that the cloudy mirror, through
which the human eye is directed in purblind speculation represents the path of
virtue as thorny and crooked, and the road to vice flowery and delightful --
but that -- were it possible for men to wind with their Creator, through all
the infinitude of mazes that lead from, first causes, to ultimate effects -- to
view all the labyrinths which are absolutely necessary to connect, continue,
and complete the system, the whole matter would be inverted, and the regularity
appear, without confusion -- Thus therefore, madam, all comes right at last.

To be good is to be happy
The confusion is regular, and
Whatever is, is right.
A future life, only -- (in every instance I have mentioned, and in many that I
have omitted to mention) can make the present life supportable, or the present
system equitable. And upon these rational principles, I would argue the
essentiality of that futurity -- but not so much from the power and wisdom, as
from the benevolence of the hand that has prepared us for it -- nor is the
attribute of justice less concerned in this provision -- for -- were the death
of the body, the death also of the soul, -- the devil himself, as the system
now stands might yet want a malignity in his nature to continue it; and in that
case, the wisest way to put an end to a man's torments would be the shortest;
and suicide would obtain a sanction from common sense. The very equity and
tenderness of the supreme Power is concerned in a distribution of future
punishments and rewards -- to those attributes therefore should every unhappy
creature look up -- from them should expect the hour, in which, that which is
"now crooked shall be made strait," and every unevenness be smoothed -- when
the balances shall be poised by an omnipotent arm, and justice at last prevail.
--

Having thus vindicated the ways of God to man, I will now put an end to my
letter, and beg you will accept it at the hand of

Your ladyship's most humble and obedient servant, * -- * -- * * -- * -- *

POSTSCRIPT.
As these sketches are designed for publication, and are to stand at the
tribunal of a society of literati, who review and take cognizance of every
thing that ventures into this world of composition, I shall lay myself too
negligently open to their censure, if I leave, ultimately, the animal creation,
in the lurch -- after having all along declared so much in its favor. And this,
renders a postscript essentially necessary. Nor should I, indeed, stand
excuseable to your ladyship, if I omitted so material a part of the conclusions
to be drawn from our survey of the subject -- Having vindicated --
(notwithstanding all the miseries of good men, and the successes of bad men) --
the dispensations of God, toward our own species, let us now then, madam, in
the same transient, unsystematic manner, vindicate the ways of God, to a
numerous race of beings, no otherwise connected with our species, than by the
ties either of attachment, or necessity. --

GOD VINDICATED TO BRUTE.
Methinks, madam, the haughtyhearted man, takes fire at this -- what! would the
wicked wretch put the reptile and the rational upon an equality? Would he give
to the almost undistinguishable atom -- to the dog that laqueys my heel, and to
various monsters of the forest, and the ocean, the same prospects with man?
with the erect -- the comprehensive -- the superior? God vindicated to brute!
-- oh, infamous! blasphemous! inconsistent -- shall the ox that I kill for the
ordinary supply of my appetite, and the mule, that I drive for my diversion, be
upon a level with their master -- are they not all born to accommodate our
convenience -- are they not all put in subjection to our control, and do we
not treat them accordingly. -- I have no time to answer the cavils of
selfsufficiency -- we will proceed cooly, madam. --

Let us argue this point from the impulses of common sense -- in our survey of
the sufferings of brutes, it appeared that with a great deal less cause, they
underwent, at any rate, as much hardship as men: our inspection indeed into
this matter, like our inspection into the calamities of our own species, was
slight and cursory; but were we to set apart a serious opportunity to examine
the subject to the bottom, we should find animal misery as extended and as
exquisite as human. I admit that they are destitute of reason, and it must be
owned that a moral sense of the injuries men suffer, frequently give poignancy
to the anguish: the mind takes, as it were, an interest in the sufferings of
the body; thus a blow on the face is resented, not because of the pain, but
because of the idea annexed by the soul to such an act -- and with respect to
other miseries and accidents, the mind by sympathizing often doubles them. This
may be brought against me as an argument. It is none, madam. Even if the
sensations of animal pain were merely corporeal, they must be sufficiently
terrible, when we consider that they are molested by every innovation of
torture -- But I do not apprehend their sensations of anguish only bodily: they
have not reason, but they have something that does the business of reason so
well, that man is very often put to the blush, and is almost ashamed of the
privilege that sets him at the top of the scale. The fact is -- brutes are as
sensible of insults done to each other as men -- these they resent
indifferently -- if they do not often resent the barbarities of men, it is not
I should conceive, madam, because they do not feel the indignity, but because
the benevolent Creator has implanted in their natures a strong principle,
either of terror or obedience -- an unlimited idea of human superiority, or an
unlimited idea of his tyranny. Be this as it may; certain it is, that the
situation of animals in this life, particularly such as are subdued to the
domestic dominion of man, (and such commonly display the most amiable
qualities) is not such as can possibly make that life upon the whole desirable.
In a state of nature, where they took peaceful possession of the woods, it
might be different. In their present state of subordination to the imperious
law of man, nothing can exceed their miseries, nor can any miseries be more
diversified. Will it be urged, that a great many of them are savage in their
natures, and cruel to each other, -- that they are at continual war -- invade
the repose, property, and pleasures, of one another -- that they actually
subsist by murder and rapine -- and that man is justified in his usage to them,
nor can they upon this account fairly claim protection or redress from
Providence. This would prove a sorry argument. Do not men live upon each other
-- are not they at perpetual war -- are not many of them savage in their
natures -- do not they disturb the peace, and invade the property of their
fellow creatures -- is not every paltry trick tried, and every dirty passion
put in motion, to perplex, overreach, and fret one another? -- is not this so
general a fact, that the eye sees -- the ears ear, and the heart feels it every
hour? Is it not the tale of tradition, -- the burden of composition -- the
history of the day -- and the evidence of every newspaper -- spreads it not
over the most distant climates -- from the polished European, who seizes his
prey under a mask, to the honest Hotentot, who roasts it upon the ground, and
sits openly down to his banquet? -- and yet where, madam, is the man, who would
from hence argue, that for these reasons they must never look up for mercy, but
die without hope, without expectation -- without prospect? Rather, let them
mend the imperfections, they have been so sharpsighted to detect. If the cruel
inclination subsisting in the bosoms of particular brutes, strikes them with
horror; let it operate properly upon the human heart; but let them reflect,
that the animal never kills, but to gratify the calls of famine, or in its own
defense -- but that the rational frequently murders for sport, and inflicts
pain from a principle of malignity.

The state of animals, after they leave the present world, has been the subject
of very distinguished talents; and some have very warmly contended for their
immortality. Amongst sacred writers, Moses and Solomon, have leaned much in
their favor: amongst moderns, Mr. Lock, Dr. Hildrop, Soame Jennings, and many
others, have taken up the cause: neither have French, Spanish, or Roman
authors, been without conjectures on the subject. So that I have a sufficient
sanction, to enter the list, as the champion of so many millions of useful,
beautiful, and innocent beings.

Look, upon your Favorite -- how harmless! -- how affectionate! -- would it
not hurt you to consider, that in a very few years, the poor creature must
putrify in the dust, and, mixing with it, soon become common earth, without
hope of resurrection? for my part nothing could give a keener shock to my
sensibility than the horrid idea of universal annihilation prevailing over the
animal world -- I protest, madam, I am almost ready to shed a tear to the very
sentiment -- Must my dear Tabythyetta, -- my demure Grimalcena -- my merry
Scugypugissa -- (you will pardon me, madam, for Italianizing their names, there
is something so dreadfully dull and mechanic in the sound of an English
appellation) must all these, with that great traveller Tripsea, sink into
nothingness! -- into oblivion! into dirt!

Oh horrible, horrible, most horrible! But I see, madam, I am likely to swell
my postscript to the unreasonable size of my letter, and yet if you knew how
extremely painful it is for a man, warmed by his subject, and entertained by
his ideas -- just as that subject begins to take possession of him -- while a
swarm of benevolent arguments are pouring their honey in upon him -- and charm
him with the prospect of carrying his point -- if you knew the pangs, that
laying aside the pen, in so delicate a moment, costs a writer -- you would
certainly pity me -- however, I have said enough of this matter and every
other, just to show my intentions; and I beg your ladyship -- and I beg also my
critics may consider the whole as a mere collection of etchings -- the pencil
roughly run over them -- the out-lines just marked -- but that, the boldness --
the graces -- the proportions -- the re-touchings and -- the sinishings, --
must be the business of several sedate cautious, and careful future
opportunities. --

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.

