THE JOURNEY FROM CHESTER TO LONDON.
EAST GATE CHESTER


LONDON Printed for B. WHITE, Fleet Street. MDCCLXXXII.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE ground which is described in the following Sheets, has been for some
centuries passed over by the incurious Traveller; and has had the hard fortune
of being constantly execrated for its dullness. To retort the charge, and clear
it from the calumny, is my present business. To show that the road itself, or
its vicinity, is replete with either ancient historic facts, or with matter
worthy of present attention; is an affair of no great difficulty. Possibly my
readers may subscribe to the opinion, that the tract is not absolutely devoid
of entertainment, and that the blame rests on themselves, not the country.

WHATSOEVER entertainment they may meet with, let them join with me in thanks
to the following contributors. Firstly and chiefly, to the Reveread Mr. COLE of
Milton, near Cambridge; after him, to the Reverend Doctor Edwards, of Nuneaton,
near Coventry; to Mr. Green, Surgeon, in Lichfield; and to the Reverend
Archdeacon Coxe, of Flitton, Bedfordshire. To these Gentlemen I owe great
obligations for their assistance.

PUBLIC! smile on what is right: heartily convey correction of what is wrong.

THOMAS PENNANT.
DOWNING, March 1782.
PLATES.
FRONTISPIECE, Eastgate in Chester I. Beeston Castle Page 11 II. Tomb in Acton
Church Page 22 III. Nantwich Church Page 32 IV. Shugborough Page 67 V. Temple
of the Winds at Shugborough Page 68 VI. Antiquities at Stafford and Lichfield
Page 110 VII. Sponne Gate, Coventry Page 146 VIII. Greyfriars Gate and Steeple,
Coventry Page 160 IX. The Challenge between, the Duke of Hereford and Thomas
Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, taken from the beautiful MS. of Froissart, in the
Harleian Library, marked 4380 Page 167 X. Gorhambury Page 224 XI. Countess of
Suffolk Page 228 XII. The first Lord Baltimore Page 238 XIII. Margaret Countess
of Cumberland Page 246 XIV. View into the South Transept of St. Alban's Church
263 XV. View of part of the Body and Ailes Page 263 XVI. Abbot Ramridge's Tomb
Page 264 XVII. Castle Ashby Page 310 XVIII. John Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury Page
312 XIX. His Countess Page 312 XX. Gothurst Page 325 XXI. Bust of Lady Venetia
Digby Page 337 XXII. Houghton Park Page 381
* A few Copies are printed on Large Paper, and may be had, finely illuminated
on the Margin with Views, Coats of Arms, etc. etc. by applying to MOSES
GRIFFITH, Painter, in Whiteford Parish Flintshire.

ERRATA.
Page 17, Line 24, for Bas Bentagne read Bas Bretagne 25, 11, for
health-keepers read heath-keepers 26, 17, for Droitwich read Durtwich 70, 2,
after my countryman, add by descent 110, 6, for 4 XV read LXV 353, 5, for his
read her 356, 21, for Earl of Russel read Earl of Bedford 370, last, for
Chelsea read Oxford 381, 7, for bears read palms 383, 8, place a comma after
age, and dele the full stop after before.
THE JOURNEY TO LONDON.
IN MARCH 1780, I began my annual journey to London. At Chester some
improvements had taken place since my last account of the city. A very
commodious building has been erected in the Yatchfield, near the Watergate
street, for the sale of the Irish linen at the two fairs. It surrounds a large
square area; on each side of which are piazzas, with numbers of shops well
adapted for the purpose.

IN digging the foundation for certain houses near the street, were discovered
some Roman buildings, and a large Hypocaust with its several conveniences; and
some other antiquities, particularly a beautiful altar Engraven in Moses
Griffith's Supplemental Plates to the Tours in Wales, tab. X.
, dedicated Fortunae Reduci et Aesculapio. Much of its inscription is defaced;
but the rudder, cornucopia, rod, serpent, and various sacrificial instruments,
are in good preservation.

ON leaving the city, I passed under the fine arch of the East Gate: a work
owing to the munificence of Lord Grosvenor.

Boughton, BOUGHTON.
a suburb in the parish of St. Oswald, a little disjoined from this part of the
city, had before the dissolution an hospital Tanner, 65.
for poor lepers, as early as the beginning of Edward II. From an eminence, the
retreat of the unfortunate brave, is a view of very uncommon beauty; of two
fine reaches of the Dee, bounded on one part by meadows and hanging woods; on
the other terminated by part of the city, the ancient bridge, and over it a
distant view of the Cambrian hills.

ADJOINING to that part of Boughton which is within the liberties of the city,
is the township of Boughton, in the county of Chester; the inhabitants of which
appear at the court of the dean and chapter of Chester, and pay there a chief
rent: but usually clame and dispose of the wastes.

NEAR the two miles stone I crossed the canal to Christleton, a pretty village,
seated, as usual with those of Cheshire, on the freestone rock. Cristetone, as
it is called in the Doomsday book, was held before the Conquest by Earl Edwin.
At that event, probably, it had a chapel, or very soon after. This manor had
been bestowed by Hugh Lupus on Robert Fitz Hugh, one of his followers, who gave
the chapel of Cristentune, with the land belonging to it, and the land of a
certain peasant, with the peasant himself, to the abbey of Chester Dugdale Mon.
i. 201.
. His great great granddaughter Isabel, wife of Sir Philip Burnet, joined with
her husband in suing the abbey for this, and some other contiguous manors. It
is probable, that the monks might have taken an advantage of a fit of remorse
for some crime, or the weakness of an illness, to obtain this gift from her
ancestor. They thought fit to compromise the matter with her; and on payment of
two hundred pounds received, in 1280, the ninth of Edward I. a confirmation of
the grant: and at the same time full liberty was given to the abbot to make a
reservoir of water, and to convey it to the abbey.

IN the year 1282, FREE WARREN.
William de Birmingham had free warren given him of all his demesne lands in
this village; but it is apprehended he was only an inferior lord to the
paramount privileges of the abbey. In the Saxon times, every man was allowed to
kill game on his own estate, but on the Conquest, the king vested the property
of all the game in himself, so that no one could sport, even on his own land,
under most cruel penalties, without permission from the king, by grant of a
chase or free warren. By this, the grantee had an exclusive power of killing
game on his own estate, but it was on condition that he prevented every one
else; so that, as our learned commentator Judge BLACKSTONE.
observes, this seeming favor was intended for the preservation of the beasts
and fowls of warren; which were roes, hares, and rabbits, partridge, rails, and
quails, woodcocks and pheasants, mallards and herons, for the sport of our
savage monarchs. This liberty, which they allowed to a few individuals, being
designed merely to prevent a general destruction.

Christleton passed from the Birminghams, in Richard II.'s time; to Sir Hugh
Brower: Sir Hugh lost it by his attachment to the house of York; and Henry the
IVth, in the fourth year of his reign, bestowed it on John Manwaring, of Over
Peover, an attendant on his son, afterward Henry V Leicester, 333.
. Manwaring having no lawful issue, bestowed this place on Sir Thomas le
Grosvenor, lord of Hulme; but it passed immediately from him to John de
Macclesfield, in the 10th of Henry V. One of his descendants alienated it, in
1442, or the 21st of Henry VI. to Humphrey (afterward Duke) of Buckingham.
Henry Lord Stafford, son to Edward Duke of Buckingham, sold it to Sir William
Sneyde, of Keel; and Sir Ralph Sneyde, to Sir John Harpur, of Swerston, in
Derbyshire; one of whose descendants sold it to Thomas Brock, Esquire, the
present lord of the manor. The living is a rectory, in the disposal of Sir
Roger Mostyn: the church dedicated to St. James.

FROM hence I took the horse-road across Brownheath, by Hockenball, formerly
the seat of a family of the same name. The rising country to the left of this
road appears to great advantage, opposing to the traveller a fair front,
beautifully clumped with, self-planted groves.

PASSED over a brook, and reached the small town of Tarvin, which still retains
nearly its British name Terfn, or the Boundary, and is so to the forest of
Delamere. In Doomsday book, it is styled Terve: the bishop at that time held
it. It then contained six taxable hides of land. The bishop kept on it six
cowmen, three radmen, seven villeyns, seven boors, and six ploughlands. The
first were to keep his cattle; the second to attend his person in his travels,
or to go wheresoever he pleased to send them; the third, by their tenure, to
cultivate his lands; and the fourth, to supply his table with poultry, eggs,
and other small matters. The ploughland, or caruca, was as much as one plough
could work in the year. This shows the establishment of a manor in those early
times; which I mention now to prevent repetition.

IN Henry VI.'s time, the village and manor were estimated at L23 a year, and
were held by Reginald, bishop of Lichfield, in the same manner as they were
held by his predecessors, under the Prince of Wales, as earl of Chester. They
continued possessed by them till the reign of Queen Elizabeth, when they were
alienated to Sir John Savage, who procured for the town the privilege of a
market. The church is a rectory, and still continues part of the sea of
Lichfield; being a prebendary, originally founded about the year 1226, by
Alexander de Stavenby, bishop of that diocese. It is valued at L26. 13 s. 4 d.
the highest endowment of any prebend in that cathedral. It is called the
prebend of Tarvin, which presents to the living.

THE same prelate also bestowed this church on the vice-prebendal church of
Burton, in Wiral Anglia Sacra, i. 446.
; and formed out of its revenues an hospital for shipwrecked persons. This
hospital was probably at Burton, Tarvin being too remote from the sea for so
humane a design.

AGAINST the church-wall is a monument, in memory of Mr. John Thomasine,
thirty-six years master of the grammar school. The epitaph deservedly
celebrates the performances of this exquisite penman, as highly excelling in
all the varieties of writing, and wonderfully so in the Greek characters.
Specimens of his ingenuity are treasured up, not only in the cabinets of the
curious, but in public libraries throughout the kingdom. He had the honor to
transcribe, for her Majesty Queen Anne, the Icon Basilike of her royal
grandfather. Invaluable copies also of Pindar, Anacreon, Theocritus, Epictetus,
Hippocrates's Aphorisms, and that finished piece the Shield of Achilles, as
described by Homer, are among the productions of his celebrated pen.

As his incomparable performances acquired him the esteem and patronage of the
great and learned; so his affability and humanity gained him the good will of
all his acquaintance; and the decease of so much private worth is regretted as
a public loss.

FROM Tarvin I travel on the great road, and at about two miles distance, leave
on the right Stapleford, which retains the name it had at the Conquest, when it
was held by Radulpus Venator from Hugh Lupus. After a long interval, it fell to
the Breretons. In 1378, or the second of Richard II. it was held by Sir William
Brereton of the king, as earl of Chester. From that family it passed to the
Bruyns, and was purchased by the late Randle Wilbraham, Esquire.

Two miles farther, on the left, stood Utkinton Hall: the manor, with Kingsley,
and the baileywick of the forest of Delamere, was given by Randle Meschines,
earl of Chester, to Randle de Kingsley; whose great granddaughter Joan, about
the year 1233, conveyed it to the Dones. Richard Done was possessed of it in
1311, the sixth of Edward II. He held it by a quarter part of a knight's fee,
and the master forestership of Mere (Delamere) and Mottram, by himself, and a
horseman and eight footmen under him, to keep that forest, then valued at L10.
10 s. 3 d.

UPON the failure of issue male of Sir John Done, in the beginning of the last
century, the manor of Utkinton came to his daughters, and has been since held
by them, or persons claming under them. Mary, the second daughter, married, in
1636, John, second son of Sir Randle Crew, of Crew; and Elinor, the younger, to
Ralph Arderne, Esquire.

THE Dones of Flaxyard, in this neighborhood, were another considerable
family, at constant feud with the former, till the houses were united by the
nuptials of the heir of Flaxyard with the heiress of Utkinton. But at this
time, both those ancient seats are demolished, or turned into farm-houses.

FROM hence I soon reached Torporley, a small town, seated on a gentle descent.
It had once been a borough town, of which Richard Francis was mayor in the
twentieth of Edward I. In the tenth of the same reign, Hugh de Tarpoley had
license to hold a market here every Tuesday, and a fair on the vigil, the
feast day, and the day after the exaltation of the Holy Cross; but he alienated
this privilege, with his property, to Reginald de Gray, chief justice of
Chester.

IN the eighth of Richard II. this manor was divided into two moieties; one of
which was held by John Done, the other by Reginald Gray, of the family of Lord
Gray, of Ruthin.

THE manor and rectory of Torporley are now divided into six shares: four
belong to the Arderns; one to the dean and chapter of Chester; and another to
Philip Egerton, Esquire, of Oulton.

THE living is a rectory in the gift of John Ardern, Esquire. The church is
dedicated to St. Helen, the Empress of Constantius, the daughter of Coel, a
British prince, a popular saint among us, if we may judge from the number of
churches under her protection. That in question is of no great antiquity, in
respect to the building; nor yet of beauty. Within is much waste of good
marble, in monumental vanity.

THE best, are two monuments in the chancel, seemingly copied from half-length
portraits, included in carved borders of marble, in imitation of frames. The
figures are included in them in mezzo-relievo: the one of Sir John Done,
Knight, hereditary forester and keeper of the forest of Delamere, who died in
1629. His figure is picturesque, in a laced jacket, and a horn in his hand, the
badge of his office: which horn descended to the different owners of the
estate, and is now in the possession of John Ardern, Esquire.

WHEN that Nimrod, James I. made a progress in 1617, he was entertained by this
gentleman at Utkinton; who ordered so wisely and contentfully, says King Vale
Royal, ii. 106.]
his Highness's sports, that James conferred on him the honor of knighthood. He
married Dorothy, daughter of Thomas Wilbraham, Esquire, of Woodhey; who left
behind her so admirable a character, that, to this day, when a Cheshire man
would express some excellency in one of the fair sex, he would say, There is
Lady Done for you.

The other is of John Crew, Esquire, second son of Sir Randle Crew, of Crew,
Knight, married to Mary, daughter of Sir John Done. His face is represented in
profile, with long hair. He died 1670.

His lady, and her elder sister Jane Done, an ancient virgin, lie at full
length in the Utkinton chapel, with long and excellent characters. One lies
recumbent; the other reclined and strait laced, which give little grace in
statuary. Jane died in 1662; Mrs. Crew in 1690, aged 86.

SIR John Crew, Knight, son of Mr. John Crew, lies reclined on an altar-tomb,
with a vast perriwig, and a Roman dress, with a whimpering genius at head and
feet. Sir John married, first, Mary, daughter of Thomas Wagstaff, of Tachbrook,
in Warwickshire, Esquire; and for his second, Mary, daughter of Sir Willughby
Aston, of Aston, Baronet. He died in 1711, aged 71.

I MUST not quit this place without letting fall a few tears, as a tribute to
the memory of its honest rector John Allen; whose antiquarian knowledge and
hospitality, I have often experienced on this great thoroughfare to the
capital. From the ancient rectorial house, at the bottom of the town, is an
aweful view of the great rock of Beeston, backed by the Peckfreton hills,
tempting me to take a nearer survey.

THE distance is about two miles. In my way I crossed the canal at Beeston
Bridge, and called at the poor remains of Beeston Hall, the manor-house,
inhabited by the agent for the estate. This place was burnt by prince Rupert,
during the civil wars. There is a tradition, that he had dined that day with
the lady of the house. After dinner, he told her, that he was sorry that he was
obliged to make so bad return to her hospitality; advised her to secure any
valuable effects she had, for he must order the house to be burnt that night,
least it should be garrisoned by the enemy.

THIS manor had been part of the barony of Malpas, and was held under the
lords, by the family of De Bunbury; who changed their Norman name, St. Pierre,
and assumed that of the place where they first settled.

IN 1271, or the fifty-sixth of Henry III. Henry de Bunbury, and Margery his
wife, gave it to their nephew Richard, who made the place his residence, and
assumed its name. It continued in his family for many generations. Sir George
Beeston possessed it in the forty-fourth of Queen Elizabeth. At length, by the
marriage of Margaret, daughter of Sir Hugh Beeston, with William Whitemore, of
Leighton, it was conveyed into that house; and as suddenly transferred, by
Bridget, heiress of Mr. Whitemore, to Darcie Savage, second son to Thomas
Viscount Savage, of Rock Savage; whose granddaughter, another Bridget, brought
it by marriage to Sir Thomas Mostyn, Baronet, with the lordships of Peckfreton,
Leighton, and Thornton; in whose house they still remain. This lady was a Roman
Catholic. Tradition is warm in her praise, and full of her domestic virtues,
and the particular attention that she showed in obliging her domestics, of each
religion, to attend their respective churches. Her husband and she were lovely
and pleasant in their lives, and in their death they were not divided: they
died within a day or two of each other, at Gloddaeth, in Caernarvonshire, and
were interred in the neighboring church of Eglwys Rbos.

AT a small distance from the hall, is the great insulated rock of Beeston,
composed of sand-stone, very lofty and precipitous at one end, and sloped down
into the flat country at the other. Its height, from Beeston Bridge to the
summit, is three hundred and sixty-six feet. From the summit is a most
extensive view on every part, except where interrupted by the Peckfreton hills.
The land appears deeply indented by the estuary of the Dee and Mersey, and the
canal from Chester appears a continued slender line of water from that city to
almost the base of this eminence. To this BEESTON CASTLE.
place its utility has been proved to all the market-women of the neighboring
farmers, who have the benefit of Treck-schuyts to convey their merchandise to
their capital: a few coals also come up, and a little timber; and these form
the sum of their present commerce.

THIS rock is crowned with the ruins of a strong fortress, BEESTON CASTLE.
which rose in the year 1220; founded by Randle Blondeville, earl of Chester,
on his return out of the Holy Land; for which purpose, and for the building, of
Chartley Castle, he raised a tax upon all his estates Polychronicon cccvi.
. At that time it belonged to the lords of the manor of Beeston; from whom he
obtained leave to erect his castle. It devolved afterward to the crown; for,
according to Erdeswick, Polychronicon, cccvi.
^r Hugh Beeston purchased it from Queen Elizabeth, and restored it to his
lordship.

It had been a place of very great strength. The access, about midway of the
slope, was defended by a great gateway, and a strong wall fortified with round
towers, which ran from one edge of the precipice to the other, across the
slope; but never surrounded the hill, as is most erroneously represented in the
old prince. Some of the walls, and about six or seven rounders, still ^ist. A
square tower, part of the gateway, is also standing. ^th^n this cincture is a
large area, perhaps four or five acres in ^xtent. Near the top is the castle,
defended, on this side, by an amazing ditch, cut out of the live rock; on the
other, by the ^upt precipice that hangs over the vale of Cheshire.

THE entrance is through a noble gateway, guarded on each ^e by a great
rounder, whose walls are of a prodigious thickness. Within the yard is a
rectangular building, the chapel of the place. The draw-well was of a most
surprising depth; being sunk through the higher part of the rock, to the level
of Beeston brook, that runs beneath. In the area just mentioned, was another
well: both at this time are filled up; but King remembered the first to have
been eighty, the other ninety-one, yards deep, although the last is said to
have been half filled with stones and rubbish.

WE are quite unacquainted with the events that befell this strong hold, for
several centuries after its foundation. Slow A^ais 321.
says, that Richard II. lodged here his great treasures during his expedition
into Ireland, and garrisoned it with an hundred men of arms, chosen and able;
who, on the approach of Henry duke of Lancester, yielded it to the usurper. But
other historians assert, his treasures were placed in the castle of Holt.

THE fortress certainly fell in ruins soon after this reign; for Ireland, in
his poem on the birth of Edward VI. speaks of it as such, when he makes Foam to
alight on its summit, and foretell its restoration.

E^plicuit dehine FANA suas perniciter alas,
Altaque fulmia^^ (...) Jovis atria victrix,
Circuiens liquidi spatiosa volumina coeli.
Tum quoque duspexit terram, sublimis, ocellcs
Sidereos sigens Bisduni in moenia casiri, etc.
Thence to Jove's palace she prepared to fly
With out-stretch'd pi^ons, through the yielding sky;
Wide over the (...) of the ample space,
Surveyed the subject earth and human race.
Ta'e Ro^al, iii
Sublime in air she cast her radiant eyes,
Where far-fam'd Beeston's airy turrets rise:
High on a rock it stood, whence all around
Each fruitful valley, and each rising ground,
In beauteous prospect lay; these scenes to view.
Descending swift, the wondering goddess flew.
Perched on the topmost pinnacle, she shook
Her sounding plumes, and thus in rapture spoke:
From Syrian climes the conquering Randolph came,
"Whose well-fought fields bear record of his name.
"To guard his country, and to check his foes,
"By Randolph's hands this glorious fabric rose:
"Though now in ruined heaps thy bulwarks lie,
"Revolving time shall raise those bulwarks high,
"If faith to ancient prophecies be due;
"Then Edward shall thy pristine state renew."
R. W.
The castle was restored to its former strength, between the days of Leland and
the sad contentions betwixt the king and parliament, in the times of Charles I.
It was first possessed by the parliament; SI^G^^.
but on the 13th of September 1643, was taken by the royalists, under the
famous partizan Captain Sandford; who scaled the steep sides of the rock, and
took it by surprise Genethliacon Eaduardi Pr. Walliae, L. 749.
. Steel, the governor, was suspected of treachery, tried, and shot to death.

THE parliament made a vigorous attempt to recover a place of such importance,
and besieged it for seventeen weeks; during which time it was gallantly
defended by Captain Valet. At length, on the approach of prince Rupert, the
enemy abandoned the attack, on the 18th of March 1644 MS. account. Mr. Gross,
article Beeston.
.

IN the following year it was taken, after a most vigorous defense of eighteen
weeks. The defendants were reduced to the necessity of eating cats, etc. when
the brave Colonel Ballard, out of mere compassion to the poor remains of his
garrison, consented to beat a parley, and obtained the most honorable
conditions, far beyond what would be expected in such extremity; viz. to march
out, the governor and officers with their horses and arms, and their own proper
goods (which loaded two wagons); the common soldiers with colors flying, drums
beating, matches alight, aproportion of cannon and ball, and a convoy to guard
them to Flint Castle. On Sunday, the 16th of March, he surrendered the castle
to Sir William Brereton, and, according to articles, marched out with his men,
now reduced to about sixty Rushworth, vol. i. part 4. p. 136.
. The fortress soon after underwent the fate of the other seats of loyalty.

FROM Beeston Castle I continued my journey about two miles to Bunbury; a
village, BUNBURY.
and the seat of the parish church. This was the Boliberie of Doomsday Book;
which, with several neighboring places in the ancient hundred of Riseton, now
comprehended in that of Ledesbury, were possessed by Robert Fitzhugh. The
family who assumed the name of the place, held it under him and his successors,
till, Humphrey dying without issue, his sisters, Ameria and Joan, became
co-heiresses. Ameria's share came to the Patricks, and from them to the St.
Piers. At length Isabel, daughter and heiress of Uriam St. Pier, brought it by
marriage to Sir Walter --; who sold his share of the advowson of the church to
the famous Sir Hugh de Calvely. Joan's moiety came to her son Alexander, who
still continued the name De Bunbury. Sir Hugh de Calvely obtaining likewise the
other share of the church, erected here a college for a master and six
chaplains; for which purpose he obtained license, dated March 12th 1386, from
Richard II. on paying to the king the sum of forty pounds. It was instituted
for the good state of the King and of Sir Hugh, as long as they lived; and on
their death, for the souls of them and their progenitors, and those of all the
faithful Dugdale Monast. iii. part 2. p. 107.
. Its revenue was an hundred marks, but at the dissolution, was L48. 2 s. 8 d.
when the foundation consisted of a dean, five vicars, and two choristers.

IN the fourteenth of Queen Elizabeth, it was purchased of the crown by Thomas
Aldersey, of London, merchant-taylor, a second son of the house of Spurstow, in
this parish. Here he founded a preacher's place, of 100 marks a year, with a
good house and glebe; an assistant or curate, with L20 a year; the other for an
usher A schoolmaster, with L20 a year.
, with L10; ten pounds a year to the poor; and several other charitable gifts.
The disposal of the places here are in the haberdashers company, London. King's
Vale Royal, ii. 104, 105.


IN respect to the succession of the manor, Sir Thomas Cokesey, in the latter
end of the reign of Henry VII. having no issue, alienated his share to the
Bunburies. In the thirty-second of Henry VIII. Richard Bunbury was lord of the
manor; from whom the family of the Bunburies of Stanny, in Wirral, and the
present Sir Charles, is lineally descended.

THE church is a handsome building, embattled, CHURCH
and the tower ornamented with pinnacles. The architecture seems of the time of
Henry VII. It is dedicated to St. Boniface; from whom the place takes its name.
Whether the patron was Boniface, an Englishman, first archbishop of Mentz, who
died in 754, or Pope Boniface the First, who died in 423, I cannot determine;
for both received their apotheosis.

THE church is distinguished by the magnificent tomb of Sir Hugh de Calvely,
TOMB.
whose effigies in white marble lies on it recumbent. He is armed in the
fashion of the times; and, to give an idea of his vast prowess, his figure is
represented seven feet and a half long. He was the Arthur of Cheshire; the
glory of the county: accordingly the most prodigious seats are recorded of him.
Whether, like Milo, he could kill a bull with a blow of his fist, is not said;
but our ballads give Sir Hugh no more than the honor of devouring a calf at a
meal. His head rests on a helmet, with a calf's head for the crest, allusive to
his name; yet probably gave rise to the fable.

Sir Hugh sprung from a neighboring hamlet (of which I shall have occasion to
speak) from whence he took his surname. According to the cast of the times, he
fought adventures in the military line; and, like a soldier of fortune, first
appeared a principal commander of the Grandes Compagnies, Tard venus, or
Malandrins, a species of banditti, formed out of the disbanded soldiery of
different nations. On the captivity of king John, at the battle of Poitiers,
they amounted at lest to above forty thousand veteran troops. They lived upon
plunder; yet were ready to join the side most adverse to France. At the battle
of Auray, in 1364, Sir Hugh Froissart, i. chapter ccxxvi.
served with a considerable body of them, under the English general, Lord
Chandos; and had the honor of turning the fortune of the day, in which was
taken the great De Gueselin.

IN 1366, Sir Hugh was won over by that illustrious general, (again at the head
of the armies of France) to join him in an expedition into Spain, to dethrone
Peter the Cruel, king of Castile. The enterprise was successful; but, on the
express command of Edward III. to Lord Chandos, Sir Hugh de Calvely, and others
of his subjects, leaders of the companies, to forbear hostilities Rymer, vi.
480.
against Peter, they deserted the quarrel they had espoused; and, on the
appearance of the Black Prince in Spain, who, to his disgrace, took part with
the tyrant, Sir Hugh, and a great body of the companies, joined him. The prince
reinstated Peter on the throne, after the great victory of Najara over his
rival Henry of Trastamare; to which the bravery of Sir Hugh, and his troops,
was highly contributory. On the recall of the Black Prince, by his father, in
1367. Sir Hugh was left commander of the companies. History gives him a royal
consort, in reward of his valor, and marries him to the queen of Arragon. If
at this period he took a most antiquated piece of royalty; for I can find no
other dowager of that kingdom, unless Leonora, relict of Alonso IV. who became
a widow in 1335, was then alive. There was no issue by this match; Salusbury
Pedigrees, 72.
but by his second wife, heiress to Mottram Lord of Mottram, his line was
continued.

IN 1376, the last year of Edward III. he was appointed to the important
government of Calais. Hist. Calais, ii. 55.
In 1378, he plundered and burnt La Bas Bentagne, with several vessels which
lay in harbor: he also retook the castle of Mark, lost before by neglect. In
1379, he resigned the place to the earl of Salusbury, and was appointed by
Richard II. admiral of his fleet Rymer, vii. 223.
.

In 1382, we find him governor of Guernsey, and the adjacent isles. The last
mention we find of him, is in a cause that was to be determined in 1388 Ryneer,
vii. 576.
; after which, history is silent in respect to this hero. Fuller remarks, It
was as impossible for such a spirit not to be, as not to be active. probably
old age might subdue his enterprizing soul; for I find that he lived to the
reign of Henry IV Two visitations of Cheshire, etc. MSS. in my possession: one
in 1566; the other in 1580.
: but mention is made of the weak state of his body in Rymer's record of the
cause This satisfies me, that his royal consort was not Syhilla Fortia, relict
of Perdo fourth king of Arragon, who lost her spouse in 1388; as was suggested
to me by a most ingenious friend.
.

THIS tomb is kept always very neat; which is owing to the piety of Dame Mary
Calveley, of Lea; who, in 1705, left the interest of an hundred pounds, to be
distributed annually among certain poor of this parish, on condition they
attended divine service while they were able and swept the chancel, and cleaned
the monument.

THE Ridley chapel, founded in 1527, belonging to the Egertons of Ridley, is
separated from the church by a wood-work skreen, painted. This had been their
place of interment; but nothing monumental remains, unless the impression of a
plate of a kneeling man, against one of the walls.

IN the chancel is a recumbent figure of Sir George Beeston, who died in 1600.
This monument was erected by his son Sir Hugh, the last male of this ancient
line; who for some time survived his only son George. He died in 1640.


AT a small distance from Bunbury, I fell into the great road, opposite to
Alpram, a hamlet, whose name is corrupted from the Saxon Alburgham, in the
Doomsday book. In aftertimes it was the seat of the Pages, now extinct.

A LITTLE farther lies Calvely, long the property of that illustrious family,
now likewise lost. The place was bestowed on a Hugh, by Richard Vernon, Baron
of Shipbrook, about the time of Richard I. In Edward the IlI.'s time, it came
to the Davenports, by the marriage of Arthur to Catharine, daughter and heiress
of Robert de Calvely: in which family it has continued till the present time.

MY road lay along the low unpleasant lane that led toward Nantwich; the
prospect frequently deformed by the great fosses of the unfortunate canal,
falling in on each side of the road; for it crosses at Barbridge, and is
finished from thence to Nantwich. This was only a secondary consideration,
executed on the hopes of considerable profit in the carriage of salt and
cheese. The original and principal object was, to continue the main trunk by
Church Minshul to the great Staffordshire canal, near Middlewich, and by that
means share in the freight of the goods of the opposite side of the kingdom:
but various causes have frustrated all hopes of that benefit; and this part of
the plan remains unattempted.

AT Acton the prospect mends a little. That village, ACTON.
with its handsome new church, stand on a small rising, and command another
great extent of flat, beyond Nantwich. This place, EARL MORKAR'S.
before the Conquest, was possessed by Morkar, the gallant brother of the
gallant earl Edwin, last earl of Mercia. At that time, the hundred it lay in
was called Warmundestreu, at present Namptwich. Actune, as it is styled in the
Doomsday book, was a very considerable place. There were eight hides of land
taxable: there were thirty plough-lands; in the lord's demesne three: two
servants, thirteen villeyns, and fifteen boors, with seven ploughlands, a mill
for the use of the court ( curiae) and ten acres of meadow: a wood six leagues
long, and one broad: an aerie of hawks: two presbyters, who had a plough-land:
two aliens, having a plough-land and a half: a servant: six villeyns: seven
boors, with four plough-lands.

THIS not only shows the greatness of this Saxon manor, but that it was the
seat of Morkar, by the provision made for his support. The tenants had likewise
the right of pleas in the hall of their lord, and one house in Which (Nantwich)
where they might make salt without interruption. In the time of the Confessor,
the manor was valued at ten pounds a year; at the Conquest, at only six. It may
be observed, once for all, that the troubles occasioned at that event, and the
ravages committed, instantly sunk the value of the land.

AT the Conquest, this place was a member of the barony of Which Malhang, or
Nantwich. Hugh, second lord of Nantwich, bestowed the advowson of the living,
with the lands belonging, on the abbey of Cumbermere, which he had founded in
1113 Dugdale Monast, ii. 914.
.

THE third, or last baron, had only daughters, among whom the estates were
divided; and Acton sell to the share of Alinora, the eldest; whose daughter
Joan marrying Lord Lovel, it remained in that line as late as 1389, the
thirteenth of Richard II. when it was possessed by Sir John Lovel. It was
afterward the property of the Arderns. Sir Leonard Ardorn was lord of it in
1407, the ninth of Henry IV.

IN 1498, the fourteenth Henry VII. and in 1541, the thirty-third of Henry
VIII. it was in the heirs of Ralph Ardens. In the reign of Queen Mary it was
the property of the Wilbrahams of Woodhey, in this parish; and at present
belongs to Wilbraham Tollemache, Esquire, by virtue of the marriage of Grace,
eldest daughter of Sir Richard Wilbraham, Baronet, with his ancestor Lionel
earl of Dysart.

ABOUT twenty years ago, CHURCH.
the steeple and roof of the church were destroyed; but the whole has since
been restored, in a very handsome manner. One monument is in good preservation,
notwithstanding this church was a temporary prison after the battle of
Nantwich, in the civil wars of Charles I; but the prisoners were of the party
which respected these memorials of the dead.

THE most ancient is one in St. Mary's chapel, in memory of Sir William
Manwaring, of Over Pever, and of Badely, in this neighborhood. This knight,
before his departure on an expedition to Guienne, in 1393, settled his estate,
and next year made his will; by which he bequeaths his body to this church, and
orders a picture in alabaster, to cover his tomb. He also left to the same
church part of Christ's cross, which the wife of his half-brother had shut up
in wax, and a competent salary for a chaplain to say a competent number of
masses, in St. Mary's chapel, for the sake of his son, for seven years, when it
might be supposed to have been redeemed from Purgatory, and "The foul crimes
done in his days of nature
"Were burnt and purged away."
After his death, which happened in 1399, a magnificent tomb was erected
beneath a Gothic arch, with a large embattled superstructure. Under the arch
lies Sir William in full armor, with suppliant hands. His head is cased in a
conic helm, bound with a fillet entwined with foliage. From his helmet is a
guard of mail, which covers his neck, and rises to his lips; over which flow
two great whiskers. His head rests on a casque, with an ass's head for a crest.
Above, within the arch, is a row of half-lengths, with a book opposite to each;
probably religious, chaunting his requiem. The whole is painted. On the edge of
the tomb was this inscription, now much defaced by time: Hic jacet William
Manwaring quondam dominum de Badeleye, qui obiit die Veneris xxo ante festum
Pentecostae, anno Dni. moccco nonogessimo nono.

THE tomb of Sir Thomas Wilbraham, Baronet, and his lady Elizabeth, daughter of
Sir Roger Wilbraham, Knight, and one of the Masters of Request to James I. is
very handsome. Their figures are placed on an altar-tomb, in white marble,
recumbent: he in armor, long curled hair, and a turn-over, with one hand in
his breast, the other by his side. Beneath him is spread a large cloak. The
lady has a book in one hand; the other, like his, reclines on her breast. He
died in 1660.

THIS tomb is a specimen of the first deviation of the old form: a greater ease
of attitude began to prevail. The hands, which used to be erect, close, and
suppliant, here vary in the attitude, and show a dawning of the grace that
reigned on the revival of sculpture. In England, monumental beauty was soon
ruined by the servile copying the dress of the times; by having night-gowns
TOMB in ACTON CHURCH.
and flowing perriwigs cut out of the Parian blocks; or adding the great wig to
the absurdity of the Roman habit.

THE church had been long the place of sepulture of the houses of Woodhey and
Badeley. The vain attention of our forefathers to posthumous honors and
superstitious rites, is well exemplified from the probate of the will of
William Wilbraham, of Woodhey, who died in 1536; by which he bequeaths his body
to be buried before the image of our Lady, in the chancel of the church of
Acton, and bestows x9. to be laid out on a tenor bell, if the parish will
provide the rest; but if not, then the money to be laid out on a pax and two
cruytts of silver, to serve at the high altar on good days. He further wills,
that 12 white gowns be given to 12 a poor men; as also, that 12 torches be
made, to hold about his body the day of his burial; and that a light be over
him, with viii. tapers, in the middle whereof a bigger taper should spring out;
also, that penny-dole should be given at his burial, to every person that would
take it.

HE, moreover, requires his executors to buy a stone of marble to lie on him,
in the said chancel of Acton, with pictures of himself and his wife, and their
arms; also, that they put out xi L under sure keeping, to pay xis. yearly to a
well-disposed priest, to sing (during twenty years) for him and his wife,
children, father and mother, and all that God would be prayed for; and the said
service to be performed in his chapel of Woodhey; which priest should likewise
have iv L more yearly for his salary, if so be his heir is not pleased to give
him his board and chamber-room Collins's Baronets, ed. 1725. vol. ii. 291.
.

THE monument alluded to, either never was executed, or was destroyed by the
fall of the steeple.

FROM Acton, I went down a gentle descent to Nantwich, about a mile distant.
Anciently this place was known only by the name of Which, See Skinner's
Etymologicon. Notwithstanding the word does not appear to have any thing to do
with salt, yet which, or wych, is always applied, with us, to places where salt
is found; as Droitwich, Nantwich, etc and the houses in which it is made, are
called wych houses.
an Anglo-Saxon word for district, or habitation; and a very common termination
of a multitude of places. Here the British Nant is added, to show its low
situation.

IMMEDIATELY before the Conquest, its revenues were divided between the king
and earl Edwin. After that event, it was bestowed by the great proprietor of
Cheshire, Hugh Lupus, on William de Malhedeng, or de Malhang, a Norman
chieftain; from whom it was called Which Malhang. Hugh erected it into a barony,
in favor of Malhedeng, and honored him with a seat in his parliament.

THIS dignity continued only in him and his two sons, Hugh and William. The
last died without issue male. Of his three daughters, Alionora, the eldest, by
marriage of her daughter Joan, conveyed her share to the Lord Lovels; Philippa,
the second, to the Audleys; Doctor Gower.
and Alda, the third, to the Vernons, barons of Shipbroke.

BY these marriages, the barony became divided into four, reckoning the part
which had been given by Hugh Malhang to the abbey of Cumbermere; and soon
after, by different alliances, became split into multitudes of other shares.

WHEN entire, it was under the government of the lord, or his steward; who were
vested with the usual baronial powers. This town had been governed by a
bailiff; but the election of that officer being dropped, it is at present under
the government of the constables. It has likewise several other officers, such
as the rulers of walling, who were guardians of the salt-springs, and regulated
all matters respecting their important staple of the place History of Nantwich,
1774.
.

AFTER them came the ale-tasters; whose office related to the assize of bread
and drink.

THE next were the health-keepers; who attended to the right of the beam-heath,
anciently called the creach; and took care to preserve it from all
encroachments, or trespassers.

THE leave-lookers superintended the markets, inspected the weights, and
destroyed unwholesome meat of every kind. These corresponded a good deal with
the Aediles cereales of the Romans; as the next officers, the fire-lookers, did
to the triumviri nocturni. They had the care of the chimnies, and were to guard
against all accidents that might arise from fire.

THE town is large, but consists chiefly of old houses. The Weever, which
divides it in unequal parts, is here a small stream, and not navigable higher
than Winsford Bridge. The inhabitants of Nantwich had, many years ago, an act
for making this river navigable from that place to their town; but they never
carried the power into execution. The Chester canal is now completed from that
city, and finishes in a handsome broad basin, near the road between Acton and
the town; but at this time, it remains an almost useless ornament to the
country; nor has it, as might have been expected, given the lest increase to
the salt-trade, for which this ancient town was once so distinguished.
Unfortunately for it, the other salt-towns lie more conveniently for commerce,
and abound almost to excess with that useful article.

THE chief trade of the place is in shoes, which are sent to London. Here is a
small manufacture of gloves; but those of bone-lace and stockings, once
considerable, are now lost. In the reigns of Queen Elizabeth, and James I. the
tanning business brought much wealth into the town.

THE salt made from the adjacent brine-springs, formed once a very important
business. In the reign of Queen Elizabeth, here were two hundred and sixteen
salt-works, of six leads-walling each: in 1774, only two works, of five large
pans of wrought iron. The duty produced from them amounts annually to near five
thousand pounds: from the whole district, including the works at Lawton, and a
small one at Droitwich, from eighteen to twenty thousand pounds. The tax on
this useful article is very considerable; which it bears, as being of most
cheap fabric, and most universal use. It seems, for that reason, to have been
one of the earliest taxes of the Romans; for Ancus Martius, near 640 years
before Christ, salinarum vectigal instituit Aurelius Victor, c. v.
. This tribute was continued on the Britons when the Romans possessed our isle.

THE latter also made salt part of the pay of their soldiers, which was called
salarium; and from which is derived our word salary.

THE art of making salt was known in very early times, to the Gauls and
Germans: it is not, therefore, likely that the Britons, who had, in several
places, plenty of salt-springs, should be ignorant of it. The way of making it
was very simple, but very dirty; for they did no more than fling the water on
burning wood; the water evaporated by the heat, and left the salt adhering to
the ashes, or charcoal Plinii Hist. Not. lib. xxxi. c. 7. Galliae Germaniaeque
ardentibus lignis aquam salsam infundunt.
.

IT is very probable that the Britons used the spring of Nantwich for this
purpose; numbers of pieces of half-burnt wood being frequently dug up in this
neighborhood. Salinis was a place not far from hence, one of the wiches; but I
am uncertain which. The Romans made use of the springs, and made salt by much
the same process as we do at present. The salt produced was white. It struck
the natives, who styled this place, perhaps the first place where they saw salt
of this kind, Heledd-Wen, or the white brine-pits, to distinguish them from the
springs which they used in so slovenly a fashion.

THE Romans were acquainted with rock-salt, but had not discovered it within
the limits of Italy. There were mountains of salt in India. Spain afforded the
transparent colorless rock-salt, and Cappadocia the deep yellow Piiny,
lib.xxxi. c. 7. Strabe, lib. xx. 1057. But the rock-salt of our island remained
undiscovered till past the middle of the last century.
. The Romans were conversant in the methods of producing this useful article
from the brine Fit et e putcis in salinas ingestis. Plin. xxxi. 7.
, which they practiced in our island, and communicated their instructions to
the natives. Salt was an early import into Britain, but it was only to the
Cassiterides, Strabo, 265.
and the neighboring parts, which were remote from the salt-springs.

THESE advantages are but sparingly scattered over Great Britain: Scotland and
Ireland are totally destitute of them. In England there are several, but few
that contain salt sufficient to be worked. Thus, there are some which rise out
of the middle of the Were, in the bishopric of Durham; others in Yorkshire,
Cumberland, Lancashire, and Oxfordshire: See Campbel's Politic, Survey, i. 76.
all those are neglected, either on account of their weakness, or, in some
places, by reason of the dearness of fuel. These in Cheshire, and those at
Droitwich in Worcestershire, with the small works at Weston in Staffordshire,
are the only places where any business is done. Droitwich, and those in
Cheshire, were worked by the Romans, and had the common name of Salinae.

FROM that period to the present, they have been successively in use. The
Saxons, according to their idea of liberty, divided them between the king, the
great people, and the freemen. Thus, at Nantwich was one brine-pit, which gave
employ to numbers of salinae, or works. Eight of them were between the king and
earl Edwin, of which the king had two shares of the profits, the earl one.
Edwin had likewise a work near his manor of Aghton, out of which was made salt
sufficient for the annual consumption of his household; but if any was sold, the
king had a tax of two pence, and the earl of one penny.

IN this place were likewise numbers of works belonging to the people of the
neighborhood; which had this usage: From Ascension-day to the feast of St.
Martin, they might carry home what salt they pleased; but if they sold any on
the spot, or anywhere in the county, they were to pay a tax to the king and the
earl: but after the feast of St. Martin, whosoever took the salt home, whether
his own, or purchased from other works, was to pay toll, except the
beforementioned work of the earl; which enjoyed exemption, according to
ancient usage.

IT appears, that the king and earl farmed out their eight works; for they were
obliged to give, on the Friday of the weeks in which they were worked, xvi.
boilings; of which xv. made one sum of salt. This is a measure, which,
according to Spelman, amounts to a horse-load, oreight bushels. The pans of
other people, from Ascension-day to that of St. Martin, were not subject to
this farm on the Friday; but from St. Martin's day to Ascension they were
liable to those customs, in the same manner as those of the king and the earl.

THE Welsh used to supply themselves from these pits, before the union of our
country with England. Henry III. in order to distress them, during the wars he
had with them, took care to put a stop to the works, and deprive them of this
necessary article.

ALL these salt-works were confined between the river and a certain ditch. If
any person was guilty of a crime, within these limits, he was at liberty of
making atonement by a mulct of two shillings, or xxx. boilings of salt; except
in the case of murder or theft, for which he was to suffer death. If crimes of
that nature were committed without the precinct, the common usage of the county
was to be observed.

IN the time of the Confessor, this place yielded a rent of xx pounds, with all
the pleas of the hundred; but when earl Hugh received it, it was a waste.

THE Germans had an idea of a peculiar sanctity attendant on salt-springs; that
they were nearer to heaven than other places; that the prayers of mortals were
nowhere sooner heard; and that, by the peculiar favor of the gods, the rivers
and the woods were productive of salt, not, as in other places, by the virtue
of the sea, but by the water being poured on a burning pile of wood Taciti
Annal. xiii. c. 57.
.

WHETHER this notion might not have been delivered from the Germans to their
Saxon progeny, and whether they might not, in aftertimes, deliver their
grateful thanks for these advantages, I will not determine; but certain it is,
that on Ascension-day the old inhabitants of Nantwich piously sang a hymn of
thanksgiving, for the blessing of the brine. A very ancient pit, called the Old
Brine, was also held in great veneration, and, till within these few years, was
annually, on that festival, bedecked with boughs, flowers, and garlands, and
was encircled by a jovial band of young people, celebrating the day with song
and dance Hist. Nantwich, 60.
.

THIS festival was probably one of the relics of Saxon paganism, which
Mellitus might permit his proselytes to retain, according to the political
instructions he received from Gregory the Great Bid, lib. i. c. 31.
, on his mission, least, by too rigid an adherence to the purity of the
Christian religion, he should deter the English from accepting his doctrine. In
fact, salt was, from the earliest times, in the highest esteem, and admitted
into religious ceremonies: it was considered as a mark of league and
friendship. Neither shall thou, says the Jewish Legislator, Levit. chapter ii. v.
13.
suffer the salt of the covenant of thy God to be lacking from thy
meat offering With all thy offerings thou shall offer salt. Homer gives to salt
the epithet of divine. Both Greeks and Romans mixed salt with their sacrificial
cakes. In their lustrations they made use of salt and water, which gave rise,
in aftertimes, to the superstition of holy water; only the Greeks made use of
an olive branch instead of a brush, to sprinkle it on the objects of
purification.

Next, with pure sulphur purge the house, and bring
"The purest water from the freshest spring;
"This, mixed with salt, and with green olive crowned,
"Will cleanse the late contaminated ground."
Theocritus, Idyl. 24. Stuckius tells us, that the Muscovites thought that a
prince could not show a guest a greater mark of affection, than by sending to
him salt from his own table Pane ipso princeps suam erga aliquem gratiam; Sale
veto amorem ostendit. Antiq. Conviviales, 17.
. The dread of spilling of salt, is a known superstition among us and the
Germans, being reckoned a presage of some future calamity, and particularly,
that it foreboded domestic feuds; to avert which, it is customary to fling some
salt over the shoulder into the fire, in a manner truly classical Horace, lib.
iii. ode 23.
: Molibit et aversos penates
Far pio, saliente mica.


IN this town was an ancient hospital dedicated to St. Nicholas, endowed with a
portion of tithes, which were granted to W. Grys by Queen Elizabeth Tanner, 65.
. The historian of this place also mentions a priory, dependent on Cumbermere,
and a domus leprosorum, or lazar-house, called St. Laurence's Hospital; both
which stood in the Welsh Row, the street next to Acton; but at present, even
their site is hardly known. Here was, besides, a chapel called St. Anne's,
near to the bridge; but that, likewise, has been totally destroyed.

NEAR the end of this street stands a large house, called Town's End, till of
late the residence of the very worthy family of the Wilbrahams; that honest and
distinguished lawyer, the late Randle Wilbraham, was a younger brother of the
late owner, and, with unblemished reputation, raised a vast fortune by his
profession. For several years before his death, he retired from business, and
enjoyed the fruits of his labors in an hospitable retirement.

THE church is a very handsome pile, in form of a cross, with an octagonal
tower in the center. The east and west windows are filled with elegant tracery.
The roof of the chancel is of stone, adorned with pretty sculpture. The stalls
are neat. Tradition says, that they were brought, at the dissolution, from the
abbey of Vale Royal.

THE only remarkable tombs are, a mutilated one of Sir David Cradoc in armor,
with three gerbs on his breast for his coat of arms. The other is to John
Maisterson and his wife, engraven on a large slab, and dated 1586. The
following quaint epitaph records the good intentions of the husband: NANTWICH
CHURCH
Within this fading tomb, vaulted, lies
" John Maisterson, and Margaret his wife;
"Whose souls do dwell above the moving skies,
"In paradise with God, the Lord of lyffe.
"This John wrought means to build this Namptwich town,
"When fire her face had fret and burnde her down."


THIS town was the only one in the county which continued firm to the parliament
from the beginning to the end of the civil wars. It underwent a severe siege in
January 1643, by Lord Biron; who, after the signal defeat he here experienced
from the army commanded by Sir Thomas Fairfax Rushworth II. part iii. 302.
, on the 25th of that month retired with his shattered forces to Chester. The
place was defended only by mud-walls and ditches, formed in a hasty manner by
the inhabitants and country people; who were highly incensed at some cruel and
impolitic treatment they had met with from the royalists. The garrison defended
themselves with great obstinacy. The most remarkable attack was on the 18th of
January, when the besiegers were repulsed with great loss. Among the slain on
their side, was the famous Captain Sandford; who again employed the eloquence
of his pen, but to as little purpose as he did before at Hawarden. On each
occasion Tour in Wales, vol. i.
he maintains the same style.

To the Officers, Soldiers, and Gentlemen in Namptwyche, these.
YOUR drum can inform you, Acton church is no more aprison, but now free for
honest men to do their devotions therein; wherefore be persuaded from your
incredulity, and resolve God will not forsake his anointed. Let not your zeal
in a bad cause dazzle your eyes any longer; but wipe away your vain conceits,
that have too long let you into blind errors. Loath I am to undertake the
trouble of persuading you into obedience, because your erroneous opinions do
most violently oppose reason amongst you; but, however, if you love your town,
accept of quarter; and if you regard your lives, work your safeties by yielding
your town to Lord Byron, for his Majesty's use. You see now my battery is
fixed; from whence fire shall eternally visit you, to the terror of the old,
and females, and consumption of your thatched houses. Believe me, gentlemen, I
have laid by my former delays, and am now resolved to batter, burn, storm, and
destroy you. Do not wonder that I write unto you, having officers in chief
above me: it is only to advise you, because I have some friends amongst you, for
whose safety I wish you to accept of my Lord Byron's conditions; he is
gracious, and will charitably consider of you. Accept of this as a summons,
that you forthwith surrender the town; and by that testimony of your fealty to
his Majesty, you may obtain favor. My firelocks, you know, have done strange
feats, both by day and night; and hourly we will not fail in our private visits
of you. You have not as yet received mine alarms; wherefore expect suddenly to
hear from my battery and approaches before your Welsh Row.

This 15th of January, 1643. Tho. Sandford, Captain of Firelocks.


GENTLEMEN,
LET these resolve your jealousies concerning our religion: I vow by the faith
of a Christian, I know not one Papist in our army; and, as I am a gentleman, we
are no Irish, but true-born English, and real Protestants also, born and bred.
Pray mistake us not, but receive us into your fair esteem. I know we intend
loyalty to his Majesty, and will be no other but faithful in his service. This,
Gentlemen, believe, from

Yours, Tho. Sandford.
January 15.

AMONG many other prisoners of distinction taken by Sir Thomas Fairfax, was
Colonel George Monk, in aftertimes the famous instrument of the restoration of
Charles II. Fairfax was so well acquainted with his merit, that he was
determined that he never should have an opportunity of exerting his courage
again in the royal cause. He sent him up to London, where he was committed
prisoner to the Tower, and confined near four years. On his release he joined
the parliament; but, through a sense of honor, declined acting against his old
master: and employed his sword against the Irish rebels, in which service he
was engaged till after the death of the King.

Nantwich was the residence of the widow of the great Milton, during the latter
part of her life. Life of Milton by Bishop Newton. She died in a very advanced
age, in March 1726.
She was the daughter of Mr. Minshul, of Stoke, in this neighborhood. The poet
married her in the fifty-third or fifty-fourth year of his age, wanting, in the
season of his infirmities, assistance from a dearer relation than that of
domestics. I fear that he was disappointed; for she is said to have been a lady
of most violent spirit. Yet she maintained a great respect for his memory; and
could not bear to hear the least imputation of plagiarism ascribed to him. She
used to say, that he stole from nobody but the muse who inspired him; and that
muse was God's grace, and the Holy Spirit, which visited him nightly. She
probably had heard him say as much, in the composition of his invocation to
Urania, in his 7th book: -- upled by THEE,
Into the heaven of heavens I have presumed,
An earthly guest, and drawn empyreal air,
THY tempting.


And again, with greater force, More safe I sing with mortal voice, unchanged
To hoarse or mute, though fallen on evil days,
On evil days though fallen, and evil tongues;
In darkness and with dangers compassed round,
And solitude; yet not alone, while THOU
VISIT'ST MY SLUMBERS NIGHTLY.


I CONTINUED my journey along the London road, flat, tedious, and heavy. At the
fourth stone lies, a little out of the way, Wibbunbury, a small village,
supposed to have taken, its name from Wibba, second king of the Mercians, who
died in 615. The manor was anciently in the great family of the Praers. Sir
Robert de Praer gave it to his son Richard, about the reign of King John, upon
condition of rendering to the heirs of his elder brother two barbed arrows
yearly, on the feast of St. Peter and St. Paul, in lieu of all other services.
But the Praers remitted all their right in this manor, and the patronage of the
church, to the bishop of Litchfield and Coventry, in 1276, the fifth of Edward
I. and the bishops continued to be lords of the manor till the second of Queen
Elizabeth; about which time it was alienated: but the bishops still continue
patrons of the church.

THERE had been, in much earlier times, a family in this place which took their
name from it; for Richard de Wibbunbury was sheriff of Cheshire in 1233.
Whether the Praers ever assumed that name, is uncertain. It is probable, that
the Richard abovementioned was the same with the sheriff, and took the addition
on receiving the place from his father.

THIS village was formerly surrounded with gentlemen's seats. Among those was
Lee, the residence of a family of the same name; from which were descended the
Lees, earls of Litchfield, derived from Benedict, a son of this house, who made
a settlement at Quarendon, in Buckinghamshire, in the beginning of the reign of
Edward IV.

THE church is a very handsome building, embattled and pinnacled: the tower
lofty; the roof is timbered on the inside, and carved with the arms of the
various benefactors. Part of the church was taken down in 1591; at which time
many of the monuments were destroyed: of those remaining, are several in memory
of the Delves of Doddington. The most ancient is a large altar-tomb of
alabaster, with the figures of a father, and son, and lady, engraven on the
stone: at the feet of each is a dog, and beneath, a dolphin: on the front of
the tomb, several figures, their progeny. The persons represented are Sir John
Delves, his son John, and his wife Ellen, daughter of Ralph Egerton, of
Wrinehill, in the county of Stafford; for which, probably on account of
consanguinity, a dispensation was granted in 1439 Collin's Baronet. ed. 1720,
p. 300.
.

SIR John was in high favor with Henry VI. and enjoyed several lucrative posts
under him. This he repaid with the most faithful adherence, raised forces in
his support, and lost his life valiantly fighting, in the fatal field at
Tewkesbury, on Saturday, May the 4th, 1471. His son, with numbers of persons of
distinction, took refuge in the abbey. The furious Edward pursued them, with
his drawn sword, into the church Stow's Annals, 424.
; but was opposed by a resolute priest, who for the present diverted his
vengeance by listing up the host, interposing the sacred mystery, and denied
him admittance till he obtained a promise of pardon; depending on the king's
word, they neglected making their escape, and continued in the sanctuary till
the Monday, when the relentless monarch caused them to be drawn out and
beheaded, according to the custom of the times, without any process. The bodies
of this unfortunate pair were at first buried at Tewkesbury Leland Itin. vi. 88.
, but afterward translated to this place; where their remains lie, with the
following inscription:

Hic jacet Johannes Delves, miles, et Elena uxor ejus, nec non Johannes Delves,
armiger, filius et here is predicti Johis. qui quidem Johannes, miles obiit
quarto die Maii, anno Dni. MCCCCLXXI. quorum animabus propitietur Deus. Amen.

Ralph, the second son of Sir John, and his wife Catharine, are represented on
a tomb by two brass plates. The inscription imports, that he died the 11th
March, 1513.

THE tomb of Sir Thomas Smith, of the Hough, in this parish, and his lady, is
magnificent in its kind. Sir Thomas lies beneath a canopy, supported by four
pillars of the Ionic order, of white marble, gilt and painted. He is
represented recumbent and armed, with his gauntlets lying at his feet: his hair
long, curled, and flowing: his visage bearded and whiskered. His lady ( Anne,
daughter of Sir William Brereton) has a fashionable fore-top, a great ruff, and
extended hood. Sir Thomas died on the 21st of December 1614; and his relict
erected this monumental compliment.

ON getting into the great road, I passed on the left the site of the ancient
seat of Lee, and an iron forge.

A LITTLE farther stood the ancient seat of Doddington, originally belonging to
a family of the same name; but in the reign of Edward II. passed to the Praers:
in 1352, the twenty-sixth of Edward III. to the Brescies, by marriage with the
heiress of the house: but in the thirtieth of the same reign, John Brescie,
with Margaret his wife, alienated it to John Delves, of Delveshall in
Staffordshire, one of the four renowned 'squires who distinguished themselves
under the Lord Audley, at the battle of Poitiers. Sir John Berniers, Lord
Bourchier, the noble translator of Froissart, relates the deed with all the
simplicity of the original. But when Lord James Audeley saw that should needs
fight (he said to the Prince) I have always served truly my lord your
father, and you also, and shall do as long as I live. I say this, because I
made ones a vow, that the first battle that other the King your father, or
any of his children, should be at, how that I wulde be one of the first
setters on, or else to dye in the sail. Therefore I require your Grace, as in
reward for any servyce that ever I did to the King your father, or to you,
that you will gyve me license to depart fro' you, and to set up my self there,
as I may accomplish my vow. The Prince, according to his desire (and said)
Sir James, God gyve you this day that grace to be the best Knight of all
others, and to take him by the hand. Than the Knight departed fro the Prince,
and went to the foremost front of all the batayles all, only accompanied with
four Squyers, who promised not to sail him. This Lord James was a right sage
and a valiant knight, and by him was much of the hooste ordained and governed
the day before. -- The Lord James Audeley, with his four Squyers, was in the
front of that battle, and these did marvels in arms; and by great prowes, he
came and fought with Sir Arnolde Dandrchen, under his own banner; and there
they fought long together, and Sir Arnolde was there sore handled. -- And there
was Sir Arnolde Dandrchen taken prisoner by other men than by Sir James Audeley
or his four Squyers; for yt day he never took prisoner, but always fought
and went on his enemies. -- On the English part, the Lord James Audeley,
with the aid of his four Squyers, fought always in the chyefe of the
battle: he was sore hurt in the body, and in the vysage. As long as his
breath served him he fought: at last, at the end of the battle his four
Squyers took and brought him out of the field, and laid him under a hedge
side, for to refreshe him. And they unarmed him, and bound up his wounds as
well as they could. -- After the battle, the Prince demanded of the Knights
that were about him, for the Lord Audley, if any knew any thing of him. Some
Knights yt were there answered and said, Sir, he is sore hurt, and lies in a
litter here beside; by my faith, said the Prince, of his hurts I am right
forye, go and know if he may be brought hider, or else I will go, and se him
there, as he is. Than two Knights came to the Lord Audeley (and said) Sir,
the Prince desires greatly to see you: outher ye must go to him, (...) el^ he
will come to you. A, Sir, said the Knighte, I thank the Prince when he
thinks on so pore a knight as I am, then he called eight of his servanntes,
and caused them to here him (...) lytter to the place where was the Prince.
Than the (...) took him in his arms and kyst him, and made him (...) at ch^ar,
and said, Sir James, I ought greatly to honor you, for by your valiance ye have
this day achyved ye grace and renown of us al, and ye are reputed for the most
valyant of al others. I retain you for ever to be my knight, with five hun^ed
ma^es of yearly revenues. When Sir James Audeley was brought to his lodging,
then he send for Sir Peter (...), his brother, and for the Lord Bartylemawe
of Bren^, the Lord Stephanne of Goutenton, the Lord of Wylly, and the Lord
Rasse Perres: all these were of his lynage: and than he called before them his
four Squyers, that had (...) him that day well and trewlye: than he said
to the Hyde Lords, Syrs, it has pleased my Lord the Prince to g^ve ^e five
hundred marks of revenues by year; for the which gift I have done him but
small servyce with my body. (...), behold here these four Squyers, who has
always served (...) truly, and especyally this day: that honor that I have
is by there valyantnesse, wherefore I well 'eward them: I gyve and resign into
their (...) the gift that my Lord ye Prince (...) me of five hundred mark of
yearly revenues, to (...) and their heirs for ever. I clearly disheryte me
there (...) and inh^ryte there ^ythout any rebel or condyryon Chapter clxii. clxv.
clxvii.
.

I HAVE dwelt the longer on this account of the Lord Audley, (...) only as his
history is so mingled with that of his four 'squires, (...), Dut^ Fe^churst,
and Hawkeston; but because all five were Cheshire mer^ the 'squires, by
attachment; following their neighbor to the (...) of military glory. I must
add, that their gallant leader enjoined them, as a further proof of his esteem,
to bear in some part of their coa^ of arms, his own proper achievement gu^, a
fret d^or Dr. Gowe^ Material, (...) 47.
; which the families constantly re^ned.

THE statues of Lord Audley and his four 'squires, cut in stone, are still
preserved at Doddington Hall. Doctor Gower supposes that of Lord Audley to have
seen original; the others to have been made in the reign of Queen Elizebeth,
when the late man^o^ was (...).

SIR John (for he was knighted by Edward III.) was distinguished by several
marks of royal favo^ had the wardship of the Duchess of Bre^g^e: was
constituted one of the justices of the King's Bench, and had ^cence to embattle
his house at Doddington. He beque^ced his body to be buried in the church of
St. James, ^t Audley in Staffordshire, and, dying on the 16th of August 1309,
was interred there, according to his desire. Near him, in the same church, were
deposited the remains of his illustrious patr^n.

Audley lies a very few miles to the north-east of Doddington, seated on the
top of (...) ill, on the road between Nantwich (...) (...). A reveren^ed
curiosity led me once to visit the ^^ques of theose her^es. These of the Lord
Audley ^e beneath a ^ain altar-tomb, formerly having his figure on the slab,
engraven on a small brass plate.

His 'squire is perpetuated in a more ostentatious manner, and ^resented in
alaba^er, at full length, with his coat of arms on his breast. The inscription
is lost.

ONE of the residences of the Audleys was at this village: from which they took
their name. A farm occupies the site of their ^use; but in latter times they
inhabited Heleigh Castle, about (...) miles distant.

THE L^s had many privileges he^; such as court-lect, tumprel, and gallows: nor
could any one ^rrest a person here, except (...) officer of the manor. These
estates passed, by marriage of Sir ^n T^uchet, to Joan, daughter of the great
Lord Audley, and (...)nd coheir of his son Nicholas. George Touchet, Lord
Audley, sold it, in 1577, to Sir Gilbert Gerrard; from whose fa^ly it descended
to the Fleetwoods; and in this century was lost (...) single night by the cast
of a die.

THERE is a particularity in the situation of the house of Har(...)nd, adjacent
to this parish, which I cannot forbear men^ng Whenever the family go to church
(which is that of (...)) thev (...) out of the province of Canterbury into that
of (...) pass through two counties, viz. Staffordshire and Cheshire; (...)hes,
Woolsta^ Audley, and Lawton; three constable(...) T^s^l, Chell, and Lawton two
hundreds, Pirchill and (...) and two dioceses, L^tchfield and Chester.

^gton continued in the family of the Del^es till the present (...) when, by
the failure of issue male, in descended to the (...) of ^ghton in the county of
Stafford, by virtue of the (...) of Sir Br^an Broughton, in the ^ear 1700, with
Elezabeth, daughter of Sir Thomas delve^, Baronet. The house is feated in a
yark, wa^ed on one side by a large mere; with a small Hand, o(...)ted with an
elegant rotundo. The present owner, Sir Themes Bryghton, is now building a new
house, in a magnificent (...), and (...) a far more ^greeable situation, at the
head of the (...) a^ some distance from the old mansion. The ancient house was
fo^fied, and garrisoned during the civil wars; and taken and retaken in the
course of the contest.

^TER, ^av^ling about there miles surther, in the same tedious ^e, a p^o^ of
SHROPSHIRE presents a hilly front, W(...).
and inter^cts (...) read. On the top of the ascent lies Wore, or Oar, a ^m^e^
of a few houses, with a small chapel, dependent on the rectory of Mucciesten,
in the county of Stafford. Old Stow in^o^ms us that Ran^alph Woolley, of
London, merchant-taylor, left to the reader of the place L5 for freely
instructing the children of the inhabitants of this parish.

FROM W^ I qu^ted, for the sake of a small digression, the London road, and at
about two miles distance enter, at Bearston(...) county of STAFFORD This county
as well as Ch^r^, was the seat of the Cornavil, and was in S^ times par of the
Mer^n Kin^lo(...) its ^hn ^rants what Bid ca^d the Middle Engl^en.
.

A LI^TL^ father stands V^ccl^sion, (...)
a small village, seated on a (...) sing ground. The church, ^dicated to Si.
Mary, a rectory in the gift of John Crew, h^quire, of Crew, lord of the manor.
I(...) the twentie^ of the Cono^or, it wat held by Kenning, one of the Ty^nes
it afterward was possessed by the Morgans, (...) (...) west country, till
about the first of Queen Elizabeth; when (...) sold by Robert Morgan, Esquire,
to Sir Thomas Ossley, (...) Lord Mayor of London in 1556; whom Fuller calls the
(...) of that city, not for his low stature, but high charity.

FROM the tower of the church, BATTLE OF BLOREHEATE.
Margaret of Anjou the faithful (...) spirited consort of Henry VI. saw the
fierce battle of Blore^^^^, fatal to the cause of her meek husband, then at
Coleshill. ^^chard Nev^l, Earl of Salusbury, commanded the Yorkists: he was
(...) time on his march from Middleham Castle, with four or five thousand men,
under pretense of settling with the King the (...), of the two houses.
Margaret, fearing for her husband's (...) directed Lord Audley to intercept him
on the way. He (...) himself on Bloreheath, with ten thousand troops, collected
(...) C^^shire and Shropshire, who^e chieftains were distinguished by silver
swans, the badges of their young prince. Salusbury, (...) the disparity of
numbers, determined to stand (...) of the day, but wisely had recourse to
stratagem. He (...) at night on the banks of a rivulet, not broad, but (...)
and in the morning pretended a retreat; Audley follow^^^ him with the impetuous
valor natural to himself and the (...) Salusbury made an instant attack on the
divided forces of (...). The field was long disputed, with the animo^^^ (...)
usual in civil feuds, Audley sell, with two thousand four (...) of his troops,
chiefly the flower of the Cheshire gentry; (...) led them to the front of the
battle. A great (...) marks the spot of their leader's death. The Queen fled
(...) Castle. Salusbury joined the Duke of York at Ludlow. (...) commemorates
the slaughter of the day, and preserves the names of the Cheshire heroes; for
the county listen (...) both banners. -- The earl,
As hungry in revenge, there made a ravenous spoil.
There Du^ton, D^ton; kills; a Do^e does kill a Done;
A B^th, a Do (...) and Leigh by Leigh is overthrown;
(...) against a (...) does stand;
A Tr^^^beck fights with a Trcu^^beck hand to hand;
There M^lineux does make M^lineux to die;
And Egerton the strength of Egerton does try.


I RETURNED into the great road by Winnington forge and Wil^^^^ edge wells. The
last were once in high esteem for their fanative waters, strongly impregnated.
with sulphur. They were formerly much frequented on account of bathing and
drinking. A house for the reception of patients was built, and a bath enclosed,
but it present the waters (which to look and cast differ not from common) are
entirely deserted.

I RE-ENTERED the London road on Maer Heath, (...)
in the parish of Maer, or M^^^ so styled from a large piece of water, the head
of the r^ver Tern, which flowing through Shropshire, falls into the (...) three
miles below Shrewsbury. Maer and Aston, an ad^^ce^^ manor, were on the Conquest
divided between William de Maer and Robert Stafford. Some centuries afterward,
a Stafford changed his part of Maer, with Ralph, the son of John M^^^^esfield;
by which it came into that family, who sold it to John Lord Chetwynd.

THIS parish is remarkable for Saxon antiquities. On a hill is an ancient
^ortress or strorng hold, (...)
composed of two deep ditches and (...), formed chiefly of stone, the precinct
not of any regular shape, for the fosses conform to the shape of the hill; as
(...) usual with the Britons and the earlier Saxons. Two of the ^^^ers project
naturally, and form a species of bastions. The ^^^^ance was on the side next
the present road. The approach is very visible: it crept up the steep sides;
divided (...) midway, one branch took to the left and the other to the (...)
Near this place finished his course Osred, the licentious ^^ng of the
Northumbrians; a despiser of monks and corrupter of ^ans ^lain in battle in
716, at Mear, in the bloom of youth. (...) sortress is called the Bruss,
corruptly from Burgh. It seems (...) been cast up by Kindred, king of Mercia,
against the invasion of the former. Kindred probably gave his antagonist the
(...) funeral honors, and interred him, and his officers, with the respect due
to their rank. Tumuli, or barrows, some round, BARROWS.
others oblong are scattered over the neighboring hills and heath. Un^^^ the
large conical hill, called Coplow, might, be deposited the corpse of Osred;
beneath the others, those of his unfortunate followers. I must not pass over in
silence the Camp-hills, notwithstanding the name has outlived the vestiges of
entrenchments; (...) does any tradition of the possessor remain. Shall we
suppose (...) to be Osred, who might have been there before his defeat?

THIS country is gravelly, full of commons and low hills, en^^^^ly covered with
heath; which still give shelter to a few black (...) and red. The mention of
the vegetable reminds me, HEATH ^^ED (...).
(...) a century ago it was sometimes made use of instead (...) a practice
continued to this day in some of the He^^^^^.

(...) Hatton and Swinerton heaths. SWINERTON.
The last in a parish and (...) of the same name, owned, from the Conquest to
the reign of Henry VIII. by the Swinertons. Their ancestor was called (...) who
held the estate from Robert de Stafford; who, at the time of the general
survey, possessed in this county alone eighty-one manors This family produced
numbers of knights; and, among them, Roger de (...) had the honor of being
summoned to parliament in the reign of Edward III. He seems to have been favored
in those reigns. In that of the first Edward (...) obtained free (...) for his
manor, and got the privilege of a market and a fair to be held there. In the
reign of Edward II. he was appointed governor of Stafford; afterward, of the
important castle of Ha^ch, in Marionethshire; and was made constable of the
Tower of London. In that of his successor, besides the honor above recited, he
was made a bannere^; and had for his several services as assignation out of the
exchequer, of an hundred and forty-five pounds thirteen shillings and eight
pence. In the reign of Henry VIII. this manor of Swinerton passed into the
family of the Fitzherberts, by the marriage of the youngest daughter of
H^^^^^^y, left male heir of the line, to William Fitzherbert of Norbury; in
which name it still continues.

THE church, and ^eat of Mr. Fitzherbert command a vast view into
Worcestershire and Shropshire. In the first is a tomb of a cros-legged knight;
and a plain altar-tomb, inscribed Deminus de Swinerton and Ellen uxor ejur.

IN the school-house is placed the colossal figure of our SAVIOR, sitting. He
is represented as if after the resurrection, showing the wound in his side to
the incredulous disciple. It was found under ground, near the place it now
occupies; and seems to have been buried in the reforming times, to preserve it
form the rage of the image-breakers.

(...) the house is a very fine full-length portrait of Sir John Fitz^^^^^,
Knight.

(...) descending a hill, I reached Darlaston, DARLASTON.
a village on the (...) Near this place, on the summit of a hill, called Bury
Bank, (...) area of an oval form, about 250 yards in diameter, envi^^^ed by a
deep trench and ramparts: the entrance is on the north-west. On the south part
is a tumulus, surrounded with a (...) This I imagine to have been formed out of
the ruins of some buildings, and to have been a sort of praetorium to the
occupier of this post. It is supposed to have been the residence of (...) who
reigned over Mercia from 656 to 675. The old (...) W^serecester in a manner
confirms the opinion. Whether (...) neighboring Cop, or Low, was the place of
his interment, as (...) drinks, is doubtful.

Hence I (...) meet with the Trent. This river rises in the More^^ (...)
Biddulph, out of Newpool, and two springs near Mole^^^(...) this place it is an
inconsiderable stream, becomes navi^^^^ (...) Burton on Trent, and, after
flowing through this county (...) it almost equally divides) that of Derby,
Nottingham, and (...) it loses its name in the Humber, the great receptacle of
(...) rivers. Poets have taken most beautiful liberties in (...) ^^^ologies of
the name of this; for i^ neither derives it (...) its thirty kinds of fish, nor
yet from its thirty rivers that (...) waters. The bounteous Trent, that in
himself enseams
Both thirty sorts of fish, and thirty sundry streams.


AFTER quoting the sublime description of M^lon, we shall (...) simple
derivation. (...) Feather the^ a be the son
Of (...) or (...), or gulphy Dun,
(...) like (...) earth-born giant, spreads
(...) indented mends.


in (...) the name is (...), and for^ed from the word ^ie, (three) on account
(...) from three heads.

AFTER crossing the river and ascending a small bank, STONEFIELD
I find myself in a vast open tract rising to the left, called Stonefield Here,
in 1745, the Duke of Comber^^ed drew up his army, to give battle to the rebels,
who were supposed to have been on their march this way. His intelligence failed
him, and the Scotch insurgents possessed themselves of Derby. In future times
pos^erity will almost doubt the fact, when they read that an incons;iderable
band of mountaineers, undisciplined, unofficered, and half-armed, had
penetrated into the center of an unfriendly (...), with one ^my behind them,
and another in their front: that they rested there a few days; and that they
retreated above three hundred miles, with scarcely any loss, continually
presses by a foe supplied with every advantage that loyalty could afford.

PARA^^^L to my road runs that magnificent enterprise the (...) for the
junction of the eastern and and the western oceans; (...)
designed to give to each side of the kingdom an easy share in the comm^^^^^^
of both. In other countries, the nature of the land permits a ready execution
of these designs. Egypt and Holland are levelled to the workmen's hands. Our
aspiring genius scoffs at obstructions and difficulties serve but to what our
ardor: our aqued^^^^ (...) over our once-admired rivers, now despised for the
purposes of navigation: we fill valleys, we penetrate mountains. H^^ (...) the
prophet have been treated, who, forty years ago, should have predicted, that a
vessel of twenty-five tons would be seen (...) over Stonefield? Yet such is the
case ar present.

Figitur (...) viridi (...) fors (...) prato. (...) great enterprise was begun
a July 17th 1766, near th^^^^^ end of Hare-castle Hill, in this county. Its
^nure length is (...) three miles, viz. sixty-one miles two furlongs from the
south (...) of that hill to Wil^^^, ferry, in the county of Derby; and
(...)-one miles six furlongs on the north side, to its function with (...) Duke
of Bridgewater's canal at Preston on the Hill, in Che^^^^.

To affect this work, there we forty locks on the south side; (...) in all
three hundred and sixteen feet fall; and on the north (...)-five, with three
hundred and twenty-six feet fall. Six (...) southern locks are fourteen feet
wide adapted for the (...) of large vessels, from, opposite to Burton to
Gainsho^^^^ Midd^^^^^, on the north side, is another, of the same (...).

THE common dimensions of the canal are twenty-nine feet (...) at top; at
bottom sixteen; arid the depth four and a (...) in the part from W^de^. to
Burton, which is thirty (...) at top, eighteen at bottom, and five and a half
(...) The same is observed from Middlewich to Preston on the (...) upon which
vessels, capable of navigating in the estuary of (...) may pass to the port of
Liverpool.

(...) is carried over the river Dove, in an aqueduct of (...) arches, and the
ground raised one mile and two fur^^^^^ and to a very considerable height, It
is also (...) over the river (...), on an aqueduct of six arches, (...) twenty
one feet span each: and again over the river Dane (...) the same (...), on
three (...) of twenty feet diameter.

BESIDES these there are near a hundred and sixty lesser (...) and (...), for
the conveyance of brooks and (...) the canal many of which are in span from
twelve to eighteen feet.

THE undertakers, for the convenience of the several persons whose lands they
have out though, or when the canal interfeers any public road, (...) built a^
hundred and eighty-nine cartridges, and (...) fiit-bridges; and frequently,
when the canal passes (...) of any gentleman's (...) have politely given it a
(...), to improve me beauty of the prospect.

(...) hills or rocks, that obstracted the canal (...) in the following places.

THE most (...) it is called, is at Hermits (...) of an hundred and thirty
(...) horses (...) and ^^de.

(...) through them (...) Castle is cut through (...) and was a (...) of (...)
difficulty and (...) of the courage and (...). In passes under (...) eight
hundred and eighty yards (...) twenty (...) arches with (...).

(...) in the parish of Great Budworth, is (...) five hundred and sixty yards
long; as Saltenford, in (...) and fifty yards long (...) (...), at Preston on
the Hill is another, which passes under (...) twelve hundred and forty-one
yards; each of them (...) feet four inches high, and thirteen feet six inches
(...) that, at Preston on the Hill it emerges, and soon con^^^^ (...) course,
by falling into that formed by an useful Peer, (...) of Bridgewater which drops
into the Mersey at Run^^^^ with a fall of eighty-two feet, eased by terv
magnificent (...).

(...) Middlewide to Manchester is a dead level, which does (...) a look in all
that space.

(...) of this great work have employed on it about (...) exclusive of those
belonging to other persons, which (...) left to the same number. They are
calculated to (...) twenty-five tons each; are drawn by one horse, for which
(...) receive per mile three halfpence a ton.

(...) be ungrateful not to pay some respect to the memory (...) architect and
contriver or these works, OF JAMES BRINDLEY.
Mr JAMES (...) rare genius was born at Tunsted, in the parish (...), in the
year 1716. His father was a small (...) himself by following the sports of the
(...) himself from giving his children any fort of (...).

(...) showed very early the goodness of his-heart, by (...) familly be such
labor as he was ca^^^ (...) he bound himself apprentice (...) Ma^^^field, when
his amazing abilities were (...) He speedily became a great proficient and
per^^^ (...) of things a which his master was totally ignorant (...) was equal
to his genius; for he overpaid any instructions he might receive from his
master, by maintaining (...) manner when, he (...) past working, and felt into
(...).

THE first (...) the public received from him, was a (...) considerable
improvement in the paper-press. He got great (...) water-engine at C^fro^, in
Lancashire; and (...) more (...) the machinery of new silk-(...) at (...), to
which he gave many most imiportant movements. He highly (...) gr^ling (...) for
the potteries and in 1756, erected (...) on a new plan, by which he reduced the
consumption of word to one half.

IT was a peculiar (...), to the Duke of BRIDGEWATER, to find a genius such as
Brindley, cotemporary to the great designs formed by his Grace. That wonderful
mechanic (...) rally fell under the Duke's patronage, (...) was the grand
con^^ver of all the work which his noble friend carried on. Many of his
projects were of so stupendous (...), and so incomprehensible to vulgar maids,
as to subject him to great ridicule, (...) were put (...) confusion by the
successful execution.

(...) any great difficulty arose, be constantly took (...) bed, excluded all
light and lay in meditation for two or three (...), all he had (...) completed
whole of his plan. A (...) would have (...), he was visited by his (...) in
those hours (...) certainly (...) ^lumma^, amidst she darkness by (...). He
reminds (...) similar method: Claus^e se^estr^ (...) (...) sequor, qui cadem
qu^ men's ^lent quoties non vi(...). (...) op. 30.


(...) ^ound his health and faculties to decline, he virtu^^ (...) to extend as
far as possible his services, even grave. He communicated all his plans and
designs (...), his wife's brother, who had been employed (...), from the
beginning, as clerk of the works. (...) and (...) seem to have compensated for
the loss (...) for the most difficult parts in the undertaking (...)
successfully executed, since Mr. Brindley's death (...) the parish of
Welste^ton, Staffordshire, September 27th.
, un(...) direction of M^. Henshall.

(...) the clamors which have been raised against to undertaking, in the places
through which it was, intended (...) when ii was first projected we have the
pleasure now to (...) reign universally on its banks, and plenty attend its
(...) cottage instead of being half covered with mi(...) is now secured with a
subtaintial covering of tiles (...) brought from the distant hills of Wales or
Cumberland. (...) which before were barren, are now drained, and, by (...) of
man^, conveyed on the canal toll-free, are (...) with a beautiful endore.
Places which rarely knew the (...) plentifully supplied with that essential
article upon (...) and what is (...) of greater public utility, the (...) corn
are prevented from exercising their infa^^^ (...), for, the communication being
opened between Liver^^^ (...) and Hall line of the canal being through
countries abundant in grain, it affords a conveyance of corn unknown to past
ages. At present, nothing but a general dearth can create a scarcity in any
part adjacent to this extensive work.

THESE, and many other advantages, are derived, both to individuals and the
public, from this internal navigation. But when it happens that the kingdom is
engaged in a foreign war, with what security is the trade between those three
great ports carried on; and with how much less expense has the trader his goods
conveyed to any part of the kingdom, than he had formerly been subject to, when
the goods were obliged to be carried coastways, and to pay insurance?

I BELIEVE it may be asserted, that no undertaking, equally expensive and
arduous, was ever attempted by private people in any kingdom; and, in justice
to the adventurers, it must be allowed, that, considering the difficulties they
met with, owing to the nature of the works, or the caprice of persons whose
lands were taken to make the canal, that ten years and a half was but a short
time to perform it in; and that satisfaction has been made to every individual
who suffered any injury by the execution of the undertaking. The profits
arising from tonnage is already very considerable; and there is no doubt but
they will increase annually; and, notwithstanding the enormous sum of money it
has cost in the execution, the proprietors will be amply repaid, and have the
comfort to reflect, that, by the conclusion of this project, they have
contributed to the good of their country, and acquired wealth for themselves
and posterity.

IMMEDIATELY after leaving Stonefield, STONE
reached the little town of Stone, a place remarkable for religious antiquity.
Legend tells us, that the beforementioned Wulferus, then a Pagan, put to death
his two sons, Wulfad and Rufin, on suspicion of favoring the Christian faith;
Wulfad at this place, Rufin at Burston, about three miles distant. Over each,
stones were erected, as usual, in memory of the dead; from whence the names of
those places are derived. Wulfere, after this unnatural deed, was struck with
the utmost remorse, and, by the influence of his queen and St. Cedda, or Chad,
who lived in a neighboring hermitage, was converted to the religion he had so
lately persecuted; and, by way of expiating his guilt, among other works of
piety, founded at Stone a college of canons regular, COLLEGE.
about the year 670. His queen Ermenilda is said to have also founded a nunnery
here. On the invasion of the Danes, the religious were dispersed; but on the
abatement of the cruelty of those barbarians, it is probable they returned, or
at left a new establishment was formed. This is certain, that religious were
found here after the Conquest; for there is an idle tale of two nuns and a
priest being slain there, by Enysan, a Norman. This Enysan, of Walton, was the
true re-founder. Caution must be used in reading the histories of these times,
which are filled with pious romance. Little credit should also be given to the
murder of the sons of Wulfere. The Saxon Chronicle is silent about the deed.
That prince was a convert to Christianity, and seems to have founded the house
through the common motives of zeal.

Enysan, on his re-establishment of this house, filled it with canons from
Kenelworth, PRIORY.
and made it a cell to that place. The Staffords, who were his superiors,
assumed the honor of this new foundation; and a second Robert de Stafford,
about the year 1260, rendered it free from Kenelworth, excepting the right of
patronage, and a yearly pension. The church of this priory was the place of
interment of several of this great family; and numbers of magnificent tombs,
with their figures in alabaster, lay there till the dissolution; when they were
removed to the Augustines, on Stafford Green. I see on the road-side a fragment
of a thick wall, perhaps a remnant of the priory. The church is quite new, and
is a very elegant building, dedicated to St. Wulfad, one of the supposed
martyrs. At the time of the suppression, a tablet, giving the whole history of
the house, was hung up in the priory: it is related in old English meter; but
is so tedious, that I must refer the readers, who desire to peruse it, to the
cited author. Dugdale Mon. ii. 126.


As soon as I left Stone, ASTON.
I saw on the right a large house called Aston, originally the property of a
branch of the Heveninghams of Suffolk. Walter, the last of the line, left two
daughters; the second (who only had children) conveyed by marriage the estate
to Sir James Simeon, who rebuilt the hall. He also built in the garden a
mausoleum; in which, I think, he is interred. The place is at present the
property of Edward Weld, Esquire, of Lulworth castle, in Dorsetshire, and
descended to him of late years, by virtue of a marriage of an ancestor with a
daughter of this house, in the reign of Charles II.

THE road from this place, BURSTON.
for several miles, passes along a pretty vale, watered by the Trent, bounded
by two hills, and much enlivened by the course of the canal. About the third
mile from Stone, I went by Burston, a small hamlet, noted formerly for a chapel
erected over the spot where Rufin, second son of Wulfere, was supposed to have
been martyred; and on that account, in old times, greatly frequented by the
devout.

ABOUT a quarter of a mile from hence, on the top of a hill, stands the church
of Sandon. SANDON.
This manor, in the twentieth of William the Conqueror, was in the hands of the
king; who bestowed it on Hugh Lupus; and he again gave it to William de
Malbanc, or Nantwich. It passed from this family (by the gift of Adena, eldest
daughter of William, grandson to the former) to Warren de Verdon; and by his
daughter Alditha, to Sir William Stafford; and by the marriage of Margaret,
daughter of one of his descendants, in the twelfth of Edward III. to Thomas of
Erdeswik. It continued in possession of that family till the reign of James I.
In his time it was sold to George Digby, groom of the stole to that monarch, by
his half-brother Richard Erdeswik. Charles Lord Gerard, of Bromley, became
master of it, by marriage with a daughter of Mr. Digby; whose granddaughter,
by matching with William Duke of Hamilton, conveyed it to Lord Archibald
Hamilton; who, in 1776, disposed of it to Lord Harrowby. A lawsuit concerning
this place gave rise to the fatal duel, in November 1712, between James Duke of
Hamilton and Lord Mohun; in which both combatants lost their lives.

THE ancient mansion stood near the church, within a moat; but is now
demolished, and a beautiful house, commanding a fine view, was built by Lord
Archibald Hamilton, on an eminence impending over the Chester road. The steep
slope is beautiful, clothed with plantations of recent date, but extremely
flourishing.

THE church is in the gift of Lord Harrowby. Before the dissolution, it
belonged to the abbey of Cumbermere; being bestowed on it by the founder, Hugh
de Malbanc.

THE monuments are curious. The finest is in memory of the celebrated Sampson
Erdeswik, the learned antiquary of the county; a faithful guide of all that
concerned the families, till his death, which happened in 1603. He might have
spared himself the expense of a monument; his work would have perpetuated his
name. He erected one in his lifetime; and is represented recumbent, a colossal
figure in a jacket with short skirts, and spurs on his legs. Above, in two
niches, are his two wives, kneeling: the one was Elizabeth Dikeswel; the other
Maria Neale, widow to Sir Everard Digby, and mother to the unfortunate victim
to the gunpowder plot. Besides inscriptions to these ladies, is a pedigree of
the house; for which, as well as several other epitaphs of the Erdeswiks, the
reader is referred to the Appendix. I shall only mention, that the tombs are of
the altar-form, and have the figures of the persons commemorated engraved on
the stone.

THE inscription on a plain marble tomb, in memory of Mr. Digby, OF GRORGE
DIGBY.
once owner of the place, is very worthy of preservation: as it records a
remarkable piece of history, I shall give it here at length, and add notes to
the obscure parts.

Si quis hic jaceat, roges, viator,

Georgius Digbaeus,

Armiger.

Vir (si quis alius) celebrati nominis.

Nobili clarus prosapia, sed vita nobiliori:

Quippe qui

Ipsum nobilitatis fontem caeno turbatum

Demum limpidum reddidit:

Hoc est

Ut memet explicem,

Qui regis Jacobi purpuram

Maledicti Schopii Gaspar Scioppius was a German of great erudition, but of a
most turbulent disposition: he became a convert to Popery in 599, and naturally
distinguished himself by a blind and furious zeal against his former religion;
and went so far as even to recommend the utter extirpation of its professors.
He was a fierce antagonist to Scaliger, Causabon, and other Protestant writers;
and in his book styled Ecclesiasticus, 611, he attacked James I in a very
indecent manner.
dicterici soedatam

Obtrectatoris sanguine The affront, offered to our monarch, induced Mr. Digby,
and some other followers of the Earl of Bristol, then ambassador to Spain, to
attack Scioppius in the streets of Ma^rid, in 16^4; where they left him for
dead. As soon as he recovered, he removed to Padua, dreading another attack. He
lived afterward in continual apprehensions, and shut himself up in his room
for the last fourteen years of his life. He died in 1649 at enmity with all
mankind.


Retinxit.

Nec tamen homuncionem penitus sustulit

Sed gravius stigma fronti incussit

Quam Henricus magnus

Libello He was as profuse of his abuse of Henry IV in the book above
mentioned, as he was of the English monarch. The regency of France, in honor to
the memory of that great prince, directed it to be burnt by the hands of the
common hangman.
,

Quo scilicet toto vitae curriculo

(Utpote omnium contemptui expositus)

Sensit se mori.

Hujus egregii facinoris intuitu

A Jacobo honoribus auctus est

Digbaeus

Meritis tandem annisque plenus

Vivere desiit, semper victurus.

Ipsis Idibus Decembris ao. (...) Aetatis suae LXXXVI.

Tanti herois lauds

Licet non taceant historici

Haec saxa loqui curavit

Lectissima heroina Jana Baronissa Gerrard

De Bromley,

Clarissimi Digbaei filia

Superstes unica.

FROM Sandon the hills recede to the north. I directed my course to Chartley,
CHARTLEY.
about four miles and a half distant, and about three north from the great
road. This venerable pile is built round a court, and great part of it
curiously made of wood, embattled at top, and the sides carved. In many places
are the arms of the Devereux; the devices of the Ferrars and Garnishes; and, in
Saxon characters, the initials of the founder, W. D. (Walter Devereux) with the
motto Loial suis je. Over the door of the gateway is carved a head in profile,
with a crown above. In the middle of the court stands a fountain: and the whole
building is surrounded with a moat. The view within the court is faithfully
shown in Plot, tab. v.

IN several of the windows are painted glass. In the great bow-window of the
hall are the horse-shoes, the ancient device of the Ferrars; in others, the
arms of that family, the Devereux, Garnishes, and Shirlies. A bed is still
preserved here, the work of Mary Stuart, who was for some time imprisoned in
this house: besides this, at present there are no vestiges of its former
grandeur. Within and without is a mortifying appearance of neglect and
approaching decay A fire in July 1781, completed its destruction.
.

AT a small distance from the house, on a knowl, are the poor remains of the
castle; CASTLE.
consisting of the fragments of two rounders, and a bit of a wall, almost hid
in wood. This fortress was very soon permitted to fall in decay. Leland speaks
of it as a ruin in his days. When the power of the nobility was broken, by the
policy of Henry VII. numbers of the barons, finding their castle no longer a
protection to their insolence, were glad to quit so incommodious a kind of
habitation. We often see, as in the present instance, an ancient mansion near
the remains, or on the site of a more ancient castle: the times were so much
bettered, and monarchy had recovered so much rightful strength, that the former
became useless against; their prince, or their rival reguli, who then began to
acknowledge the power of law. Yet still some species of castellated mansion,
against popular commotions, or the attacks of bands of robbers, was requisite.
Convenience, and a sort of elegance, was affected in their houses; but a
necessary suspicion still remained, and safety provided for by the deep
surrounding moat, by the gateway, and the strong door.

Chartley castle was built by Randle Blundeville, Earl of Chester, in 1220, on
his return from the Holy Land; and to defray the expenses of this, as also of
Beeston, which he also founded, a tax was levied on all his vassals. By his
death, this part of his estate devolved on William Ferrars Earl of Derby, in
right of his wife Agnes, third sister of Randle.

His son Robert, entering into the factious views of the barons, received a
defeat at Chesterfield in 1266. His estates were confiscated, and the castle
and manor bestowed by Henry III. on Hamon Le Strange; but, notwithstanding
this, he possessed himself of it by force, and the king was obliged to order
his brother, Edmund Earl of Lancaster, to besiege the place; which he took, but
not till after much loss on both sides. Edmund, and the nobility who assisted
in the siege, thought proper to obtain his majesty's pardon for the lives lost
on the occasion. Ferrars himself received his pardon, was divested of the
earldom of Derby, but was suffered to retain this castle; possibly, being
reduced so low as to be incapable of giving farther disturbance. It continued
in his line till the reign of Henry VI. when, in 1447, by the marriage of Anne,
or Agnes, sole heiress to William Lord Ferrars, to Walter Devereux, sheriff of
Herefordshire, it passed into another great race of peers. The lady was at that
time only eleven years and eight months old; but by the king's special favor,
in 1452, she had livery of her lands, without further proof of her age. This
estate continued in his posterity (the Lords Ferrars, Viscounts Hereford, and
Earls of Essex) till the year 1646, when it fell to Sir Robert Shirley, by his
marriage with Dorothy, youngest sister to Robert Earl of Essex, the noted
parlement-general; and is at present possessed by their descendant Earl Ferrers.

IN hopes of finding, STOW CHURCH.
in the neighboring parish church of Stow, the monumental honors usually
attendant on great families, I visited it, at the small trouble of a mile's
ride. I was disappointed; for I found only, one of this great line deposited in
the place. This is very frequent with a race of heroes, whose active spirits
carry them into scenes remote from their natal soil, or bring themselves to
fates that prevent possession of their parental sepulchers. Walter Devereux,
the first Lord Ferrars, fell in the field of Bosworth, fighting valiantly in
behalf of Richard, and was buried among the undistinguished slain. Walter, his
descendant, first Earl of Essex, died Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, September
22d. 1576, as supposed by poison, and was interred at Caermarthen. His son, the
favorite of Elizabeth, fell a victim to his indiscretion and ambition; perished
by the ax, and was flung among the attainted herd. His son, for a series of
victories in the cause of liberty, received from his grateful party the
magnificent honors of a public funeral in the capital, which his arms had
defended.

I FOUND here only the tomb of Walter, first Viscount Hereford, grandson of the
first Lord Ferrers, and founder of the house of Chartley. He served with honor
in the French wars, under Henry VIII; and in the naval attack of Conquet, in
1512, he was honored with the garter by his royal master, and with the title of
Hereford by his successor. His death happened in 1558. He lies here under a
fine monument, erected in his lifetime; his figure is represented in robes,
with the collar of the garter round his neck: his head reposed on a plume of
feathers, wreathed round a helmet. On one side of him is placed his first lady,
Mary, daughter of Thomas Marquis of Dorset; on the other, his second, Margaret,
daughter of Robert Garnyche, Esquire, of Kyngeton, in Suffolk. Around the side
is represented, I suppose as mourners, six female and six male figures; the
last begirt with swords.

NEAR this is another tomb of alabaster, with the figures of two persons
engrav^n on it; but so cankered with age, that neither inscription nor
distinction of sex, can be made out.

ON the chancel floor a brass plate preserves the memory of Thomas Newport,
steward of the household to Walter, first Earl of Essex, and delivers his
character in these terms: Qui charus charis fuerat qui firmus amicis;
En! Thomas Newport conditur hoc tumulo.
Qui felix ortu suit et morta beatus;
Quem Deus et coelum, quem pia vota habent.


FROM Stow I hastened to the Chester road, WYCH WESTON.
which I reached at the hamlet of Wych, in the parish of Weston on the Trent,
whose spire steeple appears at a small distance on the other side of the road.
This place is productive of salt, and has been long noted: for its brine-pits,
the property of Earl Ferrers.

AFTER going about two miles farther, HEYWOOD.
I passed through Great Heywood, a village bestowed by Roger de Melend, alias
Long Epee, a worthless prelate, in the reign of Henry III. on his valet Roger
de Aston; whose family made it their residence, till the marriage of a
descendant with the heiress of Tixal, occasioned it to remove to the new
acquisition. In my memory the old seat was in possession of the Whitbies. It
has since been reunited to the house of Tixal, by purchase. The barn belonging
to the manor-house of Heywood, was of a most magnificent size; but of late has
been greatly reduced.

THE horse-bridge over the Trent, ITS LONG BRIDGE.
adjoining to Heywood, was not less remarkable, for I remember it to have
consisted of two-and-forty arches; but the number at present is much lessened.
There is a tradition, that it was built by the county, in a compliment to the
last Devereux Earl of Essex, who resided much at Chartley; and, being a keen
sportsman, was often-deprived of his diversion for want of one. I am not clear
about the truth, of this report. There certainly had been a bridge here long
before, so that, if there was any foundation for such a mark of respect, it
could only have been rebuilt after falling to decay.

SHUGBOROUGH.


FROM the middle is a view, of very uncommon beauty, VALE OF SHUGBOROUGH.
of a small vale, varied with almost every thing that nature or art could give
to render it delicious; rich meadows, watered by the Trent and Sow. The first,
animated with milk-white cattle, emulating those of Tinian; the last with
numerous swans. The boundary on one side, is a cultivated slope; on the other,
the lofty front of Cannock Wood, clothed with heath; or shaded with old oaks,
scattered over its glowing bloom by the free hand of nature.

IT is more difficult to enumerate the works of art dispersed over this
Elysium; they epitomize those of so many places. The old church of Colwich; the
mansion of the ancient English baron, at Welsely Hall; the great-windowed mode
of building in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, in the house of Ingestre; the
modern seat in Oak-edge; and the lively improved front of Shugborough; are
embellishments proper to our own country. Amidst these arise the genuine
architecture of China, in all its extravagance; the dawning of the Grecian, in
the mixed gothic gateway at Tixal; and the chaste buildings of Athens,
exemplified by Mr. Stuart, in the counterparts of the Choragic monument of
Lysicrates, Antiquities of Athens, chapter iv. tab. 1. 3.
and the octagon tower of Andronicus Cyrrhestes. The same, chapter iii. tab. 1. 3.
From the same hand arose, by command of a grateful brother, the arch of Adrian
of Athens, embellished with naval trophies, in honor of Lord Anson, a glory to
the British fleet; and who still survives in the gallant train of officers who
remember and emulate his actions. My much respected friend, the late Thomas
Anson, Esquire, preferred, the still paths of private life, and was the best
qualified for its enjoyment of any man I ever knew; for with a most humane and
the most sedate disposition, he possessed a mind most uncommonly cultivated. He
was the example of true taste in this country; and at the time that he made his
own place a paradise, made every neighbor partaker of its elegancies. He was
happy in his life, and happy in his end. I saw him about thirty hours before
his death, listening calmly to the melody of the harp, preparing for the
momentary transit from an earthly concert to an union with the angelic
harmonies. The unfinished improvements are carried on with great judgment, by
his worthy nephew and successor George Anson, Esquire.

AMONG the great number of statues which embellish the place, an Adonis and
Thalia are the most capital. There is also a very fine figure of Trajan, in the
attitude of haranguing his army. The number of rude Etruscan figures in the
garden, show the extravagance of the earliest ages, and the great antiquity of
the art of sculpture in Italy, long before the Romans became, a people. The
beautiful monument in the lower end of the garden, does honor to the present
age. It was the work of Mr. Schemecher, under the direction of the late Mr.
Anson. The scene is laid in Arcadia. Two lovers, expressed in elegant pastoral
figures, appear attentive to an ancient shepherd, who reads to them an
inscription on a tomb,

Et in AZCABIA ego!

The moral resulting from this seems to be, that there are no situations of
life so delicious, but which death must at length snatch us from. It was placed
here by the amiable owner, as a TEMPLE of the WINDS at SHUGBOROUGH.
memento of the certainty of that event. Perhaps, also, as a secret memorial of
some loss of a tender nature in his early days; for he was wont often to hang
over it in affectionate and firm meditation. The Chinese house, a little
farther on, is a true pattern of the architecture of that nation, taken in the
country by the skilful pencil of Sir Percy Brett: not a mongrel invention of
British carpenters.

OPPOSITE to the back-front of the house, on the banks of the Sow, stand the
small remains of the ancient mansion, which, according to Leland, originally
belonged to Suckborrow with a long heard, and who, as some say, gave it to the
mitre of Lichfield. It must have been in very early times; for the manor of
Haywood (in which this is included) belonged to the sea in 1085, the twentieth
of William the Conqueror, and so continued till the reign of Edward VI. who
bestowed it on Lord Paget. The house was till that time one of the palaces of
the bishops. The relics, at present, serve to give the appearance of reality
of ruin to some beautiful Grecian columns, and other fragments of ancient
architecture; which were tacked to the front by the late Mr. Anson.

Shugborough was frequently the house I had the happiness of making my
headquarters: from whence I made many an excursion to the neighboring places.
I beg the reader's pardon for indulging myself with a recollection of what
formerly gave me so much pleasure in the survey, and for detaining him with the
account of a short circuit, rich in objects.

I SHALL cross the Sow, and begin with Tixal, TIXAL.
distinguished at present only by the magnificent gateway, a motley pile of
Gothic and Grecian architecture, embellished in front with three series of

AT a very little distance from this heath lies Ingestre, INGESTRE.
or Ingestrent, a respectable old house, seated on the easy slope of a hill,
and backed by a large wood, filled with ancient oaks of vast size: this makes
part of the pleasure-ground. The walks are partly bounded by enormous hedges of
forest-trees, and partly wander into the ancient wood, beneath the shade of the
venerable trees.

THIS manor, about the time of Henry II. was the property of Eudo de Mutton; in
the reign of Edward III. it was transferred to the family of the Chetwynds, by
the marriage of Isabel, daughter of Philip de Mutton, with Sir John de
Chetwynd; in which line it continues, being at present owned by John Chetwynd
Talbot, Esquire, grandson of John Lord Chetwynd.

THE house is built in the style of the reign of Elizabeth, with great windows
in the center, and a bow on each side: the last are of stone, the rest of the
house brick. In the great hall, over the fireplace, is a very good picture of
Walter Chetwynd, Esquire, in a great wig, and crossed by a rich sash. This
gentleman was distinguished by his vast knowledge in the antiquities of his
country, CHURCH.
and more so by his piety. The present church of Ingestre was rebuilt by him,
and was consecrated in August 1677. A sermon was preached, prayers read, a
child baptized, a woman churched, a couple married, a corpse buried, the
sacraments administered, and, to crown all, Mr. Chetwynd made an offering on the
altar of the tithes of Hopton, worth fifty pounds a year, to be added to the
rectory for ever. The church is very neat, and is prettily stuccoed. In it is a
mural monument, in memory of its great benefactor, who died in 1692.

Hopton Heath lies on the side of Ingestre Park, HOPTON HEATH SKIRMISH.
and is noted for a skirmish between a party of the King's forces, under the
Earl (...) Northampton, and another of the parlement's, commanded by (...)
William Brereton and Sir John Gell. Victory, notwithstanding (...) great
inequality of numbers, declared itself on the side of the ^yalists; but it was
purchased at so dear a rate, that, as Lord ^arendon expresses, a great victory
had been an unequal recom^ence for the loss sustained in the General. The earl
fell in the ^tion, neglected by his troops, busied in the pursuit; and left
en^oned by enemies. He flew his first assailants, and died valiantly, ^fusing
the offered quarter.

AFTER riding from Ingestre three miles, through very bad roads, ^eached
Stafford, a good town, STAFFORD.
containing about five thousand ^habitants, seated on a plain, bounded by
rising grounds at a ^ry small distance. The streets in general are well built;
the ^arket-place large, ornamented with a handsome town hall, with ^e windows
in front: it is built upon pillars, and presents a ^cade with six arches,
intercolumniated with Ionic pilasters. ^is is the county-town; and here the
assizes are appointed to (...) held, by a statute of the first of Elizabeth.

THE county infirmary lies at a small distance from the town, INFIRMARY.
^a good plain building; was finished in 1772, and is supported (...) an annual
subscription of between eight and nine hundred ^ear.

Stafford consists of but a single parish, CHURCHES.
with two churches. That (...) St. Mary is a rectory, in the gift of the king;
a large building ^th an octagon tower, and formerly with a lofty spire rising
from Here is to be seen the tomb of Sir Edward Aston, the builder Tixal; who
died in 1567, and Joan his wife. Their figures are presented in alabaster,
under a large canopy.

THE font is a singular piece of antiquity: very clumsy; but the sides and base
most singularly carved into rude Gothic figures.

THIS church had been collegiate, and was given, a little before the year 1136,
by King Stephen, to the bishop and chapter of Lichfield and Coventry. The
patronage was granted, in 1445, by Henry VI. to Humphrey Duke of Buckingham. It
was of exempt jurisdiction, and consisted, in the twenty-sixth of Henry VIII.
of a ^ean and thirteen prebendaries Tanver, 495.
. The dean's house stood at the vese end of the church, and serves at present
for the school.

THE religious houses were the Gray Friars, RELIGIOUS HOUSES.
or Franciscans, at the north end of the walls, founded, according to Erdeswik,
by Sir James Stafford of Sandon. It was valued at L35. 13 s. 10 d. per annum,
and granted in the thirty-first of Henry VIII. to James Leveson.

THE FRIARS AUSTINS had a piece of ground given them on the green, at the south
end of the town, by Ralph Lord Stafford. Dagdale's Baron. i. 161.
in order to found a house, about the year 1344, for his own soul's sake, those
of his wives ( Katharine and Margaret) Sir Humphrey Hastings, Knight, and that
of Edward III. The tomb of his great line were removed to this church from
Stone, at the dissolution, but soon suffered to perish. It was granted, in the
(...) of Queen Mary, to Thomas Neve and Giles Isam.

A PRIORY of black canons, founded by Richard Peche, bishop of Lichfield and
Covenery, about the year 1180; as others say, by Gevard Stafford, on land which
he held from the bishop, whom (...) complimented with the title of founder
Tanner, 499.
. The prelate had a great affection for this house; for, on resigning his see,
he became a canon of it: and here ended his days (...) Sacra, i. 435. This
house was dedicated to St. Thomas Becker, (...) ten years after his death.
. It maintained only seven religious, whose revenues were L198 a year. On the
^tion it was granted to Rowland Lee, bishop of Lichfield.

BESIDES these, were two hospitals, and the free chapel of Saint Nu^^^as. in
the castle.

THE town was defended partly by the river Sow, FORTIFICATIONS.
which bounds one half of it; the rest was guarded by a wall, and by a ditch,
supplied by the river with water. It had formerly four gates; of these two are
yet standing. The place never was defencible; at last ever stood a siege. Sir
William Brereton, the parliament general, took it by surprise, in May 1643, with
the loss only of a single man.

THE origin of Stafford is very uncertain: the first name of it is led to be
Betheney, ORIGIN OF STAFFORD.
and that it had been the seat of an hermit called Bertelin, in high fame for
his sanctity. The earliest au^hentic mention of the place is in the year 913,
when Ethelfleda Saxon C^ 104.
Countess of Mercia, and sister of Edward the Elder, built a castle her^. This
lady had one child by her lord Ethelred; when, ba^ing the pangs of parturition
with the joys of connubial rites, ^azon like, she determined to forbear for the
future all commerce with him. From thenceforth her delight was in arms, in
conquests, and in securing her dominions. Such was her prowess, that laying
aside all feminine titles, she received that of King, as if Countess and Queen
were inadequate to her heroism Tour in Wales.


THE site of this fortress is not precisely known. Doctor Plot is of opinion,
that it lay within the entrenchments at Billington, at some distance from
Stafford, and seems to found his conjecture from the lands wherein they are
being still a remaining part of the demesne land of the barony of Stafford
Hist. Staff. 416.
. Cambden attributes a tower to Edward the Elder, founded in the year after
that which was built by his sister, and places it on the north side of the
river. A mount still remains near the new bridge, called by Speed, Castle-hill;
at present named Bullyhill, on which it probably stood.

THE poor remains of the castle, CASTLE.
which was garrisoned in the civil wars, stand on a little insulated hill, a
mile south from the town. The keep was on an artificial mount: the whole is
surrounded with a deep fosse, which, on the south side, has besides the
additional strength of a high rampart. This was founded by William the
Conqueror, and was soon after demolished. It is supposed that during the time
it stood, the custody of it was committed to Robert de Tonei, younger son of
Roger, standard bearer of Normandy, Dugdale's Baron. i. 256.
a follower of the Conqueror, who took from this circumstance the name of
Stafford. It is conjectured, that the king at that time reserved this manor to
himself, and that it was not included in the vast grant made by him to Robert,
of eighty-one manors in this county, twenty-six in that of Warwick, twenty in
Lincolnshire, two in Suffolk, and one in each of those of Worcester and
Northampton. It appears that it continued in the crown till the second of
Edward II. when Edmund Lord Stafford received the grant, and held it in capite
by barony, together with that of Bradeley and Madeley, by service, of finding
for forty days, at his own charge, three armed men, with three equis coopertis,
horses harnessed for war, as often as there should be war with Wales or
Scotland. Blunt's Tenures, 25.
I do not affirm for certain the restorer of this castle. Mr. Erdeswic says, it
was Ralph de Stafford, a distinguished warrior, cotemporary with Edward III. It
was garrisoned by the king in the last civil wars; was taken by the parliament
forces, and demolished in 1644.

ABOUT a quarter of a mile south of the castle, in a low situation, MANOR-HOUSE.
stood the manor-house of the family, fortified by the same Ralph; for I find
from Dugdale, Baron, i. 160.
that he had permission, in 1348, to make castles of his manor-houses at
Stafford and Madeley. This great family had in it barons, earls, and dukes; and
in the year 1637 became extinct: at that time humiliated into barens again. The
moat of their ancient residence is still to be seen, surrounding a rectangular
piece of ground, the site of the house.

My curiosity led me about two miles further, to Billington, BILLINGTON BURY.
to examine the supposed site of the ancient Stafford castle. Near the
extremity of a high hill, steeply sloping on three sides, and commanding a most
extensive and beautiful view, I found a large sea, surrounded in some parts
with one, in others with two, deep fosses. This had been a British post, as it
agrees with those we find in many parts of the kingdom; but as it retains the
name of Billington Bury, it probably might have been occupied by the Saxons,
whose posts are distinguished by the addition of Borough, Bury, and Berry.

THE town of Stafford is governed by a mayor, recorder, ten aldermen, and
twenty common-council-men; and was incorporated in the third of Edward VI. It
first sent burgesses to parliament in 1294, the twenty-third of Edward I. They
are elected by inhabitants paying scot and lot, and are returned by the mayor
Willis, iii. 50.
.

THE borough still retains one ancient custom, BOROUGH.
the privilege of borough English, or the descent of lands, within its liberty,
to the youngest sons of those who die intestate: an usage which is supposed to
have been originally founded on the presumption, that the younger child was the
most incapable of providing for itself.

THE barony was, BARONY.
even at the Conquest, one of the greatest in England, and afterward, like
other great seigniories, styled the Honor of Stafford. None were such
originally, but which were royal; but were afterward bestowed in see on some
nobleman, as proved the case with this, as mentioned in page 76; when it was
given to Edmund Lord Stafford, with eighty-one dependent manors, with sixty
knights sees, viz. nine in his demesne, and fifty-one in service.

AFTER leading the town, I crossed the Wolverhampton Navigation Distances.
Heywood, to its junction with the Birminghaus canal, near ^verlampton, 22. 4.
0: rise 125 feet: Stainport on the Severn, 24. 0. c; (...) 301 feet.
at Redford Bridge. This may be called a port to Stafford. A little further is
Weeping Cross, so styled from its vicinity to the ancient place of execution. A
little farther on, opens the rich view of the vale of Shugborough, varied with
rivers and canals, and bordered with the several seats before described.

CANK WOOD.
ON approaching Cank Wood, HEYWOOD PARK.
I find on its confines Heywood Park; a small house, the property of Lord
Paget, remarkable for the beautiful woody dingles that wind into the sides of
the forest. When I was wandering through them, I imagined myself engaged in
those of my native country. Here I suppose to have been the park of red deer,
which Leland says the bishop of Lichfield had in his manor of Shugborow. I
skirted part of the wood, which here ends boldly, almost driving the traveller
into the Sow. This front has received from Mr. Anson a wonderful change.
Miraturque novas frondes.

Pines instead of oaks; which, waving over the head of the passenger, would
recall to his memory, had he been abroad, the idea of many an alpine scene.

RETURNING over Heywood bridge, I passed through the two hamlets of that name;
and within two miles of the first, reached the church and village of Colwich. I
must imagine the traveller, COLWICH.
as well as myself, blinded, if we rode this space insensible of the most
elegant view of the vale. It is perfectly prodigal in its beauties, and spreads
at once every charm that can captivate the eye. It shows here at once, all that
I before mentioned en detail.

THE parsonage and church of Colwich contribute to the variety of the view,
from another station: both are ancient. This place had been the property of a
family of the same name Erdeswic.
, at le^t from Henry III's reign to about the beginning of Elizabeth; when it
passed into that of Leicester of Tabley, in Cheshire, by the marriage of the
daughter of Edward Colwich Leicester's Cheshire, 303.
to Peter Leicester, Esquire.

The church is dedicated to St. Michael, CHURCH.
and is a prebend in the cathedral of Lichfield. Within is a tomb, with the
recumbent figure, dressed in a gown, of Sir William Wolsely. Here is also the
burial-place of the Ansons, made a l'antique, in form of a catacomb. I must not
forget an inscription, in memory of another Sir William Wolsely, which does not
commemorate his unlucky and singular end; being drowned in his chariot, on the
8th of July 1728, by the accidental breaking of a mill-dam, in the village of
Longdon, by a thunder-shower. His four horses perished. The coachman was saved,
being carried by the torrent into an orchard, where he stuck till the water
abated.

BISHTON.
AT a little distance from Colwich is Bishton, WOLSLEY BRIDGE.
near which I cross the navigation again, and instantly after the Trent, at
Wolsley Bridge, placed at the foot of the hanging-woods of Wolsley park; an
enclosure of much native wild beauty. The ancient mansion of the family of the
same name, lies low and near the river. This manor is a member of Heywood. In
the twentieth year of the Conqueror. Nigellus, the paternal ancestor of
Greslei, held it of the bishop. About the reign of Henry II. it was a divided
manor, between Richard Hints and Richard Wolsley. Bedeswic,
Soon after this, they seem to have become sole proprietors.

AFTER riding a little way along the Lichfield road, I turned to the left, and
crossing the vale, which now expands and grows less rionte, repass the Trent at
Colton, on a bridge of a fine single arch. THE BURBOT.
Near this place is sometimes taken the Burbot, Plot, 241, tab. xxii. Br. Zool.
111. No
a fish of disgusting appearance, but of a delicate flavor, and very firm. It
is not common in these parts, but abounds in the Witham, and in the fens of
Lincolnshire; and is very common in the lake of Geneva, where it is called
Lota. According to the new arrangement of fish, it is ranked among the gadi, or
cod-fish: by Mr. Ray, among the eel-shaped fish. The form is long; the head
depressed; the mouth large, armed with small teeth; the nose furnished with two
beards, the chin with one: on the back are two fins; the skin smooth and
slippery, of a disagreeable green color, spotted with yellow. It is very
voracious, and very prolific. The noted old fisherman of the Rhine, Leonard
Baltner, took out of a single fish not fewer than 128,000 eggs.

MR. Erdeswik informs us, that at the time of the Conqueror, one Galfridus was
lord of Colton. Soon after, COLTON.
Sir Hardulph de Gastenoys had either all, or shared it with another; for in
the year 1315, Sir William Gastenoys and Anselm le Marshal were joint lords of
it. After many generations, a female ( Thomasine, sole heiress and daughter of
Sir Thomas Gastenoys, last male heir of the family, by marriage with Sir
Nicholas Greislei, about 1379) transferred it to the house of Drakelow. The old
hall, which was large enough to contain fourscore lodging-rooms, was burnt down
in the time of Charles I. by the carelessness of a servant. It at that time
belonged to Lord Aston. Mr. Allen's MSS.


THE country now alters for the worse, and the soil becomes wet and miry. About
two miles distance from Colton stands Blithefield, BLITHEFIELD.
the respectable old seat of the respectable family of the Bagots; a most
ancient and virtuous race. At the time of the Conquest they were found
possessed of Bagot's Bromley. In 1193, or the fifth of Richard I. a younger
branch became ennobled, by the marriage of Millisent, heiress of Robert Lord
Stafford, Dugdale, i. 158.
with Hervey Bagot; from which match sprung a long line of peers of every rank.
The elder branch acquired this place by the marriage of Sir Ralph Bagot (before
the reign of Henry IV.) with Elizabeth, sole heiress of Richard Blithefield,
lineally descended from a Saxon of the name of Hereman, or the warrior.

THE house is built round a court, and still retains, on the outside, the
simplicity of appearance of that of an ancient baron; and within, the old
hospitality. The best rooms are, the hall, the library, and a large
drawing room, lately added. The first is a noble apartment, unadorned,
excepting over the chimney-piece, where is a representation in bold and good
sculpture, in freestone, of an event dear as life to every true Englishman;
that of King John granting to his subjects the great charter of liberty.

AMONG the portraits, I observed on a board, in a flat manner, LORD-TREASURER
BURLEIGH.
the head of lord treasurer Burleigh, with a white beard, bonnet, collar of the
garter, the George, and a white wand. His abilities as a statesman were
inimitable; his private virtues not beyond the power of the great to copy; his
magnificence was attended with hospitality; his annual deeds of alms to the
amount of five hundred pounds; his honesty, temperance, moderation, industry,
and justice Cambden's Annals, year 1598.
. As his life was excellent, so his death was happy; dying in the fullness of
years and of glory, envied, as his greatest enemy declared, only because his
fun went down with so much luster; not clouded, as generally is the fate of
great ministers.

A CONTEMPORARY of his is painted in the same manner, HENRY EARL OF HUNTINGTON.
with the collar of the garter; his beard forked: the date 1588, aet. 52. This
preserves a likeness of a very different character, Henry Earl of Huntington,
lord president of the north, and one of the peers to whom the custody of the
queen of Scots was entrusted. Burleigh created a fortune by his prudence;
Huntington dissipated his, by being the dupe to the ministers of the rising
fanaticism of the age, which, nurtured by such wooers of popularity as
Leicester, Essex, and this noble peer, in the next age attained strength
sufficient to subvert the church it pretended to purify.

A NEIGHBORING statesman, Sir Walter Aston of Tixal, SIR WALTER ASTON.
is painted on board. He appears with a firm countenance, short hair, and
whiskers; in a black dress, laced with gold on the seams, and graced with a
triple gold chain. Sir Walter was ambassador to Spain in the time of the
negotiations about the Spanish match, in the reign of James I. and favored the
designs of the young prince, and his favorite Buckingham. He was resolute and
prudent, and had great knowledge of the importance of the English trade with
Spain. Lloyd's Worthies, ii. 248.
He might serve his master, but he hurt his own fortune; dissipating great part
of L10,000 a year in supporting the dignity of his character, and the honor of
his country. His reward was a Scotch peerage; being created by Charles I. in
the third year of his reign, Lord Forfar.

AN half-length of Walter Earl of Essex, father to the unfortunate Robert. He
is represented in rich armor. WALTER EARL OF ESSEX.
On one side are the words Virtutis comes invidia; allusive to the constant ill
usage he met with from the worthless favorite of Elizabeth, the Earl of
Leicester. He was a nobleman of great merit and courage; was sent to command in
Ireland, in 1573, and performed services worthy of his character; but at
length, worn out by the ill usage of the ministry, who withheld from him the
necessary support, he came over to England, to lay his complaint before the
queen. He was artfully received, and sent back with the promises of better
usage. Grief, or, as others say, poison, administered by the instigation of
Leicester, who loved his wife, cut him off at the age of thirty-five, at
Dublin, in 1576. Perhaps the infamy of Dudley's character, and the speedy and
indecent marriage of the countess with that favorite, might give rise to the
scandal; for an inquisition was made on his death, and the report in
consequence was, that he died of the flux; a disorder very frequent in Ireland
in those days.

HERE are several portraits of different persons, COLONEL RICHARD BAGOT.
of this worthy house. Among them is Colonel Richard Bagot, governor of
Lichfield, who fell in the cause of loyalty, in the fatal battle of Naseby. He
is dressed in a buff coat, and represented with long hair.

I MUST not omit a curious-picture of a countrywoman of mine, MRS. SALUSBURY.
Mrs. Salusbury of Bachymbed, in Denhighshire, in a vast high sugar-loafed hat
and kerchief, bordered with ermine. Near her are two of her grandchildren, Sir
Edward Bagot, and Elizabeth, afterward Countess of Uxbridge, by her daughter
Jane, who married Sir Walter Bagot, and conveyed the Welsh estate into the
family. A head of her son Charles Salusbury, in long hair, and flowered
nightgown, is also preserved here.

MARY Countess of Ailsford, LADY AILSFORD.
painted in her old age, by Hudson, sitting, is a most beautiful portrait. She
is dressed, simplex munditiis, in pale brown satin, white hood, handkerchief,
apron, and short ruffles: a reproach to the unsuitable fantastic dress of these
times, which attempts to disguise respectful years, and renders that inevitable
period the object of ridicule.

Mary, daughter to Hervey Bagot, Esquire, of Pipehall, first married to Sir
Charley Berkeley. Earl of Falmouth, According to Lord Clarendon's account, he
was a very worthless young favorite of Charles II. He was killed in the great
sea fight with the Dutch, in 1665. Charles wept bitterly at his death. The loss
of better men never went so near his heart. Clarendon's Continuation, 268.
and afterward to Charles Earl of Dorset; a brown, beauty of the gay court of
Charles II. and, as Grammont says, the only one that had the appearance of
beauty and wisdom in the departments of maids of honor to the Duchess of York.

William Leg, first Earl of Dartmouth, and his lady; parents of the late Lady
Barbara Bagot.

THAT eccentric statesman, Henry Earl of Bolingbroke, when young, dressed in
his robes.

A HEAD of that great actor, and dramatic poet, Moliere. MOLIERE
He lived the adoration of his countrymen; but, dying in his profession, was,
according to a custom of the church of his nation, refused Christian burial by
Harlai de Chanvalon, a debauched archbishop of Paris. The king ( Lewis XIV.) at
length prevailed to have him buried in a church; but the curate would not
undertake the office. The populace, with difficulty could be persuaded to
suffer his remains to be carried to their grave. Bouhours marks the injustice
done this great man, in the following lines: Tu reformas and la ville and la
cour,
Mais quella en fut la recompense?
Les Francois rougiront un jour
De leur peu de reconnaissance.
II leur falut an comedien
Qui mit a les polir sa gloire and son etude;
Mais Moliere, a tu gloire il ne manquera rien.
Si parmi les defauts que to peignis si bien,
Tu les avais repris de leur ingratitude.


I QUIT the subject of paintings, notwithstanding there are multitudes of
pictures, by the best masters, in this house. They were all undergoing a
removal; therefore I avoid further mention of them, until they are fixed in
their permanent situations. But I must not be silent about the collection of
coins, one of the most valuable and instructive in England, the bequest of his
beloved neighbor and friend Thomas Anson, Esquire.

THE park is at some distance from the house. PARK.
The oaks are of a very great size: a twin-tree was lately sold for L.120, and
some single ones for half that sum; and I am told, that there are several now
standing equally large.

THE church is very near the house, CHURCH.
in the gift of Sir William Bagot, dedicated to St. Leonard. Within, are
several sculptured tombs, of the time of the fifteenth century; some with
imaged figures, others engraven; mostly in memorial of the Bagots: one of an
Aston of Broughton, and another expressed by a little skeleton of a Broughton,
a child of three months old. The monument of Sir Edward Bagot, who died in
1673, is mural, and supersedes the ten commandments, being placed over the
altar. The inscription tells us, that he was a true assertor of episcopacy in
the church, and hereditary monarchy in the state; which probably entitled him,
in those days, to this sacred place. On the outside of the church, two modest
heaps of turf, parallel to each other, mark the spot where the remains of the
last amiable owners of the place repose; whole merit survives in their
successor.

I FOUND myself here not very distant from Whichenoure Hall, and could not
resist the desire of visiting the seat of the celebrated Flitch, the desperate
reward of conjugal affection.

IN my road, not far from Blithefield, I again met with the Trent, HERMITAGE.
and the Canal: the last a most fortunate embellishment to the neat seat of Mr.
Lister of Hermitage. The proprietors (with the respect they usually pay to
gentlemen) have before this house given it an elegant form; and, to add to the
scenery, luckily the aweful mouth of a considerable subterraneous course of the
navigation opens to view, and affords the amazing sight of barges losing
themselves in the cavern, or suddenly emerging to day from the other side.

THE church of Hermitage, seated on a small eminence, CHURCH.
forms another beautiful object. This belongs to the cathedral of Lichfield,
and is styled the prebendary of Hansacre, a hamlet in this parish, founded by
Bishop Clinton.

ON the opposite side of the Trent is Maveston Ridware, a rectory, MAVESTON
RIDWARE.
whose church is dedicated to St. Andrew. This had been the property of the
Mavestons, at left from the time of Edward I. to that of Henry IV. The tomb of
Sir Robert Maveston, or Mauvesine, in the parish church, recals to memory a
melancholy story. In the beginning of the reign of the usurping Henry, when the
kingdom was divided against itself, two neighboring knights, Sir Robert
Maveston, and Sir William Handsacre, of Handsacre, took arms in support of
different parties: the first, to assert the cause of Bolingbroke; the last,
that of the deposed Richard. They assembled their vassals, and began their
march to join the armies, then about to join battle, near Shrewsbury. The two
neighbors, with their respective followers, unfortunately met, not far from
their seats. Actuated by party rage, a skirmish ensued: Sir William was slain
on the spot. Sir Robert proceeded to the field, and met his fate with the
gallant Percy. What a picture is this accident, of the miseries of civil
dissension! What a tale is the following, of the sudden vicissitude of hatred
to love, between contending families! Margaret, one of the daughters, and
co-heiress of Sir Robert Maveston, gave her hand to Sir William, son of the
knight slain by her father; and with her person and fortune compensated the
injury done by her house to that of Handsacre. Erdeswik.


THE other daughter, Elizabeth, married Sir John Cawardine, whose posterity was
extinct here in the male line, by the death of Thomas Cawardine, Esquire, in
1592.

THE tomb of Sir Robert is altar-shaped: his figure armed and helmed, with a
great sword on one side, and a dagger on the other, is engraven on the
incumbent alabaster slab, with the following inscription: Hic jacet Dns.
Robertus de Mauvesine, miles, Dns. de Mauvesine Ridware, qui occubuit juxta
Salopiam, 1403, stans cum rege, dimicans ex part sua usque ad mortem, cujus
animae propitietur Deus.

HERE is a tomb of two other Mauvesins, one cross-legged, with each hand on his
sword; both under arches in the wall.

NEAR the church is the gateway, part of the ancient mansion of the family of
Mauvesin; and on the other side of the Trent, beyond High Bridge, is a moated
fragment of the rival house of Handsacre.

AT the distance of about two miles from Maveston, KING'S BROMLEY.
I passed by King's Bromley. Before the Conquest, this manor had been the
residence of the Earl of Mercia. Here, in 1057, died the pious Leosric,
Dugdale's Baron. i. 10.
husband to the famous Godiva. At that time, it was called Brom-legge. After
the Conqueror took it into his own hands, the name was changed to that of
King's Bromley. It continued in the crown till the year 1258, or the
forty-third of Henry III. when Roger Corbet died, holding it of the king in
capite Erdeswik.
. It continued in that family till the year 1451, or the thirtieth of Henry VI.
when it came by descent to Prayers of Baddeleigh, in Cheshire: from him to one
Partridge, who sold it to Francis Agard of Ireland; whose descendants possessed
it for some generations, when it was sold to John Newton, Esquire, of
Barbados; in whose line it remains.

FROM hence I passed by Orgrave, one of the seats of George Anson, ORGRAVE.
Esquire, lately the property of the Turtons. Afterward, through the village
of Alrewas. The manor was in possession of Algar Earl of Mercia; but on the
forfeiture of his son, the brave Edwin, was bestowed by the Conqueror, with the
following, on Walter de Somervil, one of his Norman followers.

FROM hence I visited Whichenoure, or Wichnor, WHICHENOURE MANOR.
where I crossed a bridge of the same name over the Trent, not far from the
place where it receives the Tame. The Roman road passes this way, and on this
marshy spot was formed upon piles of wood. It runs from the east side of
Lichfield, and points to the north-east. Much brass money has been found, and,
as I am informed, there are vestiges of a Roman camp in Whichenoure park.

THE church stands on an eminence, CHURCH.
on the north side of the river. The house is at a small distance, and enjoys a
most beautiful view. I believe this to have been on the site of a very ancient
mansion, which Leland observes to have been quite down in his days; and that
the seat was then below, SINGULAR TENURE.
much subject to the n^ngs of the Trent. The present house is a modern
building, remarkable for the painted wooden bacon flitch, still hung up over
the hall chimney, in memory of the singular tenure by which Sir Philip de
Somervile, in the time of Edward III. held the manors of Whichenoure,
Sirescote, Ridware, Netherton, and Cowlee, of the Earl of Lancaster, then lord
of the honor of Tutbury. The services clamed were these, viz. two small fees;
that is to say, when other tenants pay for releef one whole knight's fee, one
hundred shillings; he, the said Sir Philip, shall pay but fifty shillings; and
when escuage is assessed throgheout the land, or aid for to make the eldest
son of the lord knight, or for to marry the eldest daughter of the lord, the
said Sir Philip shall pay bot the moiety of it that other shall pay.

Nevertheless, the said Sir Philip shall synde meyntienge and susteiyne one
bacon flyke hanging in his halle, at Wichenore, ready arrayed all times of the
year, bott in Lent, to be given to everyche mane or womane married, after the
dey and year of their marriage be passed; and to be given to everyche mane of
religion, arch bishop, prior, or other religious; and to everyche priest, after
the year and day of their profession finished, or of their dignity reseyved, in
form following. Whenever that any such before named will come for to
enquire for the baconne in their own person, or by any other for them, they
shall come to the bailiff or porter of the lordship of Whichenour, and shall
say to them in the manner as ensewethe: Baylife, or Porter, I do you to know,
that I am come for my self (or, if he come for any other, showing for whom)
one bacon flyke, hanging in the halle of the lord of Whichenour, after the
form thereunto belonginge.

After which relation the bailiffe, or porter, shall assign a day to him, upon
promise by his feythe to return, and with him to bring tweyne of his
neighbors; and in the meyn time the said bailif shall take with him tweyne of
the freeholders of the lordship of Whichenoure, and they three shall go to the
manor of Rudlowe, belonging to Robert Knyghtley, and there shall somon the
foresaid Knyghtley, or his bayliffe, commanding him to be ready at Whichenour
the day appointed, at pryme of the day, with his carriage; that is to say, a
horse and a sadyle, a sakke, and a pryke, for to convey and carry the said
baconne and corn a journey out of the county of Stafford, at his costages; and
then the said bailiffe shall, with the said freeholders, somon all the tenants
of the said manoir to be ready at the day appointed at Whichenour, for to do
and perform the services to the baconne. And at the day assigned, all such as
owe services to the baconne, shall be ready at the gatte of the manoir of
Whichenour, from the fonne risinge to none, attendyng and awayting for the
coming of him and his felowys chapaletts, and to all those which shall be
there, to do their services deue to the baconne: and they shall led the said
demandant, with tromps and tabours, and other manner of mynstralseye, to the
halle door, where he shall find the lord of Whichenour, or his steward; ready to
deliver the baconne in this manner:

He shall enquere of him which demands the baconne, if he has brought tweyne
of his neighbors; who must answer, They be here ready; and then the steward
shall cause these two neighbors to swear if the said demandant be a weddyt man,
or have be a man weddyt, and if sith his marryage one year and a day be passed,
and if he be a freeman or a villeyn: and if his seid neghbours make oath that
he has for him all these three points rehearsed, then shall the baconne be take
down, and brought to the halle door, and shall there be laid upon one half a
quarter of wheatte, and upon one other of rye: and he that demands the
baconne shall kneel upon his knee, and shall hold his right hand upon a book,
which shall be laid above the baconne and the corn, and shall make oath in this
manner:

Here ye Sir Philip de Somervyle, lord of Whichenour, mayntayner and giver of
this baconne, that I A. sith, I wedded B. my wife, and sith I had her in my
keeping and at will, by a year and a day after our marryage, I would not have
changed for none other, farer ne fowler, richer ne powrer, ne for none other
descended of gretter lynage, slepyng ne waking, at no time; and if the seid B.
were sole, and I sole, I would take her to be my wife before all the wymen of
the world, of what condytions. soevere they be, good or evyle, as help me
God, and his seyntys, and this flesh, and all fleshes.

And his neghbours shall make oath, that they trust verily he has said truly.
And if it be found by his neghbours before named, that he be a villeyn, there
shall be delyvered to him half a quarter of wheatte and a cheese; and if he be a
villein, he shall have half a quarter of rye, withoutte cheese, and then shall
Knyghtley, the lord of Rudlow, be called for, to carry all their things to fore
rehearsed; and the said corn shall be laid upon one horse, and the baconne
apperteyneth shall ascend upon his horse, and shall take the chese before him, if
he have a horse; and if he have none, the lord of Whichenour shall cause him
have one horse and sadyl, to such time as he passed his lordshippe; and so
shall they depart the manoyr of Whichenour with the corn and the baconne to
fore him, him that has won ytt, with trompets, tabourets, and other manoir
of mynstralsce. And all the free tenants of Whichenour shall conduct him to be
passed the lordship of Whichenour; and then shall they return except him to
whom apperteiyneth to make the carriage and journey withoutt the countye of
Stafford, at the costys of his lord of Whichenour. And if the seid Robert
Knyghtley do not cause the baconne and corn to be conveyed as is rehearsed,
the lord of Whichenour shall do it to be carried, and shall distreigne the said
Robert Knyghtley for his default, for one hundred shillings in his manoir of
Rudlowe, and shall keep the distress so takyn irreplevisable Blunt's Tenures,
95.
:

SUCH is the history of this memorable custom. I wish, PRESENT STATE OF THE
FLITCH.
for the honor of the state matrimonial, that it was in my power to continue
the register of successful clamants, from that preserved in the 608th
Spectator; but, from the strictest enquiry, the flitch has remained untouched,
from the first century of its institution to the present: and we are credibly
informed, that the late and present worthy owners of the manor, were deterred
from entering into the holy state, through the dread of not obtaining a single
rasher from their own bacon.

THE first pessessor of this manor was Sir Walter de Somervile, a Norman, on
whom it was bestowed by the Conqueror. It rested in his family till the death
of the abovementioned Sir Philip de Somervile, who left two daughters, Joan,
wife of Sir Rhys ap Griffith, Knight; and Maud, married to Edmund Vernon. This
estate fell to the former, and remained in the family till the last century,
when it was sold by Mary, daughter or widow to Henry Griffith, to -- Offley,
Esquire, ancestor to the late owner; who, within these few years, alienated it
to the present John Levet, Esquire.

I CANNOT tell the precise year in which it was sold to Mr. Offley; but it
appears that Henry Griffith was living in 1597.

IN compliance with my original plan, I took the same way, in order to return
into the great road. Soon after, RUDGLEY.
repassing the Trent, at Colton bridge, I reached Rudgley, a small town,
celebrated for its great annual fairs for horses of the coach breed.

THE church is a little north of the town, CHURCH.
is dedicated to Saint Augustine, and is a vicarage belonging to the chapter of
Lichfield. Opposite is a very ancient timber-house, belonging once to the
Chetwynds; at present to Mr. Anson. On an eminence, above the town, is
beautifully situated a large house, formerly belonging to the Westons, greatly
enlarged and improved by the present owner, Ashton Curzon, Esquire.

THE ancient owners of Rudgley were of the same name with the town: some of the
family had the honor of being sheriffs of the county, in the reign of Edward
III: another was knight of the shire, in the same period. The name continued
here till after the time of Henry VI. Erdeswik mentions this to have been a
manor belonging to the bishop of Lichfield; which I find was alienated to the
king by bishop Sampson, in 1547.

THE parish and village of Longdon succeeds that of Rudgley. LONGDON.
The church lies out of the road, on the left; is a vicarage, dedicated to St.
James; and belongs to a prebendship of Lichfield. The village consists of
scattered houses, extending for a vast way on each side of the lane; from
whence the name. This gave rise, to a common saying in these parts, The
stoutest beggar that goes by the way,
Cannot beg through Long' in a summer's day.


THIS village anciently was full of gentlemen's seats; a most useful species of
population to the poor, whose distresses seldom fail reaching the ears of
mediocrity, but whose cries rarely attain the height of greatness. Sir Edward
Littleton had a house called Chestal; Simon Rudgley, sheriff of the county in
the time of Edward III. had another; the younger brother of the Astons had a
seat here, from the reign of Edward I; the Broughtons had Broughton Hall, from
the days of King John; and Adam Arblaster possessed Liswys (now Longball) in
1351, or the twenty-fifth of Edward III. in whose name it continued till of
late, when it was purchased by Francis Cob, Esquire.

THIS manor is of vast extent. Above thirty other manors, lordships) and
villages, owe suit and service, besides Cank, Heywood and Rudgley, to the
court leet, which is held here every three weeks. It once belonged to the
bishop of Lichfield, but was alienated by Bishop Sampson.

AFTER winding up the steep of a high hill, an advanced part of the forest of
Cank, I turned out of the road to Beaudesert, BEAUDESERT.
the princely seat of Lord Paget, placed on the side of a lofty sloping
eminence, sheltered above, and on each side, by beautiful rising grounds, and
embosomed with trees, commanding in front, over the tops of far subjacent
woods, a most extensive and agreeable view; so that it well vindicates the
propriety of its name.

THIS had been a place belonging to the bishops of Lichfield, which, with the
manors of Longdon, Heywood, Berkswick, Cank, Rudgley, and Shugborrow, were part
of the spoils of that see, wrested from it in the time of Edward VI. with the
connivance of Richard Sampson, then bishop, who accepted in their stead certain
impropriations of the value of an hundred and eighty-three pounds a year. These
livings at that time were good rectories; now poor vicarages, or mercenary
curacies, annexed to the bishopric.

THE leviathan who swallowed these manors, was Sir William Paget, created by
Edward VI. Baron Beaudesert. He first appeared in the reign of Henry VIII. and
from a low beginning, meritoriously rose to the dignity of secretary and
ambassador to Charles V. and Francis I. In the next reign, he was made
chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, and comptroller of the household; and
obtained a peerage. In that of Mary, became lord privy seal, and was restored
to the order of the Garter, from which he had been degraded in the time of her
predecessor. At the accession of Elizabeth, at his own request, he was
permitted to retire from the service of the state, being zealously attached to
the religion of his former mistress Fuller's Worthies, 210.
. Yet his zeal for the old religion, produced in him no scruples about sharing
in the plunder of the church. The reforming Somerset, and the papal Paget,
agreed in that single point. His posterity derive from him an uncommon extent
of interest and command.

Beaudesert was rebuilt by Thomas Lord Paget, in the reign of Queen Elizabeth.
It is a very handsome stone edifice, in form of an half H; of late most
admirably improved, and fitted up by the noble owner. It is totally disengaged
from the gateway, walls, and other obstructions that encumbered it in the days
of Plott; See his plate viii. p. 126.
and the grounds that environ it are laid with the simplicity that forms true
grandeur.

HERE is a gothic hall of eighty feet by twenty-one; a diningroom of forty-two
by twenty-seven; and a magnificent gallery of ninety-seven by seventeen. The
other apartments are small.

IN the drawing room is a fine portrait of the founder of the family, PORTRAIT
OF LORD PAGET.
the first Lord Paget, a three-quarters length; in a bonnet, black gown furred,
with a great forked beard, the George, a stick, and dagger. A fine performance
of Holbein's.

FROM the house I ascended to the summit of the hill, CASTLE-HILL.
on the verge of Cank heath, to an ancient British post called the Castlehill.
It is encompassed with a vast rampart and two ditches. The two entrances are
opposite to each other, and before the eastern are several advanced works. It
commands a vast view, and was well situated for the purposes of a temporary
retreat. I refer the reader, for an account of the uses of these entrenchments,
to my Welsh Tour Vol. i. 412.
; for they are common to most parts of Britain. Doctor Plott ascribes this work
to King Canute; but I suspect it to be of earlier origin.

FROM hence is an extensive view of the chase, CANK FOREST.
or forest, of Cank, or Cannock, which Plott derives from the name of the
Danish prince Canuti Sylva. This vast tract was once covered with oaks, but for
some centuries past, has been spoiled of its honors; even old Drayton
Polyolbion, song 12.
deplores its losses, owing, as he says, to the avarice of the times. O woeful
Cank the while,
As brave a wood-nymph once as any of this isle,
Great Arden's eldest child!
Now by vile gain devoured!


BUT this change is much more beautifully described by Mr. Masters, in his
Itinerary Published under the title of Iter Boreale.
of 1675; in which he describes his journey in most elegant Latin. His passage
over Cank wood, and the translation by my ingenious friend The Rev. Richard
Williams of Vron, Flintshire.
, cannot but be acceptable to every reader of taste. Hinc mihi mox ingens
ericetum complet ocellos,
Sylva olim passim nymphis habitata ferisque:
Condensae quercus, domibus res nata struendis
Ornandoque foco, et validae spes unica classis.
Nunc umbris immissa dies, namque aequore vasto
Ante, retro, dextra, laeva, quo lumina cunque,
Verteris una humili consurgit vertice planta,
Purpuresque erice tellurem vestit amictu;
Dum floret suaves et naribus adflat odores
Haec ferimus saltem amissae solatia sylvae.
A vast and naked plain confines the view,
Where trees unnumber'd in past ages grew,
The green retreat of wood-nymphs; once the boast,
The pride, the guardians of their native coast.
Alas! how changed! each venerable oak
Long since has yielded to the woodman's stroke.
Wherever the chearless prospect meets the eye,
No shrub, no plant, except the Heath, is nigh;
The solitary Heath alone is there,
And wafts its sweetness in the desert air.
So sweet its scent, so rich its purple hue,
We half forget that here a forest grew.
R. W.

FROM Castle-hill I descended toward the great road, and passed by Fairwell
church Called Ecclesia Sanctae Mariae. DUGDALE.
, once conventual, FAIRWELL CHURCH.
belonging to a priory of Benedictine nuns. It originally was the property of
canons regular, or hermits; but at the request of Roger, Jeffry, and Robert,
brothers of Farewell, Dugdale Mon, i. 441.
and with the consent of the chapter of Lichfield, was bestowed on the priory,
about 1140, by Roger de Clinton, bishop of Litchfield; who endowed it with the
mill, and all the lands between the brooks, then called Chistals, and Blache
Siche, with other emoluments mentioned in his two grants. Henry II. was also a
great benefactor to these nuns, bestowing on them three ploughlands at
Fagereswell, one at Pipe, and one at Hamerwich, and forty acres of land cleared
from wood, in the forest of Cank, The same, 443, 444.
in 1527. On the suppression of the lesser religious houses, it was given to
Lichfield, to increase and maintain the choristers, in recompente of a pension
which should have been given by Cardinal Wolsey, out of his college at Oxford.
Leland Itix. iv. 119. Rymer, xiv. 193. -- This place is called in different
places Fairweld, Faurwell, Fagrewell, and Fagereswell.


AFTER a short ride, I reached the summit of a long but gentle descent, from
which is a fine view of the city of Lichfield, lying at the foot of it. The
situation is delightful, in a fertile and dry soil, with small risings on
almost every side. The cathedral, with its three spires, is a most striking
object.

Lichfield is a place of Saxon origin, LICHFIELD.
and owes its rise to Ceadda, or Chad, the great saint of Mercia. I omit the
legend of the thousand Christians, disciples of St. Amphibolus, that were
martyred here under Dioclesian; or the three kings slain at this place in
battle, as sculptured over the-town-hall. I take up its history about the year
656, when Oswy, king of the country, established a bishopric here, and made
Dwina, or Dinma, the first prelate. To him succeeded Cellach and Trumberct; and
on his demise, ST. CHAD.
the famous Ceadda. This pious man at first led an eremitical life, in a cell,
at the place on which now stands the church of his name, and supported himself
by the milk of a white hind. In this place he was discovered by Rufine, the son
of Wolphere, who was privately, instructed by him till the time of his
martyrdom, before-recited. Remorse, and consequential conversion, seized the
Pagan prince. As some species of expiation, he preferred the apostle to the
vacant see. He built himself a small house near the church, and, with seven or
eight of his brethren, during the interval of preaching, read and prayed in
private. On the approach of his death, flights of angels, sang hymns over his
cell. Miracles at his tomb confirmed the holiness of his life. A lunatic, that
by accident escaped from his keepers, lay a night on it; and in the morning was
found restored to his senses. The very earth taken out of it, was an infallible
remedy for all disorders incident to man or beast. Bid Hist. lib. iv. c. 3.
Ceadda was of course canonized; a shrine was erected in honor of him; great
was the concourse of devotees: the place increased and flourished.

THE history of our cathedrals is; in its beginning, but the history of
superstition, mixed with some truth and abundance of legend: humiliating proof
of the weakness of the human mind! yet all the fine arts of past times, and all
the magnificent works we now so justly admire, are owing to a species of piety
that every lover of the elegance of architecture must rejoice to have existed.

WE are told, that in the days of Jaruman, about the year 666, CATHEDRAL WHEN
FOUNDED.
the cathedral was founded.

I SHALL not trouble the reader with a dry list of prelates; but only mention
those distinguished by some remarkable event, that befell the sea during their
days.

IN those of Winfrid, successor to St. Chad, in 674, Theodore, archbishop of
Canterbury, thought fit to divide the bishopric into two, and to establish the
other at Sidnacester; in Lincolnshire, the present Stow^ Winfrid disapproving
this defalcation, was deprived for contumacy. The diocese might well bear
dividing; for at that time it contained the whole kingdom of Mercia. At
present, it comprehends all Staffordshire, except (...), which belong to
Worcester; the larger part of? (...) and about half Shropshire.

IN the time of Bishop Adulf, Ossa, king of the Mercians, procured liberty from
the pope of erecting the fee into an archbishop^ick, in 786, and to assign him
for suffragans Winchester, Hereford, L^g^ster (Leicester), Helmham, and
Dunwick. This honor died with Adulf.

A BISHOP Peter, in 1067, the year succeeding the Conquest, removed the sea to
St. John's, in Chester; where he died, and was interred, in 1085.

HIS successor, Robert de Limesey, smitten with the love of the gold and silver
Wharton's Augl. Sacr, i. 433.
with which the pious Earl Leofric had covered the walls of his new convent at
Coventry, in 1095 removed the sea to that city, and at once scraped from a
single beam, that supported a shrine, 500 marks worth of silver William of
Malmsbury, as quoted by Dugdale, Hist. Warwick, i. 157.
.

I NOW speak of a prelate of a different temper; (...) C^I^TON.
to whose munificence both the church and city were highly indebted. Roger de
Clinton, consecrated in 1129, took down the ancient Mercian cathedral. We are
not informed of the dimensions or nature of the building, any more than we are
of that built by this bishop. It must have been, according to the reigning mode
of the times, of the species of architecture usually called Saxon, with massy
pillars and round arches. There is not at present the left relic of this
style. But I am unacquainted with the accident, or calamity, which destroyed
the labors of this pious prelate; who took up the cross, and died at Antioch,
on a pilgrimage to the holy sepulcher.

AFTER a succession of twelve prelates, Walter de Langton, BISHOP LANGTON
treasurer of England, was consecrated bishop of this see, in 1296. He was
highly favored by Edward I. His prosperity was interrupted by the resentment of
the prince, who meanly revenged on the bishop a short imprisonment he had
suffered in the time of his father, for riotously destroying his deer. After a
persecution and confinement of above two years, he emerged from all his
difficulties, and resumed his pastoral charge in a manner that did him great
honor. He may be considered as the third architect of this cathedral: to him we
are indebted for the present elegant pile. He laid the foundation for our
Lady's chapel; an edifice of uncommon beauty, finished after his death with
money left for that purpose. He built the cloisters, and expended L2,000 upon a
shrine for St. Chad. He bestowed on the choir several rich vestments, a
chalice, and two cups of beaten gold, to the value of L200. To the vicars
choral he gave a standing cup, and an annual pension of L20, and procured for
them and the canons great immunities: in particular, there was an order from
the king to the justices of Staffordshire, that, without trial, they should
hang upon the next gallows diverse persons that by force kept their lands from
them. This prelate also surrounded the close with a wall and ditch, made the
great gate at the west end, and the postern at the south. He gave his own
palace, at the west end of the close, to the vicars choral, and built a new one
for himself at the east end. He partly built, or enlarged, the castle at
Eccleshal, and the manors of Heywood and Shugborow, and the palace in the
Strand. He finished his useful life in November 1321, and was buried in the
chapel of his own founding.

THE cathedral continued in the state it was left by Bishop Langton, till the
time of the dissolution, when the rich shrine of St. Chad, and other objects of
similar devotion, fell a prey to the rapacity of the prince. The building
continued in its pristine beauty till the unhappy wars of the last century,
CATHEDRAL FORTIFIED.
when it suffered greatly by three sieges. The situation of the place on an
eminence, surrounded by water and by deep ditches, and fortified with walls and
bastions, rendered it unhappily a proper place for a garrison.

IN 1643, it was possessed by the royalists of the county, under the Earl of
Chesterfield: when it underwent the attack rendered memorable by the death of
Lord Brook, commander of the parlementary forces. His lordship, in
reconnoitring the cathedral, in a wooden porch in Dams street, was shot into
the eye by a musket-ball, on March 2d, 1643. This happened to be the festival
of St. Chad, the patron of the church. The cavaliers attributed the direction
of the fatal bullet to the influence of the Saint, in resentment of the
sacrileges this nobleman was committing on his cathedral. What share the Saint
had in this affair, I will not pretend to say; but the musket was aimed, and
the trigger drawn, by a neighboring gentleman posted in the leads, known by the
name of dumb Dyot. The loss of Lord Brook gave very short respite to the
garrison; which was taken almost immediately after, by Sir John Gell.

IN April, in the same year, it was attacked by Prince Rupert At that time it
was commanded by Colonel Rouswel; a steady governor over an enthusiastic
garrison. He defended the plac^ with vast resolution. A breach was made by the
blowing up o^ a mine. The attack was made with great bravery, but great loss At
length the garrison gave up, on the most honorable conditions Clarendon, ii.
235.
. The colonel took care to plunder the church of the communion-plate, during
the time the fanatics were in possession. They used every species of
profanation; hunted a cat in it with hounds, to enjoy the fine echo from the
roof; and brought a calf, dressed in linen, to the font, and sprinkled it with
water, in derision of baptism Mr. Greene's MSS.
.

THE prince appointed Colonel Hervey Bagot During the time this gentleman
commanded at Lichfield, he received the following extraordinary challenge from
a Captain Hunt, a parlementary commander in Tamworth. Mercurius Aulicus, p.
1347. Bagot, thou son of an Egiption hoar, meet me half the way to morrow
morning, the half way betwixt Tamworth and Litchfeald, if thou dare; if not,
I will whippe thee when soever I meet thee. Tamworth, this December. 1644. The.
Hunt.


Colonel Bagot met him, and after a brisk action, whipped the fellow himself
into his retreat, and narrowly missed taking him.

the governor; who kept possession till the ruin of the king's affairs, in
1646; when the colonel, and other commanders, being satisfied that the king had
not an hundred men in any one place in the field, nor any garrison unbesieged,
surrendered on very honorable terms, on the 10th of July, to Adjutant Louthian
Articles of Surrender.
.

THE state of this church, after so many sieges, may easily be conceived. The
honor of restoring it to its former splendour, RESTORED BY BISHOP HACKET.
was reserved for John Hacket, presented to this see in 1661. On the very next
day after his arrival, he set his coach-horses, with teams, to remove the
rubbish; and in eight years time restored the cathedral to its present
beautiful state, at the expense of twenty thousand pounds Br. Biogr. iv. 2457.
A MS. with which Mr. Green favored me, makes the sum much less. See Appendix.
; one thousand of which was the gift of the dean and chapter; the rest was done
either at his own charge, or by benefactions resulting from his own
solicitations. He died in 1670. A very handsome tomb was erected in the choir
to his memory, with his effigies laid recumbent on it, with a mitre on his
head, and in his episcopal dress.

THE west front is of great elegance, adorned with the richest sculpture, and,
till of late, with rows of statues of prophets, kings of Judah, etc. and, above
all, a very bad one of Charles II. who had contributed to the repair of the
church, by a liberal gift of timber. This statue was the work of a Sir William
Wilson, originally a mason from Sutton Coldfield, who, after marrying a rich
wife, arrived at the dignity of knighthood.

THE sculptures round the doors were very elegant; but time, or violence, has
greatly impaired their beauty.

James II. when Duke of York, bestowed on this church the magnificent west
window. The fine painted glass was given of late years, by Dean Addenbrook.

THE northern door is extremely rich in sculptured moldings: RICH NORTH DOOR.
three of soliage, and three of small figures in ovals. In one of the lowest is
represented a monk baptizing a person kneeling before him. Probably the former
is intended for St. Chad; the latter for Wulferus. It is a misfortune, that the
ornaments of this cathedral are made of such friable stone, that what
fanaticism has spared, the weather has impaired.

IN the front are two fine spires, and a third in the center, FRONT.
of a vast height, and fine proportion.

THE roof was till of late covered with lead, but grew so greatly out of
repair, that the dean and chapter were obliged to substitute slates instead of
metal, on account of the narrow revenues left to maintain this venerable pile;
and, after the strictest economy, they will be under the necessity of
contributing from their own income, in order to complete their plan. The
excellent order that all the cathedrals I have visited are in, does great
credit to their members; who spare nothing from their own incomes to render
them not only decent, but elegant.

THE body is lofty, BODY.
supported by pillars formed of numbers of slender columns, with neat foliated
capitals. Along the walls of the ailes are rows of false arches, in the gothic
style, with a seat beneath.

THE upper rows of windows, in the body, are of an uncommon form, being
triangular, including three circles in each.

IN each transept are two places, formerly chapels; at present consistory
courts, and the vicar's vestry-room.

THE choir merits attention, CHOIR.
on account of the elegant sculpture about the windows, and the embattled
gallery that runs beneath them. On each side are six statues, now much
mutilated, placed in beautiful gothic niches, and richly painted. The first on
the left is St. Peter; the next is the Virgin; the third is Mary Magdalene,
with one leg bare, to denote her legendary wantonness. The other three are St.
Philip, St. James, and St. Christopher, with CHRIST on his shoulders.

THE beauty of this choir is much impaired by the impropriety of a rich
altar-piece, of Grecian architecture, terminating this elegant gothic building.

BEHIND this is St. Mary's chapel, ST. MARY'S CHAPEL.
with a stone skreen, the most elegant which can be imagined, embattled at top,
and adorned with several rows of gothic niches, of most exquisite workmanship;
each formerly containing a small statue. Beneath them are thirteen stalls, with
gothic work over each. In this chapel are nine windows, more narrow, lofty, and
of more elegant work than any of the others; three on each side, and three at
the end.

In this chapel stood the shrine of St. Chad. SHRINE OF ST. CHAD.
Here was interred Ceolred Saxon Chr. 51.
, king of the Mercians; and in later times, here was placed the magnificent
tomb (on the site of the shrine) of the first Lord Paget, adorned with columns,
MONUMENTS.
with two kneeling figures of a man and woman between the front and back
pillars. These were destroyed in the blind fury of civil war; as was another
fine tomb of a Lord Basset of Drayton, who died in 1389. Few indeed escaped. Of
those are the effigies of the great Bishop Langton, with his pastoral staff in
one hand, and the other hand in the action of benediction: another of Hugh de
Pateshul, who died in 1241, remarkable for having the stigmata, or marks of our
Savior's, wounds on the hands and feet: a respectful superstition of ancient
times. Dean Heywood is represented in his habit, and again naked, with the
emaciated change which death occasions.

HERE are several monuments within the walls, of a most frugal nature, having
no appearance of any part but the head and feet. From an intermediate bracket,
it is probable some favorite saint might have been honored with a rich image.

I HAVE a singular drawing of a tomb now lost, of a knight naked to his waist;
his legs and thighs armed, and at his feet and head a flag's horn; his hair
long and dishevelled a (...) his hands, as if he was reading a confession, or
act of cont^^ion: across his middle, on his ballet, is his coat of arms; which
show him to have been a Stanley. He is called Captain Stanley. (...) said to
have been excommunicated, but to have received funeral rites in holy ground
(having shown signs of repentance) on condition his monument should bear those
marks of disgrace. I and (...) Sir Humphry Stanley of Pipe, who died in the
reign of He^ VI^. who had a squabble with the chapter, about conveying the
water through his lands to the close. He also defrauded the pr^bendary of
Stotford of his tithes: so probably this might be the gentleman who incurred
the censure of the church for his ^mp^ety.

ON the floor, near the west door, are two droll epitaphs. Wiliam Roberts
A^SURD EPITAPHS.
of Overbury, some time malster in this town (tells ^ou) for the love I bore to
choir service, I chose to be buried in this place. He died Dec^. 16th, 1748.

THE other gives you the posthumous grief of a deceased wife, (...) clas^ical
knowledge of the living husband:

H. S. ^.

Secunda Hora^^^ Line^

viz.

(...), ^Z: (...)

(...)

Qu^

(...)

In St. Mary's chapel is a fragment of singular sculpture, of two (...) beneath
one is a king sitting, with one hand on young p^^^ce; in the other a monarch
also seated.

(...) there lay near the north door a very thick and clamsy (...), with a
cross ^eury on it, and a great knif^ resembling those represented in Monfo^on I
part II. tab 4xv. as (...) I know of ne^es in the Christian church which (...)
instrument; therefore presume it to be a simp^^ (...), and that the person whom
the stone comme^^^ (...) was neither more nor less than a butcher. These (...)
acknowledgements are not unfrequent: I have seen a deceas^ shearer de^^^^d by
his shears, and a tailor by his goose.

(...)
ON the part of the south choral aile is the chapter house* (...) is approached
through a passage with gothic (...) s^^te. The room is an octagon, consisting
of two long (...) six (...) or side^, orn^mented with arches, like the
approach; (...) the lost pillars, instead of being restored, are now supplied
wi^ (...) uniform pla^^ter, supported in the center by a clustered (...) l^m^.
Above is a library, instituted by Dean Heywood, conta^^^ng some ^aluable books
and manuscripts.

(...)
T(...), (...) surrounding sp^re, is built on three sides. The palace
originally founded by Bishop Longton, was rebuilt (...) manner by Bishop
Hacket. The dea^^^ (...) in the civil wars, was resrtored after the restoration.

I^ the hall of the ancient palace ^as pain^ed the life and most (...) of
Edward I. and his officers; a^ng (...)al^ deeds of Sir Roger de Pulesdor,
against my (...).

1. at Seafford. p. 74. 2.....Lichfield. p. 106. 3.....Lichfield. p. 109.
4.....Lichfield. p. 110.




THE prebendal houses are built around the close. The whole property is in the
church, except two houses on the south side, bordering on the pool, which,
before the present causeways were made, were granted to the city, that the
inhabitants might have landing-places, and access to the cathedral; which in
old times had a vast concourse of devotees to the shrine of St. Chad.

THIS precinct is supplied with water from Maple Hay, WATER.
about a mile and a half to the north; two fountains having been bestowed on
the church by Thomas Bromley, for ever, on the annual payment of 15 s. 4 d. I
find that this donation was made before 1293; for in that year a dispute arose
between the dean and chapter, and Thomas de Abbenhale, about the passage of the
water through his lands Mr. Greene's MSS.
.

THE whole close is of exempt jurisdiction, MEMBERS OF THE CHURCH.
and quite independent of the city. Its members are, a dean, precentor,
chancellor, and treasurer, who have prebends annexed to their offices. There
are twenty-seven other prebends, of which that of Eccleshal is annexed to the
bishopric. Out of these thirty-one, the dean and four more are styled canons
residentiary; which four are chosen out of the prebendaries and dignitaries.
Here are twelve minor canons: five of whom are called priest-vicars; the other
seven, lay-vicars, or singing-men. Both these were formerly collegiated, and
had their hall and houses. That of the priest-vicars is a handsome room,
rebuilt, and usually is lent for the purposes of assemblies, and other
amusements. A new house also stands on the ground once occupied by the house of
the choristers: before it stood, within memory, a very pretty gate, which
formed the entrance; on which was inscribed Domus Choristes.

BESIDES these members, are an organist, two vergers, a sacrist, and
sub-sacrist. It is remarkable, that the four archdeacons have here no stalls,
as is usual in all other cathedrals.

THE other churches are that of St. Mary, ST. MARY'S
rebuilt since the year 1716, when, the body being ruinous, its fine spire
steeple was unnecessarily pulled down. In the time of Edward III. a religious
guild was instituted, and after that much promoted by Dean Heywood. Five
priests belonged to this society, who officiated in the church Leland Itin. iv.
117.
. It is a vicarage, in the gift of the dean.

ST. Michael, ST. MICHAEL.
or Greenhill, is on an eminence east of the town; remarkable for its extensive
churchyard. This, and that of Stow, or St. Chad's, are curacies dependent on
St. Mary's. St. Chad's is reckoned the oldest of the churches of this city. In
its north end formerly stood the shrine of St. Catherine, whose chauntry-priest
had his stipend from the vicars-choral of the cathedral. Near it is the well of
the faint, where he had his first oratory; which in ancient times was much
frequented by devotees.

THE gray friars had a house here, GRAY FRIARS.
founded about 1229, by Bishop Alexander, who gave certain free burgages, on
which it was erected. It was destroyed by fire in 1291, but rebuilt in the
thirty-sixth of Henry VIII. It was granted to Richard Crumblethorn. At present,
both house and land support an hospital at Seal, in Leicestershire. The water
which now supplies the city, was granted, on St. James's day, in 1301, by Henry
Campanarius, son of Michael de Lichfield, bell-founder. Henry gave his
fountains at Foulwel, near Alreschaw, in pure and perpetual alms to the friars
of this house, with power to cover them with a head of stones, and of carrying
the pipes through his land, on condition that, whenever they wanted repair, the
friars were to indemnify him and his heirs for the damage done to the ground.
Several parts of the house are yet standing, and form a pleasant and
comfortable habitation. In digging near it, was found a large tombstone, with a
cross fleury, surrounded by a singular inscription, to the following purpose:
Ricardus mercator victus morte noverca
Qui cessat mercari pausat in hac ierarca.
Exculit ephebus paucis vivento diebus
Ecclesiam rebus ditat variis speciebus,
Vivat ut in Caelis nunc mercator Michaelis.
Richard the merchant here extended lies,
"Death, like a step-dame, gladly closed his eyes.
"No more he trades beyond the burning zone,
"But happy rests beneath this sacred stone.
"His benefactions to the church were great;
"Though young, he hastened from his mortal state.
"May he, though dead in trade, successful prove,
"Saint Michael's merchant in the realms above."


The stone is still to be seen there. A figure of it was sent to the
Gentleman's Magazine, by Mr. Green, in this city. The inscription and
translation are copied from the same magazine: for they appear to me to be
equally faithful and ingenious.

A LITTLE beyond, stands the hospital of St. John's, HOSPITAL OF ST. JOHN.
consisting of a master and twelve poor brethren. The master is a clergyman,
who has a good house and stipend for superintending the charity, and reading
daily prayers in the chapel belonging to it. The founder is uncertain. We only
know that William Smith, while bishop of Lichfield, in the time of Henry VII.
formed here a new foundation for a master, two priests, and ten poor men. Henry
patronized the charity, and endowed it with the old hospital of Denhal, and the
lands and impropriation of Burton church, both in Wiral, in Cheshire. Smith
also founded the grammar school in this city Leland Itin. iv. 117.
.

AMONG other things worthy of attention in this city, is the cabinet of
curiosities, ancient, natural, and artificial, in the possession of Mr. Green,
surgeon. It contains numbers of most valuable and instructive pieces in each
class. A visit to my worthy friend is the more agreeable, as he takes great
pleasure in gratifying the curiosity of all that favor him with their company.

THE city is divided from the close by a large piece of water, CITY.
originally three; at present remain only this and another, called Stowpool, a
little to the east. Bishop Langton made the causeway, bridges, and dams, at
each end of the pool. Before that, the great road went round Stowpool, near
Stow church. The city is neat, and well built; contains little more than three
thousand souls; is a place of great passage, has a considerable manufacture of
sail-cloth, and a small manufacture of saddle-cloths and tammies.

IT was originally governed by a guild and guild-master; HOW GOVERNED.
which were the origin of corporations, and took rise before the time of the
Conquest; the name being Saxon, signifying a fraternity, which unites and
flings its effects into a common stock, and is derived from Gildan, to pay
Spelman, 260. Kennet's Gloss. to Paroch. Antiq.
. A guild was a public feast, to commemorate the time of the institution; and
the guild hall the place in which the fraternity assembled: These (at lest
after the Conquest) paid fines to the crown, and formed part of its revenue.
Richard I. enabled it to purchase lands to the value of ten pounds; but it was
not chartered till the reign of Edward VI. who formed it into a regular
corporation by its first charter. This was confirmed by Queen Mary and
Elizabeth; and Charles II. granted a new one, confirming all the others.

IT is governed by a recorder, high steward, sheriff, two bailiffs, a
town clerk, and coroner. One of the bailiffs is elected by the bishop; the
others to be elected annually by and out of the brethren which form the
corporation. The city has power of life and death within their jurisdiction; a
court of record; and a pie-powder So called from pier poudreux, or dusty feet,
because country people usually come with dusty shoes to fairs. See Doctor
Pettingal's able dissertation on the word, Archaeol. i. 190.
court, which regulated the disputes arising in fairs.

THE district of the city and county of Lichfield is called the sheriff's ride,
DISTRICT.
and lies at unequal distances around. In this the corporation has exclusive
jurisdiction.

THIS city sent representatives in the thirty-third of Edward I; MEMBERS.
the fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, and twentieth of Edward II. and first,
fourteenth, and twenty-seventh of Edward III; from whose reign they were
discontinued, till that of Edward VI Willis's Notitia Parliam. iii. 50.
. The members are returned by the sheriff and bailiffs. The right of electing
is in the freemen by servitude; in the burgage-holders, or such who live in the
town and pay a small acknowlegement to the corporation; and in the freeholders
of forty shillings a year, within the sheriff's ride.

Lichfield is quite an open town: all the traces of the ditches made by Bishop
Clinton are lost, CASTLE.
as well as of the tower, on which he is said to have bestowed such great
expense Goodwin, 367.
. The name only of Castle Ditch, in the east part of the town, preserves its
memory. Probably in this fortress Richard II. kept his sumptuous Christmas, in
1397, when he consumed two hundred tuns of wine, and two thousand oxen Stow's
Chr. 318.
; but with more certainty we know that it was his place of confinement, in his
road to the tower of London, in 1399, a captive prince. The unhappy Richard
here attempted his escape, by slipping from the window of the high tower into a
garden; but being seen, was carried back to his imprisonment The same, 322.
.

Wall, WALL, OR ETOCETUM.
the ancient Etocetum, lies about a mile and a half from Lichfield, on the
Watling-street road, on a rising ground. There are still some remains of the
walls to be seen, mixed with roots of some very old ash-trees. Coins and tiles
evince it to have been the Roman Etocetum, as well as its distance from
Pennocrucium, a place somewhere on the river Penk, not far from Penkridge; but
the site not well ascertained. The Watling-street road enters the county near
Tamworth, and is continued into Shropshire, as far as Wroxeter. Near Wall,
another Roman road crosses it; and at the intersection is an exploratory mount,
about forty feet in diameter, called Offlo, in sight of Borough Cop, near
Lichfield, on which the martyrdom of the thousand Christians, in the tenth
persecution, is said to have happened. This is asserted by John Ross, a
Warwickshire antiquary, who died in 1491, near twelve hundred years after the
event; which he alone relates.

THESE lows, which have the same signification as laws in Scotland, LOWS.
and mean a mount, and placed here in sight of one another, were usually
designed as exploratory, and for the repetition of signals; and sometimes were
sepulchral.

I MADE one day an excursion in search of the seven Tumuli, TUMULI.
which are said, in the first volume of the Archaeologia, p. 57, to be near
this town. As I could discover only Borough Cop and Offlo, which fall within
the description, I was obliged to extend my ride. I passed through Whittington,
a village with a church and spire-steeple, about two miles N. E. of Lichfield.
Passed through Fisherwick park, a fine seat of the Earl of Donnegal, built from
a design of Mr. Brown's: the grounds bounded by the Tame, a beautiful river.
Elford church, village, and house, the seat of the late Earl of Suffolk, form a
pretty groupe of objects on the opposite bank. I forded the river, and went by
Elford Low, a verdant mount, which Doctor Plott proved, from examination, to
have been sepulchral; but, from its situation and elevation, I suspect it might
have had on it a specula, or watchtower; and that all the others might have
been for the same use, and to repeat signals in time of danger See Vegelius,
Not. ad lib. iii. 307.
.

Elford, before the Conquest, was possessed by Earl Algar; ELFORD.
after which the Conqueror himself seized it for his own use. About Henry the
Third's reign, William of Arderne was lord of it, and his posterity was seized
of it till the marriage of Maud, sole heiress of Sir John Arderne, with Thomas,
second son of Sir John Stanley of Latham, Knight; he dying in 1463, the 6th of
Edward IV. Margaret, his daughter, conveyed it by marriage to the Stantons: by
the same means it passed from the Stantons to the Smiths; from the Smiths to
the Huddlestons, and from the Huddlestons to the Bows. So very rapid was the
change of family in this place! It continued with the Bows four or five
generations; but, about the latter end of the last century, became the property
of the Honorable Craven Howard, by marriage with Mary, daughter of George
Bows, Esquire: and continued in his posterity (the Earls of Suffolk) till the
death of the late able and honest peer; when it devolved to his sister, the
Honorable Frances Howard.

IN the church are several fine monuments, CHURCH.
in the ancient style.

IN the north wall is a painted figure, with curled hair, gown down to his
knees, buskins on his legs, sword, gold chain, his hands closed, and a ring on
his thumb.

AN alabaster tomb of an Arderne, in a conic helmet, mail round his neck, chin,
and shoulders, and a collar of S S: one of his hands clasps that of his wife,
who has on a rich pearl bonnet, a cloak, and gown. Around the tomb are various
figures, in the dress of the times.

SIR William Smith, who died in 1500, lies armed, has a collar of S S. and is
represented beardless. He lies between his two wives: Isabel, in long hair and
a coronet, daughter of John Nevil Marquis of Montacute, brother to the great
Earl of Warwick; and Anne, daughter of William Stanton, by whom he acquired
this place. Monks, and coats of arms, surround the tomb: the first, to express
his piety; the last, to gratify the vanity of survivors.

SIR John Stanley, son of Thomas Stanley and Maud Arderne, lies under an arch,
with both hands supplicatory, in armor, with a mail muffler. His head rests on
a helm, with the Eagle and Child, the cognizance of the Stanleys.

UNDER another arch is his eldest son, a child with curled hair, and in a long
gown, recumbent: one hand points to his ear; the other holds a ball, the
unfortunate instrument of his death; on which was inscribed Ubi dolor ibi
digitus.

ABOUT two miles further, in a place called Elford Park Farm, I discovered the
site of the seven Tumuli, or Barrows: only one exists, the rest having been
destroyed within a few years; that which remains is small, and evidently
sepulchral. There had probably been a battle on this spot during the heptarchy:
whether between Saxons and Danes, or two Saxon princes, is uncertain.

Croxal church stands on an eminence. Within are two tombs, CROXAL CHURCH.
with the figures of an armed man and his wife, curiously engraven on each. One
commemorates John Horton, of Caton, and his spouse, Anne, daughter of John
Curzon, of this place. He died in the year 1500. His name is expressed in form
of a rebus; the word Hor cut upon a tun.

THE other tomb is of George Curzon, Esquire, and his wife Catharine, who died
in 1605. By the marriage of their only daughter Mary, to the famous Sir Edward
Sackville Earl of Dorset, it was conveyed to that noble family, in which it
still remains. The Curzons had been possessed of it ever since the reign of
Henry I.

PASS by Hazelar hamlet and chapel. The last is prebendal, and at present
converted into a pig-stye. Ride for some time by the side of the little river
Mease, the boundary, in this part, between Staffordshire and Derbyshire. A
little further is the village and church of Clifton, CLIFTON.
usually called Clifton Camville, from a family of that name, who possessed it
from the year 1200, or the second of King John, to about the year 1315. The
spire of the church is extremely elegant, joined to the tower by flying
buttresses. In the church is a tomb, with the effigies of Sir John Vernon of
Harleston, in this neighborhood, and Dame Allen, his wife. He is dressed in a
bonnet and long gown, with a chain from his neck, as usual with people of
worship; for he had been one of the king's counsel, and custos rotulorum of the
county of Derby. His wife is dressed in a square hood, with a purse, knife, and
beads by her side. They died in 1545.

VISIT Thorp Constantine, THORP.
a small church close by the seat of my matrimonial relation, William Inge,
Esquire, who deservedly bears the respectable and useful character of being the
best justice of any country gentleman in England. The living is in his gift,
and the whole parish his property. The manor was once belonging to the sea of
Ely; for it appears that Hotham, bishop of that diocese in 1316, obtained for
it a charter of free warren.

Henry Lord Scrope, favorite of Henry V. beheaded for his ungrateful plot
against his master, left to this church a vestment worth 26 s. 8 d. on
condition the priest should pray for his soul on Sundays, and in all his
masses. His will, made before his treason was discovered, is a curious piece of
hypocrisy Rymer's Faedera, ix. 275.
.

I CONTINUED this little ramble to Sekindon, a mile distant, on the edge of
Warwickshire, remarkable for a lofty artificial mount, the keep of a Saxon
castle, with a flat area beneath; at the bottom are the remains of a great
rampart, and the whole surrounded with a deep ditch. This place is celebrated
for the battle between Ethelbald, king of the Mercians, and Cuthred, king of
the West Saxons, in 755 Saxon Chr. 59.
, when Ethelbald, disdaining flight, was slain by Beonred; Brompton, 769.
Ingulphus, 853.
one of his own officers, who, for a short space, usurped the kingdom.

ABOUT four miles farther lies Tamworth, TAMWORTH
between the conflux of the Tame and the Ankor, which formed at this place the
appearance of an island; its Saxon name being Tameneordige and Tamanweorthe;
ige signifying an island. It had long been the residence of the Mercian
princes, who preferred it on account of its pleasant situation, and the
quantity of woodland, which afforded them in plenty the pleasures of the chase.
Offa dates a grant, in 781, to the monks of Worcester, A ROYAL RESIDENCE.
from his royal palace at Tamworth. Ceonulf, Bernwulf, and Burthred, date other
charters, in the years 814, 841, and 854, from the same place Dugdale's
Warwicksh. ii. 1130. Plott's Staffordsh. 410.
. The precinct of their residence was an enormous ditch, forty-five feet wide,
protecting the town on the north, west, and east; the rivers serving as a
defense on the other side. The ditch is filled up in many places, yet still
there are vestiges of it, and also of two mounts, on which probably stood two
small towers.

Tamworth was totally ruined by the incursions of the Danes: RUINED BY THE
DANES.
at length was restored by the celebrated Ethelfleda, who, RESTORED BY
ETHELFLEDA.
in the spring of 913, erected a tower Saxon Chr. 104.
on the artificial mount on which the present castle stands. Here, in 920, she
finished her glorious life, and in 922 she received, I may say, posthumous
honors, by the assemblage of the Mercian tribes she had conquered, who, with
the princes of North Wales, here acknowleged the sovereign power of her brother
Edward, The same, 110.
probably obtained by her valor and prudence.

THE town, or borough, as it was called on the Conquest, continued part of the
royal demesne, but was afterward set at a certain rent to the lords of the
castle; the first of whom, after that event, MARMIONS.
was Robert Marmion, one of the followers of the Conqueror, on whom it was
bestowed. His posterity remained masters of it for some generations, holding of
the crown in capite, by the service of finding three knights at their own
costs, for forty days, in the wars of Wales.

ON the death of Philip Marmion, in 1291, the twentieth of Edward I. this
fortress descended to his eldest daughter Joan, wife of William Mortein; who
dying without issue, it fell three years after, by agreement among the
coheirs, to Joan, FREVILES.
a relation of Philip Marmion, and wife of Alexander Frevile. The Freviles by
this means owned it till the year 1419, or seventh of Henry V. when Sir Baldwyn
Frevile dying childless, Thomas Ferrers, second son of William Lord Ferrers, of
Groby, became master of it, in right of Elizabeth his wife, eldest of the three
sisters of Sir Baldwyn. FERRERS.
The Ferrers held it till the beginning of the present century; when it passed
into the family of the Comptons, by the marriage of James Earl of Northampton
with Elizabeth, sister to Robert Lord Tamworth, grandson and heir apparent to
Robert Earl Ferrers, who had obtained it by his marriage, in 1688, with Anne,
daughter of Sir Humphrey Ferrers, of this place. Lady Charlotte Compton, sole
surviving daughter of the match, Baroness de Ferrers in right of her mother,
married the present Lord Townshend, whose son, now Lord De Ferrers, enjoys the
place. I must not forget to add, that Sir John Baldwyn, Knight, on the
coronation of Richard II. claimed the honor of being the king's champion, by
virtue of tenure of this castle (a service performed by his predecessors the
Marmions); but it being found that the Marmions held their right only from the
tenure of Scrivelsby manor, it was challenged by Sir John Dymock, the then
owner, and adjudged to him Dugdale's Warwicksh. ii. 1134.
.

TILL the present century it had been the seat of its lords. CASTLES.
The rooms are numerous, but inconvenient and irregular, except a dining room
and drawing room; each with large projecting windows. Around the first are
painted great numbers of coats of arms of the family of the Ferrers, and its
alliances. The chimney-piece of the drawing room is richly carved, in the old
taste, and beneath the arms is the motto, Only one.

THE beauty of the situation of Tamworth is seen from the castle to great
advantage, varied with rich meadows, two bridges over the Tame and the Ankor,
and the rivers wandering picturesquely along the country. Michael Drayton, born
on the banks of the last, most elegantly paints out his love-complaints, and
celebrates the last in the sweetest strain. Clear Ankor, on whose silver-sanded
shore
My soul-shrin'd saint, my fair idea lies:
A blessed brook, whose milk-white swans adore
Thy crystal stream, refined by her eyes;
Where sweet myrrh-breathing zephyr in the spring
Gently distills his nectar-dropping showers;
Where nightingales in Arden sit and sing
Amongst the dainty dew-impearled flowers.
Say thus, fair brook, when thou shall see thy queen:
Lo, here thy shepherd spent his wandering days,
And in these shades, dear nymph, he often has been,
And here to thee he sacrificed his tears.
Fair Arden, thou my Tempe art alone;
And thou, sweet Ankor, art my Helicon.


THE town is large and well built; part is situated in Staffordshire, and part
in Warwickshire; for which reason its members are returned by the sheriffs of
both counties Willis Notitia Parl, iii. 51.
. It first sent representatives in the fifth year of Queen Elizabeth: and was
made a corporation two years before; which consists of two bailiffs, a
recorder, and twenty-four capital burgesses. The right of voting is in the
inhabitants paying scot and lot.

THE church is large, CHURCH.
built at different times. Near the chancel are two great round arches, with
zigzag moldings, which were prior to the reign of Henry III. when this species
of arch fell into disuse. Here are numbers of monuments, some ancient, of the
Freviles and Ferrers, with their figures, and those of their wives. Here is
also a handsome monument of John Ferrers, Esquire, who died in 1680, aged 52;
and of his son Sir Humphry Ferrers, knight, who died in 1678, aged 25. Their
figures are represented in marble, as big as life, in a Roman dress, long
flowing hair, and half-kneeling. Sir Humphry was the last male heir of his line.

THE church is dedicated to St. Editha, daughter to king Edgar; who, preferring
the cloistered life to the troubles of a throne, received after death the honor
of saintship. It has been said, that she founded here a nunnery, and that
Robert Marmion, lord of this place, received from her very sensible marks of
resentment, for daring to remove the holy sisters. St. Editha descended from
heaven, and, while Marmion was lying down, after a costly feast, in Tamworth
castle, she admonished him to restore them to their rights, and, by way of
memorandum, gave him such a blow with her crosier on his side, that he rose in
extreme torments; which instantly ceased on repentance and restitution Dugdale,
Baron, i. 375.
. It is probable that this very Marmion made the church collegiate, and placed
here a dean and six prebendaries, each of whom had his substitute, or vicar;
for it is the opinion of Leland, this foundation arose from the piety of one of
the name Itin. iv. 121.
The idle legend might have been formed from some real offense As it is very
doubtful whether, there had been any nunnery here, the offense might be the
expulsion of the nuns from Polesworth convent, dedicated to Saint Editha; but
were restored by Robert Marmion and his wife. Stevens, 1251. Tanner, 566.
, which might have been expiated in the manner usual in old times.

SAINT Editha had also an image here. After the dissolution, the seven
incumbents had pensions, as late as 1553 Willis, ii. 218.
. Queen Elizabeth granted the college, and all its prebends, to Edward Downing
and Peter Ashton. At present, this great church is only a curacy.

In 1286, HOSPITAL.
the fifteenth of Edward I. Philip Marmion dedicated here an hospital to St.
James, intending to found a house of Premonstrensians; but, till he could
execute his design, granted it to William of Combery-hall, with all its
appurtenances, and pasture in Ashfield for four oxen and two horses, on
condition it should celebrate mass for his soul Tanner, 502.
. There is now an hospital founded for more useful purposes, by Mr. Guy.

FROM Tamworth I returned to Lichfield, and resumed my journey along the London
road.

ABOUT two miles from the city, SWINFEN.
see on the left Swinfen, the seat of a gentleman of the same name; happy in
its beautiful demesne, ornamented with an extent of water, meads, and
hanging-woods. This place was once the property of the Spermores; but in the
time of Henry VI. by marriage of Joyce, daughter and heiress of the family,
with Willam Swinfen, it came into that name. The executors of the last of that
line, a Doctor Swinfen, sold it, in the present century, to Mr. Swinfen, of
London; in whose family it continues.

A LITTLE farther, the great Watling-street crosses the road near Weford, or
the ford on the way. This is seated on Blackbrook, a small stream, now
furnished with a bridge. The stream runs through a beautiful tract of narrow
but rich meadows, prettily bounded by low and fertile risings. This spot had
been the scene of much civil rage. A Purefoy was here slain by Sir Henry
Willoughby, in the cause of Edward IV; and Sir Henry in the same place fought,
and was desperately wounded by Lord L'Isle Leland Itin. iv. 120. Probably one
of the neighboring L'Isles of Moxhull.
. Weford Common, a black heath, succeeds; and a little beyond, on the left,
stood Canwell priory, founded about the year 1142, by Geva, CANWELL.
widow of Jeffry Riddel, and daughter of Hugh Earl of Chester, for Benedictine
monks. It had ten pounds a year in spiritualities, and fifteen pounds ten
shillings and three pence in temporalities. It became at length a cell for a
solitary monk; was suppressed, and granted by Henry VIII. to Cardinal Wolsey,
toward the endowment of his two colleges Tanner, 497.
.

NEAR this place I entered WARWICKSHIRE, in the parish of Middleton; from which
the Willoughbies take their title. The road is over part of the common of
Sutton Cofield, which is finely bounded on the left by a long-continued range
of woods.

A FEW miles farther, I passed Moxhull hall, MOXHULL.
the neat-dressed seat of Mr. Hacket, a descendant of the worthy bishop of that
name; whose son, by marriage with Mary, eldest daughter of John L'Isle, became
owner of it, after it had been in the L'Isles, or de Insula, for some hundreds
of years Dugdale Warwicksh, ii. 936.
. On the right is the parish church, Wishaw, and a little farther, that of
Curdworth. CURDWORTH.
That manor was possessed, in the time of the Conqueror, by Turchil de Warwik,
son of Alwine, a potent Saxon in the time of Edward the Confessor. Turchil is
recorded to have been the first in England who, in imitation of the Normans,
took a surname, stiling himself Turchil de Eardine, Dugdale Warwiksh. ii. 925.
or Arden, from his residence in that part of the country then called Arden, or
the forest; a word, according to Cambden, i. 606.
by which both Britons and Gauls expressed a woodland tract. He was ancestor to
the ancient and respectable family which flourished under the same name, till
the year 1643, when it was lost in the male line, by the death of Robert Arden.

ABOUT half a mile from Curdworth, I crossed the Tame at Curdworth Bridge, and
a mile further the Cole, The view from hence, of the stream watering a range of
rich meadows, bounded on one side by hanging-woods, is extremely agreeable; as
is, a little farther, the town of Coleshill, COLESHILL.
covering the steep ascent of a lofty brow, on whose top appears the handsome
church and elegant spire.

THE place had been long a royal demesne; was possessed by Edward the
Confessor, and afterward by the Conqueror. It fell, either in his reign or
that of William Rufus, into the hands of the Clintons, in whom it continued
till the year 1353, the twenty-seventh of Edward III; when it passed to Sir
John de Mountfort, by virtue of his marriage with Joan, daughter of Sir John
Clinton. Dugdale Warwicksh. ii. 925.
The Mountforts held it till the reign of Henry VII. when, by the cruel
attainder and execution of Sir Simon Mountfort, for sending thirty pounds, by
his younger son Henry, to Perkin Warbeck, on supposition that Perkin was the
real son of his former master Edward IV. This brought ruin on himself and
family. He was tried at Guildhall, in 1494, and condemned to be drawn through
the city, and hanged and quartered at Tyburn. Dugdale Warwicksh. ii. 1012.
Digby Pedigree, viii. 15.
His manor of Coleshill was immediately bestowed on Simon Digby,
deputy-constable of the castle, who brought the unfortunate gentleman to the
bar. He was a younger son of the house of Tilton of Leicestershire, ancestor of
the Lord Digby, the present worthy possessor.

IN the upper part of the town is a small PLACE, neatly built. The churchyard
commands a fine view of a rich country. The vicarage was formerly belonging to
Markgate, in Bedfordshire, but is now in the gift of its lord. The spire, lofty
as it is, was fifteen feet higher, before it had been struck with lightning in
1550; when the inhabitants sold one of the bells toward the repairs.

IN the church are numbers of fine tombs of the Digbies, CHURCH.
with their figures recumbent. Among others, that of the abovementioned Simon,
and his spouse Alice, who lie under a tomb erected by himself. He died in 1519:
she survived him, and left by her will a silver penny to every child under the
age of nine, whose parents were housekeepers in this parish (beginning with
those next the church) on condition that, every day in the year, after the
sacring of the high mass, they should kneel down at the altar and say five
paternosters, an ave, and a creed, for her soul, that of her husband, and all
Christian souls; and the annual sum of six shillings and eight pence to the
dean, for seeing the same duly performed, and likewise for performing the same
himself. At the reformation, this custom was changed. The inhabitants purchased
from the crown the lands charged with this money part maintains a school: the
rest is distributed to such children who repair to the church every morning at
ten o'clock, and say the Lord's prayer; and the clerk has an allowance for
seeing the performance, and for the ringing the bell to summon them Dungale
Warwicksh. ii. 1013, 1014.
.

THE figure of Simon Digby is in armor, with lank hair, and bare-headed. His
grandson John, and great grandson George, knighted at the siege of Zutphen, are
represented in the same manner, with their wives. The first died in 1558; the
last in 1586. These are of alabaster, and painted.

THE tomb of Reginald, son of Simon, who died in 1549, differs. His figure, and
that of his wife, are engraven on a flat slab of marble, with twelve of their
children at their feet.

ON a pedestal, with an urn at the top, is an inscription to Kildare Lord
Digby, of Geashil, in the kingdom of Ireland, who died in 1661; and on the
opposite side is another, in memory of his lady, who died in 1692, drawn up by
Bishop Hough, forming a character uncommonly amiable and exemplary; the
integrity of that worthy prelate giving sanction to every line.

I FELT great pleasure in perusing an epitaph, by a grateful mistress, to the
memory of a worthy domestic, Mary Wheely, whom she styles an excellent servant
and good friend; for what is a faithful servant but an humble friend?

BENEATH two arches are two ancient figures of cross-legged knights, armed in
mail, with short surtouts, in all respects alike; only one has a dog, the other
a lion, at his feet. On their shields are two fleurs de lis, which denote them
to have been some of the earlier Clintons; and by Dugdale Dugdale, etc. 1009.
it appears, that one was John de Clinton, lord of this place, a strong
adherent to the barons against Henry III. who suffered a temporary forfeiture
of his estate; but was restored to it by the famous Dictum de Kenelworth. He
became a favorite of Edward I. and clamed for his manor of Coleshill by
prescription, assize of bread and beer, gallows, pillorie, tumbril, a
court leet, infangthef, outfangthef, mercate, fair, and free warren. He died
in the year 1291, the period of crusades, and is buried cross-legged.

I OBSERVE, that the piety of the Catholics has given the same attitude to
several of the Sherborns, in the church of Mitton, in Yorkshire, who were
interred in the last century; so that I suspect it to have sometimes been
considered merely as a reverential sign of our SAVIOR'S suffering.

THE deserted seat of the Digbies lies about a mile or two from the town,
COLESHILL HALL.
in a fine park. The house consists but of one story, besides garrets; yet the
apartments are numerous, approachable by strange and unintelligible access to
all that are unacquainted with them, according to the style of old buildings.

FROM Coleshill I descended to pay a respectful pilgrimage to Blithe Hall, the
seat of the great antiquary Sir William Dugdale; BLITHE HALL.
from whose indefatigable labors, his successors in the science draw such
endless helps. In respect to this county, he has fairly baffled every effort
toward the discovery of any thing that could escape his penetrating eye.

THE house lies about a mile below Coleshill, on the river Blithe; was
purchased by Sir William from Sir Walter Aston, and made his place of
residence. It at present belongs (by female descent) to Richard Guest, Esquire;
whose politeness to an inquisitive intruder I shall ever acknowledge. He was so
obliging as to show me an excellent half-length of his great ancestor, dressed
in black, with a bundle of manuscripts in his hand, PORTRAIT OF SIR WILLIAM
DUGDALE.
painted at the age of sixty, by Peter Bosscler, I imagine, the same with the
person Mr. Walpole calls Bustler, ii. 26.
in 1665.

ANOTHER portrait of his wife, Margery, daughter of John Huntback, Esquire, of
Sewal, in Staffordshire; a head of Lord Keeper Bridgeman, a thin primitive
face; LORD KEEPER LITTLETON.
another of Lord Clarendon; and a third of Lord Keeper Littleton, with a jovial
open countenance. As a judge (for he had been lord chief justice of the King's
Bench) he was, as Sir Edward Coke said, a well-poised and weighed man Lloyd,
ii. 322.
. As lord keeper, dispirited, from the melancholy apprehensions he had of the
approaching calamities of the times. For a while he temporized with the views
of the opposition. At length, finding the resolution of the leaders to seize on
the seals, and make use of them against his royal master, he gave them up to a
messenger, appointed for that purpose, and followed them, at the hazard of his
life, to the king at York; Clarendon, ii. 574.
where he loyally resumed their use, till his death, at Oxford, in 1645; when
he at once performed the functions of lord keeper, privy-counsellor, and
colonel of a regiment of foot.

A HALF-LENGTH of the famous Elias Ashmole, ELIAS ASHMOLE.
whom Antony Wood styles the greatest virtuoso and curioso ever known or read
of in England. Uxor solis took up its habitation in his breast, and in his
bosom the great God did abundantly shore up the treasures of all sorts of
wisdom and knowledge Athen Oxon. ii. 289.
. It is well for poor Ashmole, that the peevish historian never read the
wonderful diary of his life, in which is a most minute and filthy detail of all
his ails and strange mishaps Mr. Ashmole's Life, 287.
; otherwise Antony never would have been so profuse of his praise. Yet, amidst
his foibles, he was an able botanist; of most uncommon knowledge in the study of
antiquity and records; a physician, herald, chemist, and astrologer. On
rectifying his nativity, he found his birth to have been on the 23d of May
1617, about three in the morning, or 3 hours 25 minutes 49 seconds A. M. the
quarter 8 of II ascending; but, upon Mr. Lilly's rectification thereof, anno
1667, he makes the quarter 36 ascending Mr. Ashmole's life.
. This jargon should not deprive him of his real merit. To him we owe a most
elaborate treatise on the institution of the order of the Garter, he having
been Windsor herald; various manuscripts respecting county antiquities, still
extant; and, above all, the foundation of the Museum at Oxford, which bears his
name, finished in 1682, on purpose to receive the vast collection of
curiosities bestowed by him on that university, which he had defended in 1646,
as comptroller of the ordnance. Mr. Ashmole was doubly engaged to the worthy
owner of this house: first, by the friendship resulting from the congenial turn
of their studies; and again, by his alliance with Sir William, in his marriage
with his daughter Elizabeth, which proved a source of great generosity, on his
part, toward his father-in-law and his family. By his portrait, drawn by Nave,
Probably Neve.
in 1664, in his herald's coat, he appears to have been a good-looking man, in
long hair, with a view of Windsor in the back-ground.

FROM hence I visited Maxstoke castle, MAXSTOKE CASTLE.
three miles south-east, most of the way through fields. The castle is very
entire, and stands on a plain, in a most sequestered spot, surrounded with
trees, and guarded by a moat. It is of a square form: at each corner is an
hexagonal tower, and at the entrance a fine gateway, with a tower of the same
form with the rest on each side. The gates are in their original state, covered
with plates of iron. Above, are the holes for pouring of hot sand, or melted
lead, on assailants, and the cavity which once held the portcullis. These gates
were made in the time of Humphry Stafford earl (afterward duke) of Buckingham.
He fixed on them his arms (still remaining) impaled with those of his wife,
Anne Nevil; supported by two antelopes, derived from his mother, as one of the
daughters of Thomas Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester; and added the burning nave,
or knot, the cognizance of his own ancestors. Within the court the walls are
pierced with diverse cells, the ancient casernes of the garrison.

MUCH of the habitable part is still standing, but part was burnt by accident;
what remains is the dwelling house of Mr. Dilkes, in whose family it has been
for several generations. The great vault ribbed with stone, the old chapel, and
kitchen, still remain; and the noble old hall, and a great dining room with a
most curious carved door and chimney, are still in use.

AFTER the Conquest, OWNERS.
it was given to Turchil de Warwick; from one of his posterity it was granted
to the Limesies, lords of Long Icbinton and Solibull; from them to the
Odingfells; and from the Odingfells, by Ida, eldest daughter of the last of the
name, to the great family of the Clintons before mentioned, who made it their
chief seat. In 1437, the sixteenth of Henry VI. Sir William de Clinton
exchanged it with Humphry earl of Buckingham, with whom it became a favorite
residence. On the execution of his son Henry Duke of Buckingham, in 1483, the
first of Richard III. it was seized by the king. Richard, on his march toward
Nottingham, ordered all the inner buildings of Kenelworth castle to be removed
here Dugdale, ii. 995.
. After his defeat and death in Bosworth field, this place reverted to Edward,
son of the last duke; who fell a victim, in 1521, to Henry VIII. a tyrant
greater, and more inexcusable, than him who destroyed the father. The estates,
again forfeited, were granted to Sir William Compton, a favorite, and gallant
tilter, in the reign of the former, and ancestor of the Earl of Northampton. In
1596, his great grandson, William Lord Compton, conveyed it to Lord Keeper
Egerton, who, in two years after, sold it to Thomas Dilke, Esquire; in whose
family it remains.

I DID not visit the neighboring priory of Maxstoke; so shall say no more of
it; than that it was founded in 1336, by Sir William de Clinton, afterward
Earl of Huntingdon, and peopled with canons regular of St. Augustine Tanner, 583.


RETURNED through Coleshill, and at a small distance, on the left of the road,
digressed to Packington, the seat of the Earl of Ailsford. PACKINGTON.
The manor anciently belonged to the priory of Kenelworth, being granted to it
by Geoffry de Clinton, lord chamberlain to Herny II: At the dissolution, it was
sold for the sum of six hundred and twenty-one pounds and one penny, to John
Fisher, Esquire, gentleman-pensioner to Henry VIII. and four succeeding
monarchs. By the marriage of Mary daughter and heiress of Sir Clement Fisher,
Baronet, with Heneage, second Earl of Ailsford, the place was transferred to
that noble family. The situation has of late years been highly improved by the
change of the road. The grounds are prettily sloped by nature, are well wooded,
and the bottom filled with two pleasing pieces of water. The house has also
undergone many alterations; is a plain convenient building; except on one side,
where opens a loggio (in our climate) most admirably adapted for the
encouragement of rheums and rheumatisms.

WITHIN is a good portrait of its founder, John Fisher; a halflength, with a
square white beard, close black cap, upright ruff, and black jacket.

A BEAUTIFUL picture of Henrietta Maria, consort to Charles I. She is
represented sitting, in blue, with roses in her hand, and her thorny crown by
her.

HERE is also a portrait of Charles Duke of Somerset, in his robes, father to
the Countess Dowager of Ailsford.

THE country here begins to lose the comforts of a gravelly soil, and changes
to the wet-retaining clay. At the pleasant village of Mireden it is uncommonly
deep, MIREDEN.
but by the assistance of turnpikes become an excellent road. The pretty houses
on each side of the way, and the magnificent inn, famed for time immemorial for
its excellent malt-liquor, with the various embellishments (made by the old
innkeeper, Reynolds) of gateway, little ponds, statues, and other whims,
enliven the spot greatly.

THE church is seated a little higher up, CHURCH.
on an eminence. Within is a handsome alabaster tomb of John Wyard, in armor
and mail, with sword and dagger by his side; his arms a cinquefoil on his
breast. This gentleman had been 'squire (as the inscription relates) to Thomas
de Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, and founder of a chauntry in this church; near
which he had his residence. He was also knight of the shire for this county, in
the second year of Richard II.

HERE is another tomb, with a figure in stone, supposed to have been that of
one of the Walshes, the ancient lords of this manor. His figure, as well as the
former, is recumbent, with their hands in the action of supplication: but this
gentleman has a short skirt over the lower part of his armor.

THE ancient name of this place was Alspath, or Ailespede, even till the
beginning of the reign of Henry VI; about which time, becoming a great
thoroughfare, it got the name of Myreden; den signifying a bottom, and mire,
dirt: and I can well vouch for the propriety of the appellation, before the
institution of turnpikes.

IN March 1739-40, I changed my Welsh school for one nearer to the capital, OLD
FASHION OF TRAVELING.
and traveled in the Chester stage; then no despicable vehicle for country
gentlemen. The first day, with much labor, we got from Chester to Whichurch,
twenty miles; the second day, to the Welsh Harp; the third, to Coventry; the
fourth, to Northampton; the fifth, to Dunstable; and, as a wondrous effort, on
the last, to London before the commencement of night. The strain and labor of
six good horses, sometimes eight, drew us through the sloughs of Mireden, and
many other places. We were constantly out two hours before day, and as late at
night; and in the depth of winter proportionably later.

Families which traveled in their own carriages, contracted with Benson and
Co. and were dragged up in the same number of days, by three sets of able
horses.

THE single gentlemen, then a hardy race, equipped in jackboots and trowsers,
up to their middle, rode post through thick and thin, and, guarded against the
mire, defied the frequent stumble and fall; arose and pursued their journey
with alacrity: while in these days their enervated posterity sleep away their
rapid journies in easy chaises, fitted for the conveyance of the soft
inhabitants of Sybaris.

I CONTINUED my way to Coventry through Allesey, ALLESEY.
a village with a church and spire-steeple. The place was originally a member
of that city, Bishop Clinton having permitted a chapel to be built here for the
use of the poor, reserving the right of burial to the mother church Dugdale, i.
129.
. In a place called The Parks, stood a castle, doubly moated, probably the
residence of the Hastings, who possessed this place in the time of Edward I.
The present handsome seat is owned by -- Neale, Esquire.

AFTER a ride of two miles from hence, COVENTRY.
I entered Coventry, a great and ancient city. The time of its foundation is
unknown. By the addition of tree, a town, it should seem as if it had been
inhabited by the Britons, before the Saxons added the word coven to it, as is
conjectured, from a nunnery very anciently established here. The site of the
old town is supposed to have been on the north side of the present, not only
because great foundations are discovered about the spot called St. Nicholas
Churchyard, but, I may add, from the tumulus near it, on the Atherston road,
called Bars Hill, on which might have been a castelet.

THE certainty of there having been a convent here in the early times, SAXON
NUNNERY.
depends on the authority of John Rous Leland (iv. 124.) says it was founded by
king Canute.
who says, that when the traitor Edric ravaged this country, in 1016, he burnt
the nunnery in this city, of which a holy virgin, St. Osburg, had been abbess.

ON its ruins, Leofric, fifth earl of Mercia, and his countess Godeva, founded
a monastery. At that period Coventry must have been a considerable place, and
its number of inhabitants great, otherwise the fair Godeva could never have
made so great a merit of riding naked through the town, STORY OF GODEVA.
to redeem it from the intolerable taxes and grievances it at that time labored
under. The cause must have been equal to the deed. Her husband long resisted
her importunity in its behalf, on account of the profits that accrued to him:
at length thought to silence her by the strange proposal: she accepted it, and,
being happy in fine flowing locks, rode, decently covered to her very feet with
her lovely tresses. The history was preserved in a picture, about the time of
Richard II. in which were portrayed the earl and countess. He holds a charter
of freedom in his hand, and thus addresses his lady: I Luriche (Leofric) for
love of thee,
Do make Coventre toll-free.


Legend says, that previous to her ride, all the inhabitants were ordered, on
pain of death, to shut themselves up during the time; but that the curiosity of
a certain tailor, overcoming fear, took a single peep; which is commemorated
even at present, by a figure looking out of a wall in the great street. To this
day, the love of Godeva to the city is annually remembered, by a procession;
and a valiant fair still rides (not literally like the good countess) but in
silk, closely fitted to her limbs, and of color emulating their complexion.

AFTER the Conquest, NORMAN OWNERS.
the lordship of this city fell, by the marriage of Lucia (daughter to Algar,
successor and son of Edwin, and grandson of Leofric) with her third husband
Randle Meschine, to the earls of Chester Leicester, 127. Cambden, i. 611.
. Randle bestowed on it the same privileges that Linsda enjoyed, and bestowed
great part of the city on the monks. When Henry III. took the earldom of
Chester into his hands, the remainder of Coventry fell to William de Albany
earl of Arundel, in right of his wife Mabil, daughter of Hugh Cevelio^. On the
death of Hugh earl of Arundel, in 1243, it fell to Roger de Montalto, who had
married Cecilia, his youngest sister. After that, it was granted by his
grandson Robert, in default of issue, to Isabel, queen mother of Edward III.
with remainder to John of Eltham, afterward earl of Cornwall; and then to
Edward king of England. It thus became annexed to the earldom of Cornwall,
INCORPORATED.
and became more immediately the object of royal favor. Edward III. in the
eighteenth of his reign, by letters dated the 20th of January, made it a
corporation, consisting of a mayor and two bailiffs, whom the inhabitants were
to choose out of themselves. The first mayor was John Ward, who was chosen in
the year 1348.

Henry VI. in 1451, bestowed on this city a very particular mark of his
affection, by erecting it, with a considerable district around, MADE A COUNTY.
into a county Accurately laid down in Mr. Beighton's map of Warwickshire.
, by the name of the city and county of Coventry; and ordered that the bailiffs
from that time should be sheriffs: so that at present, it is governed by a
mayor, recorder, two sheriffs, ten aldermen, thirty-one superior and
twenty-five inferior common-council-men. Henry came expressly to Coventry,
heard mass in St. Michael's church, presented the church with a gown of cloth
of gold, and then created the first sheriffs.

THE representatives are chosen by the citizens paying scot and lot, and are
returned by the sheriffs. The city sent members the four first parlements of
Edward I. That privilege was interrupted (except the eighth of Edward II. and
twentieth and twenty-fifth of Edward III.) till the thirty-first of Henry VI.
when it was resumed.

AMONG all its privileges, unfortunately for the magistrates, it has that of
life and death.

Two parlements have been held in this city, PARLEMENTS HELD HERE.
in the great chamber of the priory. The first, in 1404, by Henry IV. which was
styled Parliamentum indoctorum; not that it consisted of a greater number of
blockheads than parlements ordinarily do, but from its inveteracy against the
clergy, whose revenues it was determined not to spare: whence it was also
called the Laymen's Parliament.

THE other was held in the chapter house of the priory, in 1459, by Henry VI.
and was called Parliamentum diabolicum, by reason of the multitude of
attainders passed against Richard Duke of York, and his adherents.

THE trade of this city was originally the manufacture of cloth, TRADE, CLOTH.
and caps, or bonnets Anderson's Dict. i. 262.
, which arose to a great degree of consequence, as early as 1436, and continued
till the last century, when it was changed for the worsted business; and, for a
long time, the making and sale of shags, camblets, lastings, tammies, etc. etc.
proved a very extensive and profitable trade; but this gradually migrated into
Leicestershire and Northamptonshire; and at present, only a few articles, such
as camblets and lastings, constitute the woollen trade.

I MUST remark, that in the beginning, or middle, BLUE THREAD.
of the sixteenth century, Coventry had a vast manufacture of blue thread;
which was lost before the year 1581 Anderson's Dict. i 422.
. So famous was it for its dye, that true as Coventry blue became proverbial.

ABOUT eighty years ago, RIBANDS.
the silk manufacture of ribands was introduced here, and, for the first thirty
years, remained in the hands of a few people, who acquired vast fortunes; since
which, it has extended to a great degree, and is supposed to employ at left ten
thousand people; and has likewise spread into the neighboring towns, such as
Nuneaton, and other places. Such real good results from our little vanities!

THERE are about a dozen traders in Coventry, who have houses in London; to
which they send up weekly great quantities of ribands; and, before our unhappy
breach with America, a very extensive trade was carried on with the colonies:
but the home-consumption has been always reckoned most material. A few ribands
are exported to Spain, Portugal, and Russia; but the French undersell us at
those markets.

WITHIN these few years, four or five houses have begun to introduce the making
of gauzes; and for that purpose chiefly, employ hands from Scotland. This
branch is at present in its infancy. Another of broad silks was likewise set
up, which, I am sorry to find, does not go on with the expected success.

THE military transactions of this city are very few. It was an open town for
many centuries, and, of course, incapable of sustaining a siege. The walls were
not begun till the year 1355, WALLS.
and then by virtue of a license granted by Edward III. twenty-seven years
before; nor were they finished in less than forty. They were built by money
raised by taxes, and by customs on the wine, malt, oxen, hogs, calves, and
sheep, consumed in Coventry. These walls were of great strength and grandeur,
furnished with thirty-two towers and twelve gates. These continued till the 22d
of July 1661, when great part of the wall, and most of the towers, and many of
the gates, were pulled down, with certain circumstances of disgrace, as a
punishment for the disloyalty of the inhabitants, in shutting their gates
against their monarch Charles I. on the 13th of August 1642. His majesty, after
setting up his standard at Nottingham, had sent to this city, to acquaint them
that he meant to reside there for some time, and desired quarters for his
forces in and about the place. The mayor and aldermen, with many expressions of
affection, offered to receive the king, but refused admittance to any of the
soldiery. Incensed at this, his majesty attacked the city, CITY ATTACKED BY
CHARLES I.
and with his ordnance forced open one of the gates; but was repulsed by the
valor of the citizens, and obliged to retire with loss Vicar's Parliament,
Chron. 141.
. In the following month Coventry was regularly garrisoned by the parliament
Whitelock, 63.
, and remained in its possession during the whole war.

I SHOULD have mentioned before, that in the fifteenth century another monarch
had been denied the possession of this city. The great Earl of Warwick armed it
against Edward IV. in 1470, when he attempted entering on the side of Gosford
Green. The king amply repaid the insult on the citizens, who perhaps acted by
constraint. He deprived them of their privileges, and made them pay five
hundred marks for the recovering of them, by having the sword restored to them.

BEFORE the building of the walls, CASTLE.
there had been, from very early times, a castle on the south side of the town,
near Chylesmore, with a park belonging to it. This had been the residence of
the kings and earls of Mercia: it afterward fell to the earls of Chester, and
at length was vested in the royal line. No vestige of it is now to be seen: in
its place is a very ancient wooden building, the remains of the manor-house of
Chylesmore, probably built after the demolition of the castle.

KING Stephen forcibly took this fortress from Randle de Gernons earl of
Chester. The earl, in 1146, attempted to reduce it, not by siege, but by
erecting a fort near it, in order to distress the garrison, by cutting off
supplies. The king twice attempted its relief; the first time without success,
but in the second action he defeated the earl; forced him to fly, covered with
wounds; DEMOLISHED.
and then demolished the castle Leicester's Cheshire ex gestis Stephani, 124.
.

I SHALL take notice of the ecclesiastical history, churches, remains of
religious houses, and the public buildings, in the course of my walk about the
city, in which I was accompanied by the Reverend Doctor Edwards; whose
hospitality and politeness I have more than once had occasion to experience.

Coventry is seated on ground gently sloping on most sides: CITY DESCRIBED.
its length, from Hillstreet-gate to Gosford-gate, is about three quarters of a
mile, exclusive of the suburbs. The streets in general are narrow, and composed
of very ancient buildings, the stories of which, in some, impend one over the
other in such a manner, as nearly to meet at top, and exclude the sight of the
sky. By the appearance of the whole, it is very evident that it never under^ent
the calamity of fire; which, deprecated as it ought to be, is usually the cause
of future improvement.

THE number of inhabitants, taken at different periods, NUMBERS.
in the last two hundred years, is very different. Before 1549, they were found
to have been 15,000; but on that violent convulsion, the Dissolution, trade
grew so low, and occasioned such a dispersion of people from this city, as to
reduce them to 3,000. To remedy this evil, Edward VI. granted the city a
charter for an additional fair. To this cause perhaps was owing the increase,
by the year 1586, to 6502. In 1644, when the inhabitants were ^umbered, from
the apprehension of a siege, they were found to amount to 9,500 Dagdale, i.
146, 150, 152.
. By Bradford's Published by (...) in 1750.
Survey of Coventry, made in 1748 and 1749, there appears to have been 2,065
houses, and 1211, people. The accounts at present vary from 20,000 to ^0,000;
but, from my enquiries, the middle sum between both may come nearest the truth.

THE city is watered by the Radford and the Sherborn brooks, which, from N. and
S. meet within the walls, and, after a short (...), bound the north-eastern
parts without the walls.

WE began our progress from the Chester road, SPONNE HOSPITAL, FOR LEPERS.
on the western side of the city, at the relics of Sponne hospital,
consisting of the chapel and gateway. It was founded for the lepers which
happened to be in Coventry, by Hugh Ceveilioc earl of Chester, out of affection
to William de Auney, a knight of his household, afflicted with the leprosy. Here
was also a priest, to pray both for the living and the dead; also certain
brethren and sisters, to pray, with the lepers, for the good estate of all
their benefactors. This hospital is said once to have belonged to the abbey of
Basingwerk, in Flintshire; but at length was appropriated to the monk^ of
Coventry, from whom it passed to the crown, in the time of Edward IV; who gave
it to the canons of Studley, in order to obtain their prayers for him, and all
his connections.

THAT loathsome disorder, which gave rise to this, (...) APPEARANCE IN ENGLAND.
and number^ of other similar foundations, was introduced into England in the
reign of Henry I. and was supposed to have been brought out of Egypt, or
perhaps the east, by means of the crusades. To add to the horror, it was
contagious; which enhanced the charity of a provision for such miserables, who
were not only naturally shunned, but even chaced by royal edict, from the
society of their fellow creatures Edward III. drove from London all the lepers,
except fourteen, who (...) ^dmittance into St. Giles's hospital.
. All the lesser Lazar houses in England were subject to the rich house at
Burton, in Leicestershire, which again was subject to that in Jerusalem.
^anner, 239.
They were usually dedicated to St. Lazarus, from whom they derived their name.

A LITTLE farther is the entrance into the city; SPONNE GATE.
in my me^ under a venerable and magnificent gate, called Sponne Gate, (...)
late years demolished, in order to give admittance to the e^^mous SPONNE GATE.
wagons, laden beyond the height of arches erected when war was our chief
trade.

IMMEDIATELY within the walls, on the left, stands the church of St. John,
CHURCH OF ST. JOHN.
a very handsome building, with a neat but not lofty tower, placed in the
center: the inside is in form of a cross, intersected by a short transept: the
windows high, and form a long range, with very narrow divisions. This church
was originally a chapel to the merchants gild, the most ancient in Coventry,
licensed by Edward III. in 1340, for a fraternity of brethren and sisters, with
a warden, or master, to be elected out of the body; who might make chauntries,
bestow alms, and do other works of piety; constitute ordinances, and purchase
lands to the value of L20 a year, within the liberty of the city, for the
founding of a chauntry of six priests, to sing mass every day in the churches
of the holy Trinity and St. Michael, for the soul of king Edward, queen
Philippa, their children, and for the souls of the gild, and others. Soon
after, Isabel, queen mother, assigned the land on this spot, then called
Bablake, for the building a chapel, in which masses were to be sung daily for
the same purposes; which was finished and dedicated in 1350. At length, in
1399, license was given for celebrating divine service here, provided it might
be done without injury to the mother church Dugd. W. i. 188.
.

ON the dissolution, its revenues were found to be L111. 13 s. 8 d. and that
they supported a warden and eight priests, who had chambers in the precinct; a
master of a grammar school, two singing-clerks, and two singing-boys, and
several poor men, who had been brethren of the gild. The church has of late
years been rebuilt; made a rectory by act of parliament, in 1734, and settled on
the master of the free school of Coventry Ecton, 93.
.

BEHIND this church is Bablake hospital, BABLAKE HOSPITAL.
an old building, with a court in the middle: one part is occupied by Bond's
almshouses, founded in 1506, by Thomas Bond, mayor of Coventry in 1497, for
ten poor men and one poor woman, with a priest to pray for the soul of the
founder, his grandfather, father, and all Christian souls. At that time the
revenues were L49. 11 s. 7 d. In the first of Edward VIth's time, they were
vested in the city; and, the revenues being improved, at present they maintain
eighteen old men and a nurse, each of whom have three shillings a week, a black
gown, and other emoluments Dugd. W. i. 193.
. About the year 1619, an infernal ambition of becoming chief of the house,
seized one of the alms-men; who, to attain his end, poisoned eight of his
brethren; five of whom instantly died. On detection, the wretch effected his
own destruction by the same method, and was buried with the usual marks of
infamy. Had his fortune flung him into a higher station, his deeds would have
paralleled him with Caesar Borgia, or his more monstrous father, Pope Alexander
VI.

THE other part of the building is allotted for the blue boys: a foundation
owing to a very singular accident. Mr. Thomas Wheatly, mayor of Coventry in
1556, and ironmonger and cardmaker by trade, sent his servant, Oughton, to
Spain, to buy some barrels of steel gads; which he thought he did, in open
fair. When they were brought home and examined, they were found to contain
cochineal and ingots of silver. Mr. Wheatly kept them for a considerable time,
in hopes of discovering the owner; for his servant did not know from whom he
bought them. At length he applied the profits, as well as much of his own
estate, for the support of poor children.

FROM thence my walk was continued along the west side of the city, CANAL.
to Bishopgate-street. A little without is the head of the great canal, which,
passing by the neighboring collieries at Hawkesbury, is to extend to Brinklow,
Hill-Morton, Branston in Northamptonshire, return into Warwickshire, and, after
passing by Banbury, conclude at Oxford Distances. Coventry to Hill Morton, 20 1
0. Napton Napton Field, 17 1 5, rise 88. f. Claydon, -- 8 5 1 Oxford, -- 36 0
7, fall 204.
. By another branch, likewise begun near to Coventry, it is to pass by
Atherston and Tamworth, and to unite with the great Staffordshire canal on
Eradley heath, three miles N. E. of Lichfield Distances. Staffordshire canal to
Atherston, 21 0 0, rise 95. Coventry, 14 4 0 Branches to coal mines, 1 4 0.
. which, by means of the Stour Port canal, would have become the uniting spot
of the commerce of Thames, the Severn, and the Trent, had Britain flourished in
the manner it did when these vast designs were undertaken, in the full
intoxication of its prosperity. At present it is only finished as far as
Atherston.

AT the lower end of this street is the free school: it sprung out of an
hospital, FREE SCHOOL.
founded in the beginning of the reign of Henry II. by Laurence, prior of
Coventry, and his convent, at the request of Edmund, archdeacon of Coventry,
for the reception of the sick and needy. At the dissolution, John Hales, a
gentleman who had large share in the plunder of the church, and having neither
wife or child, converted this foundation, which he had purchased at a very
cheap rate, into a free school, and endowed it with CC marks a year in land. At
first, the boys were instructed in the church of the White Friars; but the
magistrates finding that Mr. Hales had bought the lands but not the church,
took advantage of the flaw, and removed the scholars to the present place, and
pulled down the church Dugd. W. i. 179, 180.
. The chapel, now reduced to one aile, is the present school; and the master
resides in the house belonging to the ancient master of the hospital. The
school has also a library belonging to it.

PASS by Cookstreet Gate, on the outside of the city, and a little further, by
the Three Virgins, or Priory Gate, between which there is a complete part of
the wall. On the outside was a paved road, in imitation of the military way
from turret to turret on the famed wall of Severus: Tour Scotl. vol. iii. 288.
and besides, here were four others, which went a mile each way from the city.

AT a small distance without the Priory Gate, is Swanswell Pool, which supplies
the city with water. This did belong to the priory, but was at the dissolution
purchased by the corporation from the crown Dugd. W. i. 146.
.

FROM hence I returned to the priory, PRIORY.
seated on the south side of the brook Sherburn. What bears that name is an
uninhabited house, of much later date than that monastery; but built on some
part of the site of this great foundation.

ABOUT the year 1043, earl Leofric and his fair countess more than repaired the
loss in 1016, in the destruction of the famous Saxon nunnery, by founding in
its stead a magnificent monastery. They placed here an abbot, and twenty-four
monks of the Benedictine order; enriched the very walls and the church with
massy gold and silver, and endowed it with half the town and twenty-four
manors. All this they did with the advice of king Edward the Confessor and the
reigning pope, and dedicated the church to the honor of God and his blessed
mother, St. Peter, St. Osburg, and all saints. The pious founders were buried,
according to the custom of the times, in the porches; for the distasteful
custom of church interment did not prevale till long after.

THE first abbot was Leofrin; but that dignity was of short duration, for, on
the removal of the sea of Lichfield to this place, in 1095, by Robert de
Limisie, the office was suppressed, the bishop being in such cases always
esteemed supreme of the house Willis's Abbeys, i. 70.
in his stead; a prior was appointed, but without derogating from the honor of
the house; for the priors were barons in parliament as well as the preceding
abbots, and the place a mitred abbey. This first prelate was more attracted by
the wealth of the house than by any spiritual call; for he at once scraped from
a single beam five hundred marks worth of silver, in order to carry on the
intrigue at Rome against the poor monks. He reduced them to such short commons,
that he depressed their spirits, discouraged all sorts of knowledge among them,
and, in short, rendered them too dejected to think of obtaining any redress.

THIS was a prelude to greater misfortunes. In the latter end of the following
century, Hugh Novani, a Norman, became bishop. He soon fell at variance with
the monks; who, in a synod held before the high altar, doubtless on some high
provocation, broke his head with the holy cross. Tantaene animis caelestibus
irae!

This enraged the proud prelate (as he was called by those meek monks) to lay
his complaint against them at Rome. The pope attended to it, expelled the
ancient inhabitants, and placed in their room a set of secular canons. The
monks, now driven into the wild world, had only the satisfaction of seeing
their persecutor struck with deep remorse; for, in 1198, lying on his
deathbed, in the abbey of Bec, in Normandy, he was seized with fierce horrors
at his conduct toward those holy men; implored forgiveness, and desired their
intercession with the Almighty in his behalf. He requested to be buried in the
habit of the order, that he might receive the benefit of its protection in the
other world, and finally consigned himself to purgatory, ibi in diem judicii
cruciandus.

LUCKILY at the time of this event, Thomas, a monk of Coventry, happened to be
at Rome soliciting the cause of his brethren: he so enraged Innocent III. (then
pope) by his importunities, as to order him to withdraw. The poor monk, with
tears, replied, Another pope will come, to whom I shall not sue in vain. I
therefore will patiently wait your death, as I have that of your two
predecessors. "Here is a devil of a fellow" (says his Holiness, in high wrath,
to his attendants) by St. Peter! He shall not wait for my death; so I will not
put him off any longer, but make out the purpose of his petition before I put a
morsel more into my mouth Dugdale W. i. 161.
.

THIS troublesome affair ended, they were replaced with double advantage; their
privileges, as if by way of atonement for their short sufferings, increased
beyond all reason; for in the time of Edward III. they obtained, that they and
their tenants, except those who held by knight service more than half a
knight's see, should be quit of murder, robbery, suit to the county or hundred
courts, aid to the sheriffs, view of frankpledge, and repair of the king's
castles or pools Dugdale, i. 161.
. Reign after reign they received fresh emoluments; so that in the end it
became possessed of revenues to the amount of L731. 19 s. 5 d. or, after
reprises, L499. 7 s. 4 d Tanner, 567.
.

AMONG the sacred furniture was an image of the Virgin Mary, adorned with a
chain of gold enriched with gems, bestowed by the Countess Godeva on her
deathbed: to which the devotees were to say as many prayers as there were in
it precious stones.

AND besides this, an arm of St. Augustine of Hippo, which Agelnethus,
archbishop of Canterbury, in 1020, bought at Rome from the pope, for the small
sum of C talents of silver, and one of gold Dugdale W. i. 158. Goodwin, 78.
.

BUT even this arm had not power to ward off the blow given by the more
irresistible one of Henry VIII; who, not content with the expulsion of its
inhabitants, and seizure of the revenues, directed this noble pile to be
levelled with the ground; which he did, notwithstanding the earnest prayers of
its bishop, Rowland Lee, one of his most servile tools. A deed equally wanton
and impious!

THE loss is the more to be regretted, as this cathedral is supposed to have
been built on the model of that of Lichfield, and equally beautiful. Nothing
remains except a fragment, constituting part of a private house, to be seen
with difficulty, and after some search. The palace stood between the priory and
Saint Michael's, and was sold in 1651, for its materials, to Nathaniel Lacy and
Obadiah Chambers, for the sum of an hundred guineas. The last prior, Thomas
Camsel, in 1538, was prevaled on to make a surrender of the house, either
through fear of death, for withstanding the tyrant's pleasure, or through lucre
of pension; for he had not less than L133. 6 s. 8 d. annuity, besides other
allowances to the monks Stevens, i. 223. Willis's Abbeys, i. 72.
. The site was then granted to John Combs and Richard Stansfield, after
flourishing under monastic government above five hundred years.

WHEN the cathedral was standing, Coventry possessed a matchless group of
churches, all standing within one coemetery. ST. MICHAEL'S CHURCH.
Saint Michael's at present is a specimen of the most beautiful steeple in
Europe: a tower enriched with faintly figures on the sides; an octagon rising
out of it, and that lengthened into a most elegant spire. Every part is so
finely proportionable, that it is no wonder that Sir Christopher Wren spoke of
it as a masterpiece of architecture. The outside is extremely handsome; the
inside light and lofty, consisting of a body and two ailes, divided by four
rows of high and airy pillars and arches. The height of the steeple and length
of the church are the same, three hundred and three feet; the width of the
latter an hundred and four.

IN king Stephen's time, this church was a chapel to the monks; became
afterward a vicarage, and on the dissolution fell to the gift of the crown.
This, Trinity, and St. John's, form the parishes of this great city; so
numerous are the dissenters.

ITS beautiful steeple was begun in the reign of Edward III. in 1372, by two
brothers, Adam and William Bota, at their own charges, which amounted annually
to one hundred pounds; nor was it finished in less than twenty years. By the
style of architecture, I agree with Sir William Dugdale, that the present body
was built in the reign of Henry VI. Some ornament was also added to the steeple
at the same time. Coventry seems to have been particularly favored by Henry,
or, to speak more properly of that meek prince, by the heroine Margaret; for
this city used to be styled the secret harbor of that queen.

TRINITY church, and its spire, would be spoken of as a most beautiful
building, was it not eclipsed by its unfortunate vicinity to St. Michael's.
Within are two epitaphs, which I give for their singularity. One is on Philemon
Holland, the famous translator. He was schoolmaster and physician in the city.
A wag made this distich on one of his labors: Philemon with translations does
so fill us,
He will not let Suetonius be Tranquillus.


HE was called translator-general of his age; acquired much credit by his
fidelity, but none greater than by his translation of Cambden, in that great
antiquarian's lifetime, and by his consent; to whose work he made considerable
additions.

HE wrote a great folio with one pen, and, as he tells us, did not wear it out.
With one sole pen I writ this book,
Made of a gray goose quill:
A pen it was when it I took;
A pen I leave it still Fuller's Worthies, 127, 128.
.


AT length (if I may be allowed to pun with Fuller) death translated this
translator to the other world, in 1636, at the good old age of eighty-five;
leaving behind this epitaph of his own composition.

Nemo habet hic, nemo'? hospes salveto, Philemon
Holland hac recubat rite repostus humo:
Si quaeras ratio quaenam sit nominis, haec est,
Totus terra fui, terraque totus ero:
At redivivus morte tua servabor, Jesus,
Una sides votis, haec est via sola salutis
Hac spe fretus ego, culpa poenaque solutus
Jamque renatus, et inde novo conspectus amictu,
Coetu in sanctorum post redimitus ero.
Claudicat incessu senior mea musa, videsne?
Claudatur capulo mecum simul ipsa, valeto. Valedictio
Ad liberos et nepotes superstites.
Dantque omnes una dudum de stirpe creati
Henrice ah! septem de fratribus une superstes
Orphanici patris Gulielmi nuper adempti
Et mihi (bis puero) nutricis Anna, Maria
Cumque tuis angelis Elizabeta; valete Copied from Dugdale.
.
THE other commemorates a Captain Gervas Scrope, written; as the proem tells
you, in the agony and dolorous pains of the gout, soon before his death.

Here lies an old tennis-ball,
Was racketted from spring to fall,
With so much heat and so much haste,
Time's arm for shame grew tired at last.
Four kings in camps he truly served,
And from his loyalty never swerved,
Father ruined, the son slighted,
And from the crown never recruited.
Loss of estate, relations, blood,
Was too well known, but did no good,
With long campaigns, and pains of gout,
He could no longer hold it out.
Always a restless life he led;
Never at quiet till quite dead.
He married, in his latter days,
One who exceeds the common praise;
But wanting breath still to make known
Her true affection and his own,
Death timely came, all wants supplied,
By giving rest, which life denied.
ON leaving of these churches, I surveyed with indignation, such as antiquaries
experience, the site of the elegant and ancient cross, till of late years such
an ornament to the city. CROSS.
I am not furnished with an apology for the corporation who destroyed this
beautiful building; so must leave it doubtful, whether the gothic resolution
was the result of want of money, or want of taste. In 1629, the city paid it
such respect, as to expend L323. 4 s. 6 d. in its repair Dugdale W. i. 146.
.

IT was built, or rather begun, in 1541, to replace another cross, taken down
some years before. The founder was Sir William Hollies, lord mayor of London,
and son of Thomas Hollies of Stoke, near this city, who left by his will two
hundred pounds toward the design. The base was hexangular, finely ornamented
with gothic sculpture; above, rose three stories of most light and elegant
tabernacle-work, lessening to the summit. In the niches were saints and English
monarchs, from Henry II. to Henry V. and around each story variety of pretty
figures with flags, with the arms of England or the rose of Lancaster expressed
on them: and on the summit of the uppermost plate Justice, and other gracious
attributes.

A LITTLE south of St. Michael's, ST. MARY HALL.
stands St. Mary Hall, at present used for corporation-assemblies. This place
was built in the beginning of the reign of Henry VI: a venerable pile, whose
entrance is beneath a large gateway, over which are the figures of a king and
queen sitting; probably Henry and his consort Margaret. Within this building is
a fine old room: in the upper end is a noble semicircular window, divided into
nine parts, elegantly painted with figures of several of our monarchs, with
coats of arms and ornaments, but now very imperfect: those in the windows on
the one side are lost; several of those on the other are entire, and were
designed to represent some of our great nobility, who had honored this hall
with their presence as brothers and sisters of the gild, for whose use this
hall was founded. This had been the gild of St. Katherine, established by
certain citizens of Coventry, in 1343, by license of Edward III; after which it
was united to those of the Holy Trinity, Our Lady, and Saint John the Baptist.

THE illustrious personages represented here, are William Beauchamp, lord of
Abergavenny, and fourth son to Thomas Earl of Warwick; and by him is his
countess Jean, daughter of Richard Earl of Arundel.

Richard Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, and his second wife Isabella, daughter of
Thomas Lord D' Espencer; Humphry Earl of Stafford, with a battle-ax in his
hand; and one of the John Mo^^^rays Dukes of Norfolk. All those great men are
dressed with the magnificence and luxury of the east, in long robes lined with
ermine, and with large and singular hoods. These were the garments of peace,
when they passed the festive day in honor of their fraternity.

ALONG the walls are ranged a number of Latin verses, with a ^ort of Ste^nhold
translation opposite. I shall only give the last, as Doctor Stukely has already
preserved the former in his Itinerary.

Edward the flower of chivalre, whilesome the Black Prince hyghre,
Who prisoner took the French king John, in claim of grandames right;
And slew the king of Bram^ in field, whereby the ostrich penn
He won, and were on crest here first; which poesy bare Ich Dien*
^n^d their martial seats of arms, wherein he had no peer,
His county eke to show this seat he chose and loved full d^e^.
The former state he g^^ confirmed, and freedom did increase
(...) president of knyghthood rare, as well for war as peace.
(...) time that first this ancient town Earl Leofrike feoffed free,
(...) suite and merit strange, or else it could not be.
In princes grace by long descent, as old records do date,
It stood manteind, until at length it grew to cities state.
Queen Isabel, sole heir of France, great favor hither cast,
And did procure large fraunchises by charter ay to last.
(...) therefore, in loialtie our selves, and all we have,
(...) Elizabeth, our lady liege; whom God in mercy save.
When (...) once to fade, and commonwealth decay,
No (...) in cities great; for what endures aye?
John, late Duke of Northumberland John Dudly, beheaded in 1553. a character as
wicked as that of his son.
, a prince of high degree,
Did grant (...) lands for commons weal, as here in brass you see.
And Leicester (...) great affairs* whereto high place does call,
His father's worthy steps has traced to prop, that his might fall
On ^oth i^ p^^^ce and countrie's (...) hold forth this course your days:
Such dee^^ do ^o^^e blood comm^nd, such bring mortal praise.
IN the apartments of this building are held the balls and assemblies of this
city. In one of the drawing-rooms is to be seen, in high preservation, an
antiquity equally delicate and curious; an unique, which Coventry alone has the
happiness of possessing. Here it is known by the name of The Lady's Spoon, but
is doubtless no other than the S^^ph^^m of the ancients, described by Coelius
Rhs^nus and (...), Rerum ^^morab^^^ deperd As quoted by the learned author of
The Dialogue on Decency, etc. etc. 40, 41.
.

THE front of the Drapiers Hall is very elegant, DRAPIER^ HALL.
ornamented with Tus^an pi^asters, and does much ^^edit to the city. It was
lately rebuilt on the site of the ancient hall, ^ounded by certain drapiers,
whose n^mes have long since perished.

FROM hence we crossed the city to the Gray Friars, GRAY FRIARS.
which stood on the south side. This order arrived in Coventry before the year
1^34, when they had only an oratory, which was covered with shingles from
Kenelworth wood, by an order of Henry III. to the sheriff of Warwickshire. Both
the house and church, of an order devoted to poverty, were built by pious alms,
on a spot of ground bestowed on them by the last Randle Earl of Chester, ou^
GRAY FRIARS GATE and STEEPLE COVENTRY.
(...) ^is neighboring manor of Cheyl^smor. The church seems nor to have been
built till the ^^me of Edward III. when the Black (...) permitted the friars to
take stone out of his park of Cheyles^^^ for that purpose. A beautiful steeple,
with a spire springing from an octagon, is all that remains of this church.
Dugdale supposes the Hastings to have been great benefactors; for numbers of
them were interred here, in a chapel of their name, and (...) in the habit of
the order, from a superstition of the respect (...) Spirit would pay to it on
the last day.

THOSE friars were celebrated for their annual exhibitions of the (...) stories
called Corpus Christi plays, CORPUS CHRISTI PLAYS.
which they performed on that day, to their great emolument, before crowds of
spectators. (...) ^^^orted hither at that season from all parts. Like Thespis
of old, they are recorded Plaustris vexisse poemata.

(...) have gone to the most advantageous parts of the city, (...) po^table
theaters drawn on wheeled carriages, from which (...) exhibited their pageants,
which amounted to forty. The ^ubjects are announced in a sort of prologue, by a
person called (...) or, who probably carried a flag painted with the subject of
the day, and at the same time gave out to the crowd the his^ (...) was to
expect. The history is taken up at the creation, (...) ^^ds with the last day.
I have said much of these religious (...) in my Wesh Tour Tour 1773. p. ^^^^
therefore will not pester the reader ^ present with more than Eve's rhetoric,
after being tempted by the serpent, to persuade poor Adam to taste of the
forbidden (...). My semely spouse and good husbond,
Lystenyth to me ser, I ow pray;
Take this ^ayr appyl all in ow hond,
Thereof a mursel byte and asay
To ete this appyl look that e ^ond
Goddys felaw to be always;
All his wisdom to undyrstonde,
And Goddys p^r to be for ay.
All thing for to make,
Both ^ysch and soul, se and sond,
Byrd and best, waty^ and land,
THis appyl you take out of mine hond
A beat hereof you take Stevens, i. 145, etc.
.


Henry VIII. put an end to the performances of these poor friars, who had the
honor of falling with the greater monasteries having escaped the wreck of the
lesser, because they had nothing worth sei^ing to gratify that rapacious court.
But the king, net content with their ruin, added to it the mortifying
obligation of making their surrender on the 5th of October 1538, and to sign it
with their names and common seal. The instrument is curiou^ and worthy perusal.

For as much as we the wardens and freers of the house of Say^^ Frances in
Coventre, commonly called the Gray Freers in Coventre, in the county of
Warwick, do profoundly consider, that the perfection of Christian livynge
does not consi^t (...) ^^me ceremonies, werynge of a gray coot, disgeasinge
our self (...) strange fassions, do king, noddynge, and beckyng, in gu^rdyng
our selves with a gurdle fulle of knotts, and other like papisticall
ceremonies, wherein we have been most principally practiced and mislyd in
times paste; but the very true way to plese God, and to live a true Christian
mon, wytheout all ypo^^^^ and feigned diseimulation, is sinceerly declared unto
us by our Mr. Christ, his evangelists and apostles; being myndyd hereafter to
follow the same, conformynge our self unto the will and pleasure of our supreme
hedde under God in earth, the kings majesty, and not to follow henseforth die
supersti^^us traditions of any forinsecall potentate or peer; with mu^^^il
assent and consent do surrendre and yield up into the ^ondes of the same all
our seide house of Saint Frances, in the (...) of Coventre, commonly called the
Gray Freers in Coventre, with also the londs, tenements, gardens, medows,
waters, ^^^diards, fedings, pastures, comens, rents, reversions, and all other
our interest, ryghtes, or titles appertaining unto the ^ame: most humbly
beseechinge his most noble grace to (...) of us, and of the same, as best
shall stand with his ^ooste gracious pleasure. And further, freely to grant
unto ^^ery on of us his license under wretyng and seealle, to change (...)
habits into secular fashion, and to receive such manner of (...) as other
secular priests commonly be preferred unto. And we all faithfully shall pray
unto Almighty God long to preserve his most noble grace with increase of
much feli^ and honor. And in witness of all and singular the pre^, we the
seide warden and covent of the Gray Freers is Coventre to these presences have
put our covent seealle, the fivithe day of October, in the thertythe year of
the raynge of our most soveraynge lord king Henry the eyghte.

Per me Johannem Stafford, Guardian, Per me Thomas Maller, Per me Thomas
Sanderson, Per me Johannem Abell, Per me Johannem Wood, Per me Rogerum Lilly,
Per me Thomam Aukock, Per me Matheum Walker, Per me Robartum Walker, Per me
Thomam Bangsit, Per me Willielmum Gosnelle.
Which s^d house, or site, was in the thirty-fourth of Henry VIII. granted by
the king (...) ali^) to the mayor, bailiffs, and commonalry of this city, and
their successors for ever.

NOT far from the friary is a f^ne gate, called The Gray Friar Gate, the most
beautiful of any left standing.

A (...) farther to the east is Cheleysmor, where is still to be se^^ part of
the ma^or-house: a wooden building, with a gate way beneath. This, or some
other on the site of it, had been the ^^^^dence of the lords of the place, and
of the kings and earls of (...); after that, of the earls of Chester; and
finally, it fell to the (...), when that ^arldom was resumed: which, with the
park, about three miles in circumference, belongs to the Prince of W^^es as
Earl of Chester. The castle stood not remote from the manor-house.

FROM hence we proceeded to the Carmelites, or White Friars; whose house stands
at the east end of the city: another order devoted to poverty, who lived on
charity both from the living and the dead; for they often received legacies,
supposed expiations for sins. Their house was built about the year 1342, by Sir
John Poultney, four times lord mayor of London: a gentleman deservedly
celebrated for his pious munificence Barton's Leicestershire, 191.
. At the dissolution it was granted to Sir Ralph Sadler. It was afterward ^ell
to John Hales, who, residing here, occasioned it to be called H^les' Place. At
present, it is occupied by numbers of poor families.

HERE are considerable remains of the building: part of the ^^^ed cloisters;
the refectory and dormitory, and vast vaulted room, which served as magazines
for provisions. A very handsome gateway, with three niches on the front, is
still standing; and on an inner gate are three arrows, the arms of one of the
be^^factors.

IN the course of my walk a chamber was shown me, in Gosford-street, noted for
the melancholy end of Mary Clues, in February 1772, who was found almost
consumed by fire, occasioned by an accident of a most uncommon nature. She had
been confined to her bed by illness, the consequence of intemperance. The room
was ^^ored with brick; the bed furnished with only one curtain, and that was
next to the window. The fireplace was on the other side. She was left, the
evening before the accident, with two ^mall bits of coal put quite back in the
grate, and a rush-light on the chair, by the head of the bed. The next morning
a great smoke was perceived in the room. On bursting open the door (...) flames
appeared, which were easily extinguished. The remains of the woman lay on the
floor, but the furniture of the room was only slightly damaged; the bedstead
superficially burnt but neither sheets, feather-bed, nor blankets destroyed.

THE solution of this phenomenon is rather ridiculous. Mrs. (...) was
excessively addicted to dram-drinking: she would drink a quart in a day, either
of rum or anise-seed water; and by that means, filling her veins with pure
spirits, became as inflammable as a lamp. She tumbled out of bed, took fire by
the candle, and in about two hours was fairly burnt out to her thighs and one
leg, and nothing left except her bones, completely calcin^d (...). LXIV, part
i. p ^40.
.

THIS is not the only instance I have read of persons being (...) by their own
phlegist^n, natural or ^equired. Two Co^^nd noblemen, after a drinking-match of
spirituous liquors, died scorched and suffocated: and the Countess Cornelia
Bau^^^, of (...) in Italy Annual Register, ^^^^
, was found in the situation of Mary Clu^^, but without imputation of the
guilty origin. Semele was certainly one of those combustible ladies; but the
gallant Ovid has ascribed her fatal end to another cause. Corpus mortale
tumultu^
Non ^ui^t Aethereo^; donisque jugalibus arsit.


IN Gosford-street I took horse to visit Comb abbey, GOSFORD GREEN.
the (...) Lord Craven; passed through Gosford-gate, and by a green of (...)
same name, memorable for the single combat which was to (...) been ^ought there
in September 1398, between the Duke of Here^ord Afterward Henry IV.
and the Duke of Norfolk, earl marshal Thomas M^wbray.
. The former had ^^sely betrayed a private conversation, in which he said that
M^^bray had dropped several expressions of a treasonable nature. The accusation
was denied, and, according to the barbarous ^sage of the times, Mowbray
demanded the privilege of acquit^^ng himself by single combat. Each of the
dukes, agreeable to the laws of chivalry, flung down his glove, which was taken
up before the king and sealed Polychronico^ ^^^xxi^.
(I suppose, to prevent any future den^al of the challenge). The king appointed
Coventry for the place of combat, and caused for that purpose a vast and
magnificent theater to be erected on this green (...) Ricar^^ II. 145.
. The rival dukes ^^^de all requisite preparation, and particularly about the
essential article armor. Froissar^ relates the steps they took; which ^hews
the preference which was given to foreign armourers. (...) I shall deliver in
the words of his noble translator Sir John Bourchier, Lord (...).
.

These two lords made provision for that was necessary for them for their
battle. The Earl of Derby The (...) of Hereford.
sent his ^^^ssangers in to Lombardy, to the Duke of Myllayn, Sir Gal^^, for to
have armure at his pleasure. The duke agreed (...) the earls desire, and caused
the knight that the earl had sent (...), whose name was Fraunces, to se all the
dukes armorye; (...) when the knight had chosen such as he lyked, than the duke
^^rthermore, for love of the earl of Derby, he sent four of the best armourers
that were in Lombardy to ye earl into England with the knight, to ^henten^ yt
they should arm and make armure according to the cries intent. The Earl
Marshal, on his part, (...), and in to other places, to provyde him for the
journey. The charge of these two lords was great. But the Earl of Derby was at
most charge.

THE armor of the great men was uncommonly splendid and expensive usually
inlaid with gold and silver, with most elegant devices and patterns. That of
Francis I. in possession of Mr. W^^p^^e and that of George Earl of Cumberland,
at Appleby castle, exist as specimens of the great attention given to that
circumstance. Besides beauty, the utmost regard was paid to the essential
requisite of its being proof. This was to be the result of the (...) of the
a^m^ourer not of art-magic; for the combatants ^ere to clear themselves by
oath, from having any commerce with (...) any or of rendering their armor or
bodies invulnerable by any charm. Let their cause be ever so bad, they
determined to die like good Christians; disavowed all dependence on the power
of Satan, and supplicated the prayers of the pious (...). Ad^ ^roof unto my
armor with thy prayers,
And with thy blessings steel my lance's point (...) II. in a speech of
Hereford on this occasion.
.


I SHALL give the consequence of this important affair in the very graphical
words of honest Holinshed, who minutely describes the pomp and ceremony
preceding the resolution taken by the unfortunate monarch, which in the end
cost him his crown and life.

At the time appointed, the king came to Coventrie, where the two dukes were
ready, according to the order prescribed therein; coming thither in great
arraie, accompanied with the lords and gentlemen of their linages. The king
caused a sumptuous scaffold, or theater, and roial listes there to be erected
and prepared. The Sundaie before they should fight, after dinner, the duke of
Hereford came to the king (being lodged about a quarter of a mile without the
town, in a tower that belonged to Sir William Bagot) to take his leave of him.
The morrow after, being the day appointed for the combat, about the spring of
the day came the duke of Norfolk to the court, to take leave likewise of the
king. The duke of Hereford armed him in his tent, that was set up near to the
lists; and the duke of Norfolk put on his armor betwixt the gate and the
barrier of the town, in a beautiful house, having a fair perclois of wood
toward the gate, that none might see what was done within the house.

The duke of Aumarle that day being high constable of England, and the duke of
Surrie marshal, placed themselves betwixt them, well armed and appointed. And
when they saw their time, they first entered into the lists with a great
company of men, apparelled in silk sendal, imbrodered with silver both richly
and curiously; every man having a tipped staff, to keep the field in order.
About the hour of prime came to the barriers of the lists the duke of
Hereford, mounted on a white courser, barded with green and blew velvet,
imbroidered sumptuously with swans and antelopes of goldsmiths work, armed at
all points. The constable and marshal came to the barriers, demanding of him
what he was? he answered, 'I am Henry of Lancaster, duke of Hereford: which am
come hither to do mine endeavor against Thomas Mowbraie duke of Norfolk, as a
traitor untrue to God, the king, his realm, and me.' -- Then incontinently he
swear upon the holy Evangelists, that his quarrel was true and just; and upon
that point he required to enter the lists. Then he puts up his sword, which
before he held up naked in his hand, and, putting down his visor, made a cross
on his horse, and with spear in hand entered into the lists, and descended
from his horse, and set him down in a chair of green velvet, at the one end
of the lists, and there reposed himself, abiding the coming of his adversary.

Soon after him entered into the field, with great triumph, King Richard,
accompanied with all the peerses of the realm; and in his company was the
earl of Saint Paul, which was come out of France, in post, to see this
challenge performed. The king had there above ten thousand men in armor, least
some fraie or tumult might rise amongst his nobles, by quarrelling or
partaking. When the king was set in his seat, which was richly hanged and
adorned, a king at arms made open proclamation, prohibiting all men, in the
name of the king, and of the high constable and marshal, to enterprise or
attempt to approach, or touch any part of the lists, upon pain of death, except
such as were appointed to order or marshal the field. The proclamation ended,
another herald cried, 'Behold here Henry of Lancaster duke of Hereford,
appelant, which is entered into the lists royal, to do his devoir against
Thomas Mowbraie duke of Norfolk, defendant, upon pain to be found false and
recreant.

The duke of Norfolk hovered on horsseback at the entry of the lists, his
horse being barded with crimson velvet, imbrodered richly with lions of
silver and mulberie trees; and when he had made his oath before the constable
and marshal, that his quarrel was just and true, he entered the field
manfully, saying aloud, 'God, and him that has the right;' and then he
departed from his horse, and sat him down in his chair, which was of
crimson velvet, courtined about with white and red damask. The lord marshall
viewed their spears, to see that they were of equal length, and delivered the
one spear himself to the Duke of Hereford, and sent the other unto the Duke of
Norfolk by a knight; then the herald proclaimed, that the traverses and chaires
of the champions should be removed, commanding them, on the king's behalf, to
mount on horssebacke, and address themselves to the battle and combat
Holinshed's Chr. 494.
.

The duke of Hereford was quickly horssed, and closed his bauier, and cast his
spear into the rest; and when the trumpet founded, set forward courageously
toward his enemy six or seven pases. The duke of Norfolk was not fully set
forward, when the king cast down his warder, and the heralds cried 'Ho, ho.'
Then the king caused their spears to be taken from them, and commanded them to
repair again to their chaires; where they remained two long hours, while the
king and his council deliberatlie consulted what order was best to be had in
so weighty a cause. Finally: after they had devised, and fully determined
what should be done therein, the heralds cried 'Silence;' and Sir John Bushie,
the king's secretary, read the sentence and determination of the king and his
council, in a long roll; the effect whereof was, that Henry duke of Hereford
should, within fifteen days, depart out of the realm, and not to return
before the term of ten years were expired, except by the king he should be
repealed again; and this upon pain of death: and that Thomas Mowbraie duke of
Norfolk, because he had sown sedition in the relme by his words, should
likewise avoid the realm, and never return again into England, nor approach
the borders or confines thereof, upon pain of death: and that the king would
sta^e the profits of his lands, till he had levied thereof such sums of money
as the duke had taken up of the king's treasuror, for the wages of the garrison
of Calis; which were still unpaid.

When these judgments were once read, the king called before him both parties,
and made them to swear that the one should never come in place where the other
was, willingly, nor keep any company together in any foreign region: which
oath they both received humbly, and so went their ways. The duke of Norfolk
departed sorrowfully out of the realm into Almanie, and at the last came into
Venice, where he, for thought and melancholy, deceassed; for he was in hope
(as writers record) that he should have been borne out in the matter by the
king; which, when it fell out otherwise, it greeved him not a little. The duke
of Hereford took his leave of the king at Eltham, who there released four
years of his banishment; so he took his jornie over into Calis, and from
thence went into France, where he remained.

A wonder it was to see what number of people ran after him, in every town
and street where he came, before he took the sea, lamenting and bewailing his
departure; as who should say, that when he departed, the only shield,
defense, and comfort of the commonwealth was vaded and gone.

ABOUT two miles from Coventry, I crossed the little river Sow at Binly bridge,
a little beyond which stands the beautiful small church of the name, dedicated
to St. Bartholomew, BINLY CHURCH.
formerly belonging to the monks of Coventry; now a curacy in the gift of Lord
Craven, who rebuilt the church with uncommon elegance. The roof is coved, and
ornamented with scriptural histories, in form of medallions, and with pious
ornaments of crosses, crowns, and thorns, and other decorations adapted to the
place. The altar is in a tribune, with marble pillars; and its window consists
of glass painted with a fine holy family, by Mr. William Pecket.

Comb Abbey, or, to spell it with propriety, Cwm, from its low situation,
COMB ABBEY.
lies about two miles farther. Notwithstanding its conversion to the seat of a
nobleman, it retains in part the form of its conventual state. The cloisters
are preserved on three sides of the ancient court, glazed as when occupied by
the ancient owners, and their walls enriched with the spoils of the chase.
Methinks the jovial abbot is now before me, formed out of the monk so admirably
described by old Chaucer. A monk there was, a fair for the maistrie,
An out rider that loved venerie;
A manly man, to ben an abbot able;
Full many a deinte horse had he in stable.
And when he rode, men might his bridel here,
Gingeling in a whistling wind as clear
And eke as loud as does the chapel belle.
There as this lord was keeper of the celle,
The rule of Seint Maure and of Seint Beneit,
Because that it was old and somedele streit,
This ilke monk let old things pace,
And held after the new world the trace.
He yave not of the text a pulled hen,
That says that hunters ben not holy men;
Ne that a monk, when he is rekkeles,
Is like a fish that is waterles:
This is to say, a monk out of his cloistre,
This ilke text held he not worth an oistre.
And I say his opinion was good:
What should he study, and make himselven wood,
Upon a book in cloistre always to pore,
Or swinken with his hondes, and labor
As Austin bit? How shall the world be served?
Let Austin have his swink to him reserved.
Therefore he was a prickasoure a right;
Greihounds he had as swift as soul of flight:
Of pricking, and of hunting for the hare,
Was all his lust; for no cost would he spare.


THE abbot is now represented by a jovial English baron, not less a lover of
the generous exercise. He derives his right to the place from his ancestor Sir
William Craven, Knight, great grandson of Henry Craven, elder brother to Sir
William, lord mayor of London in 1610; one of the richest men of his time. It
was purchased from that squanderer Lucy countess of Bedford, who inherited it
from her brother Lord Harrington, who derived it from his mother Anne, daughter
of Robert Kelway, who received it in lease after the forfeiture of John Dudley
duke of Northumberland, to whom it had been granted by Edward VI. It had been
founded by Richard de Camville, in 1150, and peopled with Cistercian monks;
FOUNDER.
who were at the dissolution found to be endowed with upwards of three hundred
pounds a year Tanner.
. Robert Bates, alias Kymmer, was the last abbot; who, for his surrender, was
rewarded with a pension of eighty pounds a year Willis, ii, 241.
, and his thirteen or fourteen religious with small pittances, as the merit of
the deed rested in the former.

THAT accomplished nobleman Lord Harrington was the refounder of this house;
which Cambden says arose from the ashes of the ancient abbey. His taste is
evident, in his preservation of the venerable cloisters. It is indebted to the
owners of the present name for its instructive furniture of portraits; probably
entirely to the hero William Craven, a most distinguished personage of this
family.

IN the north parlour is a fine full-length of his great master in the art of
war, PORTRAITS.
Gustavus Adolphus; under whose banners he defended the Protestant cause in
Germany, and, when very young, gained immortal honor at the desperate storming
of the fortress of Creutenach, in the palatinate.

A FULL-LENGTH of James Stewart duke of Richmond, in black, with long flowing
flaxen hair, and a dog by him. This illustrious nobleman forms one of the most
amiable characters in the reign of Charles I. His attachment and affection to
his royal relation was unequalled: he is even said to have offered his own
life, to save that of his devoted master Perichef, as quoted by Mr. Hume.
. He was permitted to attend the funeral of the beloved remains; then lingered
away a few years, and died a victim to grief on March 30, 1655.

Frederick V. elector palatine, a full-length, in robes, and with the
unfortunate crown which he wore, as short-lived king of Bohemia, elected by the
revolted state in 1619, when it attempted to shake off the yoke of the emperor
Ferdinand II. The battle of Prague, in the following year, deprived Frederick
of his new kingdom and his hereditary dominions, and, from a potent prince,
reduced him hereby to that of a fugitive beggar in Holland. He survived his own
misfortunes twelve years, but died with grief, on the death of his great friend
Gustavus Adolphus, in 1632.

NEAR him is his queen, dressed in black, and with a melancholy look. She was
the daughter of our peaceful monarch James I; who, either through hatred of
war, or disapprobation of his son-in-law's ambition, reluctantly undertook his
defense, and made, under Mansfield, an unfortunate essay. His daughter
Elizabeth supported her unhappy situation with uncommon dignity, and showed,
amidst the most distressful poverty, an illustrious example of magnanimity. She
visited the army of Gustavus, which had in view her husband's restoration, as
well as the giving liberty to the German Protestants. The English volunteers
seem to have fought her battles, inspired by love. She was the admiration of
the camp, and had votaries among every nation. The young Craven was among her
warmest devotees, and continued his attachment to the last moment of her life;
possessed her deserved confidence, directed all her affairs, and gave a most
distinguishing proof of his esteem, by building for her use, at his estate in
Berkshire, a magnificent palace. The difference of rank alone prevented the
publication of their union, which is generally supposed to have taken place.
Her spotless fame was never aspersed with improper connection.

I MUST step to another room, the picture-gallery, for the portrait of her
admirer; a fine head, with the body armed, and crossed with a sash. Let me
finish his history with saying, that after the death of Gustavus, he retired
from the Swedish army into the service of the Dutch, and, notwithstanding he
never interfered in the civil wars of his own country, yet, in 1650, his
estates were confiscated by the parliament (as is said) through false
accusations of favors done the exiled king. On the restoration he came over,
and in 1670, on the death of the Duke of Albemarle, he was appointed colonel of
the Coldstream regiment of guards. His gallant spirit never forsook him: he
braved the pestilence in its greatest fury, and, with a few other worthies,
undertook the care of London in 1665, during the desolation of the plague; and
in every fire, was so active in preventing the devastation of that other
scourge, that it was said, his very horse smelt it out.

I MUST return to the parlour, to mention a fine conversation-piece, consisting
of prince Rupert, prince Maurice, and the duke of Richmond at table, in the
manner of Dobson, by Honthurst. Those of the king of Bohemia and his queen are
by the same hand; Honthurst having had the honor of instructing that
unfortunate princess and her family.

A HEAD of Raphael.

THE brazen serpent, surrounded by the terrified multitude: a fine performance.

Judith and Holofernes. Her maid, a swarthy old woman, is performing the
operation of cutting off the head.

ON the staircase is a large picture of Lord Craven on horseback, with a
truncheon in his hand.

IN the breakfast-room is a fine scene among the Alps, by John Loren, a
Dutchman, who, residing much in Switzerland, became celebrated for his wild
romantic views.

IN the picture-gallery is a fine half-length of David, with the head of
Goliath, by Guercino. Frederick Tromellus, count Lavella, a head.

John Ernest duke of Savoy.

Gustavus Adolphus, a half-length, and the heads of sixteen of his illustrious
generals, by Mirevelt. These, and most of the other portraits of men of
eminence in Germany, were brought over by the queen of Bohemia, and by her
bequeathed by will to Lord Craven.

A HEAD of Mirevelt, and another of Honthurst, painted by themselves. The
former resided chiefly at Delft, and was prevented from visiting England by
reason of the plague. The latter was here some time, by the encouragement of
Charles I.

Christian duke of Brunswick, a fierce hero in the army of Gustavus, subdued by
the charms of our royal countrywoman. It is said, that he snatched a glove from
her, put it in his cap, and swore he would never part with it, till he saw her
husband in possession of the capital of Bohemia Harte's Gustavus Adolphus, i.
177.
.

SIR Edward Cecil, third son of the earl of Exeter, a celebrated commander
during thirty-five years in the Netherlands. He died in 1638, after being
honored with the title of Lord Wimbledon. His picture is a head, with short
gray hair; his body in rich ^rmour, with a sash. From this the print by Simon
Pass was (...).

A REMARKABLE legend of Otto, or Otho I. earl of Oldenberg, represented as
wearied with the chase, and separated from his compassions, on a wild mountain.
When he was almost fainting with (...), a beautiful virgin, in white, with long
flowing hair, and a ^^^land on her head, bursts out of the side of the hill,
and offers him drink out of a rich horn, which she put into his hand, assur^^^
him, that if he drank, prosperity would attend him and his house. He disliked
the proposal, suspecting deceit. Accordingly, pouring some of the liquor on the
hind part of his horse, found it so noxious as to take off the hair. He
instantly rode off (...) the horn full speed, terrified at the adventure; and
the sp^^^re retired into the bowels of the mountain. The horn, which gave rise
to this fable, is of silver, gilt, and of most exquisite workmanship; and is
still preserved in the museum at (...). (...) Regium Hav^iae, etc pars II.
sect. iii. par. ^o. tab. v.
Instead of being of the age of Otho I. or about the year (...), it is proved
to have been made by Christian I. in honor of the three kings of Cologne, whose
names are inscribed on it; ^or it seems it was customary, among the northern
nations, to de^ their cups or horns to saints, and make large libations out of
them, invoking the saint to assist the mighty draught: Help Gol (...) Maria dat
^w Got (...), par. 62.
. What gave rise to the particular le^ relative to the horn, is the figure of a
woman on the recur^^^ed up, with a label, with this jovial exhortation, Drine
all w^^; (...) the lip, O matter Dei memento mei.

In several apartments whose names I have forgotten, are var^^ty of other
paintings and portraits.

AMONG them is one of the founder of the family, Sir William Craven, lord ma^or
of London, by Jansen; two full-lengths of Earl Craven, in armor, one very
spirited; and a portrait of Sir William Craven of this place, by Sir Peter
Lely; Lucy countess of B^^ford, by Jansen, in the same attitude and dress in
which she is painted at Weburn and at A^^ Tour Se^l. 1772, part ii. p. 223.
.

AN elegant figure of Henry prince of Wa^^s, in a gay silk jacket, crimson
hose, roses to his shoes, a white silk hat and feather before h^^, and a glove
in one hand. He stands in a room with a pretty view through the window. Drawn
while that amiable prince was in his boyhood.

Charles II. when young, his body armed with steel, the rest with buff.

GENERAL Monk, clothed entirely in buff. This species of defense was usually
made of the sl^^n of the elk, and oftentimes of the stag, and was proof enough
to turn a ball.

DUKE of Ormond, by Sir Peter Lely.

A PRETTY half-length of Lord Herbert, young, in armor, laced crav^t, and his
helmet before him.

THE punishment of sloth: a man whipping a woman out of bed.

A F^NE decollation of St. John, by Albert Dur^r. The executioner sheathing his
sword* Herodias's daughter receives the head with great satisfaction of
countenance, and her swelling waist shows the price of the Evangelist's
destruction.

FOUR musicians: two, a Flemish gentleman and a lady; the other, peasants: a
capital performance, by Frank Hals.

THE offering of the wise men in the east, by Paul Veronese, equally fine.

AN old woman and boy, heads, by candlelight, likewise fine.

TWO fine paintings, by Rembrandt, of two philosophers; each with a noble
pupil: one in a Turkish dress; the other in an ermine robe. These young figures
are called Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice. The time of the residence of their
mother in Holland, agrees entirely with that of Rembrandt in Amsterdam, which
makes the conjecture probable.

I RETURNED through Coventry, and, passing over the site of the New gate, soon
entered on a long common. At about a mile's distance from the city, on the left
side of the road, stood the Chartreux, now inhabited by -- Inge, Esquire.
Little of the ancient building remains. The wall of the precinct is still
standing and in a wall in the garden are the marks of many small doors, the
entrance into the cells of the austere inhabitants.

THIS religious house arose from the pious intentions of William Lord Zouch of
Harringworth, in Northamptonshire, who obtaining, in 1381, fourteen acres of
land in this place from Sir Baldwyn Frevile the elder, determined on that to
erect a monastery of Carthusians, and endow it with ample revenues. Death
prevented the execution; but in his last illness he left sixty pounds toward a
future establishment.

THE design was speedily completed by various pious persons. Richard Luff, a
mayor of Coventry, and Richard Botoner, a fellow-citizen, bestowed four hundred
marks on the church-choir, cloisters, and three cells: others followed their
example. Richard II. on his return from Scotland, in 1385, assumed the honor of
being the founder, and, at the instance of his queen Anne, laid the first stone
of the church with his own hands, declaring, in the presence of his nobility,
and of the mayor and citizens of Coventry, that he would bring it to
perfection. After this, it received considerable endowments, and at the
dissolution was found, according to Dugdale, to be possessed of L131. 6 s. 8 d.
above all reprizes. The prior seemed to want the resolution of this severe and
conscientious order; for more of this than any other resisted the will of their
cruel monarch, and underwent martyrdom in support of the trusts committed to
them. It is probable that John Bochard, the last who presided over the house,
was prevaled on to surrender for the consideration of the great pension of
forty pounds a year: after which it was granted to Richard Andrews and Leonard
Chamberlain.

A LITTLE farther I crossed the Sherbourn, leaving on the right Whitley,
WHITLEY.
a large old house, in which Charles I. resided during the attempt upon
Coventry. I was told, that the history of many of his actions had been painted
on the wainscot. About a mile and a half from hence I passed the Avon, at
Finford bridge. This is the river that runs by Warwick and Stratford, and
discharges itself into the Severn, near Tewkesbury; still retaining the British
name Afon, or river, as is the case with several others watering English ground.

ASCEND an extensive brow, commanding a rich and vast view toward the north and
west. On the summit is a tumulus, from which the spot, which gives name to the
hundred, is called Knightlow, KNIGHTLOW.
or mount. It seems to have been sepulchral, and to have covered the ashes of
some Roman eques, or knight, from which it was denominated. It lies very near a
great Roman road, as customary with similar memorials. On it in aftertimes
stood a cross; on whose base the inhabitants of several towns in this hundred
still attend, and pay the dues to the lord on Martinmass-day: the sums are from
1 d. to 2 s. 3 d. each. These rents are called Wroth-money, and Warth or Swarff
penny, and are supposed by Dugdale to be the same as ward-penny: Vicecomiti aut
aliis castellanis persoluti ob castrorum praesidium vel excubias agendas. They
must be paid at this cross before sunrise, and the party paying must go thrice
round the cross, say wroth-money, and put it into the hole in the stone before
good witness, or on omission to forfeit thirty shillings and a white bull
Dugdale, i. 4.
.

A SMALL space beyond, the Roman foss-way crosses the road: ROMAN ROAD.
it enters this county at High Cross, on the verge of Leicestershire, where it
is intersected by the great Watling-street, and traverses direct to Stafford
upon Fosse, near the edge of Glocestershire.

Go over Dunsmore heath (now enclosed) and, after riding in a tedious avenue of
elms and firs for five miles, reach Dunchurch, or the church on the hill; a
small village, whose church once belonged to the monks of Pipwell, in
Northamptonshire.

DESCEND the hill, and about three miles further go near Willoughby, or the
place of willows; a little village, WILLOUGHBY.
with a church dedicated to St. Nicholas, formerly appropriated to the hospital
of St. John, without Eastgate, Oxford; now in the patronage of Magdalen
College. This bottom, at present enlivened with the windings of the canal,
assumes a commercial appearance, by the number of new buildings rising on its
banks, and the magazines of coal and limestone laid up for sale. The former
gives a most comfortable prospect to the half-starved inhabitants of
Northamptonshire, by flattering them with the speedy approximation of the means
of warmth, and giving to their poor good fuel, instead of the wretched
substitute of horse-dung, which they collect in scanty portions for that
purpose.

IT would be ungrateful to leave Warwickshire, without paying a tribute to the
memory of Mr. Henry Beighton, author of the map of this county, surveyed by him
in 1722, 23, 24, and 25. As it was the earliest, so it was the best performance
of the kind. He had an estate of about a hundred a year, in the parish of
Coton, in this county. He assisted his income by surveying, in which, for
elegance, accuracy, and expedition, he had few equals. He left behind him, in
his neighborhood, numbers of excellent surveyors, who own him for their master.
His account of London bridge, in the Philosophical Transactions, shows his
skill in mechanics. He was interred at Chilvers Coton; where a small monument
barely tells that he lived and died, without mentioning his merit, neglected by
his countrymen during life; for he never met with encouragement to publish his
admirable map: which was done about the year 1750 He begun his survey in 1725,
and finished it in 1729.
. by subscription, for the support of his widow.

FROM Willoughby I instantly entered NORTHAMPTONSHIRE, BRAUNSTON.
in the parish of Braunston. The village, church with spire steeple, and the
number of narrow enclosures, appear on the side of a slope, on the left of the
road. This is among the few places I neglected to visit. I must therefore speak
from Mr. Bridges Twenty-six.
of its cross, twenty-four feet high; of the effigy of the Knight Templar in
the church; and of the instance of the longevity of William Bren, of this
village, who attained the age of an hundred and twenty-one.

AFTER the Conquest, the D' Aiencourts and the Peverels held land here. From
the last it fell, by marriage, to Albricius de Harcourt; by his daughter, to
William de Trussebot, a man raised from a low situation, by his desperate
valor, to great estates. In the reign of king Stephen, being attacked in
Bonville, of which he was governor, he set fire to his own house in four
places; which so terrified the enemy, that they instantly evacuated the town.

BY his daughter Roese, it fell to Everard de Roos; a family who flourished
here for several centuries, a distinguished race. One of them, William, was
clamant to the crown of Scotland, under the arbitration of Edward I Sir David
Dalrymple's Annals Scotl. i. 203.
. They became extinct in the male line, in the reign of Henry VII. when Elinor,
eldest sister of the last Lord Roos, conveyed it by marriage to Sir Robert
Manners; and it was sold by his descendant, Henry earl of Rutland (who died in
1563) to Gregory Isham, of London, merchant, a younger son of the respectable
and ancient family of that name.

THE present lord of the manor is -- Web, Esquire; who keeps in the small
manor-house a court leet and baron. SINGULAR TENURE.
The tenure of a considerable portion of land in the parish is very singular.
If a widow appears at the next court after her husband's death, and presents a
leathern purse with a groat in it, she can keep her husband's copyhold lands
for life; but she must attend every court after she has done this service.

FROM Dunchurch the country grows hilly, and till of late uninclosed; pleasant
during the verdure of the young, and the rich yellow of the ripened corn. About
three miles from Braunston appears Daventry, DAVENTRY.
on the side and top of a hill. The place is populous, and carries on a
considerable manufacture of whips: is an incorporated town, governed by a
bailiff, twelve burgesses, and a recorder; has two sergeants at mace, and one
town clerk. The bailiff for the time is justice of the peace, and also the year
following; and is likewise coroner of the inquest. The sergeants may arrest any
within their jurisdiction for a sum under one hundred pounds, and the cause is
to be decided here. No county justice has power in this place; the justices of
the borough having power of commitment to the county-jail in criminal causes.
The inhabitants also enjoy the privilege of exemption from serving on juries at
the county assizes.

ITS charter is said to have been first granted by king John, and was renewed
by queen Elizabeth. The place is of considerable antiquity; especially if we
give into the derivation of its name, Dwy Avon tree, the town of the two Avons,
or rivers, from its situation between them. Certainly it was a place of note at
the Conquest; had in it sixteen plough-lands; in the manor three, with three
slaves, twenty villeyns, a presbyter, and ten boors, and twelve acres of
meadow. It had been worth three pounds: after that event improved to eight.

THIS was part of the great possessions of the countess Judith, niece to the
Conqueror, whom he had married to the brave Waltheof earl of Northumberland;
and farther to engage his fidelity, he gave with her this county, and that of
Huntingdon. Waltheof unfortunately engaged in a conspiracy; and,
notwithstanding he repented, and flung himself at the king's mercy, was
beheaded in 1074, at the instigation of his wife Order Vital.
. It seems she had cast a favorable eye on another person: but was
disappointed; for the king offered to her Simon de Liz, a noble Norman, lame of
one leg: him she rejected; which so enraged her uncle, that he deprived her of
the two earldoms, and gave them to De Liz, with her eldest daughter; which
obliged Judith to a state of penitential widowhood during life.

HERE are some remains of the priory, PRIORY.
inhabited by poor families. The place is easily discovered, by several gothic
windows, and a door accessible by a great flight of steps. Four Cluniac monks
were originally placed at Preston Capes, in this county, by Hugh de Leycester,
sheriff of the county, and steward to Maud, sister to the first S. Liz earl of
Huntingdon; but finding the situation inconvenient, for want of water, he built
a priory here; to which place he removed them, about the year 1090. It was
dedicated to St. Augustine, and was subordinate to St. Mary de Caritate Tanner,
375.
. Its spiritualities were valued at L115. 17 s. 4 d. per annum; its
temporalities L120. 10 s. 2 d. Cardinal Wolsey made five of his emissaries to
pick a quarrel with the poor monks, about certain lands of theirs; and, causing
the dispute to be referred to himself, took occasion to dissolve the house,
and, as Stow says, to be given to his own college. But of this irreligious
robbery, done of no conscience, but to patch up pride, which private wealth
could not furnish, what punishment has since ensued by God's hand (says mine
author) partly ourselves have seen; for of those five persons, two fell at
discord between themselves, and the one slew the other; for which the survivor
was hanged: the third drowned himself in a well: the fourth, being well known,
and valued worth two hundred pounds, became in three years so poor, that he
begged till his dying-day: and the fifth, called Doctor Allane, being chief
executor of these doings, was cruelly maimed in Ireland, even at such time as
he was bishop Annals, 522.
. -- The pious historian then traces the judgment to the cardinal, who died
under the king's displeasure: to the colleges which occasioned the sacrilege;
that of Ipswich being pulled down; that of Christ-church never finished under
Wolsey's patronage: and lastly to the pope, who permitted these violences on
religious houses; for he was besieged in his holy see, and suffered a long
imprisonment.

THE parish church had been the conventual: CHURCH.
of late years it was handsomely rebuilt; but is no more than a curacy in the
gift of Christ-church college. The arms of the college, and of the earl of
Winchelsea, lord of the manor, grace the east window.

FROM Daventry I visited the noted camps on Borough-hill, BOROUGH-HILL.
or Danes-hill, about a mile south-east of the town. It is lofty and insulated.
The area is of an oblong or oval form, about a measured mile in length, and
near two in circumference. The whole is surrounded by two, three, or four deep
trenches, and the same number of great ramparts, or banks; according as the
strength or weakness of the ground required. These run on the margin of the
hill, and on the slope; and having the entrance on the eastern and western
sides opposite to each other.

WITHIN the area, near the middle, is a bank, which passes strait from the
western side toward the eastern: the remainder is destroyed. Farther on is the
vestige of another, running parallel. These, when entire, would have formed a
rectangular camp, by the assistance of part of the ditches on the sides of the
hill.

NEAR this camp are several tumuli of the sepulchral kind; but since Mr.
Morton's time, their number is evidently lessened; for in his days, he informs
us, there were eighteen.

THE northern end of the hill is formed into a third camp, of a circular shape,
and of vast strength. Two ditches, of prodigious depth, with suitable ramparts,
and a deep entrance, cross the area, and fall into the general surrounding
ditches, which have been deepened to add to the strength of the third part.
There is likewise the imperfect remains of another ditch and bank on the
outside, a little south, designed to add to the security.

ON the north-west part of the great rampart of this round camp, is a great
mount, either exploratory, or the spot where the chieftain pitched his tent.

I MUST differ with Mr. Morton about the makers of the first of these camps or
posts, which were the Britons themselves. It has every agreement with the
multitudes of others scattered over the kingdom, and suits exactly with the
description left by Tacitus of the method of defense used by our ancestors,
Tunc montibus arduis, et si qua clementer accedi poterunt in modum valli saxa
praestruit. I shall not here repeat what I have fully dwelt on in my Tours in
Wales and Scotland Tour Scotl. 1772, part ii. 159. Tour Wales, 413.
.

THIS post was in all probability made use of when the victorious Ostorius was
traversing this island, to quell the commotions he found on his arrival in
Britain. It is evident, that the Britons at this period made use of the same
species of defense which is proved to have been common to the whole country.
The Iceni lodged themselves within a post of this kind, against this very
general (Locum pugnae delegere septum agresti aggere et aditu angusto ne
pervius equis foret) Taciti Annal. lib. xii. c. 31.
but it did not avale. The Coritani of these parts had recourse to the strong
hold of what I dare say they called Ben Avon, or the head over the river; one
of the streams which form the Nen, the river of this country, passing beneath.

THIS post proved no obstacle to the Conqueror; he found it sit for a station:
he contracted its limits east into the shape of the camps of his people, and
made this a summer station, as he did the warm bottom, near the fort, a winter
station. Numbers of Roman coins found on the spots, evince the conjecture. The
Romans, as is frequently the case, latinized the British name, and formed from
it their Benvenna; which I beg leave to place here, rather than at Wedon, a
place destitute of all classical traces.

I MUST add, that on the south-east side of Borough-hill, about two or three
hundred yards below the ditches, is a lesser camp, surrounded by a fosse and
bank. Mr. Morton guesses it to have been the receptacle of the carriages of the
greater camp: I imagine it to have been a procestria, a sort of free post
attendant often on camps, where provisions and other necessaries were brought.

As to the third division of the area of this hill, it is probably Saxon; the
words borough, burgh, berry, and bury, being the constant appellation left by
the Saxons to similar places. It is my belief, that every post of this nature,
occupied by that nation in our island, had been originally British; which they
altered to their conceptions of strength and defense; which was usually done by
deepening the ditches, raising the ramparts, and clearing the area, and often
exalting one part into what was called the dunjeon, or keep. These places were
stationary, not properly camps; for the ancient Germans, from whom these
invaders were derived, and whose customs they retained, made use of no other
defense to their camps than a barrier of wagons, with which they formed the
precinct. Omnes Barbari, says Vegetius, carris suis in orbem connexis ad
similitudinem castrorum securas a supervenientibus exigunt noctes Lib. iii. c.
10.
. Caesar twice Bell. Gal. lib. 1. and lib. iv.
mentions this custom among the German nations; and I am told, that even in
later days, this mode of defense has been used, and called Waggenburg, or the
camp of wagons.

EVERY thing on this hill must not be attributed to remote antiquity; for
Charles I. a few days before the fatal battle of Naseby, occupied this post,
and fortified it: so possibly some of the entrenchments might be the work of
the unfortunate monarch Whitelock, 150.
.

I MUST not quit this place without mentioning a spot which I overlooked. BURNT
WALLS.
This is what Mr. Morton calls the Burnt Walls; where many loads of walls and
foundations have been dug up. The precinct is about six acres, and was moated
round. The water that filled the moat was conveyed from pools in Daventry Park,
a place not remote. Tradition says, that within the area stood a seat of John
of Gaunt; which is probable, as this manor was once possessed by the earls and
dukes of Lancaster, in Edward III's time, annexed to that duchy, and assigned
to that great duke Hist. Northampt. 44.
.

CONTINUE my journey: turn a little out of my road, on the left, DODFORD CHURCH.
to Dodford church; and found there a tomb of a cross-legged knight, armed in
mail, with both hands upon his sword, as if in the attitude of drawing it. On
his shield are, ill-blazoned, vaire, argent and azure; two bars gules, which
denote the person here deposited to have been a Keynes, one of the ancient
lords of the place; and, from the attitude of his legs, to have lived during
the fashionable madness of crusades.

Two ladies, in hoods, recumbent, said to have been two sisters, co-heiresses
of the manor, and probably Margaret and Maud de Ayote, who were possessed of
this manor, I think, in the time of Richard II; which descended to their
father, Laurence, from his mother, Lettice, sister to William de Keynes.

A BRASS plate of William Wide, who died owner of this place in 1422, and
another of his wife.

AN alabaster figure, armed, of John Cressy, a successor of the former; who
distinguished himself in the French wars, under the duke of Bedford, was
captain of Lycieux, Orbef, and Pontesque, in Normandy, and privy-counsellor in
France. He died in 1443, at Tove, in Lorrain Hist. Northampt. 51.
.

IN this manor, the Watling-street crosses the road to Wedon: it enters the
county at Dowbridge, on the edge of Leicestershire, passes close by
Borough-hill, and proceeds from Wedon to Toucester and Stoney Stratford, where
it enters the county of Bucks.

NEAR the sixty-eighth mile-stone is the entrance to the new turnpike-road to
Northampton, which is above seven miles distant; and on an eminence, a little
to the left, is pleasantly seated the church and village of Flore, or Flower.

A LITTLE beyond, on the right, lies the village of Wedon on the Street, WEDON.
or Weedon Bec; from which I choose to transfer the old Bennevenna to
Borough-hill, on account of deficiency of classical evidence at this place, and
the little difference of distance from the other stations.

SUFFICIENT honor will remain to Wedon, in allowing it to have been the site of
the royal palace of Wulfere Bridges, 93.
, the Mercian monarch; afterward converted into a nunnery, at the instance of
his daughter, St. Werburg; who presided for a time over it. Here she performed
the miracle of the wild geese; who, at her word, forgot their nature, were
driven by her steward from their ravages among the corn, into the grange, and,
after receiving from her a severe check for their depredations, were commanded
to take wing, and never appear in her demesns. They obeyed in part, but kept
hovering about, till one of their companions, which had been stolen (and some
say eaten) by a servant, was restored; on which they bid an eternal adieu to
the fields of Wedon Cressy's Cb. Hist. 427.
.

THIS nunnery was destroyed by the Danes; but the memory of the foundress was
preserved in Leland's day, by a fair chapel dedicated to that saint Leland
Itin. i. 11.
.

AFTER the Conquest, Roger de Thebovil gave a moiety of lands in this monastery
to the abbey of Bec, in Normandy; which was, with many other grants to the same
house, confirmed by Henry II. That abbey afterward became possessed of the
whole, when it was made dependent on their great cell or priory at Okeburn, in
Wiltshire. Vast privileges were bestowed in favor of the monks of this abbey;
such as exemption from suit and service to the county and hundred courts; from
toll passage and pontage; and exemption from forest laws. They had also free
warren, and right of determining in murder, manslaughter, etc. etc. all which
perished at the dissolution of the priories; and this manor, as part of the
possessions of Okeburn, was vested in the provost and fellows of Eton college,
by Henry VI; in which it still continues Hist. Northampt. 93; in which Mr.
Bridges denies that there ever was a priory here, as Sir W. Dugdale and Bishop
Tanner imagine.
.

FROM hence, I was led by my curiosity about two miles westward, CASTLE DIKES.
to Castle Dikes, in the parish of Farthingstone, remarkable for some ancient
works attributed to the Saxons. They are placed on the brow of a steep hill,
commanding a vast view; but at present so overgrown with thick woods, that I
had but a very indistinct sight of them. They appeared to comprehend near
thirteen acres of ground, and to consist of strong holds, divided from each
other by a ditch of stupendous breadth and depth. A plat, called the
Castle-yard, stands to the south-west of these, entrenched on all sides but the
south-west, comprehending about seven acres, on which, tradition says, a town
was situated.

MR. Morton informs us, that a vaulted room, formed of squared stones, was
discovered in his time, and beneath that another, which falling in
accidentally, a smell, resembling that of putrid carcases, issued from it. Two
or three, rude sculptures were also discovered among the rubbish.

IT is conjectured that this place was burnt by the Danes; for vast masses of
cinders, mixed with pebbles and clay, have been found in different parts; and
many of the stones had on them the marks of fire Mr. Morton, 543.
. There is no account left of the particulars of their ravages; so this rests
upon conjecture, as well as the notion of Ethelfleda having been founder of
this place, among her other great works performed in 913.

ON my return to the great road, about two miles from the place, I visited the
church of Stow-nine-Churches, STOW-NINE-CHURCHES.
to see the most elegant tomb which this or any other kingdom can boast of;
that of Elizabeth, fourth daughter of John lord Latimer, wife, first to Sir
John Danvers, of Dantrey, Wiltshire, and afterward to Sir Edmund Carry, third
son of Henry lord Hunsdon. Her figure is of white marble, lying recumbent on a
slab of black. The attitude is the most easy possible, that of one asleep; her
head, covered with a loose hood, reclines on a rich cushion. One hand is placed
on her breast, the other lies on one side. Round her neck is a quilled ruff.
The fashionable stiffness of her embroidered stays is a disadvantage to this
elegant sculpture. Her gown flows to her feet in easy folds, and covers them.
She lies on a long cloak, lined with ermine, fastened at her neck with rich
jewels. At her feet is a griffin holding a shield of the family-arms. The whole
rests on a white marble altar-tomb, with inscriptions and arms on the sides.
After informing us of her parentage, marriages, and children, are these lines:
Sic familia praeclara

Praeclarior prole

Virtute praeclarissima

Aetatis 84,

Anno

Dni. 1630.

Commutavit Saecula; non obiit.



She left three sons and seven daughters by her first husband. Sir Charles, the
eldest, lost his head through his unfortunate attachment to the ill-fated Earl
of Essex; Henry, an able warrior, died Earl of Danby, full of years and glory;
Sir John married into the great family of the Newports, in Shropshire.

THIS noble monument was erected by the lady in her lifetime, and was the chef
d'oeuvre of that great statuary Nicholas Stone, master-mason to king James and
Charles I. statuary and stone cutter; so humbly does he style himself. It
appears by a note of his, that, March the 16. 1617. I undertook to make a tomb
for my lady, mother to Lord Davers; which was all of whit marbell and touch
Touch, Pierre de Touch was a name applied to any black stone which was used for
the touching or trying of gold. At length the statuaries bestowed it on all the
black marbles, because they were sometimes used for that purpose.
; and I set it up at Stow of the nine Churches, in Northamptonshire, some 2
year after. One altar tomb: for the which I had 220 li. Mr. WALPOLE, in the
2d vol. of his Anecdotes of Painting, p. 23, informs us, that this able artist
was born at Woodbury, near Exeter, in 1586, and died in London, 1647. I refer
the reader to that elegant performance for a list of his works. Let me add,
that the first time I saw this beautiful tomb, it was going fast to decay; but,
since that time, has been fully restored, by the care of the worthy ^ector and
(I think) patron of this church, Doctor Lloyd.


OPPOSITE to this is a very handsome cenotaph, in memory of the Reverend Doctor
Thomas Turner, born at Bristol in 1645, and buried in 1714, in Corpus Christi
college, Oxford, of which he had been president.

HE laid out his great income in acts of hospitality and charity; and on his
death, after bequeathing L4000 to his relations and friends, left the rest of
his wealth to pious uses. He augmented the stipends of the poorer members of
Ely cathedral, in which he was prebend: he left L100 to be expended in
apprenticing poor children of that city: he left L6000 for improving the
buildings of the college he presided over: and finally, left L20,000 to be laid
out by his executors in estates and lands, to be settled by them on the
governors of the charity for the relief of the poor widows and children, of the
clergy. Accordingly they purchased this manor, and other estates here, and at
West Wratling in Cambridgeshire, to the amount of upwards of L1000 a year, and
settled them, in 1716, agreeable to his will Willis's Cathedrals, ii. 389.
. This manor was purchased from Edward Hooley, Esquire, for L16,000; which
occasioned the honorable mark of gratitude in this church. It is singular, that
Francis Turner, bishop of Ely, lost his preferments in 1690, for refusing the
oaths to William and Mary, when this gentleman, his brother, had the good
fortune to preserve his, without injuring his conscience.

IN 1702, the last year allowed for undergoing the test, he left London on the
28th of July, and went to Oxford with a full resolution to sacrifice all his
preferments on the first of August, the last day allowed by the act. He wisely
made no resignation, well knowing that his refusal would be ample deprivation.
Whether he was forgotten, or whether the omission was winked at, does not
appear; but he retained all his benefices to his dying day Bentham's Hist. Ely,
263.
.

THIS charitable divine is placed standing in a graceful attitude, in his
master of arts robes, in his own hair, under a canopy supported by two fluted
pillars of the Corinthian order, of colored marble. On the side of him is
Religion, represented by a woman on a celestial globe, with a cross in one, and
a font in the other hand. On the last is inscribed (...). The doctor stands on
a terrestrial globe, with a book in his hand, in which is written (...). The
account of his various charities is placed on the pediment.

IN a corner of an aile, to make room for this sumptuous monument, was removed
the tomb of a cross-legged knight, armed in mail, and partly covered with a
surtout. One hand is on his breast, the other on his sword. On an enormous
shield, which is belted to his body, is a rude figure of a lion passant
guardant, and crowned. He is supposed to be one of the Gilbert de Gants, the
ancient owners. There were five of them. The first was great nephew to the
Conqueror; the last died in 1295.

FROM hence I descended to the great road: the country hilly and clayey. The
quarries are of a coarse grit stone, often filled with shells, but of too
shattery a nature to be used, except in ordinary buildings. A few miles farther
is an eminence, called Forster's Booth, so named from a booth erected here by
one Forster, a poor countryman. It grew at length into a scattered street, of
several houses and carriers inns, through which runs the Watling-street road in
a direct line to Toucester, four miles distant.

THIS is a pretty considerable town, seated on a plain, TOUCESTER.
on a small stream called the Tove, from which the name is derived; Toucester,
or the castle on the Tove. The great tumulus on the east side of the town,
points out of the site of the speculum or watchtower. The Roman coins found in
digging about, prove it to have been an appendage to a Roman station, whose
name has never reached us. The Saxons profited of this little fortress, and
added the fosse which surrounded it. From them it received its present title of
the Bury, or Borough, to which has been since added the double tautology of
Berry Mounthill.

THE Saxons called the town Tofeceastre. In the time of Edward the Elder it was
almost ruined by the ravages of the Danes; but in 921, the king determined to
restore it, and for that purpose detached part of his forces; who, soon after
their arrival, were attacked by the Danes resident in Northampton and Leicester
Sax. Chr. 107.
; but, assisted by the townsmen, they repelled the barbarians; and Edward, in
order to prevent future insults, fortified the whole place with a stone wall
Sax. Chr. 108.
. But time has destroyed every vestige of it.

THIS manor, after various changes, became the property of the famous Sir
Richard Empson, one of the instruments of the avarice and oppression of Henry
VII; who, in 1509, lost his head, with Edmund Dudley, on Tower Hill; perhaps
more deservedly than legally. Empson had been the son of a sieve-maker in this
town: by his great abilities in the profession of the law, he was promoted to
the chancellorship of the duchy of Lancaster; but by his unbounded submission
to the will of his rapacious master, fell a victim, in the next reign, to the
demands of an enraged nation. At present, the manor belongs to the Earl of
Pomfret, who derives it from his ancestor Richard Fermor, a merchant of Calais,
and a younger brother of the ancient house of Fermors, of Oxfordshire.

THERE was a church here at the Conquest, CHURCH.
which was given by the Conqueror to the abbey of St. Wandragasile, in
Normandy. In the present, is nothing remarkable, excepting the tomb of William
Sponne, archdeacon of Norfolk, and rector of this parish in the reign of Henry
VI. who founded here a college and chantry for two priests to say mass for his
soul, and the souls of his friends. At the dissolution, it was worth L19. 6 s.
8 d. a year Tanner, 388.
. He was also a great benefactor to the town, and his charities are still felt
here, governed by feoffees, consisting of fifteen of the principal inhabitants.

HIS figure is represented recumbent, dressed in a red gown, which reaches
round his feet, with ermine hood and sleeves. Beneath is another representation
of him after death, with a sunk nose and emaciated body, and all the changes
wrought by that fell monster on the human frame.

THE town is supported by the great concourse of passengers, and by a
manufacture of lace, and a small one of silk stockings. The first was imported
from Flanders, and carried on with much success in this place, and still more
in the neighboring county of Buckingham.

I TOOK a walk about a mile east of the town, to see Easton-Neston,
EASTON-NESTON.
the seat of the Earl Pomfret. The wings were built by Sir Christopher Wren, in
1682; the center by Hawkesmore, about twenty years after, who is said to have
departed greatly from the original design. It has nine windows in front, and is
enriched with pilasters. The inside has been long since despoiled of its
curious portraits and valuable statues: the latter having been presented to the
university of Oxford, by the late Countess of Pomfret, grandaughter to the lord
chancellor Jeffries.

THIS manor was purchased by the same Richard Fermor, MANOR.
in 1530, from Thomas, son of Sir Richard Empson. The ancient house stood below
the church, in a park enclosed by Sir Richard, by license from Henry VII, at
the time it came into the possession of Mr. Fermor. He lived here with
boundless hospitality, till the year 1540, when, for sending 8 d. and a couple
of shirts, to one Nicholas Thane, his confessor, then in prison at Buckingham
for denying the king's supremacy, he incurred the tyrant's displeasure. He fell
under a praemunire, and, in his old age, being stripped of all he had, was
forced to live with the parson of, Wapenham (whom he had presented); which he
did for several years, with consummate piety and resignation Bridges, 290.
.

THE recovery of part of his fortune was owing to a singular accident. During
his prosperous days he kept, as usual in those days, in the establishment of
people of rank, a fool or jester: his was the noted Will. Summers, WILL. SUMMERS.
who, for his drollery, was promoted to the same office under Henry VIII. I
have a very scarce print of this illustrious personage, by Delaram, with all
the insignia of his place about him. Will. with a gratitude not frequent at
courts, remembered his old master; and in the latter days of Henry, when his
constitution was weakened by infirmities, took occasion, by some well-timed
speech, to awaken the king's conscience; who, touched with a compunction rarely
known to him, ordered restitution Collins's Peerage, v. 50.
; but died before it could be effected. His pious successor, Edward VI.
restored to him this manor, that of Toucester, and some others of his estates,
and added many grants, by way of compensation for the injury done him; but all
fell short of the great losses he had sustained from the cruel father. He
returned to his house, which he enjoyed only two years, dying in January
1552-3. He seemed to have a presage of his end; for on the day of his death he
had invited a number of his friends and neighbors, took his leave of them,
retired to his closet, and was found dead in an attitude of devotion Ibid.
. His tomb, with his figure in brass, and that of his wife, are still to be
seen in the adjacent church.

THERE are, CHURCH.
besides, several other family-monuments. Sir John Fermor (son of Richard) and
Maud his wife, are represented kneeling at a desk, beneath an arch: she is
dressed in a great ruff and lappets. He, perhaps out of respect to his father's
sufferings in the cause of the sea of Rome, received the honor of Knight of the
Bath at the coronation of queen Mary. He died in 1571.

His son Sir George lies in alabaster, recumbent and armed, with peaked beard
and small whiskers. His wife, Mary daughter of Thomas Curzon, of Addington,
Bucks, lies by him, dressed in a gown tied neatly with ribands from top to
bottom, a quilled ruff, and great tete a caleche. Beneath are represented,
kneeling, their seven sons and eight daughters. Above all, is a vast quantity
of ornaments, arms, etc. etc. This gentleman might, like Sir Fulk Grevil, have
boasted of being the friend of Sir Philip Sydney, having contracted an intimacy
with him in the wars in the Netherlands, where he served all his youth, under
William prince of Orange, and walked at the funeral of the celebrated English
hero. He also improved himself by foreign travel; lived at home with vast
splendour and hospitality; and, on June 11, 1603, his house had the honor of
being the place of meeting between James I. and his queen, on her journey from
Scotland, to receive her new crown. Here they dined, and were entertained, with
all their trains, in a princely manner Collins, 52.
. He quitted this life in 1612.

SIR Hatton Fermor, who with nine other gentlemen were knighted at the above
interview, is also buried here. He died of the consequences of a broken leg, in
1620. He and his lady are very elegant figures, placed standing: he armed; in
great boots, flapping down; vast whiskers; peaked beard; and, what was not in
use at the time of his death, a cravat. It seems the monument was not erected
till 1662, when his widow Anna, daughter of Sir William Cockain, lord mayor of
London, gave this proof of her affection.

She is dressed in a loose gown, and with long flowing tresses: her hand is on
an hourglass; his on a scroll: between, is a bust of a man in long hair:
above, are three most awkward figures of kneeling women. I must not quit the
lady, without saying she suffered, with exemplary patience, a long imprisonment
and great confiscations, on account of the loyalty of her family; which were
rewarded with a peerage in the person of her son Sir William Fermor.

FROM hence I continued my journey southward, and much of the way near the
borders of Whittlewood, or Whittlebury Forest, WHITTLEBURY FOREST.
which still continues wooded for several miles in length, and of different
extents in breadth, in a most deep and clayey country. Much of the timber is
cut in rotation, but in parts toward the edge of Buckinghamshire, are
considerable quantities of good oak. This forest remained in the crown till the
year 1685, when Henry Fitz-roy, first duke of Grafton, was appointed hereditary
ranger. The present duke has an elegant house, called Wakefield Lodge Designed
by W. Kent.
, originally built by Mr. Claypole, son-in-law to Oliver Cromwell, and ranger
of the forest. This was one of the five tracts, called walks; viz. Wakefield,
Shelbrook, Hazelbury, Shrob, and Hanger. Fourteen townships are allowed the
right of common in the open coppices and ridings, from the principle of
justice, that some reparation might be made to them for the damages sustained
by the deer. In this great tract here are two lawns, i. e. spots enclosed with
pales, for pasture for the deer: one is Wakefield Lawn, the other Sholbrook
Lawn, which are secluded from the forest cattle.

THAT fierce animal the wild cat, is still met with in this forest. In the
reign of Richard I. the abbot and convent of Peterborough had a charter for
hunting in this place the hare, the fox, and the wild cat; which was confirmed
to them, in 1253, by Henry III Morton, 443.
. By these charters, the wild cat should be added to the beasts of forest, or
of venerie; which the book of St. Albans, and old Sir Tristram, in his worthy
Treatise of Hunting, confined to the heart, the hynde, the hare, the boar, and
the wolf: the heart and hind being separated, because the season of hunting
them was different; yet they remain in species still the same. Beasts of the
chase (which was an inferior sort of forest) were the buck, the do, the fox,
the martion, and the roe Manwood's Forest Laws, 39.
.

THE fondness that seized the regular clergy for the pleasures of the chase,
did not appear till after the Conquest. The Saxon clergy were expressly
forbidden the amusement. King Edgar directs the priest to be neither a hunter
nor hawker, nor yet a tippler; but to keep close to his books, as becomes a man
of his order Leges Saxon. 86.
.

THE canon law still preserved its severity, and forbad to spiritual persons
the amusement of the chase. This probably was rather designed to check what
might by the excess estrange them from their sacred function. The common law,
from a principle of good sense and humanity, permitted the recreation, from
these arguments; that nothing could contribute more effectually to the
performance of their duty than good health, resulting from fit exercise; as
nothing could disqualify them so greatly as the disorders arising from a
sedentary life. This indulgence probably soon ended in abuse. In the twelfth
century, we find Abelard unhappy in presiding over a monastery of huntsmen.
Chaucer, as I have before quoted, flings a fine ridicule on the sporting monk.
Finally, the chase became so necessary an appendage to the ecclesiastical
state, that every see had a number of parks: that of Norwich, thirteen; and the
sixth mortuary which the king clamed on the death of a prelate, was his kennel
of hounds.

PASS by Potters Pery, POTTERS PERY.
a village which takes its name from the manufacture of coarse ware, such as
flower-pots, etc. which has been long carried on here. The clay is yellowish,
pure, and firm; yet the pots made with it are very brittle, unless glazed; when
they endure the weather as well as any.

THE post-road is still continued the whole way on or near the Watling-street.
Near Potters Pery I quitted it, PASSENHAM.
through curiosity of visiting Passenham, about a mile or two distant, on the
banks of the Ouze, near this village. Edward the Elder encamped here to cover
his workmen, who were employed in building the walls of Toucester Saxon Chr.
108.
, from being interrupted by the Danes. A square entrenchment is supposed to
have been cast up by him, and garrisoned for that purpose.

THE church is small, CHURCH.
and without ailes; dedicated to Guthlaius, the saint of the fens. It was
rebuilt in 1626, at the sole expense of Sir Robert Banastre. This gentleman was
lord of the manor; he died in 1649, aged about eighty. His figure is a
halflength, with a book in his hand, placed against the wall. His epitaph
informs us, that he was born at Wem, in Shropshire; that he was bred at court,
and served three princes; that he had three wives, and by the last an only
daughter, who conveyed the estate, by marriage with William lord Maynard, into
that family; a younger branch of which possesses it, as I apprehend, at present.

I REGAINED the great road, and passed through the hamlet of Old Stratford,
seated on rich meadows, OLD STRATFORD.
watered by the Ouze' which rises in this county, not remote from Brackly. This
place is reasonably supposed to have been the Lactodorum, or Lactorodum, of the
Itinerary, as the distance suits extremely well, and Roman coins have been
found in the neighboring fields. Antiquaries derive it from Llech dwr, and
Llech rhyd: one signifying the stone on the water; the other, the stone on the
ford See Gale, 60, and Burton, 144.
: a name bestowed on it by the Britons, probably because the bank of the river
was marked by a military stone on this great military way. I here cross the
river into BUCKINGHAMSHIRE; which, with Bedfordshire and Hertfordshire, formed
the country of the Catticuchlani. The present name is, according to Mr.
Cambden, taken from the quantity of beeches found in parts of it; a word
derived from the Saxon bucken. Two arguments serve to confirm the assertion of
Caesar, that this tree was not found in Britain at the time of his invasion:
one is, that the woods of it are merely local, and confined to a very few of
our southern counties: the other is, that the Britons had no name for it, but
what they derived from the Latin fagus; for they styled it, as we do still,
Ffawydden, and Pren ffawydd.

ON crossing the Ouze I entered Stoney Stratford, STONEY STRATFORD.
a town built on each side of the Watling-street. It suffered greatly by fire
on May the 19th, 1742, which almost destroyed the whole place; but it was soon
restored by the vigor of English charity. One church (that of St. Giles) has
never been rebuilt; the body of the other (St. Magdalene's) is restored in a
very handsome manner, by Mr. Irons, architect in Warwick, and, I suppose,
enlarged sufficiently to supply the want of the other. St. Giles's had been a
chantry, valued at L20. 2 s. 6 d. a year; and was at the time of its ruin a
curacy: St. Magdalene's was a chapel belonging to Wolverton, but now in the
presentation of the parishioners.

MY journey was continued along the Street road to the 47th stone, BLECHELEY
CHURCH.
where, tempted by the same of certain monuments in Blecheley church, I
digressed about a mile and a quarter to the right. I found there a very fine
alabaster tomb of Richard lord Gray of Wilton, TOMB OF LORD GRAY.
restored by the celebrated antiquarian Brown Willis, Esquire, who added an
inscription, and in the front the arms. From the former we find, that besides
Richard, his son Reginald, who died February 22, 1493; and his great granson
Edmund, who died Water-hall, on May 6th 1611; were interred here.

THIS Richard lord Gray, by will, dated at Blecheley, August 12, 1442,
bequeaths his body to be buried in the church of the B. V. Mary of Blecheley;
and directs his executors to find a priest, for four years, to perform divine
service in the said church for his soul; and that they make a tomb of alabaster
or marble, according to his state and degree. He bequeaths to the lady Margaret
his wife, his mano^ of B^^^y-hall, in Essex, for life. The residue of his lands
and goods he gives to his executors, to dispo^e of for the health of his soul;
viz. the lady Margaret Gray, (...) Darcy, Esquire. John ^^^ethal, Esquire,
Roger Eton Clear, rector of Blecheley, and William Barker H^^ will, ^ated Aug
^^. 442. Mr. Cole's MSS.
.

THE tomb is of alabaster: his figure is armed, his hair cropped, his face
without a beard; round his neck is a collar of SS, and round the lower part of
his armor is another collar of jewels, in the midst of which is a small shield
with the cross St. George; for he was made Knight of the Garter by Richard II.
On the fingers of his left hand are not fewer than six rings.

NOTWITHSTANDING it may be thought tedious to many, yet I cannot forbear
describing two monuments, full of the fashionable ^^blem, p^n, and quibble of
the times. The first is in memory of THOMAS SPARK, S. See. Theol. Dr. ^^le^er
bujus eccle. reb^or vi^^^^^issimus, DR. SPARK.
as inscribed round the oval that contains his figure. A little altar with
sparkling flames is placed near his name. The monument is a small but extremely
neat one of brass set in a white marble frame: on the top is the crest, a demi
^albot rampant, studded with ^orteauxes, and sparks of fire issuing from his
mouth^ on the brass is finely engraven an altar-tomb, on the ta^^e of which is
an urn, with sparks issuing from the mouth; and on the ^elly is written

Non extincta, sepulta licet; S^i^tilla favilla est.

ON the (...) side of the urn stands Death, in ^^rm of a skeleton, (...) a
spade, on the flat part of which, going to cover the mouth of the urn, is wrote
Mors teg^^; and an angel in the he heavens founding a trumpet, from the end of
which issues these words, Retege^ ^untius is^e (...); and on a s^r^^, in the
same ha^^ is written, Is^a cadu^^ ro^^ est: just above which, in the other hand
of the angel, is a fresh-blown rose, inscribed Sed (...), about the angel's
head, and in the clouds, are several sta^ and quite at top is written, Qu^
^ultos ad just^^^m, (...) s^ell^ semper spl^ndebunt.

(...), with her usual attributes of ears, eyes, and tongue^ blowing a trumpet,
stanos on the other side of the urn. On each side of her are two scrolls: o^
one ^s* Vindex fam^ li^ros sa^a^l to^lit ab ur^a. on the other, Si^ S^ntilla
micat quem tegit atra cinis.

Fame holds in one hand a book, near the mouth of the (...) on which is written
Funer^^ Sermons. On other books, scat^^^^^ about are inscribed, A Persuasive to
Conformity; A comfort^^ ^reatise for a troubled (...), Motives to Qu. Elizabeth
for Successor, A Treatise of Ca^^^chising; A Confutation of J. Albin ^word out
of the mouth of the trumpet, The high way to Heaven. Th^^ were the works of the
Doctor, who was a most famous contro^^ ^ia^ut, in the reign^ of Elizabeth and
(...) I. He is engraven (...) front of the tomb, a half-lenght, in gown,
cassock, scarf, scull-(...) ruff, and square beard. On each side of him is a
shield: on o^ is (...): on the other, (...) a nostr^ sunt spiritual^^. (...)
side of the figure are three clergymen in their habits, (...) with a church o^
each; and beyond them two women in high crowned hats. These five were h^s
children, whom he ad^ ^^^es, Filioli cavete vobis ab idolis; and above their
heads are (...) lines: Bis geniti, retinete, fidem zelumque paternum:
Hoeredis vestri sic dece^ esse patris
Sic dece^, O mea tun^ quam molli^er ossa cubabunt
Si licet in natis sic superesse meis:
Scintillam S^^^tilla meam si vestra sequetur
Orba sua flamma more erit ara Dei.


(...) the other side of his picture are represented his parishioners, (...)
these verses: (...) sacra in populo signatur epistola Paul^
Sic mea in h^^ sancto lucet imago grege.
Co^poris in ^abula datur imperfecta; sed ill^
Cordi^us in vestris viva figura mei e^t.
Viva mei, dixi, CHRISTI a^ sit vera figura;
S^^ mini si populus vera figura Dei.


(...) Doctor died in 1616; his wife the year before. Luckily, (...) was Rose;
which afforded fresh matter of allusions. Sixty-eight years a fragrant ROSE she
lasted:
No vile reproach her virtues ever blasted.
Her autumn past, expects a glorious spring,
A ^^^ond better life, more flourishing.


(...) is in memory of Mrs Fa^^h Tailor, wife of Mr. (...), minister of the
parish, with many pretty sportings (...) Faith; but the dullness of this species
of epitaph has (...) ^^me, as I fear it has the reader, that I dare not venture
on the transcript of that was probably ^uch admired at the p^^ of (...).

I (...) I got into (...) great road at Fenny Stratfford, FENNY (...).
(...) from its (...) The chapel, which is in the par^s^ (...) as (...) at the
expense of Mr. (...) His (...) was nea^ the church (...) for the works of his
own hands, he (...) the Reverend Mr. William Cole, the^ (...) of the parish,
the following inscription; which Mr. Cole was requested to (...) to be
inscribed on a white marble stone ^i^cered with ^^^ck, to be laid over him in
this chapel. ^

(...) W^l^^s, antiquarius

^

The Wil^^^ (...) berri^^

(...) Sancti (...) A. D. 1675

(...) est.

(...). Anno Domini 1760.

Aetatis ^uae ^8.

O Chris^e Seter e^ J^^ex,

(...) ^ecatorum primo

M^^ereco^^ et propitius esto.



ON the (...) are the (...) of all benefactors of ten pounds (...) upwards The
chapel had been originally a chantry ^ct^^. ^^.
. (...) was dedicated to St. Martin, out of respect (...) who happened to die
on that day. The same (...) physician first made a settlement in this parish,
by the purchase of the manor of Blecheley, and that of Fenny Stratford, from
the (...) George Villiers duke of Buckingham.

FROM hence I kept a gentle ascent to Little B^^ckhill, seated on the sleep of
a long range of sand-hills, divided by pleasant (...) dingles, which extend for
a considerable way, and form a any frontier at this end of the county. Very
soon after my ^^age over them, I entered the county of BEDFORD, (...) keep as
far as Dunstable on the Wa^ling-street, which goes di^ to this town. In the
beginning it crosses a most undula^ed (...). On the right are the woods and
park of Battlesdon, a seat (...) ^rs. Page. In the bottom go through Hockley in
the Hole; HOCKLEY.
(...) range of houses, mostly inns, built on each side of the (...) The
English rage of novelty is strongly tempted by one sa^ publican, who informs us
on his sign, of newspapers (...) to be seen at his house every day in the week.

(...), place, whose proper name is Occleie, or Hockeliff, HOCKELIFF.
was (...), with a master and several brethren, dedicated to (...) Baptist
(...), 8.
. In 1^83 here was a ^eudal of quarrel, between (...) of the priory of
D^nstaple and those of William de (...), a potent baron; in which one John the
Smith was (...) on the side of the priory, and Thomas Musta^a, a fierce (...)
o^ the other (...) Danstaple ^^. 48.
. In old times, these were very frequent, (...) fatal: men were always formed
into ^^rties, and ready to ^^rsue the most bloody ends on the most trivial
occasions.

TWO miles farther, (...)
I reached the foot of Chalkhill, formerly of a tremendous steepness, and the
terror of country passengers; at present formed into an easy ascent. This is
the first specimen the traveller (...) with of the great chalky str^^um which
intersect^ the kingdom. A lint drawn from Dorchester, in the county of Dorset,
to the county of Norfolk, would include all the chalky be^^ of the kingdom; for
none is found in any quantity to the west of that line. This earth was of great
estimation, and an article of comm^^ce in the times of the Romans. The workers
in it ha^ (...) their goddess Nehele^nia, who presided over it. To her (...) we
find this votive altar, DEAE NEHELENNIAE.

O^ merce^^^ite conservata^

M. secundus (...)

Negetor Cretarius

Brit^nni^ianus

^. ^ L. M.



AFTER descending the ^^ll, (...)
I turned about half a mile out of (...) to visit M^^^e^'^ Bower, a very large
Danish camp of (...), surrounded with a great rampart with a ditch (...) side
(...) on a plain with a portion verging toward a (...). Its history is
unknown, yet mer^ts a (...) the (...) of the ^^nes are not very common (...).

(...), (...)
enter Dunstable, a long town, (...) side of the Wa^ling street, and
intersected in the midd^^ (...) ^e I^^nield-street. This town had been the
Magiovinum, or Magi^, of the Itinerary: and probably had four port^, answerable
(...) the great ^oads. The Icknield-street issues out on the north side of the
church. Antiquarians derive the name, very properly, from Maes Gwyn, or the
wh^^e field, from the color of the chalky (...). Roman money has been found
about the place, which the country people call ma^ing money: which, as Dr.
Stukely observes, (...) have no reference to Maiden's Bower, which belonged to
another people. But on a hill, called Castle-hill, about half a mile well of
it, is a Roman camp: within which, near one end, is a (...) mount, very hollow
in the top; and near the outside of one of the ramparts is a deep hole,
probably the place of the draw^. The whole stands on a ^t^ep promontory,
projecting west^.

(...) was certainly occupied by the Saxons, after the de^ of the Romans. We
can indeed only argue from the pre^ (...) Du^-Staple, the mart near the hill.
We cannot allow (...) sh ^^gend, that it was called Dun's Stable, or the stable
(...) of that name. It probably was a waste at the time (...) Conquest, as many
places were, and might become a har^ (...), by reason of the woods with which
the country (...). This determined Henry I. to colonize the spot; (...) that
purpose, he encouraged people by proclamation to (...) and, in order to destroy
the shelter which the forest (...), directed the woods to be grubbed up. He
also (...) ^oyal palace, called Kingsbury Stow, 136. Dugdale M^nast. ii. ^3^.
, which stood near the (...) and whose site is now occupied by a farm-house.
Here he kept his Christmas in 1123, with his whole court, and received at the
same time the embassy from the earl of Anjou (...) 22^^ (...) Antiq Ex^^ ^.^.
. He ma^^ the town a borough, bestowed o^ it a fair and a market, and various
other privileges; particularly, that the inhabitants should not be (...) to be
called before the ^^iner^^t justices, but that (...) causes should be
determined by the justices of the king, (...) a jury of twe^ve of the burgesses
Dugdale M^nast(...)
. He kept the town (...) in ^is own hands, and then bestowed it, with all (...)
priveleges (re^^r^^ng only his royal residence) on the priory, (...) founded
here some time after the year 1^31, for black (...) honor of St. Peter. At the
time of the dissolution, here (...) prio^ and twelve canons, whose revenues,
according to (...) were L344. 13 s. 3 d. a year: to Speed, L40^. 14 s. 7 d.

THE last prior (...) ^^rv^se Markham, (...)
who, with his canon^ ^^^scribes to the king's supremacy in 1534; and on the
dissolution^ had a pension of sixty pounds a year for life. His reward was the
greater, as his conven^ was the residence of the commi^ (...) for carrying on
the divorce between Henry VIII. and Catharine of Arragon; in which he took an
active part (...)^, ii. 2.
. The unfortunate princess at that time resided at Ampthill. (...) neighborhood.

THE church, CHURCH.
and an arch in the wall adjoining, are the only ^mains of the prio^^. The
front of the church is singular, (...) a gallery d^vided ^y c^rved gothic
arches: a great door with round arch richly c^rved with scrolls and ovals,
including (...) figures. (...) ^^pitals of the pillars cut into grotesque
forms. The lesser door is gothic, richly ornamented with nail heads. Between
both doors is a row of false arches interlaced; the co^ consist of very
singular greater and lesser joints, placed alternate, not unlike one species of
the fossils called en^.

THE steeple is attached to one side of the front, and has two (...) of niches,
STEEPLE.
now deprived of their statues. Formerly (...) towe^ corresponded with this:
both fell down in (...) and destroyed the prior's hall and part of the church
(...) de D^nstable, i. 126.
. (...) body was rebuilt in 1273, by the parishioners; but one (...) Ch^^de
went to the greatest expense The same, 417.
. The inside of the church is supported with six round arches, all plain except
one: the windows above are also round at the ^op. Either the date (...) the
rebuilding is wrong, or the Saxon or round-arched mode and have continued
longer than is generally allowed.

THE church had been originally in form of a cross, with a (...) the center.
Two of the vast pillars which supported it (...) to be seen at the east end.

ABOVE the altar in a large and handsome painting of the Last ^^pper; which,
with (...) plate and ^^ch pulpit-cloth, were (...) two maiden sisters, of the
name of Carter.

I ^^ITTED in its place a visit made to the priory by Henry III. (...) family;
when the monks presented the king with a gilt (...) and the queen with another;
and gave his son Edward and daughter Margaret a gold clasp apiece. In return,
the royal vi^ bestowed on the church eight pieces of silk; and the king (...)
for the making of a thuribule and a pix The same, 277.
.

I (...) with some a^^i^nt tombs, (...)
dated between the years 1400 and 1500* but none of dignity sufficient to be
mentioned. Sir (...)'s ^amous pedigree-book has preserved one, in memory of
William M^ls^ and his wife (...)
. Both are dressed in their (...) their ^and in the ^titule of pr^ver. At their
feet (...) group of (...), another of seven daughters. The (...) of the four
evangelists are placed at the corners. ^etween their ^eet were these lines:
(...) scciavit et Ali^.

(...) ^ors gener^li^:

(...) hic ^atos (...)

(...) binos, De^s (...) cle^e^s (...)



THIS gentleman was (...), in the county of Northhamp^ The name of the (...),
(...) Marmore. This seems to have been (...) them (...) celebrates for having
three times, three children (...), and twice five children British (...), p.
110.
I suppose they must (...) by (...) and h^^band; for the pedigree gives her but
(...) P. 42.
.

BESIDES the religious house, was one of friars preachers, who ^^ttled here
about 1^59. It was valued only at L4. 18 s. 4 d; and at the dissolution its
site was granted to Sir William Herbert. These brethren as the Chronicle says,
came sorely against the will of the (...); but by their interest with (...)
queen, and courtiers, got leave to stay here. Chr.
. It seems the inhabitants of the priory did not like such insinuating
interlopers as Chaucer describes this order to have been, who were sure to win
all the penitent males and females. Full swetely herd he confession,
And pleasant was his absolution.


HERE was a house or hospital for lepers. Whether it was the same with that
marked at the post house, a mile west of the town, in the new map, I cannot
determine.

THE schools here were probably considerable; for I find the quarrels between
the scholars and the townsmen important enough to be mentioned in the Chronicle.

THIS town is now supported chiefly by the great passage of travelers. A small
neat manufacture of straw hats, and baskets, and toys, maintains many of the
poor. In old time the breweries raised many of the inhabitants to great wealth.
We are told by Hollinshed of one William Murlie, an eminent brewer in this
town, who fallied out in the time of Henry V. to join the foolish insurrection
of the Lollards, near London, followed with two led horses with gilt trappings.
He also took with him a pair of gilt spurs, ready to wear on his receiving from
lord Cobham the honor of knighthood Hollinshed, p. 544.
; but had the hard luck to be taken and hung, with them about his neck.

ABOUT four miles from Dunstable I passed by Market Cell, MARKET CELL.
at present a gentleman's seat; formerly a nunnery of Benedictines, dedicated
to the Holy Trinity of the Wood. Legend ascribes its origin to Roger, a monk of
St. Alban, who, on his return from Jerusalem, led here an eremetical life; and,
taking under his care Christina, a rich virgin of Huntingdon, inspired her with
the same contempt of the world. She succeeded to his cell, and many temptations
resisted, many divine visions visited by, and many miracles wrought in her
favor Dugdale Monast. i. 350, etc. etc.
. She was patronized by Geoffry, elected abbot of St. Albans in 1119, who built
and endowed a house, and constituted Christina first abbess. The site of some
adjoining lands were the gift of the dean and chapter of Saint Paul Ibid. ii.
872.
; but the rest of the pious work resulted solely from the abbot, who twice
rebuilt the same, after it had suffered by fire Matthew Paris, 1013.
: but Matthew Paris complains, that all this was done at the expense of the
convent of St. Albans, and even without its consent The same.
, to the great injury of the church. In the time of Henry VIII. Humphry Boucher
Leland Itin, i. 116.
, base sun to the late Berners, did much cost in translating of the priory
into a manner place; i. e. converting it into a mansion for himself, but left it
unfinished. It probably was granted to him; but it afterward was bestowed by
Edward VI. on George Ferrers Tanner, 4.
. At the dissolution it was valued by Dugdale at L.114. 16 s. 1 d. a year; by
Speed at L.143. 18 s. 3 d.

IT appears that these religious were grievously oppressed by a neighboring
knight; of whom they complained in certain lines too ludicrous to be inserted
See Weever, 585.
. Whether they got any redress does not appear.

AFTER passing through the village of the same name, built on each side of the
Watling-street road, I entered the county of HERTFORD; and near the
twenty-eighth mile-stone leave on the right Flamsted, FLAMSTED.
where stood a small priory of Benedictine nuns, founded in the time of king
Stephen, by Roger de Tonei. The manor had been granted by the Conqueror to
Ralph de Tonei. His predecessor was a Saxon knight, called Thurnoth, who, with
the true spirit of the times, engaged with thirteen soldiers, Waldef, and
Thurman, to protect all passengers from the thieves and wild beasts which then
infested the road; and in time of war, to protect the church of St. Albans with
all their might. Leofftan, abbot of that convent in the time of the Confessor,
facilitated the undertaking, by cutting down the great woods on the side of the
Watling-street, which gave shelter to robbers. He bestowed on Thurnoth this
manor; who, in return, presented Leofftan with five ounces of gold and a fair
palfrey. Thurnoth, at the Conquest, resisted the power of the Norman invader;
who bestowed it on de Tonei; who directed that the same services should be
strictly performed to the abbey Chauncy, 432, who by mistake calls this De
Tonei, Roger; but in page 565 gives him his right name.
.

ABOUT three miles further, go through Redburn, a small town, REDBURN.
built like the former, on each side of the ancient road. At this place was
discovered the bones of St. Amphibalus, the noble Briton, who lodging at the
house of St. Alban, at Verulam, proved the means of his conversion. In the
Dioclesian persecution he was diligently sought after; but St. Alban,
generously determined not to give up his guest, promoted his escape by putting
on his preceptor's cloak, and suffering himself to be seized by the soldiers in
his stead Bid de Br. Eccl. 539.
. Amphibalus for a time evaded their fury; but was at length seized, and
underwent a most cruel death Weever's Fun. Mon. 585.
, on the spot on which his pious convert was martyred. The Christians stole the
body, and gave it a private interment at this place. In 1178, the relics were
removed to St. Albans, enshrined near those of his fellow-sufferer; and a prior
and three monks, with 20 s. a year, were appointed guardians of the sacred
deposit. I am sorry to find, that, after all, the very existence of this Saint
is doubted; for there are some who believe that the Saint was no more than an
amphibalus, a long cloak, which St. Alban, before he went to execution, threw
about him; which being at length personified, was canonized, and received into
the Calendar Usher de Br. Eccl. 539.
.

A CELL, consisting of a prior and a few Benedictines from St. Albans, was
placed here. It was dedicated to St. Amphibalus and his companions, and was
inhabited before 1195. After the dissolution, it was, with the manor, granted
to John Cork Tanner, 185.
.

THE present great road, a little beyond this place quits the Watling-street,
which runs direct on the right to Verulanium. The former can boast of no great
extent of view, but is bounded by beautiful risings varied with woods, and
enclosures dressed with a garden-like elegance. The common soil is almost
covered with flints: the stratum beneath is chalk, which is used for a manure.
CHALK.
Pliny describes this British earth under the title of Creta argentaria; and
adds petitur ex alto in centenos pedes actis puteis ore angustatis: intus ut in
metallis spatiante vena, hac maxim Britannia utitur Lib. xvii. c. 8.
. This very method is used in the county at present. The farmer sinks a pit,
and (in the terms of a miner) drives out on all sides, leaving a sufficient
roof, and draws up the chalk in buckets, through a narrow mouth. Pliny informs
us, in his remarks on the British marls then, that they will last eighty years;
and that there is not an example of any person being obliged to marl his land
twice in his life The same.
. An experienced farmer, whom I met with in Hertfordshire, assured me, that he
had about thirty years before made use of this manure on a field of his, and
that, should he live to the period mentioned by the Roman naturalist, he
thought he should not have occasion of a repetition.

THIS bottom is watered by the small stream of the Verlume, Ver, or Mure; which
rises at Rowbeach, beyond Market-street; flows by Flamsted, Redburn, and St.
Albans; and loses itself and name in the Coln, a little N. E. of Colney-street.

ABOUT a mile and a half from St. Albans I turned out of the road to the right,
to visit Gorhambury, GORHAMBURY.
the venerable seat of that glory of our country Sir Francis Bacon viscount
Verulam. His matchless talents, his deplorable weaknesses, and his merited
fall, have been the subjects of so many able pens, that it would be a
presumption in me to enter into a detail either of his life or works. I shall
prefer giving an account of the place, and perhaps touch accidentally on what
may relate to one whom Mr. WALPOLE justly styles The Prophet of Arts, which
Newton was sent afterward to reveal.

THIS manor was, from very ancient times, part of the lands of the abbey of St.
Albans: the original name is not delivered to us; that which it has at present
was derived from Robert de Gorham, elected abbot of the house in 1151. Mr.
Salmon conjectures, that he might have built here a villa Salmon Hist. Hertf.
83. Chauncy, 464.
: a luxury not unfrequent with the abbots of the richer houses. In 1540, Henry
VIII. made a grant of it to Ralph, afterward Sir Ralph Rowlet; who sold it to
Sir Nicholas Bacon, the worthy and able lord keeper, and father of the great
lord Verulam. The elegance of his taste was apparent in his buildings; which
confirm the observation of Lloyd i. 356.
, that "his use of learned artists was continual." To him we are indebted for
Redgrave in Suffolk, and the seat in question. In both he adhered to his
rational motto, Mediocria Firma. He is said to have departed a little from it
in the instance of Redgrave, but not till after his royal mistress, who honored
him with a visit there, told him, You have made your house too little for your
lordship. 'No, madam,' replied he; but your highness has made me too big for
the house. But after this, he added the wings Collin's Barouets, i.
.

THE building consists of two parts, discordant in their manner, yet in various
respects of a classical taste. On the outside GORHAMBURY.
of the part which forms the approach is the piazza, or perticus, with a range
of pillars of the Tuscan order in front, where the philosophic inhabitants
walked and held their learned discourse; and withanside is a court with another
piazza: the one bring in^^ded for enjoying the shade, the other to catch,
during winter, (...) comfortable warmth of the sun. The walls of the piazzas
are (...)ed of freseo, with the adventures of Ulysses, by Van Keopen. (...) is
a statue of Henry VIII; in the other a bust of the founder. Sir N^^holas Bacon;
and another of his lady. Over the en(...) from the court into the hall, are
these plain verses; which (...) the date of the building to have been 1571.
Hae^ cum perfecit Nicholaus tect^ Baconus
Elizabeth regni lustra (...) duo.
Factus eque^ magni cu^os fuit ip^e sigilli.
Gloria sit soli tota ^^^buta Deo.
MEDIOCRIA FIRMA.


Some lines ove^ the statue of Orpheus, that once stood on the en(...) into the
orchard; show what a waste the place was before (...) possessed by this great
man. Horrida nuper eram aspectu Intebraequ^ serarum;
Ruricolis tantum numinibusque locus.
Edomitor fausto hic dum forte superveni^ Orph^us,
Ul^e^ius qui me no^ finit esse rudem:
^^^^cat avulsis virgulta vi^e^tia truncis:
E^sedem quae vel diis placuisse potest.
Si^qu^ mei cultor, sic est (...) cultus et Orpheu^:
Floreat O noster cultus amorque diu.


(...)ouse (no longer (...), W^^^ (...).
but to re^^^^ (...) ^phered on the walls, (...) illustrious ancients (...).
W^^^^^ (...). 58^.
This room seemed to (...) favorite summer-room of the (...) for the enjoyment
(...) from the (...) of his house Lib. ii. (...)
. Mo^ (...) between the villas of the (...) countrymen This building, (...)
(...) ^^^^ble gal^ (...) placed at different (...) to mind many parts of the
villa, (...) owner.

(...) over the (...)-piece is (...) II. (...)
Most of the others (...) (...) of (...) beginning of the last century.

(...)
(...) of the^ (...) of his or any age appears (...) (...) who succeeded his
brother Anthony (...) Much is said of his depravity (...) of his a^ sawing
after his fa^ (...) I look or the la^ part of his (...) as the period to (...)
with greatest dignity. That soul which (...) (...) beneath the temptation of
corruption, ar^ (...) by d^ and superior to obloquy. He passed (...) Lib.
(...). 17.
(...) days in labors which have made him the admiration of succeedings times.
He was then disengaged from business, which ^d his ^nius, and was supported
(notwithstanding assertion, ^me contrary) by a great pension (L1800 2 year)
which ^d him to purpose his studies at c^, removed from every (...) of the
embarrassments of poverty.

His portait is a full-length, by Varsomer, dressed In his than^'s robes.

HERE is besides, in one of the room, another portrait of (...) and a bust of
him while a child. N^ him is his accom^ kinsman his half-brother Sir Natha^ B^,
SIR NATH BACON
Knight of (...) (...), leaning back in (...) chair, in a g^ (...) laced, yel^
^kings, a dog by him, and lord and pallet hung up. In the art of paintings
none," says P^, "des^ more respect and admiration than Master N^ Bacon, of
Brom (...), not inferior, in my judgment, to our sk^ullest (...) He improved
his ta^ by traveling into Italy;. (...) in this home, as a proof of the
excellency of his persor^, this por^, and a most beautiful one of a cook, a
perfect with an old game-keeper: behind is a variety of dead (...) particular a
swan, whose plumage is expressed with (...) ^le ^o^ness and gloss.

In the house is a half-length of a beautiful woman reading, (...) Melancholy
Cock; perhaps the same with the former. (...) who, COUNTERS OF SUFFOLK.
like lord (...), (...) Gentlemen, Mr. Walp^le's (...) Painting, i. 163, where
the (...) (...) is engraven.
fell under the charge of cor^ should have been placed next to him In the room
is a fine ful-length of the countess of Suffolk, daughter of Sir Henry ^word,
and wife to the lord tre^. She is dressed in whi^, (...) in a great (...),
(...) b^ (...) exposed: her waist show and swelings, for she was (...) prolis^.
This lady had un^ (...) and was extrem (...) (...) to in (...) ^varics, and
took bribes from (...). Sir ^ran^ Ba^, in (...) in the star chamber against her
husband, wittily compares her to an exchange wo^, who kept her shop, while S^
John Bingley, a (...) of the Exchequer, and a tool of here is, cried (...) Her
beauty was remarkable, and I fear the made a bad use of her charms. "Lady
(...)," says the famous Anne C^, in the d^ary, under the year 1019, had good
face of (...), which spoiled that good face of (...) had bought to other much
misery, and to herself gre^ is, ^ch (...) in much unhappiness.

A (...) of T^ duke of Norfolk, (...)
is a bonnet, so (...) of the Garter, and a where rod: an unfor^ (...), who
through weakness and ambition, aspired to be husband to the (...) queen of
Scots, and for that, and his practice for her (...) ^ead in 1572.

A (...) Thomas Wentwort^ and of Clev^^, (...)
(...) at the creation of Henry prince of W^. He (...), with a red (...),
turnover, and yellow hair. He was ^p^ or the guard to Charles (...) a
distinguished (...) the Restor^, and enjoyed his for m^ (...).

COUNTESS OF SUFFOLK.


A REMARKABLE picture of Sir Thomas Meautys, SIR THO. MEAUTYS.
secretary to lord Verulam. His dress confirms the account of the choice he
made of his servants, whom he selected from the young, the prodigal, and
expensive Wilson, 159.
. Sir Thomas makes a most finical appearance: his habit elegant: has on a sash,
a hat with a white feather, laced turnover, a long love-lock extended on his
left arm, an ear-ring in one ear, a spear in the other, and brown boots. Thus
he is represented as a smart office-clerk, walking in his new-acquired park;
for he was clerk of the privy council to two kings: and got possession of
Gorhambury from his master, who conveyed it to him on foreseeing his fall. Like
a grateful servant, Meautys erected a handsome monument to him in a neighboring
church, more to show his respect, than from any necessity of endeavoring to
preserve the memory of one self-immortalized.

FROM the heirs of Sir Thomas Meautys, SIR HARBOTTLE GRIMSTON.
this place passed by sale to Sir Harbottle Grimston, Baronet; whose portrait
is here at full length, in black, with a turnover and black coif, leaning on a
slab. On the picture is this motto, Nec pudet vivere, nec piget mori. This
gentleman was one of those worthy persons who set out with a view of reforming
the abuses of the arbitrary court of Charles I. but whose moderation and good
sense made them oppose their own party, when it attempted measures subversive
of the constitution: in consequence, he, with several others, were excluded the
house. In 1656, he was elected one of Cromwell's parliament; but not being
approved by the slavish council of the usurper, was laid aside. He was active
in promoting the Restoration; was chosen speaker of the parliament; was rewarded
with the mastership of the Rolls, and died in great reputation, at the age of
ninety, in 1683 Here is another portrait of him, in his robes, as master of the
Rolls.
.

IN the same room is a head of Mr. Chiffinch; MR. CHIFFINCH.
a beautiful picture of Catharine, queen to Charles II. in the character of St.
Catharine; and a fine half-length of St. Augustine.

IN the dining-parlour is a piece containing the portrait of Algernon earl of
Northumberland, ALGERNON EARL OF NORTHUMBERLAND.
in black, standing: his lady, in blue, sitting, and a child by them. This
generous peer stepped forward in the cause of liberty, in the beginning of the
troubles of Charles I. while he held the post of lord high admiral: a post he
was displaced from by the popular party, by reason of his moderation; which
they suspected would be a check to their unreasonable views. He was constantly
a mediating commissioner in all treaties on the side of the parliament; in which
he behaved with dignity, spirit, and integrity. He was appointed governor of
the king's children while they were separated from him, and behaved to them
with respect and affection. He joined with opposing the ordonnance for the
trial of his master; and, after his death, retired to Petworth, and took no
part with the usurping powers. He joined heartily in the Restoration; but, like
a true friend to his country, wished for it on terms of security to the people,
and advantage for the nation. He received from the restored king honors suited
to his rank, and enjoyed them till his death, in 1668.

OVER the chimney-piece is a half-length of Sir Edward Grimston, SIR EDW.
GRIMSTON.
in black, a bonnet, and lawn ruff, by Holbein. Its date is 1548, aet. 20. On
one side are these verses: The life that nature sends, death soon destroys,
And momentarie is that life's remembrance;
The seeminge life which peaceful art supplieth
Is but a shadow, though life's perfect semblans:
But that true life which virtue does restore,
Is life indeed; and lasts evermore.


THIS gentleman was comptroller at Calais, at the time it was taken by the duke
de Guise in 1558. He had frequently wrote to the ministry, to inform them how
ill provided it was against a siege. His remonstrance was neglected; but when
the place was lost, the English government permitted him to remain prisoner,
for fear of his complaints. The French demanded, as the price of his ransom, a
large estate he had purchased about Calais; but he preferred captivity rather
than injure his family. He suffered a long and rigorous imprisonment in the
Bastile: at length escaped to England, and was honorably acquitted of any thing
that could be laid to his charge Lodge's Irish Peerage, iii. 267.
. He lived to the great age of ninety-eight. Another portrait shows his figure
at that of eighty-one, with a skull in his hand, and white bushy beard.

SIR Samuel Grimston, in a long wig and laced cravat. SIR SAMUEL GRIMSTON.
He had rendered himself so obnoxious to James II. as to be excepted out of an
act of grace, when that prince meditated a descent, 1692.

HIS two wives, lady Anne Tufton, and lady Elizabeth Finch, HIS TWO WIVES.
the last, daughter of lord chancellor the earl Nottingham; whose portrait is
also here, EARL OF NOTTINGHAM.
dressed in black robes.

IN the great drawing room is the portrait of lady How, LADY HOW.
with white long hair, daughter to Sir Harbottle Grimston, and wife of Sir John
How, of Wiltshire.

SIR Herbottle Luckyn, SIR HARBOTTLE LUCKYN.
Baronet, in a blue coat, long white wig, and breast plate; a castle at a
distance. His granfather, by the marriage with Mary, eldest daughter of Sir
Harbottle Grimston, brought the estate into his family; which changed its name
for that of his lady.

A HEAD of Thomas Howard, THOMAS EARL OF ARUNDEL.
the virtuoso earl of Arundel; who, by much residence in foreign parts,
acquired a thorough contempt for his own country. Filled with family-pride, he
was sent to the Tower for a contempt shown in the house to a nobleman less
highly born than himself: yet on the breaking out of the troubles of his royal
master, Charles I. he showed a great want of true spirit, consulting his own
safety and ease, rather than to risque them by siding with either party. He
quitted England, for which, as lord Clarendon says, he had little other
affection than as he had a great share in it, in which, like a great leviathan,
he might sport himself. He was a man of a noble presence, and affected a plain
garb. He accordingly is here dressed in a dark habit, robed with fur. His
countenance corresponds to the description: his hair short, and his beard
bushy: his turnover plain; and the only ornament is the pendent order of the
Garter.

IN the turret-room is the fine picture of the cook, by Sir Nathaniel Bacon.

THE great gallery is a magnificent room, GALLERY.
a hundred and thirty feet long, and nineteen wide; the roof wooden, richly
gilt, and painted, and the sides filled with full-length portraits of the great
cotemporaries with its illustrious owner lord Verulam. They are indeed all
copies; but copies taken during the lives of the personages represented.

His peaceful master James, is drawn in inconsistent armor, JAMES I.
black and gold, with each foot on a rock. Above him, Jam tu^ tenditque
sovetque. beneath, Jacobus unitor Britanniae, plantator Hiberniae, conditor
imperii Atlantici.

The last, I fear, a piece of the characteristic adulation of the chancellor.

NEAR him are two monarchs, not in fact coeval with Bacon, but placed here from
the admiration he had of their abilities, in extending their dominions to the
Indies. By Emanuel king of Portugal, EMANUEL KING OF PORTUGAL.
he pointed out the advantage of commerce, received by the discovery of the new
passage to India under his auspices, by Vasco di Gama: by Ferdinand V. he
points out the discovery of America by Columbus. FERDINAND OF SPAIN.
The first monarch he calls Conditor imperii Europae super Indias orientales;
the other, Super Indias occidentales. Each of these princes are represented
knee-deep in water: but I suppose, by the situation of his cautious master, he
would show he had too much prudence to wet his feet.

IT is to no purpose to preserve the present order of portraits, in a house
unhappily devoted to demolition. I shall therefore, at lest in this part of it,
give a chronological series; out of which the noble owner may, if he pleases,
give, in the succeeding edifice, an interesting history of past times, in the
lively representation of the great actors of a great period.

Ludovic Stuart duke of Richmond and Lenox, LUDOVIC DUKE OF RICHMOND.
and earl of Newcastle, properly follows his prince and relation. He is dressed
in his robes, a bonnet with a white feather: the George and a white rod are
other appendages; the last, as lord high steward of the household. He was also
high chamberlain, and admiral of Scotland, and was sent ambassador to France
Crawford's Peerage Scot. 262.
before the accession of his royal master to the English throne. He was a most
deserved favorite, and supported himself with such true dignity, that, as
Wilson expresses it, the king, as it were, wanting one of his limbs to support
the grandeur of majesty at the first meeting of parliament, in 1623, sent for
him with great earnestness, and received, by the return of the messenger, the
melancholy news of his being found dead in bed, after going to rest in the
fullest health Wilson, 257, 258.
. His majesty showed the sincerest respect to his deceased servant, by
proroguing the parliament for several days, unable sooner to digest his loss.

William earl of Pembroke, WILLIAM EARL OF PEMBROKE.
in black, with the white rod and key, as lord chamberlain; George pendent,
flat ruff, short hair, peaked beard: a great and amiable character, and the
most universally esteemed and beloved of any man of that age; and, having a
great office in the court, he made the court itself better esteemed, and more
reverenced in the country; Clarendon.
. He was beloved in court, because he was disinterested; in the country,
because he was independent. In 1630, he died universally lamented: his many
fine qualities causing his abandoned sensualities to be forgotten.

His brother, and successor to the title, is painted here twice: in
full-length, PHILIP EARL OF PEMBROKE AND MONTGOMERY.
in black, with a star, George, and turnover, with black hair and peaked beard;
and again in half-length, advancing. Philip was a complete contrast to his
brother: rude, reprobate, boisterous, and devoted to his dogs and horses: so
mean as to receive tamely a horse-whipping from one Ramsay, a Scotchman, at a
public horse-race; and for his civility in not resenting the insult, was
rewarded by the peaceful James, by being made a knight, baron, viscount, and
earl on the same day. His mother, Sidney's sister, Pembroke's mother, tore her
hair when she heard of her son's disgrace. He was likewise lord chamberlain to
Charles I. and, as Osborn observes, in that office broke with his white rod
many wiser heads than his own; but his fear always secured him, by a quick and
ample submission. Notwithstanding the profundity of his ignorance, he became,
on the king's imprisonment, chancellor of the university of Oxford, a fit
instrument for the eradication of loyalty. A noble statue of him stands in the
picture-gallery. On the usurpation, he had the meanness to sit in Cromwell's
mock parliament as knight of the shire for Berkshire; and concluded his
despicable life on January the 23d, 1649-50.

A MAN in black and gold, a ruff, chain round his waist, and sword. Date 1594.

A LADY with red hair, great lawn ruff, her dress black and gold. In materials
resembling the former. Three long chains of pearl.

Charles Howard earl of Nottingham, CHARLES EARL OF NOTTINGHAM.
lord high admiral, dressed in his robes, with a view of a fleet and storm; the
conqueror of the Spanish armada.

SIR Edward Sackville, EDWARD EARL OF DORSET.
the accomplished, witty, and learned earl of Dorset: a nobleman of quick
passions and resentments, violent in his friendships and enmities. In the great
national quarrel between the English and Scots, at Croydon races, he alone left
his countrymen and sided with the latter, out of friendship to lord Bruce; for
which, had not the affray been prevented, the English had fixed on Sir Edward
as the first victim Osborn's Reign of King James, paragr. 26.
: yet a dispute with his beloved Scot produced the famous duel, which was
pursued with unheard of animosity, and terminated in the death of Bruce For an
account of this dreadful affair, read the Guardians, No 129, 133.
. He behaved in the public quarrel of his royal master with equal spirit, and
survived till 1652.

EDWARD earl of Worcester, EDWARD EARL OF WORCESTER.
master of the horse to queen Elizabeth, and privy seal to James I. What
recommended him to the first, was his being of royal blood, and at the same
time the finest gentleman, and the best horseman and tilter of his time
Collins's Peerage, i. 204.
. He is represented here at the period at which he had outlived the athletic
exercises, with a bald head and white beard; in a white jacket and ruff, and
George pendent.

THE first lord Cornwallis, THE FIRST LORD CORNWALLIS.
with long hair, in black, and a turnover: an active and valiant adherent to
Charles I; brought up from his youth in his service, and that of his brother
Henry. So resolute, that he knew not fear; so cheerful, that sorrow never came
next his heart. Death would not try him by illness, but took him off suddenly,
on January 31, 1661-2, after he had been raised to the peerage the preceding
year.

THE gallant fickle earl of Holland, in a striped and very rich dress: hat with
red feather in his hand, the blue riband across his breast.

A YOUNG warrior has somehow crept in among the veterans: Henry duke of
Gloucester, HENRY DUKE OF GLOUCESTER.
in buff coat, breast plate, long black hair, the Garter, and a truncheon. A
prince whose eminent virtues made his early end universally deplored. He died
in 1660, in his twenty-first year, feelingly lamented by his brother Charles;
who was never observed to show a sensibility equal to what he did on this
occasion.

George Carew earl of Totness, GEORGE EARL OF TOTNESS.
in a white flowered jacket; hand on his sword; white beard, and short hair: a
nobleman celebrated as a warrior, scholar, and author. He was son of a dean of
Exeter; received his education at Oxford. His active spirit led him from his
studies into the army; but in 1589, he was created master of arts. The scene of
his military exploits was Ireland, where, in the year 1599, he was president of
Munster. With a small force he reduced great part of the province to her
majesty's government, took the titular earl of Desmond prisoner, and brought
numbers of the rebellious Septs to obedience Prince's Worthies of Devonshire,
197.
. The queen honored him with a letter of thanks under her own hand The same.
. He left his province in general peace in 1603, and arrived in England three
days before the death of his royal mistress. Her successor rewarded his
service, by making him governor of Guernsey, creating him lord Carew, of
Clopton, and appointing him master of the ordnance for life. Charles I. on his
accession, created him earl of Totness Dugdale's Baron, ii. 423.
. He died in March 1629, aged seventy-three, and was interred beneath a
magnificent monument at Stratford upon Avon Beneath a rich arch, supported by
Corinthian pillars. He and his countess lie in their coronets and robes. In
front are artillery, balls, powder-barrels, and other marks of his office as
master of the ordnance. See Dugdale's Warwicksh. ii. 686.
.

HE was not less distinguished by his pen than his sword. In his book Pacata
Hibernia, he wrote his own commentaries; of which his modesty prevented the
publication during life. He collected four volumes of antiquities relating to
Ireland, at this time preserved unheeded in the Bodleian library: he collected
materials for the life of Henry V Prince, 198.
, digested by Speed into his Chronicle. To conclude, he merited entirely the
encomium given him by Wood, of being a faithful subject, a valiant and prudent
commander, an honest counselor, a gentle scholar, a lover of antiquities, and
great patron of learning Athen. Oxon. i. 529.
.

SIR George Calvert lord Baltimore, FIRST LORD BALTIMORE.
is dressed in black, a turnover, and with short hair. He was born at Kipplin
in Yorkshire, was educated at Oxford, and received his first preferment, which
was in the law line, in Ireland. His political abilities occasioned his being
taken notice of by Sir Robert Cecil. Mr. Calvert was first his clerk, and after
knighthood promoted to be one of the secretaries of state; and was in great
confidence with his master GEORGE CALVERT the First Lord Baltimore
James I. He thought fit to change his religion, which he ingenuously avowed.
The king, pleased with his sincerity, continued him of his privy council, and
even created him lord Baltimore, of the kingdom of Ireland, and made him large
grants in that kingdom: a proof that the perversion of his subjects was far
from exciting his displeasure. He also obtained a grant of a part of
Newfoundland, which he called Avalon, after Old Avalon, the site of Glastonbury
abbey, where (as is said) Christianity was first planted in Britain. He was
constituted absolute lord and proprietor, with the royalties of a county
palatine, except the sovereign dominion and allegiance, with a fifth part of
the gold and silver reserved to the crown. After the king's death, he twice
visited the place, built a fair house there; and, when his settlement was
molested by the French, he fitted out two ships at his own expense, and drove
them away. At length, on a repetition of their insults, was obliged to abandon
the island. Charles I. to make him amends, gave him a new grant of the country
on the north side of Chesapeak Bay, to hold in common socage as of the manor of
Windsor, delivering annually to the crown, in acknowlegement, two Indian arrows
on Easter Tuesday, at Windsor castle, with a fifth of the gold and silver ore
Fuller's Worthies of Yorkshire, 201.
. His lordship died on April 15th 1632, before the patent was made out; but his
son Cecil took it in his own name, in June following, and laid the foundation
of a flourishing colony, which was named by the king himself Maryland, in honor
of Henrietta Maria, his royal consort.

ARCHBISHOP Abbot, in a cap and episcopal habit, ARCHBISHOP ABBOT.
with a gray square beard. This prelate owed his preferment under James I, to
the Scottish favorite, the able and worthy earl of Dunbar: perhaps from the
Calvinistical principles with which he was strongly imbued. Fuller says, he
honored cloaks above cassocks; lay, above clergymen Worthies of Surrey, 83.
. He was upright and firm in his principles: probably too favorable to the
tenets which, under him, acquired strength, in the following reign, to subvert
both church and state, with the assistance of the contrary conduct of the
indiscreet and furious Land. How difficult is the virtue of moderation! Abbot
gloriously resisted the licensing of a slavish sermon, preached by doctor
Sibthorp, and fell into disgrace; his office was suspended: nor was it taken
off, till the rising strength of the puritanical party made the compliance with
the times prudent. His manners had in them an uncourtly stiffness and
moroseness Clarendon.
. He found he was restored more through policy than affection. As he attained
to the age of seventy-one, I can scarcely think that grief, either on account
of his suspension, or unconquerable sorrow for the sad accident of killing a
gamekeeper with a cross-bow, in shooting at a deer Illustr. Heads, i. 60.
, brought him to his end. Nature might effect his dissolution, without having
recourse to other causes.

THE beautiful George Villiers duke of Buckingham, GEO. VILLIERS DUKE OF
BUCKINGHAM.
in white, with a hat and feather on a table. A minion of fortune, who owed his
rise to a handsome face and elegant person: merits irresistible with James I.
The king, by the insolence and ingratitude of his favorite, received sufficient
punishment for his folly. Buckingham was possessed of abilities, clouded by the
violence of his passions, and almost rendered useless. In his embassy to
France, in 1625, he had the presumption to make his addresses to the queen Anne
of Austria Clarendon, i. 38.
. On receiving the treatment which his vanity merited, he not only, in revenge,
involved his country in war, but endeavored to alienate the affection of his
master Charles from his spouse, her lovely sister-in-law, Henrietta Maria. I
ought to have mentioned the common report, that his ill success with the wife
of Olivarez, the Spanish minister, and a cruel deception in consequence
Granger, i. 326, note.
, was the primary cause of the breach of the Spanish match, and the hazard his
young prince ran in escaping from an incensed court. He fell at length by the
hands of the melancholy Felton, who, taught by the murmurs of the people,
thought he did an acceptable service, by freeing his country from so
distasteful a minister.

SIR Richard Weston earl of Portland, appears dressed in black, SIR RICHARD
WESTON EARL OF PORTLAND.
with a ruff blue riband, and white rod; his hair and beard gray. This nobleman
is a proof how honors change manners. He set out with a great character for
prudence, spirit, and abilities, and discharged his duty as ambassador, and, on
his return, as chancellor of the exchequer, with much credit. Under the
ministry of the duke of Buckingham, he was appointed lord treasurer: on which
he suddenly became so elated, that he lost all disposition to please; and, soon
after the duke's death, became his successor in the public hatred, without
succeeding him in his credit at court Clarendon, i. 49.
. His lust after power, and his rapacity to raise a great fortune, were
unmeasurable; yet the jealousy of his temper frustrated the one, and the
greatness of his expenses the other. His imperious nature led him to give
frequent offense; yet his timidity obliged him to make humiliating concessions
to the very people he had offended. He had a strange curiosity to learn what
the persons injured said of him; the knowledge of which always brought on fresh
troubles; as he would expostulate with them for their severe sayings, as if he
had never given cause for them; by which he would often discover the mean
informant of his fruitless intelligence. He died in March 1634, in universal
disesteem; and the family and fortune, for which he labored so greatly, were
extinct early in the next reign.

Thomas Wentworth earl of Strafford, THOMAS EARL OF STRAFFORD.
in armor. Like Buckingham, a victim also to the popular fury; but brought to
his end by all the solemnity of trial and pomp of strained justice. His great
abilities and moving eloquence, his fortitude and great deportment on the
scaffold, make us lose sight of his failings, and lament that so much heroism
should be devoted to plans which made his life incompatible with the public
security.

THE illustrious and faithful servant to Charles I. James duke of Richmond,
JAMES DUKE OF RICHMOND.
in long, flowing, flaxen hair; his star; and a dog by him.

Thomas Wriothesley earl of Southampton, THOMAS EARL OF SOUTHAMPTON.
another nobleman, not less attached to his royal master; and who, like the
former, offered himself a victim for his prince's life. The earls of Hertford
and Lindsey joined in the generous petition to the commons, on the condemnation
of the king; alleging, that they having been counselors to his majesty, and
concurring in the advice of the several measures now imputed as crimes, they
alone were guilty in the eye of the law, and ought to expiate the supposed
offenses of majesty. He survived to see the restoration of the royal family;
was rewarded with the treasurer's rod; and died a friend to his country as well
as prince, on May 16th 1667. His death, and the fall of chancellor Hyde,
removed from the abandoned court every check upon its profligate designs. It
was so impatient to remove him, as to wish to wrest the rod from his dying
hands, had not Hyde earnestly entreated the king to wait four or five days,
till his death must happen. He died of the stone. So little credit had our
surgeons at that time, that he sent to Paris for one; but his end prevented the
operation Continuation. Clarendon, 411.
.

THE chancellor himself is dressed in robes. In him is the character of an
honest great man; CHANCELLOR HYDE.
the glorious victim to a prince and party, that neither could nor dared to
attempt the slavery of their country, while he remained in power in it. He was
exiled in 1667, by the contrivances of an ungrateful master, and lived abroad,
venerated by the good, till this ornament to human nature gave way to death, on
December the 9th, 1674.

George Monk duke of Albemarle, GENERAL MONK.
the well-known instrument of the Restoration. He is dressed in a buff coat, with
an anchor by him. He entered at a very early age into the military life, and
first made trial of his sword in the ill-conducted expedition to Cadiz, in
1625: but his military experience was attained by a ten years service in the
Low Countries. On the breaking out of the civil wars, his principles led him to
embrace the royal party, after serving for some time against the rebels in
Ireland. In his first campaign he was taken prisoner at Namptwich, and
imprisoned for some years, with such severity, that he was at last induced, for
the sake of obtaining liberty, to engage with the parliament. Perhaps by
stipulation, he never served the remainder of the war in England. Clarendon.
Ireland was the scene of his exploits, and afterward Scotland, which he
entirely reduced. He was justly laden with honors by his restored prince,
under whom, by indulging his spirit of frugality, he amassed a vast fortune.
His great military abilities fitted him equally for sea or land. He commanded,
jointly with prince Rupert, the fleet against the Dutch, in the dreadful
engagement of 1666. His success was equal to his valor. He became the darling
of the sailors, who called him by the familiar appellation of honest George;
for he was a plain man, of few words, but inviolable in his promises. Worn out
with fatigue, he died in 1670, and received a funeral pomp, which his eminent
services so well merited.

LORD keeper Coventry in his robes, LORD KEEPER COVENTRY.
and a ruff, with his hands on the seals: his look remarkably pleasing; a mark
of the internal comfort he felt in a life passed in the full integrity of the
discharge of his profession. He held the seals for fifteen years, and died in
universal esteem, January 14, 1639-40, at a period unhappy for his country;
when the respect borne to his counsels might have prevented the dreadful feuds
that so immediately followed his decease.

FOUR portraits of the Stuart line: James I. Charles I. and II. and James II.
The first is dressed in black, barred with gold. Typical of the Stuarts, the
prerogative is before his eyes, in form of the crown and scepter. William III.
who gave us the power of happiness, makes a fifth portrait in this royal
succession.

Heneage Finch earl of Nottingham, in his robes, with the seals in his hands,
CHANCELLOR NOTTINGHAM.
and long deep brown hair. This nobleman was lord chancellor in the reign of
Charles II. and in those dangerous times distinguished himself for his
integrity and prudence, in steering clear from a criminal compliance with the
views of the court, or humouring the unbounded faction of the popular side. He
brought the peerage into the family, which (rare to say) has never been fullied
by those who have derived the honor from him. He received the seals in 1673;
died in 1682.

THIS concludes the list of portraits in the noble gallery of Gorhambury:
scattered over the house are a few others which merit mention, as persons
eminent in their generation. Among them is one which ought properly to have led
the van; the head of Sir Nicholas Bacon; his dress a furred robe. SIR NICHOLAS
BACON.
He was a person of a very corpulent habit; for which reason queen Elizabeth
used to say, "that her lord keeper's soul lodged well." To what I have given of
him before, I shall only add, that he caught his death by sleeping in his chair
with a window open. He awoke disordered, and, reproving his servant for his
negligence, was told, that he feared to wake him. "Then," replies the keeper,
"your complaisance will cost me my life." He died in 1579.

ANOTHER head of his second wife, in a close cap and white gown, HIS SECOND
WIFE.
worked with oak-leaves and acorns. This distinguished lady was Anne daughter
of Sir Anthony Cook, of Giddy-hall, in Essex. She had great abilities, natural
and acquired, and was eminently skilled in Greek, Latin, and Italian. She had
the honor of being appointed governess to Edward VI Chauncy, i. Hertfordsh. 464.
. To her instructions was probably owing the surprising knowledge of the
excellent young prince. She shared his education with her father, doctor Cox,
and Sir John Cheek Complete Hist. Engl. ii. 274.
. Her sons Anthony and Francis were not a little indebted, for the reputation
they acquired, to the pains taken with them by this excellent woman in their
tender years Br. Biegr. i. 412.
. When they grew up, they found in her a severe but admirable monitor. She
translated from the Italian the sermons of Barnardine Ochine; and from the
Latin, Jewel's Apology for the Church of England: both which met with the
highest applause. She died in the beginning of the reign of James I. and was
buried in the neighboring church of Saint Michael Ballard's Br. Ladies, 136.
.

A BEAUTIFUL picture of lady Margaret Russel, COUNTESS OF CUMBERLAND.
daughter to Francis earl of Bedford, and wife to George earl of Cumberland,
and mother to the celebrated Anne Clifford: a lady happier in the filial
affections of her daughter, than the conjugal tenderness of her husband; who,
taken up with military glory, and the pomps of tilts and tournaments, paid
little attention to domestic duties. In her diary, which is preserved in
manuscript, I find she suffered even to poverty, and complains of her ill usage
in a most suppliant and pathetic manner. Her lord felt heavy compunction on his
deathbed. I cannot help relating two of the minutiae of her journal. She
relates, that Anne Clifford was begot on her the first of May 1589, in
Channel-row House, hard by the MARGARET COUNTESS OF CUMBERLAND.
river Thames; and in Skipton Castle, on Bardon tower, she felt a child stir in
her belly. She survived her lord.

THE dress of the portrait is very elegant. Her hair is turned up before, and
backed with chains of pearl. Over her head is a black feather: a beautiful ruff
and pearl necklace surround her neck. Her gown is black, hung with chains, and
set with ornaments of pearl.

A HALF-LENGTH of Sir George Croke, SIR GEORGE CROKE.
one of the judges of the King's Bench in the time of Charles I. in his robes;
distinguished for his knowledge of the laws. He was one of the judges who had
the honor of deciding against the illegality of ship money; yet still, on
account of his eminent qualities, preserved the favor of the court. When sunk
in years, and petitioning for a retreat, the king granted his request, and
rewarded his services with the sees and honor of chief justice during life
Lloyd, ii. 267.
. Mundum vicit et deseruit, says his epitaph, aet. 82. Anno R. C. 1. 17. Anno
Domini 1641.

HIS lady is in black, with a lawn ruff: her portrait is dated 1626. HIS LADY.
Lady Croke should by no means be passed unnoticed; especially as Whitelock
Memorials, 25.
gives her the chief merit in her husband's decision in the case of ship money.
He had, it seems, resolved on the contrary side; but appearing wavering, was
told by his wife, that she hoped he would do nothing against his conscience,
for fear of any danger or prejudice to him or his family; and that she would be
contented to suffer want, or any misery, with him, rather than be an occasion
for him to do or say any thing against his judgment or conscience.

I SHALL conclude with a very singular portrait on wood, PHILIP LE BON DUKE OF
BURGUNDY.
called Sylvester de Grimston, a noble Norman, standard bearer to the Conqueror
at the battle of Hastings, and afterward his chamberlain. He held lands in
Yorkshire of the lord Roos; among others, that of Grimston in Holderness; from
whence he took the name. The picture is ancient and curious, but wants four
centuries of the great period in which Sylvester lived; neither did that age
afford any artists that could give even a tolerable representation of the human
figure, much less convey down a likeness of the fierce heroes of their times. I
premise this, to show the impossibility of this portrait having been a copy of
some original of this great ancestor. The dress is singular: a large bonnet,
with a very long silken appendage; a green jacket, hanging sleeves: a collar of
SS held in one hand: his face beardless. On the back of the picture is Petrus
xoi. me fecit, anno 1416. The artist is unknown to me: but the habit of the
person is that of the date; for I find in Monfaucon's Monarchy Francoise
several persons of rank in the dress, particularly Philip Le Bon duke of
Burgundy: between whom and this portrait, there is so strong a resemblance of
feature See the book cited, vol. iii. p. 260. tab. xlix. fig. 2.
, that I do not hesitate to imagine that the Gorhambury portrait is no other
than one of this illustrious prince. He was born in 1396; died in 1467: so that
he was a youth when the picture was taken.

I NOW resume my journey, and, in my way to St. Albans, about a mile and a half
distant, pass by the site of St. Mary de la Pre, de Pratis, or the Meadows; an
hospital for leprous women, founded about 1190, by Warine, abbot of St.
Alban's. It afterward rose to a priory of Benedictine nuns; but fell in 1528,
when Wolsey, commendatory abbot, obtained from Clement VIII. a bull for its
suppression, and for annexing it to the abbey; after which he got a grant of it
for himself from the king; who, on the ruin of the cardinal, gave it to Sir
Ralph Rowlet Tanner, 185.
.

IMMEDIATELY after quitting this place, VERULAMIUM.
I entered the celebrated Verulamium, at a spot distinguished by a great
fragment of the ancient wall, known by the name of Gorhambury-block, which
probably bounded one side of one of the portae, or entrances, being exactly
opposite to that on the eastern part. The precinct departs from the rectangular
form of the Romans, this being among those which were laid out, Prout loci
qualitas aut necessitas postulaverit Vegetius, lib. i. c. 23.
. It inclines to an oval shape; is placed on a slope, and the lower side
bounded by the river Ver, which in former times might have spread into a lake,
and given greater security to the town. According to Humphry Lloyd
Commentariol, 31.
, it gave also the name to the place, Gwerllan, or the temple on the Ver;
rightly bestowing on the Britons a pre-occupancy of it to the Romans. I shall
not dispute the notions of the particular ford over which Caesar crossed the
Thames, when he penetrated into our island. It probably was at or near Coway
Stakes. Caesar leaves us no room to depart from that opinion, as he expressly
tells us that he led his army to the river Thames, toward the borders of the
territories of Cassivelaunus, Caesar cognito consilio eorum ad flumen Tama^in
in finos Cassivelauni exe^citum duxit. Bell. Gal. lib. v.

Preceding this, he speaks of the fines Cassivelauni, as being a mari circiter
^lia passaum lxxx.


, the golden-locked leader of the country of the Cassi: and these Cassi are
reasonably supposed to have been a clan of the Cattieuchlani, and to have
inhabited the hundred of this county now called Cashio, in which Verulamium
stood. But I must contend, that the distance of that city is far too remote
from the fordable parts of the Thames, to admit it to have been the town of the
British leader destroyed by the invader. It lies, in the nearest line,
thirty-seven miles from those parts of the river: a distance too great for the
time given to Caesar for his second campaign in Britain. The town, or rather
post, which was forced by him, was not remote from the camp occupied by him on
the side of the river; and most likely was that which is still very entire, in
the park of her Grace the duchess dowager of Portland, at Bulstrode, about
fifteen miles distance from the Roman camp; whose vestiges are still to be
seen, not far from the famous ford Sylves Paludibusque munitum.
. Partly by length of time, partly by constant cultivation, this post has lost
some of the characters ascribed by Caesar to the town of Cassivelaunus; for it
wants at present the marshy defense it had in his days.

THE town alluded to was within the territories of the British chieftain, and
one of the strong holds into which the Britons were used to drive their cattle
in time of danger. This, by Cesar's account, was certainly not the most
capital; for his first relation informs us, it only contained saits numerus
pecorum, a pretty considerable number of cattle. Notwithstanding his vanity, a
few lines lower, swells his booty into magnus numerus, a vast number Le^vis
Hist. Br. 73.
. Near Shepperton, also, near that place, in a field called War Close, are
found spurs, swords, bones, and other marks of a battle. See Cambden, i. 366:
but in all likelihood, the first is the nearest to the truth.

^erulamium was the capital of this country, and the residence of its princes.
I do not reckon Cassivelaunus among them; he was a chieftain of the Cassi, and,
for his great abilities, elected general on the Roman invasion, if our British
history is to be trusted. He was a guardian to his nephews, Anarwy and Tenafan
Stukely Itin. i. 117.
(the last) father to Cunoboline, whose coins are so frequent. Here was one of
the British mints; for we find the word Ver on the coins, but no prince's name
to distinguish the reign.

After the Romans had effected their conquest, they added walls to the ordinary
British defense of ramparts, and ditches. Many great fragments of the former
still remain, proofs of the strength and manner of the Roman masonry. On the
one side is a vast fosse; on another, two. The walls are twelve feet thick,
where entire, WALLS.
formed of flints bedded in mortar, now grown into amazing hardness. By
intervals of about three feet distance, are three, and in some places four,
rows of broad and thin bricks, or tiles, which were continued the whole length
of the walls, which seem designed as foundations to sustain the layers of
flints and lime, while the last was in a moist state. There were, besides,
round holes, which penetrated quite through See Doctor Stukely's admirable plan
of this place.
; but these are either filled up, or escaped my notice. According to Doctor
Stukely's measurement, the area is five thousand two hundred feet in length,
and the greatest breadth about three thousand. It is at present enclosed into
fields; but under the hedges, in many places, are vestiges of buildings, and,
as I am told, when it is under tillage, the sites of the streets appear, by the
different color of the corn above them. The Watling-street comes to the Porta
Decumana, the gate on the western side, and passes quite through the city.
There is another road goes on the outside of the south side; a small military
way, like that which passed from turret to turret on Severus's wall Tour Scotl.
1772, part ii. p. 288.
, for the convenience of external passengers.

THIS place, by its attachment to the conquerors, acquired the privileges of a
free borough, A MUNICIPIUM
a municipium, or municipal city, whose inhabitants enjoyed all the rights of
the Roman citizens; for which reason such towns derive their name a muneribus
capiendis, their power to bear public offices. They had their senators,
knights, and commons; magistrates and priests; censors, ediles, questors, and
flamens.

THE attachment of this town to its new masters, proved the cause of a heavy
misfortune, which befell it under the reign of Nero. Boadicea, SACKED BY
BOADICEA.
widow of Prasutagus, king of the Iceni, enraged at the cruel indignity offered
to her and her daughters, raised an insurrection against the Romans and their
friends, and repaid with the most dreadful cruelties the injuries they had
received. Camolodunum, Londinium, and Verolamium, suffered from the fury of the
Britons; and seventy thousand citizens and allies fell by the edge of the
sword. This city was remarkable for its wealth Taciti Annal. lib. xiv. c. 31,
etc.
; which was another incentive for the Britons to attack it, added to a
particular animosity against a people who had forsaken the customs and religion
of their ancestors.

THE place in a short time emerged from its misfortune; and had the honor of
producing Albanus, OF ST. ALBANUS.
the proto-martyr of Britain, a wealthy citizen of Verulamium, and, by
privilege, of Rome also. He had been a Pagan, but was converted by means of a
guest, whom he had sheltered during the great persecution of Dioclesian, as I
have before related. St. Alban suffered in the year 302. Let not legend destroy
the credibility of the martyrdom, by assigning attendant miracles, long after
their cessation. We are told, that after he had refused to sacrifice to the
heathen gods, the usual test of the alleged crime of Christianity, he was, as
customary, whipped with rods, and then led to execution, and beheaded on
Holmhurst, where the town of St. Alban's at present stands. In his passage, the
torrent, which then divided the place from Verulamium, like the Red Sea,
divided its waters, and gave dry passage to the Saint and his followers: a
fountain sprung up where the martyr kneeled: one of the executioners relenting,
was converted, and suffered with Albanus; another, who performed the deed, lost
his eyes, as a penalty for his cruelty; for they dropped out of his head in the
moment in which he gave the blow Bid Hist. Eccl. lib. i. c. 7. Father Cressy,
in his Church History, lib. vi. has given a much longer detail.
* St. Alban was interred on the spot; and his remains were miraculously
discovered several centuries after their interment.

IN 429, SYNOD HOLD HERE.
this place was honored with a synod, in which St. Germanus and Lupus, two
French prelates, assisted. A chapel was erected, about the year 945, by abbot
Ulsin, in honor of the former, on the spot in which he preached; whose ruins
were to be seen the beginning of this century.

AFTER the Saxon invasion, the name of the town was changed for that of
Verlamcester and Watlincester. The British hero, Uther Pendragon, after a long
siege, wrested it out of the hands of the Saxons, and held it during his life;
after which they soon recovered it; but by reason of the cruel wars that raged
during the contest between them and the Britons, the place became totally
desolated.

LIKE the ancient Deva Tour in Wales, p. 108.
, Verulamium had its great vaults, GREAT VAULTS.
or subterraneous retreats, strongly and artfully arched. These are supposed,
by Sir Henry Chauncy, to have been designed as places of retreat in time of war
for the women and children, and for the concealing of the most valuable
effects. In 960, they were found to give shelter to thieves and prostitutes;
which caused Eldred, the eighth abbot, to search after these sousterrains, and
found several ways and passages; all which he caused to be destroyed, but
preserved the tiles and stones for the rebuilding the church, then in ruins
Chauncy, 431.
.

THE present St. Alban's arose from the ruins of Verulamium. Offa king of the
Mercians, directed, says legend, by a vision from heaven, discovered the
relics of St. Alban, by beams of glory springing from the grave Cressy, lib.
xxv. c. 6.
. In 793, he erected on the spot the magnificent monastery, for the maintenance
of a hundred Benedictine or black monks, and in a parlementary council, which
he held in the same year, bestowed on it most liberal endowments. Verulamium
was now reduced to the state elegantly described by Spencer, assuming the
character of the Genius of the place. I was that city which the garland wore
Of Britain's pride, delivered unto me
By Roman victors, which it wore of yore,
Though naught at all but ruins now I be,
And lie in mine own ashes, as ye see.
Verlame I was: what boots it that I was,
Since now I am but weeds and wasteful grass?


Ruins of Time.

BEFORE I quit these ancient precincts, I must note the church of St. Michael,
CHURCH OF ST. MICHAEL.
built within them, by the same pious abbot who founded the chapel of St.
German. It became an impropriation of the abbey, and, after the dissolution, a
vicarage. The church is small, supported within by round arches. It is most
distinguished by the monument of the great lord Verulam. His figure is of white
marble, placed sitting in a chair, reclining, in the easy attitude of
meditation. He is dressed in robes lined with fur, and a high-crowned hat. Any
emblems of greatness would have been unnecessary attendants on this illustrious
character. The spectator's ideas must render every complimental sculpture
superfluous. The epitaph conveys high honor to the grateful servant: his master
could receive nothing additional. H. P.

Francisc. Bacon, Baro de Verulam, Sanct. Albani viceco'

Sen notioribus titulis

Scientiarum lumen facundiae lex,

Sic sededat:

Qui postquam, omnia naturalis sapientiae

Et civilis arcana evolvisset,

Naturae decretum explevit.

Composita solvantur.

Anno Dom. MDCXXVI.

AEt. LXVI.

Tanti viri Mem.

Thomas Meautys Superstitis cultor.

Defuncti admirator.



ON leaving St. Michael's, I passed through a sort of suburbs to St. Alban's,
ST. ALBAN'S.
and crossing the Ver, to the site of the palace of Kingsbury. It had long been
the residence of the Saxon princes, who, by their frequent visits to the abbey
of St. Alban's, became an insupportable burden to its revenues. At length abbot
Alfric, by his interest with king Ethelred II. prevaled on him to dispose of
it, the king only reserving a small fortress in the neighborhood of the
monastery Chauncy, 431, 463.
. This also continuing to give offense to its pious neighbors, was destroyed by
king Stephen, at the intercession of Robert, the seventh abbot The same, 436.
.

I SEE in Doctor Stukeley's plan, a bury, or mount, called Osterhill, on which
the palace might have stood; and a ditch, called Tonman Ditch, which took its
name from this Tommin, or Tumulus.

ON ascending into St. Alban's, up Fishpool-street, FISHPOOL.
the bottom on the right reminded me of the great pool which once occupied that
tract. This had been the property of the Saxon monarchs, and was alienated by
Edgar to the all-grasping monks. Those princes were supposed to have taken
great pleasure in navigating on this piece of water. Anchors have been found on
the spot; which occasioned poets to fable that the Thames once ran this way.
One of them, speaking to the Ver, says, Thou saw great burdened ships
through these thy valleys pass,
Where now the sharp-edg'd scythe shears up the spiring grass;
And where the seal and porpoise used to play,
The grasshopper and ant now lord it all the day Drayton, song xvi. Spenser
sings in the same strain, See Ruins of Time.
.


THE town spreads along the slopes and top of the hill. The magnificent mitred
parlementary abbey graced the verge of the southern side. Of this there does
not remain the lest vestige, ABBEY.
except the gateway, a large square building, with a fine spacious pointed arch
beneath: so that all the labors of Offa, and the splendid piety of a long train
of abbots, and a numerous list of benefactors, are now reduced to the
conventual church; and the once-thronged entrance of the devout pilgrims, to
the shrine of our great proto-martyr, is now no more than an empty gateway.

A BARBAROUS murder was the true spring of Offa's munificence. A MURDER.
The Mercian monarch cast a longing eye on the dominions of Ethelbert, prince
of the East Angles; treacherously invited him to court, under pretense of
marrying him to his daughter Althrida; seized on the young prince (who is
represented to have been the most amiable of his time) beheaded him, CAUSE OF
THE FOUNDATION OF THE ABBEY.
and seized on his dominions Carte, i. 274.
. Offa had recourse to the usual expiation of his crime, that of founding a
monastery; when the grateful monks, to conceal the infamy of their benefactor,
call down a vision from heaven, as a motive to his piety. But Offa did not
trust to this solely: he made a penitential pilgrimage to Rome, and, by the
merit of his monastic institution at St. Alban's, readily obtained absolution,
ITS GREAT PRIVILEGE.
and not only procured for the house exemption from the tax of Peter Pence, but
power to collect the same for its own use, through the whole province of
Hertford: a privilege which no person in the realm, the king himself not
excepted, ever enjoyed. By the same bull, his holiness granted, that the abbot,
or monk, whom he appointed archdeacon, should have pontifical jurisdiction over
the priests and laymen of the possessions of this church; and that no person
whatsoever, save the Pope himself, should offer to interfere. It was, by the
charter of the king, to be free from all taxes, repair of bridges and castles,
and free from making entrenchments against an enemy; to be exempt from
episcopal jurisdiction; and that the fines for crimes, which belonged to the
king, should be given for ever to this monastery. Offa, not content with this,
enclosed the body of the Saint in a shrine of beaten gold and silver, set with
precious stones; and, encircling the scull with a golden diadem, caused to be
inscribed on it, Hoc est caput SANCTI ALBANI, Anglorum protomartyris Mat.
Paris, 984.
.

Wiligord was the first abbot. It flourished from his time to the dissolution,
FIRST AND LAST ABBOT.
and received vast endowments and rich gifts. At that fatal period it was
surrendered, on the 5th of December 1538, by Richard Boreman, alias Stevenache,
the last abbot; who got, in reward for his ready compliance, the annual pension
of L266. 13 s. 4 d; and the thirty-nine monks, then of the house, lesser sums;
some even as small as five pounds a year Willis, i. 27.
. The house, and the greatest part of the lands, were granted to Richard Lee,
captain of the band of pensioners, as scandal reports, in reward for his
prudence in winking at the king's affection for his handsome wife Stevens, i.
265.
. The town, or, as Willis says, the abbot, purchased the church from the king
for L400, and by that means preserved it from destruction; which gave him so
much merit with queen Mary, that when she determined to restore the abbey, she
appointed him to preside over it Willis, i. 27.
. It is said that he died of a broken heart, within a few days after he
received the news of her death.

THE revenues at the dissolution were valued by Dugdale at L2102. 7 s. 1 d. per
annum; REVENUES.
by Speed, at L2510. 6 s. 1 d. Tanner, 180.
Notwithstanding the purchase made by Boreman, GRANTED TO THE TOWN.
Edward VI. granted the monastery to the corporation of St. Alban's, which he
had lately instituted, and ordered that the church should be reputed the parish
church of the place, and be served by a rector, to be nominated by the mayor
and burgesses of the town.

THE abbots lived in splendour, suitable to their rank and revenues. They dined
in the great hall, at a table to which there was a flight of fifteen steps. The
monks served up the dinner in plate, and in their way made a halt at every
fifth step, where there was a landing, and sung on each a short hymn. The abbot
usually sat alone in the middle of the table; and when any persons of rank
came, he sat toward the end of the table. After the monks had waited some time
on the abbot, they sat down at two other tables, placed on the sides of the
hall, and had their services brought in by the novices; who, when the monks had
dined, sat down to their own dinners Antiquarian Repertory, iii. 60.
.

THE church, CHURCH.
in its present state, is a most venerable and great pile: its form that of a
cross, with a tower. At the intersection the length is six hundred feet; that
of the transepts one hundred and eighty. The height of the tower one hundred
and forty-four feet; that of the body sixty-five; of the ailes thirty; the
breadth of the body two hundred and seventeen.

BY neglect, RUINED.
or by the ravages of war, the original church fell to decay. Abbot Ealdred,
who lived in 969, designed to pull down and rebuild it; and for that purpose
collected, from the ruins of Verulamium, all the stone, tiles, and timber, he
could find. Death put a stop to his intention. His successor, Eadmer, resumed
the task of getting together the materials; and in his search, found great
quantities of curious antiquities; such as altars, urns, etc. which the pious
man broke to pieces, as heathen abominations. He also, as is said, discovered
several books, some in British, others in Latin; and a great one in a language
and character unknown to any but an old priest. This was found to be the
authentic life of St. Alban; which was carefully treasured up, being a
confirmation of what Bid had wrote on the same subject. The other books, being
only accounts of heathen mythology, inventions of the devil, were instantly
condemned to the flames Stevens, i. 237.
.

A FAMINE stopped the design of the new church, under the abbot Leofric. The
troubles that ensued, under the remaining Saxon monarchs, and the unsettled
state of the kingdom at the Conquest, occasioned the plan to lie dormant till
the year 1077, when it was executed by abbot Paul, a Norman monk. He applied to
that purpose the timber, AND REBUILT.
the stones, and tiles, collected by his predecessors Ex lapidibus et tegulis
veleris civitatis Verolamii et materie lignea quam invenit a praedecessoribus
suis collectam et reservatam. Mat. Paris, 1001.
: accordingly we see the far greater and more ancient part of the walls a
motley composition of stones and Roman tiles.

MANY other parts afterward were pulled down, ALTERATIONS.
and rebuilt in the style of the times; and I suspect that, in general, the
present windows are long posterior to those coeval with the walls; being
painted, and of a taste of another age. The windows in the great tower, and
perhaps the range along the nave, are of time intervening; for they differ from
the mode of each of the others. I find this confirmed in the lives of the
abbots. John (first of the name) who died in 1214, pulled down the frontwall,
which was built of old tiles, so strongly cemented with mortar, that it proved
a work of great labor. Master Hugh Goldcliff, a most excellent workman, was
employed; who, consulting more the ornaments of sculpture, of images and
flowers, neglected the security of his building; so that it fell down, and was
left unfinished during the life of this good abbot Mat. Paris, 1047.
. His successor, William of Trampington, had the honor of completing his
design. He not only rebuilt that front, but made new windows, and put glass
into them, so as to give more light to the church. He also raised the steeple
much higher, covered it with lead, and died full of good works, in 1235 The
same, 1054, 1063.
.

IN the abbacy of John of Whethamstead, this church received the most
considerable alterations. To avoid prolixity, I omit the numerous works of that
most munificent abbot: I shall only note the change he made in the exterior
part, by enlarging and glazing the windows on the north side of the church,
which was before dark, and by causing a large window to be made at the west end
of the north a^^e, which was as destitute of light as the other part Stevens,
i. 262.
. John died in 1464; before which time the narrow windows had been changed for
those more expanded, lightsome, and less painted.

IT is in the inside only that any part of the original building, PART STILL
SAXON.
or the genuine Saxon architecture, is preserved; which is to be seen in the
round arches which support the tower, and some of VIEW into the SOUTH TRANSEPT
of ST. ALBAN'S CHURCH.
View of part of the BODY and AILES of ST ALBANS CHURCH.
^normous pillars with round arches in the body of the church, (...) the style
of each transent. After the Conquest the round (...) was continued, but the
pillars were also round and massy: (...) are square, and not less than
twenty-nine feet thick, with (...) totally unadorned. Their composition, as
well as that (...) the stair-cases, are of brick: the other pillars are light,
(...) arches pointed, evidently of a (...) later (...) then the d^^e than the
(...). Above, are two galleries; the lowest is very elegant, (...) with light
slender pillars, much enriched; but I have no (...) to ascertain the time.

ABO^^ the ancient arches are galleries, with evenings round; (...) probably
coeval with the former.

THE upper part of the choir is entirely of gothic architecture, CHOIR.
(...) from the body by a stone skreen, ornamented with ^^le-work. Before this
stood the chapel of Saint (...) a work owing so the piety of abbot Richard, who
(...) to be present at the translation of the incorruptible (...) that Saint to
the church of Durban, apprehending, from ^ess then, it was going to fall to
pieces, ^^^ght it in his (...) and in reward, one of them, which was withered,
was in^ (...) M. Paris. 1006.
.

(...) altar fills the end of the choir a most rich and ele^ (...) of gothic
sculpture, HIGH ALTAR.
once adorned with images of gold (...) placed in beautiful ni^hes: the middle
part is not of (...) the rest, being modern and c^umsy. This altar was made by
abbot Wallingford, either in the reign of Edward IV. or Richard III. at the
expense of eleven hundred marks.

THE hind part of it, which stands in the chapel of St. Alb^ is of gothic work,
(...)
inferior indeed to the other side, but still of much elegance. The (...) of
both are nearly similar; consi^ of (...) work battlement: at the bottom is a
large arched (...), (...)
in which stood the superb shrine which contained the re^ of St. Alban, made of
beaten gold and silver, and enriched (...) and sculpture. The gems were taken
from the treasure one accepted, which being of singular use to parturient women
wa left (...). This was no other than the famous Ae^^es, ^gle, (...)
superstitious repute from the day of Pl^ny to that of (...), re-founder of the
shrine; which had been taken down and (...) during the reign of Edward the
Co^^essor, to preserve them from the ravages of the Danes (...)
. To guard the invaluable treasures, a careful and trusty monk was ap^eed who
was called Custos Foretri, and who kept watch (...) gallery, still standing,
near the site of (...) (...)
.

ON the north side of the high altar stands the magnificient o^ (...) who was
elected in the year 1496. (...)
(...) of most elegant gothic open work; the upper p^: (...) ^tatues: in many
parts are carves, al^ (...) two ram^, with the word Ridge^ (...), (...) at
R^dbourn. M. (...), (...)
supporting a coronet over the arms. ABBOT RAMRIDGE'S TOMB.
the abbey. At the foot of this beautiful structure is a large flag, with the
figure of an abbot, with figures of rams: probably the spot of the good man's
interment.

ON the south side of the chapel of St. Alban is the magnificent tomb Finely
engraven in Sandford's Genealogical History, p. 318.
of Humphry duke of Gloucester, TOMB OF HUMPHRY DUKE OF GLOUCESTER.
distinguished by the name of The Good. He was uncle to Henry VI. and regent of
the kingdom, under his weak nephew, during twenty-five years. His many eminent
qualities gained him the love of the people; his popularity, the hatred of the
queen and her favorites. His life was found to be incompatible to their views.
They first effected the ruin of his duchess by a ridiculous charge of
witchcraft, and after that, brought as groundless a charge of treason against
himself. He was conveyed to St. Edmund's Bury, where a parliament was convened
in 1446; before which the accusation was to be made. His enemies, fearing the
public execution of so great and so beloved a character, caused him to be
stifled in his bed, and then pretended that he died of vexation at his sudden
fall. His body was interred in this church, the scene of his detection of the
pretended miracle of the blind restored to sight at the virtuous shrine of St.
Alban. Shakespeare gives us the relation admirably Henry VI. part ii. sc. 2.
taken from Grafton, p. 597, 598.
. Gloucester had a predilection for this place: he had bestowed on it rich
vestments, to the value of three thousand marks, and the manor of Pembroke,
that the monks should pray for his soul: and he also directed that his body
should be deposited within these holy walls. The sees attendant on his funeral,
were not of the most moderate kind; unless we may suppose, as probably was the
case, that the house was at the charge of erecting the monument to so great a
benefactor. Sir Henry Chauncy expressly says 448.
, that abbot Whethamsted adorned duke Humphry's tomb; which shows, that part at
left of the expenses were borne by the convent. The account is curious.

CHARGES of the burial of Humphry duke of Gloucester, FUNERAL EXPENSES.
and observances appointed by him, to be perpetually born by the convent of the
monastery of St. Alban Cotton Library Cla^dii, A. S. fol. 195. A copy of this
is hung up in the church.
.

L s. d. First. The abbat and convent of the said monastarie have paid for
markynge the tumbe and place of sepulture of the said duke, within the seid
monastery, above the sum of -- CCCCXXXIII. 2. VIII. Item. To two monks
prests, daily seiying mess at the auter of sepulture of the seid prince,
everich taking by 1 day VId sma. thereoff, by 1 hole year -- XVIII. V s. Item.
To the abbat there yearly, the day of the anniversary of the seid prince,
attending his exquys there -- XL. s. Item. To the priour yerly there, the same
day, in likwyse atteinding -- XX s. Item. To XL monks prests, yerly, to everich
of them, in the same day, VI s. VIII d. sm. theroff -- XII. VI. VIII. Item. To
VIII monks not prests, yerly, in the seid day, to everich of them 3 s. 4 d. sm.
thereoff -- XXVI s. VIII d. Item. To II ankeresses, I at St. Peter church,
another at St. Mich. the seid day, yerly, to everich sm. -- III s. 4 d. Item.
In money, to be distribut to pore people there, the seid day, yerly -- XL. s.
Item. To XIII pore men beryng torches, the seid day, about the seid sepulture
-- II s. II d. Item. For wex brennyng daily at the messes, and his anniversary
of torch, yerly -- VI. XII. III. Item. The kechin of the convent there yerly, in
relief of the great decay of the hustode of the seid monasteri in the marches
of Scotland, which before time shall be appointed to the kichyn -- X. THIS
beautiful tomb was once insulated, as appears by one of these items. In the
middle is a pervious arch, adorned above with the coat of arms of the deceased;
and others again along a freeze; with his supporters, two antelopes with
collars. From the freeze arises a light elegant tabernacle-work, with niches;
containing on one side the effigies of our princes; the other side is despoiled
of the figures.

IN 1703, the vault in which reposed the remains of this illustrious personage
was discovered. The body was preserved in a leaden coffin, in a strong pickle;
and over that was another case, of wood, now perished. Against the wall is
painted a Crucifixion, with four chalices receiving the blood; a hand pointing
toward it, with a label, inscribed Lord have mercy upon me.

THE epitaph has long since been defaced; but was as follows: Hic jacet
Umphredus dux ille Glocestrius, olim
Henrici regis protector, fraudis ineptae
Detector; dum ficta notat miracula caeci Alluding to the detection of the
impostor.

Lumen erat patriae, columen venerabile regni:
Pacis amans musisque favens melioribus; unde
Gratum opus Oxonio He founded the beautiful divinity-school at Oxford.
quae nunc scola sacra refulget,
Invida sed mulier regno, regi, sibi, nequam
Abstulit hunc, humili vix hoc dignata sepulchro.
Invidia rampente tamen post funera vivit.


ABBOT Whethamsted's, WHETHAMSTED'S CHAPEEL.
tomb (or Johannes de loco frumentario, as he styled himself) is covered by a
small chapel, erected by himself. It is a plain building, on the south side of
the choir. His arms, allusive to his name, are three ears of wheat; and the
motto, allusive to the flourishing state of the monastery under his government,
is Valles abundabunt, twice repeated. Weever, from p. 562 to 567, enumerates
all his munificent works. He had a great turn toward ornamental generosity;
and caused this church, the Lady's chapel, and several parts of the house, to
be adorned with historical paintings, and inscriptions of his own composition
to be placed under them. He also was a great composer of epitaphs. The reader
will accept, as a specimen of the first, a distich placed in our Lady's chapel:
Dulce pluit manna, partum dum protulit Anna,
Dulcius ancilla dam CHRISTUS crevit in illa Weever, 562.
.


Of the other, a curious one upon one Peter, who was interred in the lower
choir. Petram petra tegit; qui post obitum sibi legit
Hic in fine chori, se sub tellure reponi.
Petra fuit Petrus, petrae quia condicionis
Substans et solidus, quasi postis religionis
Hic sibi sub petra, sit pax et pausa quieta Idem, 577.
.


His artist was Alan Strayler, painter; STRAYLER, THE PAINTER.
who is said to have been so well paid for his work, that he forgave the
convent three shillings and four pence of an old debt, for colors; and on that
account was probably complimented with the following epitaph: Nomen pictoris
Alanus Strayler habetur
Qui sine fine choris celestibus associetur Idem, 578.
.


I BELIEVE, some of his labors are yet extant in the roof of the choir; on
which is painted, in compartments, an Eagle and a Lamb. Under others, in our
Lady's chapel, was this line: Inter oves Aries, ut sine cornubus Agnus. under
the other, Inter aves aquila veluti fine fell columba.

IN the middle of the cieling of the north aile, is a painting of the martyrdom
of St. Alban, (as is said) over the very spot on which he suffered. There is,
besides, a rude sculpture of his death in a small aile on the back of his
chapel, expressing the manner how the executioner lost his eyes for his impiety.

IN the center of another cieling, is a rude painting of king Offa; and this
inscription beneath: Fundator ecclesiae circa annum 793
Quem male depictum, et residentem cernitis alte
Sublimem solio Mercius Offa fuit.


BRASS MONUMENTS.
IN the choir are some fine brasses of mitred abbots. That of Thomas de la
More, a most munificent and pious man, ABBOT THOMAS.
who died in 1396, is very richly engraved. His figure lies in the center,
surrounded by the twelve Apostles in miniature: a proof that this art was
arrived at great perfection at so early a period.

I MUST not omit the modest epitaph of an ancient abbot. Hic quidem terra
tegitur,
Peccato solvens debitum:
Cujus nomen non impositum
In libro vitae sit inscriptum.


ON a large brass plate is engraven the figure of a warrior. HEIR OF EDMUND
EARL OF KENT.
Fragments of the inscription are given by Mr. Salmon; which inform us, that it
was in memory of the son and heir to Edmonde earl of Kent. The date 1480. The
historian says, that he was killed in the second battle of St. Alban's. This
must be a mistake; for none of the name of that family fell on that day, except
Sir John Gray of Groby. This must therefore have been a cenotaph in honor of
Anthony Gray, eldest son of Edmund earl of Kent, buried at Luton, who died
before his father Vincent's Discovery, etc. 287.
; the earl dying in 1489: which might bring the son's death to the date on the
brass.

AGAINST a wall, near Whethamsted's chapel, is painted, kneeling, in a cloak,
Ralph Maynard, of this town, of the family of the ancestor of lord Maynard.

A LONG inscription This, and many others, are nearly defaced with white; but
may be seen in Weever. 567.
against a column, on the north side of the body of the church, clames the
honor of having the body of the celebrated Sir John Mandeville interred
beneath. We admit that this place gave him birth; SIR JOHN MANDEVILLE.
but he found a grave at Liege, in the convent of the Gulielmites, in 1371. He
was the greatest traveller of his or any other age; having been out thirty-four
years; and in the character of pilgrim, knight errant, and man of observation,
visited the greatest parts of Africa and Asia then known. It is probable that
he penetrated as far as China. He left an account of his travels, which were
shamefully falsified by the monks; who destroyed much of their credit, by
mingling with them legendary tales, and stories out of Pliny: but still truth
appears so frequently, that the authenticity of the groundwork is by no means
impaired. He was called Johannes de Mandevile, aliter dictus ad Barbam, from
his forked beard. He is engraven on his tomb with that addition, armed, and
treading on a lion. At his head, the hand of one blessing him; and these words
in the French of the time, Vos ki paseis sor mi pour l'amour Deix proies por
mi. His knives, horse-furniture, and spurs, were, in the time of Ortelius, Life
of Sir J. M. prefixed to his Travels. The tomb was in being in the time of
Weever, who law both that and the inscription.
preserved at Liege by the monks, and shown to strangers.

AN inscription under the great west window denotes, that the courts of justice
were adjourned from London to this town: once, in the reign of Henry VIII, and
again in that of his daughter Elizabeth, on account of the pestilence which at
those times raged in the capital.

THE magnificent brazen font, FONT.
brought from the plunder of Leith by Sir Richard Lee, in the reign of Henry
VIII. was again stolen in the civil wars. The knight commemorates his
benefaction in these bombastic terms: Cum Laethia oppidum apud Sco^^s non
incelebre et Edinburgus primoria apud eos civitas incerdio conflagrarent,
Ricardus Leius eques auratus me flammis ereptum ad Anglos perduxit. Hujus ego
tanti beneficii memor non nisi reeum liberos lavare solitus, nunc meam operam
etiam infimis Anglorum li^enter condixi. LEIUS VICTOR SIC VOLUIT. Vale. A. D.
1543.

THE last inscription I shall mention, is that in memory of two hermits, now
almost defaced, inscribed near a benetoire, by the door in the south aile
leading into the cloisters. Vir domini verus jacet hic hermita Rogerus
Et sub eo clarus mentis hermita Sigarus.


THE door adjacent is extremely beautiful; rich in sculpture. The cloisters lay
on the other side. Nothing but the marks of their junction with the outside of
the church now remains; a series of tripartite arches: nor is there the lest
relic of the vast and magnificent buildings, which once covered a large space
on this side.

ADJOINING to the east end of the church is the chapel of St. Mary, CHAPEL OF
SAINT MARY.
supported by light and elegant pillars. The roof is of stone; the sides of the
windows ornamented with a fine running foliage; and little images adorn the
pillars of each widow. The staircase from hence to the leads has a beautiful
imitation of cordage cut in stone, following the spiral windings. All the
arches are of the sharp-pointed gothic.

I CANNOT trace the founder of this elegant building. It was prior to the days
of John of Whethamsted; for he caused Weever, 562.
our Lady's chapel to be new trimmed, and curiously depicted with stories out
of the Sacred Word; and caused some verses (before quoted by me) to be
curiously depensed in gold.

Edmund Beaufort duke of Somerset, Henry Percy earl of Northumberland, John
lord Clifford, and others of the nobility and gentry, to the amount of
forty-seven, slain in the first battle of St. Alban's, were interred in this
chapel.

SAINT Peter's, the third church in St. Alban's, ST. PETER'S
lies at the upper end of the town: it was founded by abbot Ulfin: was an
impropriation of the abbey, now a vicarage in the patronage of the bishop of
Ely. This church received the overflowings of the bodies of the men of rank
slain in the same battle. There is still a perfect brass of Sir John Entwysle,
in complete armor. He was born in Lancashire, and was viscount and baron of
Brikbeke in Normandy. He died on May 28th, 1455, of the wounds he received on
fighting in the cause of Henry.

THE two Ralph Babthorps of Yorkshire, father and son (the one sewer, the other
squire to that unfortunate prince) found their graves here; slain in the same
cause.

ON a stone is this inscription: Edithe le Vineter gist: ici: Dieu: de: sa:
alme: eye: merci.

A LARGE marble monument, with a bust, commemorates the reward of ingenuity and
honest industry. Beneath, lie the remains of Edward Strong, a shepherd's boy
near this town, who took to masonry, worked at St. Paul's cathedral, and laid
the last stone. He acquired a good fortune, with a fair character, and died
aged 72, in 1723.

AT the bottom of the town is a small brick house Lord Treasurer Godolphin died
in that house.
, HOLYWELL HOUSE.
called Holywell; once the residence of Sarah duchess of Marlborough. Her
portrait, in white, exquisitely handsome, is preserved here; as is that of her
aged mother, Mrs. Jennings. In the first, are not the lest vestiges of her
diabolical passions, the torments of her queen, her husband, and herself.

TWO little pictures in this house are so charmingly finished, as to merit a
visit. One is of a beautiful woman, with red hair parted in the middle; a close
cap, placed far behind; with a long black coif, edged with pearl.

SHE is dressed in a scarlet gown, with sleeves and mantle of purple: breasts
and shoulders naked. She appears a deep devotee, reading a rich illuminated
missal, seated in a chair. Her middle is surrounded with a chain, a rosary of
gold and colored beads pendent from it. On a table, behind, is a chalice of
gold, set with pearls.

THE other is a head of an old man, in a black gown; his beard gray and square,
finely finished.

THE town of St. Alban's is large, and, in general, TOWN.
filled with ancient buildings. It originally sprung from a few houses built by
king Offa, for the convenience of the officers and servants of the monastery.
About the year 950, it was so increased, that king Ethelred, at the
intercession of abbot Ulfin, gave it a grant of a market, and the rank of a
borough. In the Doomsday Book, it appears at the Conquest to have been rated
for ten hides. The arable was sixteen ploughlands. In demesne, three hides, two
ploughlands, and another may be made. There were four aliens, sixteen villeyns,
and thirteen boors, having thirteen ploughlands: forty-six burgesses: the toll,
and other rents of the town, eleven pounds fourteen shillings a year: three
mills, forty shillings a year: meadow, two ploughlands in quantity: wood to
feed a thousand hogs in pannage-time: and seven shillings rent. The total
twenty pounds at that time; in that of Edward the Confessor, twenty-four. There
are now twelve cottagers, a park of deer, and a fish pond.

THE town was always considered as part of the demesne of the abbey; and at the
Conquest it was part of its possessions. Richard I. by charter, confirmed it to
them, with a market, and all the liberty attending a borough: the abbot
holding, as he alleged, of the king in capite, and holding the burgesses as
demesned men of the abbey. This tenure the burgesses wished to force from him;
which they attempted by the following stratagem: -- In the thirty-fifth of
Edward I. they had sent representatives to parliament, and also in the first and
second of Edward II; but in the fifth of the same reign, the sheriff of
Hertfordshire, by the contrivance of the abbot, to save the expense, had
omitted the usual summons. This the burgesses complained of, asserting that
they held of the king; hoping thereby to get released of the services they owed
their lord abbot: or, if they succeeded in sending members, to be freed of
those which they owed the king. Both of which expectations, in the opinion of
Mr. Madox, were illfounded Antiquities of the Exchequer, i. 760.
. Burgesses were returned to parliament the fifth of Edward II. and in the
second, fourth, and fifth of Edward III; after which the load, or the
privilege, as it was respectively thought by the disputants, ceased. At the
time of the dissolution, the town, with the other possessions of the abbey,
fell to the king (Henry VIII.) and from him to his heir, Edward VI; who, by
letters patent, dated May 12th, 1553, INCORPARATED
made the town of St. Alban's a body corporate, by the name of the mayor and
burgesses, and granted to the said mayor and burgesses, and their successors,
the said profits, and other franchises; they to hold the premises in free
burgage, and to render yearly to the crown XL. as a fee-farm, at the feast of
St. Michael Madox, i. 762.
.

THESE were changed, by Charles II. into a mayor, recorder, twelve aldermen,
and twenty-four assistants. The members are returned by the inhabitants and
freemen (about a thousand in number) and the returning-officer is the mayor
Willis Notit. Parl. iii. 26.
.

THE remarkable events, which befell this town in earlier times, were, as usual,
of the sanguinary kind. During the rage of the barons wars, in the reign of
Henry III. the burgesses fortified the place, and defended it with strong
gates, well secured. They were particularly jealous of horsemen; therefore
refused passage to all cavaliers. The constable of Hertford, displeased at this
prohibition, in a bravado, boasted that he would enter the town with three
youths (knights) and four of his best villeins. He did so; and, walking up and
down with great insolence, asked his companions which way the wind was. The
townsmen, alarmed at the question, thought he designed to fire their houses. In
a summary way they executed justice, by knocking down and beheading him, his
youths, and villeins; placing their heads on poles, at the corners of their
streets. The king resented this invasion of his prerogative, and fined the town
in a hundred marks; which was immediately paid Chauney, 442.
.

IN the reign of Richard II. they underwent a mortification of a far heavier
nature. In 1381, after the bloody insurrection of Wat Tyler, a court of justice
was held here, by the famous Sir Robert Tresilian. John Ball, a priest of
Coventry, was tried and executed. Several of the inhabitants had favored the
rebels, or, taking advantage of the turbulence of the ^^mes, had demanded from
the abbot a release from all their services. Several of them were condemned and
put to death, and orders given, that their bodies should remain on the gallows
in terrorem. The burgesses, in contempt of the king, took them down; but when a
discovery was made, Richard, in a rage, commanded the townsmen to make chains,
and hang the putrid carcases on the same places they took them from; which,
disgusting and horrible as the task was, they were obliged to perform
Holinshed, 438.
.

IN the civil wars between the houses of York and Lancaster, FIRST BATTLE AT
ST. ALBAN'S.
this town was the scene of dreadful carnage. Here was shed the first blood in
that fatal quarrel. As soon as ever the weak Henry, or rather his queen and
ministers, found themselves free from the power of his rival the duke of York,
they armed their forces, and marched from London to St. Alban's to meet their
enemy, who was advancing toward them with a mighty host. They met on the 22d
of May, 1455. The peaceful prince sent out a herald to York, strictly
commanding him to keep the peace as became a dutiful subject, and to avoid
effusion of blood. York's answer was humble, yet resolute; demanding the duke
of Somerset, and other delinquents, to be delivered into his hands, that
justice might be executed on them, for the miseries they had brought on the
realm. Somerset, who had been regent of France, was charged in particular with
the loss of Normandy. The king determined to stand the event of the day, rather
than give up his friends. His banner was placed in St. Peter's street. Orders
were issued by Henry (but most probably by the bloody Margaret) that no quarter
Stow, 399.
should be given to his opponents. The Yorkists began the attack in three
places. The famous John lord Clifford defended the barriers with his accustomed
valor. The king-making Warwick, who at this time espoused the cause of York,
collected his force, and broke in through the gardens into Holywell-street
Stow, 399.
: his soldiers shouted his tremendous name. The duke of York entered at the
same time, and a dreadful fight ensued. Victory declared in his favor. Numbers
of the nobility and gentry, with about eight hundred common men, fell on the
side of Henry: the valiant Clifford, usually called The Old, though only forty
years of age; the earl of Northumberland, son to the noted Hotspur; and the
great duke of Somerset, were slain. The last lost his life beneath the sign of
the Castle, to fulfill the prophecy thus delivered by Shakespeare: Let him shun
castles.
Safer shall he be on the sandy plains,
Than where castles mounted stand Henry VI. part ii. act 1. Hulle's Chronicle,
lxxxvi.
.


Numbers of the nobility were wounded, and numbers fled till the fury of the
battle was over. None were executed by the victor: the barbarity of civil feuds
had not yet taken place, provoked by the reciprocal cruelties which speedily
followed.

Henry, wounded in the neck by an arrow, which hurtled in showers on him,
retreated to a poor cottage, where he was found by the conquerors. They asked
forgiveness on their knees; which the humane prince readily gave, on condition
they would stop the carnage. He became their prisoner, and they of course
became governors of the kingdom. The abbey escaped plunder; for fortunately the
king did not make it his headquarters.

THE king, from this time to the year 1461, remained a mere shadow of royalty,
entirely under the directions of the Yorkists, His queen was driven from him,
under the terror of a proscription. That spirited woman did not employ her time
in prayers, or counting her beads, like her weak husband; but, by the
assistance of her northern friends, raised a potent army, fought and slew the
duke of York at the battle of Wakefield, on December 30th, 1460; and, marching
toward London, gave occasion to a second battle at St. Alban's.

THE earl of Warwick, SECOND BATTLE AT ST. ALBAN'S.
now in possession of the king, hastened from London with the captive monarch,
and took post in St. Alban's. Margaret, attempting to pass through the town,
was repulsed by a storm of arrows, directed from the marketplace; but she
quickly forced her way through a lane into St. Peter's street. The conflict
became then very bloody; and, after great slaughter, both parties quitted the
town, and continued the battle, with the animosity usual in civil feuds, on
Bernard Heath, north of St. Alban's, as far as the village of Sauntbridge, and
even beyond it, at a place called No Man's Land Stow, 413.
. There a corpse de reserve of Warwick's army, to the number of four or five
thousand, made so vigorous an onset on the Lancastrians, as to render the
victory for some time doubtful. At length the treachery or cowardice of a
captain Lovelace, who commanded the Kentishmen, determined the day: he quitted
the field, and left a complete victory to the queen. The confederated lords
fled, and left the king in company of Lord Bonvil and Sir Thomas Kiriel, a
gallant knight of Kent, both Yorkists. These gentlemen Henry had prevaled on to
stay with him, assuring them of pardon and security; but his barbarous queen,
in contempt of the royal word, and in defiance of all good faith, caused them
to be beheaded in presence of her son Edward Halle, p. c.
, as it were to familiarize the young prince with blood, and train him to
cruelty.

THREE-AND-TWENTY hundred men perished in this battle. Only one man of rank was
slain, Sir John Gray of Groby; who had that morning, with twelve others, been
knighted by the king at Colney. His widow became queen to Edward IV. and
occasioned fresh calamities to the kingdom; and proved the innocent cause of
the destruction of her kindred.

ON quitting St. Alban's, I passed by the long wall which enclosed the nunnery
of Sopewell, SOPEWELL.
made of stone mixed with great quantities of Roman tiles. The religious house
took its rise from two pious women, who on the site built a hovel with boughs
of trees, and covered it with bark, in order to indulge in privacy their
fondness for prayer and fasting. Abbot Jeffry, about the year 1140, encouraged
their virtue, by founding a nunnery of Benedictines.

IN this house Henry VIII. was privately married, by Doctor Rowland Lee,
afterward bishop of Lichfield, to Anna Bullein. It maintained thirteen nuns:
on the dissolution, only nine; when its revenues, according to Dugdale, were
L45. 7 s. 10 d.; to Speed, L68. 8 s. It was first granted to Sir Richard Lee;
but finally became the property of Sir Harbottle Grimston, and his heirs
Tanner, 183.
.

AFTER passing through the village of London Colney, LONDON COLNEY.
seated on the Colne, RIDGEHILL.
at about a mile's distance I ascend Ridgehill, remarkable for a most extensive
and rich view northwards of the fine country about St. Alban's. At South Mims,
enter the county of MIDDLESEX; WROTHAM PARK.
and soon after leave, on the left, Wrotham Park; a beautiful house, built by
admiral Byng, who was put to death in 1757!

ABOUT a mile farther, BATTLE OF BARNET.
reach the bloody field of Barnet, marked by a column, that shows the spot
where the decisive battle was fought between the houses of York and Lancaster,
which fixed the crown on the head of Edward IV.

THE great earl of Warwick, resentful of the injuries he had received of that
prince, deposed him from the throne he had enabled him to mount. So popular was
the character of this potent baron, that a numerous army flew to his standard:
every one was proud of bearing his cognizance, the bear and ragged staff, in
his cap: some of gold, enamelled; others of silver; and those who could not
afford the precious metals, cut them out of white silk, or cloth. When he
visited London in peaceful times, he came attended by six hundred men, in red
jackets, embroidered with ragged staves before and behind. He kept house at his
palace in Warwick Lane. Six oxen were consumed at every breakfast; and every
tavern was full of his meat; and every guest was allowed to carry off as much,
roasted or boiled, as he could bear upon his long dagger Stow's Hist. London,
edit. 1611, p. 130.
.

Edward, on his return to England, was joyfully received in London. Hearing
that Warwick was on his march toward the capital, he hastened to meet him, and
posted himself at Barnet. So bad was the intelligence in those days, that
Edward advanced in the night so near to Warwick's camp, that the earl,
unapprized of his vicinity, kept firing his ordnance over that of the king the
greatest part of the night, without the lest execution. On the morning, being
that of Easter Day, April 14th 1471, both the leaders placed their armies in
order. Warwick wore as his cognizance an ostrich's feather Ibid. 422.
, the badge of Edward, the son of king Henry: his friend Vere earl of Oxford, a
star; the fatal cause of the loss of the day. Edward wore a sun; from a fancy,
that before the battle of Mortimer's Cross, he saw three distinct suns at last
unite in one Hollinshed, 660. Shakespeare, Henry VI. part iii. act 2.
. The battle began at four in the morning, which opened in a thick mist, with
that deadly hate which the long series of civil wars had created. The battle
raged with various success, as might be expected from the undaunted courage and
animosity of the leaders, and from the reflection on the certain destruction
consequential of defeat. They fought obscured in fog till ten o'clock: victory
seemed to incline to Warwick; when his people, mistaking the stars in the helms
of Oxford's soldiers, for the suns of Edward's party, charged their own
friends; who, crying Treason! Treason! fled with eight hundred men. The marquis
of Montacute, with the fickleness usual in those times, had privily agreed with
Edward to desert his brother Warwick, and had changed his livery. This was
discovered by some of the earl's men; who instantly put him to death: a fit
reward of fraternal perfidy! Warwick, seeing his brother slain, Oxford fled,
and the fortune of the day turned against him, leaped on a horse, in hopes of
escaping; but coming to an impassable wood, was there killed, and stripped
naked; and, after being exposed, with the body of Montacute, for three or four
days, in the church of St. Paul's, was interred in the abbey of Bisham in
Berkshire, founded by the Montacutes, his maternal ancestors. About four
thousand were slain on both sides; who were interred for the most part on the
spot. Edward built here a chapel, and, according to the custom of the times,
appointed a priest to say mass for the souls of the deceased. This place, in
the days of Stow Annals, 423.
, was converted into a dwelling house. The following conversation relative to
this battle, between Civis and Roger, extracted from Doctor Bullein's Dialogues
both pleasante and pietifull, etc. will probably be acceptable to the reader:

Civis. How like you this heath? Here was foughten a fearful field, called
Palm Sondaie Battle, in king Edward the fowerthes time. Many thousands were
slain on this ground. Here was slain the noble earl of Warwiche.


Roger. If it please your maistership, my granndfather was also here, with
twenty tall men of the parish where I was borne, and none of them escaped but
my granndfather only. I had his bow in my hand many a time: no man could stir
the string when it was bent. Also his harnes was worn upon our S. Georges back,
in our church, many a cold winter after; and I heard my grand-dame tell how
he escaped.


Civis. Tell me, Roger, I pray thee, how he did escape the danger?


Roger. Sir, when the battle was pitched, and appointed to be foughten nere
unto this windmill, and the somons given by the harolts of armies, that spear,
polax, blackbille, bow and arrows, should be set a work the day
following, and that it should be tried by bloody weapon, a sudden fear fell
on my grandfather; and the same night, when it was dark, he stale out of the
erle's camp, for fear of the king's displeasure, and hid him in the wood; and
at length he espied a great hollow oak tree, with arms somewhat green, and
climbed up, partly through climing, for he was a thatcher; but fear was worth
a ladder to him: and then, by the help of the writhen arm of the tree, he went
down, and there remained a good while; and was fed there by the space of a
monthe with old achorns and nuttes which squirrels had brought in; and also did
in his sallet keep the rain water for his drink, and at length escaped the
danger.


AT a small distance stands Hadley church, and pleasant village, HADLEY CHURCH.
on the edge of Enfield Chase; where, in my boyish age, I passed many happy
days with my uncle, the Reverend John Pennant; who, during forty years, was the
worthy minister of the place. Here had been, in early times, a hermitage; which
Geffry de Magnaville, about the year 1136, bestowed on his newfounded abbey of
Walden in Essex Newcourt's Repertorium, i. 621.
. The church was probaby a chapel to the hermitage, and, from its being annexed
to Walden, was called Hadley Monachorum. It is at present a donative in the
gift of the lords of the manor. The present church is built with flints. Over
the west door is the date 1498, and the sculpture of a rose and a wing. The
same is found under the upper window of Enfield, and on a gateway opposite to
the Curtain in Shoreditch, once belonging to the Benedictine nunnery of
Haliwell. Sir Thomas Lovel, who lived at the period in which this church was
built, was a great benefactor to the nunnery, and had his residence at Enfield.
Whether he contributed to the building of Hadley, does not appear; otherwise it
would seem to have been a badge of his: but others have conjectured it to have
been a rebus, expressive of the name of an architect, Rosewing.

ON the top of the steeple there remains an iron pitch-pot, BEACON.
designed as a beacon, occasionally to be fired, to alarm the country in case
of invasion. It takes its name from the Saxon Becnian, to call by signs. Before
the time of Edward III. the signals were given by firing great stacks of wood;
but in the eleventh of his reign, it was first ordered that this species of
alarm should be made with pitch-pots placed on standards Lambarde's Kent, 66.
, or on elevated buildings, within due distances of one another.

Hadley stands at the edge of Enfield Chase This Chase was enclosed in the
seventeenth of the present reign, and was found to contain 8349 acres; which
were thus allotted:

A. R. P. Enfield parish -- 1732 2 6 including 200 to be enclosed and let, in
aid of land tax and poor's rate. Old Park in ditto 30 0 15 Edmonton -- 1231 2 6
Hadley -- 240 0 0 South Mims -- 1026 0 0 Oldfold Farm -- 36 3 24 The Crown --
3213 2 20 Tithe Owners -- 519 0 32 Four Lodges -- 313 0 3 To be enfranchised 6
2 1 The 200 acres allowed in relief of Enfield parish, are divided into
forty-one lots, and let at L1. 16 s. per acre, and some for two guineas, for
ninety nine years, commencing at Michaelmas 1778. The crown makes L1300 a year
of twenty-four lots, for the same term, and at various and higher rents.


, a vast tract of woodland, ENFIELD CHASE.
filled with deer. The view of the county of Essex, over the trees, is
extremely beautiful. This great extent of forest was first granted, by William
the Conqueror, to Geffry de Magnaville, a noble Norman, one of his followers:
the name afterward corrupted to Mandeville. His posterity were earls of Essex
till the death of William Fitzpier, in 1227, his descendant by the female line;
when this chase, and the title of Essex, fell to Humphry de Bohun earl of
Hereford, in right of his mother, sister to Fitzpier Vincent's Discovery, 180.
. It continued with the Bohuns till the decease of the tenth of the name; after
which, the property of the Chase descended to Henry earl of Derby, afterward
Henry IV. by virtue of his marriage with Mary, younger sister to the last
Bohun, and became annexed to the duchy of Lancaster Cambden, i. 398.
.

FROM Hadley to Barnet is half a mile: BARNET.
a small thoroughfare town on the top of a hill; whence its name, corrupted
from the Saxon Bergnet, a little hill. It has also the title of Chipping
Barnet, on account of its market. In Saxon times, a vast wood filled this
tract; which was granted to the abbey of St. Alban's. An inscription in the
midst of the church shows it was founded by a Beauchamp: CHURCH.
Ora pro anima Johannis Beauchamp hujus operis fundatoris.

HERE is a fair monument to a countryman of mine, Thomas Ravenscroft, Esquire,
born at Hawarden, of an ancient family in that parish. He lies in a gown and
ruff, recumbent. He died in 1630. He and his son James were considerable
benefactors to this place. To him was owing the vestry-room; to James, an
almshouse for six poor women, which he amply endowed.

Near Barnet is a medicinal well, a gentle and safe chalybeate; in former times
in great repute.

FROM this town is a quick descent. WHETSTONE.
Near the village of Whetstone I again enter Middlesex; FINCHLEY COMMON.
which I quitted on going into Barnet. Just beyond Whetstone, the road passes
over Finchley Common; infamous for robberies, and often planted with gibbets,
the penalty of murderers. The resort of travelers of all ranks, and the
multitudes of heavy carriages which crowd this road, compared with those
between St. Dennis and Paris, give a melancholy idea of the overgrown size of
our capital, which makes such annual havoc of the lives and fortunes of the
distant visita^ts.

ABOUT a mile beyond this common, stands Highgate, a large village, HIGHGATE.
seated on a lofty eminence, overlooking the smoky extent of the town. Here, in
my memory, stood a large gateway, at which, in old times, a ^oll was paid to
the bishop of London, for liberty granted (between four and five hundred years
ago) by one of his predecessors, for passing from Whetstone, along the present
road, through his parks, instead of the old (...) way by Friarn Barnet,
Colme-b^^ch, Muswell-hill, Crouch^^d, and (leaving Highgate to the west) by the
church of Paneras. In the time of queen Elizabeth, it was farmed from the
bishop for forty pounds a year Norden's Speculums Brit, Middlesex, 15.
. After resting for a small space over the busy prospect, I descended into the
plain, reached the metropolis, and disappeared in the crowd.

PART II. FROM NORTHAMPTON TO LONDON.
IN a preceding year, I determined to vary part of my journey^ to the capital,
by quitting the common road near Daventry. I began with making a digression
about five miles to the south of that town, as far as Fawsley. I passed through
the village, and by the church of Badby. The manor, in Saxon times, BADBY.
was bestowed on the abbey of Crowland, by one Norman, a sheriff; and (...)
grant was confirmed by Witlaf and Beored, kings of M^r^i^, in 868. That great
convent held it for no^ very long (...). In 1017 it devolved to Leofric earl of
Leicester, by (...) of his brother, also of the name of Norman, to (...) house
of Crowland had granted it for one hundred (...), on the payment of a
pepper-corn* but Leofric severed (...) on the abbey of E^^^ham. (...) VIII.
^ave it to Sir Edm^nd Kinghtly the (...) of Sir Edward (...) of (...) and it
now is the sole (...) of (...) Esquire.

(...) the parish, and at a small distance to the west of the (...), noted for
the vast d^^^h and rampa^^ (...). It is of an irregular shape, conforming to
the shape of a hill; notwithstanding which, it may have been (...), and
possessed afterward by the Saxons; who bestowed on (...) present name of And,
which signifies, in the British, high: (...), which in their own tongue, is an
eminence (...), 524.
.

AT a (...) distance from hence is Cates^y: long the prop^^^ of a family of the
same name. Sir William Cates^y one of the three favorites of Richard III. was
lord of this manor. (...) ancestors possessed the place in the reign of Edward
III, and (...) in his posterity till the infamous conclusion of his (...), the
execrable Dod^s Church Hist. ii 430.
con^^^^ of the Gun-p^^^^ Plot.

FROM Badly, I rode through some pretty woods, (...)
and through E^-park, to the house of ^^^s^ey, the seat of the ancient (...) o^
the (...); standing in an improved de^^esne, above some pretty pieces of ^ter,
winding along a fine woo^ed (...)

THE present owner derives it from a very long race of (...) ^^^^ors, who were
settled here from the year 1^15: at which (...) it was purchased by Richard
Knightly, descended from a Staffordshire ^a^^ly^ taking in name from a manor
in that (...) (...) they had possessed from the twentieth year of William the
Conqueror.

THE present house is a motley building; part being exceedingly old, HOUSE.
part middle-aged, and part new. The hall is a mag^ (...) gothic, of a vast
height, timbered at top, and fifty-two (...) long. The recess, or bow-window,
is richly ornamented at (...) with sculpture in stone. Ail the other windows
are very (...), and placed at a great height above the floor. In every (...)
arms of the family, and their alliances. I enumerated above sixty; for it has
been greatly allied, from very early (...).

THE chimney-piece is large, grand, and well carved. Above (...) great window.
The smoke is conveyed by flue^ passing on (...) of it; so that the chimney does
not in the lest disturb (...) ^^^formity of the room: at the lower end are two
arched (...) There would be a faultless prop^iety, if it was not for (...)
wooden skreen trespassing on the lower end.

THE kitchen is most hospitably divided. On each side of the (...) is an
enormous fireplace, KITCHEN.
fitted for a hecatomb of (...) they are placed back to back, so as not to
interrupt their (...) operations.

(...) portraits preserved here are very curious: PORTRAITS.
than of Sir (...) Knightly caught my eye first, as senior of the company. He
is represented half-length, in black, with short brown hair, (...) and a small
beard; one hand on ^us sword, the other (...). I find nothing more remarkable
of him than being (...) more active spirit.

Sir Richard Knightly: who is painted in two periods of (...) in advanced
years, sitting; his head kept warm by a coi^; (...) dress black; his ruff
laced. Near him are his spectacles, a Bible, and hour-g^a^s. Between his leg,
is a little girl playing with his stick, while he, ^^^ing one hand on her
shoulder, forms a true picture of aged affection. In the inscription he is
styled of Norton; a manor belonging to the family, and possibly the residence
of Sir Richard at this time

THE other portrait represents ^^m in the thirty-third year of his age, A. D.
1^67. On his head is a bonnet: his dress is yellow: his clock black: his ruff
small. He is painted with a sword and small rod. It should seem, from some not
ill-wrote (...) that he had p^ssed his youth licentiously; but afterward made
a (...) reform. They begin, In (...) Fotuna.
So hit^^^^ by help of hevenlie powers,
My doubtful liffe has ^onne his postinge race;
Whose (...) you^^^ has passed such stormy showers
As might have cute me of in half this space.
Yet mighty JO^^, by his celestial grace,
Has brought my bark to such a blissful shore,
As da^^ie does advaunce me more and more,
In vita Fortuna.


It is probable he had an enthusiastic turn. He took part with the puritans,
who early beg^n to give disturbance to the church of England. Their spirits
were so greatly e^t^tered by the unfavorable conclusion of the mock conference
between their ^inister^ and the royal paedagogue, in 1603 Rapin, ii 162.
, that they gave ^ent (...) their rage in variety of most s^urrilous pamphlets
against the ^^^la^ical order. These were the productions of secret presses,
(...) traveled from place to place. The lord of Fawsley was (...) guilty of
harboring then. He was cited before the Star^, and would have been severely
treated, had it not been (...) the mild Whitgift, archbishop of Canterbury, who
had been (...) principal object of their abuse (...)
. The agreement of Sir (...) with Sir Francis Hastings, in a petition to the
House for ^^^n^ing a toleration to the Roman catholics, must not be thought
(...) ^^nsistent with the views of his party; for, had, success followed the
puritans might have clamed, and most probably ob^ the same indulgence. He died
in 1615.

HIS first wife was Mary, daughter of Mr. Richard Fermor, of (...) Neston: his
second, was lady Elizabeth Seymour, sixth (...) (...) Discovery. 483.
daughter to the protector duke of Somerset. There are two por^ of this lady:
one dated 1590, at ^^. Her hands and face (...) ^mall: her dress a quilled
ruff; black gown hung and beset (...) vast strings and rows of pearls. The
other is also in black, (...) ruff. This lady brought her husband seven sons
and (...) daughters: died in 1602, and was interred in the church at (...)
Bridges, 79.
.

^LL-LENGTH of Thomas lord Gray of ^roby, in armor, (...), a turnover, and
boots; with a boy in red giving him (...). This nobleman was eldest son to the
first earl of (...), and married to Anne, second daughter of Edward (...) earl
of Bath. He is represented as a young man of mean (...) who took a determined
part in the civil wars against his sovereign: was active against him in the
field, and submitted, (...) others equally warm in the cause of liberty,
declined the ^^nge^^s office, to sit among the judges on the trial of the king;
and finally in sign his name to the warrant which brought him. to the block.
These services were fully rewarded. He had (...) ^mou^^ of a thousand a year
bestowed on him Drake's Parl Hist. xx. 50.
, and (...) of the royal manor of Holdenby; but before the Restoration, (...)
luckily rescued him from the fate of ^is b^^^^ d^^inquents.

I MUST close this (...) mentioning two most beautiful heads of women, do^e in
crayons; much to the honor of the fair performer, a lady of the present
generation.

THE church is dedicated to St. Pet^^, CHURCH
and was bestowed by Henry II. on the mo^ks of Daventry. On the dissolution, it
was given to the college of St. ^^s^ide, Oxford; TOMB^.
but is now in the gift of Mr Knightly. Within are numbers, of ancient tombs of
the (...) from its first settlement in this country; but many of them much
^^^lated. That of Sir Richard Knightly, who died in 15^4, and Jane his wife,
are magnificently represented (...), rec^mbent, on an altar-tomb: he in (...)
with a herald's mantle over it, and a defense of (...) over his th^g^^.

SIR Edward Knightly, and his wife Ursula, sister to John Vere earl of Oxford
is figured on a brass plate; and, according to the fashion of the times, is
armed, notwithstanding he was a sergeant of law. He died in 1542.

A VAST mural monument preserves the memory of another Sir Valentine and his
spouse, Anne, daughter of Sir Edward Ferrers of Badesly, in Warwickshire. He
died in 1566. This memorial is a great pile of marble, with a great black
sarcophagus in the middle, and finished with a pediment.

THE seats are most ridiculously carved with variety of droll subjects: such as
a cat fiddling, and the mice dancing; an animal riding on a sow, bridled and
saddled: and other figures equally calculated to spoil the gravity of the
best-disposed congregation.

FROM Fawsley I returned into the London road, near the eighth stone from
Toucester; and crossing it, reached the village and church of Flore, or Flower,
pleasantly seated on rising ground, FLORE.
at a small distance from the great road. In Doomsday-book it is called Flora;
perhaps from its agreeable situation. I left the church unvisited. I must speak
from Mr. Bridges P. 506, etc.
of the most remarkable particulars. It is dedicated to All Saints. It was
bestowed in the reign of king John, CHURCH.
by a Ralph de Kaines, on Merton abbey, in Surrey; but at the dissolution, was
given to Christ-church, Oxford; under the patronage of which it continues.

ON a gray stone, in brass, is the figure of the VIRGIN, TOMBS.
clasping our SAVIOR in her arms. Beneath them is Thomas Knaresburght, in
armor, and Agnes his wife; both with suppliant hands, addressing themselves to
the object of the adoration of their days. She in these words: O Blyssyd Lady,
pray to IHU, of us to have mercy. He died in die ramis palmarum, 1450; she, on
the 26th of March, 1488.

THE following curious epitaph informs us of the end of Robert Saunders, and
Margaret his wife.

ROBERT Saunders, the second sone of Thomas Saunders of Sybbertoft, lyethe
here buried:

To Margret Staunton, the heir of Thomas Staunton, he was first married;

WHICH Margret being dead, Joyse Goodwyn he took to wife.

THE XIII day of November, Ao. XCVO. XLIX. he departed this life;

AND rest the at GOD'S pleasure, till the day of perfection.

GOD send us and him then a joyful resurrection. Amen.

CLOSE by Flower I enter on the new turnpike-road, which forms a communication
between Daventry and Northampton, and which opens into the London road between
Dodford and Weedon.

ABOUT two miles from Northampton, I passed through the village of Upton, UPTON.
and by Upton-hall, the seat of Sir Thomas Samwell, Baronet, and property of
his ancestors since the year 1600; when it was purchased from Sir Richard
Knightley by William Samwell, Esquire, a gentleman of ancient Cornish descent.

AFTER a short space, I crossed the northern water, or Naesbyhead, a river that
rises due north, and by its junction a little below with another stream, which
flows from Fawsley-pools, forms that which receives at Northampton the name of
Nen. Leland calls one of these branches the Avon; the other the Weedon.

I ENTERED this beautiful town at the west gate, NORTHAMPTON.
and passed beneath the site of the castle. Nothing, excepting an outer wall
and fosse, remains; in part of which is a vast stratum of ferruginous geodes.

OPPOSITE to the castle is a great mount, CASTLE.
once the foundation of some more ancient fortress; perhaps one of the line of
forts which crossed this and the neighboring counties. One exists at Toucester,
and another I shall have occasion to speak of, lying about three miles to the
east. I cannot speak with certainty of the period in which it was occupied by
the Saxons, who gave it the name of Hamtune. Mr. Bridges supposes it to have
risen from the ruins of Eltavon, a Roman station on the side of the town. It
appears that the Danes were possessed of Northampton in 917; and from thence
long made their barbarous excursions Sax. Chr. 104, 106.
. Before the year 1010, they had quitted the place; but in their inroads in
that year, they burnt the town, and desolated the country.

IN 1064, it found in the Northumbrians, under Morcar, who had advanced as far
as Northampton, a cruel set of banditti, who committed most unprovoked
outrages. They murdered the inhabitants, burnt the houses, and carried off
thousands of cattle, and multitudes of prisoners. But in the reign of Edward
the Confessor, here were LX burgesses in the king's lordship, and LX houses. At
the time of the Conquest, fourteen were waste; but at the time of the survey,
there were forty burgesses in the new borough Doomsday-book, in Mortor's
Northampt.
.

Simon de Sancto Licio, or Senliz, a noble Norman, founded here the castle. He
had married Maude, daughter of Waltheof, the Saxon earl of Northampton, and
succeeded to the title.

THE Conqueror had bestowed this town, and whole hundred of Fawsley, then worth
forty pounds a year, on St. Liz, to provide shoes for his horses Blunt's
Ancient Tenures, 16.
. From that period it became considerable, and frequently was the seat of
parlements, and was on several other occasions honored with the royal presence.

I MUST particularize the great council held there in 1164, in which the
contumacy of Thomas Becket was punished by a heavy fine. At this time, the
whole people came, as one man; and yet all were unequal to the pride and
obstinacy of the single prelate Lord Lyttelton's Henry II. 41 to 56.
. The other great council, or parliament, was summoned in 1176, to confirm the
statutes of Clarendon; in which the rights of the crown and customs of the
realm, especially as to judicial proceedings, had been established The same, V.
264, octavo, 2d edit.
.

DURING the civil contests which England was so unhappily afflicted with, it
came in for its share of the calamities incident to war. In that between king
John and the barons; it was stoutly defended on the part of the king against
Robert Fitzwalter, fanatically styled marshal of the army of God and the holy
church Cambden, i. 519.
; who, for want of military engines, was obliged to raise the siege Dugdale
Baron, i. 219.
. This post was of such importance, that, after the charter of liberties was
extorted from John, the constable for the time being was sworn (by the
twenty-five barons appointed as a committee to enforce its execution) to govern
the castle according to their pleasure. This was done in the fullness of their
power; but as soon as the perjured prince got the upper hand, he appointed Fulk
de Breans (a valiant but base-born Norman) to the command, as one in whom he
could entirely confide Dugdale Baron, i. 743.
.

IN the year 1263, the younger Mounfort and his barons held it against their
sovereign Henry III. The king marched against them with a great force; and
having with his battering-rams made a great breach in that part of the
town-walls nearest to the monastery of St. Andrew, entered the place, and,
after a short but vigorous resistance, made the whole garrison prisoners Carte,
ii, 141.
.

IN 1460, Henry VI. made Northampton the place of rendezvous of his forces. The
strength of his army encouraged his spirited queen to offer battle to his young
antagonist, the earl of March, then at the head of a potent army. A conference
was demanded by the earl, and rejected by the royal party; who marched out of
the town, and encamped in the meadows between it and Hardinston. The battle was
fierce and bloody; but by the treachery of Edmund lord Gray of Ruthen; who
deserted his unhappy master, victory declared in favor of the house of York.
Thousands were slain, or drowned in the Nen: among them the duke of Buckinghum,
earl of Shrewsbury, John viscount Beaumont, and lord Egremont. The duke was
interred in the church of the Gray Friars; others of the men of rank, in the
adjacent abbey of De la Pre; and others, in the hospital of St. John, in the
town.

THE town had been enclosed with a strong wall, probably before the reign of
king John; for mention is made, in the second year of his reign, of the
eastgate, one of the four. The walls were of breadth sufficient for six men to
walk abreast. Both walls and castle were early neglected; for they appear to
have been in 1593 in a ruinous state Norden, as quoted by Bridges, 432.
; yet part of it was used as a prison before the year 1675: and within had been
a royal free-chapel, dedicated to St. George; to which a chaplain was presented
by the crown, with a salary of L s. a year.

IN the civil wars of the last century, Northampton was seized by lord Brook,
for the use of the parliament. In 1642, he fortified it with a fosse and
ramparts; converted the bridges into draw-bridges; and brought several pieces
of cannon here to defend it, in case of attack. Whether it distinguished itself
by any particular acts of disloyalty beyond other places, I cannot say; but in
1662, pursuant to an order of council, the walls, gates, and part of the
castle, were demolished Bridges.
.

RELIGIOUS HOUSES.
THE most ancient of the religious houses in this town was the priory of St.
Andrew, ST. ANDREW'S.
founded about the year 1076, by Simon de St. Liz, (first earl of Northampton
of his name) and Maude his wife. He peopled it with cluniacs, and in 1084 made
it subject to the abbey of St. Mary de Caritate, a monastery upon the Loire.
This occasioned it to undergo the common fate of all alien priories, that of
being seized into the king's hands. It was surrendered to Henry at the
dissolution, by Francis Abrae, then prior; who, in reward for his ready
compliance, was appointed the first dean of Peterborough Willis, ii, 160. The
recantation which he and his poor monks were forced to make, is well worth
perusal. See Appendix.
.

ITS revenues, according to Dugdale, was L263. 7 s. 1 d.; to Speed, L344. 13 s.
7 d. The house stood near the north end of the town, and, with the demesne
lands, was granted by Edward VI. to Sir Thomas Smith Tanner.
.

THE Gray Friars, or Franciscans, GRAY FRIARS.
had a house on the west side of the place. They originally hired a habitation
in St. Giles's parish, but afterward built one on ground given them by the
town, in the year 1245. John Windlowe, the last warden, and ten of his
brethren, surrendered their poor revenues, of L6. 13 s. 4 d. per annum, on
October 28th, 1539 Willis, ii. 160,
; after which it was granted to one Richard Taverner.

ABOVE this house was a priory of Carmelites, or White Friars, WHITE FRIARS.
founded in 1271, by Simon Mountfort and Thomas Chetwood. It was valued at L10.
10 s. and granted to William Ramesden Tanner, 386.
, after being resigned by John Howel, the last prior, and eight brethren.

THE Dominicans, or Black Friars, were fixed here before 1240. BLACK FRIARS.
John Dalyngton was either founder, or a considerable benefactor. Its revenues
were only L5. 11 s. 5 d. Bridges, 455.
It was resigned to the crown by its prior William Dyckyns, and seven of his
friars.

William Peverel, natural son to the Conqueror, founded, BLACK CANONS.
before 1112, a house of Black Canons, in honor of St. James. This Peverel has
no less than forty-four manors granted to him in this county. The revenues of
this house amounted to L175. 8 s. 2 d. according to Dugdale; or L213. 17 s. 2
d. according to Speed. Henry VIII. granted it to Nicholas Giffard Tanner, 377.
. Its last abbot was William Brokden, who, with five monks, resigned it in 1540.

THE Austin Friars, AUSTIN FRIARS.
or Friars Eremites, had a house here in the Bridge-street, founded in 1322, by
Sir John Longueville of Wolverton, in Buckinghamshire; and several of his name
were interred there. John Goodwyn, the prior, with seven friars, resigned it to
the king in 1539. It was soon after granted to Robert Dighton. Its revenues are
unknown Bridges, 456.
.

THE college of All Saints was founded in 1459, ALL SAINTS.
with license of purchasing to the value of twenty marks. It consisted only of
two fellows. In 1535, it was found, clear of all reprizes, to be worth XXXIX s.
IV d. College-lane, in this town, takes its name from it The same, 458.
.

THE hospital of St. John is an ancient building, HOSPITAL OF ST. JOHN.
standing in Bridge-street. It consists of a chapel, a large hall with
apartments for the brethren, and two rooms above for the co-brothers. It was
founded for the reception of infirm poor, probably by William St. Clear,
archdeacon of Northampton; who died possessed of that dignity in 1168. He is
supposed to have been brother to one of the Simon St. Clear; but Leland justly
insinuates, that they never were called by that name, but by that of St. Liz
Leland Itin, i. 10. and Bridges, 456.
.

AT the dissolution, its clear revenues were L57. 19 s. 6 d. Sir Francis Brian
was then high steward of the house, and had 40 s. yearly; and eight poor
persons were maintained at 2 d. a day each: a charity founded by John
Dallington, clerk, and confirmed in 1340, by Henry Burgherst, bishop of
Lincoln. It is at present governed by a master, and two co-brothers or
chaplains, whose salary is L v. each, with XI s. each, in lieu of firing, and X
s. on renewing of leases. The eight poor people are named by the master, and
maintained in lodging, firing, and common room, and 1 s. 2 d. weekly.

ST. Thomas's hospital stands a little more to the south of St. John's, ST.
THOMAS'S.
beyond the south gate, in the suburbs called The Quarters, which extend to the
south bridge. This owes its foundation, in 1450, to the respect the citizens
had for St. Thomas Becket. Originally it maintained twelve poor people: six
more were added in 1654, by Sir John Langham; and one more of later years, by
Richard Massingberd. It is governed by a warden, who is one of the aldermen;
and the vicar of All Saints is the chaplain, with an annual salary of L III.
XVI s. VIII d. Bridges, 457.


I FIND, besides, an hospital on the south side of the town, in the parish of
Hardingstone, dedicated to St. Leonard, for a master and leprous brethren;
founded before 1240. The mayor and burgesses were patrons. Dugdale valued it at
ten pounds a year Tanner, 386.
.

I MUST not omit mention of the short-lived university which existed in this
town; UNIVERSITY.
and which arose from the following occasion: -- In 1238, Otho, the pope's
legate, happened to visit the university of Oxford, and took his residence at
the neighboring convent of Osney. He was one day respectfully waited on by the
students; who were insolently refused admittance by the Italian porter. At
length, after intolerable provocation from the clerk of the kitchen, a Welsh
student drew his bow, and shot him dead Wood's Hist. Ox. i. 89.
. The resentment of government, and the fear of punishment, caused the first
secession of the students to Northampton, and other places. In succeeding years
fresh riots arose, and occasioned farther migrations. At length, these
migrations were made under sanction of the king; who imagined that the
disturbances arose from the too great concourse of scholars to one place. It is
said, that not fewer than fifteen thousand students settled in this town.
Whether from resentment of former proceedings against them, or from the usual
dislike youth has to governing powers, they took the part of the barons. They
formed themselves into companies, had their distinguishing banner, and, when
Henry III. made his attack on Northampton, proved by far his most vigorous
opponents. After the king had made himself master of the place, he determined
to hang every student; but being at length appeased, he permitted them to
return to Oxford, under the conduct of Simon Mountfort, and abolished the
university of Northampton Bridges, 426.
.

THE town is extremely finely situated on an eminence, TOWS DESCRIBED.
gently sloping to the river, which bounds it on the south, as it also does on
the west. The streets are in general strait, and very handsomely built. The
great marketplace is an ornament to the town: few can boast the like. Much of
the beauty of Northampton is owing to the calamity it sustained by fire, on
September 20th, 1675; when the greatest part was laid in ashes. The houses were
at that time chiefly wooden. Twenty-five thousand pounds were collected by
briefs and private charity toward its relief; and the king gave a thousand
tons of timber, out of Whittlewood forest, and remitted the duty of
chimney-money in this town for seven years: so that it was soon rebuilt; and
changed its wooden edifices for more secure and ornamental houses of stone.

THE church of All Saints fell a victim to the flames. The old church was a
large pile, CHURCHES.
with a tower in the center. It was rebuilt with great magnificence, and is a
considerable ornament to this pretty town. The portico is very elegant,
supported in front by eight columns of the Ionic order. The body stands on four
lofty columns, and has a neat dome in the middle. The roof beautifully
stuccoed. This church, and that of St. Peter, were bestowed on the priory of
St. Andrew, by Simon de St. Liz, the founder. All Saints is at present in the
gift of the members of the corporation, who are inhabitants of the parish.

THE church of the Holy Sepulcher was supposed to have been built by the
Knights Templars, on the model of that at Jerusalem. The imitative part is
round, HOLY SEPULCHER.
with a nave issuing from it. In the round part is a peristyle of eight round
pillars, thirteen feet eight inches high, and twelve feet three in
circumference. The capitals consist of two round fillets: the arches sharp and
plain. The space from the wall to the pillars is eleven feet: the diameter,
from the inside of one pillar to that of the opposite, is twenty-nine feet two
inches. In the center of the area stands, in the church at Jerusalem, the
supposed sepulcher See Sandys's Travels.
; and it is probable a model might be placed in those which we find of the same
kind in our island; for, besides this, the Temple church in London, and St.
Sepulchre's in Cambridge, are built on the same plan. The steeple, and some
other parts of that in question, have been added after the building of the
circular church.

ST. Peter's church is a singular building. ST. PETER'S.
Two corners of the tower are ornamented with three round pillars: above these
are two, and above them one; all gradually lesser than the others. The middle
of the tower is ornamented with small round arches, which are continued along
the outside of the body of the church, and have a good effect. Within are two
rows of round arches, carved with zigzag work: the pillars which support these
are alternately single and quadruple. A small monument commemorates John Smith,
that eminent metzotinto scraper Mr. WALPOLE, Engravers, 105.
, who died in January 1742, aged ninety.

THE advowson of this church was given by Edward III. to the hospital of St.
Catherine, near the Tower, in London, and still remains under its patronage.

WHOSOEVER intended to clear himself of any criminal accusation in this town,
was obliged to do it in this church only; having here first performed his vigil
and prayers in the preceding evening Bridges, 445.
. St. Giles's church stands in the east skirts of the town; but contains
nothing worthy notice.

IN old times Northampton was possessed of three other churches, which are now
destroyed. St. Bartholomew's stood on the east side of the road going to
Kingsthorp; and was bestowed by St. Liz on his convent of St. Andrew. St.
Edmund's stood without the east gate, and was also under the patronage of St.
Andrew's: and the church of St. Gregory was the third; also the property of
that much-favored house.

AMONG the public buildings, I first speak of the county infirmary; INFIRMARY.
not on account of the beauty or magnificence of the house; for it is laudably
destitute of both; but because the subscription which supports it does honor to
the province, by proving the benevolence of its inhabitants. That of 1779
amounted to near eight hundred pounds; and the number of patients perfectly
cured, from its foundation in 1744 to the former year, is not fewer than
thirteen thousand one hundred and fifty.

THE county hall is a very handsome building, COUNTY HALL.
and ornamented in the manner which gives dignity to courts of justice. The
vulgar are affected with external show, and never pay half the respect to a
judge scampering in boots and bob-wig up the stairs of a barn-like court, as
they would to the same person, who adds solemnity to his merit, and assumes the
garb suited to his character.

THE jail is at a small distance from the sessions house, JAIL.
and was originally a house built by a Sir Thomas Haselwood, and sold by him to
the justices of peace.

THE town or guild hall, is an ancient building, in which the corporation
transacts its business. Northampton was incorporated by Henry II. Henry III.
gave it power of choosing annually a mayor, and two bailiffs, to be elected by
all the freemen; but Henry VII. ordered by charter, CHARTER
that the mayor and his brethren, late mayors, should name forty-eight persons
of the inhabitants, with liberty of changing them as often as was found
necessary; which forty-eight, with the mayor and his brethren, and such as had
been mayors and bailiffs, were annually to elect all future mayors and
bailiffs. There are, besides, a recorder, chamberlain, and town clerk. The
mayor, late mayor, and one other member of the corporation, nominated by the
mayor, aldermen, and bailiffs, are justices of the peace within the town for
one year. The mayor, recorder or his deputy, and one justice, are necessary to
form a sessions: they have power in criminal causes to try all offenders; but
wisely leave all but petty larcenies to the judges of the great sessions
Bridges, 433.
.

Northampton is among the most ancient boroughs. In the parliament held at Acton
Burnel, in the time of Edward I. it was one of the nineteen trading towns which
sent two members each. Every inhabitant, resident or non-resident, free or not
free, has liberty of voting: a cruel privilege for such who have of late years
been ambitious of recommending their representatives.

FROM Northampton I visited Castle Ashby, CASTLE ASHBY.
the princely seat of the Comptons earls of Northampton. It lies about six
miles south-east of the town, in a wet country, and without any advantage of
situation. It is a large structure, surrounding a handsome square court, with a
beautiful skreen, the work of Inigo Jones, bounding one side. More is
attributed to that great architect. Some is more ancient than his time; yet he
probably had the restoring of the old house, as the finishing appears, by a
date on the stone ballustrade, to be 1624, preceded by the pious text, Nisi
DOMINUS aedificaverit Domum, in vanum laboraverunt qui aedificant cum.

CASTLE ASHBY.


ONE front is taken up by a long gallery, and at the end is a small room,
PROTRAITS. COMPTON, BISHOP OF LONDON.
the chapel closet. In it is a full-length or Henry Compton, bishop of London.
He was youngest son of the famous loyalist earl of Northampton. Went for a
short time into the army, after the Restoration; but soon quitted it for the
church. In 1674 he was promoted to the bishopric of Oxford, and in the next
year to that of London. His abilities were said not to be shining; but his
discharge of his pastoral office gained him great reputation. He was firmly
attached to the constitution and re^^^ion of his country; and, in the reign of
the bigoted James, underwent the honor of suspension, for not complying with
the ^aws of the court. He appeared in arms at Nottingham, in support of the
Revolution; and lived till 1713, when he died, at the age of eighty-one.

IN the same closet is a good head of the Reverend Mr. (...), who began the
Saxon Dictionary, MR. LIE.
finished and published by the Reverend Mr. Man^ing, 1772. He also published
Junius's ^^^^^ogicum Angli^num, in 1743. He was born at To^ness, in (...)
became possessed of benefices in this county; and died in ^^67, at the rectory
of Yardly Hastings.

THE drawing room is remarkably grand; it is fifty feet five, DRAWING ROOM.
by twenty-four; and eighteen feet ten inches high. It is hung (...) tapestry,
the meritorious labor of two aunts of the present (...). The chimney-piece is
of an enormous size: a quarry of (...) filled with shells from Raunce.

MR. WALPOLE had made me impatient for the sight of the pic^^^^ of the hero
JOHN TALBOT, JOHN TALBOT EARL OF SHREWSBURY.
first earl of Shrewsbury, by inform^^^ that such a portrait existed in this
house. I was at first (...) ^^^grined, by my attendant denying all knowledge of
it. (...) much search, I discovered it in a garret, and re^^^^ the earl and his
(...) countess from beneath a load of (...) of the garrets.

THE portraits (...) originals: coarse, and rudely painted on (...) might be
(...) from the artists of the period in (...) this later inscription: John
(...) lord (...) E. of Shrewsbury by Henry VI. (...) his hair short and
ill-combed, his hands (...) of prayer. He is in armor, but (...) emblazoned
with his arms. His (...), is wanted. He was (...) ^ame put armies to flight. He
had (...) in forty several and dangerous skirmishes: at (...) aged eighty, at
Cha^^^lon: and with him (...) good fortune of the English during that unhappy
(...), dressed in the sortout of the hero's arms (...) bed embraced (...) took
off the sortout painted with his ma^ters arms (...) the dead corpse with it,
and burst into these passionate expressions: Alas! is it you? I pray God par^^^
all my misdoings! I have been your officer of arms ^orty years or month (...) I
should surrender them to you (...) last edit.
.

HIS countess (...), (...) HIS (...)
eldest daughter and co-^eir of Richard Be^^cham^ earl Warwick, is represented
in the same attitude, and with a herald's (...) properly emblazoned. Her cap^
worked (...), the arms of her husband: her (...) ornamented with gold chairs.
She died June 14th 1468, (...) JOHN TALBOT EARL of SHREWSBURY.
MARGARET COUNTESS of SHREWSBURY.
was interred in St. Paul's cathedral. The body of her lord was brought over
and buried at Whichurch, Shropshire.

HERE is a portrait of Spencer earl of Northampton (the justly-boasted
character and hero of the house) represented in armor. SPENCER EARL OF
NORTHAMPTON;
His genius was so extensive, that in his youth he at once kept four different
tutors in employ, who daily had their respective hours for instructing him in
the different arts they professed. In the civil wars he was the great rival of
lord Brooks, whom he drove out of his own county of Warwick; and was a most
successful opponent to the earl of Essex. He brought two thousand of the
best-disciplined men in the army to the royal standard at Nottingham. At length
fell in Staffordshire, in March 1743, desperately fighting; forgetting, as is
too frequently the case with great minds, the difference between the General
and common man.

HIS eldest son, James earl of Northampton, is in armor, HIS SON JAMES.
and with a great dog near him. He inherited his father's valor, and was
wounded in the battle in which his father was slain. In all the following
actions he maintained a spirit worthy of his name. On the fall of monarchy he
lived retired. On the Restoration he was laden with honors, and died in
fullness of glory at this place, in December 1681.

A PORTRAIT, which I take to be Sir Spencer Compton In the house he is called
earl of Northampton.
, his third brother, SIR SPENCER COMPTON?
is dressed in a green silk vest, a laced turnover, and with long hair. This
youth was at the battle of Edgehill, at a time he was not able to grasp a
pistol; yet cried with vexation that he was not permitted to share in the same
glory and danger with his elder brothers.

THE celebrated Edward Sackville earl of Dorset is painted in armor. EDW.
SACKVILLE EARL OF DORSET.
His well-known spirit, in the duel between him and lord Bruce, would make one
imagine that he would have appeared with peculiar luster in the field of
action, during the civil wars; but fortune f^ung him but once into the bloody
scenes of that period. He fought with distinguished bravery at Edgehill, and
retook the royal standard, after its bearer, Sir Edward Verney, was slain.
Might not the weight of the sanguinary conflict at Tergose rest heavy on his
mind, and make him shun for the future scenes of destruction? for HE could do
it with unimpeached reputation. Certain it is, that his lordship acted chiefly
in the cabinet, was a faithful servant to his master, and a true friend to his
country; and spent the rest of his service in earnest and unremitting
endeavors to qualify affairs, and restore peace to his country. After the
king's death, he never stirred out of his house; and died in 1652, at his
house, then called Dorset-house, in Salisbury-court.

HERE is a singular head, GEO. VILLIERS DUKE OF BUCKINGHUM.
called that of George Villlers duke of Buckingham; bearded, whiskered, and
represented as dead.

THE heads of the duke of Somerset, Protector, Francis first earl of Bedford,
and Sir Thomas More, and another, the name of which I have forgot, are
beautifully painted in small size.

THAT favorite of fortune Sir Stephen Fox, SIR STEPHEN FOX.
is represented sitting, in a long wig and nightgown: a good-looking man. He
was the son of a private family in Wiltshire, but raised himself by the most
laudable of means, that of merit. After the battle of Worcester, in which his
elder brother was engaged, he fled with him to France, and was entertained by
Henry lord Percy, then lord chamberlain to our exiled monarch. To young Fox was
committed the whole regulation of the household; "who," as lord Clarendon
observes, was well qualified with the languages, and all parts of clerkship,
honesty, and discretion, as was necessary for such a trust; and indeed his
great industry, modesty, and prudence, did very much contribute to the bringing
the family, which for so many years had been under no government, into very
good order. On the Restoration he was made Clerk of the Green Cloth; and on the
raising of the two regiments, the first of the kind ever known, he was
appointed paymaster, and soon after paymaster-general to all the forces in
England. In 1679, he was made one of the lords of the Treasury; and in the same
year, first commissioner in the office of master of the horse; and in 1682, had
interest to get his son Charles, then only twenty-three years old, to be
appointed sole paymaster of the forces, and himself, in 1684, sole commissioner
for master of the horse. James II. continued to him every kind of favor; yet
Sir Stephen made a very easy transition to the succeeding prince, and enjoyed
the same degree of courtly emolument. James thought he might have expected
another return from this creation of the Stuarts: accordingly excepted him in
his act of grace, on the intended invasion of 1692.

SIR Stephen made a noble use of the gifts of fortune: he rebuilt the church of
Early, his native place; built an hospital there for six poor men, and as many
poor women; erected a chapel there, and handsome lodgings for the chaplain, and
endowed it with L188 a year: he founded in the same place a charity-school; he
built the chancel of a church in the north of Wiltshire, which the rector was
unable to do. He also built the church of Culford in Suffolk, and pewed the
cathedral of Salisbury: but his greatest act was the founding of Chelsea
hospital, which he first projected, and contributed thirteen thousand pounds
toward the carrying on; alleging, that he could not bear to see the common
soldiers, who had spent their strength in our service, beg at our doors
Collins, v. 368.
.

HE married his second wife in 1703, when he was seventy-six years of age, and
had by her two sons: Stephen, late earl of Ilchester; and Henry, late lord
Holland. His happiness continued to his last moment; for he died, without
experiencing the usual infirmities of eighty-nine, in October 1716.

THE manor of Castle Ashby was called in the Doomsday-book, MANOR OF CASTLE
ASHBY.
Asebi: it was afterward called Ashby David, from David de Esseby, who was
lord of it in the time of Henry III. It fell afterward to Walter de Langton,
bishop of Lichfield; who, in 1305, got leave to fortify it Bridges, 341.
; from which it got the name of Castle Ashby. It afterward passed through
several owners. The Greys, lords of Ruthin and earls of Kent, possessed it for
a long time, till Richard, who died in 1503, parted with it to lord Hussy; who
alienated it, in the time of Henry VIII. to Sir William Compton, of Compton
Vinyate, in Warwickshire, ancestor of the present noble possessor.

THE grounds have been laid out by Mr. Brown, and the church, dedicated to St.
Nicholas, stands in them, at a small distance from the house. I took horse and
rode through the park, EASTON MAUDUIT.
and, after a mile and a half, reached Easton Mauduit, one of the seats of the
earls of Sussex; a large but low old house, with a quadrangle in the middle.
This place probably took the addition of Mauduit from some ancient owner. Sir
Christopher Yelverton, third son of a very ancient family in Norfolk, was the
first of the name who settled at this place.

THE portraits in this house are numerous. In the hall is a full-length of
Henry, PORTRAITS.
seventh earl of Kent, of the name of Gray, HENRY, SEVENTH EARL OF KENT.
dressed in black, with a turnover; and another of his lady, Elizabeth, second
daughter and coheir of Gilbert, seventh earl of Shrewsbury. She is also in
black, with a great black aigret, light hair, bare neck, and ruff.

HER father, in white, with a black cloak, ruff, and George. He died in 1616. A
misnamed portrait, called his great ancestor, the first earl of Shrewsbury, is
shown here. It seems to be of some nobleman of the time of Edward VI. dressed
in black, with a sword, the George, and the garter about his leg.

ON the stairs is an excellent painting of an old poultry-woman.

IN the dining room is a half-length of Sir Christopher Yelverton, SIR
CHRISTOPHER YELVERTON.
with a ruff, and in robes, as one of the justices of the King's Bench. He
distinguished himself in the profession of the law in the reign of queen
Elizabeth, was appointed queen's sergeant, and was chosen speaker of the House
of Commons in 1597. His speech of excuse is singular, and historical of himself
Drake's Parliam. Hist. iv. 411.
. His prayer (for in those days it was usual for the speaker to compose one,
and read it every morning during the sessions) ran in a strong vein of good
sense and piety The same, 413.
. He was the purchaser of this estate. Died here in 1607, and was buried in the
adjacent church.

His son, SIR HENRY YELVERTON.
Sir Henry, appears in the same habit with the father. The date is 1626, aet.
60. He proved as distinguished a lawyer as his father, but was less fortunate,
in falling on more dangerous times. He owed his rise to the profligate favorite
Ker earl of Somerset. On the disgrace of his patron, Sir Henry had gratitude
enough to refuse to plead against him Lloyd's Worthies, ii. 86.
, notwithstanding his office as solicitor-general might have been a plea for
doing it. When he was attorney general, he fell under the displeasure of the
court: -- He was charged by the commons with making out the patents for the
monopolies, so justly complained of in that reign. In his defense he suffered
to escape some indiscreet truths, which were interpreted as if his delinquency
was not disagreeable to the king and the then favorite Buckingham. The rage of
the court was directed against him: he was fined in ten thousand marks to the
king, and five thousand to Buckingham; who instantly remitted the last Carte,
iv. 73.
. Perhaps the favorite might fear him; it having been said, that one cause of
his disgrace was the refusal of making out patents to the degree which the duke
desired Wilson.
, whose brother was deeply concerned in this plunder of the public. A mean
letter to Buckingham, and a submission in the star chamber, acknowleging errors
of negligence, ignorance, and misprision, restored him to favor Cabala, 409,
etc.
. In the following reign he was made one of the judges of the Common Pleas, and
died in January 1630.

HIS grandson, Sir Henry Yelverton, Baronet, HIS SON HENRY.
is dressed in a brown mantle and large wig. He was a worthy character, with a
most religious turn; a strenuous defender of Christianity in general, and of
the church of England in particular, as appears by his writings in behalf of
both.

HIS lady Susanna, daughter and sole heiress of Charles Longueville lord Gray
of Ruthin; which title devolved to her, and afterward to her son Charles. She
is very beautiful, and represented by Sir Peter Lely with her head reclining on
her hand.

Anne, daughter to the second Sir Christopher Son to Sir Henry Yelverton, the
solicitor-general, and father to the second Sir Henry.
, is drawn by the same painter, in yellow, leaning on an urn. She was first
married to Robert earl of Manchester, and afterward to Charles earl of Halifax.

A Lady Bulkeley.

A HEAD of Frances viscountess Hatton, daughter to the last Sir Henry Yelverton.

BARBARA, daughter to Sir Thomas Slingsby, second wife to Thomas earl of
Pembroke, by Dahl.

MRS. Lawson, a celebrated beauty of her time, bare-necked, in a loose habit
clasped before, with a sort of veil flung over her head.

SIR John Talbot, a head, with a big wig and armor.

THE church is at a small distance from the house: CHURCH.
is now in the gift of Christ-church, Oxford; but formerly belonged to the
abbey of Lavendan, Buckinghamshire. Within are very expensive monuments. The
first is in memory of Sir Christopher Yelverton, TOMES.
who died in 1607, aged seventy-six; and his lady Margaret, daughter of Thomas
Catesby of Ecton and Whiston, in this county.

Their figures are placed recumbent, and painted: he in his robes, and square
cap, and an artichoke at his feet; she, in a black jacket and petticoat, and
great distended hood. At her feet a cat, allusive to her name.

OVER them are two arched canopies of veined marble, supported by six square
pillars of shell-stone. On one side of the tomb are eight females; on the
other, two male figures, and a little girl.

THE other monument is of his son Sir Henry. His figure is placed in his robes:
and on one side his lady Anne, daughter of Sir William Twisden of Rawdon-hall,
in Kent, lies by him, wrapped in a black cloak from head to feet. Round her
neck is a ruff: in one hand an open book. Above them is a vast canopy, with
various statues on the top. This is supported on each side by two full-length
figures of almsmen, in black gowns and hoods, with great white beards; the arch
resting on their heads. This probably alludes to some charitable foundation
with which I am unacquainted. In front, beneath Sir Henry, is an altar, at
which kneel two men in armor, and two in cloaks, and five women. It does not
appear that either Sir Christopher or Sir Henry left a number of children equal
to those expressed on their respective tombs.

IN my return I saw at Little Billings the poor remains of the mansion of the
great family of the Longvilles. LITTLE BILLINGS.
John de Lungville was declared lord of the place in 1315. This was he who
founded the Augustines in Northampton. It continued in the name till the time
of queen Elizabeth, or James I. when that succession expired in the person of
Sir Edward Longeville.

NOT far from hence I visited Clifford's Hill, in the parish of Houghton Parva,
a vast artificial mount, having once on it a specula, or watchtower. The coins
found in and near it, prove it to have been the work of the Romans. Before the
river Nen was diverted, by the building of Billings Bridge, the channel ran
under this mount; which it is supposed to have guarded Morton, 518.
.

REACH Northampton, and, after a short stay, pass over the river into the
suburbs, called the South Quarters, and into the parish of Hardingstone. On
each side is a fine range of meadows; those on the left are greatly enlivened
by the beautiful plantations and improvements of the Honorable Edward Bouverie,
whose house stands on the site of the Abbey de Pratis, or de la Pre; a house of
Cluniac nuns, DE LA PRE ABBEY.
founded by Simon de St. Liz the younger, earl of Northampton Dugdale, i. 1011.
in which is the recital of the old charters.
. It had in it ten nuns at the time of the dissolution. The last abbess,
Clementina Stokes, governed it thirty years; obtained the king's charter for
the continuance of her convent; but, fearing to incur the displeasure of the
tyrant, resigned it into the hands of Doctor London, the king's commissioner,
and got from him the character of a gudde agyd woman; of her house being in a
gudde state; and, what was more substantial, a pension of forty pounds a year.

BETWEEN this place and the town, in 1460, encamped Henry VI. and his insolent
nobility, immediately before the bloody battle of Northampton. The king (or
rather queen) depending on the strength of their entrenchments and warlike
engines, returned a haughty answer to the humble proposals sent by the earls of
March and Warwick. BATTLE OF NORTHAMPTON.
These spirited commanders led their troops instantly to the attack, and forced
the camp, favored by the treachery of Edmund lord Gray of Ruthen; who, on some
disgust, changed sides, and assisted the enemy in forcing their way into the
works. "Ten thousand talle Englishmen and their "king," says Halle xxiv. xxv.
The battle was fought July 9th.
, "were taken, and numbers slain or drowned "in the river;" for the fight was
carried on with the obstinacy usual in civil dissension. Humphrey duke of
Buckingham, John earl of Shrewsbury, John viscount Beaumont, Thomas lord
Egremont, and Sir Thomas Lucy, were among those who fell. Multitudes of my
countrymen also perished on that day xxiv. xxv. The battle was fought July 9th.
. The slain were buried either in the church of this convent, or in the
hospital of St. John.

ON the road-side, QUEEN'S CROSS.
on an ascent near this place, stands one of the pledges of affection borne by
Edward I. to his beloved Eleanor; who caused a cross to be erected on the spot
wheresoever her body rested, in its way from Hareby in Lincolnshire, where she
died, in 1290, to Westminster, the place of her interment. It is kept in
excellent repair: is of an octagonal form, and stands on a base of seven steps.
Coats of arms and an open book adorn the lower compartments. Above, in six
gothic niches, are as many female figures, crowned. Above them, are four modern
dials, facing the four cardinal points; and above those is the cross.

AROUND this spot are frequently found Roman coins and medals; from which it is
conjectured, that this might have been the site of Eltavon, ELTAVON.
or Eltabon (from the British Ael, a brow, and Avon, a river); and is supposed
to have been the Eltanori, or Eltavori, of the geographer of Ravenna Morton
Northampton, 504. Gale's Iter. Br. Com. 145.
. The dry and elevated situation, and its vicinity to a river, makes it very
probable that this was a Roman station, at left a summer camp.

NEAR this place, on the summit of the hill called Hunsborough, HUNSBOROUGH.
are some ancient works, of a circular form; i. e. conforming to the shape of
it; consisting of a fosse and double rampart, with a single entrance. Mr. Morton
Morton, 538.
attributes this to the Danes, and imagines it to have been a summer-camp of
one of the plundering parties which infested the kingdom of Mercia about the
year 921. Another was raised, about the same time, at Temsford, in the county
of Bedford, for the same purpose. This has very much the appearance of a
British post; but as there is great similitude between the early fortifications
of the northern nations, I will not controvert the opinion of that ingenious
author; yet I have probability on my side, as he admits that the Danes had
possession of Hamtune, i. e. Northampton, in 917. I think they would scarcely
trouble themselves with raising these works so near their former quarters,
which, for any thing that appears, was as open to them in 921, as in the former
year.

ABOUT five miles from Queen's Cross I turned a little out of my road, to see
Horton church, HORTON CHURCH.
remarkable for a fine monument of William lord Parr, uncle, to Catherine, the
last queen to Henry VIII. His lordship is represented in alabaster, recumbent,
WILLIAM LORD PARR.
with his lady, Mary Salusbury, by his side; in right of whom he became master
of this manor. He is dressed in armor, with a collar of SS, and a rose at the
end. His head rests on a helmet, whose crest is a hand holding a stag's horn.
His upper lip is bare, but his beard is enormous, regularly curled in two rows.
He was called to the House of Peers on this second marriage of his niece, was
appointed her chamberlain, and, during the queen's regency, on the king's
expedition to France in 1544, had the respect shown him to be named as a
council to her majesty, occasionally to be called in Herbert's Henry VIII. 577.
. He died in 1548; left four daughters, the eldest of whom conveyed, by
marriage with Sir Ralph Lane, the estate into his family.

ON the floor are the figures of Roger Salusbury, between his two wives, in
brass. He died in 1482, first owner, of his name, of this estate; whose
grandaughter became mistress of it on the death of her father William.

THE Lanes kept it for some generations. On the death of Sir William, it was
found to be held of Sir Richard Chetwood, as of his manor of Woodhall, by the
service of one knight's see, suit of court, and the annual payment of 6 s.
toward the guard of Rockingham castle. The estate passed from the Lanes (I
believe by purchase) to Sir Henry Mountague, first earl of Manchester, and, by
descent, fell to the earl of Halifax; and is now possessed by lord
Hinchinbroke, in right of his lady, daughter and heiress of the last earl.

THE house is in a very unfinished state; part modern, part ancient and
embattled.

GOTHURST.


FROM the Queen's Cross to this place the country is uneven, unwatered, and far
from pleasant. It is now, in general, enclosed; but the hedges are young, and,
till within these few years, quite a novelty.

NEAR the fifty-eight mile-stone enter the county of BUCKINGHAM. Here the
country improves. After passing Stoke Goldington, STOKE GOLDINGTON.
a small village, a beautiful vale opens on the left, watered by the Ouze,
running through rich meadows, THE OUZE.
and embellished with the spire of Oulney church. This river rises near Sysam
in Northamptonshire, and, after watering this country, becomes navigable above
Bedford, by means of locks; runs by Huntingdon; and, after creeping almost
undistinguished amidst the canals of the fenny tracts, falls into the sea at
Lynn Regis. The name is probably derived from the British, perhaps signifying a
river Skinner.
; being, in common with Avon, the name of numbers of British streams.

ABOUT half a mile from its banks, on a rising ground on the right, stands
Gothurst, anciently Gaythurst; GOTHURST.
whose venerable form has not been injured by inconsistent alterations. It was
begun in the forty-third of queen Elizabeth, and was greatly improved, a few
years after, by William Mulsho, Esquire. The windows are glazed with propriety:
only part of the back-front is modernized. The lands are very finely dressed,
and swell into extensive lawns. One before the house consists of a hundred and
twenty-eight acres; and on the sides are others of great extent. The woods are
vast, and cut into walks extensive and pleasing. Several pretty pieces of
water, the view of the Ouze and its verdant meadows, and the old respectable
house of Tyringham, with its church, on the opposite side, are no small
embellishments to the place.

THIS manor, at the time of the compilation of the Doomsday-book, was held by
Robert de Nodavirs, or de Nouers, under Odo bishop of Baieux, earl of Kent, and
half-brother to the Conqueror. THE DE NOUERS.
The De Nouers became possessed of it in their own right in the time of Henry
II; perhaps earlier Mr. Cole.
: but the first I meet with is Radulphus, and his son Almaric, who lived in
1252, the thirty-seventh of Henry III. It continued in that family till 1408
Digby Pedigree, 46 to 47.
, the tenth of Henry IV. when it became the property of Robert Nevyll,
descended from Hugo de Nevyll, who had lands in Essex in 1363, or the
thirty-fifth of Edward III. Robert Nevyll possessed himself of Gothurst, by
marrying Joanna, sister and sole heir to the last Almaric de Nouers; his two
other sisters, Agnes and Gracia, having preferred a monastic life The same ^,
47.
.

THE Nevylls remained owners of it till the reign of Henry VIII. when Maria,
NEVYLLS.
only daughter of Michael Nevyll, on the death of her two brothers; became
possessed of it; and she bestowed it, with her person, MULSHOS.
on Thomas Mulsho of Thingdon, in the county of Northampton The same, 45.
, a respectable family. I find sheriffs of the name, as early as the time of
Richard II; and one of that house governor of Calais in the reign of Henry VI.
But the first mention of the name is in 1370, when lived John Mulsho of
Goddington.

Gothurst continued with the Mulshos till the beginning of the reign of James
I; when Maria, daughter and sole heiress to William (who died in 1601) resigned
herself and great fortune to Sir Everard Digby Digby Pedigree, x. 43.
, one of the handsomest and completest gentlemen of his time: DIGBYS.
but Eumenides tenuere faces de funere raptas:
Eumenides stravere torum.
She had not been married three years, before her husband was snatched from her
by an ignominious and merited death, for his deep concern in the plot, which,
thanks to the charity of the times, is execrated by each religion. It is very
probable, that a mind so tinctured with bigotry as his was, soon devoted itself
to the most desperate resolutions, for the restoration of the ancient church.
He foresaw the certain consequences of ill success, and, preparing against the
event, took every method to preserve his infant son from suffering from the
fault of the father. Before he committed any acts of treason, he secured to his
heirs his estates, in such a manner as to put it out of the power of the crown
to profit by their confiscation Wright's Antiq. Rutlandshire, 114
.

THIS illustrious line was the chief of the Digby family; the peers of that
name springing from younger branches. The origin is Saxon. The first, of whom
notice is taken, is Aelmar, who had lands at Tilton in Leicestershire, in 1086,
the twentieth of William the Conqueror. They afterward took the name of Digby,
from a place in Lincolnshire; and became owners of Stokedry in Rutlandshire
(which, till the acquisition of Gothurst, was their usual residence) by the
marriage of Everard Digby, Esquire, in the reign of king Henry VI. with Agnes,
daughter of Francis Clare of Wyssenden and Stokedry, Esquire. This gentleman,
with three of his sons, fell in the bloody field at Towton, fighting in the
cause of the house of Lancaster Collin's Peerage, vii. 631.
.

MOST of the particulars relative to this great family, DIGBY PEDIGREE.
I owe to the friendship of my worthy neighbor Watkin Williams, Esquire, who
favored me with the use of the famous genealogy of the Digbys of Tilton; a book
compiled by the direction of Sir Kenelm in 1634, at the expense of twelve
hundred pounds. This tradition, is very credible, to any who have seen the
book: a large folio, consisting of five hundred and eighty-nine vellum leaves;
the first hundred and sixty-five ornamented with the coats of arms of the
family and its allies, and of all the tombs of the Digbys then extant,
illuminated in the richest and most exquisite manner. The rest of the book is
composed of grants, wills, and variety of other pieces, serving to illustrate
the history of the family; drawn from the most authentic records, as the title
sets forth. Several of the wills are curious proofs of the simplicity of the
manners of the times; and another, of the magnificence, superstition, and
vanity of our greater ancestors. One of the first kind I shall give here; the
other, being of great length, is reserved for the Appendix.

In the name of God, CURIOU^ WILL.
Amen. The XVI day of the month of January, the year of our Lord God a
thousand fyve hundred and VIIIth, I Everode Dygby of Stoke dry, in the county
of Rutland, of the diocese of Lincoln, seek in body and hole in mind, make my
testament and last will in this form following. First, I bequeth my soul to
God Allmyghty, our blessed lady saint Mary, and all the seynts of heven. My
body to be buried in the parish church of Saint Pet at Tylton, before the
image of the blessed Trinity, at o'lady autther. Itm. I bequeth to reparacon
of the said church, for my buryall there, vi s. viij d. Item. I bequeth to the
said church a webe of land; which the churhmasters of the said church have in
their keeping. Item. I bequeth to the high aiot. of the parish church of
Stokedry, for tithes by me forgotten, ij s. Itm. I bequeth to the reparacons of
the said church of Stokedry vi s. viij d. Itm. I biqueth to the cathedral
church of Linc, ij s. Itm. I biqueth to John Dygby, my son, all my rents,
lands, and tenementes which I have prchased, by deed or by copyhold, in the
towns and fields of Vipinghm, Preston, Pysbroke, and Elynden, to have and to
hold, to him and his assigneys, during the term of his lyff; and aftr his
decease, I will that the said rentes, lands, and tenementes, shall remain to
Everod Dygby, my eldest son, and to his heirs and assigns for ever. Item. I
biqueth to Alice, my daughter, all my rentes, lands, and tenementes, with all
prousetts and commodities to them belongyng, which I have prchased, by deed or
by copy, in the towns and feldes of Hareborow, Bowden, and Foxton, to have and
to hold to her, her heirs and assigneyes for ever. Itm. I biqueth to the
foresaid John Dygby, my son, ij geldyngs, iij maires for his ploughe, with all
barnes and other things to it belongyng, and also a pair of cart wheles
unshode. Itm. I biqueth to my forsaid daughter Alice, a fetherbed, a matras, a
bolster of fethures, with pillowes, blanketts, shetys, coverletts, and covyng.
with all the hangyng of read say pertenyng to the bed which I now ly in. Itm.
I biqueth to Elyn, my dowght. lxxx l. of good and lawful money, to be paid to
her by my sone Everode, within the space of iij years next following aftr my
decease, if she within that time be married; and if she be not married within iij
years next after my decease, then I will that my sone Everad shall delyv. her
10 l. in good money, and the residue of the lxxx l. I will be put into stock,
and be occupied by my said son Everad to her use and proufitt, until the
time that she be married, and then to be delyvered to her: and if she decease
before that she be married, then I will that the said residew of lxxx l. besides
the x l. paid to her, be gyven and paid to the fynding of a priest to sing for
my soul, as long as the money will extend to, after the discrcion of my
executo. Itm. I biqueth to my said dought. Elyn, a fetherbed, a matras, a
spaiver with hanging, blankette, shetis, and coverlitts, and other things to it
belongyng, as it lies in the chamber called the Norcery, within my place of
Stoke bifor said. Itm. I bequeth to Everad my sone, and Alice my daughter, iiij
pair of my best and finest shetis, to be divided equally bitwixt them. Itm. I
biqueth to my said daughter Elyn, the next best pair of shetis that I have, and
other v pair of fflexyn shetys, and ij pair of hardyn shetis. Itm. I bequeth to
my daughter Alice aforsaid, x other pair of flexyn shetis, and ii pair of
harden shetis. Itm. I bequeth to my daughter Kateryn, nun at Sempinghm. xx s.
in money, and a pair of flexyn shete, and a white sparnar. Itm. I bequeth to
Darnegold, my daughter, ij kyne and 12 ewes. Itm. I bequeth to my son Everad
Dygby, my grettest bras pot, to be kept for a standard of that hows, and the
next bras pott and two little bras pottes, and half a garnysh of pewter
vessel, with all other ledy fattys, tubbys, and bolles wtin my hows, and my
grettest bras pane, with two other lesser pannes: and all other my brass pottes,
panes, and pewt. vessel, I will be divided between John Dygby my son, and
Alice and Elyn my daughters. Itm. I biqueth to my said son Everod, a plough,
with all harnes pertenyng to it, and six of my plough horses, for his said
plough, and my waynes, and viij of my best oxen, with all things pertenyng to
the same waynes, and six of my best keyn, and lx of my best sheep. Itm. I will
that the residew of all my sheep, keyn, calves, and oxen, not by me biquested,
divided bitwen John Dygby my son, and Alice and Elyn my forsaid daughters,
equally. Itm. I biqueth to Rowland of Lee, my susters son, ij keyn and a
young black ster, and vj ewes. Itm. I bequeth to Everard Ashby, my godson, iiij
of my best calves, which be going in Tylton feilds. Itm. I biqueth to Margaret
Kynton, my hunte, a matras, a good coverlitt, a bras pott, a pair of flexyn
shete, a kow, and vj ewes, and xiij s. iiij d. in money, for her wages. Itm. I
biqueth to Elyn Hall, my hunte, at Tylton, a kow and xl s. in money. Itm. I
biqueth to the parish church of Skevyngton vj s. viij d. Itm. To the parish
church of Vpinghm. x s. Itm. To the parish church of Lidington iij s. iiij
d. Itm. To the abbot of Wolston vj s. viij d. and every chalon. of his house
viij d. if they be at my burial. Itm. I gyve to the covent there, to have
placebo and dirige song in their church for my soul, x s. Itm. I biqueth to Sir
Robert Kyrkby, chalon. there, to py. for my soul, xx s. Itm. I will that my
executo. do find an able pressed, to sing for my soull, and the soulles of my
father and mother, and all Christian souls, by the space of iij year next
following after my decease, in parish church of Tylton. The residue of all my
rentes, lands, and tenementes, dettes, and all other my gods, moveable and
unmovable, I give and biqueth them to Everad Dygby, my eldist son and mine
heir, whom I ordeyne and make my sole executor, to pay therewith my debt, and
to dispose the residew thereof act his discretion, Of Dalison.
for the health of my soulle and my friends. Thyes beryng witness, Of
Skeffington.
Mr. Thomas Dalyson, pson. of Stoke dry, William Skevyngton, Everod Darby, and
John Dalyson, Of Darby.
gentilmen, Sir Robart Kyrkby, chalon. of Wolston, Of Kirkby.
and Sir Thomas Northmpton, chalon. of Laund, Of Northampton.
of the diocise of Lincoln above rehearsed.

E. Watson.
Tenore putm. nos Willmus. permissione divinae Cant' Archiepus totius Anglie
primus et Aplice sedis legtus notum sacimus universis quod duodecimo die mentis
Februarij anno Dm. millimo quingentesimo octavo, apud Lamehith probatum fuit
coram nobis ac p. nos approbatur et insinuatur testm. Everardi Dygby defuncti
putib. annexu. trents. dum vixit and mortis sue tempore bona in diversis dioc
nre. Cant, provinc. cujus pro textu ipsius testamenti approbatio et insinuatio
ac administrationis bonorum and debitorum concessio nec non compoti calculi
sive rationarii administrationis hinor. auditio finalisq. liberatio sive
dimissio ab eadm. nos solum et insolidum et non ad alium nobis inferiorem
cudicem de nre prerogativa et censuetudine nris ac ecclie. pre xpi. tant
hactenus quiet pacifice et inculle in hac pte. usitat. et obsuat. ltimeq.
prescript dmonstrat. notorie pertinere comissaq. suit admistratio om. et
singulor. bonor. et debtor: dri. defuncti Everardo Dygbi executori in timor.
testamento anoint. de been et fidelit. admistrando eadm. ac de pleno et fideli
inuentario omni. etc. singlor. bono. et debitoru. timoi. conficiend. et nobis
citra festid. annunciationis beat Marie Virginis px. futur. exhibendo, nec non
de plano et vero compoto calculo sive ratiotino nobis aut successoribus nris.
in ea pte. redend. ad fta. dei eungelia. in rat dat. die mends, anno Dni. et
loco predicto et nre. trans anno sexto.

Exam. a. concard. recordia J. Hen. Lilly, Rouge Rose.
Everard Digby made his will anno 1508.

Everard Digby, eldest son and heir.

John Digby.

Alice.

Ellen.

Katharine, a nun at Sempringham.

Darnegold.







I NOW return to the period when the family emerged from its misfortune; and in
the person of Sir Kenelm, the son of the last Sir Evarard, was restored to its
former honor, by the uncommon merits of the successor. He married Venetia,
daughter of Sir Edward Stanley of Tongue Castle, Shropshire, Knight of the
Bath. His eldest son, Kenelm, was slain in 1648, in the civil wars, at St.
Neots: his second son, John, succeeded to the estate, and survived his father
many years. He left by his wife Margaret, daughter of Sir Edward Longueville of
Wolverton, in this county, Baronet, two daughters; the eldest, Margaret Maria,
married Sir John Conway of Boddruddan, in Flintshire; the younger, Charlotta,
married Richard Mostyn of Penbedw, in the same county, Esquire. These two
gentlemen, in 1704, sold this manor, with Stoke Goldington, and the advowson of
both the churches, to George Wright, Esquire, son of the lord keeper, Sir
Nathan Wright; in whose posterity it still remains. By the preceding owners,
the relics of Sir Kenelm's collection came into my country; but the leaving
behind the two beautiful busts of lady Venetia, impress no favorable idea of
their taste.

SOME portraits, PORTRAITS.
belonging to the former possessors, still keep a place in the house. In the
parlour is a full-length of old Mr. Digby, OLD MR. DIGBY.
father to the unhappy Sir Everard. He is represented in a close black dress, a
laced turnover ruff, and with lace at his wrist: his hair black, his beard
round, with one hand on his sword, the other

HIS lady, HIS LADY.
Mary daughter of Francis Neile, Esquire, of Prestwold, and Keythorp, in
Leicestershire, and widow to the Staffordshire antiquary, Sampson Erdeswik. Her
dress is black, pinked with red; has a high fore-top adorned with jewels, a
thin upright ruff, round kerchief, a farthingale, with gloves in her hand.

THEIR son, SIR EVERARD.
the victim to bigotry, is here at full-length, in a black mantle and vest, the
sleeves slashed, and pinked with white, large turnover, and turn-ups at his
wrists: one hand holds his gloves; the other is gracefully folded in his mantle.

A REMARKABLE portrait, SIR KENELM.
of a young man of large size, in a quilled ruff, white jacket, black cloak,
purple hose, flowered belt, a bonnet with a white feather in it, flowered belt,
with one hand on his sword. Above him, in a tablet, is represented a lady, in a
most supplicatory attitude, with a lute in one hand, and a purse in the other,
offering it to him. He stands by her, with averted look, one hand on his
breast, and with an air which shows his rejection of her addresses, and horror
at the infamy of mercenary love; and as if uttering to her the words inscribed
near to him, his majora This portrait is inscribed on the back John Digby; but
from the romantic circumstance attending it, the dress, and the likeness to
other pictures of Sir Kenelm, I cannot help supposing it to be his.
.

THIS is a portrait of the famous Sir Kenelm, in his youthful days; that
prodigy of learning, credulity, valor, and romance, whose merits, although
mixed with many foibles, entirely obliterated every attention to the memory of
his father's infamy. The circumstance of the lady painted along with him, is a
strong confirmation of the truth of the story related by Lloyd, that an Italian
prince, who was childless, earnestly wished that his princess might become a
mother by Sir Kenelm, whom he esteemed as a just model of perfection. It is
probable that the princess would not have disobeyed the commands of her lord:
but whether the painting alludes to our knight's cruelty on this occasion, or
whether it might not describe the adventure of the Spanish lady, recorded in an
elegant old ballad Ancient Songs and Ballads, ii. 231.
, I will not pretend to determine.

IN the long room above stairs, LADY VENETIA.
is the picture of his beloved wife Venetia Anastatia Stanley, in a Roman
habit, with curled locks. In one hand is a serpent; the other is on a pair of
white doves.

She is painted at Windsor in the same emblematic manner, but in a different
dress, and with accompaniments explanatory of the emblems. The doves show her
innocence; the serpent, which she handles with impunity, shows her triumph over
the envenomed tongues of the times. We know not the particulars of the story.
Lord Clarendon must allude to her exculpation of the charge, whatsoever it was,
when he mentions her as a lady of an extraordinary beauty, of as extraordinary
same Lord Clarendon's Life, 34.
. In the same picture is a genius about to place a wreath on her head. Beneath
her is a Cupid, prostrate: and behind him is Calumny, with two faces, flung
down and bound; a beautiful compliment on her victory over Malevolence. Her
hair in this picture is light, and differs in color from that in the other. I
have heard, from a descendant of here is, that she affected different
hair-dresses, and different-colored eyebrows, to see which best became her.

SIR Kenelm was so enamoured with her beauty, that he was said to have
attempted to exalt her charms, and preserve her health, by a variety of
whimsical experiments. Among others, that of feeding her with capons fed with
the flesh of vipers I am told, that the great snail, or Pomatia, (Br. Zool. iv.
No 128) is found in the neighboring woods, which is its most southern residence
in this island. It is of exotic origin. Tradition says, it was introduced by
Sir Kenelm, as a medicine for the use of his lady.
; and that, to improve her complexion, he was perpetually inventing new
cosmetics. Probably she fell a victim to these arts; for she was found dead in
bed, May 1st, 1633, in the thirty-third year of her age. She was buried in
Christchurch, London, under a large insulated BUST of LADY VENETIA DIGBY.
tomb of black marble, with her bust on the top. This perished in the great
fire; but the form is represented in the Pedigree-book, and from that engraven
in the Antiquaries Repertory.

BOTH the pictures are the performances of Vandyck. In this at Gothurst are two
of her sons, of a boyish age, and in the dress of the times.

HERE are, besides, two most beautiful busts of the same lady, BUSTS OF LADY
VENETIA.
in brass; whether by Le Soeur or Fanelli, I am not certain. One is in the
dress of the times: an elegant laced handkerchief falls over her shoulders,
leaving her neck bare. Her hair is curled, braided, twisted, and formed on the
hind part of her head into a circle; beneath which fall elegant locks. On this
bust is inscribed, Uxorem vivam amare voluptas, defunctam, religio.

THE other is a l'antique. The head is dressed in the same manner, only bound
in a fillet: the drapery covers her breast; but so artificially, as not to
destroy the elegancy of the form.

I KNOW of no persons who are painted in greater variety of forms and places,
than this illustrious pair: possibly because they were the finest subjects of
the times. Mr. Walpole is in possession of several most exquisite miniatures of
the lady, by Oliver, bought from the heirs of Boddrudan and Pembedw, at a very
high price. The most valuable is one in a gold case, where she is painted in
company with her husband. There is another, said to be painted after she was
dead; and four others, in water-colors.

THE same gentleman is in possession of a beautiful miniature of her mother,
lady Lucy Percy, purchased at the same time. She is dressed like a citizen's
wife, and with dark hair.

AMONG other portraits, LORD KEEPER WRIGHT.
is a full-length of the lord keeper, Sir Nathan Wright, in his robes, and a
head of Sir Joseph Jekyll, with a long wig and robes. The first received his
appointment in the year 1700, unfortunately for him, as successor to lord
Summers; whose precipitate dismission, in favor of a Tory, hardly allowed time
for reflection on the impropriety of the choice. Sir Nathan kept his place till
the year 1703, when he was dismissed, not without disgrace; more through defect
of ability than want of integrity: but contemned by both parties.

SIR Joseph was a very different character: a staunch Whig, and a man of great
abilities and worth. He died Master of the Rolls, in 1738. His wig was probably
none of the best, if we are to trust these complimentary lines of Pope Epilogue
to the Satires.
: A horse-laugh, if you please, on honesty;
A joke on Jekyll, or some odd old Whig,
Who never changed his principle, or wig.


THE church is at a little distance from the house; CHURCH.
is new, and very neat, having been rebuilt, in pursuance of the will of George
Wright, Esquire, son of the keeper. The figures of father and son face you as
you enter the church: the first in his robes; the other in a plain gown: both
furnished with enormous Parian perriwigs.

In the old church was a gravestone, lying in the chancel, supposed to have
been laid over John de Nouers, who lived in the time of Edward III. The
inscription was in French Communicated by Mr. Cole, from church-notes, taken in
1634.
.

JO: DE: NOVERS: GIST ICI DIEV: DE: S'ALME: EIT: MERCI: AMEN.

FROM Gothurst I crossed the Ouze, to the respectable old house of Tyringham,
TYRINGHAM.
(once the seat of a family of the same name) which stands very high in point
of antiquity. Giffard de Tyringham gave the church of Tyringham to the priory
of Tickford, near Newport Pagnel, in 1187. Sir Roger was one of the knights who
attended Edward I. into Scotland; and Roger, his son, was sheriff of this
county as early as the fifteenth of Richard II In 1322, or the fifteenth of
Edward II. Roger de Tyringham was appointed to superintend the estates
forfeited in this county, on the earl of Lancaster's rebellion. Rymer, iii. 963.
. A Sir John Tyringham had the honor of losing his head in the cause of Henry
VI; being, with several others, put to death unheard, in 1461, for the murder
of the duke of York; that is, for being present at the battle of Wakefield,
where that prince fell by some unknown hand. It continued in this ancient
family till 1685, when, on the death of Sir William Tyringham, it devolved to
John, son of Edward Backwell, alderman of London, who had married his only
daughter.

THE house has been neglected for some time, but not wholly unfurnished.
Several family-portraits still continue there: such as a head of lady
Tyringham, PORTRAITS.
in a yellow laced cap and ruff, of the same kind with that in which the famous
Mrs. Turner went to be hanged, for her concern in Overbury's murder.

A VERY curious picture, full-length, of an aged lady, in a great quilled ruff
and gauze cap, distended behind, with an enormous gauze veil falling to the
ground; a black gown spotted with white; jewels, in form of a cross, on her
breast; another on her arm, and great strings of pearl round her wrists. She
stands beneath a canopy, on which is a crown and coat of arms.

ANOTHER, of a young lady leaning on a chair, in a gauze cap, falling back;
yellow petticoat flowered with red, and a feather-san.

A HALF-LENGTH of Colonel Backwell, in blue, gold sleeves and frogs, a sash;
and a battle in view.

A SMALL portrait of Edward Backwell, EDW. BACKWELL.
Esquire. He is represented in long hair and a flowered gown, with a table by
him. I have a fine print of him, given me by the late Mr. Backwell, one of his
descendants. He was, says Mr. Granger, an alderman of London and a banker, of
great ability, industry, and integrity, and of most extensive credit; but
ruined in the reign of Charles II. by the infamous project of shutting up the
Exchequer. He retired to Holland, where he died, and was brought over to be
interred in the church of Tyringham; where he lies embalmed. A glass is placed
over his face; so his visage may possibly be seen to this time.

I COULD not but admire a spirited picture of a Falcon stooping at Bitterns.

IN the hall is a curious table, of an ash-colored marble. I should call it a
polynesious marble, being veined like a chart filled with little islands,
nicely shaded at their edges.

As my curiosity led me to explore the kitchen, I found on the walls the rude
portraits of me following fish, recorded to be taken in the adjacent river, in
the years below-mentioned.

A carp, in 1648, 2 feet 9 inches long. A pike, in 1658, 3 7. A bream 2 31/2. A
salmon, 3 10. A perch, 2 0. A shad, in 1683, 1 11.
These are the records of rural life; important to those who were perhaps
happily disengaged from the bustle and cares attendant on politics and
dissipation.

THE adjacent church is dedicated to St. Peter, and united with Filgrave: it is
in the gift of Mr. Backwell. The village of Tyringham is quite depopulated, and
the church of Filgrave dilapidated; but the inhabitants of that parish make use
of the church of Tyringham.

ABOUT a mile farther, go through the village of Lathbury; LATHBURY.
near which is the church, and a large old house.

A LITTLE farther is Newport Pagnel: in former times of dangerous approach,
NEWPORT PAGNEL.
by reason of the overflowing of the Ouze. This small town stands between that
river and the Lovet, near their junction. Soon after the Conquest, it was the
property of William Fitz-Ausculph; Dugdale Baron. i, 431.
; from him it passed to the Paganels, or Painels, in the reign of William
Rufus, who continued possessed of it above a century. Leland mentions them as
lords of the castle of Newport Pagnel Ireland Itin. i. 26.
. On the death of Gervase Pagnel, in the reign of Richard I. this manor became
the property of John de Somerie, by marriage with Hawise, daughter of Gervase.
Dugdale Baron. i. 612.
His son Ralph, gave king John a hundred pounds, and two palfreys, for livery
of this lordship, and did homage for it. In the reign of Henry III. Roger de
Somerie forfeited his lands, for neglecting (on summons) to receive the honor
of knighthood The same, p-613.
. The king then granted the farm of this place to Walter de Kirkham for life,
quitting him of suits to county and hundred, and of aid to sheriffs and his
bailiffs; and that, when the king or his heirs should tallage their manors and
demesnes, the said Walter might by himself, and to his own use, tallage the
said manor in like form as it might be tallaged if it were in the king's hand
Madox Antiq. Exch. i. 418.
. But I find that it afterward reverted to the Someries. In the reign of
Edward II. it was conveyed to Thomas de Botetourt, by his marriage with Joan,
one of the sisters of John de Somerie, last male heir Dugdale Baron. ii. 46.
. I now lose sight of the succession, and can only say, that it continued a
place of strength till the civil wars of the last century, when its strength
was demolished, or, according to the phrase of the time, slighted, by order of
parliament, in 1646 Whitelock, 167, 236.
.

IT flourishes greatly, LACE MANUFACTURE.
by means of the lace manufacture, which we stole from the Flemings, and
introduced with great success into this county. There is scarcely a door to be
seen, during summer, in most of the towns, but what is occupied by some
industrious pale-faced lass; their sedentary trade forbidding the rose to bloom
in their sickly cheeks.

THE church is dedicated to St. Peter and St. Paul; CHURCH.
was an impropriation belonging to the neighboring abbey of Tickford; and is in
the gift of the crown.

Here were three hospitals, founded in early times. That by John de Somerie,
HOSPITALS.
about the year 1280, still survives, for three poor men, and the same number
of poor women; having been refounded by Anne of Denmark, and from her is called
Queen Anne's Hospital. The vicar of Newport, for the time being, is appointed
master Tanner, 33.
.

ABOUT eight miles from Newport, at the forty-four mile-stone, at Hogsty-house,
enter the county of BEDFORD, on Woburn Sands, seated on the extremity of the
range of hills which traverse the east end of the former county, WOBURN SANDS.
and contain the parishes of the three Brickhills. Near the road side are the
noted pits of fullers earth, that invaluable substance, FULLERS EARTH.
which is supposed to give that great superiority to the British cloth
(honestly worked) over that of other nations.

THE beds over this important marl are, firstly, several layers of reddish
sand, to the thickness of six yards; then succeeds a stratum of sand-stone, of
the same color; beneath which, for seven or eight yards more, the sand is again
continued to the fullers earth; the upper part of which, being impure, or mixed
with sand, is flung aside, the rest taken up for use. The earth lies in layers;
under which is a bed of rough white freestone, about two feet thick, and under
that sand; beyond that the laborers never have penetrated.

THE great use of this earth is cleansing the cloth, or imbibing the tar,
grease, and tallow, which are so frequently employed by the shepherds, in
healing the external diseases which sheep are liable to; neither can the wool
be worked, spun, or woven, unless it be well greased. All this grease must be
gotten out, before the cloths are fit to wear. Other countries either want this
species of earth, or have it in less perfection. The British legislature
therefore have, from the days of Charles I. guarded against the exportation,
under severe penalties. The Romans attended to the fulling business by their
lex Metella, which was made expressly to regulate the manufacture Keque enim
pigebit hanc quoque partem attingere, cum lex Metella extet fullonibus dicta,
quem C. Flaminius, L. Aemilius, censores dedere ad populum ferendam. Adeo omnia
m^joribus curae fuere. Ergo ordo hic est^ primum abluitur vestis Sarda, dein
sulphur suffitur: mox desequamatur Cimolia quae est coloris very. Plinii Hist.
Not. lib. XXXV. c. 17. -- The finest foreign earth of this kind, is what the
prince of Biscari sent me from Sicily, under the title of Terra Chiemata
supona^a della quale si servono quei Paesani per lavare i pennilini.
. They used various kinds of earth: the cimolia, the sarda (which came from
Sardinia) and the umbrica. The two first were white; the latter might be allied
to ours, crescit in macerando. It swells in water Plin. ibid.
; a property of the true marls. But the application of earths in the woollen
manufacture, and for the cleansing purposes, was of very early times: -- But
who may abide the day of his coming, and who shall stand when He appears? for
He is like a refiner's fire, and like FULLERS SOAP Malachi iii. 2.
.

AT a small distance from hence lies the little town of Woburn, WOBURN TOWN.
in which is a free school, founded by Francis I. earl of Bedford, and a
charity-school for thirty boys, by Wriothesly duke of Bedford. The church was
built by the last abbot of Woburn Willis, ii. 4.
, and CHURCH.
belonged to that religious house; having been a chapel to Birchmore, a church
long since demolished. This place is of exempt jurisdiction, under the
patronage of the adjacent great family Ecton, 211.
. The steeple is oddly disjoined from the church. The chancel has been very
elegantly fitted up with stucco by the late duke. The pulpit is a pretty piece
of gothic carving, probably coeval with the abbey.

A NEAT monument of Sir Francis Stanton is preserved here; TOMBS.
who, with his lady, is kneeling at an altar.

IN the south aile stood a gray marble, robbed of the figure of a priest under
a large canopy, and four coats of arms, with the inscription entire.

Hic jacet Johs Morton, filius quonda Johes Morton, de Portsgrave, domini de
Lovelsbury, qi obiit in die comemorcois Sci Pauli, anno Dni Millmo C. C. C.
nonagesimo quarto. Quor aie ppicietur Deus These two particulars I collect from
Mr. Cole's papers.
.

IN the east window were the arms of Robert Vere earl of Oxford, impaling
Samford; the last, in right of his wife Alice, daughter and heiress to Gilbert
lord Samford, chamberlain to Elinor, consort to Edward I. These two particulars
I collect from Mr. Cole's papers.


AT a little distance from the town was situated the abbey, ABBEY.
founded, in 1145, by Hugh de Bolebec, a nobleman of great property in this
neighborhood; who, inspired by God, made a visit to the abbot of Fountains, to
advise with him about his pious design Dugale Monast. i. 829.
. The abbot encouraged him to proceed; and Hugh erected the buildings, endowed
them, and peopled them with monks of the Cistercian order, and placed over
them, as first abbot, Alan, brought from the monastery of St. Mary, at York.
Willis, ii. 4.
. The place prospered, by several benefactions; and at the dissolution, was
found, according to Dugdale, to be possessed of revenues to the amount of L391.
18 s. 2 d. a year, or to L430. 13 s. 11 d. according to Speed Tanner, 4.
.

THE last abbot, Robert Hobbs, was hanged at Woburn, in March 1537, for not
acknowleging the king's supremacy. The monastery and its revenues, in 1547,
were granted by Edward VI. to lord Russel, soon after created earl of Bedford
by the same prince. No one profited so greatly by the plunder of the church as
this family: the fortune, even to the present time, does principally originate
from gifts of this nature. To the grant of Woburn it owes much of its property
in this county, and in Bucks; to that of the rich abbey of Tavistoke, vast
fortunes and interest in Devonshire; and, to render them more extensive, that
of Dunkeswell was added. The donation of Thorney abbey gave him an amazing
tract of fens in Cambridgeshire, together with a great revenue. Melchburn abbey
(I should have before said) increased his property in Bedfordshire; the priory
of Castle Hymel gave him footing in Northamptonshire; and he came in for
parcels of the appurtenance of St. Alban's, and Mountgrace in Yorkshire; not to
mention the house of the friars preachers in Exeter, with the revenues
belonging to the foundation: and finally, the estate about Covent Garden, with
a field adjoining, called The Seven Acres, on which Long Acre is built,
appertenances to the convent of Westminster; the first, a garden belonging to
the abbot.

THE superstitious will stand amazed, that no signal judgment has overtaken the
children of sacrilege; yet no house in Britain has thriven more than the house
of Russel.

THE house is situated in a very pleasant park, well wooded, HOUSE.
but defective in water; the several pieces being too much divided, and the
dams too conspicuous. The present house was built by the late duke, excepting a
paltry grotto, by Inigo Jones (which shows that his taste was superior to such
childish performances) and the great stables, which were part of the ancient
cloisters, and still preserve their pillars and vaulted roof. The offices are
also the work of the late duke, and form two magnificent but plain buildings,
at a small distance from the mansion.

THIS house is a treasure of paintings; of portraits of the great, PORTRAITS.
now illustrious by their figure they make in the eyes of posterity, undazzled
with their wealth, rank, power, or qualifications, mental or corporeal, which
concealed their failings, and made them pass at lest unnoticed openly by their
cotemporaries. They now undergo a posthumous trial, and, like the Egyptians of
old, receive censure or praise according to their respective merits.

THE first which struck me was a lady, who defied the strictest scrutiny; a
small full-length, in widow's weeds, with her head reclined on one hand, and a
book by her; RACHEL LADY RUSSEL.
with a countenance full of deep and silent sorrow: the sad relict of the
virtuous lord RUSSEL, and daughter to the good and great Wriothesly earl of
Southampton. I imagine her in the third month of her affliction, filled with
the following meditation:

LORD, let me understand the reason of these dark and wounding providence,
that I sink not under the discouragement of my own thoughts. I know I have
deserved my punishment, and will be silent under it; but yet secretly my heart
mourns, because I have not the dear companion and sharer of my joys and
sorrows: I want him to talk with, to eat, and sleep with. All these things are
irksome to me now: the day unwelcome, and the night so too. All company and
meals I would avoid, if it might be; yet all this is, that I enjoy not the
world in my own way; and this sure hinders my comfort. When I see my children
before me, I remember the pleasure he took in them! This makes my heart to
shrink. Can I regret his quitting a lesser good for a bigger? O! if I did
steadfastly believe, I could not be dejected! But I will not injure myself, to
say I offer my mind any inferior consolation to supply this loss: no, I most
willingly forsake this world, this vexatious, troublesome world, in which I
have no other business but to rid my soul from sin; secure, by faith and a good
conscience, my eternal interest; with patience and courage bear my eminent
misfortunes, and ever hereafter be above the smiles and frowns of it; and when
I have done the remnant of the work appointed me on earth, then joyfully wait
for the heavenly perfection, in GOD'S good time; when, by his infinite mercy, I
may be accounted worthy to enter in the same place of rest and repose, where he
is gone for whom only I grieve Lady Russel's Letters, Letter vi.
.

I NOW turn my eyes to a lady, whose felicity consisted in a different fate; in
being early cut off from the embraces of a capricious tyrant, LADY JANE SEYMOUR.
whose inconstancy and whose lusts would probably have involved her in misery,
had not heaven, in its mercy, taken her to itself. Lady Jane Seymour, the lady
in question, became queen to Henry VIII. in 1536, and was released from him by
death, 1537. The portrait expresses the elegance of her person. She is dressed
in red, with great gold network sleeves, and rich in jewels. Her print, among
the illustrious heads, does her little justice.

THAT gloomy insipid pair, Philip II. and his consort Mary, PHILIP AND MARY.
are painted in small full-lengths, by Sir Antonio More. The first of these
ungracious figures is dressed in a black jacket, with gold sleeves and hose;
the queen sitting, in a black-and-gold petticoat, and furred sleeves. Her black
conic cap is faced with gold and jewels. A rich chain of great pearls and small
vases, red and gold, are other ornaments to our bigoted sovereign. The date is
1553. Sir Antonio was sent from Spain to draw her picture; so has placed them
in a scene of awkward courtship; for they were not married till the following
year.

ANOTHER remarkable portrait, by the same painter, ED. COURTENEY EARL OF
DEVONSHIRE.
is that of Edward Courteney, last earl of Devonshire of his name; who, for his
nearness in blood to the crown, was imprisoned by the jealous Henry, from the
age of ten till about that of twenty-eight. His daughter Mary set him at
liberty, and wooed him to share the kingdom with her. He rejected her offer, in
preference to her sister Elizabeth; for which, and some false suspicion of
disaffection, he suffered another imprisonment with Elizabeth. He was soon
released. He quitted the kingdom, as prudence directed, and died at the age of
thirty, at Padua.

HE is represented as a handsome man, with short brown hair, and a yellow
beard, a dark jacket, with white sleeves, and breeches; behind him is a ruined
tower; beneath him this inscription, expressive of his misfortunes: En! puer et
insons et adhuc juvenilibus annis;
Annos bis septem carcere clusus eram.
Me pater his tenuit vinclis, quae filia solvit:
Sors mea sic tandem vertitur a superis.
Fourteen long years in strict captivity,
Tyrant-condemn'd, I passed my early bloom,
'Till pity bade the generous daughter free
A guiltless captive, and reverse my doom.
R. W.

SIR Philip Sydney is painted in the twenty-second year of his age; SIR. PHILIP
SYDNEY.
in a quilled ruff, white slashed jacket, a three-quarter length. He was a
deserved favorite of queen Elizabeth: who well might think the court deficient
without him; for, to uncommon knowledge, valor, and virtuous gallantry, was
joined a romantic spirit, congenial with that of his royal mistress. His
romance of Arcadia is not relished at present: it may be tedious; but the
morality, I fear, renders it disgusting to our age. It is too replete with
innocence to be relished. Sir Philip was to the English, what the Chevalier
Bayard was to the French, Un Chevalier sans peur, et sans reproaches. Both were
strongly tinctured with enthusiastic virtue: both died in the field with the
highest sentiments of piety.

I LAMENT that the portraits are not placed in chronological order: I must give
them as I found them. Isabella, ISABELLA DUCHESS OF GRAFTON.
daughter to Henry Bennet earl of Arlington, and wife to the first duke of
Grafton, is represented a half-length, in white, with long flowing hair, very
handsome.

IN one of these apartments is a head of the duke of Monmouth. DUKE OF MONMOUTH.


A CAPITAL picture of the plague. The dead bodies appear infectious, by the
attitudes of the living. To increase the horror, the artist has placed a live
infant by its dead mother: a circumstance not unknown in the dreadful
pestilence in London, of 1665. By Nicholas Poussin.

A FINE view of Pout Neuf, with numbers of figures, by Wovermans.

IN the green drawing room is a fine landscape by Claude Lorrain; with a view
of the sea. The figures are shepherds and shepherdesses.

David, and Abigail averting his wrath. Her beauty and suppliant looks are
admirable. By Lucca Jordano.

A LANDSCAPE, by G. Poussin; with the figure of an old man begging.

FROM hence I crossed through the hall, a low room, supported by eight pillars,
into

THE DINING ROOM. In this apartment are four pieces, representing Alexander's
campaigns, by old Parocel. The first is a repose after a march: he and his
companions feasting under a tree. Two others are battles.

A LANDSCAPE, by Mr. Gainsborough; containing cattle, figures, and an ancient
tree: a piece that would do credit to the best masters.

IN THE COFFEE-ROOM is a large family-picture, FAMILY PICTURES.
by Jervis, of Elizabeth Howland, duchess to the first Wriothesley duke of
Bedford, in her weeds, with her four children. Above her, in the back part of
the picture, hangs the portrait of her lord; the same who built Covent Garden
church, and was called The good Duke.

IN another apartment is a large picture, representing the present duchess,
presenting her daughter (the duchess of Marlborough) to Minerva, the Sciences,
and Graces; painted by Hamilton, an artist settled, I believe, at Rome.

A FULL-LENGTH of a nobleman, in a hat with a red crown and feather, square
black beard, red earrings and stockings: in his robes, with a white rod in his
hand. This was brought from Thornbaugh, a seat of the family in
Northamptonshire.

OPPOSITE to him is a portrait of a lady, in black, a red-and-white petticoat,
flat ruff, and a great string of pearls across her breast.

Two children in one piece, LADY DIANA AND ANNE RUSSEL.
lady Diana and lady Anne Russel, daughters of William, first duke of Bedford.
They had the misfortune of being poisoned, by eating some noxious berries which
they met with. Lady Anne died; lady Diana survived, and is again painted, in
more advanced life, by Sir Peter Lely.

A MAN, with his jacket gray, breeches red, short hair, and small beard; a
stick in his hand, and helmet by him. Date 1592, aet. 28.

Elizabeth Bruges, ELIZABETH BRUGES.
or Bridges, aged 14, 1589, painted in a flat style, by Hieronymo di Custodio,
of Antwerp. She is represented in black, flowered with white, with full
sleeves, a gold chain, a great pearl set in gold on one shoulder, and a gold
ornament on the other. This lady was eldest daughter to Giles lord Chandos, and
wife to Sir John Kenneda, Knight Dugdale's Baronage, ii. 395. There is another
picture of her in the gallery.
: she dying childless, the whole fortune of her family devolved to his second
sister, Catherine countess of Bedford.

IN this room is a full-length of that fantastic lady, LUCY COUNTESS OF BEDFORD.
Lucy countess of Bedford, in a dancing attitude, dressed in as fantastic a
habit, with an immense transparent veil distended behind her. I have spoken
sufficiently of this lady elsewhere Tour Scotland 1772, part ii. p. 220.
; so shall add nothing more, but that her vanity and extravagance met with no
check under the rule of her quiet spouse Edward earl of Bedford, whom she
survived only one year.

A STRANGE figure of a man, in black, half-length, in a close black cap, and a
letter in his hand, directed to Pr. de Nassau. I am informed, by a very able
herald, that, from the arms on the picture, the personage represented is the
Count de Nassau-Uranien Nassau.

IN the billiard-room is a curious painted pedigree.

THE arras hangings fall over the doors, in the old fashion. The lifting up of
such hangings have often given opportunity for dreadful assassinations.

IN the passage-room is a portrait of the present duchess of Marlborough.
PRESENT DUCHESS OF MARLBOROUGH.


James earl of Carlisle, See a full account of him, Tour Scotl. 1772, part ii.
p. 84.
, in long hair, buff coat, JAMES EARL OF CARLISLE.
and red sash.

SIR Edward Stradling, SIR EDW. STEADLING.
of St. Donet's, in South Wales. A head, with whiskers, a turnover, and black
dress. I imagine him to be the gentleman who had a regiment under Charles I;
who was taken prisoner at the battle of Edgehill, and who died on his release
at Oxford.

THE Angel hastening the departure of Lot out of Sodom, by Rubens. Small.

LORD Francis Russel, a miniature, in black dress.

RUBENS and his two wives. Heads.

A BOY and girl, by Morillio.

THE LIBRARY, with a coved roof, painted by Cypriani and Rebecca. Apollo and
the Muses by the first; the other subjects by the latter.

IN the green room is a singular picture of Ignatius Loyola, in black, with a
dog behind him, kneeling to the apparition of our Savior in the clouds, by
Bassan.

TWO, by Rosa di Tivoli.

AN Ascension, a fine piece, by Sebastian Ricci. The confusion and terror of
the soldiers are inimitably expressed.

A BATTLE, by Pandolfo.

THE castle of St. Angelo, by Lucatelli. A MAN'S head, in which is a noble
appearance of contrition and hope, by Balestra.

AN old woman's head, by Guido.

IN the little blue room is a fine full-length of a nobleman, in a
black-and-gold vest, and a high-crowned hat in his hand. On the back ground is
a curtain, almost concealing a lady; of whom nothing but one hand and part of
her petticoat is seen. By this is Aetatis. 1614. L^ I.

THE music-room is small, but elegant, stuccoed and gilt. Several oval
compartments, and prettily filled with paintings in clare obscur, by Cypriani
and Rebecca.

A PORTRAITS, called Lucy countess of Bedford, in a white satin gown worked
with colors, LUCY? COUNTESS OF BEDFORD.
a laced single ruff, and a long scarlet velvet cloak hanging gracefully, with
one arm folded in it. On her head is a pearl coronet, and pearls on her wrists.
In the back ground she appears in a garden, in the true attitude of stately
disdain, bent half back, in scorn of a poor gentleman bowing to the very
ground. Unfortunately for her lover, it is probable that Done had just told
her, Out from your chariot morning breaks at night,
And falsifies both computations, so;
Since a new world does rise here from your light,
We your new creatures by new reck'nings go.
This shows that you from nature lothly stray,
Thus suffer not an artificial day.
In this you have made the court the antipodes,
And willed your delegate, the vulgar sun,
To do profane autumnal offices,
Whilst here to you we sacrificers run.
In all religions as much care has bin
Of temples frames and beauty', as rites within Donne's Poems, p. 80. This
portrait is so extremely unlike others of this lady, that I doubt whether it
was designed for her.
.


HEADS of lions, by Rubens.

THE Israelites carrying the ark, by Parocel.

A FEMALE dwarf; dwarf to Catherine, queen to Charles II.

IN the upper dining room is a full-length portrait of the well-known
unfortunate Robert, ROBERT EARL OF ESSEX.
earl of Essex, in white. The queen's passion for Essex certainly was not
founded on the beauty of his person. His beard was red, his hair black, his
person strong, but without elegance, his gait ungraceful Reliquiae Wottianae,
3d od. 170.
. But the queen was far past the heyday of her blood: she was struck with his
romantic valor, with his seeming attachment to her person, and, I may add,
with the violence of his passions; for her majesty, like the rest of her sex,
probably Stooped to the forward and the bold. At length his presumption
increased with her favor: her fears overcame her affection, and, after many
struggles, at length consigned him to the scaffold; having thoroughly worked
himself out of her gracious conceit. The same, 165.
.

Catherine countess of Bedford, CATHERINE COUNTESS OF BEDFORD.
wife to Francis earl of Bedford, and daughter to Giles Bruges, third lord
Chandos. Her dress is a pearl coronet, and hair flowing below her waist, a
worked gown, and red mantle: a fine full-length.

Edward earl of Russel, EDWARD EARL OF BEDFORD.
sitting. He is dressed in black-and-gold, with a high-crown hat; his hand in a
sash, being gouty. This nobleman was an exception to the good understanding
this family is blessed with; and unluckily was matched with a lady whose vanity
and expenses were boundless.

LORD TREASURER Burleigh, the able statesman of Elizabeth; a favorite,
TREASURER BURLEIGH.
whom she chose, as she expressed it, not for his bad legs, but for his good
head Lloyd's Worthies, i. 360.
. His maxims did not quite agree with those of the ministers of later days; for
he held, That nothing could be for the advantage of the prince, which makes
anyway against his reputation: wherefore he never would suffer the rents of
lands to be raised, nor the old tenants to be put out Cambden's Eliz.
.

THIS great statesman is represented sitting. His countenance comely, his beard
gray, his gown black and furred, and adorned with a gold chain. His mistress
lost this faithful servant in 1598, aged seventy-seven.

HIS second son is placed near him, standing: a mean, little, ROBERT EARL OF
SALISBURY.
deformed figure, possessed of his father's abilities, but mixed with deceit
and treachery. His services to his master and his country, will give him rank
among the greatest ministers; but his share in bringing the great Raleigh to
the scaffold, and the dark part he acted, in secretly precipitating the
generous, unsuspecting Essex to his ruin, will ever remain indelible blots on
him as a man. His dress is that of the Spanish nation (though he was averse to
its politics) a black jacket and cloak, which add no grace to his figure.

NEXT is the portrait of Sir William Russel (afterward duke of Bedford) when
young. SIR WILLIAM RUSSEL, FIRST DUKE OF BEDFORD.
He is dressed in robes of the order of the Bath, leaning on his sword; and by
him a dwarf, aged thirty-two. On the picture is inscribed Johannes Priwezer, di
Hungaria, fecit. 1627: a painter of merit, but whose works are rare. There is
another portrait of him in the gallery, a full-length, in a long wig, and, I
think, the robes of the Garter.

Anne, HIS DUCHESS.
daughter of that infamous pair, Robert Car earl of Somerset and his countess,
is painted by Vandyck, in blue, drawing on a glove: a most beautiful
half-length. She was the wife of Sir William Russel, above mentioned, married
to him in the year 1637. She proved worthy of the alliance she made. It is said
that she was ignorant of her mother's dishonor, till she read it in a pamphlet
she found accidentally left in a window. It is added, that the was so struck
with this detection of her parents guilt, that she fell down in a fit, and was
found senseless, with the book open before her. She died on May 10th, 1684. The
anecdote is omitted in the histories of the family, probably to avoid the
revival of a disgraceful tale. Francis earl of Bedford was so averse to the
alliance, that he gave his son leave to choose a wife out of any family but
that. Opposition usually stimulates desire: the young couple's affections were
only increased. At length the king interposed, and, sending the duke of Lenox
to urge the earl to consent, the match was brought about. Somerset, now reduced
to poverty, acted a generous part; selling his house at Chiswick, plate,
jewels, and furniture, to raise a fortune for his daughter of twelve thousand
pounds, which the earl of Bedford demanded; saying, that seeing her affections
were settled, he chose rather to undo himself than make her unhappy British.
Biogr. v. 3534.
.

HER father-in-law, THE SECOND FRANCIS EARL OF BEDFORD.
the second Francis earl of Bedford, by Vandyck; full-length, in black, with
light hair and short peaked beard; painted in 1636, aged forty-eight. He died
in 1641, and left behind him a distinguished character. He was of the popular
party; but of such an excellent understanding, so good a heart, and of such
great moderation, that it is supposed, that, had he lived, his influence with
his friends would have been exerted to have composed the unhappy violences of
the times. This was the nobleman who undertook, and succeeded in the arduous
attempt of draining the vast fen in Cambridgeshire, called The Great Level;
containing three hundred and six thousand acres Dugdale on Embanking, 344.
.

IN the saloon is a fine half-length of a man, by Titian.

Cain slaying Abel, by Guido.

A BEAUTIFUL young woman washing, with an old man by her: a most pleasing
picture, by Le Moine.

OVER the chimney is a full-length of the earl of Bristol, EARL OF BRISTOL AND
SIR W. RUSSEL.
and Sir William Russel (afterward earl of Bedford). The former is in black;
the other in red. A copy from Vandyck.

LATE king of France: full-length.

ANGELS flying: a very graceful painting, by Morillio.

THE Last Supper, by Tintoret.

THE vision of our Savior's passion to admiring spectators. God appears above,
and angels support the cross. By Luca Jordano.

Two landscapes, by Poussin^

IN the blue drawing room is an exquisite picture of Joseph expounding the
dream to Pharaoh's baker. The last, sitting, with vast and eager attention in
his countenance. In Joseph appears vast concern, at his assured foreknowlege of
the fatal prediction. By Rembra^. Near it is a portrait of that great painter,
by himself.

IN the French dressing room is a striking resemblance of the present duchess
of Bedford; and in the gallery is a very fine full-length of her worthy
husband, the late duke, represented sitting, in his robes.

A MADONNA and child, by Guercino.

A MAGDALENE, by An. Caracci.

Anne countess of Warwick, ANNE COUNTESS OF WARWICK.
daughter to the first Francis earl of Bedford, and wife to Ambrose Dudley earl
of Warwick. The date is 1600. She is in her full age, and dressed in black and
gold, with white-and-striped sleeves.

IN the state dressing room are numbers of small pieces. A fine landscape, with
figures, by Cuyp: Oliver Cromwell, represented in a field of battle: two very
fine small views of rock and wood, by Salvator Rosa: a sea view, by Vandevelde:
a holy family, by Simon de Pesaro: the child seizing on a crown of thorns, out
of a basket of flowers, in preference to the most exquisite of the assemblage;
the turn of his head beautiful: a Magdalen, by Hannibal Carracci: and a horse
in a stable, by Wouverman: another Magdalen, by Trevisiani: a fine bright
landscape, by Claude Lorrain; two, by Salvator Rosa; one, by Cuyp; and two
humorous Dutch pieces, by Both, merit attention.

LATE lord and lady Tavistoke. His lordship in a red gown, LORD AND LADY
TAVISTOKE.
furred. He is again represented in another room, in the uniform of the
Dunstable Hunt.

THE gallery; GALLERY.
a room unparalleled for its valuable and instructive number of portraits:
their history would make a volume. I can only pretend to point out some
principal facts, that the spectator, who may honor me with his company through
this illustrious assemblage, may not have to reproach me, with suffering him to
depart wholly uninformed.

THE first I shall point out, is a head of lord WILLIAM RUSSEL, LORD WILLIAM
RUSSEL.
the sad victim to his virtuous design of preserving our liberties and
constitution from the attempts of as abandoned a set of men as ever governed
these kingdoms. True patriotism, not ambition nor interest, directed his
intentions. Posterity must applaud his unavailing engagements, with due censure
of the Machiavelian necessity of taking off so dangerous an opposer of the
machinations of his enemies. The law of politics gives sanction to the removal
of every obstacle to the designs of statesmen. At the same time, we never
should lessen our admiration and pity of the generous characters who fell
sacrifices to their hopes of delivering purified to their descendants, the
corrupted government of their own days. To attempt to clear lord RUSSEL from
the share in so glorious a design, would be to deprive him of a most brilliant
part of his character. His integrity and ingenuity would not suffer even
himself to deny that part of the charge. Let that remain unimpeached, since he
continues so perfectly acquitted of the most distant design of making
assassination a means; or of intriguing with a foreign monarch, the most
repugnant to our religion and freedom, to bring about so desired an end.

OVER the door is Sir Nicholas Bacon, in a black dress, furred See p. 245 of
this volume.
. SIR NICHOLAS BACON.
By Zucchero.

SIR Nicholas Throgmorton.

SIR. Ed. Gorges? SIR ED. GORGES.
a head.

ANOTHER, SIR JOSSELYN PERCY.
head, of Sir Josselyn Percy, seventh son of Henry, eighth earl of
Northumberland. He and his brother Charles were concerned in the earl of
Essex's insurrection. Both received their pardons: and Josselyn survived till
1631.

ANOTHER, COMPTROLLER ROGERS.
of a gentleman of the name of Rogers, comptroller to queen Elizabeth. I
imagine him to have been Sir Edward Rogers: a person of some consideration at
the time of her accession; for he was one of the few who waited on her at
Hatfield, on the death of queen Mary, and formed one of the privy council held
there on that great event Carte iii. 355. Perhaps Rogers of Briainston, in
Dorsetshire. There was a Sir John Rogers, who died in 1566; possibly Carte
might mistake the Christian name.
.

Thomas earl of Exeter, THOMAS EARL OF EXETER.
eldest son to the great Burleigh, is painted, a full-length.

NOTWITHSTANDING this nobleman was inferior in abilities to his younger
brother, yet was he a man of spirit and of parts. He served as volunteer at the
siege of Edinburgh castle, in 1573; distinguished himself in the wars in the
Low Countries; and, with his brother, served on board the fleet which had the
honor of defeating the Spanish armada. He entered also into the romantic
gallantries of the reign of queen Elizabeth, and was a knight-tilter in the
tournaments performed for the amusement of her illustrious lover the duke of
Anjou, in 1581. In the following reign he was employed as a man of business;
was created earl of Exeter; and finished his course, aged eighty, in February,
1622.

NEAR him is the head of Charles Brandon duke of Suffolk, CHARLES BRANDON.
son of Sir William Brandon, standard bearer to Henry VII. slain in the battle
of Bosworth. His dress is black, with red sleeves, with the collar of the
Garter and the George. His beard is white; his countenance bluff, not unlike
that of his master, Henry VIII. Their qualities, happily for the favorite, were
different; for the inscription with truth says, that he was gratiose with Henry
VIII.; void of despyte; most fortunate to the end; never in displeasure with
his king. He was brought up with his master, and justly beloved by him for his
noble qualities, for his goodly person, courage, and conformity of disposition
(I suppose only) in all his exercises and pastimes Herbert's Henry VIII. 35.
. He was a principal figure in every tilt and tournament. In his younger days
(1510) he appeared at Westminister in the solemn justs, held in honor of
Catherine of Arragon, in the dress of a recluse, begging of her highness
permission to run in her presence; which obtained, he instantly flung off his
weeds, and came out all armed. He signalized himself at the just at Tournay, in
1511, instituted by Margaret princess of Castile, in compliment to his royal
master. The place was flagged with black marble, and the horses of the knights
shod with felt, to prevent them from slipping The same, 41.
. He here won the heart of the fair foundress of the entertainment; but fortune
reserved him for another princess.

IN 1514 he performed amazing deeds of arms at St. Dennis, at the coronation of
the youthful Mary, sister to Henry, on her marriage with the aged and decrepid
Louis XII. The good king, says Henault, forgot his age, and met with death in
her arms in less than three months. This opened the way to the possession of
the beautiful dowager. Her heart was lost to him at the preceding tournaments;
in which she had opportunity to compare her feeble bridegroom with the
dexterity, the grace, and strength of her valiant knight; who, at single
combat, overthrew man and horse. The French, envious of his prowess, introduced
into the lists a gigantic German, in hopes of bringing the English hero into
disgrace. He treated the Almain so roughly, that the French interfered; but, in
a second trial, Suffolk caught him round the neck, and pummelled him so
severely about the head, that they were obliged to convey the fellow away
secretly; who had been surreptitiously introduced in disguise, merely on
account of his great strength Halle, xlix. Holinshed, 833.
.

Mary, on the death of her royal consort, proposed to Suffolk, and gave him
only four days to consider of the offer Herbert's Henry VIII. 54.
. This seems concerted, to save her lover from the fury of Henry, for daring to
look up to a dowager of France, and, what was more, his sister. His master,
fortunately, favored the match. He continued beloved by the king to the end of
his life; after seeing the following knights and attendants on the conjugal
festivities, the earl of Devonshire, lord Leonard Gray, Sir Nicholas Carew, and
Anne Bullein, sent headless to their graves. But Charles went off triumphant
with his royal spouse; carried with him her jewels, to the amount of 200,000
crowns; the famous diamond le mirroir de Naples; and secured her jointure of
sixty thousand crowns Herbert, 55.
. He married almost as many wives as his master, leaving his fourth to survive
him. He died universally lamented, in August 1545, and was buried
magnificently, at the expense of his master; his loss being one of the few
things that touched his hardened heart.

Edward Clinton, first earl of Lincoln, sitting: a half-length, EDW. CLINTON,
FIRST EARL OF LINCOLN.
in black, a short ruff, bonnet, and with his George. By Cornelius Ketel, the
whimsical artist, who took it into his head to lay aside his brushes, and paint
with his fingers only; and at length, finding those tools too easy, undertook
to paint with his toes Mr. WALPOLE, i. 38, 139.
. This nobleman was one of the most distinguished persons of his age, and shone
equally as a soldier and a sailor; for, during the reigns of Henry VIII. Edward
VI. Mary, and Elizabeth, there were scarcely any expeditions in which he did
not signalize himself. He was lord great admiral for thirty years; counselor
to three princes; and of unspotted reputation. In an advanced age, he married
for his third wife the fair Geraldine, the subject of the gallant earl of
Surrey's affection, and of his amorous Muse. Their union never took place. It
is probable that she deserted him; for soon after his sonnet, descriptive of
the fair, From Tuscane came my ladies worthy race. follow several others,
complaining of his hard lot, in experiencing the scorn and inconstancy of his
mistress; but what affects him most is, the giving the preference to a lover of
meaner rank. I know (though she say nay, and would it well withstand)
When in her grace thou yeldest the most, she bare thee but in hand.
I see her pleasant cheer in chiefest of thy suite,
When thou art gone I see him come that gathers up the fruit;
And eke in thy respect, I see the base degree
Of him to whom she gave the heart that promised was to thee Folio 11. edition
1585.
.


The lady, THE FAIR GERALDINE.
like many other beauties, humiliated by years, at length resigned the noon of
her charms to this ancient peer; who quitted her and the world in 1585.

IN this room is the portrait of Geraldine herself, a head. Her hair yellow:
her face, a proof how much beauty depends on fancy: her dress far from elegant.

A HEAD of John Russel, JOHN RUSSEL, FIRST EARL OF BEDFORD.
first earl of Bedford, a profile, with a long white beard, and the George
hanging from his neck. This gentleman was the founder of the family, and owed
his rise to his merit and accomplishment. Philip archduke of Austria, being, in
1508, driven by a storm on the coast of Dorsetshire, was entertained by Sir
Thomas Trenchard; who sent for his neighbor, Mr. Russel, who was skilled in the
languages, to wait on his highness. The duke was so pleased with his
conversation, as to insist on his going with him to the king, then at Windsor.
Henry, at the recommendation of the duke, took him into his service. In the
following reign he advanced in fortune with vast rapidity. He fortunately was
cotemporary with the fall of monastic life, and obtained vast grants of the
possessions of the church. Edward VI. created him earl of Bedford. The last act
of his life was a voyage to Spain, to bring over Philip II. (grandson of the
prince to whom he owed his rise) to espouse his royal mistress. He died in
March 1555, and lies buried at Cheneis, in Buckinghamshire, with his lady; by
whom he acquired that estate. The church of Cheneis, from that time, became the
aeterna domus of all this great family, and contains a most superb collection
of different-fashioned monuments.

Ambrose Dudley earl of Warwick, a head, with a bonnet, AMBROSE EARL OF WARWICK.
black dress, the George pendent. His third wise, lady Anne, daughter to
Francis earl of Bedford, in black-and-white sleeves, and a black body.

A HALF-LENGTH of Henry earl of Southampton, HENRY EARL OF SOUTHAMPTON.
by Solomon de Cause Mr. WALPOLE, i. 20.
; with short gray hair; in black, with points round his waist, a flat ruff,
leaning on a chair, with a mantle over one arm. This nobleman was friend to the
earl of Essex, and through friendship, not disaffection, attended him in the
mad and desperate insurrection which brought the favorite to the block. The
plea was admitted: he was condemned, but reprieved; and continued in the Tower
till the accession of James I. when he was instantly restored to his honors and
estate. By reason of his love to the earl of Essex, he never was on good terms
with the minister, the earl of Salisbury. He was one that attended Mansfield's
army into the Netherlands, and died in 1624, at Bergen op Zoom, of a fever,
contracted in that fatal expedition.

Thomas earl of Southampton, THOMAS EARL OF SOUTHAMPTON.
in black, with a star on his mantle.

SIR William Russel, SIR WM. RUSSEL LORD THORNHAUGH.
in a black slashed vest. He was lord deputy of Ireland in the reign of queen
Elizabeth, in 1594: a wise and most gallant commander, and successful in
various expeditions against the rebels; but not brooking a divided power with
the general, Sir John Norris, was, at his own request, recalled. He was created
by James I. baron of Thornhaugh, and died in 1613.

HIS lady is painted, HIS LADY.
dressed in great sleeves. She was daughter of Edward Long, Esquire, of
Thingay, in Cambridgeshire, and died two years before her lord.

THEIR son Francis, afterward earl of Bedford, is painted in his childhood, in
white, with green hose; with a hawk on his hand, and two dogs in couples near
him.

ANOTHER, LUCY COUNTESS OF BEDFORD.
portrait of Lucy countess of Bedford, exactly resembling that at Alloa.

A FULL-LENGTH of Catherine, wife of the second Francis earl of Bedford,
full-length, in black, with roses in her hand.

Edward earl of Manchester, EDWARD EARL OF MANCHESTER.
lord chamberlain to Charles II. Long hair and robes.

QUEEN Elizabeth, QUEEN ELIZABETH.
full-length, with a rich gown, white, embroidered with flowers, and a fan of
feathers in her hand. I find that her majesty would condescend to accept of the
smallest present, as a mark of her subjects love; for, in passing through a
Doctor Puddin's house, in her way to the celebrated wedding of Mrs. Anne Russel
with lord Herbert, she did the Doctor the honor of accepting from him a fan en
passant Sydney Papers, ii. 203.
.

THE first Francis earl of Bedford, with a long white beard and furred robe,
FIRST FRANCIS EARL OF BEDFORD,
and George pendent; a head. Another illustrious personage of this house, who
discharged several great offices in the reigns of Mary and Elizabeth. Such was
his hospitality, that the latter used to say of him, that he made all the
beggars. He died, aged fifty-eight, on the 28th of July 1585, the day after his
third son, Sir Francis, was slain, happily unknowing of the misfortune.

THIS youth, and his elder brother Edward lord Russel, AND HIS BROTHER.
are represented in small full-lengths, in two paintings; and so alike, as
scarcely to be distinguished: both dressed in white close jackets, and
black-and-gold cloaks, and black bonnets. The date by lord Edward, is aet. 22,
1573. He is represented grasping in one hand some snakes, with this motto,
Fides homini, serpentibus fraus: and in the back ground he is placed standing
in a labyrinth, and above is inscribed, Fata viam invenient. This young
nobleman also died before his father.

HIS brother Francis has his accompaniments not less singular. A lady,
seemingly in distress, is represented sitting in the back ground, surrounded
with snakes, a dragon, crocodile, and cock. At a distance the sea, with a ship
under full fail. The story is not well known; but it certainly alludes to a
family transaction similar to that in Otway's Orphan, and gave rise to it. He,
by the attendants, was perhaps the Polydore of the history. Edward seems by his
motto, Fides homini, serpentibus fraus, to have been the Castalio, conscious of
his own integrity, and indignant at the perfidy of his brother. The ship
alludes to the desertion of the lady. If it conveyed Sir Francis to Scotland,
it was to his punishment; for he fell there on July 27th, 1585, in a border
fray.

A FULL-LENGTH of Henry Danvers, HENRY DANYVERS EARL OF DANEY.
created baron Dauntsey by James I. and earl of Danby by Charles I; a
full-length, by Vandyck. His beard square and yellow; his jacket black; over
that a red mantle, furred and laced with gold. His rich armor lies by him.
Near him is written Omnia praecepi. He was son of Sir John Danvers of Dauntsey,
in Wiltshire, by Elizabeth, daughter and coheir of John Nevil lord Latimer
Dugdale Baron. ii. 416.
. His elder brother, Sir Charles Danvers, lost his head for his concern in
Essex's insurrection. James, who on all occasions testified his respect to that
unhappy nobleman, countenanced every family who suffered in his cause;
accordingly, had Danvers restored in blood. Besides a peerage, he made him
governor of Guernsey for life. Charles promoted him to an earldom, and created
him knight of the Garter. He passed his life as a soldier, under Maurice prince
of Orange, in the Low Countries; under Henry IV. in France; and under the earl
of Essex and lord Monjoy, in Ireland See his Epitaph, ibid, and in Lloyd's
Worthies, ii. 263.
. At length, in 1644, died, as his epitaph says, at his house of Cornbury Park,
Oxfordshire, full of honor, wounds (verified in the portrait, by a great patch
on his forehead) and days, in the seventy-first year of his age. Besides his
military glory, we may add that of founding the physic-garden at Chelsea, in
1632; purchasing for that use the ground, (once the Jews cemetery) and
enclosing it with a wall and beautiful gate, at the expense of five Wood's
Hist. Oxon. lib. ii, 45. and Dugdale, as above.
thousand pounds.

AN earl of Rutland, a full-length, in a rich slowered jacket, AN EARL OF
RUTLAND.
red full skirts, a single laced ruff, short hair and beard, brown boots: a
plumed helmet near him. He wears the honor of the George. From his boots (a
fashionable part of dress in the time of James I. and Charles I.) I suspect him
to be Francis earl of Rutland, who commanded the fleet which convoyed Charles,
when prince of Wales, in his return from his romantic expedition into Spain.
This nobleman died in 1632.

Giles, the third lord Chandos, in a high-crowned hat, GILES LORD CHANDOS.
white jacket, black gown laced with silver, short hair and beard.

Aet. 43, 1589. He died in 1594.

HIS lady, Frances, daughter of the first earl of Lincoln, in a great ruff, HIS
LADY.
a black dress rich in pearls; aet. 37, 1589: lived till the year 1623.

LADY Anne Ayscough, eldest daughter of the first earl of Lincoln, LADY ANNE
AYSCOUGH.
and wife to William Ayscough, son to Sir Francis Ayscough, of Lincolnshire.

A HEAD of Catherine, youngest daughter to the treasurer, CATHERINE COUNTESS OF
SALISBURY.
earl of Suffolk, and wife to William earl of Salisbury. She is in a flowered
dress; her ruff worked with gold; and her breasts naked.

THE head of her infamous sister, Anne countess of Somerset, COUNTESS OF
SOMERSET.
is placed over one of the doors, dressed in black, striped with white, and her
ruff and ruffles starched with yellow. This fashion soon expired; for her bawd
and creature, Mrs. Turner, went to Tyburn in a yellow ruff, and put the wearers
out of conceit with it. I need not enlarge on the well-known marriage and
divorce of this lady from the earl of Essex. They are too well known to be
insisted on; as is her weakness, in having recourse to the impostor Forman for
philtres to debilitate Essex, and impel the affections of Somerset toward her.
Her wickedness, in procuring the death of Overbury, who obstructed this union;
her sudden fall, and confession of guilt on her trial, need no repetition. Her
earl avowed his innocence; he had been more covert in his proceedings. Her
passions were more violent, her resentments greater, and, of course, her
caution less. They both obtained an unmerited pardon, or rather reprieve, being
confined in the Tower till the year 1622, and then confined, by way of
indulgence, in the house of lord Wallingford. The little delicacy which people
of rank too frequently show, by countenancing the vices of their equals, was
conspicuous at this time. The countess felt their pity, and was visited even by
the stern Anne Clifford. Somerset lived with his lady, after their confinement,
with the strongest mutual hatred: the certain consequence of vicious
associations. He died in the year 1645 Dugdale Baron. ii. 426.
: she, before him. In her end may be read a fine lesson on the vengeance of
Providence on the complicated wickedness of her life. It may be held up as a
mirror to posterity, persuasive to virtue, and teach that Heaven inflicted a
finite punishment on the criminal, in mercy to her, and as a warning to future
generations. I give the relation (filthy as it is) in the Appendix; but hope
the utility of the moral will excuse the grossness of the tale.

IN this gallery is a full-length of a nobleman, in a black jacket, double
ruff, brown boots, and a stick in his hand: armor by him: a manly figure, with
short black hair and square beard: miscalled Car earl of Somerset, this lady's
husband. I forget whether the print among the illustrious heads, (vol. ii. 19.)
was not copied from this. But Car was a person of effeminate features, and
light hair.

A PORTRAIT of a very different character follows, in the head of lady Cook,
LADY COOK.
dated 1585, aet. 44. She has on a quilled ruff; is dressed in black, richly
ornamented with pearls. I apprehend this lady to have been the wife of the son
of Sir Anthony Cook, one of the tutors to Edward VI. and distinguished by being
father to five daughters, the wonders of their age for intellectual
accomplishments.

Margaret countess of Cumberland, MARGARET COUNTESS OF CUMBERLAND.
is dressed much like the former. She was youngest daughter to the first
Francis earl of Bedford, and wife to the celebrated George Clifford earl of
Cumberland For an account of both, see my Tour in Scotland, vol. iii. 355.
.

LADY Bindloss, wife to Sir Francis Bindloss, of Berwick, LADY BINDLOSS.
near Lancaster, and daughter to Thomas, third lord Delawar.

LADY Wimbledon, wife of lord Wimbledon.

Christiana, daughter to Edward lord Bruce, of Kinloss, LADY WIMBLEDON.
and wife to the second William earl of Devonshire; a small head. CHRISTIANA
COUNTESS OF DEVONSHIRE.
with long hair: her dress white Eleven ^^^^rs, of the same size with the
portrait of this lady, hang up in this gallery; copies, by a painter of the
name of Russel.
. This lady, who is less talked of than others, was by far the most illustrious
character of the age in which she lived. Her virtues, domestic and public, were
of the most exalted kind. Hospitality, charity, and piety, were in her
pre-eminent. I speak not of her great maternal cares; nature dictates that,
more or less, in all the sex: but her abilities in the management of the vast
affairs of her family, perplexed with numberless litigations, gave her a
distinguished character. She at left equalled her lord in loyalty, and was
indefatigable in inciting the nobility, who had quitted the cause of majesty,
to expiate their error. After the battle of Worcester, she lived three years in
privacy at her brother's house at Ampthill, and had correspondence with several
great personages, on the subject of restoring the exiled king. The reserved
Monk had such an opinion of her prudence, as to communicate to her the signal
by which she might know his intentions on that subject. She lived in high
esteem, to a very advanced age; died in 1674, and was interred by her beloved
lord, at Derby.

IT is no wonder that so illustrious a character should attract the powers of
the poets. She had the honor of being celebrated by one equal in rank to her
own. That accomplished nobleman William earl of Pembroke, wrote several poems
to her, and dedicated a collection of them to her. There is wit and ease in
several; but a great want of correction, and often of harmony. The following is
the lest faulty Communicated to me by Mr. WALPOLE; who is in possession of this
very scarce book: a thin small quarto, published in 1660. It consists of the
earl's Poems, and Responses by Sir Benjamin Ruddier; and other poems, by both,
on other subjects. See Royal Authors, i. 192; also p. 234 of this Tour, for a
farther account of this noble poet.
; the subject,

That he would not be beloved.
Disdain me still, that I may ever love;
For who his love enjoys can love no more:
The war once past, with peace men cowards prove,
And ships returned, do rot upon the shore.
Then though thou frown, I Will say thou art most fair,
And still I Will love, though still I must despair.
As heat to life, so is desire to love;
For these once quenched, both life and love are done.
Let not my sighs nor tears thy virtue move;
Like basest metals, do not melt too soon:
Laugh at my woes, although I ever mourn:
Love surfeits with rewards; his nurse is scorn.
FROM Woburn, for the sake of variety, I left the great road, and, crossing the
county, went through the village of Ridgemont, and, soon after, through that of
Millbrook, whose church is pleasantly seated on the bluff point of a hill.
About two miles farther, reach Ampthill, a small market town, AMPTHILL.
on a rising ground, noted in old times for the magnificent mansion built by
lord Fanhope, as Leland says, with such spoils that he wanne in France Itin,
i. 115.
. It had four or five fair towers of stone in the inner ward, beside the basse
court The same.
. It was worthy the princess for whom it is supposed he built it, Elizabeth
duchess of Exeter, and sister to Henry IV. This hero was son of Sir John
Cornwall: LORD FANHOPE.
his mother, niece to the duke of Britany, who was delivered of him at sea. He
was usually styled green Cornwall, from the color of that element. He rose by
his merit; was celebrated for deeds of arms and acts of chivalry, and those
equally in the field, and in the lists of arms. At York he fought and
vanquished, in the presence of Henry IV. two valiant knights; one a Frenchman,
the other an Italian. In reward for his prowess, Henry created him knight of
the Garter. He signalized himself at the battle of Azincourt, where he took
prisoner Louis de Bourbon count of Vendome, and had his ransom confirmed to him
Sandford's Genealog. Hist. 258.
, with which he might have built the house; for it seems to be the spoils
alluded to by Leland. In reward for his services, he was created by Henry VI.
baron of Fanhope and Millbrook; and died in 1443. He had no lawful issue;
neither were the large grants made to him by the crown, for more than term of
life; so that they reverted on his decease.

THE place was afterward bestowed by Edward IV. on Edmund lord Gray. The gift
was not (as Leland supposes) founded on the ruin of lord Fanhope, after the
battle of Northampton; for that event did not take place till seventeen years
after Fanhope died peaceably in his bed. It continued in the family of the
Greys till the death of Richard earl of Kent, who made it over to Henry VIII.
That prince added it to the crown, and erected it, with the great estate
belonging to it, into the honor of Ampthill Cambden, i. 340.
. Here was the residence of the injured princess Catherine of Arragon, during
the period that her divorce was in agitation; and from hence she was cited to
appear before the commissioners, then sitting at Dunstable She died at
Kimbolton, in Huntingdonshire, on the 8th of January, 1535-6.
. About the year 1774, John earl of Ossory, on the site of the castle, erected
a gothic column (designed by Mr. Essex) to perpetuate the memory of this
ill-fated queen, with the following elegant inscription: In days of old, here
Ampthill's towers were seen,
The mournful refuge of an injured queen;
Here flowed her pure, but unavailing tears;
Here blinded zeal sustained her sinking years:
Yet Freedom hence her radiant banner waved,
And Love avenged a realm by priests enslaved;
From Catherine's wrongs a nation's bliss was spread,
And Luther's light from Henry's lawless bed.


Johannes Fitz-Patrick,

Comes de OSSORY, posuit, 1773.

THE only remarkable thing I observed in the church, CHURCH.
was a mural monument in memory of Richard Nicolls, governor of Long Island
after the expulsion of the Dutch. He was a gentleman of the bedchamber to the
duke of York, and was slain in the celebrated engagement of May 28th, 1672,
attending his royal highness on board of his ship. What is singular in this
monument is, the preservation of the very ball with which he was killed, a five
or six pounder; which is placed within the pediment, inlaid in the marble; and
on the molding of the pediment, on each side of the bullet, are the words,
Instrumentum mortis et immortalitis.

MR. Sandford Geneal. Hist. 259.
has given a plate of the figures of Sir John Cornwall and his wife, as painted
in a window of this church. They are either lost, or I have overlooked them.
They are represented kneeling, and both with mantles of their arms over them:
she in her ducal coronet. Between them, at top, is a banner with her arms; at
bottom, his arms included in the Garter.

FROM the town I descended to Ampthill Park, AMPTHILL PARK.
the seat of the earl of Ossory: a modern house, plain and neat, with eleven
windows in front, and wings. Within, is the portrait of Richard lord Gowran, in
his robes: he was ancestor to the noble owner, and married, in 1718, to Anne,
younger daughter of Sir John Robinson of Farming Wood, in Northamptonshire, her
ancestor. Sir John Robinson's portrait is preserved here: a half-length, in a
great wig, cravat, sash, and buff coat. He was an eminent loyalist; was lord
mayor of London in 1663, and lieutenant of the Tower, from the Restoration to
the time of his death. His double employ is expressed by a distant view of the
Tower, and the gold chain placed by him on a table.

THE indiscreet prelate Laud, is admirably painted by Vandyck.

HERE is a full-length of Catherine Cornaro, CATHERINE CORNARO.
queen of Cyprus: a bulky woman, in black, with flaxen hair, much curled. This
distinguished female was daughter to Mark Cornaro, the most illustrious of the
Venetian families. James Lusignan, or James the Bastard, king of Cyprus, in
order to strengthen himself in his throne, demanded, by his ambassador, a wife
out of the republic of Venice. The senate fixed on this lady, adopted her as
their own, and styled her, from its tutelar saint, the daughter of St. Mark.
She reigned long in that island, and governed fifteen years after the death of
her husband. He had left the senate of Venice protectors of her, and the child
with which she was pregnant at the time of that event. The infant son lived
only ten months; and the Venetian state considered itself as heir to the
kingdom, in right of its daughter Catherine. Apprehensions arose, that the
Turkish emperor Bajazet, and the Christian monarch Ferdinand, had designs on
it: they determined to frustrate both, and sent George Cornaro, brother to the
queen, to assist her in the government. By his eloquence, he succeeded in the
arduous task of persuading a lady out of her love of power. He promised her
regal state in her native county. She accepted the terms, and erected the
Venetian standard in her capital; and, on her arrival at Venice, was met by the
whole senate, and the ladies of rank, and received, during life, every mark of
esteem which her patriotism merited; with a magnificent establishment, equal to
the dignity she had so generously quitted. This event happened about the year
1489 Gratiani's Wars of Cyprus, 10, 11.
.

Albert archduke of Austria, commonly called the Cardinal Infant, CARDINAL
INFANT.
in black, a great ruff, and with a sword. He was fifth son of the emperor
Maximilian II. and was originally brought up in the church; became cardinal,
and had the archbishopric of Toledo conferred on him. His talents were more
fitted for the field and cabinet. Accordingly, we find him in universal esteem,
for his prudent administration as regent of Portugal; and a brave and
enterprizing general in the Low Countries, in the reign of Philip II. who had
invested him with their government. In the year 1598, Philip bestowed on him
his daughter, the infanta Isabella, and with her the sovereignty of the
Netherlands. Under him was undertaken the famous siege of Ostend, which cost
the Spaniards a hundred thousand men. He lived till the year 1621, and died
universally lamented by his subjects. He was a patron of the arts. He was so
struck with the merit of Rubens, that he detained that able painter some time
at Antwerp; and to him we owe the portrait of this illustrious prince Anecdotes
of Painting, ii. 81.
.

HERE is a fine half-length of a general, by Baroccio; an artist who died at a
great age, in 1612. The person is represented with light hair and whiskers, a
hat, armor, and red sash.

A CONVERSATION; consisting of Edward late duke of York, lord Ossory, lord
Palmerston, Topham Beauclerk, colonel H. St. John, and Sir William Boothby:
done when they were at Florence, by Brompton.

Ampthill Park, and that of Houghton, contiguous to it, were granted by James
I. to Sir Edward Bruce of Kinloss (a favorite, brought by his majesty out of
Scotland) or to his son Thomas earl of Elgin. It continued for some time in his
posterity, earls of Elgin and of Aylesbury. It became, about the year 1690 (by
purchase) the property of lord Ashburnham, who built the house; which still
retains nearly the original form. It was alienated by John, the first earl of
that title, between the years 1720 and 1730, to lord viscount Fitz-William. His
lordship sold it, in the year 1736, to lady Gowran, grandmother to the present
lord Ossory.

FROM hence is a very short ride to Houghton Park, HOUGHTON PARK.
formerly part of the estate of Ampthill. As soon as that honor was alienated
from the crown, the earl of Elgin pulled down the old castle, HOUGHTON.
and built what is now called Houghton House, and enclosed the park which goes
by that name; and then Old Ampthill Park became only the second park to the
seat. The house is seated on a bold eminence, and commands a fine view. Two of
the fronts are very beautiful; each has an elegant portico and loggio above. On
the intervening space are variety of ciphers, devices, and crests; such as
bears and ragged staves, staves and palms, crowned lions and crowns, and beards
of arrows, or hedge-hogs and porcupines In an old edition of the Arcadia, date
1629, is a hedgehog, or porcupine, as a crest to the top of a frontispiece. A
proof, perhaps, of a Sydney being concerned in the plan.
. Some of these certainly relate to the Sydnies. This gave rise to the
assertion of the editor of Cambden, that it was built by the countess of
Pembroke, Sydney's sister, Pembroke's mother;and that the model was contrived
by her brother, the incomparable Sir Philip Sydney, in his Arcadia. From the
letters on the south front, I. R. with a crown over them, it is evident that
the house was built in the time of James I; and, as there is great reason to
suppose that Inigo Jones was the architect, it is possible that he might have
been recommended by that lady, wife to William earl of Pembroke, one of Inigo's
great patrons; from whose designs the earl built the noble front of his seat at
Wilton. Let this be admitted, we are not to wonder at seeing the devices, of
her beloved brother ornamenting a place, with which she might have no
connections, but those of friendship.

THE portico and loggio are of stone, and ornamented with columns of the Doric
and Ionic orders: the rest of the house is of brick. The fronts are unequal;
one being a hundred and twenty-two feet in extent; the other, only
seventy-three feet six inches.

THE house and manor were purchased by the late duke of Bedford, from Charles
earl of Aylesbury, and with it the stewardship of the honor of Ampthill, hold
under the crown.

THIS place must not be confounded with Houghton Conquest: HOUGHTON CONQUEST.
a very ancient house, at the foot of the hill. This had been the property of
the very old family of the Conquests, and was purchased, with the manor, from
the last Mr. Conquest, by the late earl of Ossory.

I DID not leave the neighborhood without visiting the church of Maulden, TOMBS
IN MAULDEN CHURCH.
a mile or two to the east of Ampthill. This is noted for the octagonal
mausoleum erected by Thomas Bruce earl of Elgin, in honor of his second wife
Diana, daughter of William lord Burgbly, and by her first husband countess of
Oxford. Her tomb, of white marble, is placed in the center. On it is a
sarcophagus, or at lest what was designed to represent one; out of which rises
a miserable figure of the countess in her shroud: on whom the country people,
by a very apt similitude, have bestowed the title of The lady in the
punch-bowl. In a niche in the wall of the building is the bust of her husband,
with long hair, a short beard, and turnover; and on the floor is another bust
(I think) of her son-in-law, Robert earl of Elgin, placed at a respectable
distance, as well as the other, for the reason given in the inscription, Eminus
stantes venerabundi, quasi contemplabuntur See the whole epitaph in the
Appendix. Thomas earl of Elgin died in 1663; the countess in 1654.
.

IN the church are the brasses of Richard Faldo and his family, inlaid on a
tomb of shell-marble.

AFTER a short ride, I reached the large house of Wrest, seated in a low and
wet park, crossed with formal rows of trees. The pleasure-grounds have, since
their first creation, been corrected by Brown: his hand appears particularly in
a noble serpentine river. Several parts are graced with obelisks, pavilions,
and other buildings, the taste of the age before. From his melon-ground the
peasant slave
Had rudely rushed, and levelled Merlin's cave.


In the quarters of the wilderness are to be seen two cenotaphs, for the late
duke and duchess, erected by the duke himself: and, if you gain a steep
ascent, from the hill-house is a most extensive view of the country. The front
is plain and extensive. Within, is a great court. This place is the property of
the earl of Hardwick, in right of his lady Jemima, marchioness Gray, daughter
to John earl of Breadalbane, by Amabel; daughter to Henry Gray, thirteenth earl
and first duke of Kent of the name. That illustrious family had been possessed
of the manor of Wrest, and other estates in this county, at lest from the time
of Roger de Gray, who died owner of it in the year 1353.

THE portraits and their history would take up a volume. I must, therefore, be
excused for giving a more brief account than their merits might demand.

IN the hall is a full-length of the unfortunate Mary queen of Scots, PORTRAITS.
aet, reg. 38, 1580, in black, with her hand on a table: a copy from one at
Hampton Court.

ANOTHER of her grandmother, Margaret, daughter of Henry VII. and queen of
James IV. of Scotland. Another full-length, in black hair, naked neck, with a
marmoset in her hands.

THREE very fine portraits of James I. in his robes. JAMES I.
Anne of Denmark, ANNE OF DENMARK.
in white; dressed in a hoop, with a feather fan, and neck exposed. Their son
Henry, in rich armor, boots, and with a truncheon. His military turn appears
in the dress of most of his portraits. Had he lived, England might probably
have transferred the miseries of war to the neighboring kingdom. His mother had
inspired him with ambitious notions, and filled his head with the thoughts of
the conquest of France. She fancied him like Henry V. and expected him to prove
as victorious. I am sorry to retract the character of this lady; but I fear
that my former was taken from a parasite of the court Wilson.
. She was turbulent, restless, and aspiring to government; incapable of the
management of affairs, yet always intriguing after power. This her wiser
husband denied her See Carte, iii. 746. This historian is far from being
singular in this account.
, and of course incurred her hatred. Every engine was then employed to hurt his
private ease: she affected amors, of which she never was guilty, and permitted
familiarities, which her pride would probably have never condescended to. James
was armed with indifference. At length, in 1619, he saw her descend to the
grave; but not with the resignation of a good Christian monarch, as might have
been expected from her conduct.

LORD SUMMERS, in a long wig and his chancellor's robes, sitting.

A PERSON unknown; a full-length, in a black cloak laced with gold, laced
bonnet, triple gold chain.

OVER the chimney is a copy of the Cornaro family.

IN the eating-room is a full-length of Philip baron of Wharton, PHILIP EARL OF
WHARTON.
with long hair, breast plate, and truncheon, and boots; aet. 26, 1639. This
nobleman took part with the parliament in the civil wars. Mr. Grainger relates,
that at the battle of Edgehill he hid himself in a saw-pit: a fact incredible,
as he gave a very clear account of the battle, in a long speech in Guildhall
Drake, xi. 474.
. He survived long, and in 1677 was sent to the Tower, for doubting the
legality of one of Charles's parlements, after a recess of fifteen months
Macpherson, i. 216.
.

LADY Rich, in black. This is, I suspect, LADY RICH.
the lady who was married by Laud to Charles Blount earl of Devonshire, during
the life of her first husband, Robert lord Rich, afterward earl of Warwick.
She was daughter to Walter Devereux earl of Essex: and had been addressed by
Blount while he was a younger brother, and she favored his passion. Her friends
broke off the match, and married her to a very disagreeable suitor, her first
lord. When Blount, after some years absence in the Irish wars, returned laden
with glory, and, by the death of his elder brother, honored with the title of
Mountjoy, he commenced a criminal connection with his former mistress. She was
fully and legally divorced from lord Rich. Blount, now earl of Devonshire,
determined to make her reparation, and persuaded Mr. Laud, then his chaplain,
to marry them. In those days this was looked on as so high a crime, that king
James was for several years extremely averse to the bestowing any preferment on
him: and Laud himself had such a sense of his fault, as to keep an annual fast
on the unlucky day ever after. These two pictures were painted by Vandyck, and
part of the Wharton collection; bought by Sir Robert Walpole, and sold after
his death.

LORD CHANCHELLOR Hardwich, in his robes, by Hoare: a character superior to my
pen.

HIS son, the present earl, by Gainsborough.

ON the staircase is Henry seventh earl of Kent, a full-length, in black.
Elizabeth, daughter of Gilbert earl of Shrewsbury, is painted in the same
color, with a ruff, flaxen frizzled hair, and a great black egret. He died in
1639; she, in 1651.

HIS successor Anthony, grandson of Anthony, third son of George earl of Kent,
is drawn in black, with his hand on a book: a meagre personage. He was
surprised with the peerage at his parsonage of Burbach, in the county of
Leicester, where he lived in hospitality, and the full discharge of that great
character, a good parish priest. He was summoned to parliament, but preferred
the duty to which he was first called Fuller's Worthies, 299.
; never would forsake his flock, and was buried among them in 1643.

HIS wife, Magdalene Purefoy, is represented a half-length, sitting, with a
book in her hand, and a long motherly black peaked coif on her head.

Amabella, AMABELLA COUNTESS OF KENT.
surnamed, from her super-eminent virtues, The good countess of Kent, is drawn
in black and ermine, full curled hair, and a kerchief over her neck; aet. 60,
1675: by Lely. She was second wife to Henry, son and successor to the parson of
Burbach, and daughter to Sir Anthony Ben of Surrey. Her epitaph speaks her
deserts See Appendix.
.

HER husband is in his robes, with a small beard and whiskers, painted by
Glosterman; aet. 53, 1643. He died in 1651.

THEIR son, Anthony earl of Kent, and his lady, Mary, daughter and sole heir to
John lord Lucas; both in their robes: by Lely. The date to his portrait is
1681, aet. 36. He died in August 1702; she, in November, in the same year.

THE old dining room is most curiously furnished: mock pilasters finished with
stripes of velvet, and worked silk festoons between each. This is said to have
been done for the reception of Anne of Denmark.

IN this apartment is the portrait of that eminent statesman and honest man Sir
William Temple: a copy from one by Lely; yet a most beautiful picture. He is
placed sitting, and looking toward you, in a red vest; his hair long, black,
and flowing; his whiskers small. In his hand is the triple alliance: the
greatest act of his patriotic life; but soon frustrated by the profligate
ministry of the time.

IN the chapel-closet is the glory of the name, lady Jane Gray, LADY JANE GRAY.
the sweet accomplished victim to the wickedness of her father-in-law, and the
folly of her father. Her person was rather plain; but that was amply
recompensed by her intellectual charms. She was mistress of the Greek and Latin
tongues; versed in Hebrew, Chaldee, Arabic, French, and Italian; skilled in
music; and excellent at her needle. I have seen in the library at Zurich
several of her letters, wrote in a most beautiful hand, to Bullenger, on the
subject of religion; and a toilet, worked with her own hand, is preserved there
with great reverence. She fell at the age of seventeen. Could there be wanting
any proof of her amazing fortitude, it was supplied near her last moments with
the most invincible one: -- As she was passing to the scaffold (whether by
accident, or whether by the most cruel intention) she met the headless body of
her beloved husband. A line in Greek, to the following purpose, was her
consolation: That if his lifeless body should give testimony against her before
men, his most blessed soul should give an eternal proof of her innocence in the
presence of GOD.

THE dress of this suffering innocent is, a plain white cap, a handkerchief,
fastened under her arms, and a black gown: a book in her hand.

IN the same room is the picture of Banaster lord Maynard, BANASTER LORD
MAYNARD.
who had married a daughter of this house.

A PORTRAIT of the valiant Sir Charles Lucas, by Dobson: a half-length, in
armor, fine sash, long hair. He was barbarously shot to death, at Colchester,
after quarter given; and for a reason that should have endeared him to a
soldier -- the vigorous defense made by the garrison.

HIS niece, Mary Lucas, sole heiress to his elder brother lord Lucas, married
to Anthony earl of Kent.

SIR Anthony Ben, in hoary short hair, quilled ruff, red dress faced with black.

HIS lady, in black, a kerchief, and curled hair. These were parents to the
good countess.

IN the passage is a most curious portrait of lady Susanna Gray, LADY SUSANNA
GRAY.
daughter to Charles earl of Kent, and wife to Sir Michael Longueville. She was
a celebrated workwoman; and the dress in which she is drawn is said to have
been a wedding-suit of her own doing. This is the lady who is fabled to have
died of the pricking of her finger with the needle, and who is shown as such in
Westminster abbey. She looks as pale as if the fact was true. Her gown is
finely flowered; her petticoat white and striped; her robe lined with ermine;
her veil vast and distended; her wedding-ring hanging from her wrist by a
silken string.

IN another room is the portrait of Sir Randle Crew, in a bonnet, SIR RANDLE
CREW.
ruff, gold chain, and robes, as lord chief justice of the King's Bench: a
dignity he filled with credit in the last year of James I. and first of Charles
I. He had the honor of being displaced in 1626, for his disapprobation of the
imprisonment of those gentlemen who refused the arbitrary loan proposed by the
court. He discovered, says Fuller, no more coffeehouse at his discharge,
than a weary traveller is offended at being told that he is arrived at his
journey's end British Worthies, Cheshire, 178. It must not be forgot that Sir
Randle had been speaker of the House of Commons in 1614.
. He lived many years, in great hospitality, in Westminster: he purchased the
estate of the Falshursts of Crew, in Cheshire; built the magnificent seat of
Crew Hall; and was the first who brought the model of good building into that
distant county. He died in 1642. He was the son of John Crew of Nantwich, and
the ancestor of the present flourishing family.

THE next portrait is that of his younger brother Sir Thomas Crew, SIR THOMAS
CREW.
in red robes, and a coif as king's sergeant. He was among the most active
supporters of the rights of the commons in the reign of James I. The king,
under pretense of redressing certain matters in Ireland, sent him, and several
of the most obnoxious members, into that kingdom, with proper commissions
Drake, v. 525.
. In 1623 he was chosen speaker, and made a speech, which his majesty heard
with no more patience than approbation The same, vi. 10.
; yet, by his lord keeper, thanked him for several parts of it. He was again
speaker to the first parliament of Charles I. and died in February 1633, aged
sixty-eight. By his marriage with Temperance, fourth daughter of Reginald Bray,
Esquire, he obtained the manor of Stene, in Northamptonshire; which became the
settlement of him and his posterity, till it devolved to this house, by the
marriage of Henry duke of Kent with Jemima, eldest daughter of Thomas lord Crew.

HIS son, JOHN LORD CREW.
John lord Crew, is represented in his baronial robes, with long gray hair, and
a small coif. He was created lord Crew of Stene, in 1661, having been active in
promoting the Restoration, and freeing his country from the confused government
it had long labored under. No one was more active in defense of the liberties
of his country, in the beginning of the troubles of the former reign, than
himself. He had been member for Northamptonshire in the long parliament; was
chairman to the committee of religion; and was committed to the Tower, for
refusing to deliver up the petitions and complaints The same, viii. 489.
. He was nominated one of the commissioners for the treaty of Uxbridge: he was
one of those entrusted with the receipt of the king's person from the Scots,
and the conveying him to Holmby House. He again acted as commissioner in the
treaty of the Isle of Wight; and finally, was so far in the favor of the
usurper, as, in 1657, to be constituted one of the sixty which formed the upper
house of his mock parliament Whitelock, 233, 334, 666.
. The game being soon over, he conciliated himself to the approaching change,
and proved so active an instrument in the Restoration, as not only to make
amends for his past demerits, but to obtain, in 1661, the honor of baron of
Stene. He died in 1679, after attaining the good old age of eighty-two.

HIS wife Jemima, daughter of Edward Walgrave of Lawford, in Essex, is sitting,
in black, and a great black hood.

A VERY fine half-length of their son Thomas lord Crew, THOMAS LORD CREW.
in black, with long hair, and his hand on his breast, by Lely. In the old
dining room is another portrait of him, in his robes, dated 1680. He was father
to Jemima, duchess of Kent.

Nathaniel Crew, bishop of Durham, fifth brother to the former. CREW BISHOP OF
DURHAM.
He is in red robes faced with ermine, a turnover, and long hair; his
countenance good. By the death of his brother, he became lord Crew. Never was
any person of his time so subservient to the will of his master, as this noble
prelate. He was the most active member of the inquisitorial commission,
established by James II. to promote his wild designs in religious matters. Of
the three bishops joined in it, one declined acting; a third, struck with his
own imprudence, resigned. Crew continued obstinately servile, and suspended
thirty of his clergy for refusing to come into the views of the court.
Conscious of his conduct, he fled out of the kingdom at the Revolution; but at
length made his peace, and died in 1721, aged eighty-eight, after having been
bishop, and of Durham, forty-seven. His charity, it is to be hoped, has covered
his multitude of political sins. Oxford experienced largely of his bounty; and
the navigators of the Northumberland sea may bless his well-planned benevolence
as long as tempests endure See article BAMBOROUGH, Tour Scotl. 1769.
.

A STRANGE picture of lady Harold, LADY HAROLD.
daughter to Thomas earl of Thanet; first married to lord Harold, the late duke
of Kent's eldest son, and afterward to the late earl Gower. She is dressed in
the riding-habit of the time, a blue-and-silver coat, silver tissue waistcoat,
a long flowing wig, and great hat and feather.

I FORGOT to mention, SECRETARY WALSINGHAM.
that in a bedchamber is a portrait of Secretary Walsingham, in a quilled ruff:
the active, penetrating, able, and faithful servant of queen Elizabeth; the
security of the kingdom as well as her own person. So attentive to the
interests of his country, so negligent of his own, as to die (in 1590) so poor,
as not to leave enough to defray his funeral expenses.

A FINE portrait of Sir Nicholas Throgmorton: SIR NICHOLAS THROGMORTON.
his face thin, his beard black. At his girdle is a large ring to hold his
handkerchief. Has a sword and stilletto, and is graced with a gold chain and
medal. He had a narrow escape in the time of queen Mary; being tried, and
narrowly acquitted, for a supposed concern in Wiat's insurrection. Was employed
by Elizabeth in important embassies to France and Scotland. His abilities were
great: his spirit was said to have bordered on turbulence: his death,
therefore, was esteemed rather fortunate: it happened in 1570, at the table of
Cecil; not without suspicion of poison Complete Hist. ii. 430.
: an end in those days more frequently attributed than it ought to be.

THE mausoleum of the Greys adjoins to the church of Flitton, FLITTON CHURCH.
about a mile and a half from the house. It consists of a center and four
wings. In one is the tomb of Henry fifth earl of Kent, TOMBS.
and his countess Mary, daughter of Sir George Cotton of Cumbermere, Cheshire:
both are in robes, and painted; both recumbent, with uplifted hands: his beard
long and square, his ruff quilled. This was the fiery zealot who fat in
judgment on Mary Stuart, and, with the earl of Shrewsbury, was deputed to see
execution done on the unhappy princess. They, with true bigotry, refused her
the consolation of her almoner in her last moments; and Kent had the brutality
to give a most reluctant assent to her request of having a few of her domestics
to perform their final duties to their dying mistress. Kent even burst into the
exclamation of saying, Your life will be the death of our religion, and your
death will be the life of it. A cause of triumph to Mary Stuart. He founded
this building, and took possession of it in the beginning of the year 1614. The
tomb of the countess is a mere cenotaph; for she was buried, in 1580, at Great
Gaddesden.

Henry earl of Kent, and his second lady, the good countess, repose in another
wing, with Justice, Temperance, and other Virtues, on each side. Both are
represented in white marble, recumbent, and both in robes. His beard is small,
his lip whiskered; one hand is on his breast, the other on his sword. She is
dressed in an ungraceful pair of slays; her hands before, holding her robes;
her neck naked; her hair curled, and enormously bushy. He died in 1651; she
finished her excellent life in School, aged ninety-two.

AT one end is an inscription of Elizabeth Talbot countessdowager of Kent, who
died in 1651; and another to lady Jane. Heart, relict of Sir Eustace Heart. Her
figure is in white marble, in a reclining posture.

ON the floor is a brass of Henry Gray, second son of Sir Henry Gray, Knight,
in armor.

IN another appears Henry late duke of Kent, reclined on a sarcophagus, in a
Roman dress, in white marble, with a coronet in his hand. His Grace died in
1740. His first duchess, Jemima Crew, is represented with her countenance
looking up, and leaning on one side. Opposite to his Grace is a most amiable
character of his second lady, Sophia, daughter of William earl of Portland.

A MONUMENT of his son Anthony earl of Harold, in a Roman dress. He died in
1723. And near him is another son and a daughter of his Grace; but not one of
the figures do any credit to the statuary.

NEAR the altar, on the floor, is an admirable figure, in brass, of an honest
steward; a true Vellum in aspect: in a laced nightcap, great ruff, long cloak,
trunk breeches. This was Thomas Hill, receiver-general to three earls of Kent.
Ask how he lived, and you shall know his end:
He did a saint to GOD, to poor a friend.
These lines men know do truly of him story,
Whom GOD has called, and seated now in glory.


He died May 26th. 128, aged 1601.

GRATITUDE forbids me from leaving this place without my acknowlegements to the
Reverend Mr. Archdeacon Coxe, the worthy incumbent, for his great hospitality,
and the various information he favored me with respecting these parts.

FROM hence I went southwards, over a hilly and open country. Ride over Luton
Downs, and reach Luton, a small dirty town, LUTON.
seated on the Lea; remarkable for its church and tower-steeple, prettily
chequered with flint and freestone. Within is a most remarkable baptisterium,
FINE FONT.
Engraven in Gent. Mag. 1778.
, in form of an octagon, open at the sides, and terminating in elegant
tabernacle-work. In the top is a large basin, in which the consecrated water
was kept, and let down by the priest into the font, by means of a pipe. On the
top of the inside is a vine, guarded by a lamb from the assaults of a dragon.
The vine signifies the church, protected by baptism from the assaults of the
devil.

ADJOINING to the church is a chapel, founded, as appears by the following
lines, by John lord Wenlock: JESU CHIRST, most of might,
Have mercy on John le Wenlock, knight,
And of his wyffe Elizabeth,
Which out of this world is past by death;
Which founded this chapel here.
Help them with yr hearty praer;
That they may come to that place
Where ever is joy and solace Br. Mus. H. M. II. No 1531. fo. 15.
.


THIS lord Wenlock rose in the reign of Henry VI; LORD WENLOCK.
was knighted, made constable of Bamburgh castle, and chamberlain to the queen.
He acquired great wealth, and was able to lend his master a thousand and
thirty-three pounds six shillings and eight pence; for which he received an
assignment of the fifteenth and tenth, granted by parliament in 1456; and soon
after he was rewarded with being made knight of the Garter. He valiantly
supported the royal cause at the first battle of St. Alban's, and was carried
out of it dreadfully wounded; yet, with the fickleness of the times, he joined
the duke of York, in 1459, and was of course attainted by the Lancastrian
parliament. He fought valiantly in Towton field, and received, as recompense for
his former loss, the office of chief butler of England, and the stewardship of
the castle and manor of Berkhamstead; and was created a baron Dugdale's Baron,
ii. 264.
. He was employed by the Yorkists in several important embassies, and advanced
to the great post of lieutenant of Calais. Notwithstanding all these favors, he
again revolted, and joined the earl of Warwick. to restore the deposed Henry.
He raised forces, and joined Margaret of Anjou, before the battle of
Tewkesbury. He was appointed by the general, John earl of Somerset, to the
command of what was called the middle ward of the army. When Somerset, who led
the van, found himself unsupported in the fierce attack he had made on the
enemy, he returned, enraged, to see the cause. He found lord Wenlock, with his
troops, standing in the marketplace. Whether a panic had seized him, or
whether, through a mutability of mind, he was meditating a new revolt, does not
appear; but the earl, unable to curb his fury, rode up, and with one blow of
his battle-ax clove the skull of the supposed traitor Halle's Chr. xxxii.
. He was interred at Tewkesbury; and his tomb is still to be seen in that noble
church.

IN this chapel are several tombs: one very magnificent, in the altar-form,
with a rich canopy, open beneath on each side. On the top various arms, some
enclosed in a garter. On a wreath is a crest, a plume of feathers.

ON the tomb lie the effigies of William Wenlock, WILLIAM WENLOCK.
in the habit of a shaven priest: his hands closed as if in prayer; beads hang
from them; and on a label from his mouth is a small shield of a chevron,
between three croslet gules, and these words: Salve Regina Matter miserecordie
Jesu fili Dei miserere mei.


On the side which opens into the chapel is this inscription: In Wenlok brad I,
in this town lordschipes had I.
Her am I now laid, Christ's mother help me, Lady.
Under these stones, for a time, schal I rest my bones.
Deye not I ned ones myghtful God grant me thy wones.
Ave.


On the other side, in the chancel, Wills sic tumulatus de Wenlok natus
In ordine presbyteratus.
Alter hujus ville: dominus Someris fuit ille
Hic licet indignus: anime Deus esto benignus.


This William was prebend of Brownswood prebendary, in the church of St.
Paul's, London, in 1363; before which he had been rector of St. Andrew's,
Holborn. In 1379, Richard II. made him custos of the hospital of Farle, in
Bedfordshire. See Bromfield's Collect. article LUTON.
He died in 1392, and was buried here, in pursuance of his will. By the garter,
in which one of the coats of arms is included, it is evident that the tomb was
erected by the founder of the chapel. This also directs us to the origin of
lord Wenlock. It is most likely that his father was related to this prebend,
and that he left his possessions to him; and that lord Wenlock, in the height
of his prosperity, paid this ostentatious compliment to the memory of his
kinsman.

IN the middle is an altar-tomb of shell-marble, with the brass plate of a
woman.

IN the wall, beneath two arches, are the tombs, I think, of the Rotherhams,
owners of this chapel after the Wenlocks. On one had been an inscription to a
Rotherham, who had married Catherine, daughter of a lord Gray; and was himself
nephew to Scot, alias Rotherham, archbishop of York.

THE following odd medley of English and Latin, merits transcribing. It is on
the tomb of John Ackworth, Esquire, who died in 1513; and is represented here
with his two wives, eight sons, and nine daughters. O man, who eer thou be,
timor mortis should trouble the;
For when thou be wenyst,
Veniet te
Mors superare.
And so -- grave grevys
Ergo mortem memorare
Jesu mercy: Lady help: Jesu mercy.


NEAR the altar is a large mutilated figure in the wall, in a priestly habit,
with a pastoral staff, or a crosier, lying on him. He was an abbot, and
probably of St. Alban's, for the abbots had a seat near this town Leland Itin.
vi. 63.
. The chancel appears to have been rebuilt by abbot Whethamsted; whose motto,
VAL LES HA BUN DA BUNT VAL LES, is to be seen on the walls.

PART of this place was said to have been bestowed by king Offa on the monks of
St. Alban's, Gilbert de Clare earl of Gloucester, had the patronage of the
church; which they bought from him in 1166, for eighty marks, and kept in their
own hands, till they were compelled to appoint a vicar. The purchase was in the
time of abbot Robert Chauncy, 438.
. It appears that this place, Houghton, and Potesgrave, had been bestowed on
the monastery, for the support of the kitchen for the guests. This is seen in
the charter of confirmation, made by king John, in the first year of his reign
Dugdale Man. i. 179. Henry I. had confirmed the same. In his charter the names
are mis-spelt. See Chauncy, 434.
.

The church is dedicated to St. Mary, and is a vicarage in the gift of the earl
of Bute.

Luton Ho, the seat of that nobleman, lies near the London road; LUTON HO.
about three miles from the town. I lament my inability to record his taste and
magnificence; but alas! the useful, talent, Principibus placuisse viris, has
been unfortunately denied to me. I must therefore relate the ancient story of
the favored spot. In the twentieth of Edward I. it was possessed by Robert,
Chauncy, 352.
who took the addition of de Hoo, from the place; which signifies a high
situation. His grandson, Thomas, was created lord Hoo and Hastings, by Henry
VI. in 1447. He, if no mistake is made in the account, settled two parts of the
tithes on the abbey of St. Alban's, for the use of strangers. Lord Hoo left
only daughters. From one, who married Sir Geofry Bullen, was descended queen
Elizabeth. I do not discover the time in which the tower in Luton Park was
built. It is an ancient structure, of flint and Tottenhoe-stone intermixed.

ABOUT two miles to the north-east of Luton Hoo, SOMMERIS.
is the village of Sommeris, where, as Leland informs us, lord Wenlock had
begun sumptuously a house, but never finished it: that the gatehouse of brick
was very fair and large. The gateway and part of a tower are yet to be seen. In
the last are fourteen or fifteen brick steps; and there was originally a hole,
or rather pipe, which conveyed the lowest whisper from bottom to top. Part of
this, and of the other building, was pulled down by Sir John Napier, about
forty years ago. Leland also acquaints us, that these estates of lord Wenlock
passed, by marriage of an heir general Leland, vi. 63.
of his, to a relation of Thomas Scot, alias Rotherham, archbishop of York from
1480 to 1500: a prelate remarkable for nepotism, and the preferment of his
kindred by marriage, and other ways Goodwin Pros. Angl. 70.
. This family assumed the name of Rotherham, and flourished here for some
centuries. John was sheriff of the county in the seventeenth of Edward IV. and
others, in aftertimes, enjoyed the same honor Fuller's British Worthies, 123,
124.
. Luton Hoe and this place became the property of the Napiers; from them they
passed to Mr. Hearn, who sold them to the earl of Bute.

FROM Luton I pursued my journey southward: near the twenty-sixth mile-stone,
passed through the village of Hardin, or Harpedon, and by its chapel, dependent
on Whethamsted. This manor belonged, in 1292, to Robert Hoo, and continued in
his line till the death of Thomas lord Hoo and Hastings, about the latter end
of the reign of Henry VI; when it devolved to his three daughters Chauncy, 525.
. The manor was sold soon after their marriages to Matthew Cressy, in the time
of Edward IV. It continued in his line till the reign of queen Elizabeth, when,
by the marriage of a female descendant, it fell to the Bardolfs. Richard
Bardolf sold it to Sir John Witherong, created baronet in 1662; and it is now
possessed by John Bennet, Esquire.

ABOUT four miles from this village, passed through St. Peter's street, in ST.
ALBAN'S, and turning toward the east, after a ride of about five miles, reach
the small town of Hatfield, HATFIELD.
prettily seated on a gentle ascent. Its Saxon name was Haethfeld, from its
situation on a heath. The important synod, SYNOD.
held during the heptarchy, at the instance of Theodore, consecrated archbishop
of Canterbury in 668, in which the most interesting tenets of Christianity were
declared and confirmed Beda, lib. iv. c. 17. p, 160. Beda had been an eleve of
this venerable archbishop.
, is generally supposed to have been held at a place of the same name in
Yorkshire. Hatfield was part of the revenues of the Saxon princes, till it was
bestowed by Edgar on the monastery of Ely. At the time of the Conquest, it was
found to be in the possession of that great house; in which it continued, till
that abbey was converted into a bishopric, in the reign of Henry I. It then
became one of the residences of the prelates; for they had not fewer than ten
palaces belonging to the sea Bentham's Ely, 163.
; and from that was called Bishop's Halfield, to distinguish it from other
places of the same name. It probably fell into decay during the long wars
between the houses of York and Lancaster; for I find it was rebuilt and
ornamented by bishop Morton, in the reign of Henry VII. Ib. 181.
Among the shameful alienations made from the bishopric of Ely, by queen
Elizabeth (by virtue of the imprudent statute, which gave her power of
exchanges over all) must be included the manor of Hatfield. The palace had at
times been an occasional royal residence, notwithstanding it was the property
of the church. William, second son of Edward III. was born here in 1335, and
was called, from that circumstance, William of Hatfield. Queen Elizabeth
resided here many years before she came to the crown See the curious account of
the practices of the lord admiral on her at this place, in 1548, in Burghley's
State Papers, 99, 100.
; and, on the death of her predecessor, removed from hence, on the 23d of
November, to take possession of the throne. This place did not continue long a
part of the royal demesne. James I. in the fifth year of his reign, exchanged
it for Theobalds, with his minister, Sir Robert Cecil, afterward earl of
Salisbury; who built, on the site of the palace, the magnificent house now
standing; and enclosed two large parks, one for red, the other for fallow deer.
At the bottom of the first was a vineyard, in being when Charles I. was
conveyed there a prisoner to the army Herbert's Memoirs, 30.
.

THE building is of brick, and of vast extent; HOUSE.
in form of an half H. In the center is an extensive portico of nine arches:
over the middlemost rises a lofty tower, on the front of which is the date
1611, and three ranges of columns, of the Tuscan, Doric, and Composite orders.
Between the second are the arms of the family, in stone Among Kip's Views is
one of this house, engraven from a drawing by Thomas Sadler, Esquire.
.

IN the chapel is a small ancient organ; CHAPEL.
a fine window of stained glass, in twelve compartments; and a gallery, on the
front of which are painted the twelve apostles.

OVER the chimney-piece of the hall is a painting of a great clumsy gray horse,
HALL.
given by queen Elizabeth to Sir Robert: a sign our breed was at that time far
from excellent.

IN the common parlour are portraits of lord-treasurer Burleigh and his son
Robert, PORTRAITS OF THE CECILS.
the first earl, the founder of this house: both in robes, and with white
staves See p. 357.
.

William second earl of Salisbury, in black, with long hair, a star on his
cloak, and the George, a dog by him. He was captain of the band of Gentlemen
Pensioners to Charles I. privy counselor and ambassador extraordinary to the
court of France. He was one of those characters who preferred his own safety to
all other considerations. He had been in two reigns so supple a courtier, as to
over-act every thing he was required to do. No act of power was ever proposed,
which he did not advance and execute with the utmost tyranny Clarendon iii. 209.
; but, on the first appearance of danger, he deserted his royal master, fled to
the parliament, and subscribed an engagement to be true to his new party, to
whom he passively adhered; and, on the usurpation, condescended to be a member
in the usurper's parliament. He ended his inglorious life in 1668, aged 78. This
portrait, and that of his son, viscount Cranbourn (who died in his father's
lifetime) are both by Lely.

Two children of the second earl, caressing a dog. Lely. Good.

A portrait, called the second earl of Salisbury, but probably lord Danby: the
Garter on his shoulder; hand on a dog's head. Vandyck.

FOURTH earl, probably by Kneller; as are two others, called the fifth earl and
lady; but probably lady Ranelagh, engraved by Faber, among the Hampton Court
beauties.

James third earl of Salisbury, a full-length, in his robes. Lely.

A head of Anne, daughter to the first earl, married to Algernon* earl of
Northumberland.

Charles I. a full-length, CHARLES I.
in the dress in which he went into Spain, with the blue ribband tied under his
arm, instead of being pendent: a mode of wearing begun in this reign. The hand
remarkably fine. His picture at Gorhambury greatly resembles this.

A half-length of a lady. Good.

IN the drawing room is a portrait of the late earl of Thanet, EARL OF THANET.
in a long black wig. Another of his lady. They were maternal, grandfather and
grandmother to the late earl of Salisbury.

OVER the chimney a fine half-length of lady Latimer, by Lely. CURIOUS
HISTORICAL PIECE.
IN the dressing room is a picture, on board, uncommonly curious; a
representation of some of the amusements of the court of Henry VIII. who often
relaxed his savage disposition in little progresses about the neighborhood of
the metropolis. This seems to have been in the spring of 1533; for Halle says
P. ccxvii.
, that this seasone the king kept his progress about London, because of the
queen; which means, on account of queen Anna Bullen's being then pregnant.
Accordingly we see Henry, with his royal consort I think the king and queen are
masked.
, in the condition described, at a country wedding, fair, or wake, at some
place in Surrey, within sight of the Tower of London. In the back ground is an
open room in a temporary building, with the table spread. At the entrance
appears a man, seemingly Henry's favorite, Charles Brandon duke of Suffolk,
inviting them in.

THERE are great numbers of other figures; many of which appear to have been
portraits. In one group is a lady with a gold chain, between two men with white
beards. The utmost festivity is exhibited. There are four fiddlers, and a
number of dancers. Behind the king is his 'squire, carrying his dagger and
buckler; and near Henry are a boy and a girl; perhaps the children of Charles
Brandon, by the king's sister, Mary dowager of France; for at this time Henry
had only one child, Mary, afterward queen of England, who was at this period
older than the others represented in this picture.

OTHER figures are, a man on foot, with a buckler on his back: a yeoman of the
guard, in red, with a rose and crown on his breast: five figures on horseback;
the first with a hawk on his hand, and a portmanteau before him; the second on
a bay horse, followed by a lady on horseback; after her a cavalier with another
lady behind him.

IN the room called King James's dining room, is a bronze-colored stone statue
of that prince. The cieling is of rich old-fashioned stucco.

Algernon Percy earl of Northumberland; his lady Anne, daughter of the second
earl of Salisbury; and their daughter. Half-lengths, by Vandyck.

THE portrait of queen Elizabeth is extremely worth notice; QUEEN ELIZABETH.
not only because it is the handsomest we have of her, but as it points out her
turn to allegory and apt devices. Her gown is close-bodied: on her head is a
coronet and long aigret, and a long distended gauze veil: her face is young;
her hair yellow, falling in two long tresses; her neck adorned with a pearl
necklace, her arms with bracelets. The lining of her robe is worked with eyes
and ears, and on her left sleeve is embroidered a serpent: all to imply wisdom
and vigilance. In the other hand is a rainbow, with this flattering motto, "
Non sine sole IRIS."

IN the gallery, THE GALLERY.
which is a hundred and twenty feet long, are two vast marble chimney-pieces.
The portrait furniture are, first, a curious half-length of the first earl of
Salisbury, in mosaic.

THE head of Laura, LAURA.
in a furred robe, with red sleeves, reading. La belle Laure, the celebrated
object of love with the virtuous and elegant Petrarch, for the space of
twenty-one years before, and twenty-six after her death; for he first saw Laura
on April 6th, 1327. Their passion seems to have been of the seraphic kind. She
devoted herself to religion, and persuaded him to do the same. She died in the
convent of the Cordeliers, in Avignon, April 6th, 1348: he, in 1374, in Italy,
his native country; to which he had retired after the loss of Laura. Her age
was probably about forty; his seventy. Both of them became the subject of the
finest pens for centuries after their deaths. Francis I. celebrates her memory
in a beautiful epitaph. The tender and amorous earl of Surrey made them the
subjects of two sonnets Songs, etc. ed. 1585, p. 74.
. He modestly yields the palm to Petrarch, but denies, the superiority of
beauty to Laura in preference to his mistress, the fair Geraldine. The
inscription on this picture is, LAURA fui. Viridem RAPHAEL fecit, atque
PETRARCHA.

THE next portrait is on wood, MARGARET COUNTESS OF RICHMOND.
of a lady not less celebrated for her piety than the fair inhabitant of
Vaucluse; but it appears in a less amiable form, attended with high rank and
great austerity. Her virtues were of a nature fitted for the praise of bishop
Fisher, not for the sweet pen of the elegant Petrarch. Margaret countess of
Richmond did not pique herself to far (virtuous as she was) as to carry her
passion for a single object to the grave. The pious prelate gravely tells you,
that she accepted her first husband, Edmund duke of Richmond, at the instance
of St. Nicholas, patron of virgins, who appeared to her in a dream. We are not
told at whose recommendation she took Sir Henry Stafford and Thomas earl of
Derby; for she liked the state matrimonial so well, as afterward to accept
both their hands. She signalized herself, during life, by her piety, charity,
humility, and chastity. The first appeared in her rigorous attendance on the
duties of the church, and her admittance into the fraternity of five religious
houses: the second, in her noble foundations of Christ College and that of St.
John, in Cambridge, besides a number of other great deeds of charity: the
third, in her declaration, that, if the princes of Christendom would undertake
a crusade, she would cheerfully be the laundress of the army: and then, for her
chastity, in her last husband's days she obtained a license from him to live
chaste, and took the vow of celibacy from bishop Fisher's hands, at the age of
sixty-four. For this reason she is usually painted in the habit of a nun, and
here is represented veiled.

Richard III. RICHARD III.
a head. He is represented with three rings; one of which he is taking from or
putting on his little finger.

A head of John Frobenius, FROBENIUS THE PRINTER.
by Holbein. He is dressed in a black gown lined with fur. Frobenius was a
native of Franconia, but settled at Basil, in Switzerland; of which city he
became a citizen. He was a man of considerable learning, and the finest printer
of his time. Erasmus resided a long time with him; attracted by his personal
merit, and his admirable skill in his profession: for to him we are indebted
for the most beautiful edition of the works of his illustrious friend.
Frobenius died in 1527, and was honored by the same hand with two epitaphs; one
in Greek, the other in Latin.

Francois de Coligni, seigneur de Dandelot, a head. Rich armor, COLIONI
SHIGNEUR DE DANDELOT.
short hair, and peaked beard. He was youngest son of the first Gaspar de
Coligni, and colonel-general of the French infantry.

THREE dukes of Guise: one is Le Balafree, DUKES OF GUISE.
or the slashed; so called from a scar on his left cheek, occasioned by a wound
he received in his face in the battle of Chateau-Thierri, against the
Huguenots. He fell a victim to his turbulent disposition, and his practices
against the state, on the 23d of December, 1588; being assassinated at Blois,
by order of his prince, Henry III: the common fate, in that age, of such great
men who were grown too potent to be brought to justice by the ordinary means
Consult Sully, vol. i. book 3. and Montfaucon Monarchy Francoise, v. 297.
.

LADY Burleigh, very old, blind, and decayed.

A FULL-LENGTH, on board, of Mary queen of Scots, in a long black mantle edged
with white lace, MARY STUART.
and reaching to the ground; a small gold crucifix; a cross and rosary at her
girdle; beads of gold richly wrought, and set with rubies. The inscription,
Maria D. G. Scotiae piissima regina, Franciae dotaria. Anno aetatis regnique
36. Anglicae captivitatis 10. S. H. 1573. resembles that I have mentioned, in a
former tour, on her whole-length portrait at Hardwick House, in Derbyshire.

A PORTRAIT of Charles Gerard, baron Gerard of Brandon, GERARD EARL OF
MACCLESFIELD.
created earl of Macclesfield in 1679: died January 7th, 1694. He is dressed in
black; a coif on his head, a turnover on his neck, gray hair and beard; his
hand on his breast. He was a brave and successful commander on the side of
Charles in the civil wars: yet, notwithstanding his zeal in the royal cause, he
was one of the persons who thought it his duty to present the duke of York, in
the King's Bench, as a popish recusant Granger, iii. 219, octavo.
; in which he thought he did his country equal service as when he bled in the
field in support of regal authority.

Robert Dudley earl of Leicester, the unmerited favorite of queen Elizabeth.
His hair and beard are represented gray; his gown black, his vest white and
gold. On his head is a bonnet: by him a white rod.

IN a lumber-room is a picture of Christopher de Harlay count Beaumont, COUNT
BEAUMONT.
ambassador from Henry IV. to queen Elizabeth, in her last year, and the first
years of her successor. He was a nobleman of great personal merit, and an able
negociator. He died governor of Orleans, in 1615. He is painted as a tall thin
man, in black, with white sleeves, and a ruff. Aet. 34, 1605; the year in which
he concluded his embassy See Sully.


SIR Simon Bennet of Bechampton, SIR SIMON BENNET.
in the county of Bucks, knight. His dress is that of a magistrate, in a red
gown furred, ornamented with a gold chain; ruff; high hat. Aet. 70, 1611. He
died 1631, being uncle to Simon Bennet, who was his heir; and whose daughter,
Frances, married James fourth earl of Salisbury, and died 1713.

HIS lady, in a great ruff, red dress furred, gold chain, jewels on her breast,
feather-fan set in silver.

Frederic P. la gra. de Dieu comte Palatin de Ryn, small, in an ermined cap: in
his hands two covered dishes, with a napkin over them. I believe this prince to
have been Frederic IV. father of the unfortunate Palatin king of Bohemia.

Henry VI. a head on board. There is another at Kensington-palace, from which
Virtue took his print.

Catherina de Cornara regina de Cipri, in black, with blue mantle, pearl
necklace, and crowned. See the account of her, p. 378.

IN the chaplain's room is another portrait of queen Elizabeth, QUEEN ELIZABETH.
richly dressed in black. On the table is a great sword, as if she was sitting
ready to confer the honor of knighthood. A spotted ermine, with a crown on its
head and collar round its neck, is represented running up the arm of her
highness. This little beast, being an emblem of chastity Gwillim's Heraldry, 14.
, is placed here as a compliment to the virgin queen.

SINCE this account of these pictures was taken, they have been differently
arranged. I have the pleasure to learn, that the house has undergone a complete
repair, in the original style, under the conduct of Mr. Donowell, the
architect; the pictures have been repaired by Mr. Tomkins; the grounds disposed
in the modern taste; a considerable tract of road is going to be removed to a
proper distance from the park; and the splendour of this noble family is
reviving with all the magnificence of the Cecils.

THE church is dedicated to St. Ethelreda. In an adjoining chapel is a
beautiful monument to the first earl of Salisbury; CHURCH.
who is represented in his robes, in white marble, lying on a slab of black,
which is supported by the four cardinal Virtues, with their attributes.
Beneath, is a skeleton, in white marble, lying on a well-counterfeited mat of
the same, also placed on a slab of black marble.

IN the church is a monument of Sir John Brocket of Brocket Hall, knight, who
died in 1598: and not far from him are the figures of two ladies: one is his
first wife, Helen Litton; the other a younger figure, with a scull in her hand,
representing his second lady, widow of Gabriel Fowler. Both lie on their sides,
one above the other.

FROM hence I continued my journey along the great road; GOBIONS.
passed by Gobions, in the parish of North Mims. It took its name from the old
family of the Gobions, its ancient lords, as early as the time of king Stephen.
Salmon's Herts, 46.
The Mores afterward possessed it for some generations. Sir John, the father
of the celebrated Sir Thomas More, owned it in the reign of Henry VII; and it
became the residence of that illustrious character till the time of his cruel
sacrifice; when the son was stripped of every part of his fortune, by the most
arbitrary attainders. It reverted again to the family; but the grandson of Sir
Thomas, being ruined by the civil wars, sold it to Sir Edward Desbovery. It
afterward passed, by sale, to Mr. Pitchford, and to Sir Jeremiah Sambroke.
From his sisters it devolved to Mr. Freeman of Hammels; and was afterward sold
to the present owner, Mr. Hunter.

NOT far from a place called Potters Bar (probably from some pottery, such as
is still carried on at Woodside, about two miles to the north, on the same
road) I entered the county of MIDDLESEX: kept along the edge of Enfield Chase
This chase was enclosed by act of parliament, 1779; and of the 8000 acres
whereof it consisted, 2584 were appropriated to the use of the Crown, and the
residue divided between the four adjoining parishes of Enfield, Edmonton,
Hadley, and South Mims.
to Hadley; passed through Cheping Barnet, and, in less than a mile beyond,
quitted the great road at Pricklers Hill; again skirted the Chase, descended
Winchmore Hill, and concluded the day's journey at my friend RICHARD GOUGH'S,
Esquire, at Enfield, the object of this little digression.

THE New River, NEW RIVER.
the work of my illustrious countryman Sir Hugh Middleton See some account of
it in my Welsh Tour, vol. ii. p. 29.
(which on the north edge of this parish, for some yards, as till lately at
Islington, is conveyed in a trough of wood lined with lead, called The Boarded
River, over a brick arch fifteen feet high) was the first object of my
attention.

I NEXT visited the ancient brick house called Enfield Palace, built by Sir
Thomas Lovel, knight of the Garter, and privy counselor to Henry VII; where he
died in 1524 Camden, i. 398.
. It is conjectured that Henry VIII. bought it for a nursery for his children
See the Antiquarian Repertory, ii. 231; where a print of this palace is given.
It is now divided into several dwellings.
. Here Edward VI. received the first news of his father's death, and his own
accession. On the chimney-piece of the great parlour are the arms of England in
a Garter, supported by a Lion and a Griffin; on the sides, the Rose and
Portcullis crowned; with E. R. beneath. These initials are also on the stucco
in front of the house.

QUEEN Elizabeth used sometimes to make this place a visit. Robert Carry earl of
Monmouth informs us he once waited on her Highness at this place; where she
went to take a dinner, and had toiles set up in the park, to shoot at bucks,
after she had dined His Memoirs, 2d edit. p. 136.
.

IN the time of the great plague, in 1665, a very flourishing school was kept
here by Mr. Uvedale. That gentleman was very fond of gardening, and, among
other trees, GREAT CEDAR.
planted here a cedar of Libanus; which is still in being. The storm of 1703
broke off eight feet of the top. The dimensions of it at present are these:

Height 45 feet 9 inches. Girth at top 3 7 Second girth 7 9 Third 10 0 Fourth
14 6 See the ingenious account of cedars planted in England, by my respected
friend the Reverend Sir John Cullum, bart. Gent. Mag. 1779. p. 138.

NOT far from hence, on the north side of Fourtree-hill, stood Worcester House,
built by the accomplished John Tibetot, or Tiptoft, earl of Worcester Norden's
Middlesex, 19.
, who was beheaded in 1470. The manor, which still retains his title, descended
to him from his father, Sir John Tiptoft. The house was rebuilt on higher
ground, by Sir Nicholas Raynton, knight, lord mayor of London in 1640^ who died
in 1647, and has a splendid monument in Enfield church. The place is now owned
by Eliab Breton, Esquire, who married a co-heiress of the Raynton and
Wolstenholme families.

UNDER the conduct of my friend before mentioned, I made a visit to Waltham
Abbey, seated in ESSEX, about three miles from Enfield, on the west side of the
river Lea. I past by Waltham Cross, WALTHAM CROSS.
one of the affectionate memorials of Edward I. toward his beloved queen
Eleanor. The cross is in excellent preservation, and richly adorned with gothic
sculpture. This tract is a rich flat of verdant meadows, watered by the Lea,
and bounded on each side by gentle risings. The meads belonging to the abbey
are distinguished by the name of Halifield, or The holy field.

THE present church of Waltham is only the nave of the ancient structure,
CHURCH.
which was in form of a cross, with a central tower; which fell down after the
dissolution, and the new tower was built at one end, 1555. Within are six massy
pillars; some carved with spiral, others with zigzag furrows, like those of the
nave of Durham cathedral. The arches are round; above them two rows of
galleries, in what is called the Saxon style. At the east end remains one vast
round arch of the tower.

THE only monuments of any note, are those of the Dennies. That of Sir Edward
Denny, and Joan his wife, has on it their figures, in a reclined posture; he in
armor: and in front are the figures of six of their sons and four of their
daughters kneeling. Sir Edward was of the privy chamber to queen Elizabeth;
governor of Kerry and Desmonde, and colonel of some Irish forces. He died in
1599, aged about fifty-two; and, I hope, merited this eulogy inscribed on the
tomb: Learn, carious reader, how you pass;
Your once Sir Edward Denny was
A courtier of the chamber,
A soldier of the field;
Whose tongue could never flatter;
Whose heart could never yealde.


THE tombs of earl Harold, founder of the abbey; of the famous Hugo Nevill, who
slew a lion in the Holy Land; and of several others, are now lost; having
perished with the fall of the tower on the eastern part of the church, in which
they were placed Weever, 644.
.

THE abbey stood near the church. Its only remains are a gate and postern, with
the arms of England in the time of Henry III; part of a cloister; and an
elliptic bridge over the moat. The edifice was pulled down after the
dissolution, and the materials applied to building a mansion by Sir Anthony
Denny (father of Sir Edward) to whom the place had been granted by Edward VI.
His lady afterward purchased the reversion in see of Waltham manor, from the
same prince, for between three and four thousand pounds, with several large
privileges in the adjoining forest Fuller's Hist. Waltham Abbey, 13.
. This, and the great estate of the family, passed afterward to the luxurious
Hay earl of Carlisle, by his marriage with the heiress of Edward Denny earl of
Norwich, grandson of Sir Anthony. The fortune was soon dissipated; and the
estate sold by their heirs to Sir Samuel Jones of Northamptonshire; who gave it
to the Wakes: and it is at present owned by Sir William Wake, baronet.

THE abbey was founded in 1062, ABBEY.
by earl Harold, afterward king of England. It might more properly be styled a
college, being supplied by a dean and eleven secular black canons, who were
excellently provided for; the dean having six manors, and each canon one. A
copy of the charter of confirmation by Edward the Confessor is preserved by Sir
William Dugdale Monast. ii. 11.
.

AFTER the battle of Hastings, Githa, the mother of Harold, and Osegod, and
Ailric, by their prayers and tears moved the Conqueror to deliver to them the
corpse of the Saxon monarch, and of his brethren Girth and Leofwin, to be
interred here. Harold's tomb was of rich gray marble, with a cross fleury on
it, and supported by four pedestals Fuller's Waltham, 7.
.

Henry II. in 1177, changed the foundation into an abbot and regulars, of the
order of St. Austin Tanner, 119.
. The first abbot was Walter de Gaunt; who obtained the privileges of the
mitre, and of being exempt from episcopal jurisdiction Willis, i. 191.
.

Robert Fuller was the last abbot; who, with seventeen of his religious,
resigned the monastery to the king, March 23d, 1540. Their whole number was
twenty-four. Their revenue, according to Dugdale, was L900. 4 s. 3 d. to Speed,
L1079. 12 s. 1 d.

THE largest tulip-tree, I believe, in England, stands within the abbey
precinct; being fourteen feet in circumference near the bottom.

FROM hence, at a distance, on a rising ground, I saw Copthall, COPTHALL.
once a villa and park belonging to the abbots. Richard I. bestowed the lands
on Richard Fitz-Auchor, to hold them in see, and hereditarily of the abbey. He
fixed himself at this seat. At length the abbot became possessed of it, and
retained it till the dissolution. Queen Elizabeth granted it to Sir Thomas
Heneage. His daughter, afterward countess of Winchelsea, sold it to the earl
of Middlesex, in the reign of James I. Charles earl of Dorset sold it, in 1700,
to Thomas Webster, Esquire, created Baronet in 1703: and he sold it to Edward
Conyers, Esquire, of Walthamstow; whose grandson, John, is the present
possessor The late Mr. Conyers took down the old house (of which a print may be
seen in Farmer's History of Waltham Abbey) and built the present on a higher
site, about thirty years ago. The beautiful east window in St. Margaret's
church at Westminster, came originally from the chapel of this old mansion.
.

RETURNING the same way over the Lea, I could not but reflect on the different
appearance this tract made, to what it did in the days of king Alfred, when it
was navigable for ships to the Thames, ALFRED'S EXPLOITS IN 896.
and by which the piratical Danish navy came up quite to Hertford. Our great
monarch instantly set about frittering this vast water into various small
streams; and, to the amazement of the free-booters, left their fleet on dry
land Saxon Chr. 96. Chr. J. Bromton, 813.
. At present a useful canal passes along the country.

CLOSE to Cheshunt stood the magnificent palace of Theobalds, THEOBALDS.
built by lord treasurer Burleigh. When James I. came from Scotland to take
possession of the English throne, on May 3d, 1603, he was received here by the
lords of the privy council, and was most sumptuously entertained by the owner,
Sir Robert Cecil, afterward earl of Salisbury. James fell in love with, the
place; obtained it from Cecil in exchange for Hatfield; enlarged the park, and
enclosed it with a brick wall ten miles in circuit. The place was resigned to
the king and queen, on the 22d of May 1607. A poetical entertainment was made
on the occasion, by Ben Jonson, and suitable scenery invented, in all
probability by Inigo Jones Tour in Wales, ii. 142.
. The Genius of the place is at first very anxious about her lot; at last is
reconciled to it by Mercury and the Fates: and the piece concludes with a most
flattering chorus Ben Jonson's Works, v. 226.
. James was particularly fond of this palace, and finished his days here in
1625. In 1651, the greatest part of this magnificent place (so particularly
described by Heutzner) was pulled down, and the plunder given to the soldiers.
The small remains (such as the room in which the king died, and a portico with
the painting of the genealogical tree of the house of Cecil) were demolished in
1765, by the present owner, George Prescot, Esquire; who leased out the site to
a builder, and built himself a handsome house a mile south of it; so that the
memory of it is only preserved by the picture in possession of earl Poulet, at
Hinton St. George; and the description, from lord Burleigh's own handwriting,
preserved in Murden's State Papers Mr. GOUCH'S Br. Topogr. i. 426.
.

I RETURNED by Enfield, pursued the direct road to London, passed by Tottenham
High Cross (so called from a wooden cross formerly placed on a little mount)
and in a short space joined my friends in the great metropolis.

APPENDIX.
No I. SANDON CHURCH, p. 60.
UPON A CURIOUS MONUMENT AND TOMB AGAINST THE NORTH WALL.
Ricardus de Vernon Baro de Sibroc 20 Willmi Conquestoris Pater harum
ffamiliar' de Vernon Holgreve et Erdeswik 1086.
Hoc s^bi spe in Xpo resurgendi posuit Sampson Erdeswik ^miger. qui gen' recta
serie ducit a Rico de Vernon, barone de Sibroc tempore gui' coma^qst.

Hujus ffili' et here is Hugo de Verno^ duxit ffilia^ et herede^ Rainaldi
Ballioli dni de Erdeswik et Holgreve dedern^nt ffilio Mattheo cuju' ffili' inde
dict' fuit de Holgreve.

Vernon. Malbanc.

Vernon.

Vernon.

Vernon. Balliole.

Vernon.

Holgreve.

Holgreve.

Vernon. Mandevill.

Richardus s^ilius junior Mathai de Holgreve tertij cum pater illi Erdeswik
dedisset nomen de Erdeswik sibi assumpsit et posteris reliquit et ex altera
herede Guil. dni de Leighton Thomam de Erdeswik genuit cujus pronepos Thomas
quartus accepit in uxore^ Margareta unica ffilia et heredem Jacobi Stafford de
Sandon militis cujus proavia fuit AVda, una ffiliar et heredu Warini ultimi
baronis de Sibroc proav' vero Guil. Stafford, ffilius secund' Harvaei Bagod ex
Melice^ta baronissa Staffordiae qui fuit proneptis Roberti primi baronis
Staffordiae qui Anglia Guil. Conquestore ingressus.

Holgreve. Bunbury.

Stafforde. Vernon.

Holgreve. Leigh^.

Stafford. Walkelin.

Stafforde.

Stafforde. Stafforde.

Erdeswik. Stafforde.

Erdeswik. Mirshull.

Erdesw. Clinton.

Erdeswik.

Erdeswik.

Erdeswik.

Erdeswik. Basset.

Erdeswik. Harccurt.

Erdeswik. Gray.

Erdeswik. Lee.

Sampson Erdeswik. Elizabetha Dikeswell. Elizabetha uxor prima fuit silia
secunda, et una trium ^eredum Humfridi Dikeswell de Church Waver in com ^arwici
armigeri ex qua quinque suscepit filias, Mar^aretam nondum nuptam, Helenam
uxorem Thomae ^eyne ^e Westen Coin in comitatu Staffordiae armigeri,
Elizabetham. Mariam, et Margerian^, omnes supers^ites ^cdum enuptas.

Sampson Erdeswik. Maria Neale. Maria uxor secunda fuit ffilia secundo genita
et una heredu Ffra^cisci Neale de Kaythorpe in comitatu Lecestrie armigeri quae
illi peperit Richardum et Mathaeum filios et Jehan. fili^ at priori marito
Everardo Digby armigero 14 liberos en^xa est., e quibus Everardus, Jeannes,
Georgius, Maria, Elizabetha, Ffrancisca, et Christiana, nunc sunt super^ites

Vernon semper viret anno Domini 1601.



No II. EXPENSES IN THE REPAIRS OF LICHFIELD CATHEDRAL, AFTER THE RESTORATION.
p. 105.
[From Mr. Green of Lichfield's MSS.]
L. s. d. BY the accounts of the late Bishop Hacket, Mr. Glazier, and Mr.
Harrison, the sum of money received by them, for the repairs of the cathedral
church of Lichfield, amounts to -- 9092 1 7 Besides two fair timber trees,
which his majesty gave out of Need-wood, inserted, but not valued, in the book
of the said accounts -- As also, there is omitted out of the said accounts,
glazing seven of the south windows, by Mr. Creswell; wherein his arms, which
(says he) cost about -- 30 00 0 Out of which L9092. 1 s. d. the late Bishop
Hacket gave out of his own purse, to the repairs of the said cathedral -- 1683
12 0 Bishop Wood, when dean, gave -- 50 00 0 And since bishop -- 10 00 0 And
promised (says Dean Smallwood) more 100 00 0

In St. Peter's chapel (which is now a place to lay ladders and scaffolding)
was painted upon the wall St. Peter crucified with his head downwards; and two
other apostles. And in this place is the noted St. Chad's tomb (though defaced)
removed from the Lady Choir to be put here, since the Restoration.

No III. THE RESIGNATION OR SURRENDER OF THE PRIOR AND CONVENT OF SAINT
ANDREWS, NORTHAMPTON: WITH A RECOGNITION OF THEIR MANIFOLD ENORMITIES. p. 303.
MOST noble and virtuous prince, owr most rightuous and gracyous soueraign
lord, and undoubted founder, and in earth next under GOD supreme heed of this
English church. We yowr gracys pore and most unworthy subjects, FRANCYS,
priour of yowr graces monastery of Saint ANDREW the apostle, within yowr graces
town of Northampton, and the hoole covent of the same, being steryd by the
gryffe of owr conscience, unto great contricion for the manifold negligence,
enormytes, and abuses, of long time by us and other owr predecessors, under
the pretense and shadow of perfyght religion, vsyd and committed, to the
grievous displeasure of Almighty GOD, the craftye decepcion, and subtell
seduccion of the pure and simple myndys of the good Christian people of this
yowr noble realm, knowlegen owr selffes to have grievously offendyd GOD, and
yowr highness owr soueraign lord and founder. As Well in corrupting the
conscience of yowr good Christian subjects, with vain, superstitious, and
other unprofitable ceremonies, the very means and plain induccions to the
abominable sin of idolatry; as in omyttyng the execucion of such deuowte and
due observances, and charitable acts as we were bounden to do, by the promises,
and avowes made by us and our predecessors, unto Almighty GOD, and to yowr
graces most noble progenitors, orygynall founders of yowr said monastery. For
the which obseruances, and dedys of charity, only yowre said monastery was
endowed with sundry possessions, jewels, ornaments, and other goods, moveable
and immovable, by yowr graces said noble progenitors. The revenues of which
possessions, we the said priour and covent, voluntaryly only by owr propre
conscience compellyd, do recognyce, neither by us, nor owr predecessors to have been employed according to the origynall intent of the founders, of yowr said
monastery; that is to say, in the pure observaunce of CHRYSTS religion,
according to the deuowte rule, and doctrine, of holy Saint BENEDICT, in
vertuose exercise, and study, according to owr professyon and avowe; ne yett in
the charytable sustayning, comforting, and releiuing of the pore people, by the
keeping of good and necessary hospitality. But as well we as others owr
predecessors, called religiouse persons within yowr said monastery, taking on
us the habit or owtewarde vesture of the said rule, only to the intent to
lead owr liffes in an ydell quyetnes, and not in vertuose exercise, in a
stately estymacion, and not in obedient humylyte, have under the shadow, or
color of the said rule and babite, vaynly, detestably, and also ungodly,
employed, yea rather deuowred the yearly revenues yssuing and coming of the
said possessions, in contynuall ingurgitacions and farcyngs of owr carayne
bodies, and of others, the supportares of owr voluptuose and carnal appetyte,
with other wayne and ungodly expensys to the manifest svbuertion of devotion,
and clennes of living; and to the most notable slander of CHRYSTS holy
e^angely, which in the form of owr professyon, we did oftentate, and openly
advaunte to keep most exactely: withdrawing thereby from the simple and pure
myndys of yowr graces subjects, the only truth and comfort, which they ought
to have by the true faith of CHRIST. And also the devyne honor and glory,
only due to the glorious majesty of GOD Almighty, steryng them with all
persuasions, ingynes, and polyce, to dedd images, and counterefeit relics,
for owr dampnable lucre. Which our most horrible abhominacious, and execrable
persuacions of yowr graces people, to detestable errors, and our long covered
ipocrysie cloked with sayned sanctity; we reuoluing daily and continually
ponderyng in owr sorrowful hearts, and thereby perseyuing the bottomless gulf of
everlasting fire ready to deuowre us, if perseysting in this state of living,
we should depart from this uncertain and transytory liff; constrained, by the
intolerable anguysh of owr conscience, called as we trust by the grace of GOD,
who would have no man to perysh in sin: with hearts most contrite, and
repentante, prostrate at the noble feet of yowr most royal majesty, most
lamentably do crave of yowr highness, of yowr habundant mercy, to grant unto
us, most grievous against GOD, and yowr highness, yowr most gracious perdon, for
owr said sundry offenses, omyssyons, and negligences, committed as before by
us is confessyd, against yowr hyhnes, and yowr most noble progenitors. And
where yowr highness, being supreme hedd, immediately next aftre CHRIST, of his
church, in this yowr roialme of England, so consequently general and only
reformatur of all religious persons, there, have full authority to correct or
dyssolue at your graces pleasure and liberty, all couents and religious
companyes abusyng the rewles of their profession. And moreover to yowr highness,
being owr soueraygn lord and undoubted founder of yowr said monastery, by
dissolucion whereof apperteyneth only the oryginall title, and propre
inherytance, as well of all other goods moveable and immovable, to the said
monastery in any wise apperteyning or belonging, to be dispossessed, and
employed, as to yowr graces most excellent wisdom shall seem expedyent and
necessary. All which possessions and goods, yowr highness for owr said
offenses, abuses, omyssyons, and neglygences, being to all men obedyent, and by
us plainly confessed, now has, and of long time past has hadd, just and
lafull cawse, to resume into yowr graces hands and possessyon at your graces
pleasure. The resumption whereof, yowr highness nevertheless, lick a most
natural loving prince, and clement govenour, over us yowr graces pore, and for
owr offenses, most unworthy subjects, has of long season differred, and yet
does, in hope and trust of owr voluntary reconciliation and amendment, by yowr
graces manyfolde, loving and gentle admonyshments, showed unto us by diverse
and sundry meanys. We therefore consyderyng with owr selffes your graces
exceedyng goodness and mercy, extended at all times unto us, most miserable
trespassers against GOD and yowr highness; for a perfight declaracion of owr
unfeigned contricion and repentance, felyng owr selffes uery week, and unable
to observe and perform owr aforesaid avowes and promyses made by us and owr
predecessors, to GOD, and yowr graces noble progenitors; and to employ the
possessions of yowr said monastery, according to the first will and intent of
the oryginall founders. And to the intent that yowr highness, yowr noble heirs
and successors with the true Christian people, of this yowr graces roialme of
England, be not from hensforth eftsoon abused with such feyned devotion, and
deuilysh persuasions, under the pretext and habyte of relygion, by us or any
other, which should happen to bear the name of relygyous within yowr said
monastery. And moreover, that the said possessyone and goods should be no
longer restreyned, from a bettyr or more necessary employment. Most humble
beseechen yowr highness, owr most graycious soueraign lord and founder, that it
might lick yowr majesty, for the discharging and exonerating us, of the most
grievous bourden of owr payned conscience, to the immynent parell and danger of
owr dampnacion, that we should be in, if by persisting in the state that we now
rest in, we should be the let of a more godly and necessary employment:
graciously to accept owr free gifts without coercion, persuasion, or
procurement, of any creature living, other then of our voluntary free will, of
all such possessions, right, title, or interest, as we the said prior and
covent has or euyr hadd, or a supposed to have had, in or to our said
monastery of Northampton aforsaide. And all and every parcel of the lands,
aduousons, comodytes, and other revenues, whatsoeuyr they ben belonging to the
same. And all manner of goods, jewels, ornaments, with all other manner of
cattals, moveable and immovable, to the said monastery in any wise
apperteyning or belonging, into whoes hands or possession so euyr they ben
come into, to be employed, and disposed, as to your graces most excellent
wisdom shall seem expedyent and necessary. And although, most gracious
soueraign lord, that the thing by us gyven unto your highness, is properly, and
of right ought to be yowr graces own, as well by the meryts of our offenses,
as by the order of your graces laws; yen notwythstandyng we estsones most
humble beseechen yowr highness, graciously, and benevolently to accept owr free
will, with the gift thereof, nothing requyring of yowr majesty therefore, other
than yowr most gracious perdon, with some piece of yowr graces alms, and
habundant charity toward the mayntenance of owr pore lyving, and license
hensforth to live in such form in correcting the rest of our liffes, as we
hope to make satysfaccion thereby to GOD, and yowr highness: for owr hypocrasie,
and other owr grievous offenses by us committed, as well again his Deite, as
your majesty. And for the more infallyble proffe that this our recognycion unto
yowr highness, is only the mere and voluntary act of us the said priour and
covent aforesaid, withought any compulcion, or inducement, other then of owr
propre conscience, we have not only publyshed the same, openly in the presence
of your graces true and faithful subjects, and servants, Sir WYLLIAM APARRE,
knight, RICHARD LAYTON, doitor in the laws, archedeacon of Buckingham, and
ROBERD SOUTHWELL, atturnay for the augmentacions of yowr graces most noble
crown, yowr graces commyssyoners here, with diverse other that were present at
that time. And under this owr present recognicion sealed with our covent seal,
subscrybed owr own names; but also have made sealed with owr covent seal, and
delivered to the said ROBERD SOUTHWELL, to yowr highness use, a sufficient
and lawful dead, according to the form of yowr graces laws, for the
possessing your grace, yowr noble heirs, and successors thereof for euyr, to be
presented by him unto yowr highness, together with this owr free recognicion and
assent; offering owr selffes most humbly unto your highness, to be at all times
ready to do from time to time, any other act or acts, as by yowr highness, and
yowr most honorable council shall be of us farther required, for the more
perfight assurans of this owr voluntary surrendre and gift unto yowr highness.
And finally we most humbly, and reverently, with habundant tears proceedyng
from our hearts, having before owr eyes owr detestable offenses, submytt owr
selffes totally to the order of GOD, and yowr merciful and benygne majesty,
most heartily beseching Almighty GOD, to grant your highness, with the noble
prince EDWARD your graces most noble and natural son, next unto yowr grace
the most precious iuell, and chyse comfort of this yowr graces roialme, long
to live among us, yowr graces honorable and devout procedings, which hitherto
through yowr graces most excellent wisdom, and wonderful industry, assidually
solycyted abought the confirming and stablyshying men's conscience contynually
vexed, with sundry doubtful opynions, and vain ceremonies, have taken both
good and lawdable effect; to the undoubted contentation of Almighty GOD, the
great renown, and immortal memory of your graces hye wisdom and excellent
knowledge, and to the spyrituall weal of all your subjects. Datyd and
subscrybyd in our chaptre the first day of March in the xxix year of yowr
graces reign. By the hands of yowr graces pore and unworthy subjects:

Per me Franciscum priorem. Per me Iohannem subpriorem. Per me Tho. Smyth. Per
me Tho. Golston. Per me Rob. Martin. Per me Jacob. Hopkins. Per me Rich.
Bunbery. Per me Iohannem Pelte. Per me Io. Harrold. Per me Tho. Barley. Per me
Will. Ward. Per me Tho. Atterbury. Per me Will. Fowler.
No IV. THE WILL OF SIR EDMUND MULSHO. p. 328.
IN the name of the high Trinity, Fader, Son, and Holy Ghost. Amen. The
first day of the monethe of May, the year of our Lord Godd M. CCCCLVIIJ,
and in XXXVJth year of the reign of my sovereign lord king Henry the
Syxte, I Edmude Mulso, knight, of our Lord Gods vysitation, weak, sick, and
feeble in body; nevertheless, of holle, sownde, and clear mind, and of
sensible wit, being honorid and thancked my Maker. I make and ordeyne this
my prnte testament and last will, in manner and form that suethe. First, I
bequethe and recomende my soul unto Almightye God, my Maker and Savior, and to
his blessed mother virgin Marie, and all the company of heaven; and my body to
be buried in the chapel of or lady, in the church of St. Mychaell, called
Pater Noster Church, in the Ryall of London, beside the tomb where the
worshipful knight Herre Tancke lyethe buried. And I will first, before all
things, after yt my body is buried, that all my debtes, in which of right I am
bownde, be fully contentid and paid, in discharge of my soul. Also, I will
and ordain, that, that mine executors under written make and ordain, or do to
be made and ordained, in all godly and honest wife, wthin the first year next
after my deceasse, a tomb of allabaster, in the place whereas my body is
buried, as is aforesaid, with an image over the same tomb, after my p^son and
degree, to be set with mine arms about the same, in all places thereupon,
where as mine executors shall seem most convenient and necessary. And I
bequethe for the same tomb so to be made, XLL sterlinge, or more, as yet
neadethe, after the discrection of mine executors. Also, I bequethe all my
goods, jewels, and ornaments, in any wise belonginge to my chapel, for to
serve at the altar of our Lady, in the chapel abouesaid, for any tow prists
there, for to sing as hereafter followethe, as long as they may endure.
Also, I bequethe my ornaments and garments of clothe of gold and veluit, in
any wise belonginge to my body, to be made in alter clothes, and vestments so
made, I bequethe to be distributed and disposed, by my executors, unto the
chapel of our Lady abouesayd, and to the churches of Miche Newton and Little
Newton, in the shier of Northt. after there best discrection. Also, I will
that mine executors ordeyne and do make an altar clothe, and a frounte, of
white satin or damask, with low curtaynes of the same suit, with my arms,
which I bequethe unto the auter of our Lady at Pewe, Westminr. there to serve
as long as they may enduer. Also, I bequethe, to be disposed and distributed
unto the said churches of Miche Newton and Little Newton, XXL sterlinge in
books, jewels, and ornaments, after the best discrection of my executors,
So: always that the p.sons and p.ishons of both said churches devoutly,
every Sondaie, pray heartily God for the good estate and prosperytie of the
noble prince Ric. duke of York, and of dame Cecyley his wyffe, and for the
souls of me and my fader and mother, and for the soul espially of John
Washebourene, all Xtian souls. Also, I bequethe to Wyllm. Mulso, my brother,
XLL sterlinge. Also, I bequethe to Margrett Langley, my sister, XLL sterlinge,
and a standinge cup coverid of silver. Also, I bequethe to John Mulso, my
nephew, XXt sterlinge, and part of my raiment and vesture longinge to my body,
after the discrection of my chosen Rychard Whettebey to be dd to the same John.
Also, I bequethe to Alice and Margrett, daughters to the said Simon, XX^^
marks sterlinge: that is to say, to every of them ten marks sterlinge.
Also, I bequethe to Alyce Chamber, the dowghder of Willm, cytyzen and mercer,
whilst he lived, ten marks sterlinge. Also, I bequethe to Thomas Tanner,
cytezen and scryvener of London, XLs. sterlinge. Also, I bequethe to John
Purfoote, late servant to my said lord the duke, ten marks sterlinge. Also,
I bequethe, to be disposed emongste my servants and mean, XXXt sterlinge, after
the discrection of my executors, as I have mencyoned in a byll of pap. under my
sign manuell. I bequethe to him or her, now on lyve, next of the blood of the
Candyshes, that last hadd off the manor off Pentlow, in possession before me
and my feoffees, XL^ sterlinge. Also, I bequethe A C marks sterlinge, to be
disposed and distrybuted for my soul, and for the souls abouesayd; as in
massis to be song, high ways and brydges to be amendid and helped, and to
poor people most needful, and in other wourkes of charytie and pyttie, to be
done after the best discrection of mine executors. Also, I will and bequethe,
that all my lands and tenements, rents, and services, with thappurtennes in
Nassington and Yarwell, in the county of Northt. shale remain to my executors,
by them to be sold; and all the money of that same sale comeinge, I bequethe to
be disposed and distributed by my said executors into the p.formeigne of my
bequests, and for my soul, and for the souls above said, and in espiall for
the soul of my son Walt. in works of charity and pity, as is abouesaid.
Also, I will and ordain, that mine executors, imediately after my decesse,
sell my manor of Rychmonds, in Thackstedd, in the shier of Essex, with the
appurtennances, in the best wise and the most auailable proffitt that they can
or may; and all the money of that sale comeinge, I bequethe to p.form and
fullfilll the bequests in this my testament contained: and if by any p.son now
one live, being next unto the kyneredd of the Rychemonds that last had the said
manor of Rychemond in possessyon before err yt came into the hands of me, or
any feoffees that woll bye the said manor of Rychemonds; than I will that he
have it better cheap then any other by XL marks sterling. Also, I will and
ordeyne, that mine executors, immediatlye after my decesse, sell my manor of
Greys, in the shier of Suffolk, with thappurtenances, in the best wysse, and to
the most avail and profitt that they can or may; and all the monney of that
same sale coming, I bequethe to fulfill and p.form the bequests in this my
testament contained: and if there be any p.rson now one lyve, beyinge next unto
the kyndred of the Greys that last hadd the said manor of Greys in
possessyon before yt came to the hands of me or my feoffes, that will bye the
said manor of Greys, with the' appurtenances; than I will that he have the
said manor of Greys bett. chepe then any other, by A C marks sterlynge.
Also, I will that mine executors, imedyatelye after my decesse, sell
th'advouson of the church of Candyshe, in the said shier of Suff.; and all the
money of that sale comeinge, I bequethe to fulfill the bequestes in this my
present testament contained. Also, I will and inwardly desire, and pray and
beseech the most reverend Fader in God, and my good lord Thomas archebishopp
of Cantsbury, his brother my lord Bourcher, and all my feoffees I straightly
requier which of great trust and confidence been feoffees o enfeoffid in any of
my lands and tenements, rents and services, manors and advousons, as of
churches or chappells, with th'appurtenances, wheresoever they be, within the
realm of England, or in any other place, that they make such estates,
feoffments, and releases thereof, to such p.sons, and in such convenyent and
lawful form as mine executors shall desyer, as soon after my deceasse, as
mine executors them thereto shall pray and requyer. Also, I bequethe to Dame
Elizabeth Mutton j pewe basin, and a peue ewre of silver, or a pewe pottes of
her choice. Also, I bequethe unto John Neuell, knight, my black horse. Also, I
bequethe unto John Otter five marks sterlinge. Also, I bequethe unto Robert
Kolfey five marks sterlinge. Also, I bequethe to John Grove, scryuener, XLs
sterlinge. Also, I bequethe unto y^ chapel and fraternity of the
Resurrection, in the church of St. Nicholas, of the town of Calace, XLd
sterlinge. Also, I bequethe to the reparation of the same church XXVjs. viijd.
sterlinge. Also, I bequethe to the fraternytye and alms table in the same
church of the Holy Trinitye, of the same church, vj. viij. sterlinge. Also,
I bequethe five marks sterlinge to the makeinge of a new glass wyndow to my
memory, to be made in our Lady church of Calace, with three images of the
Holy Trinitye; our Lady, and St. George, and my good angel; presentinge my
person with my arms. Also, I bequethe to the hospital of Callace, called the
Mayson dyne, and to the poor peoples fyndinge there, and to the relieuing of
the lazar-house, without the town of Collace, to be disposed by the
discrection of Richard Whyttwell, xxvj^. viijd. sterlinge: also, to be dealte
by the discrection of the same Richard, to the prisoners in Callace, where
most need is, xxvjs. viij sterlinge. Also, I bequethe to friar James Stope,
to pray especyallye for me to God in his massys, by a year, Lijs. iiijd.
sterlinge. Also, I bequethe to the pryer and couente of the friars church in
Callace, that they spially have my soul recomendid to God, xxvjs. viijd.
sterlinge. Also, I bequethe Liijs. iiijd. to the reparation of the church of
St. Peter wthoute Callace, and to the makeinge of an auter clothe, and a
frontell, stained with an image, or the storye of St. Peter, and mine arms, and
name of them, to be made; there to serve at the high alter, in the honor of
God and St. Peter, as long as it may enduer. Also, I bequethe to the makeinge
of a challyce to the parryshe of Bockarde, in the march of Callace, where
Doctor Salmon is parson, xxs. sterlinge. Also, I give and bequethe to Johanat
of Fan, at Thakestedd, xxtie marks starlinge. Also, I bequethe to the
chapel of our Lady in the Woule, in Callace, vjs. viijd. sterlinge; Also, I
will and bequethe that CCL. marks sterlinge of my moveable goods, jewels,
and lyvelood, shale remain in the hands of my dear sister Margarett Langley,
and of my cosen Rychard Whytwell; and they to dispose the same some without
any mynyshing, defalcacon or abridgement of any part there of in such wise as
I have declared unto them my wryghtinge, under my sygnett and sign manuell, by
me delivered before my menyall meny to the said Richard Whyttwell. Also, I will
that my householde and menye shale be kept wholle and together fownden of my
goods by XV. days next sueinge after my decease. Also, by this my present
testamente and will, I adnull and defeat my former testament and will that I
made in England; before that I came to Callace, and all the bequestes contained
in the same, bearing date the tenth day of the month of September, in the
year of or Lord God M.CCCLIII, and in the year of yt reign of king Henry
the Syxt, after the Conqueste the xxxijth, and all other testaments and wills
by me made. As for my proper goods and live lodde, if any be before this my
present testament. Also, I will and specially requier, that all the parsons
that have any moveable goods or jewels of mine, by wrytinge or other wise, in
there possessyon and keepinge, that they, and every of them, make delyuerance
thereof to my executors, when they desyer them. Also, I will that mine
executors be rewardid, recompensyd, and allowed, for all manner of costs and
expensys that they make, or shale make and dafer me in any wise, in any of the
matters and causys contained in this my testament, and by the oversight and
knowledge of my overseers wnder written. Also, I bequethe unto the Trynitie
Table, wthin our Lady church of Callace aforesaid, vjs. viij^. sterlinge.
The resydue of all my goods, cattalls, and debtes, whatsoever they be, in
whose hands that they be, after that my debts be paid, my body brought on
earth, my bequests fullfilled and paid, and this my present testament and
last will in all wyses performed, I bequethe to my executors underwrytten, they
therwithe for to do dispose and distribute for my soul, and for all the souls
above rehearsed in works of charytie and pity, in manner and form above
specyfyed, as they may best please God and most profitt my soul. And over
all this, as to the disposytion of my manner of Pentlowe, with appurtenances, in
the shier of Essex, and the advouson of the church of Pentlowe there, I will,
requier, and hartelye pray all my feoffees in the said manor of Pentlowe,
with th'appurtenances and th'aduouson of the same church, and mine executors
under written, that they, or the more part of them, with th'aduise of learned
council, imediatly after my deceasse, sue, purchase, chase, and get of the
king, our sovereign lord, his lers patents, to be made and hadd unto them in
all sufficyent and suer wise, vunder his great seal, whereby that my feoffees
or executors, or on or more of them, may have power and auctoritye sufficient,
after the form of law, to give and grant unto Mr. Thomas Eborall, p.son of
the church of St. Michall, abouesaide; and to the wardins and keep.s of the
goods and ornaments of the same church of St. Michaell, and to their
successors, p.sons and wardins of the same church, which for the time shall be, for
evermore, my said manor of Pentlowe, with th'appurtenances and advouson of the
said church of Pentlow; and so thereof that they establish mortise and fowunde
a channterie in the said church of St. Michaell, and to be cauled Mulso
Chaunterie, for tow priests there perpetually for to singe for my soul; to
have and to hold to the said parson and wardins, and to their successors of
p.sons and wardins of the said church of St. Michaell for the time being for
evermore, under the manner and form and condition that followethe; that is to
say, First, I will and ordain the sd. p.son and wardins, and there
successors, parsons and wardins of the said church of Saint Michaell for
the time being, of the revenew and profitts cominge of the said manor of
Pentlowe, and th'advouson of the church off Pentlowe, with appurtenances, find
tow seculer priests dailye and perpetually, for to singe in the said church
of St. Michaell's for my soul, and for the souls of my fader and mother, and
my friends and kyneffolkes, for evermore. And I will and ordeyne, that the
said towe priests be always chosen, received, and admitted to the said
chaunterye by the said parson and wardins, and their successors, parsons and
wardins of the said church of Saint Michaell for the time being; and the
said towe priests to be honest good men, and of good name and same, and of
honest conversation and condicon; and that they be at all mattins hours,
masseys, and evensonges, and at all other divine services and obsequies there
now used and done, and to be used and done. And if the said towe preistes, or
either of them, so chosen, received, and admitted to y^ said chaunterie at any
time hereafter, be unhoneste, or any ungodly or outragyous wise behave or bear
him, then I will and ordeyne that the said towe priests, or either of them,
lyneinge unhonestly, or in any ungodly or outrageous wise ruleinge, behavinge,
or beareinge himself, be removed by the said parson and wardins, and their
successors, parsons and wardins of the said church of St. Michael's for the
time being, from the said service; and that another priest or preistes, in
his place or their places, by the said parsone and wardins and their
successors, parsons and wardins, unto the said chaunterie be chosen and putt
in, in the manner and form above-saide; and so from time to time to be done, as
often as yt so happethe or faullethe vayde by the death of them, or that they,
or either of them, be promotid to any benyfyce or office. Also, I will and
ordeyne the revenewe and profitts cominge of the said manor of Pentlow, and
advouson of the church of Pentlow, with th'appurtenances, duly repayere,
sustain, and meynteine the said manor, with th'appurtenances, and all manner
rents and chargis thereof goinge out, pay and supporte yearly fortever more.
And that the said parson and wardins, and their successors, parsons and wardins
of the said church of Saint Michaell for the time being, pay yearly for
evermore unto the sd. towe preistes for their salarie, XXtie marks sterlinge,
at the feasts of Xmas, Easter, Midsomer, and Mychaellmas, by even portions;
that is to say, to each of them X marks sterlinge. And I will and ordeyne
furthermore, that the said parson and wardins, and their successors, parsons
and wardins of the said church of St. Michaell, which for the time shall be,
with a parcel of the revenews comeinge of the said manor of Pentlow, with
th'appurtenances, yearly for evermore, in the church Saint Mychaell
abouesaide, hold and keep mine anniversarie the day of my deceasse; that is
to say, in the even, dirige by note, and one the morrow, mass of requiem by
note, with tow tapers at my said tomb, each of tow pound of wax; and that
the parson have for his labor, being there present in there obsequies, XXd,
and every of the priests XIJd, and of the clarks XIJd, and either of the church
wardins XXd; and that there be disposed emongste xxiiij poor men and the
women, the same day of my anniversarrie, iiijs in money yearly, for ever more.
Also, I will and ordain, that the day following mine anniversarye, an account
be had and made between the parson and wardins, and their successors for
evermore, yearly, of all the receiptes, payments, and chargis, by them hadd and
done within yc year; and that all the money that upon such accounts, from year
to year, over and above the sustenatcon of the said towe priests, reparatyons
of the said manor of Pentlowe, with th'appurtenances, fownden and done, the
said anniversarie kept and holden, and all other chargis above said done and
paid, remain the clear, be put in a box, or in a chiste with tow locks and
keys, fast locked, for the repacyon and new edeficationes and sustenation of
the said manor of Pentlowe, with th'appurtenances, and chargis aforesaid, in
the said church safelye to be kept; and that the said parsone have and
keep the one keye, and the said wardins the other keye. Furdermore, I will
and ordeyne, that if the said person and wardins, and their successors,
parsons and wardins of the said church of Saint Michaell for the time
being, at any after, by neglygent and slothful, and find not the towe
preistes, nor keep not the said anniversarye, and all other chargis
abouesaide, in manner and form above declared, and have no cause reasonable
whereby they should be lettid or tarryed; than I will that the state, right,
and possession of the said parson and wardins, and their successors, parsons
and wardins of the said church of Sat. Michaell for the time being, be void
and of no strength; and than I will and ordeyne, that the said manor at
Pentlowe, with th'advouson of the said church of Pentlowe, and all
th'appurtenances, remain and turn unto Mr. Those Bucksall, master of the
college of Fodringhey, in the shier of Northampton, to have and to hold all
the said manor of Pentlowe, and all th'appurtenances, to the said now master
of the said college of Fodringhey, and to his successors, masters of the
said college, forevermore; so always that the same master and his successors
find for evermore towe preistes dayleye for to singe in our Lady chapel
there, for the soul of me the said Edmonde, and the souls before rehearsydd;
and also hold and keep my anniuersarye in the manner and form above writtenn,
and all other chargis and things, before rehearsed, do observe and fulfill
yearly in the said college, in manner and form as is above specifyed and
declared evermore. Also, I charge and requier, and will that none of mine
executors, in absense of the other, in the execution of this my testament and
last will, take upon them, nor presume to do any things wthout the agreement,
will, and assent of them all, or the more part of them; and when need be,
they to take thadvise of the overseers hereafter named of this my testament,
except only as for the CCL marks bequethed and assigned to my said sister
Margarett Langley, and my chosen Richard Whytwell, in form aforesaid; and also
all such things as of right and very nescessitye must be done in Callace and
marches of the same; the which I comytt only, by this my testament, to my said
cosen Rychard Whytwell, in absence of his fellowship co-executors, with him
wholly to execute and parforme. Of this my present testament and last will, I
make and ordain mine executors; that is to say, the wort^ knight William
Oldehalle, Mr. Robert Wyatt, clerk, the said Willm. Mulso, Simon Reyham, and
Rychard Whyttwell. And I bequethe to the sd. William Oldhall, knight, for his
labor in this behalf to be had, XXL sterlinge, and a gown of fine French
black, or of puowke, and a furre with a pursle of brown martirs for the same.
Also, I bequethe to the said Mr. Robert, Wm. Mulso, and Simon Reyham, for
their labor about the premyssys. trewly to be done, XXL sterlinge each of them
to have. And to the sd. Rychard Whyttwell, for his labor, I bequethe fiftye
pounds sterlinge. And I make overseers of y^ my present testament and last
will; that is to say, the most reverende Father in God, and my right good
lord Thomas archbishop of Canterbury; the high, mighty, and my full good
lord, Richard earl of Warwick; Henry Bourchere, knight, lord Bourchire; and
th'aforesaid Mr. Thomas Eborall. And I bequethe to the said most reverende
Fader the Archbishopp, XXL sterlinge; to the said mighty earl, my double
harneys complete, that I had of the gift of the dolphin of France; to my said
lord Bourchir, XXL sterlinge; and to the said Mr. Thomas Eborall, XL
sterlinge; instantly beseeching and desyreing my said good lords, and
requireinge all other of my overseers and executors of this my testament and
last will, to show and do for me, in the execution of all the premises, as
they would I did for them in semblable wise one God his behalf. Over this, I
will that an able preiste of conversation sing and pray for my soul, and the
souls of my fader and mother, and of all other souls that I am in dead to
pray for at Scala: Celi, in Rome, by the space of one wholle year and XXX
days; and, with in the same time, I will that the same preiste shale sing and
pray for my soul, and the souls before rehearsed, a trentall in certain
principal churches at Rome aforesaid in such form, and at such times, as
Saint Gregory did, and as yt is there used and accustomed; for the which
service so to be done by the said preiste, I will that my said executors give
him a competent sallary, in such form as they with him conveniently may
accord. Also, I will that my said executors ordeyne and do provide a gentill
and a well doing horse, with and harneys to the same; and that the said horse
and harneys, and also my chawferyn with the whyght feather for the said horse,
by my executors, for and in my name, be given to right noble lord the earl
of March, as for my remembrance to his good lordshipp. Provydid always, that
if any goods moveable, as well here as Callace, and in the marches of the same,
as in England, and my lands and tenements being in my feoffees hands,
wheresoevere they been, will not suffice ne streche easily to the performing and
fullfillinge of these my said bequestes and will (as I trust to God they
shall) than I will and ordeyne by this my testament and last will, that my
said executors abridge and make desalcacon of part of all and every of my
said bequestes, wills, and ordinances, in such form as they shall seem
most expedient and behofefull to be done for the health of my soul, except
only the CCL marks bequethed and assigned to my said sister Margarett
Langley, and to my cosen Rychard Whyttwell, and also the said XXtie marks to
the said Johane at Fann; which towe somes I will specially to be performed,
and my debtes paid. In wyttness whereof, to this my present testament and
last will I have putto my seal, written and yearenthe day and year before
rehearsed.

Testamentu Edmundi Mulso, militis, quo ad disposionem tam omniu et singuloru
manerioriu, terraru, et tenementoru suoru quam omniu et singuloru bonoru suoru
mobiliu; ultimam suam in se contineu volunt ap. te lect p. dictu Edmundu
sigillo suo ad arma sigillat. in p.sentia testiu subscriptoru specialiter ad
hoc vocatoru.

Aerat. John Grove John Wryght Robt. Wynnington John Deley John Pycharde Willm.
Toste Radi Knyston Robti. Leche Thome Laverocke Guuley Walmesley. Thome Usher


No V. ON THE DEATH OF THE COUNTESS OF SOMERSET. See p. 372.
HER death was infamous: and though she died (as it were) in a corner (in so
private a condition) the loathsomeness of her death made it as conspicuous as
on a housetop: for that part of her body which had been the receptacle of most
of her sin, grown rotten (though she never had but one child) the ligaments
failing, it fell down, and was cut away in flakes, with a most nauseous and
putrid savor; which to augment, she would roll herself in her own ordure in
her bed; took delight in it. Thus her affections varied; for nothing could be
found sweet enough to augment her beauties at first, and nothing stinking
enough to decypher her loathsomeness at last. Pardon the sharpness of these
expressions; for they are for the glory of God; who often makes his punishments
(in the balance of his justice) of equal weight with our sins. Wilson's Life of
King James I. p. 83. No VI. EPITAPH IN AMPTHILL CHURCH. p. 377.
M. S.

Optimis parentibus nunc tumulo conjunctus

Pietate semper conjunctissimus

Hic jacet

Richardus-Nicolls Francis. Is^i. ex Margar. Bruce

Filius

I-l-limo Jacobo Duci Ebor. a cubiculis intimis;

Anno 1663, relictis musarum castris,

Turmam equestrem contra rebels duxit,

Juvenis strenuus, atque impiger,

Anno 1664, aetate jam and scientia militari maturu^

In AMERICAM

Septentrionalem cum imperio missus

Longam I-s-lam caeterasque insulas,

Belgis expulsis, vero Domino restituit.

Provinciam arcesque munitissimas

Heri sui titulis insignivit,

Et Triennio pro preside rexit.

Academia Literis

Bello Virtute

Aula Candore Animi

Magistratu Prudentia

Celebris:

Ubique bonis carus, sibi and negotiis par,

28o Maii, 1672.

Nave praetoria contra eosd. Belgas

Fortiter dimicans,

Ictu globi majoris transfossus occubuit.

Fratres habuit,

Praeter Gulielmum praecoci fato defunctum,

Edvardum, et Franciscum.

Utrumque copiarum pedestrium centurionem,

Qui faedae and servilis tyrannidis

Quae tunc Angliam oppresserat impatientes

Exi^o praelato (si modo regem extorrem sequi exit. sit)

Alter Parisiis, alter Haga comitis,

Ad coelestem patriam migrarunt.

No VII. EPITAPH IN MAULDEN CHURCH. p. 382.
Diana

Oxonii and Eligini Comitissa

Quae

ILLUSTRI orta sanguine, sanguinem illustravit, Ceciliorum meritis clara, suis
clarissima, ut quae nesciret minor esse maximis. Vitam ineuntem honoravit, and
prodeuntem ampla virtutum cohors, et exeuntem mors beatissima decoravit,
volente Numine ut nuspiam deesset aut virtus aut felicitas. Duobus conjuncta
maritis, utrique charissima; primum (quem ad annum habuit) impense dilexit;
secundum (quem ad 24) tanta pietate and amore coluit, ut cui vivens obsequium,
tanquam patri praestitit, moriens testimonium filio reliquit. Noverca quum
esset maternam pietatem facile superavit; famulitium adeo mitem prudentemque
curam gessit ut non tam domina familiae praesse quam anima corpori in esse
videretur; denique cum pudico, humili, forti, sancto animo, virginibus,
conjugibus, viduis omnibus exemplum consecrasset integerrimum, terris anima
major ad similes evolavit superos Anno salutis 1654, April 17, aetatisque 58.

Ita gemuit Dominus Thomas Bruce, Comes Eliginensis and Baro Bruce de Whorlton,
qui hoc monumentum aeque sacellum

In perpetuam conjugis optimae memoriam

Erigendum curavit

Anno 1656.

The following inscription appears under a busto:

Thomas Comes de Elgin

Baro Bruce de Whorlton

In comitatu Eboracensi,

Hanc dilectissimi patris sui effigiem Robertus Comes de Ailesbury and Elgin,
etc. filius unigenitus in extimo sacelli circulo erigendam curavit. Medium
quippe soli Comitissae de Oxford uxori fuae cariffimae praedictus Thomas sacrum
voluit, cujus in aeternum memoriam monumentum illud centrale extruxit, quod and
ipse and prosapia sua, fatis olim cessura, eminus stantes venerabundi quasi
contemplabuntur.

Obiit December. anno salutis 1663.

Aetatis suae 73.

Edwardus Bruce Armiger, Rob. Baris Bruce, filius domae Dianae Henrici Gray
Comis de Stamford, filiae nu. m^^. quinetiam Thomae Comitis de Elgin nepos a
quo hanc vivendi rationem cum didicisset, gratus scholaris exemplo suo docuit
avum (ei vix paucis mensibus superstitem) mori. Anno salutis 1663. Aetatis suae
17mo.

No VIII. EPITAPH IN FLITTON CHURCH, ON THE GOOD COUNTESS OF KENT. p. 394.
HERE lies the Right Honble. Amabella, late countess dowager of Kent, entombed
by her dear lord Henry earl of Kent, to signify her resolution to dye with him
to the rest of ye world, and to live after so great a loss only to God, and the
interest of this noble family. This she made good, by her exemplary piety and
regular devotion in her chapel; whereto she obliged all her domestics, every
morning and evening, to attend her.

And, surviving her own monument 45 years, she had time to raise to herself a
more lasting one, by restoring the fortune of this illustrious family, which
she found under an eclipse, to near the height of it is ancient splendor.

This she effected by her wise conduct and large acquisitions, and by the
advantageous disposal of her only son Anthony earl of Kent, in marriage, with
Mary, sole daughter and heiress of the Rt. Honble. John lord Lucas, baron of
Shenfield, in Essex.

To the concerns of her children and grandchildren she confined her thoughts;
and fixed her residence at Wrest, their usual seat; which she wonderfully
improved and imbellished; continually adding to the profit or ornament of the
place, until death gently seized her, Augst. 17th, School, in the 92d year of her
age; and was here interred by the Rt. Honble Anthony earl of Kent, her most
dutiful son; who would have caused y^ to be engraven, had not a sudden death
prevented him; but it was afterward performed, in due acknowledgement of her
great beneficence, and to perpetuate her precious memory to all his posterity,
by her grandson, Henry Duke of Kent.

Mary, one of the daughters of Sir George Cotton of Combermere, in y^ county of
Chester, knight, first espowsed to Edward earl of Derby, and after, to this
Henry earl of Kent; who deceased the 16th of November, in the year of our
Lord God 1580, and lies buried at Great Gaddesden, in the county of Hertford.
In tender affection and good respect of with lady, the said earl of Kent, her
husband, caused this remembrance to be made of her.

Here lies the body of the most noble, vertvous, and worthy peer, Henry Gray
earl of Kent, lord Hastings, Weisford, and Rvthyn, lord lieutenant of the
county of Bedford: ever loyal to his prince, assvred to his country, kind to
his friends, loving to al good men, and charitable to the poor; the first
erector and fovnder of this chapel; who deceased the 31st of Janvary. 1614.

INDEX.
A.
ABBOT, archbishop page 239 Acton church 19 Alban's, St. See Saint Alban's,
Albert archduke of Austria 379 Allesey village 138 Altar, Roman, at Chester 1
Amphibalus, St. 222 Ampthill 375 Ankor river, Draiton's verses on 124 Anne
duchess of Bedford, daughter to Robert Car earl of Somerset, her story 358
Anson, Thomas, his amiable life 67, 68 Armor, great attention paid to 168
Arundel, Thomas earl of 232 Ashmole, Elias 132 Aston-hall 58 Aston, Sir Edward,
tomb of 73 Aston, Sir Walter, lord Forfar 83 Audley church 42 Audley, lord; and
his Esquires 39 Avon river 182
B.
Bacon, Sir Francis 226, 256 --, Sir Nathaniel 227 --, Sir Nicholas 224, 245
Bacon, lady, second wife of Sir Nicholas page 245 Badby manor 291 Bagot family
81 Baltimore, first lord 238 Barnet, battle of 282 -- town 288 Battle of Barnet
282 -- Bloreheath 48 -- Hopton Heath 72 -- Northampton 321 -- St. Alban's,
first 278 -- St. Alban's, second 280 Beaudesert 96 Bedford family 346 Bedford,
Lucy countess of 353 5 Beestor-hall 9 -- family 10 -- castle 11 Beighton, the
surveyor 184 Bertelin the hermit 75 Bethuei, now Stafford ib. Billings, Little
320 Billington Bury 77 Binley church, elegant 173 Blecheley church, tombs in
208 Blithe-hall 131 Blithefield 81 Bloreheath, battle of 45 Beadicea sacks
Verulamium 252 Borough-hill, near Daventry page 188 Boughton 2 Branden, Charles
duke of Suffolk, account of 363 Braunston village 184 Brickhill 213 Brindley,
James 54 Broughton family 43 Bruff the 47 Buchingham, George Villiers first
duke of 240 Bunbury church 14 Burbolt fish 80 Burleigh, lord treasurer 82
Burston 58 Bury-bank, near Stone 49 -- Stafford 77
C.
Calveley, Sir Hugh, his tomb and history 16 Camp hills 47 Canal, Cheshire 19
-- Staffordshire 51 -- Oxford or Coventry 149 Ca^^ wood 73, 98 Castle Ashby 310
-- hill 97 -- dikes 194 Cecil, Sir Edward 178 Chad, St. or Ceadda 100 Chalk,
antiquity of its use 214 Chalk-hill ib. Chartley house 62 -- castle 63
Christleton village 2 Clifford hill 320 Clifton church 120 Clifton village page
120 Clinton, Roger de, bishop of Lichfield 102 Coleshill 128 Colton 81 Colwich
79 Comb abbey 173 Combustible woman 165 Compton family 310 Cornara, Catherine,
queen of Cyprus 378 Cornwallis, first lord 236 Corpus Christi plays 161
Courtney earl of Devonshire, his story 349 Coventry, 138 --, its trade 141 --,
its churches 147, 154, 155 --, the priory 150 --, lord keeper 244 Craven, Sir
William 180 -- William lord 177 Crew, Sir Randle 389 -- lord Crew 390 --,
bishop 391 Croke, Sir George, a judge 247 Cross, queen Eleanor's 322 Croxal
church 119 Cumberland, Margaret countess of 246
D.
Danby, Henry earl of 370 Danes, at Toucester 199 Danvers earl of Danby 370 --,
lady, her fine tomb 195 Darlaston bridge 49 Daventry 186 Devonshire, Christiana
countess of 373 Digby, George, his singular epitaph 60 -- family 327 Digby, Sir
Everard page 327 -- pedigree-book 328 --, Lady Venetia 335 Doddington-hall 39
Dodford church 192 Dorset, Edward earl of 236 Duel, great, in 1398, designed at
Coventry 166 Dugdale, Sir William 1^8 Dunchurch 183 Dunsmore heath ib.
Dunstable 214 Dwina, first bishop of Lichfield 100
E.
Easton Manduit house ^^6 -- church ^^9 Easton Neston 201 Eleanor, queen, her
crosses 322. Elford church and village 117 Eigin, Diana countess of, her
strange tomb 38^ Elizabeth, queen, curious portrait of 406 El^avon 322 Empson,
Sir Richard 200 Enfield, 413 Erdeswik, Sampson 59 Ethelfleda countess of Mercia
75 Etocetum 1^6
F.
Fairwell church 99 Fanhope, lord 375 Fawsley house 292 Fenny Stratford 212
Femor family 201 Flamsted 221 Elitton church ^^^ Flor^ church page 297 Font at
Luton 395 -- Stafford 74 Free warred 3 Frevils 122 Frebenius the prinrer,
portrait of 408 Froissart, quotations from 89, 167 Fuller's-earth 344.
G.
Geese dropping down miraculously 193 Geraldine the fair 365, 366 Gerard family
58 Gobions, seat ^. Sir Thomas More 412 Godiva 139 Goldington 325 Gorges, Sir
Edward 362 Gorh^^nbury 223 Gosford-green, remarkable duel designed at 167
Gothurst 325 Gray lady Jane 387 Green, M^, of Lichfield, his cabinet 114 Gray
family 383 Grimston family, and portraits 230
H.
Haket, bishop 105 Ha^dley 285 Hatfield house 403 -- church 411 H^lead-Wen 27
H^^^^^ge, Mr. Lyster's 8^ Heywood bridge 65 Historical piece, curious at
Hatfield 405 Hoo family 400 Hop^^^ (...) 72 (...) (...) (...) ^65 (...)
I.
(...) ^15 (...) 72
K.
(...) ^9 (...) 292
L.
(...) 4^5 (...) bishop, (...) 37^ (...) 4^6 (...) ^^6 (...) 395 (...) 139
(...) 146 (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) ^5^ ^^5 (...) (...)
M.
(...) 215 (...) ^14 (...) his epitaph page 32 Mandeville, Sir John, his
birthplace 271 Margare^ queen of Henry VI. 45, 155 Market S^^eet 219 Mary
queen of Scots 409 (...) Church 382 (...), Sir Robert's tomb and (...) history
87 (...) (...) 134 (...), Sir Thomas 229 M^^^, S^^ffordshire 46 (...) 127 (...)
widow, account of 35 (...) village 136 (...) General, his beginning 35 (...)
Sir Thomas 10 (...) (...) of Norfolk 167 -- his designed duel 168 M^ccleston
church 44 (...) 326 -- Sir Edmund, his curious will 432
N.
^^^wich 24 Nassa^ count de 353 (...), goddess 214 N^^^ River 298 New River 413
(...) P^gnel 342 (...) his epitaph 377 Northampton 299 -- (...), earls of 310
(...), family 326
O.
O^^a, king 25^ (...) family 45, 94 O^grave house page 89 Orphan, supposed
origin of that play 369 O^je river ^^6
P.
Packington house 135 Paget family 96 Pagnel, Newport 342 Parliamentun
diabolium et indoctu^ 141 Passenham church 206 Pembroke, William earl of,
verses by 375 Pennoruc^um 116 Philip L^ Bon duke of Burgundy 248 Potter's Pery
206 Pri^^de la, abb^y 321
R.
Ram^^dge, abbot, his tomb 264. R^nb^^ 22^ R^b^y her story 385 Richmond, Marga
at countess of 40^ Roger and Ci^^^, dialogue between, on the battle of Bar^et
284 Rogers, comptroller ^62 Roman roads, 252, 1^6, 265, 2^3 Roos family 18^
Rothera^^ family ^9^ Rudghy village ^^ Rufin, prince ^^, ^^0 R^ssel lady Rachel
348 -- Lord William 361 -- Lord Edward and Sir (...), (...) port^ ^69
S.
(...) (...) Salines page 2^ Salt, its ancient history 26 Salt-works 26, 66
Sandon church 59 S^ruppius, account of 61 Schindon village and church 121
Sevmour, lady Jane 349 Shugborough 67 Somerts tower 400 Somerset, countess of
her infamous life 371 -- loathsome death 446 Somer^th, Sir Philip 90 Summers,
Will, the jester 202 Sop^well ^unnery 28^ Sow river 67 Spark, reverend Dr.
quibbling epitaph on 209 Stefford town 73 -- castle 76 -- family ib. S^^ne
priory 57 Stow church, near Lichfield 112 -- near Chattley 64
S^^^-nine-Churches 195 Stragle Alan, (...) old painter at St. ^lban's 261
Stratford St^ney 203 -- ^enny 212 Surrey, earl of, his passion for the fair
Geraldine 365 S^innerton house 47 Sydney, Sir Philip 35^
T.
Talbot, John, first earl of Shrewsbury, curious portrait of 311 (...) 121
T^^worth ib. Tarvin village page 4 T^^^r^ (...) 90 T^^^ river 46 Te^l^^
singular 328 Th^^bau^(...) 36^ Th^^ C^n^^ine 120 Tir (...), (...) Nicholas 392
(...) George ^rew Earl of 237 (...) 199 (...) river ib. (...) river 49 (...)
house 339
V.
Ver^^r Ver^^ame river 213 Ve^^la^^^ 249 Verse colum^ at Ampthill 377 Up^on
village 298
W.
Wall, the ancient E^o^^t^m page 116 Waltham abbey and cross 415, 416
W^^l^ng-street 208, 213 Wedon 193 Wetlock, lord 395 Whethamsied abbot, his tomb
268 Whitbenoure flitc^ 90 Whitby 184 Will^oughby 183 Wills, curious 328 Woburn
town 345 -- abbey 346 Wrest house 382
Y.
Yelver^on family 317 -- tombs 319
FINIS.

