AEROSTATION; OR, THE TEMPLAR'S STRATAGEM.

A FARCE.

IN TWO ACTS. WRITTEN By F. PILON, Author of the ^AIR AMERICAN, DEAF LOVER,
LIVERPOOL PRIZE, INVASION, etc.

As it is performed with Applause at the THEATER ROYAL IN COVENT GARDEN.

DUBLIN Printed by J. EXSHAW, for the COMPANY of BOOKSELLERS.

MDCCLXXXV.

DEDICATION.
TO THE Right Hon. LORD GRANTLEY, CHIEF JUSTICE IN AIR.
MY LORD,
FULL of Anxiety for the future Welfare of my Country, I beg Leave to call your
Lordship's Attention for a Moment to the late Aerostatic Discoveries which at
present so much engage the Speculation of the World. As Chief Justice in Air,
the Subject certainly comes more immediately under your Cognizance; and, if
there be no Laws existing to limit within proper Bounds the Excursions of
celestial Travelers, I make no Doubt you will lay the Matter, as early next
Sessions as possible, before Parliament, in order to determine the Legislation
of the upper Regions. There is no Security now against the bold Aeronaut; he
may rob us of our Daughters, and our Wives from our highest Windows, and set
the fleetest Pursuers at Defiance, who are only able to follow him upon Terra
firma. I need not inform your Lordship that Poets are the only living
Creatures, the Camelion excepted, that have any Interest, or Real Property in
Air: It is well known that they have built in that Element; and, unpleasing
Reflection! have often been condemned to feed upon it. Ariosto obtained from
Apollo the Fee Simple of all that vast Tract of Territory which lies between
Italy and the Moon. Milton, fired with a Genius more than mortal, shot up into
the Heaven of Heavens! and, with Millions of flaming Cherubims at his Chariot
Wheels, made all the Empyreal Firmament his own; whilst Shakespeare, on the
Wings of Inspiration, his head crowned with Lightning, and his Hand armed with
Thunder, subdued and peopled a vast Aerial Continent with Beings of his own
wild and wonderful Creation! After the respectable Names I have just mentioned,
who possess so large a Property in Air, I trust you will take the Matter into
your most serious Consideration: but do not suppose, my Lord, that I am
influenced by any selfish Motives in this Address; I solemnly declare all my
Property in Nubibus as yet, consists of a few temporary Booths, which I have
occasionally ran up for the Accommodation of some merry Acquaintances who are
^o^d of enjoying a hearty Laugh at any ridiculous Show the Crowd are admiring.
I feel my own Want of Importance too sensibly to expect any Application of mine
for the Security of Estates in Air, can deserve your Notice; but I am confident
that the Names of Milton and Shakespeare will ever find a Patron in a Man of
fine Taste and cultivated Understanding.

I have the Honor to remain, With the most profound Respect, MY LORD, Your
most devoted, and obedient Servant, FREDERICK PILON.

PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. WILSON. TO-NIGHT's adventurer with awe looks round,
And views the perils which his bark surround;
Three years are past since on this coast he came,
Bound on a dangerous voyage, in quest of fame.
Your smiles he will deem propitious beams that rise,
Circling the star that lights his Polar skies,
And near approaching that magnetic part,
He feels the needle trembling at his heart.
But of our bard enough perhaps I Have said,
When greater cares are laboring at my head.
I make no doubt to entertain you soon
With a new theater in a stage balloon.
No more in garret high shall poets ^it,
With rival spiders spinning cobweb wit;
Like ancient Barons future bards shall fare,
In their own castles built up in the air:
Dull poets then behind a cloud shall stay,
Whilst Fancy, darting to the source of day,
Bold as an eagle, her career shall run,
And with strong pinions fan the blazing sun.
But ere we raise our playhouse in the skies,
As Wit's Prime Minister I Will raise supplies;
For, sad to tell! above, as here below,
It Is only money makes the mare to go.
Bubbles shall then be taxed of every kind;
Why tax the light, and leave untax'd the wind?
First, for Pinetti's sake, of high renown,
Who Will steal the shirt off any man in town,
A heavy tax on Common Sense shall fall;
Nay, you may smile, but it affects you all;
Italian Op'ras, like aliens, I Have devised,
Shall pay a poll-tax to be nat'raliz'd.
Farce, Dance and Pantomime, with sprites and dragons,
Shall pay the carriage-tax of broad-wheel'd wagons;
And as for Tragedy of modern date,
Let it contribute at Quack Medicine rate.
A tax too we enact new pieces pay,
Apollo's Civil List expenses to defray;
Living, or dead, henceforward we decree,
Damned, or still born, no author shall be free;
Genius shall pay for being born to fame,
And Dullness for the burial of its name.
Thus, of our Ways and Means the state you find,
I hope these aids will meet the House's mind;
On you the stage rests all her rising fate,
You give our wit both currency and weight;
From hence, like gold in circulation brought,
By all the world it eagerly is sought,
If critics come not on the Mintage night,
To clip the sterling, and then call it light;
Assist our wishes, grant the meed we claim,
Praise that inspires, and smiles that guard our fame!

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
QUARTO, Mr. QUICK. GEORGE GORDON, Mr. DAVIES. MINEALL, Mr. BONNER. SCRIP, Mr.
WILSON. DAWSON, Mr. WEWITZER. MINEALL'S Servant, Mr. NEWTON.
WOMEN.
The Widow GRAMPUS, Mrs. WEBB. SOPHIA HARLAND, Miss RANO^. KITTY, Mrs. MORTON.
MILLENER, Mrs. POUSSIN.
AEROSTATION.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- A STREET.
Enter KITTY and DAWSON. KITTY. COME, Mr. Dawson, own the truth; -- is'nt there
another Lady in the question? does not some new flame withdraw your master's
affections from my young Lady?


Daw. Some new flame! -- poor soul! -- my master and I are in love with a score
of mistresses at a time: For instance, we admire one for her shape, another for
her air, a third, for her teeth, a fourth, for her eyes, a fifth, for her
complexion, a sixth, for her wit, a seventh --


Kit. (interrupting him) A seventh! I am out of all patience! does the
blockhead know what he would be at?


Daw. I was going to say that I admired a seventh for possessing all the charms
of the other six, -- and that her name is --


Kitty. Is what?


Daw. My lovely and even adorable Kitty Sprightly.


(Throws his arms round her waist.) Kitty. (Pats his cheek with her glove,
smiles, and leans fondly on his shoulder.) Plague take you for a flattering
wretch! there is no believing one word in twenty you say; -- now, I suppose you
think I take all this for gospel!


Daw. I do, upon my soul, or I should not have said it to you: the art of
saying civil things, Kitty, is the true art of making ourselves and other
people happy -- I could speak thus to the woman of my heart for ever -- when I
had exhausted my fancy in praising her face, her person should be my theme --
I Would find out new charms in her delicate hand, her fine-turn'd arm, her
beauteous neck and enchanting bosom; -- for it has long been with me an
established maxim, that it is impossible a man can say or do too many civil
things for a pretty woman.


Kitty. I wish, civil sir, you could prove that you possessed as much secresy
as you do civility, -- and I would impart an affair, which hereafter may prove
of no small consequence to your civil worship --


Daw. There Is not a footman, Kitty, so remarkable for keeping a secret, from
Tower hill to Hyde-park-corner: my talent in that way has obtained me the
nickname of Guy Vaux, and the Dark Lantern.


Kitty. Being as much as to say, this fellow's only fit for blowing up a plot,
though he loses his life by it; however, I Will run all risques, and repose a
confidence in you. Can you guess what brought me here this morning?


Daw. Guess the cause, Kitty! (Surveying his person with great
self-complacency.) I think the cause is pretty striking! Causes of much less
attraction have drawn women a great way.


Kitty. No, Mr. Dawson, I came hither to speak to you on another affair; and I
hope you will answer me like a friend, an old fellow servant, and a gentleman.


Daw. (Interrupting her, and taking her in his arms) My dear Kitty, you now
speak to me in so moving a strain, that I must take you in my arms.


Kitty. My poor mistress is dying for love of your flinty-hearted master.


Daw. Lord, child! do you call that a secret! -- I could have told you that.


Kitty. Now I want to ask you in confidence, and I beg you will be serious: Do
you think that your master's present coolness to my young lady is owing to his
affections being engaged in another place?


Daw. Not in my opinion, on the honor of a gentleman.


Kitty. But how can you be sure of that?


Daw. I was witness to a little circumstance which puts the matter out of all
question, in my mind.


Kitty. Tell it me, tell it me, dear Mr. Dawson.


Daw. Why, as I was combing his hair yesterday morning, I observed him take a
miniature picture out of his waistcoat pocket, and look at it as if he could
eat it with his eyes: judging it to be the likeness of some favorite Sultana,
I slyly popp'd my head over his left shoulder, and whose do you think the
picture was?


Kitty. Nay, how should I know?


Daw. Miss Sophia's, you jade.


Kitty. You don't say so! (Clapping her hands together with a mixture of
surprise and joy)


Daw. But that is not all! Going out of the room, I left the door on a jar, from
a habit I have of peeping and listening to every thing that passes in a family,
and then did I see him sit as good as an hour looking at and kissing the
picture, for all the world as if Miss Sophia herself had been there.


Kitty. I wish from the bottom of my soul it had.


Daw. But Mr. Mineall coming up suddenly, he put the picture in his pocket
again in such a hurry as if he was afraid the very light of the sun should
steal a kiss from it.


Kitty. Deuce take that Mineall, he is always spoiling sport. But how could you
be so ill-natured as to banter me in the manner you did at first about your
seven mistresses and all such impossible stuff?


Daw. Merely to keep my wit in play, to give a finer edge to my satirical vein.
Wit, my girl, is like a sword; if you would make the world admire the beauty of
your blade, you must throw away the scabbard; friend or foe must receive the
wound, if you would show its point: but a master's hand is necessary to display
the high polish of your weapon, making it flash at every graceful turn, with
the lightning's quickness and the diamond's brilliancy.


Kitty. Bless me! how you do talk! see what it is to be brought up from one's
youth with a gentleman of great learning; I vow you have almost as much wit as
your master.


Daw. You're wrong, Kitty; you should have said, that my master had almost as
much wit as I; for if my quantum of wit was not double my master's, half my
poverty would have been sufficient to hide it.


Kitty. Well; for the good news you have just told me, there is a guinea for
you, (gives him a guinea) but it is all out of my own pocket; mind, I have no
authority from my mistress.


Daw. 'Sdeath! then I cannot think of taking it; (searching his pocket as if he
could not find it.)


Kitty. (Aside) Avaricious rogue! I see he will not part with it, so I Will teize
him a bit. -- Well, if you are so generous, I Will take my guinea back.


Daw. But then I was thinking, Kitty, your mistress will pay you again when you
tell her the circumstance.


Kitty. Not she, indeed; so, come, come, give it me again.


Daw. (pulls out the guinea) Zounds! how you hurry me! you hav'n't given me
time to look whether it is a George the Third, or an old Carolus; (balancing the
Guinea on the top of his finger) it is very light, Kitty.


Kitty. If you don't like it, why don't you return it?


Daw. What! and suffer you to lose by it? No, no, my dear, I Will change it, and
stand to the loss, and if your mistress refuses to pay this small disbursement
advanced in her service, on the honor of a gentleman, you shall have a guinea
of such unequivocal weight, that it shall not want the sixteenth part of a scruple.


Kitty. No, Dawson; I give it up; if you have so many scruples about parting
with a light guinea, I Am sure you will make no kind of scruple of withholding
from me a heavy one.


Exeunt severally. SCENE II.
MINEALL 's Apartments in the Temple. QUARTO, GEORGE GORDON, and MINEALL,
discovered sitting at a Table, Wine and Glasses before them. Quar. I protest,
Mr. Mineall, you students of law are delightfully situated here in the inner
Temple; -- what a charming show of fine girls in the garden, and of wharfs,
wherries, and coal barges on the water! Indeed, I think you are too pleasantly
situated to devote much of your attention to study; a roguish leer from a fine
woman's eye under your window, would soon make you abandon the perusal of the
Statutes; there is no resisting her when she chooses to enforce the Habeas
Corpus Act.


Mine. In my opinion, Sir, there cannot be too many agreeable objects to relax
the mind after intense study.


Quar. You are wrong, Mr. Mineall; -- I Would treat a young Lawyer as I would a
young starling; you cannot put him in too dark a cage to make him talk well; --
but now I look round this apartment, is it not confounded extravagant to keep
all these windows open? I have closed my garret windows entirely; have left but
one open on the first and second floor, and if it was not for shame, would be
content with the light of a back parlour window. -- Come, lads, (filling his
glass,) I Will give you a fine woman, one of the best editions of her sex. Here Is
the widow Grampus.


(drinks.) George. Then, Uncle, you are seriously determined to marry her.


Quar. Seriously, George; -- since your aunt's death, I have passed the life of
a hermit; -- what are we born for, but society? I want some one to fill out my
tea of a morning; to press me to another slice at dinner, and play a game of
backgammon with me of an afternoon: These are the comforts of matrimony; but
you are too young to have a notion of them yet.


Geo. And do you expect the widow will indulge you in all those matrimonial
comforts?


Mine. I know she hates backgammon, because women of fashion never play at it.


Quar. It Is false, Sir; besides, I Am sure she doats upon me; she has told me a
hundred times, that I had wit at my fingers ends.


Geo. But that compliment, uncle Quarto, has lost it is point, now you have left
off book-selling.


Quar. You provoking puppy! what do you suppose I see in the blank margin of
your fool's-cap countenance to make me put up with such insolence? Have you
forgot, sirrah, that I have treated you as my own child since you were the
height of a Pope's Homer? have you forgot, you dog, that though you were
brought up at Oxford, and are now a fine gentleman, that your grandfather was a
Baker at Aberdeen, and never saw the alphabet but upon his own gingerbread?
There Is your brother Sandy too; when he heard of your exploit, he must needs
have an itch for coming to England, and be damned to him; I shall never forget
the figure he cut the first time I saw him, with his broad accent, his long
Scotch face, and such a red head, that you might have lit a candle at his pole;
and if I had not a regard for him as my sister's son, I Would have sent him trooping
back to Scotland again: I had like to have lost all my English customers by the
villain, for it is well known he was obliged to wear gloves the first three
months he was in the shop.


Geo. I am exceedingly sorry that a harmless sally of imagination, should have
given so much offense where I owe nothing but the highest respect, and the
warmest gratitude. My objection, Sir, is not to your marrying, but to the
object of your choice: Dear uncle, is not she rather too old for you.


Quar. Old, George! ha! ha! ha! why to be sure, George, a man of my figure and
constitution might have shot at younger game: but there has been a tender
between us for these some years past; when I was in business, she used to call
me the learned Aristarchus of Paternoster Row, and I called her the divine
Sappho of Watling-street: (gets up, and takes his hat and cane) I am sorry,
friend Mineall, I must leave you so soon, but when a lady is in the case --


Mine. And so accomplished as the Widow Grampus, every thing must yield to her.


Quar. She expects a great philosopher to visit her this afternoon, an Egyptian
I understand by birth, who has discovered a wonderful pickle, in which whatever
i^ immerg'd contracts the properties of a salamander, and will never afterward
consume in fire.


Mine. And no doubt, Sir, your gallantry has induced you to solicit the honor
of being the first English salamander pickled for the experiment?


Quar. No, faith, I have no ambition to be a pickled salamander, though I
should like to see the discovery brought to perfection for the honor of my
Country. France has just obtained the dominion of the air; England, for
centuries, has had the sov'reignty of the seas; the only element we want the
command of now is fire, to make the records of English glory immortal.


Exit Quarto. Geo. What Is to be done Frank? if he should marry this woman,
she will dissipate both his fortune and her own, on the ridiculous schemes of
needy projectors. He hasn't settled a shilling on me yet.


Mine. Your servant Dawson I think speaks French?


Geo. Extraordinary well; but what then?


Mine. A thought has come into my head, by which I think I shall be able to
break off your Uncle's marriage with Mrs. Grampus; there is a German Baron of
the name of Bubble Bergen, a great virtuoso at Vienna, with whom her Brother
Scrip constantly corresponds, being as Balloon-mad as himself, but never has
seen him. Suppose we make Dawson personate this philosophical Foreigner; Scrip
will receive him with open arms, and as the dog has at least the recommendation
of youth upon his side. I Will stake my existence, if he lays siege properly to
the widow, he carries the fort from your Uncle.


Geo. I must acknowledge your plan is sensible: every day's experience shows us
to what lengths elderly ladies will go, to indulge the heart in all its
partialities.


Mine But I Will not stop here to serve you, George: if I can bring my project
completely to bear, I shall reduce your Uncle to such a predicament as to
extort a proper settlement for you.


Geo. His not doing that is the reason I have discontinued my visits to Miss
Harland: I could not bear the thoughts of her supposing I harbored a design
upon her fortune, and circumstanc'd as I am now, may she not think so? the
nicely-feeling heart foregoes the very happiness it seeks, rather than enjoy it
upon terms which bear the appearance of dishonor.


Enter a Servant. Ser. There Is a young woman, Sir, at the door desires to speak
with you.


Exit Servant. Geo. (getting up) Then I Will go; but I hope nothing will prevent
our supping together.


Mine. Depend upon meeting me at half past nine at the Grecian.

Exit George. What game has Fortune sprung for me! Oh, here she comes.


Enter Kitty (curtsying low) A charming wench, by Jupiter! sit down, my love --
I was just wishing for you the moment you came in (draws a couple of chairs.)

Kitty. You don't say so, Sir.


Mine. I was by those soft rolling azure twinklers -- (throwing his hand round
her waist, and looking fondly in her face.)


Kitty. How you Gentlemen do like to flatter us poor Girls: But to what I come
about, you must know, Sir, I am a Servant in Mr. Scrip's family, the great
stock-broker, I suppose you know him?


Mine. Know him! he is my intimate friend.


Kitty. See what that is; he told me as much I assure you and moreover and
above, he told me besides it I made use of his name, (he is an old gentleman,
Sir, and knows nothing of the matter himself) that you would undertake to do a
little business for me.


Mine. That I will, my dear girl, as soon as ever you please.


Kitty. There Is above forty pounds sterling coming to me, wages due to my poor
father, who was killed last war aboard the Rattle Snake, and I cannot get a
farthing of it.


Mine. Your father's wages, I Will put you in a certain way of obtaining
immediately. In the mean time, my sweet girl --


Enter Servant. Ser. Mr. Parchment, the Conveyancer, Sir.


Mine. Dam'me, I wish yon were both conveyed out of the window. Why didn't you
say I was not at home?


Ser. He has some great business, Sir, for you to do.


Mine. You should have told him I had my hands full. Confound these chambers,
they are as public as Westminster Hall in Term time. Show him into the study.
Exit Servant. Cannot you meet me any where else, my love?


Kitty. I dar'n't Sir, I shall lose my character.


Mine. God's Death and ^ire! this wench has gained such hold of me, I cannot part
with her (muses) I have it; I Will give her a letter to Mrs. Modeley, the
Millener, in Bond-Street, who shall artfully detain her at her house, till I am
able to go and see her in the evening. Will you, my dear, sit down, whilst I
write a letter I want to give you?


Kitty. Oh to be sure, Sir, (looking earnestly at Mineall as he writes.) I
think he is as comely a man as ever I saw, only inclined to be a little ruddish,
or so. Well, I Am sure its very good of him, to offer to take my little affair
i^ hands so readily. (getting up and looking at his picture over his head, in
which he is drawn with his professional ^and and long robe) Sure that cannot be
his picture over the door in a clergyman's band, and big wig. So pretty a face
peeping through that great white (...) of a wig, look^ for all the world like a
peach growing out of a snow-ball. But I hope, Sir, your letter is almost wrote,
for I Am rather in haste.


Mine. (having sealed his letter, gets up) Yes, my dear, here it is; you know
Bond-Street?


Kitty. Very well, Sir.


Mine. Enquire for Mrs. Modeley and Co. the great Milliners in that street, and
deliver this letter into Mrs. Modeley's own hands, from Mr. Mineall, of the
Temple.


Kitty. Must I wait for an answer?


Mine. Certainly.


Kitty. (Curtseying and looking down) I hope your honor is not going to ask for
your fee?


Mine. Yes, but I am. I never fusser my fair clients to go away without paying
me.

(Kisses her.)
Kitty. I never thought that it was so pleasant to go to law before, (going,
she returns) but, Sir, Sir, I forgot to ask you whether this letter is wrote to
get me what is due to my father?


Mine. No, my dear, that letter was wrote to get you something that is due to
yourself.


Exeunt severally. SCENE III.
SCRIP'S House. A library, globes, mathematical instruments, and loose papers
on a Table. Scrip. (Discovered sitting in deep thought) I think I could make a
devilish good bargain for myself, and do my Country at the same time essential
service. (muses) Let me see, let me see; fourteen first-rate balloons, each
carrying twelve canonades, ten bombs, and four and twenty two and forty
pounders. Ay! fourteen would do it. Suppose I undertake to contract with
Government for paying off the national debt, on condition that they grant me
and my heirs for ever, an exclusive patent for the bombardment of Algiers. The
King of Spain would pay me treble the sum for the business. But then suppose
the King of Spain should break his word with me, a thing not uncommon, when
crowned heads find it their interest so to do, how am I to compel the King of
Spain to pay me? Dam'me, if I undertake the business, unless he gives me a
mortgage on Peru or Mexico; then there are two other devilish good contracts I
might make, to supply farmers with rain, and confectioners with ice, all the
year round. Besides I can now set the game laws at defiance; no man can prove
his title to a manor in the clouds; but softly, softly; hav'n't we got a Chief
Justice in Air? ecod, I believe he can take cognizance of these matters. I must
be very cautious how I ^^^ceed, 'till I know how high up his jurisdiction
extends. I must take care to be quite out of sight of the earth, before I
attempt to pursue a hare, or meddle with venison. It would vex a man confoundly
at my time of life to be strung up for dear stealing in the clouds. Here comes
my sister Grampus; I Will consult her on the subject.


Enter Mrs. Grampus. Mrs. Gram. I am still, brother, of opinion, that bodies of
a globular and rotund form are better calculated for celerity of motion than
the cylindrical.


Scrip. Upon that point, sister, we must ever disagree. Will you attempt to
persuade me, that bodies of a rotund and globular form like your own are so
well calculated for celerity of motion, as a smart, Cylinder like me?


Mrs. Gram. I meant that such bodies possessed more celerity of motion in
ascending.


Scrip. But you should have said in descending: for instance, sister, is there
a Balloon in France or England would take your weight up? though yes, I think a
well constructed Montgolfier might take you up by way of ballast.


Mrs. Gram. I beg, brother, you would let me explain the matter; do but examine
this drawing -- (takes him to the back of the stage, where both stand examining
a drawing seemingly with great attention.)


Enter Miss Harland, and Kitty. Miss Har. (as she comes on) And his servant
Dawson told you this story?


Kitty. Mr. Dawson himself ma'am, and I gave him the guinea according to your
desire.


Miss Har. Then perhaps it was the money made him invent this story of the
picture, in hopes to get more, by tales of the same complexion.


Kitty. Not at all, ma'am; I pumped the story out of him, before I gave him a
shilling, and then I made him believe it was all out of my own pocket.


Miss Har. You're a good girl, Kitty, but I cannot spare you this evening to go
with Mr. Mineall's letter.


Kitty. I don't know who in the family I can send with it; every soul's
employed about the Balloon, except old Agnes, your ladyship's nurse.


Miss Har. Then you must give her the letter.


Kitty. It Is very well, I will, ma'am; and I Will give her at the same time
charge enough to take care of it.


Exit Kitty. Miss Har If this story Kitty has just told me be true, all his
extraordinary conduct has been from too much delicacy; I know his uncle to be
his sole dependence, and perhaps he fears the old Gentleman's marriage may
deprive him of that provision, the expectation of which once made him consider
himself my equal in regard to fortune. I could almost find in my heart to be
angry with him. Poor George! insensible must that heart be, that would not
sacrifice fortune to love! --


(Scrip and Mrs. Grampus come forward, both greatly agitated.) Mrs. Gram. I
shall stick to the Globular.


Scrip. And I shall stick to the Cylinder, but Sophy shall decide between us.


Mrs. Gram. With all my heart! Miss Harland shall be judge -- (Scrip and Mrs.
Grampus get on each side of Miss Harland, and show the drawing) Observe this
circular figure.


Scrip Do you mark this horizontal tube?


Miss Har. If both speak at a time, it will be impossible for me to attend to
either.


Scrip. Why look'e there, she gives it against you already, you will not let me
speak.


Mrs. Gram. Was ever any thing so provoking! have not I as good a right to
speak first as you?


Scrip. Why, yes, Sister, I think you have the right of Seniority.


Mrs. Gram. (in a violent rage) I Will not sleep another night in your house.


Scrip. Then shall my family sleep the sounder: you may quit my house when you
will -- Off at a moment's warning, you and your Balloon together.


Mrs. Gram. But I will convince Miss Harland before I go. -- (takes hold of
Miss Harland's hand eagerly.)


Miss Har. Dear madam, I beg you will not treat me with any kind of ceremony.


Mrs. Gram. (interrupting her) If the weight of the atmosphere --


Scrip. Weight of the atmosphere! -- fiddle-de-dee -- I say the power of
gravity.


Miss Har. I am sure I must possess an uncommon share of the power of gravity
to keep my countenance; I earnestly request you would choose some other umpire
to determine this dispute. Were I to listen to you all day, my poor capacity
would not enable me to settle the difference, I perceive so equal a share of
reason on both sides.


Exit Miss Harland. Quar. (Without.) There Is no occasion; I shall go up stairs
without ceremony.


Scrip Here comes your lover, Quarto; I Will leave it to him.


Mrs. Gram. With all my heart; and you yourself shall put the question to him.


Enter QUARTO. Scrip. My dear friend, Quarto, I rejoice to see you. ( Places
Quarto between them.) Love has given you a new binding and title page; you look
as rosy as Turkey leather: but, without farther preface, which body do you
think best calculated for celerity of motion, a globe or a cylinder?


Quar. A globe, or a cylinder? -- the cylinder, to be sure.


Mrs. Gram. And that is your opinion?


Quar. By all means.


Scrip. Now for it. (Rubbing his hands with great glee)


Mrs. Cramp. So you think so?


Quar. And don't you think so too?


Mrs. Gram. No, I don't. Why, you stupid, old coxcomb, is the gaz of your
understanding entirely evaporated? do you possess so little science and reason
as to maintain that a cylinder is a better shape for a balloon than a globe?


Quar. (As if recollecting.) Oh! it was for a balloon you meant all this time;
that alters the case entirely: no, my dear madam, nothing can beat the globe
for a balloon; I would not venture up in a balloon of any other shape for all
the gold in the Exchequer.


Scrip. (Aside.) Mighty well, old Turnabout, I Will sweat you for this: well,
there is an end of it. Like three parts of the world, without being convinced, I
am obliged to be satisfied: but what is that you hinted of your not choosing to
venture up in a balloon of any other shape?


Quar. Not for the world.


Scrip. But you would have no kind of objection to ascend in one constructed
upon my sister's principles.


Quar. Objection! no, not absolutely objection; that is to say, if Mrs Grampus
requested me to accompany her.


Mrs. Gram Dear Mr. Quarto, do not increase my chagrin by your gallant offer; I
must defer my curiosity till the invention is brought to more maturity.


Scrip. Her weight will not do: she broke the galleries of five balloons already,
but we never could raise her above the garden wall; now, you're the very dandy
for a voyage in the air.


Quar. (Aside.) The devil I am! Sure she will not be so unreasonable as to expect
me to go.


Scrip. Why you're as light as a man made of cork; you will go up like a rocket!
I don't believe you weigh a dozen cock sparrows!


Mrs Gram. Consider the high fame it will give you; it will make you live after
you're dead!


Quar. But I am one of those who like to live all the days of my life: besides,
if I should be seized with a fit of the gout!


Scrip. Where could you find an easier chair than a balloon?


Quar. (Coughing violently.) Then I am very short-winded; terribly afflicted
with the asthma.


Scrip. Nothing so good for you as the pure air of the upper regions; it will
clear your pipes, and give you lungs like the bellows of an organ.


Quar. It will be an organ confoundedly out of tune.


Scrip. But come along; let us show you your flying car; it lies at anchor now
off the pigeon-house.


Quar. (Aside.) Oh, that it were cast away in the horse-pond! but zounds, my
principal objection to going up is want of company; I shou'dn't mind it a
button, if I had a couple of friends with me.


Scrip. A couple of friends! why, did you suppose we were such savages as to
send you up quite alone? -- no, man; Nicolini, our fine, large, black tom cat,
shall go with you.


Mrs. Gram. And my sweet little shock spaniel, Nero.


Quar. (Aside.) Oh, damn your little Nero! you have the heart of Nero, or you
would not press me to this undertaking.


Mrs. Gram. How I shall envy you when I see you above!


Quar. And how I shall envy you when I see you below!


Exeunt. END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I. -- A GARDEN.
Enter GEORGE GORDON and Miss HARLAND. MISS HARLAND. I Only wished to ask you
for my picture.


Geo. I don't know any thing else I could have denied you.


Miss Har. But what signifies keeping the likeness, when you set so little
value on the original?


Geo. So little value! By every hope I have of happiness, there is nothing upon
earth so truly valuable and precious to me: but how must you interpret the
addresses of a man with no certainty of fortune? My uncle is on the point of
marriage; to be sure, at present the world considers me his heir: but who can
foresee the influence a wife may have on him?


Miss Har. True happiness, George, does not depend upon immense fortune; where
there is a sufficient competency, what matter on which side it is?


Geo. My generous Sophia! what shall I say to you? whilst the charms of your
person fill my bosom with new delight every moment I behold you; the greatness
of your mind breaks forth with superior luster, as if jealous of those external
beauties which first won my admiration.


Miss Har. Your friend Mineall seems zealously interested for you.


Geo. I have already told you of his plan for breaking off my uncle's marriage
with Mrs. Grampus: he is now dressing up Dawson, as a German Baron, and giving
him every necessary instruction for performing his part with propriety.


Miss Har. As the Baron is supposed to come from Vienna, I don't think it would
be a bad hint to make him profess himself an admirer of antiquated beauty only;
and in the true spirit of German gallantry, look more for wrinkles than dimples
in the countenance of a mistress; I observe that there are no characters so
open to the grossest flattery as your learned ladies, especially when the
incense is offered them by a youthful Corydon.


Geo. An excellent thought! I Will tell Dawson of it, and he does not want
understanding to improve the hint.


Miss Har. Your plan is deficient in one particular; your Baron should have
brought a balloon with him, and persuaded the widow he traveled from Germany
in it.


Geo. My uncle was in so great a hurry to be married, we had not time to
provide the balloon.


Miss Har. And I fancy the widow will be so much of his opinion, that you will
have no occasion for it.


Exeunt George and Miss Harland. SCENE II. A Library. SCRIP, QUARTO, MINEALL,
and Mrs. GRAMPUS. Quarto furnished with a huge fur Cap, and a threadbare
Surtout Coat.
Quar. As he said that he had a great inclination to sleep when he got up high
in the air, I have furnished myself with a good warm nightcap.


Mine. Are you mad? if you give way to the drowsiness which you will certainly
find come over you it will be instant death.


Quar. Oh lord, oh lord, oh lord!


Scrip. You never will wake again.


Quar. Wake again! -- I don't think I Am awake at present, all seems a dream to
me.


Scrip. (Looking at Quarto's coat) -- But friend Quarto, your great coat seems
to partake of the quality of your nightcap, it has a very sleepy appearance.


Quar. But why a sleepy appearance, Master Scrip?


Scrip. Because I don't think it has had a nap these seven years. But, how far
do you intend to go?


Mrs. Gram. Ay! how far do you intend to go?


Mine. That Is a grand point.


( They all get eagerly round Quarto.) Quar. Why, I was thinking when I had got
as far as Highgate, it would be a pretty little voyage; then I could stop at
the Horns, and take a little refreshment to revive my old heart.


Mrs. Gram. What, go no farther than Highgate.


Scrip. I pique myself upon your pitching at least as far as Ware, in
Hertfordshire.


Quar. You pique yourself upon my pitching as far as Ware, in Hertfordshire?
Dam'me, if you would not amongst you pique and pitch me to the Peak of old Nick
in Derbyshire; but where are my bold aeronauts, the companions, the partners of
my voyage?


Mrs. Gram. Nero is ready at a moment's warning.


Scrip. And I Will answer for it, my whisker'd friend, Tom Nicolini, shall be
forth coming.


Quar. (After a pause, during which he walks about with ludicrous solemnity) Is
my ballast lighter than it was, and the roast goose stowed safe in the balloon?


Scrip. It is, my friend. (takes him by the hand.)


Quar. Get me some Holland's gin.


Scrip. You shall have two bottles; it is a cordial spirit, and will much help
you in the passage.


Mrs. Gram. And I Will provide the Holland's gin myself.


Scrip. A better judge I know not.


Mine. And I Will go and attend the filling the balloon.


Exit Mineall. Scrip. Now we are alone, I Have a secret charge to give you.


Quar. Charge me no more, I Am overcharged already.


Scrip. A squib! -- a cracker! -- a flash in the pan! -- the spark of a rocket!
-- the train of a mine, to the grand plan I have to communicate; a plan that
will make my name as immortal as Isabella's of Castile, and yours, as that of
the daring Columbus -- Do you know what time of the moon it is?


Quar. Why, if I were to judge by your conversation, I should suppose it were
at the full.


Scrip. It was new moon yesterday; the crescent will be visible this fine clear
day about six o'clock in the evening; the general rate of balloon traveling is
at about thirty miles an hour; the height of our atmosphere is just sixty
miles, and the devil's in it if the moon's atmosphere can be greater; the
entire journey, making every allowance, cannot exceed one hundred and twenty
miles. Why not undertake it! it is no more than going to Bath; you will perform
it in four hours, and when at your journey's end, you have no more to do, but
tie a rope in a slip knot, chuck it upon the horns of the moon, and dangle
there but one half hour, dam'me, if you will not have half the world gazing at you.


Quar. So, it is to the horns of the Moon you want me to travel? I thought there
was something ominous in the wind, when you objected to my stopping at the
Horns at Highgate.


Scrip. But that is not all! admitting (which is a moral certainty) that you
meet a hospitable reception from your friends in the moon, I dare say you will
meet a great many friends there; lay in a fresh stock of provisions, and take a
tour all round the firmament. You may first visit that most beautiful planet,
Venus; and by the most easy transit in the world, proceed next to Mercury; I Would
make interest with Jupiter to obtain his satellites, by way of guards, whilst I
was on my travels; and if I saw a convenient opportunity, I Would steal Saturn's
ring for the British Museum.


Quar. But I was thinking, all the time you were speaking, what I should do for
straw to burn.


Scrip. (musing as if greatly perplexed) For straw to burn! For straw to burn!
-- You have heard of the sky farmers, could not they supply you? -- I have it;
you shall take straw enough with you to go to the moon, and back again; and
when you are in the moon, you may speak to the man of it, to hire Charles's
wain for you, and thus perform all the journey I have chalked out for you in a
wagon.


Quar. A devilish good thought; besides, if a wagon is the only conveyance
from star to star, who knows but I may get a pension for introducing stage
coaches?


Scrip. Like enough; you're not the first projector who has had a pension in
the clouds.


Enter Mineall. Mine. Dear Sir! your philosophic friend from Vienna, the
celebrated Baron Bubblebergen is just arrived, and eagerly enquires for you.


Scrip. What, my friend that I never saw yet, though we have so long maintained
a scientific correspondence?


Mine. The same; it seems the information you sent him of your balloon, has so
wrought on his inquisitive spirit, that he quitted his own country on purpose
to go up in it.


Quar. Huzza! A reprieve! A reprieve!


Scrip. A reprieve! What do you mean? You know the balloon will take no more
than one person.


Quar. I know that; but as the baron is a stranger; I think it the height of
good breeding to give him the first place in it. He is waiting for you. -- I Will
not go up up until I hear his opinion on the matter.


Mrs. Gram. I Will wait on him this moment; and luckily, I have my balloon hat,
my balloon sack, and my balloon apron on.


Exit Mrs. Grampus. Scrip. Come away, my little Quarto; -- up we go, is the
word.


Quar. Up we go! I rather fear down we go, is the world.


Exeunt Scrip and Quarto. Enter George Gordon. Geo. Dear Frank, how do we
proceed?


Mine. Like heroes in the bosom of victory -- But go you instantly, and charge
me a case of pistols with powder, mind you put nothing but powder in them.


Geo. A case of pistols charged with nothing but powder; what can you possibly
want with them?


Mine. To fight a duel; there is not a moment to be lost; therefore, do what I
desire, without asking another question. Leave every thing to that zeal you
know I have for your interest.


Exit Geo. Gordon. Mine. Now, if the old bookseller has but spunk enough about
him to become jealous; what between that passion, and the more prevalent one of
interest, I think he may be worked up to send the baron a challenge, as the
last expiring struggle to regain his mistress. (walks about musing) Though,
hang it; no, no, what can make a bookseller fight? Not all the treatises in
Paternoster Row. (thoughtful) Let me see; let me see; I have hit the mark; the
Egyptian philosopher, of whom he told me! I will make him put on an inside
waistcoat, and persuade him it has been steeped in that great man's pickle
until it became proof to the fire of a musket bullet. Ay! zounds, we'll make a
pickled salamander of him.


Enter Kitty. Kitty. Lord Sir, what were you saying about a salamander?


Mine. I was saying, my dear, that if such a creature ever existed, it must
have been at a vast distance from such a pair of eyes as you possess. But you
surprise me! What answer have you brought to my letter, from Mrs. Modeley?


Kitty I hope your honor will not be angry; but I protest it was not in my power
to go with it.


Mine. Well! and what have you done with my letter?


Kitty. Oh! I have sent it by a safe hand.


Mine. Then you have sent it by another?


Kitty. Ye^, to be sure! I would not disappoint you for the world -- Old Agnes,
my young Lady's nurse, has taken it; and you could not have chose a more proper
person for your purpose.


Mine. So old Agnes the nurse has taken it?


Kitty. Lord, Sir, yes -- what signifies who took the letter, so the letter was
taken? -- What you wanted me to do, for ought I can see to the contrary, an old
woman might have done as well as a young one.


Exit Kitty. Mine. So old Agnes the nurse has taken it? If this story becomes
public, I shall be finely laughed at.


Enter a Millener. Mill. The whole family's in such confusion about the
balloon, that is to go off this evening, I cannot meet a soul to give me a
direct answer. ( approaching Mineall, and addressing him) I Will ask this
gentleman. Pray Sir, can you tell me if Mr. Mineall is in the house?


Mine. Yes! my name is Mineall; -- have you any thing to say to me?


Mill. I have a little bill to deliver you, from Mrs. Modeley, the Millener, in
Bond-street.


Mine. A little bill! you must be mistaken -- I don't owe Mrs. Modeley any
thing.


Mill. It Is for things for the Lady, you sent with the letter to her. -- You
desired in it, she should be indulged with any thing she might take a fancy to.


Mine. (Takes the Bill.) Oh, It Is for things for the lady I sent to her? mighty
well! (Reads) Silk cloak! gauze! Mecklinburgh lace! stockings, six balloon
caps! two hats, ditto -- sum total, fifteen pounds, three shillings and six
pence -- a pretty morning's frolic I must confess! but it is no matter, I very
richly deserve it. (Puts his hand in his pocket.) I hav'n't so much in my
pocket; I Will go borrow what I want of George: -- come this way, if you please,
and I Will pay you.

Going.
Enter Scrip, peeping in at the other side. Scrip. Come this way, and I Will pay
you.


Mine. But she wants a Bill paid upon sight.


Scrip. Upon sight! -- well, upon sight let it be; -- but, Mr. Mineall, Mr.
Mineall, how can you be so unconscionable to keep all these pretty rogues to
yourself; could not you spare one to a distressed friend?


Mine. I assure you, sir, I can very well spare the one whose bill the person
you see here has brought me.


Scrip. Is she very pretty?


Mine. Can you ask that question, when I am going to pay money for her?


Scrip. Egad I have a great mind to take her off your hands; -- but then she
may be too young, and when that is the case, they are generally mere hoydens or
simpletons.


Mine. This lady is not too young, I give you my word.


Scrip. Then you think she has got all her eye-teeth about her?


Mine. No faith, I don't think she has.


Scrip. Give me your hand, and give me the bill at the same time. (Mineall
gives him the bill.) I Will pay it on condition you let me visit her in your
stead.


Mine. And this good woman shall conduct you to her immediately.


Scrip. Where is she? -- for I burn with impatience to see her.


Mine. Not a hundred yards off -- here at Mrs. Modeley's, the Millener's, in
Bond-street.


Scrip. (To the millener.) Come along, my dear, -- this way, and I Will pay the
bill upon sight for you.


Exeunt Mineall, Scrip and Millener. SCENE III.
An elegant apartment: Mrs. Grampus, and Dawson as Baron Bubblebergen
discovered. Mrs. Gram. The taste for more ripened female beauty which prevails
at Vienna, Baron, has been long since made known to the Ladies of England; it
is recorded in the epistolary annals of a celebrated writer of our sex, whose
noble impatience for knowledge led her even into the recesses of the Grand
Signior's palace.


Daw. Sur l'honneur d'un Baron, Madam, a man de qualite at Vienna, cannot
endure les petites demoiselles -- fat you call de green girl, or de
boarding-school miss; mais, Madam, a votre age, touts les feus de Cupidon, all
de fires of love brullent en perfection, et scorch a de heart vid hot blaze:
Par example, regardez la rose; mark von rose in de garden! ven it is von petit
bouton it be no esteem, mais quand la rose spread les grande feuilles, da^ is,
ven de rose be old enough, we pluck de rose, and put it, by gar, in de bosom.


Mrs. Gram. Do we not observe the same rule in regard to every thing else
beautiful, or delicious in the productions of nature? Who will pluck the peach
from its wall-supported stock, 'till the mellowing hand of time has brought the
down upon its cheek?


Daw. Ah, ma belle ange! you be von quite ripe peach, you ave de down upon de
cheek.


Mrs. Gram. What a perceptible difference between the addresses of a youth of
fashion and a superannuated bookseller!


Daw. Mais, Madame, permittes moi (kneeling) sur mes genoux, suffer me, upon my
knees, to solicit von pretty hand.


Mrs. Gram. I beseech you, my Lord, to rise, I cannot listen to you in that
degrading posture.


Daw. Den me vil get up: me vil do every ting which me be command by Madam
Grand Puss.


Mrs. Gram. Oh, heavens! how the barbarous sound of my own name shocks my ear!
I do not know that name I would not change it for.


Daw. Et bien, Madame: comment trouves, vous mon nom? how you like my name? --
Baron Bubblebergen!


Mrs. Gram. (repeating after him) Bubblebergen! How trippingly it goes off the
tongue, as Shakespeare has it.


Daw. C'est vrais, Je suis -- me be von Foreigner. Eh, bien, n'est pas
l'empereur; is not de Emperor of Germany de same? Suppose now von minu^^
l'Empereur come to England, and say Madame Grand Puss, me be very much in love,
vil you marry me? Monsieur l'Empereur you say, go bout your business back to
Germany, me vil not marry von foreigneur.


Mrs. Gram. How forcibly he reasons! I hope, Sir, you do not think so meanly of
my understanding, as to suppose me influenced in my judgment of men, by the
climates in which they drew their first breaths. Who can select the regions of
their nativity? Your lot might have been my own, had fortune willed it so: --
Born on the banks of the Shannon, I had been Irish, beyond the Tweed, I had
been Scotch, but doomed in Thames Street first to see the light, the world
pronounce me English.


Daw. Apres cette declaration, Madam, after dis confession, me vil kiss a your
hand, as one earnest of your heart.

(kisses her hand.)
Mrs. Gram. But what will the world say to so hasty an espousals?


Enter Quarto. Quar. Say! -- why the world will say, that you're more deceitful
than a crocodile; -- is it thus at last that you reward your old, your learned
friend, as you called me? (hesitating and looking fondly.) When I look in her
face, all my former tenderness returns. What pleasure it gave me to mark her
gradual progress in English grammar, which I first put into her hand! little
did I think if she became an adjective, she would ever be coupled with any
substantive but myself.


Mrs. Gram. Really, Mr. Quarto, you astonish me; how have I merited this
virulence of invective? nothing that I recollect has ever passed between us,
but what was strictly within the bounds of Platonic friendship.


Daw. Monsieur Quarto, respondes moi, answer me von little question.


Quar. Ay, and one big queston, Mr. Mounsieur.


Daw. Connoisses vous, qui Je suis? Do you know who I am?


Quar. They tell me you're a German Baron.


Daw. Eh, bien! tant mieux -- now monsieur will you be so good to tell me who
you are?


Quar. An Englishman! and therefore as good as any baron in Europe!


Daw. There begar, it be again tant mieux!


Quar. Tom Mew! don't call me Tom Mew, Mr. Baron, I will not put up with it: I
suppose you call me Tom Mew, because I was going to take up the tom cat with me
in the balloon; but I will not go up in it now; I Will neither break my heart nor my
neck for that lady: but harkee, Mr. Baron, I shall send a friend to you
presently that shall make you understand me; ay -- dam'me if I don't -- Tom Mew!


Exit Quarto. Daw. Il est bien fache -- he be very anger; he vil certainment
send me von challenge.


Mrs. Gram. Not he, poor old creature; he is as spiritless as a modern pamphlet,
but let us follow him; I think I still possess sufficient influence to prevail
on him to ascend in the balloon.


Daw. Mort de ma vie! Do not ask him, me vil mount pour votre satisfaction.


Mrs. Gram. What, and risque your precious life! I will not hear it; better a
dozen booksellers should break their necks: you must defer your gratification
as well as myself; but if he comes down safe, who knows but you and I may have
the pleasure of ascending in the same balloon together?


Exit Dawson, leading Mrs. Grampus with great affected ceremony. Enter Mineall
at the opposite side. Mineall beckons to Dawson -- who hands Mrs. Grampus off,
and returns. Mine. (In a whispering tone.) Remember your challenge, your
adversary's on the ground; I hope you have secured Scrip for your second.


Daw I have, sir; and should he disappoint me, could prevail upon his sister to
fill his place: -- away, sir, we shall be observed.


Exeunt Dawson and Mineall. Scene changes to a Garden. Enter Quarto and Mineall
(each with a large pistol in his hand.) Quar. So he said he would come?


Mine. Immediately.


Quar. Did he seem frightened?


Mine. No more than you are.


Quar. Then he must certainly be a very brave fellow; I almost think it a pity
to quarrel with such a man: don't you think it rather coldish?

(Buttoning his coat.)
Mine. Cold! I think it uncommonly warm for the time of year.


Quar. (Still buttoning his coat 'till it is close up to his collar.) I don't
know how it is, but I feel it very cold, or I am going to be attacked with my
old complaint.


Mine. Your old complaint! what is that?


Quar. A slight touch of the Ague that attacks me now and then.


Dawson (without) sings Malbroc very loud. Quar. Zounds! what a noise he makes!
he goes to fight like an Indian, with the war-whoop.


Mine. Oh, here they come; I Will measure out the ground. (Mineall strides across
the stage as if measuring the distance at which they are to stand.


Quar. Measure the ground! I conceit I have taken my measure already of the
ground.


Enter Scrip and Dawson. Scrip. But listen to reason, baron; why not defer the
duel 'till he returns from his voyage? consider, if you kill him, what a fine
experiment you will spoil.


Daw. (Taking his ground.) Me vil not hear von vord: eh bien, monsieur! est
vous pret est vous pret? it be very high time begar you be pret.


Quar. It Is high time I should pray -- why friend Mineall, this bloody minded
Baron makes sure of me! But where am I to stand?


Mine. (putting him to his ground) Let the Baron remain where he is, and do you
stand here.


Scrip. Now, both discharge your pistols together.


Quar. Hold, Mr. Baron, I bar firing yet; in that case, both of us may be shot!
now I think the fairest way will be the old practice of duelling; suppose we
turn back to back, then jump round, and fire with our eyes shut.


Scrip. I think the fairest way will be to hide the horse for the first shot.


Daw. Me vil hide no vat you call horse; so, Monsieur Quarto, or Monsieur
Folio, or vat devil dey call you, you may shoot first, and me vil kill you in
very god time after.


Quar. Did you ever hear of such a blood thirsty dog! now I declare I wouldn't
wish to kill him, though he seems to owe me such a spite, and as these matters
are frequently made up, especially when the parties have come to the ground,
and behaved so bravely as you must own the Baron and I have.


Mine. Impossible! things are now gone too far for any sort of accommodation.


Enter George Gordon. Geo. Where Is my dear Uncle?


Quar. Here, my dear George!


Daw. Eh, bien; pourquoi -- vy you no fire!


Quar. Don't be in a hurry Baron, I wish to take leave of my Nephew, nobody
knows what may happen.


Geo. Dear, Sir, don't you fight him, I Will take the quarrel upon myself.


Quar. My dear boy, you don't say so? (takes his hand)


Geo. My life's of no consequence.


Quar. None in the world -- then perhaps George you will go up in the Balloon
for me too?


Geo. Most cheerfully, Sir; so, if you give me your pistol --


Quar. Here it is (gives his pistol) but take care, it is cocked, -- let me ge
get out of the way before you fire.


Mine. But hold, Mr. Gordon, in case you should kill the Baron, you must fly
the country; then what security has your Uncle given to make a proper provision
for your support during your banishment?


Quar. Don't let that stop the duel! I Will make over my estate in Shropshire to
him, and besides, bequeath him every shilling I die possessed of.


Mine. You hear what he says, Mr. Scrip; and therefore, with his own consent, I
deliver the title deeds of his Shropshire property into the hands of Mr. Gordon.

Gives George the Parchments.
Quar. Now for it, George, let him see he has a man of mettle to deal with;
mind, you have the first shot, but be sure you take good aim. Come, Baron, are
you ready? I long to see them pop at each other; I never saw a duel in my life.
(Dawson begins to undress.)


Scrip. Zounds! Baron, what are you uncasing for? are you a going to treat us
to a boxing match?


Quar. A boxing match! oh, you low lived, cowardly rascal, you ragamuffin, is
it come to this at last! if I thought this was his way I could have box'd him
myself; stand back, George, I Will fight this duel myself; let every man fight
his own battles; (strips) this is some German valet de chamber.


Daw. (turning round) An English valet de chamber, Sir, at your service; I
hope, Sir, you wouldn't have me shoot my master.


Quar. Shoot your master! as I live that impudent dog Dawson, why! Mineall, is
this a trick of yours?


Scrip. Ask him no questions, he has played me a worse trick: and in the true
spirit of a lawyer made me pay for it.


Quar. Ay, prithee what has he done?


Scrip. Not much, only sold me an old hen for a young pullet; I paid neat
twenty pounds in hard cash for the sight of a young Venus, as he made me
believe; but when I saw her, dam'me if she was not old enough to be my
grandmother.


Mine. It was a disappointment to both parties, and as one of us must have paid
for it, I thought you could best afford it.


Scrip. Pretty comfort this I must confess.


Enter Mrs. Grampus and Miss Harland. Mrs. Gram. Where is my dear Baron? I hope
he is not wounded beyond all cure.


Quar. No, Ma'am, there he is, Baron Dawson, of Dawson's Pantry, at your
service, far from being wounded beyond the power of cure; but I can assure you
at the same time, that I am cured beyond the power of your ever wounding me.


Scrip. Sister, sister, I Am ashamed of you -- a woman at your time of life to
have such a colt's tooth.


Quar. Well; instead of thinking of a wife myself, if Miss Harland will honor
my nephew George with her hand, I will immediately make such further settlement
on him, as will place him every way on a footing with her in regard to fortune.


Miss Har. Sir, your nephew's merit needs no adventitious aid from fortune; and
I do not blush to own my partiality for him, before I was acquainted with your
generous intention.


Quar. By this light, you're a noble girl! and as you're shortly to be a near
relation of mine, I will have a buss to our better acquaintance.


( Kisses Miss Harland.) Scrip. Well, my little Quarto, give me your hand, I
congratulate you on slipping your neck so dexterously out of the matrimonial
noose. But come, every thing is ready, and your flying man of war expects you.
( Pulling Quarto by the arm to the back of the stage where the balloon is seen.)


Quar. I must beg to be excused; the magnet has lost its power that was to have
drawn me to the clouds.


Scrip. Cursed unlucky this! but, Dawson, what will you take to go up?


Daw. Take, Sir! Ecod, I fancy I should take my death.


Scrip. Dam'me, if I hav'n't a great mind to go up myself; though upon second
thoughts, it would be rather imprudent, for if I be seized with the rheumatism
in my shoulders, I shall not be able to use either my oars or my wings.


Mine. I earnestly request, Mr. Scrip, that you would lay both your oars and
your wings aside, for the rest of the day, and join in the happiness of my
friend George and his lovely Sophia! I know no feeling so grateful to the human
heart as to reflect we have succeeded in our most interesting attempt; and
there is nothing now wanting (addressing the audience) but your support and
protection to elevate us without the aid of Aerostation.


THE END.

