The BASTARD. A POEM.

BY Mr. RICHARD SAVAGE.

THE BASTARD. A POEM, Inscribed with all due Reverence to Mrs. BRET, once
Countess of MACCLESFIELD.

By RICHARD SAVAGE, Son of the late Earl RIVERS

Decet, haec dare dona Novercam.
OV. MET. DUBLIN: Printed by S. POWELL, for T. BENSON, at Shakespeare's Head, in
Castle-street, and P. CRAMPTON, at Addison's Head, opposite to the Horse-guard
in Dame's -street, 1728.

The PREFACE.
THE Reader will easily perceive these Verses were begun, when my Heart was
gayer, than it has been of late; and finished in Hours of the deepest
Melancholy.

I hope the World will do me the Justice to believe, that no part of this flows
from any real Anger against the Lady, to whom it is inscribed. Whatever
undeserved Severities I may have received at her Hands, would she deal so
heartily as to acknowledge Truth, she very well knows, by an Experience of many
Years, that I have ever behaved myself toward her, like one, who thought it
his Duty to support with Patience all Afflictions from that Quarter. Indeed if
I had not been capable of forgiving a Mother, I must have blushed to receive
Pardon myself at the Hands of my Sovereign.

Neither to say Truth, were the manner of my Birth All, should I have any
Reason from complaint -- when I am a little disposed to a gay turn of Thinking,
I consider, as I was a De-relict from my Cradle, I have the Honor of a lawful
Claim to the best Protection in Europe. For being a Spot of Earth, to which no
body pretends a Title, I devolve naturally upon the KING, as one of the Rights
of his Royalty.

While I presume to name his MAJESTY, I look back, with Confusion, upon the
Mercy I have lately experienced, because it is impossible to remember it, but
with something I would fain forget; for the sake of my future Peace, and
Alleviation of my past Misfortune.

I owe my Life to the Royal Pity, if a Wretch can, with Propriety, be said to
live, whose Days are fewer than his Sorrows; and to whom Death had been but a
Redemption from Misery.

But I will suffer my Pardon, as my Punishment, till that Life, which has so
graciously been given me, shall become considerable enough not to be useless in
his Service, to whom it was forfeited.

Under Influence of these Sentiments, with which his MAJESTY's great Goodness
has inspired me, I consider my Loss of Fortune, and Dignity, as my Happiness;
to which, as I was born without Ambition, I am thrown from them without
repining. -- Possessing those Advantages, my Care had been, perhaps, but how to
enjoy Life; by the want of them I am taught this nobler Lesson, to study how to
deserve it.

R. Savage.

The BASTARD. A POEM.
IN Gayer Hours, when high my Fancy run,
The Muse, exulting, thus her Lay begun.
BLESSED be the Bastard's Birth! through wondrous Ways,
He shines excentric like a Comet's Blaze!
No sickly Fruit of faint Compliance He!
He! stamped in Nature's Mint of Extacy!
He lives to build, not boast a generous Rac^
No tenth Transmitter of a foolish Face.
His daring Hope, no Sire's Example bounds:
His firstborn Lights no Prejudice confounds.
He, kindling from within, requires no Flame
He glories in a Bastard's glowing Name.
BORN to himself, by no Possession led,
In Freedom fostered, and by Fortune fed;
Nor Guides, nor Rules, his sovereign Choic^ control,
His Body independent, as his Soul.
Loosed to the World's wide Range, -- enjoined no Aim;
Prescribed no Duty, and assigned no Name:
Nature's unbounded Son, he stands alone,
His Heart unbiased, and his Mind his own
O Mother, yet no Mother! -- it is to you,
My Thanks for such distinguished Claims are due.
You, unenslav'd to Nature's narrow Laws,
Warm Championess for Freedom's sacred Cause,
From all the dry Devoirs of Blood and Line,
From Ties maternal, moral and divine,
Discharged my grasping Soul; pushed me from Shore,
And launched me into Life without an Oar.
WHAT had I lost, if conjugally kind,
By Nature hating, yet by Vows confined,
Untaught the matrimonial Bounds to slight,
And coldly conscious of a Husband's Right,
You had faint-drawn me with a Form alone,
A lawful Lump of Life by Force your own!
Then, while your backward Will retrenched Desire,
And unconcurring Spirits lent no Fire,
I had been born your dull, domestic Heir;
Load of your Life, and Motive of your Care;
Perhaps been poorly rich, and meanly great;
The Slave of Pomp, a Cipher in the State;
Lordly neglectful of a Worth unknown,
And slumbering in a Seat, by chance my own.
FAR nobler Blessings wait the Bastard's Lot;
Conceived in Rapture, and with Fire begot!
Strong as Necessity, he starts away,
Climbs against Wrongs and brightens into Day.
THUS unprophetic, lately misinspir'd,
I sung: Gay flattering Hope, my Fancy fired;
Inly secure, through conscious Scorn of Ill,
Nor taught by Wisdom, how to balance Will,
Rashly deceived, I saw no Pits to shun;
But thought to purpose, and to act were one;
Heedless what pointed Cares pervert his Way,
Whom Caution arms not, and whom Woes betray;
But now exposed and shrinking from distress,
I fly to Shelter, while the Tempests press;
My Muse to Grief resigns the varying Tone,
The Raptures languish, and the Numbers groan.
O Memory! -- thou Soul of Joy, and Pain!
Thou Actor of our Passions over again!
Why do thou aggravate the Wretches Woe?
Why add continuous Smart to every Blow?
Few are my Joys; alas! how soon forgot!
On that kind Quarter thou invad'st me not,
While sharp, and numberless my Sorrows fall;
Yet thou repeat'st, and multiply'st 'em all!
Is Chance a Guilt? that my disast'rous Heart,
For Mischief never meant, must ever smart
Can Self-defence be Sin -- Ah, plead no more!
What though no purposed Malice stained thee over?
Had Heaven befriended thy unhappy Side,
Thou had not been provoked -- Or Thou had died.
FAR be the Guilt of homeshed Blood from All,
On whom unsought, embroiling Dangers fall!
Still the pale Dead revives, and lives to me,
To me! through Pity's Eye condemned to see.
Remembrance veils his Rage, but swells his Fate;
Grieved I forgive, and am grown cool too late.
Young, and unthoughtful then; who knows, one Day,
What ripening Virtues might have made their Way!
He might have lived, till Folly died in Shame,
Till kindling Wisdom felt a Thirst for Fame.
He might perhaps his Country's Friend have proved;
Been happy, generous, candid, and beloved.
He might have saved some Worth, now doomed to fall;
And I, perchance in him, have murdered all.
O Fate of late Repentance! always vain:
Thy Remedies but lull undying Pain.
Where shall my Hope find Rest? -- No Mother's Care
Shielded my Infant Innocence with Prayer:
No Father's Guardian Hand my Youth maintained,
Called forth my Virtues, or from Vice restrained.
Is it not time to snatch some powerful Arm,
First to advance, then screen from future Harm?
Am I returned from Death, to live in Pain?
Or would Imperial Pity save in vain?
Distrust it not -- What blame can Mercy find,
Which gives at once a Life, and rears a Mind?
MOTHER, miscalled, Farewell -- of Soul severe,
This sad Reflection yet may force one Tear:
All I was wretched by to you I owed,
Alone from Strangers every Comfort flowed!
LOST to the Life you gave, Your Son no more,
And now adopted, who was doomed before,
Newborn, I may a nobler Mother Claim,
But dare not whisper her Immortal Name?
Supreamly Lovely and Serenely Great!
Majestic Mother of a kneeling State!
QUEEN of a People's Hearts, who never before
Agreed -- Yet now with one Consent adore!
One Contest yet remains in this Desire,
Who most shall give Applause, where all Admire.
FINIS.
Books, Poems and Plays, Printed for, and Sold by P. Crampton at Addison's Head
opposite to the Horse-guard in Dame's- street, and T. Benson at Shakespeare's
Head in Castle-street.
THE Travels of Cyrus, in a neat Pocket Volume, Paice bound a British Half
Crown. An Essay on the Passions and Affections, with Illustrations on the Moral
Sense. By Mr. Francis Hutcheson, Author of the Enquiry into the Original of our
Ideas of Beauty and Virtue. Price bound two Shillings and two Pence. A Select
Collection of Tracts, by Walter Moyle, Esquire viz. 1. An Essay upon the Roman
Government. 2. Remarks upon D^. Prideaux's Connection of the Old and New
Testament. 3. An Essay upon the Lacaedemo nian Government. 4. An Argument
against a standing Army. Price bound a British Half Crown. Shadwell's Works,
consisting of all his Plays and Poems. Price bound four Shillings and four
Pence. The Orphan. Price a British Sixpence. Caius Marius. Price Ditto. Lucius
Junius Brutus, Father of his Country. Price Ditto. The Spanish Friar. Price
Ditto. The Double Falsehood. Price Ditto. The Miser turned Courtier. Price four
Pence. The Art of Shooting Flying. Price two Pence. The Norfolk Steward. Price
two Pence. The Basin a Poem. Price a Penny. A Ballad upon the Ruffs. Price a
Penny. Just published, Cyrus a Tragedy.

