REMARKS ON Dr. LEAKE's PAPER ON THE USE OF HIS FORCEPS.

REMARKS ON Dr. LEAKE's PAPER ON THE USE OF HIS FORCEPS.
TO prevent confusion, I shall examine the doctrine laid down in each
paragraph, according to the order in which they arise.

I. The description of the Forceps is not correct. The Forceps ought to be
considered as an Instrument consisting of two Levers, acting alternately from
two centres, which are those parts of the child's head undergoing the greatest
friction. It is true, that with respect to themselves, the center of motion
will be at that part where the blades unite; but when in the hands of the
Operator, and containing a body within their Curve, the alternate motion
necessary for the extraction of that body through a small space, changes the
whole circumstance. Then all that part of the blades, not bearing upon the
child's head, becomes an additional length of Lever.

II. Professors have generally misled us in the pursuit of practical knowledge,
being too often of that order of men, who are the bane of real improvement.
"Inquirunt, says Dr. Harvey, non quomodo res sunt, sed quid alii dicunt". I
believe there are reasons for suspecting that M. Crantz is but little qualified
for laying down rules for the use of Instruments in Midwifery; and M. Levrette
is not unexceptionable authority: The latter however set an example highly
worthy of imitation, when he condemned the use of his Tire Tete, after having
universally recommended it in the unexperienced part of his Life.

Dr. Leake says, "When the Child's head is wedged within the bones of the
Pelvis, it cannot be extracted by Smellie's Forceps, because of their
shortness; and when the Hind-head is forced over the Symphysis of the Pubes, it
cannot be got hold of, within the Curve of the Blades, because they are only
curved in one direction, and being applied along the Ears, they are apt to slip
over the Face, more especially as they are taper toward the point".

When the Head is incuneatum, enclavee, or wedged in the Pelvis, it is a case
in which Forceps of any kind cannot be used with prudence. If we did try them,
we should happily miscarry in the attempt; for if we succeeded, dreadful would
be the consequence to the soft parts of the Mother, crushed between the Child's
head and Forceps on one hand and the bones of the Pelvis on the other.

It is supposed that the Hind-head is forced over the Symphysis of the Pubes.
Whenever this is the case, it is not possible to apply Forceps of any kind with
advantage, or without the utmost danger; and I call upon every Gentleman
conversant in practice to confirm the truth of the assertion. This situation
can only be occasioned by the projection of the Sacrum and last Vertebrae of
the Loins. The Doctrine of applying Forceps before the bulk of the Head has
passed the superior aperture of the Pelvis, carries great danger and
unsurmountable difficulties on the face of it. Those who have endeavored to
reduce it to practice (for it is an old and obsolete doctrine) have in their
accounts given us histories of their attempting it, of the difficulties they
met with, of the mischief they did and a retraction of their errors.

The Censure on Dr. Smellie's Forceps is unprofitable. He was a man of great
Candor, Industry and Ingenuity, and we are all indebted to him. Perhaps he
pursued his favorite opinion too far, but let us attribute his errors to the
common infirmity of Human Nature. Dr. Smellie's Forceps are not taper at the
point.

The only possible advantage to be reaped from the third blade of the Forceps,
is, the prevention of their slipping over the face, which does not happen once
in a hundred times, if the Forceps are properly applied and the head of the
child be low enough for their application.

III. Independent of the dimensions of the Pelvis, it is well known that there
are many cases which require the use of the Forceps.

IV. Objections are made to the use of the Forceps, 'till the bulk of the head
of a child has passed the superior aperture of the Pelvis, not only for the
reason specified by Dr. Leake, but also because force cannot be exerted in a
proper direction. It is true that terrible accidents have followed from the
causes here mentioned; seldom of necessity however, but generally from
mismanagement or innatention after delivery. They do not happen near so
frequently when a Labor is wholly resigned to the efforts of Nature, as when
the Forceps are injudiciously applied.

V. The largeness of the Head and the narrowness of the Pelvis are relative
Terms. However desirable it might be to deliver a Woman under these
circumstances, Facts prove, that if the bulk of the head is not descended
through the superior aperture of the Pelvis, the attempt with Forceps would be
fruitless with respect to the living Child and exceedingly pernicious with
respect to the Mother.

No Practitioner who has a competent knowledge of (...) ever thinks of turning
a Child when the head has entered the Pelvis and the Uterus is contracted. If
the head is wedged in the Pelvis, this operation is absolutely impracticable.

VI. The case supposed in this paragraph, I believe never can happen at the
upper part of the Pelvis; if it is meant at the lower part, the case requires
no Instruments. For before it is perfectly turned, the Hind-head begins to
emerge from under the arch of the Pubes. All presentations of the head, with
regard to instrumental delivery, may be divided into two kinds; -- with the
face to the Sacrum; -- or to the Pubes. Yet neither of these are exact at the
time when it is judged necessary or proper to apply Instruments. At the
superior aperture of the Pelvis the head descends with one ear to the Pubes,
with the other to the Sacrum, or diagonally. As it progredes it necessarily
turns to one of the general presentations, and it is compelled to this turn by
the converging form of the internal surface of the Pelvis, and by the spinal
processes of the Ischia. Now the Head is not placed with the Ears to each side,
but diagonally, in all cases, invariably, when it is necessary to apply the
Forceps. When they are applied, if the action be gentle with them, as it ought,
the head will be turned, without our assistance, into the most favorable
position, as in a natural Delivery. My reason for preferring the straight
Forceps is a conviction that this opinion is true, and that under these
circumstances the curvilinear Forceps become inconvenient, except with regard
to the preservation of the Perinaeum. I do (...) not think any one case
sufficient for the establishment of any practice.

VII. I know enough of the history of Vectes, in as able hands as Roonhuysen's,
to convince a reasonable man that much mischief may be and has been done by
them. It is not sufficient to know that Women have been delivered; we should be
acquainted with the general events, or we cannot form any comparative judgment
of the propriety of this or that Practice. Roonhuysen's Vectis changes it is
center of action, and though it may be first fixed against the Symphysis of the
Pubes, the Ramus of the Ischium, near the obtuse process, must become the
Fulcrum, or you will not be able to extract the head. I allow his Instrument to
be very dangerous, but not to such a degree as the Forceps applied and acting
before the bulk of the head has passed through the superior aperture of the
Pelvis.

VIII. The application of a third blade is as free from danger as of either of
the other blades.

IX. The resisting point is not particularly where the Hind-head presses
against the Pubes; -- the head is wedged and presses on many points.

X. The line of action will certainly be from the extremity of the curve.
Without great caution, when the curved Forceps are introduced, we shall fix
them on a part we do not mean, and when we act with them, we shall do it in a
wrong direction.

The uniformity of the compressive force does not prevent the laceration of the
Perinaeum; but slowness in acting and a recollection that the Vagina has an
axis different from that of the Pelvis. Compressive force is not intended in
the use of the Forceps, but it always sis produced,

XI. There is a possibility of exerting insinitely more power with every kind
of Forceps that has been contrived, than can be used, if we attend either to
the safety of the Mother or Child. The designs of Nature are effected very
slowly. The only method by which we can avoid every inconvenience which attends
the use of the Forceps, is by imitating the progress of a Natural Delivery.

XII. Great advantages are said to be obtained by the use of Forceps curved,
though of the common size. I object to the use of all curvilinear Forceps,
because the head of the Child is always in a diagonal situation when it is
proper or necessary to apply them The curve of M. Levrette's Forceps seems the
most convenient, and Mr. Osborn has contrived a very elegant pair, by
diminishing the size of Levrette's and very little alteration besides.

XIII. Allowing Dr. Leake the full force of his own reasoning, I cannot
conceive the advantage arising from this complicated Instrument. But the case
is really thus:

If we act with the Forceps, from handle to handle, the third blade can do no
service, but must do much mischief by bruising the soft parts.

If we act with the Lever, the Forceps are useless or prejudicial.

I pay great regard to Dr. Leake's abilities, but being convinced that the
Instrument which he has recommended will do great mischief, if the attempt to
introduce it into practice should succeed, I have taken the trouble of writing
these Remarks.

THO. DENMAN


