THE Double-Dealer. COMEDY. As it is Acted at the THEATER ROYAL. By Their
MAJESTY'S Servants.

Written by Mr. CONGREVE.

Interdum tamen, and vocem Comedia tollit.
(...) Ar. Po. Huic equidem Consilio palmam do: hic me magnifice effero, qui
vim tantam in me and potestatem habeam tantae astutiae, vera dicendo ut eos
ambos fallam. Sir. in Terent. (...) The SECOND EDITION.

LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson, (...) Gray's Inn Lane. 1706.

To the Right Honorable CHARLES MONTAGVE, One of the Lords of the TREASURY.
SIR,
I Heartily wish this Play (...) as perfect as I intended it, that it might be
more worthy your Acceptance; and that my Dedication of it to you, might be more
becoming that Honor and Esteem which I, with every Body, who are so fortunate
as to know you, have for you. It had your Countenance when yet unknown; and now
it is made public, it wants your Protection.

I would not have any Body imagine, that I think (...) without (...) Faults,
for I am Conscious of several. I confess I designed (whatever Vanity or
Ambition occasioned that Design) to have written a true and regular Comedy, but
I found it an Undertaking which put me in mind of -- Sudet multum, frustraque
laboret ausus idem. And now to make Amends for the Vanity of such a Design, I
do confess both the Attempt, and the imperfect Performance. Yet I must take the
Boldness to say, I have not miscarried in the whole; for the Mechanical part of
it is perfect. That I may say with as little Vanity, as a Builder may say he
has built a House according to the Model laid down before him; or a Gardener
that he has set his Flowers in a Knot of such or such a Figure. I designed the
Moral first, and to that Moral I invented the Fable, and do not know that I
have borrowed one Hint of it any where. I made the Plot as strong as I could,
because it was single, and I made it single, because I would avoid Confusion,
and was resolved to preserve the three Unities of the Drama, which I have
visibly done to the utmost Severity. This is what I ought not to observe upon
my self; but the Ignorance and Malice of the greater Part of the Audience is
such, that they would make a Man turn Herald to his own Play, and Blazon every
Character. However, Sir, this Discourse is very impertinent to you, whose
Judgment much better can discern the Faults, than I can excuse them; and whose
good Nature, like that of a Lover, will find out those hidden Beauties (if
there are any such) which it would be great Immodesty for me to discover. I
think I don't speak improperly when I call you a Lover of Poetry; for it is
very well known she has been a very kind Mistress to you; she has not denied
you the last Favor; you have enjoyed her, and she has been fruitful in a most
Beautiful Issue -- If I break off abruptly here, I hope every Body will
understand that it is to avoid a Commendation, which, as it is your Due, would
be most easy for me to pay, and too troublesome for you to receive.

I have, since the Acting of this Play, harken'd after the Objections which
have been made to it; for I was Conscious where a true Critic might have put
me upon my Defense. I was prepared for their Attack; and am pretty confident I
could have vindicated some Parts, and excused others; and where there were any
plain Miscarriages, I would most ingenuously have confessed 'em. But I have not
heard any thing said sufficient to provoke an Answer. That which looks most
like an Objection, does not relate in particular to this Play, but to all or
most that ever have been written; and that is Soliloquy. Therefore I will
answer it, not only for my own sake, but to save others the Trouble, to whom it
may hereafter be Objected.

I grant, that for a Man to Talk to himself, appears absurd and unnatural; and
indeed it is so in most Cases; but the Circumstances which may attend the
Occasion, make great Alteration. It oftentimes happens to a Man, to have
Designs which require him to himself, and in their Nature cannot admit of a
Confident. Such, for certain, is all Villainy; and other less mischievous
Intentions may be very improper to be Communicated to a second Person. In such
a Case therefore the Audience must observe, whether the Person upon the Stage
takes any notice of them at all, or no. For if he supposes any one to be by,
when he talks to himself, it is monstrous and ridiculous to the last degree.
Nay, not only in this case, but in any Part of a Play, if there is expressed
any knowledge of an Audience, it is insufferable. But otherwise, when a Man in
Soliloquy reasons with himself, and Pro's and Con's, and weighs all his
Designs: We ought not to imagine that this Man either talks to us, or to
himself; he is only thinking, and thinking such Matter as were inexcusable
Folly in him to speak. But because we are concealed Spectators of the Plot in
agitation, and the Poet finds it necessary to let us know the whole Mystery of
his Contrivance, he is willing to inform us of this Person's Thoughts; and to
that end is forced to make use of the expedient of Speech, no other better way
being yet invented for the Communication of Thought.

Another very wrong Objection has been made by some who have not taken Leisure
to distinguish the Characters. The Hero of the Play, as they are pleased to
call him, (meaning Mellefont) is a Gull, and made a Fool, and cheated. Is every
Man a Gull and a Fool that is deceived? At that rate I Am afraid the two Classes
of Men, will be reduced to one, and the Knaves themselves be at a loss to
justify their Title: But if an Open-hearted honest Man, who has an entire
Confidence in one whom he takes to be his Friend, and whom he has obliged to be
so; and who (to confirm him in his Opinion) in all Appearance, and upon several
Trials has been so: If this Man be deceived by the Treachery of the other; must
he of necessity commence Fool immediately, only because the other has proved a
Villam? Ay, but there was Caution given to Mellefont in the First Act by his
Friend Careless. Of what Nature was that Caution? Only to give the Audience
some Light into the Character of Maskwell, before his Appearance; and not to
convince Mellefont of his Treachery; for that was more than Careless was then
able to do: He never knew Maskwell guilty of any Villainy; he was only a sort of
Man which he did not like. As for his suspecting his Familiarity with my Lady
Touchwood: Let 'em examine the Answer that Mellefont makes him, and compare it
with the Conduct of Maskwell's Character through the Play.

I would beg'em again to look into the Character of Maskwell before they accuse
Mellefont of Weakness for being deceived by him. For upon summing up the
Enquiry into this Objection, it may be found they have mistaken Cunning in one
Character, for Folly in another.

But there is one thing, at which I am more concerned than all the false
Criticisms that are made upon me; and that is, some of the Ladies are offended.
I am heartily sorry for it, for I declare I would rather disoblige all the
Critics in the World than one of the Fair Sex. They are concerned that I have
represented some Women Vicious and Affected: How can I help it? It is the
Business of a Comic Poet to paint the Vices and Follies of Human-kind; and
there are but two Sexes, Male, and Female, Men, and Women, which have a Title
to Humanity: And if I leave one half of them out, the Work will be imperfect. I
should be very glad of an opportunity to make my Compliment to those Ladies who
are offended: But they can no more expect it in a Comedy, than to be Tickled by
a Surgeon, when he is letting 'em Blood. They who are Virtuous or Discreet, can
hardly be offended, for such Characters as these distinguish them, and make
their Beauties more shining and observed: And they who are of the other kind,
may nevertheless pass for such, by seeming not to be displeased, or touched
with the Satire of this Comedy. Thus have they also wrongfully accused me of
doing them a Prejudice, when I have in reality done them a Service.

I have heard there are some who intend to accuse this Play of Smuttiness and
Bawdy: But I can hardly believe it, because I took a particular Care to avoid
it, and if they find any in it, it is of their own making, for I did not design
it to be so understood. But to avoid my saying any Thing upon a Subject, which
has been so admirably handled before, and for their better Instruction, I
earnestly recommend to their Perusal, the Epistle Dedicatory before the
Plain-Dealer.

You will pardon me, Sir, for the Freedom I take of making Answers to other
People, in an Epistle which ought wholly to be sacred to you: But since I
intend the Play to be so too, I hope I may take the more Liberty of Justifying
it, where it is in the Right.

I must now, Sir, declare to the World, how kind you have been to my
Endeavors; for in regard of what was well meant, you have excused what was ill
performed. I beg you would continue the same Method in your Acceptance of this
Dedication. I know no other way of making a Return to that Humanity you showed,
in protecting an Infant, but by Enrolling it in your Service, now that it is of
Age and come into the World. Therefore be pleased to accept of this as an
Acknowledgement of the Favor you have shown me, and an Earnest of the real
Service and Gratitude of,

SIR, Your Most Obliged, Humble Servant, William Congreve.

To my Dear Friend Mr, CONGREVE, On His COMEDY, called, The Double-Dealer.
WELL then; the promised Hour is come at last;
The present Age of Wit obscures the past:
Strong were our Syres; and as they Fought they Writ,
Conquering with Force of Arms, and Dint of Wit;
Theirs was the Giant Race, before the Flood;
And thus, when Charles Returned, our Empire stood.
Like Janus he the stubborn Soil manured,
With Rules of Husbandry the Rankness cured:
Tamed us to Manners, when the Stage was rude;
And boistrous English Wit, with Art indu'd.
Our Age was cultivated thus at length;
But what we gained in Skill, we lost in Strength.
Our Builders were, with Want of Genius, cursed;
The Second Temple was not like the First:
'Till You, the best Vitruvius, come at length;
Our Beauties equal; but excel our Strength.
Firm Dorique Pillars found Your solid Base:
The fair Corinthian crowns the higher Space;
Thus all below is Strength, and all above is Grace.
In easy Dialogue is Fletcher's Praise:
He moved the Mind, but had no Power to raise.
Great Johnson did by Strength of Judgment please:
Yet doubling Fletcher's Force, he wants his Ease.
In differing Tallents both adorned their Age;
One for the Study, to other for the Stage.
But both to Congreve justly shall submit,
One matched in Judgment, both o'er-match'd in Wit.
In Him all Beauties of this Age we see;
Etherege his Courtship, Southern's Purity;
The Satire, Wit, and Strength of Manly Witcherly.
All this in blooming Youth you have Achieved;
Now are vour soiled Contemporaries grieved;
So much the Sweetness of your Manners move,
We cannot Envy you, because we Love.
Fabius might joy in Scipio, when he saw
And join his Suffrage to the Votes of Rome;
Though he with Hannibal was overcome.
Thus old Romano bowed to Raphael's Fame;
And Scholar to the Youth he taught, became.
Oh that your Brows my Laurel had sustained,
Well had I been Deposed if You had Reigned!
The Father had descended for the Son;
For only You are lineal to the Throne.
Thus when the State one Edward did depose;
A Greater Edward in his Room arose.
But now, not I, but Poetry is cursed;
For Tom the Second reigns like Tom the First.
But let them not mistake my Patron's Part;
Nor call his Charity their own Desert.
Yet this I Prophecy; Thou shall be seen,
(Though with some short Parenthesis between:)
High on the Throne of Wit; and seated there,
Not mine (that is little) but thy Laurel wear.
Thy first Attempt an early Promise made;
That early Promise this has more than paid.
So bold, yet so judiciously you dare,
That your least Praise, is to be Regular.
Time, Place, and Action, may with Pains be wrought,
But Genius must be born; and never can be taught.
This is Your Portion; this Your Native Store;
Heaven, that but once was Prodigal before,
To Shakespeare gave as much; she could not give him more.
Maintain your Post: That Is all the Fame you need;
For it is impossible you should proceed.
Already I am worn with Cares and Age;
And just abandoning the Ungrateful Stage:
Unprofitably kept at Heavens Expense,
I live a Rentcharge on his Providence:
But You, whom every Muse and Grace adorn,
Whom I foresee to better Fortune born,
Be kind to my Remains; and oh defend,
Against your Judgment, your departed Friend!
Let not the insulting Foe my Fame pursue;
But shade those Laurels which descend to You:
And take for Tribute what these Lines express:
You merit more; nor could my Love do less.
John Dryden.

PROLOGUE,
Spoken by Mrs. Bracegirdle.
MOors have this Way (as Story tells) to know
Whether their Brats are truly got, or no;
Into the Sea the Newborn Babe is thrown,
There, as Instinct directs, to Swim, or Drawn.
A Barbarous Device, to try if Spouse
Have kept Religiously her Nuptial Vows.
Such are the Trials, Poets make of Plays:
Only they trust to more inconstant Seas;
So, does our Author, this his Child commit
To the Tempestuous Mercy of the Pit,
To know if it be truly born of Wit.
Critics avaunt; for you are Fish of Prey,
And feed, like Sharks, upon an Infant Play.
Be every Monster of the Deep away;
Let Us have a fair Trial, and a clear Sea.
Let Nature work, and do not Damn too soon,
For Life will struggle long, 'ere it sink down:
Let it at least rise Thrice, before it Drown.
Let us consider, had it been our Fate,
Thus hardly to be proved Legitimate!
I will not say, we'd all in Danger been,
Were each to suffer for his Mother's Sin:
But by my Troth I cannot avoid thinking,
How nearly some good Men might have 'scap'd Sinking.
But Heaven be praised, this Custom is confined
Alone to the Offspring of the Muses kind:
Our Christian Cuckolds are more bent to Pity;
I know not one Moor-Husband in the City.
I the Good Man's Arms the Chopping Bastard thrives,
For he thinks all his own, that is his Wives.
Whatever Fate is for this Play designed
The Poet's sure he shall some Comfort find:
For if his Muse has played him false, the worst
That can befall him, is, to be Divorced;
You Husbands Judge, if that, be to be Cursed.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Maskwell, A Villain; pretended Friend to Mellefont, Gallant to Lady Touchwood,
and in Love with Cynthia. Mr. Betterton. Lord Touchwood, Uncle to Mellefont,
Mr. Kynaston. Mellefont, Promised to, and in Love with Cynthia. Mr. Williams.
Careless, his Friend. Mr. Alexander. Lord Froth, A Solemn Coxcomb. Mr. Bowman.
Brisk, A Pert Coxcomb Mr. Powell. Sir Paul Plyant, An Uxorious, Foolish, old
Knight; Brother to Lady Touchwood, and Father to Cynthia. Mr. Dogget.
WOMEN.
Lady Touchwood, In Love with Mellefont. Mrs. Barrey. Cynthia, Daughter to Sir
Paul by a former Wife, promised to Mellefont. Mrs. Bracegird Lady Froth, A
great Cocquet; pretender to Poetry, Wit, and Learning. Mrs. Mountfort Lady
Plyant, Insolent to her Husband, and easy to any Pretender. Mrs. Leigh.
Chaplain, Boy, Footmen, and Attendants.
The SCENE, A Gallery in the Lord Touchwood's House. The Time, from Five a
Clock to Eight in the Evening. THE Double-Dealer.
ACT I. SCENE I.
A Gallery in the Ld. Touchwood's House with Chambers adjoining. Enter
Careless, Crossing the Stage, with his Hat, Gloves, and Sword in his Hands; as
just risen from Table: Mellefont following him. Mel. NED, Ned, whither so fast?
What, turned Flincher! Why, you wo'not leave us?


Care. Where are the Women? Pox I Am weary of guzling, and begin to think them
the better Company.


Mel. Then thy Reason staggers, and you are almost Drunk.


Care. No Faith, but your Fools grow noisie -- and if a Man must endure the
Noise of Words without Sense, I think the Women have the more Musical Voices,
and become Nonsense better.


Mel. Why, they are at the end of the Gallery; retired to their Tea, and
Scandal; according to their Ancient Custom, after Dinner. -- But I made a
Pretense of following you, because I had something to say to you in private,
and I am not like to have many Opportunities this Evening.


Care. And here is this Coxcomb most Critically come to interrupt you.


Enter Brisk. Brisk. Boys, Boys, Lads, where are you? What do you give Ground?
Mortgage for a Bottle, ha? Careless, this is your Trick; you're always spoiling
Company by leaving it.


Care. And thou art always spoiling Company by coming into it.


Brisk. Pooh, ha, ha, ha, I know you envy me. Spite, proud Spite, by the Gods!
and burning Envy -- I Will be judged by Mellefont here, who gives and takes
Raillery better, you or I. Pox, Man, when I say you spoil Company by leaving
it, I mean you leave no Body for the Company to Laugh at. I think there I was
with you, ha? Mellefont.


Mel. OF my Word, Brisk, that was a home thrust, you have silenced him.


Brisk. Oh, my Dear Mellefont, let me perish, if thou art not the Soul of
Conversation, the very Essence of Wit, and Spirit of Wine, -- The Deuce take me
if there were three good Things said, or one understood, since thy Amputation
from the body of our Society. -- He, I think that is pretty and Metaphorical
enough: I'Gad I could not have said it out of thy Company. -- Careless, ha?


Care. Hum, ay, what is it?


Brisk. O, Mon Coeur! What is it! Nay gad I Will punish you for want of
Apprehension: The Duce take me if I tell you.


Mel. No, no, hang him, he has no Taste, -- But, dear Brisk, excuse me, I have
a little Business.


Care. Prithee get thee gone; thou see we are serious.


Mel. We'll come immediately, if you will but go in, and keep up good Humor and
Sense in the Company, prithee do, they will fall asleep else.


Brisk. I'gad so they will -- Well I will, I will, gad you shall Command me
from the Zenith to the Nadir. -- But the Duce take me if I say a good Thing
till you come. -- But prithee dear Rogue, make haste, prithee make haste, I
shall burst else. -- And yonder your Uncle, my Lord Touchwood, swears he will
Disinherit you, and Sir Paul Plyant threatens to disclaim you for a Son-in-Law,
and my Lord Froth will not Dance at your Wedding to Morrow; nor the Duce take me,
I will not Write your Epithalamium -- and see what a Condition you're like to be
brought to.


Mel. Well, I Will speak but three Words, and follow you.


Brisk. Enough, enough, Careless, bring your Apprehension along with you.

[Exit.
Care. Pert Coxcomb.


Mel. Faith it is a good natured Coxcomb, and has very Entertaining Follies --
You must be more humane to him; at this Juncture it will do me Service. -- I Will
tell you, I would have Mirth continued this Day at any Rate; though Patience
purchase Folly, and Attention be paid with Noise: There are Times when Sense
may be unseasonable, as well as Truth. Prithee (...) Day; but allow Brisk to
have Wit, that thou may seem a Fool


Care. Why, how now, why this extravagant (...)?


Mel. O, I would have no room for (...) Jealous of a Plot. I would have Noise
and (...) my Lady Touchwood's Head from working: For Hell (...) busy than her
Brain, nor (...) nations.


Care. I thought your Fear of her had been over -- (...) to Morrow appointed
for your Marriage with Cynthia (...) Father, Sir Paul Plyant, come to settle
the Writings (...)purpose?


Mel. True; but you shall judge whether I have not Reason to be alarmed. None
besides you, and Maskwell, are acquainted with the Secret of my Aunt
Touchwood's violent Passion for me. Since my first Refusal of her Addresses,
she has endeavored to do me all ill Offices with my Uncle; yet has managed 'em
with that Subtilty, that to him they have born the face of Kindness; while her
Malice, like a Dark Lanthorn, only shone upon me, where it was directed. Still
it gave me less Perplexity to prevent the Success of her Displeasure, than to
avoid the Importunities of her Love; and of two Evils, I thought my self
favored in her Aversion. But whether urged by her Despair, and the short
Prospect of Time she saw, to accomplish her Designs; whether the Hopes of
Revenge, or of her Love, terminated in the View of this my Marriage with
Cynthia, I know not; but this Morning she surpised me in my Bed. --


Care. Was there ever such a Fury! it is well Nature has not put it into her
Sexes power to Ravish. -- Well, bless us (...) What followed?


Mel. What at first amazed me; for I looked to have seen her in all the
Transports of a slighted and revengeful Woman: But when I expected Thunder from
her Voice, and Lightning in her Eyes; I saw her melted into Tears, and hushed
into a Sigh. It was long before either of us spoke, Passion had tied her
Tongue, and Amazement mine. -- In short, the Consequence was thus, she omitted
nothing that the most violent Love could urge, or tender Words express; which
when she saw had (...) but still I pleaded Honor and Nearness of Blood (...)
the Storm I feared at first: For (...) a Fury, she flew to my Sword, and (...)
her doing (...) her self a Mischief: Having (...) her; in a Gust of Passion she
left me, and in a Resolution, confirmed by a Thousand Curses, not to close her
Eyes, 'till she had seen my Ruin.


Care. Exquisite Woman! But what the Devil does she think, thou have no more
Sense, than to get an Heir upon her Body to disinherit thy self: for as I take
it this Settlement upon you, is, with a Proviso, that your Uncle have no
Children.


Mel. It is so. Well, the Service you are to do me, will be a Pleasure to your
self; I must get you to engage my Lady Plyant all this Evening, that my Pious
Aunt may not work her to her Interest. And if you chance to secure her to your
self, you may incline her to mine. She Is handsome, and knows it; is very silly,
and thinks she has Sense, and has an old fond Husband.


Care. I confess a very fair Foundation, for a Lover to build upon.


Mel. For my Lord Froth, he and his Wife will be sufficiently taken up, with
admiring one another, and Brisk's Gallantry, as they call it. I Will observe my
Uncle my self; and Jack Maskwell has promised me, to watch my Aunt narrowly,
and give me notice upon a Suspicion. As for Sir Paul, my wise Father-in-Law
that is to be, my Dear Cynthia has such a share in his Fatherly Fondness he
would scarce make her a Moment uneasy, to have her happy hereafter.


Care. So, you have manned your Works: but I wish you may not have the weakest
Guard, where the Enemy is strongest.


Mel. Maskwell, you mean; prithee why should you suspect him?


Care. Faith I cannot help it, you know I never liked him; I am a little
Superstitious in Physiognomy.


Mel. He has Obligations of Gratitude, to bind him to me; his Dependence upon
my Uncle is though my Means.


Care. Upon your Aunt, you mean.


Mel. My Aunt!


Care. I Am mistaken if there be not a Familiarity between them, you do not
suspect: For all her Passion for you.


Mel. Pooh, pooh, nothing in the World but his Design to do me Service; and he
endeavors to be well in her Esteem, that he may be able to effect it.


Care. Well, I shall be glad to be mistaken; but, your Aunt's Aversion in her
Revenge, cannot be any way so effectually shown, as in bringing forth a Child
to disinherit you. She is Handsome and Cunning, and naturally wanton. Maskwell
is Flesh and Blood at best, and Opportunities between them are frequent. His
Affection to you, you have confessed, is grounded upon his Interest, that you
have transplanted; and should it take Root in my Lady, I don't see what you can
(...)


Mel. I confess the Consequence is visible, were your Suspicions just. -- But
see, the Company is broke up, let us meet 'em.


Enter Lord Touchwood, Lord Froth, Sir Paul Plyant, and Brisk. Ld. Touch. Out
upon it, Nephew -- Leave your Father-inLaw, and me, to maintain our Ground
against Young People.


Mel. I beg your Lordship's Pardon -- We were just returning. --


Sir Paul. Were you, Son? Gadsbud much better as it is -- Good, strange! I
swear I Am almost Tipsie -- the other Bottle would be too powerful for me, -- as
sure as can be it would. -- We wanted your Company, but Mr. Brisk -- Where is
he? I swear and vow, he is a most facetious Person -- and the best Company. --
And, my Lord Froth, your Lordship is so merry a Man, he, he, he,


Ld. Froth. O foy, Sir Paul, what do you mean? Merry! O Barbarous! I Would as lieve
you called me Fool.


Sir Paul. Nay, I protest and vow now, it is true; when Mr. Brisk Jokes, your
Lordship's Laugh does so become you, he, he, he.


Ld. Froth. Ridiculous! Sir Paul, you're strangely mistaken, I find Champagne
is powerful. I assure you, Sir Paul, I Laugh at no bodies Jest but my own, or a
Ladies; I assure you, Sir Paul.


Brisk. How? how, my Lord? what affront my Wit! Let me perish, do I never say
any thing worthy to be Laughed at?


Ld. Froth. O foy, don't misapprehend me, I don't say so, for I often smile at
your Conceptions. But there is nothing more unbecoming a Man of Quality, than
to Laugh; it is such a Vulgar Expression of the Passion! every body can Laugh.
Then especially to Laugh at the Jest of an Inferior Person, or when any body
else of the same Quality does not Laugh with one; Ridiculous! To be pleased
with what pleases the Crowd! Now when I Laugh, I always Laugh alone.


Brisk. I suppose that is because you Laugh at your own Jests, I'gad, ha, ha, ha.


Ld. Froth. He, he, I swear though, your Raillery provokes me to a Smile.


Brisk. Ay, my Lord, it is a sign I hit you in the Teeth, if you show 'em.


Ld. Froth. He, he, he, I swear that is so very pretty, I cannot forbear.


Care. I find a Quibble bears more sway in your Lordship's Face, than a Jest.


Ld. Touch. Sir Paul, if you please we'll retire to the Ladies, and drink a
Dish of Tea, to settle our Heads.


Sir Paul. With all my Heart. -- Mr. Brisk you will come to us, -- or call me
when you're going to Joke, I Will be ready to Laugh incontinently.

[Exit Ld. Touch, and Sir Paul.
Mel. But does your Lordship never see Comedies?


Ld. Froth. O yes, sometimes, -- But I never Laugh.


Mel. No?


Ld. Froth. Oh, no, -- Never Laugh indeed, Sir.


Care. No! why what do you go there for?


Ld. Froth. To distinguish my self from the Commonalty, and mortify the Poets;
the Fellows grow so Conceited, when any of their foolish Wit prevails upon the
Side-Boxes. -- I swear, -- he, he, he, I have often constrained my Inclinations
to Laugh, -- he, he, he, to avoid giving them Encouragement.


Mel. You are Cruel to your self, my Lord, as well as Malicious to them.


Ld. Froth. I confess I did my self some Violence at first, but now I think I
have Conquered it.


Brisk. Let me perish, my Lord, but there is something very particular in the
Humor; it is true, it makes against Wit, and I Am sorry for some Friends of mine
that Write, but -- I'gad, I love to be malicious. -- Nay, Deuce take me there is
Wit in it too -- And Wit must be foiled by Wit; cut a Diamond with a Diamond; no
other way, I'gad.


Ld. Froth. Oh, I thought you would not be long, before you found out the Wit.


Care. Wit! In what? Where the Devil's the Wit, in not Laughing when a Man has
a Mind to it.


Brisk. O Lord, why cannot you find it out? -- Why there it is, in the not
Laughing -- Don't you Apprehend me? -- My Lord, Careless is a very honest
Fellow, but harkee, -- you understand me, somewhat heavy, a little shallow, or
so. -- Why I Will tell you now, suppose now you come up to me -- Nay, prithee
Careless be instructed. Suppose, as I was saying, you come up to me holding
your Sides, and Laughing, as if you would bepiss your self -- I look grave, and
ask the Cause of this Immoderate Mirth. -- You Laugh on still, and are not able
to tell me -- Still I look grave, not so much as smile. --


Care. Smile, no, what the Devil should you smile at, when you suppose I cannot
tell you!


Brisk. Pshaw, pshaw, prithee don't interrupt me. -- But I tell you, you shall
tell me -- at last -- But it shall be a great while first.


Care. Well, but prithee don't let it be a great while, because I long to have
it over.


Brisk. Well then, you tell me some good Jest, or very witty Thing. Laughing
all the while as if you were ready to die -- and I hear it, and look thus. --
Would not you be disappointed?


Care. No; for if it were a witty Thing, I should not expect you to understand
it.


Ld. Froth. O foy, Mr. Careless, all the World allow Mr. Brisk to have Wit; my
Wife says, he has a great deal. I hope you think her a Judge.


Brisk. Pooh, my Lord, his Voice goes for nothing. -- I cannot tell how to make
him Apprehend. -- Take it the other Way. Suppose I say a witty Thing to you?


Care. Then I shall be disappointed indeed.


Mel. Let him alone, Brisk, he is obstinately bent not to be Instructed.


Brisk. I Am sorry for him, the Duce take me.


Mel. Shall we go to the Ladies, my Lord?


Ld. Froth. With all my Heart, methinks we are a Solitude without 'em.


Mel. Or, what say you, to another Bottle of Champaign?


Ld Froth, O, for the Universe, not a Drop more I beseech you. Oh Intemperate!
I have a flushing in my Face already.

[Takes out a Pocket-Glass, and looks in it.
Brisk. Let me see, let me see, my Lord, I broke my Glass that was in the Lid
of my Snuff Box. Hum! Deuce take me, I have encouraged a Pimple here too.

[Takes the Glass and looks.
Ld. Froth. Then you must mortify him with a Patch; my Wife shall supply you.
Come, Gentlemen, allons.

[Exeunt.
Enter Lady Touchwood, and Maskwell. L. Touch. I Will hear no more. -- You Are
False and Ungrateful; come, I know you false.


Mask. I have been frail, I confess, Madam, for your Ladyship's Service.


L. Touch. That I should trust a Man, whom I had known betray his Friend!


Mask. What Friend have I betrayed? Or to whom?


L. Touch. Your fond Friend Mellefont, and to me; can you deny it?


Mask. I do not.


L. Touch. Have you not wronged my Lord, who has been a Father to you in your
Wants, and given you Being? Have you not wronged him in the highest manner, in
his Bed?


Mask. With your Ladyship's Help, and for your Service, as I told you before. I
cannot deny that neither. -- Any thing more, Madam?


L. Touch. More! Audacious Villain. O, what is more, is most my Shame, -- Have
you not dishonored me?


Mask. No, that I deny; for I never told in all my Life: So that Accusation's
answered; on to the next.


L. Touch. Death, do you dally with my Passion? Insolent Devil! But have a
care, -- Provoke me not; for, by the Eternal Fire, you shall not 'scape my
Vengeance. -- Calm Villain! How unconcerned he stands, confessing Treachery,
and Ingratitude! Is there a Vice more black! -- O I have Excuses, Thousands for
my Faults; Fire in my Temper, Passions in my Soul, apt to every Provocation;
oppressed at once with Love, and with Despair. But a sedate, a thinking
Villain, whose Black Blood runs temperately bad, what Excuse can clear? One,
who is no more moved with the Reflection of his Crimes, than of his Face; but
walks unstartled from the Mirror, and straight forgets the hideous Form.


Mask. Will you be in Temper, Madam? I would not talk not to be heard. I have
been [She walks about Disorder'd] a very great Rogue for your sake, and you
reproach me with it; I am ready to be a Rogue still, to do you Service; and you
are flinging Conscience and Honor in my Face, to rebate my Inclinations. How
am I to behave my self? You know I am your Creature, my Life and Fortune i^
your Power; to disoblige you, brings me certain Ruin. Allow it, I would betray
you, I would not be a Traitor to my self: I don't pretend to Honesty, because
you know I am a Rascal: But I would convince you, from the Necessity of my
being firm unto you.


L. Touch. Necessity, Impudence! Can no Gratitude incline you, no Obligations
touch you? Have not my Fortune, and my Person, been subjected to your Pleasure?
Were you not in the nature of a Servant, and have not I in effect made you Lord
of all, of me, and of my Lord? Where is that humble Love, the Languishing, that
Adoration, which once was paid me, and everlastingly engaged?


Mask. Fixed, Rooted in my Heart, whence nothing can re^ (...)


Mask. Nay, Misconceive me not, Madam, when I say I have had a Generous, and a
Faithful Passion, which you had never favored, but through Revenge and Policy.


L. Touch. Ha!


Mask. Look you, Madam, we are alone, -- Pray contain your self, and hear me.
You know you loved your Nephew, when I first sighed for you; I quickly found it
an Argument that I Loved; for with that Art you veiled your Passion, 'twas
imperceptible to all but Jealous Eyes. This Discovery made me bold; I confess
it; for by it, I thought you in my Power. Your Nephew's Scorn of you, added to
my Hopes; I watched the Occasion, and took you, just Repulsed by him, warm at
once with Love and Indignation; your Disposition, my Arguments, and happy
Opportunity, accomplished my Design; I pressed the yielding Minute, and was
blessed. How I have loved you since, Words have not shown, then how should Words
express.


L. Touch. Well, mollifying Devil! -- And have I not met your Love with forward
Fire?


Mask. Your Zeal I grant was Ardent, but misplaced; there was Revenge in view;
that Woman's Idol had defiled the Temple of the God, and Love was made a
Mock-Worship. -- A Son and Heir would have edged young Mellefont upon the Brink
of Ruin, and left him none but you to catch at for Prevention.


L. Touch. Again, provoke me! Do you wind me like a Larum, only to rouse my own
stilled Soul for your Diversion? Confusion!


Mask. Nay, Madam, I Am gone, if you Relapse, -- Wh^t needs this? I say nothing
but what you your self, in open Hours of Love, have told me. Why should you
deny it? Nay, how can you? Is not all this present Heat owing to the same Fire?
Do you not Love him still? How have I this Day offended you, but in not
breaking off his Match with Cynthia? Which ever to Morrow shall be done, -- had
you but Patience.


L. Touch. How, what said you Maskwell, -- Another Caprice, to unwind my Temper.


Mask. By Heaven, no; I am your Slave, the Slave of all your Pleasures; and
will not rest 'till I have given you Peace, would you suffer me.


L. Touch. O, Maskwell, in vain I do disguise me from thee, thou know me,
know the very inmost Windings and Recesses of my Soul. -- Oh Mellefont! I
burn; Married to Morrow! Despair strikes me. Yet my Soul knows I hate him too:
Let him but once be mine, and next immediate Ruin seize him.


Mask. Compose your self, You shall Enjoy and Ruin him too, -- Will that please
you?


L. Touch. How, how? Thou dear, thou precious Villain, how?


Mask. You have already been tampering with my Lady Plyant.


L. Touch. I have: She is ready for any Impression I think fit.


Mask. She must be thoroughly persuaded, that Mellefont Loves her.


L. Touch. She is so Credulous that way naturally, and likes him so well, that
she will believe it faster than I can persuade her. But I don't see what you
can propose from such a trifling Design; for her first Conversing with
Mellefont, will convince her of the contrary.


Mask. I know it. -- I don't depend upon it. -- But it will prepare something
else; and gain us Leisure to lay a stronger Plot: If I gain a little Time, I
shall not want Contrivance.

One Minute, gives Invention to Destroy,
What, to Rebuild, will a whole Age Employ.
[Exeunt.
End of the First Act.
ACT II. SCENE I.
Enter Lady Froth, and Cynthia. Cynt. INdeed, Madam! Is it possible your
Ladyship could have been so much in Love?


L. Froth. I could not sleep; I did not sleep one Wink for Three Weeks together.


Cynt. Prodigious! I wonder, Want of Sleep, and so much Love, and so much Wit
as your Ladyship has, did not turn your Brain.


L. Froth. O my Dear Cynthia, you must not rally your Friend, -- But really, as
you say, I wonder too, -- But then I had a Way. -- For between you and I, I had
Whimsies and Vapors, but I gave them Vent.


Cynt. How pray, Madam?


L. Froth. O I Writ. Writ abundantly, -- Dovonever Write?


Cynt. Write, what?


L. Froth. Songs, Elegies, Satires, Encomiums, Panegyricks, Lampoons, Plays, or
Heroic Poems.


Cynt. O Lord, not I, Madam; I Am content to be a Courteous Reader.


L. Froth. O Inconsistent! In Love, and not Write! if my Lord and I had been
both of your Temper, we had never come together, -- O bless me! What a sad
thing would that have been, if my Lord and I should never have met!


Cynt. Then neither my Lord nor you would never have met with your Match, on my
Conscience.


L. Froth. OF my Conscience no more we should; thou say right -- For sure my
Lord Froth is as fine a Gentleman, and as much a Man of Quality! Ah! Nothing at
all of the Common Air, -- I think I may say he wants nothing, but a Blue Ribbon
and a Star, to make him shine, the very Phosphorus of our Hemisphere. Do you
understand those Two hard Words? If you don't, I Will explain 'em to you.


Cynt. Yes, yes, Madam, I Am not so Ignorant. -- At least I will not own it, to be
troubled with your Instructions. [Aside.


L. Froth. Nay, I beg your Pardon; but being Derived from the Greek, I thought
you might have escaped the Etymology. -- But I Am the more amazed, to find you a
Woman of Letters, and not Write! Bless me! how (...) Mellefont believe you Love
him?


Cynt. Why Faith, Man, he that will not take my Word, shall never have it under my
Ha^


L. Froth. I vow Mellefont^ pretty Gentleman, but methinks he wants a Manner.


Cynt. A Manner! what is that, Madam?


L. Froth. Some distinguishing Quality, as for Example, the Belleair or
Brillant of Mr. Brisk; the Solemnity, yet Complaisance of my Lord, or something
of his own that should look a little Jene-scay-quoysh; he is too much a
Mediocrity, in my Mind.


Cynt. He does not indeed affect either Pertness or Formality; for which I like
him: Here he comes.


L. Froth. And my Lord with him: Pray observe the Difference.


Enter Lord Froth, Mellefont, Brisk. Cynt. Impertinent Creature, I could almost
be angry with her now. [Aside.


L. Froth. My Lord, I have been telling Cynthia, how much I have been in Love
with you; I swear I have; I Am not ashamed to own it now; Ah! it makes my Heart
leap, I vow I sigh when I think on it: My dear Lord! Ha, ha, ha, do you
remember, my Lord?

[Squeezes him by the Hand, looks kindly on him, Sighs and then Laughs out.
Ld. Froth. Pleasant Creature! perfectly well, ah! that Look, ay, there it is;
who could resist! 'twas so my Heart was made a Captive first, and ever since to
has been in Love with happy Slavery.


L. Froth. O that Tongue, that dear deceitful Tongue! that Charming Softness in
your Mien and your Expression, and then your Bow! Good my Lord, bow as you did
when I gave you my Picture, here suppose this my Picture --

[Gives him a Pocket-Glass, Pray mind my Lord; ah! he bows Charmingly; nay, my
Lord, you shall not kiss it so much; I shall grow jealous, I vow now.

[He bows profoundly low, then kisses the Glass.
Ld. Froth. I saw my self there, and kissed it for your Sake.


L. Froth. Ah! Gallantry to the last Degree -- Mr. Brisk, you're a Judge; was
ever any Thing so well bred as my Lord?


Brisk. Never any thing; but your Ladyship, let me perish.


L. Froth. O prettily turned again; let me die but you have a great deal of
Wit: Mr. Mellefont, don't you think Mr. Brisk has a World of Wit?


Mel. O, yes, Madam.


Brisk. O dear, Madam --


L. Froth. An infinite deal!


Brisk. O Heavens, Madam --


L. Froth. More Wit than any Body.


Brisk. I Am everlastingly your humble Servant, Duce take me, Madam.


Ld. Froth. Don't you think us a happy Couple?


Cynt. I vow, my Lord, I think you the happiest Couple in the World, for you're
not only happy in one another, and when you are together, but happy in your
selves, and by your selves.


Ld. Froth. I hope Mellefont will make a good Husband too.


Cynt. It Is my Interest to believe he will, my Lord.


Ld. Froth. Do You think he will Love you as well as I do my W^? I Am afraid not.


Cynt. I believe he will Love me better.


Ld. Froth. Heavens! that can never be; but why do you think so?


Cynt. Because he has not so much reason to be fond of himself.


Ld. Froth. O your humble Servant for that, dear Madam; well, Mellefont, you will
be a happy Creature.


Mel. Ay, my Lord, I shall have the same Reason for my Happiness that your
Lordship has, I shall think my self happy.


Ld. Froth. Ah, that is all.


Brisk. (to Lady Froth.) Your Ladyship is in the right; but I'gad I Am wholly
turned into Satire. I confess I Write but seldom, but when I do -- keen
Iambicks I'gad. But my Lord was telling me, your Ladyship has made an Essay
toward an Heroic Poem.


L. Froth. Did my Lord tell you? Yes I vow, and the Subject is my Lord's Love
to me. And what do you think I call it? I dare swear you will not guess -- The
Sillibub, ha, ha, ha.


Brisk. Because my Lord's Title's Froth, I'gad, ha, ha, ha, Deuce take me very
a Propos and Surprising, ha, ha, ha.


L. Froth. He, Ay, is not it? -- And then I call my Lord Spumoso; and my self,
what do you think I call my self?


Brisk. Lactilla may be, -- 'gad I cannot tell.


L. Froth. Biddy, that is all; just my own Name.


Brisk. Biddy! I'gad very pretty -- Deuce take me if your Ladyship has not the
Art of surprising the most Naturally in the World, -- I hope you will make me
happy in Communicating the Poem.


L. Froth. O, you must be my Confident, I must ask your Advice.


Brisk. I Am your humble Servant, let me perish, -- I presume your Ladyship has
read Bossu?


L. Froth. O yes, and Rapine, and Dacier upon Aristotle and Horace. -- My Lord,
you must not be Jealous, I Am Communicating all to Mr. Brisk.


Ld. Froth. No, no, I Will allow Mr. Brisk; have you nothing about you to show
him, my Dear?


L. Froth. Yes, I believe I have. -- Mr. Brisk, come will you go into the next
Room? and there I Will show you what I have.

Exit L. Froth and Brisk.
Ld. Froth. I Will walk a Turn in the Garden, and come to you.

[Exit.
Mel. You're thoughtful, Cynthia?


Cynt. I Am thinking, though Marriage makes Man and Wife one Flesh, it leaves 'em
still Two Fools; and they become more Conspicuous by setting off one another.


Mel. That Is only when Two Fools meet, and their Follies are opposed.


Cynt. (...) ^sition of their Wits, render themselves as ridiculous as Fools.
It Is an odd Game we are going to Play at: What think you of drawing Stakes, and
giving over in time?


Mel. No, hanged, that is not endeavoring to win, because it is possible we may
loose; since we have Shuffled and Cut, let us even turn up Trump now.


Cynt. Then I find it is like Cards, if either of us have a good Hand it is an
Accident of Fortune.


Mel. No, Marriage is rather like a Game at Bowls, Fortune indeed makes the
Match, and the Two nearest, and sometimes the Two farthest are together, but
the Game depends entirely upon Judgment.


Cynt. Still it is a Game, and consequently one of us must be a Loser.


Mel. Not at all; only a Friendly Trial of Skill, and the Winnings to be Shared
between us. -- What Is here, the Musick^ -- Oh, my Lord has promised the Company
a new Song, we'll get 'em to give it us by the way.

[Musicians crossing the Stage. Pray let us have the Favor of you, to practice
the Song, before the Company hear it.


SONG.
I.
CYnthia frowns when ever I Woo her,
Yet she is vexed if I give over;
Much she fears I should undo her,
But much more to lose her Lover:
Thus, in doubting, she refuses;
And not Winning, thus she Loses.
II
Prithee Cynthia look behind you,
Age and Wrinkles will overtake you;
Then too late Desire will find you,
When the Power does forsake you:
Think, O think of the sad Condition,
To be past, yet wish Fruition.

Mel. You shall have my Thanks below.

[To the Music, they go out
Enter Sir Paul Plyant, and Lady Plyant. Sir Paul. Gads bud! I am provoked into
a Fermentation, as my Lady Froth says; was ever the like read of in Story?


L. P. (...)


Sir Paul. Pray your Ladyship give me leave to be Angry -- I Will rattle him up I
warrant you, I Will firk him with a Certiorari.


L. P. You firk him, I Will firk him my self; pray Sir Paul hold you contented.


Cynt. Bless me, what makes my Father in such a Passion! -- I never saw him
thus before.


Sir Paul. Hold your self contented, my Lady Plyant, -- I find Passion coming
upon me by Inspiration, and I cannot submit as formerly, therefore give way.


L. P. How now! will you be pleased to retire, and --


Sir Paul. No marry will I not be pleased, I am pleased to be angry, that is my
Pleasure at this time.


Mel. What can this mean!


L. P. Gads my Life, the Man's distracted, why how now, who are you? What am I?
Slidikins cannot I govern you? What did I Marry you for? Am I not to be absolute
and uncontrolable? Is it fit a Woman of my Spirit, and Conduct, should be
contradicted in a Matter of this Concern?


Sir Paul. It concerns me, and only me; -- Besides, I Am not to be governed at
all times. When I am in Tranquillity, my Lady Plyant shall command Sir Paul; but
when I am provoked to Fury, I cannot incorporate with Patience and Reason, --
as soon may Tigers match with Tigers, Lambs with Lambs, and every Creature
couple with its Foe, as the Poet says. --


L. P. He Is hotheaded still! It Is in vain to talk to you; but remember I have
a Curtain-Lecture for you, you disobedient, headstrong Brute.


Sir Paul. No, it is because I will not be headstrong, because I will not be a Brute,
and have my Head fortified, that I am thus exasperated, -- But I will protect
my Honor, and yonder is the Violater of my Fame.


L. P. It Is my Honor that is concerned, and the Violation was intended to me.
Your Honor! You have none but what is in my keeping, and I can dispose of it
when I please -- therefore don't provoke me.


Sir Paul. Hum, gads-bud she says true. -- Well, my Lady, March on, I will
fight under you then: I am convinced, as far as Passion will permit.

[L Plyant and Sir Paul come up to Mellefont.
L. P. Inhuman and Treacherous.


Sir Paul. Thou Serpent and first Tempter of Womankind. --


Cynt. Bless me! Sir; Madam; what mean you?


Sir Paul. Thy, Thy, come away Thy, touch him not, come hither Girl, go not
near him, there is nothing but Deceit about him; Snakes are in his Peruke, and
the Crocodile of Nilus in his Belly, he will eat thee up alive.


L. P. Dishonorable, impudent Creature!


Mel. For Heavens sake, Madam, to whom do you direct this Language!


L. P. Have I hehav'd my self with all the Decorum and Niccty, befitting the
Person of Sir Paul's Wife? Have I preserved my Honor as it were in a
Snow-House for these three Years past? Have I been white and unsullied even by
Sir Paul himself?


Sir Paul. Nay, she has been an impenetrable Wife, even to me, that is the truth
on it.


L. P. Have I, I say, preserved my self, like a fair Sheet of Paper, for you to
make a Blot upon? --


Sir Paul. And she shall make a Simile with any Woman in England.


Mel. I am so amazed, I know not what to speak.


Sir Paul. Do you think my Daughter, this pretty Creature; gads-bud she is a
Wife for a Cherubin! Do you think her fit for nothing but to be a stalking
Horse, to stand before you, while you take Aim at my Wife? Gads-bud I was never
angry before in my Life, and I Will never be appeased again.


Mel. Hell and Damnation! This is my Aunt; such Malice can be engendered no
where else. [Aside.


L. P. Sir Paul, take Cynthia from his Sight; leave me to strike him with the
Remorse of his intended Crime.


Cynt. Pray, Sir, stay, hear him, I dare affirm he is Innocent.


Sir P. Innocent! Why hark'ee, come hither Thy, hark'ee, I had it from his
Aunt, my Sister Touchwood, -- gads-bud he does not care a Farthing for any
Thing of thee, but thy Portion, why he is in love with my Wife; he would have
tantaliz'd thee, and made a Cuckold of thy poor Father, -- and that would
certainly have broke my Heart -- I Am sure if ever I should have Horns, they
would kill me; they would never come kindly, I should die of 'em, like a Child,
that was cutting his Teeth -- I should indeed, Thy -- therefore come away; but
Providence has prevented all, therefore come away, when I bid you.


Cynt. I must Obey.

[Exit Sir Paul and Cynthia.
L. P. O, such a thing! the Impiety of it startles me -- to wrong so good, so
fair a Creature, and one that loved you tenderly -- it is a Barbarity of
Barbarities, and nothing could be guilty of it --


Mel. But the greatest Villain Imagination can form, I grant it; and next to
the Villainy of such a Fact, is the Villainy of aspersing me with the Guilt. How?
which way was I to wrong her? For yet I understand you not.


L. P. Why, gads my Life, Cousin Mellefont, you cannot be so peremptory as to
deny it; when I tax you with it to your Face; for now Sir Paul's gone, you are
Little Nobus.


Mel. By Heaven, I love her more than Life, or --


L. P. Fiddle, faddle, don't tell me of this and that, and every Thing in the
World, but give me Mathemacular Demonstration, answer me directly -- But I have
not Patience -- Oh! The Impiety of it, as I was saying, and the unparalleled
Wickedness! O Merciful Father! How could you think to reverse Nature so, to
make the Daughter the Means of procuring the Mother?


Mel. The Daughter to procure the Mother!


L. P. Ay, for though I am not Cynthia's own Mother, I am her Father's Wife; and
that is near enough to make it Incest.


Mel. Incest! O my precious Aunt, and the Devil in Conjunction. [Aside.


L. P. O reflect upon the Horror of that, and then the Guilt of deceiving every
Body; Marrying the Daughter, only to make a Cuckold of the Father; and then
seducing me, debauching my Purity, and perverting me from the Road of Virtue,
in which I have trod thus long, and never made one Trip, not one faux pas; O
consider it, what would you have to answer for, if you should provoke me to
Frailty? Alas! Humanity is feeble, Heaven knows! very feeble, and unable to
support it self.


Mel. Where am I? sure, is it Day? and am I awake, Madam?


L. P. And no Body knows how Circumstances may happen together, -- To my
thinking, now I could resist the strongest Temptation, -- But yet I know, it is
impossible for me to know whether I could or not, there is no certainty in the
Things of this Life.


Mel. Madam, pray give me leave to ask you one Question. --


L. P. O Lord, ask me the Question, I Will swear I Will refuse it; I swear I Will
deny it. -- therefore don't ask me, nay you shall not ask me, I swear I Will deny
it. O Gemini, you have brought all the Blood into my Face; I warrant I am as
Red as a Turky-Cock; O fie, Cousin Mellefont!


Mel. Nay, Madam, hear me; I mean --


L. P. Hear you, no, no; I Will deny you first, and hear you afterward: or one
does not know how ones Mind may change upon hearing -- Hearing is one of the
Senses, and all the Senses are fallible; I will not trust my Honor, I assure you;
my Honor


Mel. For Heaven's sake, Madam, --


L. P. O name it no more -- Bless me, how can talk of Heaven! and have so much
Wickedness in your Heart? May be you don't think it a Sin, -- They say some of
you Gentlemen don't think it a Sin, -- May be it is no Sin to them that don't
think it so; -- Indeed, if I did not think it a Sin -- But still my Honor, if
it were no Sin, -- But then, to marry my Daughter, for the Convenience of
frequent Opportunities, -- I Will never consent to that, as sure as can be, I Will
break the Match.


Mel. Death and Amazement, -- Madam, upon my Knees --


L P. Nay, nay, rise up, come you shall see my good Nature. I know Love is
powerful, and no Body can help his Passion: It Is not your Fault; nor I swear it
is not mine, -- How can I help it, if I have Charms? And how can you help it,
if you are made a Captive? I swear it is pity it should be a Fault, -- But my
Honor -- well, but your Honor too -- but the Sin! -- well but the Necessity
-- O Lord, here is some Body coming, I dare not stay. Well, you must consider of
your Crime; and strive as much as can be against it, -- strive be sure -- But
don't be melancholy, don't despair, -- But never think that I Will grant you any
Thing; O Lord, no; -- But be sure you lay aside all Thoughts of the Marriage,
for though I know you don't Love Cynthia, only as a blind for your Passion to me;
yet it will make me Jealous, -- O Lord, what did I say? Jealous! no, no, I
cannot be Jealous, for I must not Love you, -- therefore don't hope, -- But
don't despair neither, -- O, they are coming, I must fly.

[Exit.
Mel. (after a Pause,) So then, -- spite of my Care and Foresight, I am
caught, caught in my Security, -- Yet this was but a shallow Artifice, unworthy
of my Matchiavilian Aunt: There must be more behind, this is but the first
Flash, the priming of her Engine; Destruction follows hard, if not most
presently prevented.

Enter Maskwell. Maskwell, welcome, thy Presence is a View of Land, appearing
to my shipwrack'd Hopes: The Witch has raised the Storm, and her Ministers have
done their Work; you see the Vessels are parted.


Mask. I know it; I met Sir Paul rowing away Cynthia: Come, trouble not your
Head, I Will join you together ever to Morrow Morning, or drown between you in
the Attempt.


Mel. There Is Comfort in a Hand stretched out, to one that is sinking; though
never so far off.


Mask. No Sinking, nor no Danger, -- Come, cheer up; why you don't know, that
while I Plead for you, your Aunt has given me a retaining Fee; -- Nay, I am
your greatest Enemy, and she does but Journey-Work under me.


Mel. Ha! How Is this?


Mask. What do you think of being employed in the Execution of all her Plots? Ha,
ha, ha, by Heaven it is true; I have undertaken to break the Match, I have
undertaken to make your Uncle Disinherit you, to get you turned out of Doors;
and to -- Ha, ha, ha, I cannot tell you for Laughing, -- Oh she has opened her
Heart to me, -- I am to turn you a Grazing, and to -- Ha, ha, ha, Marry Cynthia
my self; there is a Plot for you.


Mel. Ha! O see, I see my rising Sun! Light breaks through Clouds upon me, and I
shall live in Day -- O my Maskwell! How shall I thank or praise thee; Thou have
outwitted Woman. -- But tell me, how could thou thus get into her
Confidence? -- Ha! How? But was it her Contrivance to persuade my Lady Plyant
to this evtravagant Belief?


Mask. It was, and to tell you the Truth, I encouraged it for your Diversion:
Though it made you a little uneasy for the present, yet the Reflection of it
must needs be entertaining, -- I warrant she was very Violent at first.


Mel. Ha, ha, ha, I, a very Fury; but I was most afraid of her Violence at
last, -- If you had not come as you did; I don't know what she might have
attempted.


Mask. Ha, ha, ha, I know her Temper. -- Well, you must know then, that all my
Contrivances were but Bubbles; 'till at last I pretended to have been long
secretly in Love with Cynthia; that did my Business; that convinced your Aunt,
I might be trusted; since it was as much my Interest as hers to break the
Match: Then she thought my Jealousy might qualify me to assist her in her
Revenge. And, in short, in that Belief, told me the Secrets of her Heart. At
length we made this Agreement, if I accomplish her Designs (as I told you
before) she has engaged to put Cynthia with all her Fortune into my Power.


Mel. She is most Gracious in her Favor, -- Well, and dear Jack, how have thou
Contrived?


Mask. I would not have you stay to hear it now; for I don't know, but she may
come this Way; I am to meet her anon, after that I Will tell you the whole
Matter; be here in this Gallery an Hour hence, by that time I imagine our
Consultation may be over.


Mel. I will; 'till then Success attend thee.

[Exit.
Mask. 'Till then, Success will attend me; for when I meet you, I meet the only
Obstacle to my Fortune. Cynthia, let thy Beauty gild my Crimes; and whatsoever
I commit of Treachery or Deceit, shall be imputed to me as a Merit --
Treachery, what Treachery? Love cancels all the Bonds of Friendship, and sets
Men right upon their first Foundations.

Duty to Kings, Piety to Parents, Gratitude to Benefactors, and Fidelity to
Friends, are different and particular Ties: But the Name of Rival cuts 'em all
asunder, and is a general Acquittance -- Rival is equal, and Love like Death an
universal Leveller of Mankind. Ha! But is there not such a Thing as Honesty?
Yes, and whosoever has it about him, bears an Enemy in his Breast: For your
Honest Man, as I take it, is that nice, scrupulous, conscientious Person, who
will cheat no Body but himself; such another Coxcomb, as your Wise Man, who is
too hard for all the World, and will be made a Fool of by no body, but himself:
Ha, ha, ha. Well for Wisdom and Honesty, give me Cunning and Hypocrisy; oh,
it is such a Pleasure, to angle for fairfac'd Fools! Then that hungry Gudgeon
Credulity, will bite at any thing -- Why, let me see, I have the same Face, the
same Words and Accents, when I speak what I do think; and when I speak what I
do not think -- the very same -- and dear Dissimulation is the only Art, not to
be known from Nature.

Why will Mankind be Fools, and be deceived?
And why are Friends and Lovers Oaths believed?
When each, who searches strictly his own Mind,
May so much Fraud and Power of Baseness find.

The End of the Second Act.
ACT III. SCENE I.
Enter Lord Touchwood, and Lady Touchwood. L. T. MY Lord, can you blame my
Brother Plyant, if he refuse his Daughter upon this Provocation? The Contract's
void by this unheard of Impiety.


Ld. T. I don't believe it true; he has better Principles -- Pho, it is
Nonsense. Come, come, I know my Lady Plyant has a large Eye, and would center
every Thing in her own Circle; it is not the first time she has mistaken Respect
for Love, and made Sir Paul jealous of the Civility of an undesigning Person,
the better to bespeak his Security in her unfeigned Pleasures.


L. T. You censure hardly, my Lord; my Sister's Honor is very well known.


Ld. T. Yes, I believe I know some that have been familiarly acquainted with
it. This is a little Trick wrought by some pitiful Contriver, envious of my
Nephew's Merit.


L. T. Nay, my Lord, it may be so, and I hope it will be found so: But that
will require some time; for in such a Case as this, Demonstration is necessary.


Ld. T. There should have been Demonstration of the contrary too, before it had
been believed --


L. T. So I suppose there was.


Ld. T. How? Where? When?


L. T. That I cannot tell; nay I don't say there was -- I am willing to believe
as favorably of my Nephew as I can.


Ld. T. I don't know that. [Half Aside.


L. T. How? Don't you believe that, say you, my Lord?


Ld T. No, I don't say so -- I confess I am troubled to find you so cold in his
Defense.


L. T. His Defense! Bless me, would you have me defend an ill Thing.


Ld. T. You believe it then?


L. T. I don't know; I am very unwilling to speak my Thoughts in any Thing that
may be to my Cousin's Disadvantage; besides, I find, my Lord you are prepared
to receive an ill Impression from any Opinion of mine which is not consenting
with your own: But since I am like to be suspected in the End, and it is a Pain
any longer to dissemble, I own it to you; in short I do believe it, nay, and
can believe any thing worse, if it were laid to his Charge -- Don't ask me my
Reasons, my Lord, for they are not fit to be told you.


Ld. T. I Am amazed, here must be something more than ordinary in this. [Aside.]
Not fit to be told me, Madam? You can have no Interests, wherein I am not
concerned, and consequently the same Reasons ought to be convincing to me,
which create your Satissaction or Disquiet.


L. T. But those which cause my Disquiet, I am willing to have remote from your
hearing. Good my Lord, don't press me.


Ld. T. Don't oblige me to press you.


L. T. Whatever it was, it is past: And that is better to be unknown which
cannot be prevented; therefore let me beg you rest satisfied --


Ld. T. When you have told me, I will --


L. T. You will not.


Ld. T. By my Life, my Dear, I will.


L. T. What if you cannot.


Ld. T. How? Then I must know, nay I will: No more trifling -- I charge you
tell me -- By all our Mutual Peace to come; upon your Duty --


L. T. Nay, my Lord, you need say no more, to make me lay my Heart before you,
but don't be thus transported; compose your self: It is not of Concern, to make
you lose one Minute's Temper. It Is not indeed my Dear. Nay, by this Kiss you
shall not be angry. O Lord, I wish I had not told you any thing. -- Indeed, my
Lord, you have frighted me. Nay, look pleased, I Will tell you.


Ld. T. Well, well.


L. T. Nay, but will you be calm -- indeed it is nothing but --


Ld. T. But what?


L. T. But will you promise me not to angry -- Nay you must -- Not to be angry
with Mellefont -- I dare swear he is sorry -- and were it to do again, would not
--


Ld. T. Sorry, for what? 'Death, you rack me with Delay.


L. T. Nay, no great Matter, only -- Well I have your Promise -- Pho, why
nothing, only your Nephew had a mind to amuse himself, sometimes with a little
Gallantry toward me. Nay, I cannot think he meant any thing seriously, but
methought it looked odly.


Ld. T. Confusion and Hell, what do I hear!


L. T. Or, may be, he thought he was not enough akin to me, upon your Account,
and had a mind to create a nearer Relation on his own; a Lover you know, my
Lord -- Ha, ha, ha. Well but that is all -- Now you have it; well remember your
Promise, my Lord, and don't take any Notice of it to him.


Ld. T. No, no, no -- Damnation!


L. T. Nay, I swear you must not -- A little harmless Mirth -- Only misplaced,
that is all -- But if it were more, it is over now, and all is well. For my Part I
have forgot it; and so has he, I hope -- for I have not heard any thing from
him these Two Days.


Ld. T. These Two Days! Is it so fresh? Unnatural Villain! Death, I Will have him
stripped and turned naked out of my Doors this Moment, and let him rot and
perish, incestuous Brute!


L. T. O for Heavens sake, my Lord, you will ruin me if you take such public
Notice of it, it will be a Town-talk: Consider your own and my Honor -- nay, I
told you you would not be satisfied when you knew it.


Ld. T. Before I Have done, I will be satisfied. Ungrateful Monster, how long? --


L. T. Lord, I don't know: I wish my Lips had grown together when I told you --
Almost a Twelvemonth -- Nay, I will not tell you any more, 'till you are your
self. Pray, my Lord, don't let the Company see you in this Disorder -- Yet, I
confess, I cannot blame you; for I think I was never so surpised in my Life --
Who would have thought my Nephew could have so misconstrued my Kindness -- But
will you go into your Closet, and recover your Temper. I Will make an Excuse of
sudden Business to the Company, and come to you. Pray, good dear my Lord, let
me beg you do now: I Will come immediately, and tell you all; will you, my Lord?


Ld. T. I will -- I am mute with Wonder.


L. T. Well but go now, here is some body coming.


Ld. T. Well I go -- You will not stay, for I would hear more of this.

[Exit Ld. Touch.
L. T. I follow instantly -- So.


Enter Maskwell. Mask. This was a Masterpiece, and did not need my Help --
though I stood ready for a Cue to come in and confirm all, had there been Occasion.


L. T. Have you seen Mellefont?


Mask. I have; and am to meet him here about this time.


L. T. How does he bear his Disappointment?


Mask. Secure in my Assistance, he seemed not much afflicted^ but rather
laughed at the shallow Artifice, which so little tim^ must of necessity
discover. Yet he is apprehensive of some farther Design of yours, and has
engaged me to watch you. I believe he will hardly be able to prevent your Plot,
(...) have you use Caution and Expedition.


L. T. Expedition indeed; for all we do, (...) the remaining Part of this
Evening and before the Company break up, lest my Lord should cool, and have an
Opportunity to talk with him privately -- My Lord must not see him again.


Mask. By no Means; therefore you must aggravate my Lord's Displeasure to a
Degree that will admit of no Conference with him. -- What think you of
mentioning me?


L. T. How?


Mask. To my Lord, as having been privy to Mellefont's Design upon you, but
still using my utmost Endeavors to dissuade him: Though my Friendship and Love
to him has made me conceal it; yet you may say, I threatened the next time he
attempted any thing of that kind, to discover it to my Lord.


L. T. To what end is this?


Mask. It will confirm my Lord's Opinion of my Honor and Honesty, and create
in him a new Confidence in me, which (should this Design miscarry) will be
necessary to the forming another Plot that I have in my Head -- To cheat you,
as well as therest. Aside.


L. T. I Will do it -- I Will tell him you hindered him once from forcing me.


Mask. Excellent! Your Ladyship has a most improving Fancy. You had best go to
my Lord, keep him as long as you can in his Closet, and I doubt not but you
will mould him to what you please; your Guests are so engaged in their own
Follies and Intrigues, they will miss neither of you.


L. T. When shall we meet? -- At Eight this Evening in my Chamber; there
rejoice at our Success, and toy away an Hour in Mirth.


Mask. I will not fail.

[Exit L. Touchwood. I know what she means by toying away an Hour well enough.
Pox I have lost all Appetite to her; yet she is a fine Woman, and I loved her
once. But I don't know, since I have been in a great measure kept by her, the
Case is altered; what was my Pleasure is become my Duty: And I have as little
Stomach to her now as if I were her Husband. Should she smoke my Design upon
Cynthia, I were in a fine pickle. She has a damned penetrating Head, and knows
how to interpret a Coldness the right Way; therefore I must dissemble Ardour
and Ecstasie, that is resolved: How easily and pleasantly is that dissembled
before Fruition! Pox on it that a Man cannot drink without quenching his Thirst.
Ha! yonder comes Mellefont thoughtful. Let me think: Meet her at Eight -- hum
-- ha! By Heaven I have it -- If I can speak to my Lord before -- Was it my
Brain or Providence? No matter which -- I will deceive 'em all, and yet secure
my self, 'twas a lucky Thought! Well this Double-Dealing is a Jewel.

Here he comes (...)

[ Maskwell pretending not to see him, walks by him, and speaks as it were to
himself. Enter Mellefont musing. Mercy on us, what will the Wickedness of this
World come to?


Mel. How now, Jack? What so full of Contemptation that you run over!


Mask. I Am glad you're come, for I could not contain my self any longer: And
was just going to give vent to a Secret, which no Body but you ought to drink
down. -- Your Aunt's just gone from hence.


Mel. And having trusted thee with the Secrets of her Soul, thou art
villainously bent to discover 'em all to me, ha?


Mask. I Am afraid my Frailty leans that way -- But I don't know whether I can
in Honor discover all.


Mel. All, all Man, what you may in Honor betray her as far as she betrays her
self. No tragical Design upon my Person I hope.


Mask. No, but it is a Comical Design upon mine.


Mel. What do thou mean?


Mask. Listen, and be Dumb, we have been bargaining about the Rate of your Ruin
--


Mel. Like any Two Guardians to an Orphan Heiress -- Well.


Mask. And whereas Pleasure is generally paid with Mischief, what Mischief I do
is to be paid with Pleasure.


Mel. So when you have swallowed the Potion, you sweeten your Mouth with a Plumb.


Mask. You are Merry, Sir, but I shall probe your Constitution. In short, the
Price of your Banishment is to be paid with the Person of --


Mel. Of Cynthia, and her Fortune -- Why you forget you told me this before.


Mask. No, no -- So far you are right; and I am, as an earnest of that Bargain,
to have full and free Possession of the Person of -- your Aunt.


Mel. Ha! -- Pho, you trifle.


Mask. By this Light, I Am serious; all Raillery apart -- I knew 'twould stun
you: This Evening at Eight she will receive me in her Bedchamber.


Mel. Hell and the Devil, is she abandoned of all Grace -- Why the Woman is
possessed --


Mask. Well, will you (...)


Mel. By Heaven into a hot (...)


Mask. (...) you would not -- (...) would not be so conve^ (...)


Mel. What do you mean!


Mask. Mean? Not to disappoint the Lady I assure you -- Ha, ha, ha, how gravely
he looks -- Come, come, I wont perplex you. It Is the only Thing that Providence
could have contrived to make me capable of serving you, either to my
Inclination or your own Necessity.


Mel. How, how, for Heavens sake, dear Maskwell?


Mask. Why thus -- I Will go according to Appointment; you shall have Notice at
the critical Minute to come and surprise your Aunt and me together: Counterfeit
a Rage against me, and I Will make my Escape through the private Passage from her
Chamber, which I Will take care to leave open: 'twill be hard, if then you cannot
bring her to any Conditions. For this Discovery will disarm her of all Defense,
and leave her entirely at your Mercy: Nay, she must ever after be in awe of you.


Mel. Let me adore thee, my better Genius! By Heaven I think it is not in the
Power of Fate to disappoint my Hopes -- My Hopes, my Certainty!


Mask. Well, I Will meet you here, within a Quarter of Eight, and give you notice.

[Exit
Mel. Good Fortune ever go along with thee.


Enter to him Careless. Care. Mellefont, get out of the Way, my Lady Plyant's
coming, and I shall never succeed while thou art in sight -- Though she begins to
tack about; but I made Love a great while to no purpose.


Mel. Why, what is the Matter? She Is convinced that I don't care for her.


Care. 'Pox I cannot get an Answer from her, that does not begin with her
Honor, or her Virtue, her Religion, or some such Cant. Then she has told me
the whole History of Sir Paul's Nine Years Courtship; how he has lain for whole
Nights together upon the Stairs, before her Chamber Door; and that the first
Favor he received from her, was a Piece of an old Scarlet Petticoat for a
Stomacher; which since the Day of his Marriage, he has, out of a piece of
Gallantry, converted into a Nightcap, and wears it still with much Solemnity
on his Anniversary Wedding-Night.


Mel. That I have seen, with the Ceremony thereunto belonging -- For on that
Night he creeps in at the Bed's Feet like a gulled Bassa that has married a
Relation of the Grand Signior's, and that Night he (...) his Arms at Liberty.
Did not she tell you at what Distance she keeps (...). He (...) at some certain
times, that is I suppose when she apprehends being with Child, he never has the
Privilege of using the Familiarity of a Husband with his Wife. He was once
given to scrambling with his Hands and sprawling in his Sleep; and ever since
she has him swaddled up in Blankets, and his Hands and Feet swathed down, and
so put to Bed; and there he lies with a great Beard, like a Russian Bear upon a
drift of Snow. You are very great with him, I wonder he never told you his
Grievances, he will I warrant you.


Care. Excessively foolish -- But that which gives me most Hopes of her, is her
telling me of the many Temptations she has resisted.


Mel. Nay, then you have her; for a Woman's bragging to a Man that she has
overcome Temptations, is an Argument that they were weakly offered, and a
Challenge to him to engage her more irresistably. It Is only an inhancing the
Price of the Commodity, by telling you how many Customers have underbid her.


Care. Nay, I don't despair -- But still she has a grudging to you -- I talked
to her the other Night at my Lord Froth's Masquerade, when I Am satisfied she knew
me, and I had no reason to complain of my Reception; but I find Women are not
the same barefaced and in Masks, -- and a Vizor disguises their Inclinations
as much as their Faces.


Mel. It Is a Mistake, for Women may most properly be said to be unmasked when
they wear Vizors; for that secures them from Blushing, and being out of
Countenance, and next to being in the Dark, or alone, they are most truly
themselves in a Vizor Mask. Here they come, I Will leave you. Ply her close, and
by and by clap a Billet doux into her Hand: For a Woman never thinks a Man
truly in Love with her, 'till he has been Fool enough to think of her out of
her Sight, and to lose so much time as to write to her.

[Exit.
Enter Sir Paul and Lady Plyant. Sir Paul. Shall Not we disturb your Meditation,
Mr. Careless: You would be private?


Care. You bring that along with you, Sir Paul, that shall be always welcome to
my Privacy.


Sir Paul. O, sweet Sir, you load your humble Servants, both me and my Wife,
with continual Favors.


L. P. Sir Paul, what a Phrase was there? You will be making Answers, and
taking that upon you, which ought to lie upon me: That you should have so
little Breeding to think Mr. Careless did not apply himself to me. Pray what
have you about you to entertain any Bodies Privacy? I swear and declare in the
Face of the World I Am ready to blush for your Ignorance.


Sir Paul. I acquiesce, my Lady; but don't Snub so loud. [Aside to her.


L. P. Mr. Careless, If a Person that is wholly illiterate might be supposed to
be capable of being qualified to make a suitable Return to those Obligations
which you are pleased to confer upon one that is wholly incapable of being
qualified in all those Circumstances, I Am sure I should rather attempt it than
any thing in the World, [Courtesies.] for I Am sure there is nothing in the World
that I would rather. [Courtesies] But I know Mr. Careless is so great a Critic
and so fine a Gentleman, that it is impossible for me --


Care. O Heavens! Madam, you confound me.


Sir Paul. Gad's-bud, she is a fine Person --


L. P. O Lord! Sir, pardon me, we Women have not those Advantages: I know my
own Imperfections -- But at the same time you must give me leave to declare in
the Face of the World that no Body is more sensible of Favors and Things; for
with the Reserve of my Honor, I assure you, Mr. Careless I don't know any
thing in the World I would refuse to a Person so meritorious -- You Will Pardon
my want of Expression. --


Care. O your Ladyship is abounding in all Excellence, particularly that of
Phrase.


L. P. You are so Obliging, Sir.


Care. Your Ladyship is so Charming.


Sir Paul. So, now, now; now, my Lady.


L. P. So well bred.


Care. So surprising.


L. P. So well dressed, so boon Mein, so eloquent, so unaffected, so easy, so
free, so particular, so agreeable --


Sir Paul. Ay, so, so, there.


Care. O Lord, I beseech you, Madam, don't --


L. P. So gay, so graceful, so good Teeth, so fine Shape, so fine Limbs, so
fine Linen, and I don't doubt but you have a very good Skin, Sir,


Care. For, Heavens sake, Madam -- I Am quite out of Countenance.


Sir Paul. And my Lady^s quite out of Breath; you should hear -- Gad's-bud, you
may talk of my Lady Froth.


Care. O fie, fie, not to be named of a Day -- My Lady Froth is very well in
her Accomplishments -- But it is when my Lady Plyant is not thought of -- If
that can ever be,


L. P. O you overcome me -- That is so excessive


Sir Paul. Nay, I swear and vow that was pretty.


Care. O Sir Paul, you are the happiest Man alive. Such a Lady! that is the
Envy of her Sex, and the Admiration of ours.


Sir Paul. Your humble Servant, I am I thank Heaven in a fine way of living, as
I may say, peacefully and happily, and I think need not envy any of my
Neighbors, blessed be Providence -- Ay, truly, Mr. Careless, my Lady is a
great Blessing, a fine, discreet, well-spoken Woman as you shall see -- If it
becomes me to say so; and we live very comfortably together; she is a little
hasty sometimes, and so am I; but mine is soon over, and then I Am so sorry -- O,
Mr. Careless, if it were not for one thing --


Enter Boy with a Letter, carries it to Sir Paul. L. P. How often have you been
told of that, you Jackanapes?


Sir Paul. Gad so, gad's-bud -- Tim. carry it to my Lady, you should have
carried it to my Lady first.


Boy. It Is directed to your Worship.


Sir Paul. Well, well, my Lady reads all Letters first -- Child, do so no more;
do you hear Tim.


Boy. No, and please you.

[Carries the Letter to my Lady and Exit.
Sir Paul. A Humor of my Wife's, you know Women have little Fancies -- But as
I was telling you, Mr. Careless, if it were not for one thing, I should think
my self the happiest Man in the World; indeed that touches me near, very near.


Care. What can that be, Sir Paul?


Sir Paul. Why, I have, I thank Heaven, a very plentiful Fortune, a good Estate
in the Country, some Houses in Town, and some Money, a pretty tolerable personal
Estate; and it is a great Grief to me, indeed is is, Mr. Careless, that I have
not a Son to Inherit this -- It Is true, I have a Daughter, and a fine Dutitiful
Child she is, though I say it, blessed be Providence I may say; for indeed, Mr.
Careless, I am mightily beholding to Providence -- A poor unworthy Sinner --
But if I had a Son, ah, that is my Affliction, and my only Affliction; indeed I
cannot refrain Tears when it comes to my Mind^

[Cries.
Care. Why, methinks the (...) my Lady's a fine likely Woman --


Sir Paul. Oh^ a fine likely Woman as you shall see in a Summer's Day -- Indeed
she is, Mr. Careless, in all Respects.


Care. And I should not have taken you to have been so old --


Sir Paul. Alas, that is not it, Mr. Careless; ah! that is not it; no, no, you
shoot wide of the Mark a Mile; indeed you do, that is not it, Mr. Careless; no,
no, that is not it.


Care. No, what can be the Matter then?


Sir Paul. You Will scarcely believe me, when I shall tell you my Lady is so Nice
-- It Is very strange, but it is true: Too true -- she is so very Nice, that I
don't believe she would touch a Man for the World -- At least not above once a
Year; I Am sure I have found it so; and alas, what is once a Year to an old Man,
who would do good in his Generation? Indeed it is true, Mr. Careless, it breaks
my Heart -- I am her Husband, as I may say, though far unworthy of that Honor,
yet I am her Husband; but alas-a-day, I have no more Familiarity with her
Person -- as to that Matter -- than with my own Mother -- no indeed.


Care. Alas-a-day, this is a lamentable Story; my Lady must be told on it; she
must in faith, Sir Paul; it is an Injury to the World.


Sir Paul. Ah! would to Heaven you would, Mr. Careless; you are mightily in her
Favor.


Care. I warrant you, what we must have a Son some way or other.


Sir Paul. Indeed, I should be mightily bound to you, if you could bring it
about, Mr. Careless.


L. P. Here, Sir Paul, it is from your Steward, here is a Return of 600 Pounds;
you may take Fifty of it for your next half Year.

Gives him the Letter.
Enter Lord Froth, Cynthia. Sir Paul. How does my Girl? come hither to thy
Father, poor Lamb, you are Melancholy.


Ld. Froth. Heaven, Sir Paul, you amaze me, of all things in the World -- You
are never pleased but when we are all upon the broad Grin; all Laugh and no
Company; ah, then it is such a Sight to see some Teeth -- Sure you're a great
Admirer of my Lady Whifler, Mr. Sneer, and Sir Laurence Loud, and that Gang.


Sir Paul. I vow and swear she is a very merry Woman, but, I think she laughs a
little too much.


Ld. Froth. Merry! O Lord, wh^ (...) Woman of Quality -- You have (...) Day,
Madam?


Cynt. Yes my Lord -- I must (...)


Cynt. O most ridiculous, a perpetual Consort of laughing without any Harmony;
for sure, my Lord, to laugh out of Time, is as disagreable as to sing out of
Time or out of Tune.


Ld. F. He, he, he, right; and then, my Lady Whifler is so ready -- she
always comes in three Bars too soon -- And then, what do they laugh at? For you
know laughing without a Jest is as impertinent; he! as, as --


Cynt. As Dancing without a Fiddle.


Ld. F. Just 'ifaith, that was at my Tongue's end.


Cynt. But that cannot be properly said of them, for I think they are all in
good Nature with the World, and only Laugh at one another; and you must allow
they have all Jests in their Persons, though they have none in their
Conversation.


Ld. F. True, as I Am a Person of Honor -- For Heavens sake let us sacrisice
'em to Mirth a little.


Enter Boy and whispers Sir Paul. Sir Paul. 'Gads so -- Wife, Wife, my Lady
Plyant, I have a Word.


L. P. I Am busy, Sir Paul, I wonder at your Impertinence --


Care. Sir Paul, harkee, I Am reasoning the Matter you know; Madam, -- if your
Ladyship please, we'll discourse of this in the next Room.

[Exit Careless and Lady Plyant.
Sir Paul. O ho, I wish you good Success, I wish you good Success. Boy, tell my
Lady, when she has done, I would speak with her below.

[Exit Sir Paul.
Enter Lady Froth and Brisk. L. F. Then you think that Episode between Susan,
the Dairy-Maid, and our Coachman is not amiss; you know, I may suppose the
Dairy in Town, as well as in the Country.


Brisk. Incomparable, let me perish -- But then being an Heroic Poem, had not
you better call him a Charioteer? Charioteer sounds great; besides your
Ladyship's Coachman having a red Face, and you comparing him to the Sun -- And
you know the Sun is called Heavens Charioteer.


L. F. Oh, infinitely better; I Am extremely beholding to you for the Hint;
stay, we'll read over those half a Score Lines again. [Pulls out a Paper.] Let
me see here, you know what goes before, the Comparison, you know.

[Reads] For as the Sun shines every Day,
So of our Coachman I may say.

Brisk. I Am afraid that Simile will not do in wet Weather -- Because you say the
Sun shines every Day^


L. F. No, for the Sun is will not, but it will do for the Coachman, for you know
there is most Occasion for a Coach in wet Weather.


Brisk. Right, right, that saves all.


L F. Then I don't say the Sun shines all the Day, but that he peeps now and
then, yet he does shine all the Day too, you know, though we don't see him.


Brisk. Right, but the Vulgar will never comprehend that.


L. F. Well, you shall here -- Let me see.

[Reads] For as the Sun shines every Day,
So, of our Coachman I may say,
He shows his drunken fiery Face,
Just as the Sun does, more or less.

Brisk. That Is right, all is well, all is well.


[L. F. reads] And when at Night his Labor's done,
Then too, like Heavens Charioteer, the Sun:

Ay, Charioteer does better.


Into the Dairy he descends,
And there his Whipping and his Driving ends;
There he is secure from Danger of a Bilk,
His Fare is paid him, and he sets in Milk.

For Susan, you know, is Thetis, and so --


Brisk. Incomparable well and proper, Igad -- But I have one Exception to make
-- Don't you think Bilk (I know its good Rhyme) but don't you think Bilk and
Fare too like a Hackney Coachman?


L. F. I swear and vow I Am afraid so -- And yet our Jehu was a Hackney
Coachman, when my Lord took him.


Brisk. Was that he then, I Am answered, if Jehu was a Hackney Coachman -- You
may put that in the marginal Notes though, to prevent Criticism -- Only mark it
with a small Asterism, and say, -- Jehu was formerly a Hackney Coachman.


L. F. I will; you would oblige me extremely to write Notes to the whole Poem.


Brisk. With all my Heart and Soul, and proud of the vast Honor, let me perish.


Ld. F. He, he, he, my Dear, have you done -- will not you join with us, we
were laughing at my Lady Whifler, and Mr. Sneer.


L. F. -- Ay my Dear -- Were you? Oh filthy Mr. Sneer; he is a nauseous Figure,
a most fulsmick Fop, Foh -- He spent Two Days together in going about
Covent Garden to suit the Lining of his Coach with his Complexion.


Ld. F. O silly! yet his Aunt is as fond of him, as if she had brought the Ape
into the World her self.


Brisk. Who, my Lady Toothless; O, she is a mortifying Spectacle; she is always
chewing the Cud like an old Yew.


Cynt. Fie, Mr. Brisk, it is Eringo's for her Cough.


L. F. I have seen her take 'em half chewed out of her Mouth, to laugh, and
then put 'em in again -- Foh.


Ld. F. Foh.


L. F. Then she is always ready to laugh when Sneer offers to speak -- And sits
in Expectation of his no Jest, with her Gums bare, and her Mouth open --


Brisk. Like an Oyster at low Ebb, I'gad -- Ha, ha, ha.


Cynt. (Aside.) Well, I find there are no Fools so inconsiderable in
themselves, but they can render other People contemptible in exposing their
Infirmities.


L. F. Then that the other great strapping Lady -- I cannot hit of her Name; the
old fat Fool that Paints so exorbitantly.


Brisk. I know whom you mean -- But Deuce take me I cannot hit of her Name
neither -- Paints do you say? Why she lays it on with a Trowel -- Then she has a
great Beard that bristles through it, and makes her look as if she were
plastered with Lime and Hair, let me perish.


L. F. Oh you made a Song upon her, Mr. Brisk.


Brisk. He? e'gad, so I did -- My Lord can sing it.


Cynt. O good my Lord let us hear it.


Brisk. It Is not a Song neither -- It Is a sort of an Epigram, or rather an
Epigrammatick Sonnet; I don't know what to call it, but it is Satire. -- Sing it
my Lord.


SONG.
Ld. F. Sings) Ancient Phillis, has young Graces,
It Is a strange thing, but a true one;
Shall I tell you how?
She her self makes her own Faces,
And each Morning wears a new one;
Where Is the Wonder now?

Brisk. Short, but there is Salt in it; my way of Writing I'gad.


Enter Footman. L. F. How now?


Foot. Your Ladyship's Chair is come.


L. F. Is Nurse and the Child in it?


Foot. Yes, Madam.


L. F. O the dear Creature! Let Us go see it.


Ld F. I swear, my Dear, you will spoil that Child, with sending it to and again
so often, this is the Seventh Time the Chair has gone for her to Day.


L. F. O-law, I swear it is but the Sixth, -- and I have not seen her these two
Hours -- The poor dear Creature -- I swear, my Lord, you don't Love poor little
Sapho -- Come, my dear Cynthia, Mr. Brisk, we'll go see Sapho, though my Lord
will not


Cynt. I Will wait upon your Ladyship.


Brisk. Pray, Madam, how old is Lady Sapho?


L. F. Three Quarters, but I swear she has a World of Wit, and can sing a Tune
already? My Lord, will not you go? Will Not you? What not to see Saph? Pray, my Lord,
come see little Saph. I knew you could not stay.

[Exeunt.
Cynt. It Is not so hard to counterfeit Joy in the depth of Affliction, as to
dissemble Mirth in Company of Fools -- Why should I call 'em Fools? The World
thinks better of 'em; for these have Quality and Education, Wit and fine
Conversation, are received and admired by the World -- If not, they like and
admire themselves -- And why is not that true Wisdom, for it is Happiness: And
for ought I know, we have misapplied the Name all this while, and mistaken the
Thing: Since

If Happiness in Self-content is placed,
The Wise are Wretched, and Fools only Blessed.
[Exit.
The End of the Third Act.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
Enter Mellefont and Cynthia. Cynt. I Heard him loud as I came by the
Closet-Door, and my Lady with him, but she seemed to moderate his Passion.


Mel. Ay, Hell thank her, as gentle Breezes moderate a Fire; but I shall
counter-work her Spells, and ride the Witch in her own Bridle.


Cynt. It Is impossible, she will cast beyond you still -- I Will lay my Life it
will never be a Match.


Mel. What?


Cynt. Between you and me.


Mel. Why so?


Cynt. My Mind gives me it will not -- because we are both willing; we each of us
strive to reach the Gole, and hinder one another in the Race; I swear it never
does well when the Parties are so agreed -- For when People walk Hand in Hand,
there is neither overtaking nor meeting: We Hunt in Couples where we both pursue
the same Game, but forget one another; and it is because we are so near that we
don't think of coming together.


Mel. Hum, 'gad I believe there is something in it; -- Marriage is the Game that
we Hunt, and while we think that we only have it in View, I don't see but we
have it in our Power,


Cynt. Within reach; for Example, give me your Hand; why have you looked
through the wrong End of the Perspective all this while; for nothing has been
between us but our Fears.


Mel. I don't know why we should not steal out of the House this Moment and
Marry one another, without Consideration or the Fear of Repentance. Pox
o'Fortune, Portion; Settlements and Jointures.


Cynt. Ay, ay, what have we to do with 'em; you know we Marry for Love.


Mel. Love, Love, downright very Villainous Love.


Cynt. And he that cannot live upon Love, deserves to die in a Ditch. -- Here
then, I give you my Promise, in spite of Duty, any Temptation of Wealth, your
Inconstancy, or my own Inclination to change --


Mel. To run most wilfully and unreasonably away with me this Moment, and be
Married.


Cynt. Hold -- Never to Marry any Body else.


Mel. That Is but a kind of Negative Consent. -- Why, you will not baulk the
Frolic?


Cynt. If you had not been so assured of your own Conduct I would not -- But
it is but reasonable that since I consent to like a Man without the vile
Consideration of Money, he should give me a very evident Demonstration of his
Wit: Therefore let me see you undermine my Lady Touchwood, as you boasted, and
force her to give her Consent, and then --


Mel. I Will do it.


Cynt. And I Will do it.


Mel. This very next ensuing Hour of Eight a Clock, is the last Minute of her
Reign, unless the Devil assist her in propria persona.


Cynt. Well, if the Devil should assist her, and your Plot miscarry. --


Mel. Ay, what am I to trust to then?


Cynt. Why if you give me very clear demonstration that it was the Devil, I Will
allow for irresistible odds. But if I find it to be only Chance, or Destiny, or
unlucky Stars, or any thing but the very Devil, I Am inexorable: Only still I Will
keep my Word, and live a Maid for your sake.


Mel. And you will not die one, for your own, so still there is Hope.


Cynt. Here Is my Mother-in-Law, and your Friend Careless, I would not have 'em
see us together yet.

[Exeunt.
Enter Careless and Lady Plyant. L. P. I swear, Mr. Careless, you are very
alluring -- And so many fine Things, and nothing is so moving to me as a fine
Thing. Well, I must do you this Justice, and declare in the Face of the World,
never any Body gained so far upon me as your self; with Blushes I must own it,
you have shaken, as I may say, the very Foundation of my Honor -- Well, sure
if I escape your Importunities, I shall value my self as long as I live, I
swear.


Care. And Despise me. (Sighing.)


L. P. The last of any Man in the World, by my Purity; now you make me swear --
O Gratitude forbid, that I should ever be wanting in a respectful
Acknowledgment of an entire Resignation of all my best Wishes, for the Person
and Parts of so accomplished a Person, whose Merit challenges much more, I Am
sure, than my illiterate Praises can description;


Care. (In a whining Tone.) Ah Heavens, Madam, you ruin me with Kindness; your
Charming Tongue pursues the Victory of your Eyes, while at your Feet your poor
Adorer dies.


L P. Ah! Very fine.


Care. (Still whining.) Ah why are you so Fair, so bewitching Fair? O let me
grow to the Ground here, and feast upon that Hand; O let me press it to my
Heart, my trembling Heart, the nimble Movement shall instruct your Pulse, and
teach it to allarm Desire.

[Zoons I Am almost at the end of my Cant, if she does not yield quickly.
(Aside.)


L P. O that is so passionate and fine, I cannot hear it -- I am not safe if I
stay, and must leave you.


Care. And must you leave me! Rather let me languish out a Wretched Life, and
breath my Soul beneath your Feet.

[I must say the same Thing over again, and cannot help it. (Aside.)


L. P. I swear I am ready to languish too -- O my Honor! Whither is it going?
I protest you have given me the Palpitation of the Heart.


Care. Can you be so cruel. --


L. P. O rise I beseech you, say no more 'till you rise -- Why did you kneel so
long? I swear I was so transported, I did not see it. -- Well, to show you how
far you have gained upon me; I assure you if Sir Paul should die, of all
Mankind there is none I Would sooner make my second Choice.


Care. O Heaven! I cannot out live this Night without your Favor -- I feel my
Spirits faint, a general Dampness overspreads my Face, a cold deadly Dew
already vents through all my Pores, and will to Morrow wash me for ever from
your Sight, and drown me in my Tomb.


L. P. O you have Conquered, sweet, melting, moving Sir, you have Conquered --
What Heart of Marble can refrain to Weep, and yield to such sad Sayings. --

[Cries.
Care. I thank Heaven, they are the saddest that I ever said -- Oh!

[I shall never contain Laughter. [Aside.


L. P. Oh, I yield my self all up to your uncontrollable Embraces -- Say, thou
dear dying Man, when, where, and how. -- Ah, there is Sir Paul.


Enter Sir Paul and Cynthia. Care. 'Slife, yonder is Sir Paul, but if he were
not come, I Am so transported I cannot speak -- This Note will inform you.

(Gives her a Note.) [Exit.
Sir Paul. Thou art my tender Lambkin, and shall do what thou will -- But
endeavor to forget this Mellefont.


Cynt. I would obey you to my Power, Sir; but if I have not him, I have sworn
never to Marry.


Sir Paul. Never to Marry! Heavens forbid; must I neither have Sons nor
Grandsons? must the Family of the Plyants be utterly extinct for want of Issue
Male. Oh Impiety! But did you swear, did that sweet Creature swear! ha? How
durst you swear without my Consent, ah? Gads-bud, who am I?


Cynt. Pray don't be angry, Sir, when I swore, I had your Consent, and
therefore I swore.


Sir Paul. Why then the revoking my Consent does annul, or make of none effect
your Oath: So you may unswear it again (...)


Cynt. Ay, but my Conscience never will.


Sir Paul. Gads-bud no matter for that, Conscience and Law never go together;
you must not expect that.


L. P. Ay, but Sir Paul, I conceive if she has sworn, do you mark me, if she has
once sworn; it is most unchristian, inhuman, and obscene that she should break
it. -- I Will make up the Match again, because Mr. Careless said it would oblige
him. [Aside.]


Sir Paul. Does your Ladyship conceive so -- Why I was of that Opinion once too
-- Nay if your Ladyship conceives so, I Am of that Opinion again; but I can
neither find my Lord and my Lady to know what they intend.


L. P. I Am satisfied that my Cousin Mellefont has been much wronged.


Cynt. (Aside.) I Am amazed to find her of our side, for I Am sure she loved him.


L. P. I know my Lady Touchwood has no Kindness for him; and besides I have
been informed by Mr. Careless, that Mellefont had never any thing more than a
profound Respect -- That he has owned himself to be my Admirer it is true, but
he was never so presumptuous to entertain any dishonorable Notions of Things;
so that if this be made plain -- I don't see how my Daughter can in Conscience,
or Honor, or any thing in the World --


Sir P. Indeed if this be made plain, as my Lady your Mother says, Child --


L. P. Plain! I was informed of it by Mr. Careless -- And I assure you Mr.
Careless is a Person -- that has a most extraordinary Respect and Honor for
you, Sir Paul.


Cynt. (Aside.) And for your Ladyship too, I believe, or else you had not
changed Sides so soon; now I begin to find it.


Sir P. I am much obliged to Mr. Careless really, he is a Person that I have a
great Value for, not only for that, but because he has a great Veneration for
your Ladyship.


L. P. O las, no indeed, Sir Paul, it is upon your Account.


Sir P. No I protest and vow, I have no Title to his Esteem, but in having the
Honor to appertain in some measure to your Ladyship, that is all.


L. P. O law now, I swear and declare, it shall not be so, you're too modest, Sir
Paul.


Sir P. It becomes me, when there is any Comparison made, between --


L. P. O fie, fie, Sir Paul, you will put me out of Countenance -- Your very
obedient and affectionate Wife; that is all -- And highly honored in that Title.


Sir Paul. Gads-bud I am transported! Give me leave to kiss your Ladyship's
Hand.


Cynt. That my poor Father should be so very silly! [Aside.


L. P. My Lip indeed, Sir Paul, I swear you shall.

[He kisses her, and bows very low.
Sir Paul. I humbly thank your Ladyship -- I don't know whether I fly on
Ground, or walk in Air -- Gads-bud, she was never thus before -- Well, I must
own my self the most beholden to Mr. Careless -- As sure as can be this is all
his doing, -- something that he has said; well, it is a rare thing to have an
Ingenious Friend. Well, your Ladyship is of Opinion that the Match may go
forward.


L. P. By all means -- Mr. Careless has satisfied me of the Matter.


Sir Paul. Well, why then Lamb you may keep your Oath, but have a care of
making rash Vows; come hither to me, and kiss Papa.


L. P. I swear and declare, I am in such a twitter to read Mr. Careless his
Letter, that I cannot forbear any longer -- But though I may read all Letters
first by Prerogative, yet I Will be sure to be unsuspected this time. -- Sir Paul.


Sir Paul. Did your Ladyship call?


L. P. Nay, not to interrupt you my Dear -- Only lend me your Letter, which you
had from your Steward to Day: I would look upon the Account again; and may be
increase your Allowance.


Sir Paul. There it is, Madam; Do you want a Pen and Ink?

[Bows and gives the Letter.
L. P. No, no, nothing else, I thank you, Sir Paul. -- So now I can read my own
Letter under the cover of his. [Aside.


Sir Paul. He? And will thou bring a Grandson at nine Months end -- He? A brave
chopping Boy. -- I Will settle a Thousand Pound a Year upon the Rogue as soon as
ever he looks me in the Face, I will Gads-bud. I Am overjoyed to think I have
any of my Family that will bring Children into the World. For I would fain have
some Resemblance of my self in my Posterity, he Thy? Cannot you contrive that
affair Girl? Do gads-bud, think on thy old Father; Heh? Make the young Rogue as
like as you can.


Cynt. I Am glad to see you so merry, Sir.


Sir Paul. Merry, Gads-bud I Am serious, I Will give thee 500 l. for every Inch of
him that resembles me; ah this Eye, this Left Eye! A Thousand Pound for this
Left Eye. This has done Execution in its time Girl; why thou have my Leer
Hussy, just thy Father's Leer. -- Let it be transmitted to the young Rogue by
the help of Imagination; why it is the Mark of our Family Thy; our House is
distinguished by a languishing Eye, as the House of Austria is by a thick Lip.
-- Ah! when I was of your Age Hussy, I would have held fifty to one, I could
have drawn my own Picture -- Gads-bud I could have done -- not so much as you
neither, -- but -- nay, don't blush --


Cynt. I don't blush, Sir, for I vow I don't understand. --


Sir Paul. Pshaw, Pshaw, you fib you Baggage, you do understand, and you shall
understand; come don't be so nice, Gads-bud don't learn after your
Mother-in-Law my Lady here: Marry Heaven forbid that you should follow her
Example, that would spoil all indeed. Bless us, if you should take a Vagarie
and make a rash Resolution on your Wedding Night, to die a Maid, as she did;
all were ruined, all my Hopes lost -- My Heart would break, and my Estate would
be left to the wide World, he? I hope you are a better Christian than to think
of living a Nun; he? Answer me?


Cynt. I Am all Obedience, Sir, to your Commands.


L. P. [Having read the Letter) O dear Mr. Careless, I swear he writes
charmingly, and he talks charmingly, and he looks charmingly, and he has
charmed me, as much as I have charmed him; and so I Will tell him in the Wardrobe
when it is Dark. O Crimine! I hope Sir Paul has not seen both Letters.

[Puts the wrong Letter hastily up, and gives him her own. Sir Paul, here is
your Letter, to Morrow Morning I Will settle the Accounts to your Advantage.


Enter Brisk. Brisk. Sir Paul, Gads-bud you're an uncivil Person, let me tell
you, and all that; and I did not think it had been in you.


Sir Paul. O Law, what is the matter now? I hope you are not angry, Mr. Brisk.


Brisk. Deuce take me I believe you intend to Marry your Daughter your self;
you're always brooding over her like an old Hen, as if she were not well
hatched, I'gad, he?


Sir Paul. Good strange! Mr. Brisk is such a Merry Facetious Person, he, he,
he. No, no, I have done with her, I have done with her now.


Brisk. The Fiddlers have stayed this Hour in the Hall, and my Lord Froth wants
a Partner, we can never begin without her.


Sir Paul. Go, go Child, go, get you gone and Dance and be Merry, I Will come and
look at you by and by. -- Where Is my Son Mellefont?

[Exit Cynt.
L. P. I Will send him to them, I know where he is. --

[Exit.
Brisk. Sir Paul, will you send Careless into the Hall if you meet him.


Sir P. I will, I will, I Will go and look for him on purpose.

[Exit.
Brisk. So now they are all gone, and I have an Opportunity to practice. -- Ah!
My dear Lady Froth! She Is a most engaging Creature, if she were not so fond of
that damned coxcombly Lord of hers; and yet I am forced to allow him Wit too,
to keep in with him -- No matter, she is a Woman of Parts, and I'gad Parts will
carry her. She said she would follow me into the Gallery -- Now to make my
Approaches -- Hem hem! Ah Ma- (Bows.) dam! -- Pox on it, why should I disparage
my Parts by thinking what to say? None but dull Rogues think; witty Men, like
rich Fellows, are always ready for all Expenses; while your Blockheads, like
poor needy Scoundrels, are forced to examine their Stock, and forecast the
Charges of the Day. Here she comes, I Will seem not to see her, and try to win
her with a new airy Invention of my own, hem!

Enter Lady Froth. Brisk Sings, I Am sick with Love, ha, ha, ha, prithee come
cure walking about. me. I Am sick with, etc.

O ye Powers! O my Lady Froth, my Lady Froth! My Lady Froth! Heigho! Break
Heart; God's I thank you.

[Stands musing with his Arms across.
L. Froth. O Heavens, Mr. Brisk! What Is the matter?


Brisk. My Lady Froth! Your Ladyship's most humble Servant; -- The matter,
Madam? Nothing, Madam, nothing at all I'gad. I was fallen into the most
agreeable Amusement in the whole Province of Contemplation: That Is all --

(I Will seem to conceal my Passion, and that will look like Respect.) [Aside.


L. Froth. Bless me, why did you call out upon me so loud? --


Brisk. O Lord I Madam! I beseech your Ladyship -- when?


L. Froth. Just now as I came in, bless me, why don't you know it?


Brisk. Not I, let me perish -- But did I! Strange! I confess your Ladyship was
in my Thoughts; and I was in a sort of Dream that did in a manner represent a
very pleasing Object to my Imagination, but -- but did I indeed? -- To see how
Love and Murder will out. But did I really name my Lady Froth?


L. Froth. Three times aloud, as I love Letters -- But did you talk of Love? O
Parnassus! Who would have thought Mr. Brisk could have been in Love, ha, ha,
ha. O Heavens I thought you could have no Mistress but the Nine Muses.


Brisk. No more I have I'gad, for I adore 'em all in your Ladyship -- Let me
perish, I don't know whether to be splenatick, or Airy upon it; the Deuce take
me if I can tell whether I am glad or sorry that your Ladyship has made the
Discovery.


L. Froth. O be merry by all means -- Prince Volscius in Love! Ha, ha, ha.


Brisk. O barbarous, to turn me into Ridicule! Yet, ha, ha, ha. The Deuce take
me, I cannot help Laughing my self, ha, ha, ha; yet by Heavens I have a violent
Passion for your Ladyship, seriously.


L. Froth. Seriously? Ha, ha, ha.


Brisk. Seriously, ha, ha, ha. Gad I have, for all I laugh.


L. Froth. Ha, ha, ha! What do you think I laugh at? Ha, ha, ha.


Brisk. Me I'gad, ha, ha.


L. Froth. No the Deuce take me if I don't Laugh at my self; for hang me if I
have not a violent Passion for Mr. Brisk, ha, ha, ha.


Brisk. Seriously?


L. Froth. Seriously, ha, ha, ha.


Brisk. That Is well enough; let me perish, ha, ha, ha. O Miraculous, what a
happy Discovery. Ah my dear charming Lady Froth!


L. Froth. Oh my adored Mr. Brisk!

[Embrace.
Enter Lord Froth. Ld. Froth. The Company are all ready -- How now!


Brisk. Zoons, Madam, there is my Lord. [Softly to her.


L. Froth. Take no notice -- but observe me -- Now cast off, and meet me at the
lower end of the Room, and then join Hands again; I could teach my Lord this
Dance purely, but I vow, Mr. Brisk, I cannot tell how to come so near any other
Man. Oh here is my Lord, now you shall see me do it with him.

[They pretend to practice part of a Country Dance.
Ld. Froth. -- Oh I see there is no harm yet -- But I don't like this
Familiarity [Aside.


L. Froth. -- Shall you and I do our close Dance, to show Mr. Brisk,


Ld. Froth. No, my Dear, do it with him.


L. Froth. I Will do it with him, my Lord, when you are out of the way.


Brisk. That Is good I'gad, that is good^ Deuce take me I can (...)


Ld. Froth. Any other time, my Dear, or we'll dance it below.


L. Froth. With all my Heart.


Brisk. Come my Lord, I Will wait on you -- My charming witty Angel! [To her


L. Froth. We shall have whispering time enough, you know, since we are
Partners.

[Exeunt.
Enter Lady Plyant, and Careless. L. P. O Mr. Careless, Mr. Careless, I Am
ruined, I Am undone.


Care. What Is the matter, Madam?


L. P. O the unlucky'st Accident, I Am afraid I shall not live to tell it you.


Care. Heaven forbid! What is it?


L. P. I Am in such a Fright; the strangest Quandary and Praemunire! I Am all over
in a Universal Agitation, I dare swear every Circumstance of me trembles. -- O
your Letter, your Letter! By an unfortunate Mistake, I have given Sir Paul your
Letter instead of his own.


Care. That was unlucky.


L. P. O yonder he comes reading of it, for Heavens sake step in here and
advise me quickly, before he sees.

[Exeunt.
Enter Sir Paul with the Letter. Sir Paul. -- O Providence, what a Conspiracy
have I discovered -- But let me see to make an end on it. -- (Reads) Hum --
After Supper in the Wardrobe by the Gallery. If Sir Paul should surprise us, I
have a Commission from him to treat with you about the very matter of Fact. --
Matter of Fact! Very pretty; it seems then I am conducing to my own Cuckoldom;
why this is the very traitorous Position of taking up Arms by my Authority,
against my Person! Well, let me see -- 'Till then I languish in expectation of
my Adored Charmer.

Dying Ned. Careless. Gads-bud, would that were matter of Fact too. Die and be
Damned for a Judas Maccabeus, and Iscariot both. O Friendship! What art thou
but a Name! Henceforward let no Man make a Friend that would not be Cuckold:
For whomsoever he receives into his Bosom, will find the Way to his Bed, and
there return his Caresses with Interest to his Wife. Have I for this been
pinioned Night after Night for three Years past? Have I been swathed in
Blankets 'till I have been even deprived of Motion, and rendered incapable of
using the common Benefits of Nature? Have I approached the Marriage Bed with
Reverence as to a sacred Shrine, and denied my self the Enjoyment of lawful
Domestic Pleasures to preserve its Purity, and must I now find it polluted by
foreign Iniquity? O my Lady Plyant, you were chaste as Ice, but you are melted
now, and false as Water. -- But Providence has been constant to me in
discovering this Conspiracy; still I am beholden to Providence, if it were not
for Providence, sure poor Sir Paul thy Heart would break.


Enter Lady Plyant. L. P. So, Sir, I see you have read the Letter, -- Well now,
Sir Paul, what do you think of your Friend Careless? Has he been Treacherous,
or did you give his Insolence a License to make Trial of your Wife's suspected
Virtue? Do You see here?

[Snatches the Letter as in Anger. Look, read it? Gad's my Life if I thought it
were so, I would this Moment renounce all Communication with you. Ungrateful
Monster! He? Is it so? Ay, I see it, a Plot upon my Honor; your guilty Cheeks
confess it: Oh where shall wronged Virtue fly for Reparation! I Will be divorced
this Instant.


Sir Paul. Gads-bud, what shall I say? This is the strangest Surprise! Why I
don't know any thing at all, nor I don't know whether there be any thing at all
in the World, or no,


L. P. I thought I should try you, false Man. I that never dissembled in my
Life: Yet to make trial of you, pretended to like that Monster of Iniquity,
Careless, and found out that Contrivance to let you see this Letter; which now
I find was of your own inditing -- I do Heathen, I do; see my Face no more;
there has hardly been Consummation between us, and I Will be divorced presently.


Sir Paul. O strange, what will become of me! -- I Am so amazed, and so
overjoyed, so afraid, and so sorry. -- But did you give me this Letter on
purpose, he? Did you?


L. P. Did I? Do you doubt me, Turk, Sarazen? I have a Cousin that is a Proctor
in the Commons, I Will go to him instantly. --


Sir Paul. Hold, stay, I beseech your Ladyship -- I Am so overjoyed, stay, I Will
confess all.


L. P. What will you confess, Jew?


Sir Paul. Why now as I hope to be saved, I had no Hand in this Letter -- Nay
hear me, I beseech your Ladyship: The Devil take me now if he did not go beyond
my Commission -- If I desired him to do any more than speak a good Word only
just for me; Gads-bud only for poor Sir Paul, I Am an Anabaptist, or a Jew, or
what you please to call me.


L. P. Why is not here matter of Fact?


Sir Paul. Ay, but by your own Virtue and Continency that matter of Fact is all
his own doing. -- I confess I had a great Desire to have some Honors conferred
upon me, which lie all in your Ladyship's Breast, and he being a well-spoken
Man, I desired him to intercede for me. --


L. P. Did you so, Presumption! Well, remember for this, your right Hand shall
be swathed down again to Night -- And I thought to have always allowed you that
Liberty.


Sir Paul. Nay but Madam, I shall offend again if you do not allow me that to
reach --


L. P. Drink the less you Sot, and do it before you come to Bed.

[Exit.
Enter Careless. Care. Sir Paul, I Am glad I Have met with you, 'gad I have said
all I could, but cannot prevail -- Then my Friendship to you has carried me a
little farther in this Matter --


Sir Paul. Indeed -- Well Sir -- I Will dissemble with him a little. [Aside.


Care. Why faith I have in my Time known honest Gentlemen abused by a pretended
Coyness in their Wives, and I had a mind to try my Lady's Virtue -- And when I
could not prevail for you, 'gad I pretended to be in Love my self -- but all in
vain, she would not hear a Word upon that Subject: Then I Writ a Letter to her;
I don't know what Effects that will have, but I Will be sure to tell you when I
do, though by this Light I believe her Virtue is impregnable.


Sir Paul. O Providence! Providence! What Discoveries are here made? Why, this
is better and more Miraculous than the rest.


Care. What do you mean?


Sir Paul. I cannot tell you, I Am so overjoyed; come along with me to my Lady, I
cannot contain my self; come my dear Friend.

[Exeunt.
Care. So, so, so, this Difficulty's over. [Aside.


Enter Mellefont and Maskwell severally. Mel. Maskwell! I have been looking for
you -- it is within a Quarter of Eight.


Mask. My Lady is just gone into my Lord's Closet, you had best steal into her
Chamber before she comes, and lie concealed there, otherwise she may Lock the
Door when we are together, and you not easily get in to surprise us.


Mel. He? You say true.


Mask. You had best make haste, for she is gone to make some (...)


Mel. I go this Moment: Now Fortune I defy thee.

[Exit.
Mask. I confess you may be allowed to be secure in your own Opinion; the
Appearance is very fair, but I have an After Game to play that shall turn the
Tables, and here comes the Man that I must manage.


Enter Lord Touchwood. Ld. T. Maskwell, you are the Man I wished to meet.


Mask. I am happy to be in the way of your Lordship's Commands.


Ld. T. I have always found you prudent and careful in any thing that has
concerned me or my Family.


Mask. I were a Villain else -- I am bound by Duty and Gratitude, and my own
Inclination, to be ever your Lordship's Servant.


Ld. T. Enough -- You are my Friend; I know it: Yet there has been a thing in
your Knowledge, which has concerned me nearly, that you have concealed from me.


Mask. My Lord!


Ld. T. Nay, I excuse your Friendship to my unnatural Nephew thus far -- But I
know you have been Privy to his impious Designs upon my Wife. This Evening she
has told me all: Her good Nature concealed it as long as was possible; but he
perseveres so in Villainy, that she has told me even you were weary of
dissuading him, though you have once actually hindered him from forcing her.


Mask. I am sorry, my Lord, I cannot make you an Answer; this is an Occasion in
which I would not willingly be so silent.


Ld. T. I know you would excuse him -- And I know as well that you cannot.


Mask. Indeed I was in hopes 'thad been a youthful Heat that might have soon
boiled over; but --


Ld. T. Say on.


Mask. I have nothing more to say, my Lord -- But to express my Concern; for I
think his Frenzy increases daily.


Ld. T. How! Give me but Proof of it, Ocular Proof, that I may justify my
Dealing with him to the World, and share my Fortunes.


Mask. O my Lord! consider that is hard: Besides, time may work upon him: Then,
for me to do it! I have professed an everlasting Friendship to him.


Ld. T. He is your Friend, and what am I?


Mask. I am answered.


Ld. T. Fear not his Displeasure; I will put you out of his, and Fortune's
Power, and for that thou art scrupulously honest, I will secure thy Fidelity to
him, and give my Honor never to own any Discovery that you shall make me. Can
you give me a demonstrative Proof? Speak.


Mask. I wish I could not -- To be plain, my Lord, I intended this Evening to
have tried all Arguments to dissuade him from a Design, which I suspect; and if
I had not succeeded, to have informed your Lordship of what I knew.


Ld. T. I thank you. What is the Villain's Purpose?


Mask. He has owned nothing to me of late, and what I mean now, is only a bare
Suspicion of my own. If your Lordship will meet me a Quarter of an Hour hence
there, in that Lobby by my Lady's Bedchamber, I shall be able to tell you more.


Ld. T. I will.


Mask. My Duty to your Lordship, makes me do a severe Piece of Justice. --


Ld. T. I will be secret, and reward your Honesty beyond your Hopes.

[Exeunt, severally.
SCENE opening shows Lady Touchwood's Chamber. Mellefont Solus. Mel. Pray
Heaven my Aunt keep touch with her Assignation. -- Oh that her Lord were but
sweating behind this Hanging, with the Expectation of what I shall see -- Hist,
she comes -- Little does she think what a Mine is just ready to spring under
her Feet. But to my Post.

[Goes behind the Hangings.
Enter Lady Touchwood. L. T. It Is Eight a Clock: Methinks I should have found
him here. Who does not prevent the Hour of Love, outstays the Time; for to be
dully punctual, is too slow. -- I was accusing you of Neglect.


Enter Maskwell. Mask. I confess you do reproach me when I see you here before
me; but it is fit I should be still behind hand, still to be more and more
indebted to your Goodness.


L. T. You can excuse a Fault too well, not to have been to blame -- A ready
Answer shows you were prepared.


Mask. Guilt is ever at a loss, and Confusion waits upon it; when Innocence and
bold Truth are always ready for Expression --


L. T. Not in Love; Words are the weak Support of cold Indifference; Love has
no Language to be heard.


Mask. Excess of Joy has made me stupid! Thus may my Lips be ever closed.
(Kisses her.) And thus -- Oh who would not lose his Speech, upon Condition to
have Joys above it?


L. T. Hold, let me lock the Door first.

[Goes to the Door.
Mask. (Aside.) That I believed; 'twas well I left the private Passage open.


L. T. So, that is safe.


Mask. And so may all your Pleasures be, and secret as this Kiss --


Mel. And may all Treachery be thus discovered.

[Leaps out.
L. T. Ah!

[Shrieks.
Mel. Villain!

[Offers to draw.
Mask. Nay then, there is but one Way.

[Runs out.
Mel. Say you so, were you provided for an Escape? Hold, Madam, you have no
more Holes to your Borough, I Will stand between you and this Sally-Port.


L. T. Thunder strike thee dead for this Deceit, immediate Lightning blast
thee, me and the whole World -- Oh! I could rack my self, play the Vulture to
my own Heart, and gnaw it piecemeal, for not boding to me this Misfortune.


Mel. Be Patient. --


L. T. Be Damned.


Mel. Consider I have you on the Hook; you will but flounder your self a weary,
and be nevertheless my Prisoner.


L. T. I Will hold my Breath and die, but I Will be free.


Mel. O Madam, have a care of dying unprepared, I doubt you have some
unrepented Sins that may hang heavy, and retard your Flight.


L. T. O! what shall I do? say? Whither shall I turn? Has Hell no Remedy?


Mel. None, Hell has served you even as Heaven has done, left you to your self.
-- You're in a kind of Erasmus Paradise; yet if you please you may make it a
Purgatory; and with a little Penance and my Absolution all this may turn to
good Account.


L. T. (Aside.) Hold in my Passion, and fall, fall a little thou swelling
Heart; let me have some intermission of this Rage, and one Minute's Coolness to
dissemble.

[She weeps.
Mel. You have been to blame. -- I like those Tears, and hope they are of the
purest Kind -- Penitential Tears.


L. T. O the Scene was shifted quick before me -- I had not time to think -- I
was surprised to see a Monster in the Glass, and now I find it is my self; Can
you have Mercy to forgive the Faults I have imagined, but never put in practice
-- Oconsider, consider how fatal you have been to me, you have already killed
the Quiet of this Life. The Love of you, was the first wandering Fire that ever
miss-led my Steps, and while I had only that in View, I was betrayed into
unthought of Ways of Ruin.


Mel. May I believe this true?


L. T. O be not cruelly incredulous -- How can you doubt these streaming Eyes?
Keep the severest Eye over all my future Conduct; and if I once relapse, let me
not hope Forgiveness, 'twill ever be in your Power to ruin me -- My Lord shall
sign to your Desires; I will my self create your Happiness, and Cynthia shall
be this Night your Bride -- Do but conceal my Failings, and forgive.


Mel. Upon such Terms I will be ever yours in every honest Way.


Enter Lord Touchwood, Maskwell softly behind him. Mask. I have kept my Word,
he is here, but I must not be seen.

[Exit.
Ld. T. Hell and Amazement, she is in Tears.


L. T. (Kneeling) Eternal Blessings thank you -- Ha! My Lord listening! O
Fortune has o'erpaid me all, all! all is my own! [Aside.]


Mel. Nay, I beseech you rise.


L. T. (Aloud.) Never, never! I Will grow to the Ground, be buried quick beneath
it, ever I Will be consenting to so damned a Sin as Incest! unnatural Incest!


Mel. Ha!


L. T. O cruel Man, will you not let me go -- I Will forgive all that is past -- O
Heaven, you will not Ravish me!


Mel. Damnation!


Ld. T. Monster, Dog! your Life shall answer this --

[Draws, and runs at Mel. is held by Lady Touch.
L. T. O Heavens my Lord! Hold, hold, for Heavens sake.


Mel. Confusion, my Uncle! O the damned Sorceress.


L. T. Moderate your Rage, good my Lord! He Is mad, alas he is mad -- Indeed he
is my Lord, and knows not what he does -- See how wild he looks.


Mel. By Heaven 'twere senselessss not to be mad, and see such Witchcraft.


L. T. My Lord, you hear him, he talks idly.


Ld. T. Hence from my Sight, thou living Infamy to my Name; when next I see
that Face, I Will write Villain in it with my Sword's Point.


Mel. Now, by my Soul, I will not go 'till I have made known my Wrongs -- Nay,
'till I have made known yours, which (if possible) are greater -- though she
has all the Host of Hell her Servants; though she can wear more Shapes in
shining Day, then Fear shows Cowards in the Dark --


L. T. Alas he raves! Talks very Poetry! For Heavens sake away my Lord, he will
either tempt you to Extravagance, or commit some himself.


Mel. Death and Furies, will you not hear me -- Why by Heaven she laughs,
grins, points to your Back; she forks out Cuckoldom with her Fingers, and
you're running Horn-mad after your Fortune.

[As she is going she turns back and smiles at him.
Ld. T. I fear he is mad indeed -- Let Us send Maskwell to him.


Mel. Send him to her.


L. T. Come, come, good my Lord, my Heart aches so, I shall faint if I stay.

[Exeunt.
Mel. O I could curse my Stars, Fate, and Chance; all Causes and Accidents of
Fortune in this Life! But to what purpose? Yet, 'sdeath, for a Man to have the
Fruit of all his Industry grow full and ripe, ready to drop into his Mouth, and
just when he holds out his Hand to gather it, to have a sudden Whirlwind come,
tear up Tree and all, and bear away the very Root and Foundation of his Hopes;
What Temper can contain? They talk of sending Maskwell to me; I never had more
need of him -- But what can he do? Imagination cannot form a fairer and more
plausible Design than this of his which has miscarried. -- O my precious Aunt,
I shall never thrive without I deal with the Devil, or another Woman.

Women like Flames have a destroving Power,
Never to be quenched, 'till they themselves devour.
SCENE shuts. [Exit.
End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V. SCENE I.
Enter Lady Touchwood and Maskwell. L. T. WAst not Lucky?


Mask. Lucky! Fortune is your own, and it is her Interest so to be; By Heaven I
believe you can control her Power, and she fears it; though Chance brought my
Lord, 'twas your own Art that turned it to Advantage.


L. T. It Is true it might have been my Ruin -- But yonder is my Lord, I believe
he is coming to find you, I Will not be seen.

[Exit.
Mask. So; I durst not own my introducing my Lord, though it succeeded well for
her, for she would have suspected a Design which I should have been puzzled to
excuse. My Lord is thoughtful -- I Will be so to; yet he shall know my Thoughts;
or think he does --


Enter Lord Touchwood. Mask. What have I done?


Ld. T. Talking to himself!


Mask. 'Twas honest -- and shall I be rewarded for it? No, 'twas honest
therefore I shall not; -- Nay, rather therefore I ought not for it rewards it self.


L. T. Unequalled Virtue! [Aside.


Mask. But should it be known! then I have lost a Friend! He was an ill Man,
and I have gained for half my self I lent him, and that I have recalled; so I
have served my self, and what is yet better, I have served a worthy Lord to
whom I owe my self.


Ld. T. Excellent Man! [Aside.


Mask. Yet I am wretched -- O there is a Secret burns within this Breast, which
should it once blaze sorth, would ruin all, consume my honest Character, and
brand me with the name of Villam.


Ld. T. Ha!


Mask. Why do I love! Yet Heaven and my waking Conscience are my Witnesses, I
never gave one working Thought a vent; which might discover that I loved, nor
ever must; no, let it prey upon my Heart; for I would rather die, than seem
once, barely seem, dishonest: -- O, should it once be known I love fair
Cynthia, all this that I have done would look like Rival's Malice, false
Friendship to my Lord, and base Self-interest. Let me perish first, and from
this Hour avoid all Sight and Speech, and, if I can, all Thought of that
pernicious Beauty. Ha! But what is my Distraction doing? I am wildly talking to
my self, and some ill Chance might have directed malicious Ears this way.

[Seems to start, seeing my Lord.
Ld. T. Start not -- let guilty and dishonest Souls start at the Revelation of
their Thoughts, but be thou fixed, as is thy Virtue.


Mask. I am confounded and beg your Lordship's Pardon for those free Discourses
which I have had with my self.


Ld. T. Come, I beg your Pardon that I overheard you, and yet it shall not
need -- Honest Maskwell! thy and my good Genius led me hither -- Mine, in that
I have discovered so much manly Virtue; thine, in that thou shall have due
Reward of all thy Worth. Give me thy Hand -- my Nephew is the alone remaining
Branch of all our ancient Family; him I thus blow away, and constitute thee in
his room to be my Heir --


Mask. Now Heaven forbid --


Ld. T. No more -- I have resolved -- The Writings are ready drawn, and wanted
nothing but to be signed, and have his Name inserted -- Yours will fill the
Blank as well -- I will have no Reply -- Let me command this time; for it is the
last, in which I will assume Authority -- hereafter, you shall rule where I
have Power.


Mask. I humbly would petition --


Ld. T. Is It for your self? -- [ Mask. pauses.] I Will hear of naught for any
body else.


Mask. Then Witness Heaven for me, this Wealth and Honor was not of my
seeking, nor would I build my Fortune on another's Ruin: I had but one Desire
--


Ld. T. Thou shall enjoy it -- If all I Am worth in Wealth or Interest can
purchase Cynthia, she is thine. -- I Am sure Sir Paul's Consent will follow
Fortune; I Will quickly show him which way that is going.


Mask. You oppress me with Bounty; my Gratitude is weak, and shrinks beneath
the Weight, and cannot rise to thank you -- What, enjoy my Love! Forgive the
Transports of a Blessing so unexpected, so unhop'd for, so unthought of!


Ld. T. I will confirm it, and rejoice with thee.

[Exit.
Mask. This is prosperous indeed -- Why let him find me out a Villain settled
in Possession of a fair Estate, and full Fruition of my Love, I Will bear the
Railings of a losing Gamester -- But should he find me out before! it is
dangerous to delay -- Let me think -- should my Lord proceed to treat openly of
my Marriage with Cynthia, all must be discovered, and Mellefont can be no
longer blinded. -- It must not be; nay, should my Lady know it -- ay, then were
fine Work indeed! Her Fury would spare nothing, though she involved her self in
Ruin. No, it must be by Stratagem -- I must deceive Mellefont once more, and
get my Lord to consent to my private Management. He comes opportunely -- Now
will I, in my old way, discover the whole and real truth of the Matter to him,
that he may not suspect one Word on it.

No Mask like open Truth to cover Lies,
As to go Naked is the best Disguise.

Enter Mellefont. Mel. O Maskwell, what Hopes? I am confounded in a maze of
Thoughts, each leading into one another, and all ending in Perplexity. My Uncle
will not see, nor hear me.


Mask. No matter, Sir, don't trouble your Head, all is in my Power.


Mel. How? For Heavens sake?


Mask. Little do you think that your Aunt has kept her Word, -- How the Devil
she wrought my Lord into this Dotage, I know not; but he is gone to Sir Paul
about my Marriage with Cynthia, and has appointed me his Heir.


Mel. The Devil he has! What Is to be done?


Mask. I have it, it must be by Stratagem; for it is in vain to make Application
to him. I think I have that in my Head that cannot fail: Where Is Cynthia?


Mel. In the Garden.


Mask. Let us go and consult her, my Life for yours, I cheat my Lord.

[Exeunt.
Enter Lord Touchwood, Lady Touchwood. L. T. Maskwell your Heir, and marry
Cynthia!


Ld. T. I cannot do too much, for so much Merit.


L. T. But this is a thing of too great Moment to be so suddenly resolved. Why
Cynthia? Why must he be Married? Is there not Reward enough in raising his low
Fortune, but he must mix his Blood with mine, and wed my Niece? How know you
that my Brother will consent, or she? Nay, he himself perhaps may have
Affections otherwhere.


Ld. T. No, I am convinced he loves her.


L. T. Maskwell love Cynthia, impossible!


Ld. T. I told you, he confessed it to me.


L. T. Confusion! How Is this! [Aside.


Ld. T. His Humility long stifled his Passion: And his Love of Mellefont would
have made him still conceal it. -- But by Encouragement, I wrung the Secret
from him; and know he is no way to be rewarded but in her. I Will defer my farther
Proceedings in it, 'till you have considered it; but remember how we are both
indebted to him.

[Exit.
L. T. Both indebted to him! Yes, we are both indebted to him, if you knew all,
damned Villain! Oh, I am wild with this Surprise of Treachery: Hell and Fire,
it is impossible, it cannot be. -- He Love Cynthia! What have I been Bawd to
his Designs, his Property only, a baiting Place to stay his Stomach in the Road
to her; now I see what made him false to Mellefont, -- Shame and Destruction! I
cannot bear it, oh! what Woman can bear to be a Property? To be kindled to a
Flame, only to light him to another's Arms; oh! that I were Fire indeed, that I
might burn the vile Traitor to a Hell of Torments, -- But he is Damnation proof,
a Devil already, and Fire is his Element. What shall I do? How shall I think? I
cannot think, -- All my Designs are lost, my Love unsated, my Revenge
unfinished, and fresh cause of Fury from unthought of Plagues.


Enter Sir Paul. Sir Paul. Madam, Sister, my Lady Sister, did you see my Lady
my Wife?


L. T. Oh! Torture!


Sir P. Gad's-bud, I cannot find her high nor low; where can she be, think you?


L. T. Where she is serving you, as your Sex ought to be served; making you a
Beast. Don't you know that you're a Fool, Brother?


Sir Paul. A Fool; he, he, he, you're merry -- No, no, not I, I know no such
matter.


L. T. Why then you don't know half your Happiness.


Sir Paul. That Is a Jest with all my Heart, faith and troth, -- But harkee, my
Lord told me something of a Revolution of things; I don't know what to make
on it, -- Gad's-bud I must consult my Wife, -- he talks of disinheriting his
Nephew; and I don't know what, -- Look you, Sister, I must know what my Girl
has to trust to; or nor a Syllable of a Wedding, gad's-bud -- to show you that
I am not a Fool.


L. T. Hear me; consent to the breaking off this Marriage, and the promoting
any other, without consulting me, and I Will renounce all Blood, all Relation and
Concern with you for ever, -- nay, I Will be your Enemy, and pursue you to
Destruction, I Will tear your Eyes out, and tread you under my Feet. --


Sir Paul. Why, what is the matter now? Good Lord, what is all this for? Pooh,
here is a Joke indeed -- Why, where is my Wife?


L. T. With Careless, in the close Arbor; he may want you by this time, as
much as you want her.


Sir Paul. O, if she be with Mr. Careless, it is well enough.


L. T. Fool, Sot, insensible Ox! But remember what I said to you, or you had
better eat your Horns, and pimp for your Living; by this Light you had.

[Exit.
Sir Paul. She Is a passionate Woman, gads-bud, -- But to say truth, all our
Family are Choleric; I am the only peaceable Person amongst 'em.

[Exit.
Enter Mellefont, Maskwell, and Cynthia. Mel. I know no other Way but this he
has proposed; if you have Love enough to run the Venture.


Cynt. I don't know whether I have Love enough, -- but I find I have Obstinacy
enough to pursue whatever I have once resolved; and a true Female Courage to
oppose any thing that resists my Will, though 'twere Reason it self.


Mask. That Is right, -- Well, I Will secure the Writings, and run the Hazard
along with you.


Cynt. But how can the Coach and Six Horses be got ready without Suspicion?


Mask. Leave it to my Care; that shall be so far from being suspected, that it
shall be got ready by my Lord's own Order.


Mel. How?


Mask. Why, I intend to tell my Lord the whole matter of our Contrivance,
that is my way.


Mel. I don't understand you.


Mask. Why, I Will tell my Lord, I laid this Plot with you, on purpose to betray
you; and that which put me upon it, was, the finding it impossible to gain the
Lady any other way, but in the Hopes of her Marrying you. --


Mel. So --


Mask. So, why so, while you're busied in making your self ready, I Will wheedle
her into the Coach; and instead of you, borrow my Lord's Chaplain, and so run
away with her my self.


Mel. O I conceive you, you will tell him so?


Mask. Tell him so! Ay, why you don't think I mean to do so?


Mel. No, no; ha, ha, I dare swear thou will not.


Mask. (Aside.) You may be deceived. -- Therefore for our farther Security, I
would have you disguised like a Parson, that if my Lord should have Curiosity
to peep, he may not discover you in the Coach, but think the Cheat is carried
on as he would have it.


Mel. Excellent Maskwell, thou were certainly meant for a Statesman or a
Jesuit, but that thou art too honest for one, and too pious for the other.


Mask. Well, get your selves ready, and meet me in half an Hour, yonder in my
Lady's Dressing Room; go by the back Stairs, and so we may slip down without
being observed. -- I Will send the Chaplain to you with his Robes; I have made
him my own, -- and ordered him to meet us to Morrow Morning at St. Albans;
there we will sum up this Account, to all our Satisfactions.


Mel. Should I begin to thank or praise thee, I should waste the little time we
have.

[Exit.
Mask. Madam, you will be ready?


Cynt. I will be punctual to the Minute.

[Going.
Mask. Stay, I have a doubt -- Upon second Thoughts, we had better meet in the
Chaplain's Chamber here, the corner Chamber at this end of the Gallery, there
is a back Way into it, so that you need not come through this Door -- and a
Pair of private Stairs leads down to the Stables -- It will be more convenient.


Cynt. I am guided by you, -- but Mellefont will mistake.


Mask. No, no, I Will after him immediately, and tell him.


Cynt. I will not fail.

[Exit.
Mask. Why, qui vult decipi decipiatur. -- It Is no Fault of mine, I have told
'em in plain Terms, how easy it is for me to cheat 'em; and if they will not
hear the Serpent's Hiss, they must be stung into Experience, and future
Caution. -- Now to prepare my Lord to consent to this. -- But first I must
instruct my little Levite; there is no Plot, public or private, that can
expect to prosper without one of 'em has a Finger in it, he promised me to be
within at this Hour, -- Mr. Saygrace, Mr. Saygrace.

[Goes to the Chamber Door, and knocks.
Mr. Saygrace, (looking out.) Sweet Sir, I will but pen the last Line of an
Acrostick, and be with you in the twinkling of an Ejaculation, in the
pronouncing of an Amen, or before you can --


Mask. Nay, good Mr. Saygrace do not prolong the Time, by describing to me the
shortness of you Stay; rather if you please, defer the finishing of your Wit,
and let us talk about our Business, it shall be (...)


Sayg. (Enters) You shall prevail, I would break off in the middle of a Sermon
to do you pleasure.


Mask. You could not do me a greater, -- except -- the Business in hand -- Have
you provided a Habit for Mellefont?


Sayg. I have, they are ready in my Chamber, together with a clean starched
Band and Cuffs.


Mask. Good, let them be carried to him, -- have you stitched the Gown Sleeve,
that he may be puzzled, and waste time in putting it on?


Sayg. I have; the Gown will not be endued without Perplexity.


Mask. Meet me in half an Hour, here in your own Chamber. When Cynthia comes,
let there be no Light, and do not speak, that she may not distinguish you from
Mellefont. I Will urge haste, to excuse your Silence.


Sayg. You have no more Commands?


Mask. None, your Text is short.


Sayg. But pithy, and I will handle it with Discretion.

[Exit.
Mask. It will be the first you have so served.


Enter Ld. Touchwood. Ld. T. Sure I was born to be controlled by those I should
Command: My very Slaves will shortly give me Rules how I shall govern them.


Mask. I am concerned to see your Lordship discomposed. --


Ld. T. Have you seen my Wife lately, or disobliged her?


Mask. No, my Lord. What can this mean! [Aside.


Ld. T. Then Mellefont has urged some body to incense her -- Something she has
heard of you which carries her beyond the Bounds of Patience.


Mel. This I feared. (Aside.) Did not your Lordship tell her of the Honors you
designed me?


Ld. T. Yes.


Mel. It Is that; you know my Lady has a high Spirit, she thinks I am unworthy.


Ld. T. Unworthy! It Is an ignorant Pride in her to think so -- Honesty to me is
true Nobility. However, it is my Will it should be so, and that should be
convincing to her as much as Reason -- By Heaven, I Will not be Wife-ridden; were
it possible, it should be done this Night.


Mask. By Heaven he meets my Wishes. (Aside.) Few Things are impossible to
willing Minds.


Ld. T. Instruct me how this may be done, you shall see I want no Inclination.


Mask. I had laid a small Design for to Morrow (as Love will be inventing)
which I thought to communicate to your Lordship -- But it may be as well done
to Night.


Ld. T. Here Is Company -- Come this way, and tell me.

[Exeunt.
Enter Careless and Cynthia. Care. Is not that he, now gone out with my Lord?


Cynt. Yes.


Care. By Heaven there is Treachery -- The Confusion that I saw your Father in,
my Lady Touchwood's Passion, with what imperfectly I overheard between my Lord
and her, confirm me in my Fears. Where Is Mellefont?


Cynt. Here he comes.

Enter Mellefont. Did Maskwell tell you any thing of the Chaplain's Chamber?


Mel. No; my Dear, will you get ready -- the Things are all in my Chamber; I
want nothing but the Habit.


Care. You are betrayed, and Maskwell is the Villain I always thought him.


Cynt. When you were gone, he said his Mind was changed, and bid me meet him in
the Chaplain's Room, pretending immediately to follow you, and give you notice.


Mel. How!


Care. There Is Saygrace tripping by with a Bundle under his Arm -- He cannot be
ignorant that Maskwell means to use his Chamber; let us follow and examine him.


Mel. It Is loss of time -- I cannot think him false.

[Exeunt Mel. and Care.
Cynt. My Lord musing!


Enter Ld. Touchwood. Ld. T. He has a quick Invention, if this were suddenly
designed -- Yet he says he had prepared my Chaplain already.


Cynt. How Is this! Now I fear indeed.


Ld. T. Cynthia here! alone, fair Cousin, and melancholy?


Cynt. Your Lordship was thoughtful.


Ld. T. My Thoughts were on serious Business, not worth your Hearing.


Cynt. Mine were on Treachery concerning you, and may be worth your Hearing.


Ld. T. Treachery concerning me! pray be plain -- Hark! What Noise!


Mask. (within) Will you not hear me?


Ld. T. (within) No, Monster! Hellish Traitor! No.


Cynt. My Lady and Maskwell! this may be lucky -- My Lord, let me entreat you
to stand behind this Skreen, and listen; perhaps this Chance may give you proof
of what you never could have believed from my Suspicions.

[They abscond.
Enter Lady Touchwood with a Dagger, Maskwell. L. T. You want but Leisure to
invent fresh Falsehood, and sooth me to a fond Belief of all your Fictions; but
I will stab the Lie that is forming in your Heart, and save a Sin, in pity to
your Soul.


Mask. Strike then -- Since you will have it so.


L. T. Ha! A steady Villain to the last!


Mask. Come, why do you dally with me thus?


L. T. Thy stubborn Temper shocks me, and you knew it would -- By Heaven, this
is Cunning all, and not Courage; no, I know thee well: But thou shall miss thy
Aim.


Mask. Ha, ha, ha.


L. T. Ha! Do you mock my Rage? Then this shall punish your fond, rash
Contempt! Again Smile!

[Goes to strike. And such a Smile as speaks in Ambiguity! Ten thousand
Meanings lurk in each Corner of that various Face. O! That they were written in
thy Heart, That I, with this, might lay thee open to my Sight! But then 'twill
be too late to know --

Thou have, thou have found the only way to turn my Rage; Too well thou know
my jealous Soul could never bear Uncertainty. Speak then, and tell me -- Yet
are you silent? Oh, I am wilder'd in all Passions! But thus my Anger melts.
(Weeps) Here, take this Poniard, for my very Spirits faint, and I want Strength
to hold it, thou have disarmed my Soul.

[Gives the Dagger.
Ld. T. Amazement shakes me -- Where will this end?


Mask. So, it is well -- let your wild Fury have a Vent; and when you have
Temper, tell me.


L. T. Now, now now I am calm, and can hear you.


Mask. (Aside.) Thanks, my Invention; and now I have it for you. -- First tell
me what urged you to this Violence? For your Passion broke in such imperfect
Terms, that yet I am to learn the Cause.


L. T. My Lord himself surpised me with the News, you were to marry Cynthia --
That you had owned your Love to him, and his Indulgence would assist you to
attain your Ends.


Cynt. How, my Lord!


Ld. T. Pray forbear all Resentments for a while, and let us hear the rest.


Mask. I grant you in Appearance all is true; I seemed consenting to my Lord;
nay, transported with the Blessing -- But could you think that I who had been
happy in your loved Embraces, could ever be fond of an inferior Slavery.


Ld. T. Ha! O Poison to my Ears! What do I hear!


Cynt. Nay, good my Lord, forbear Resentment, let us hear it out.


Ld. T. Yes, I will contain, though I could burst.


Mask. I that had wantoned in the wide Circle of your World of Love, could be
confined within the puny Province of a Girl. No -- Yet though I dote on each last
Favor more than all the rest; though I would give a Limb for every Look you
cheaply throw away on any other Object of your Love; yet so far I prize your
Pleasures over own, that all this seeming Plot that I have laid, has been to
gratify your Taste, and cheat the World, to prove a faithful Rogue to you.


L. T. If this were true -- But how can it be?


Mask. I have so contrived, that Mellefont will presently, in the Chaplain's
Habit, wait for Cynthia in your Dressing Room: But I have put the Change upon
her, that she may be otherwhere employed -- Do you procure her Nightgown, and
with your Hoods tied over your Face, meet him in her stead; you may go
privately by the back Stairs, and, unperceived, there you may propose to
reinstate him in his Uncle's Favor, if he will comply with your Desires; his
Case is desperate, and I believe he will yield to any Conditions, -- If not, here
take this; you may employ it better, than in the Death of one who is nothing
when not yours.

[Gives the Dagger.
L. T. Thou can deceive every Body, -- Nay, thou have deceived me; but it is
as I would wish, -- Trusty Villain! I could worship thee. --


Mask. No more, -- There wants but a few Minutes of the time; and Mellefont's
Love will carry him there before his Hour.


L. T. I go, I fly, incomparable Maskwell!

[Exit.
Mask. So, this was a Pinch indeed, my Invention was upon the Rack; and made
Discovery of her last Plot: I hope Cynthia and my Chaplain will be ready, I Will
prepare for the Expedition.

[Exit.
Cynthia, and Lord Touchwood, come forward. Cynt. Now, my Lord?


Ld. T. Astonishment binds up my Rage! Villainy upon Villainy! Heavens, what a
long Track of dark Deceit has this discovered! I am confounded when I look
back, and want a Clue to guide me through the various Mazes of unheard of
Treachery. My Wife! Damnation! my Hell!


Cynt. My Lord, have Patience, and be sensible how great our Happiness is, that
this Discovery was not made too late.


Ld. T. I thank you, yet it may be still too late, if we don't presently
prevent the Execution of their Plots; -- Ha, I Will do it. Where Is Mellefont, my
poor injured Nephew, -- How shall I make him ample Satisfaction? --


Cynt. I dare answer for him.


Ld. T. I do him fresh Wrong to question his Forgiveness; for I know him to be
all Goodness, -- Yet my Wife! Dam her, -- She Will think to meet him in that
Dressing Room, -- Was It not so? And Maskwell will expect you in the Chaplain's
Chamber, -- For once, I Will add my Plot too, -- let us haste to find out, and
inform my Nephew; and do you, quickly as you can, bring all the Company into
this Gallery. -- I Will expose the Strumpet, and the Villain.

[Exeunt.
Enter Ld. Froth and Sir Paul. Ld. F. By Heavens I have slept an Age, -- Sir
Paul, what a Clock is it? Past Eight, on my Conscience, my Lady's is the most
inviting Couch; and a Slumber there, is the prettiest Amusement! But where is
all the Company? --


Sir Paul. The Company, gads-bud, I don't know, my Lord, but here is the
strangest Revolution, all turned topsie turvy; as I hope for Providence.


Ld. F. O Heavens, what is the matter? Where Is my Wife?


Sir Paul. All turned topsie turvy, as sure as a Gun.


Ld F. How do you mean? My Wife!


Sir Paul. The strangest Posture of Affairs!


Ld. F. What, my Wife?


Sir Paul. No, no, I mean the Family, -- Your Lady's Affairs may be in a very
good Posture; I saw her go into the Garden with Mr. Brisk.


Ld. F. How? where, when, what to do?


Sir Paul. I suppose they have been laying their Heads together.


Ld. F. How?


Sir Paul. Nay, only about Poetry, I suppose, my Lord; making Couplets.


Ld. F. Couplets.


Sir Paul. O, here they come.


Enter Lady Froth, Brisk. Brisk. My Lord, your humble Servant; Sir Paul yours,
-- (...)


L. F. My Dear, Mr. Brisk and I have been Star-gazing, I don't know how long.


Sir Paul. Does it not tire your Ladyship? are not you weary with looking up?


L. F. Oh, no, I love it violently, -- My Dear, you're melancholy.


Ld. F. No, my Dear; I Am but just awake. --


L. F. Snuff some of my Spirit of Hartshorn.


Ld. F. I Have some of my own, thank you, my Dear.


L. F. Well, I swear, Mr. Brisk, you understood Astronomy like an old Egyptian.


Brisk. Not comparable to your Ladyship; you are the very Cynthia of the Skies,
and Queen of Stars.


L. F. That Is because I have no Light, but what is by Reflection from you, who
are the Sun.


Brisk. Madam, you have Eclipsed me quite, let me perish, -- I cannot answer
that.


L. F. No matter, -- Hark'ee, shall you and I make an Almanac together.


Brisk. With all my Soul, -- Your Ladyship has made me the Man in it already,
I Am so full of the Wounds which you have given.


L. F. O finely taken! I swear now you are even with me, O Parnassus, you have
an infinite deal of Wit.


Sir Paul. So he has, gads-bud, and so has your Ladyship.


Enter Lady Plyant, Careless, Cynthia. L. P. You tell me most surprising
things; bless me, who would ever trust a Man? O my Heart aches for fear they
should be all deceitful alike.


Care. You need not fear, Madam, you have Charms to fix Inconstancy it self.


L. P. O dear, you make me blush.


Ld. F. Come, my Dear, shall we take leave of my Lord and Lady?


Cynt. They Will wait upon your Lordship presently.


L. F. Mr. Brisk, my Coach shall set you down.


All. What Is the matter?

[A great Shriek from the Corner of the Stage. Lady Touchwood runs out
affrighted, my Lord after her, like a Parson.
L. T. O I Am betrayed. -- Save me, help me.


Ld. T. Now what Evasion, Strumpet?


L. T. Stand off, let me go, and Plagues and Curses seize you all.

[Runs out.
Ld. T. Go, and thy own Infamy pursue thee. -- You stare as you were all
amazed, -- I don't wonder at it, -- but too soon you will know mine, and that
Woman's Shame.


Enter Mellefont lugging in Maskwell from the other side of the Stage,
Mellefont like a Parson. Mel. Nay, by Heaven you shall be seen. -- Careless,
your Hand; -- Do you hold down your Head? Yes, I am your Chaplain, look in the
Face of your injured Friend; thou Wonder of all Falsehood.


Ld. T. Are you silent, Monster?


Mel. Good Heavens! How I believed and loved this Man! -- Take him hence, for
he is a Disease to my Sight.


Ld. T. Secure that manifold Villain.


Care. Miracle of Ingratitude!

[They carry out Maskwell, who hangs down his Head.
Brisk. This is all very surprising, let me perish


L. F. You know I told you Saturn looked a little more angry than usual.


Ld. T. We'll think of Punishment at Leisure, but let me hasten to do Justice,
in rewarding Virtue and wronged Innocence. -- Nephew, I hope I have your
Pardon, and Cynthia's.


Mel. We are your Lordship's Creatures.


Ld. T. And be each others Comfort; -- Let me join your Hands. -- Unwearied
Nights, and wishing Days attend you both; mutual Love, lasting Health, and
circling Joys, tread round each happy Year of your long Lives.

Let secret Villainy from hence be warned;
However in private Mischiefs are conceived,
Torture and Shame attend their open Birth:
Like Vipers in the Womb, base Treachery lies,
Still gnawing that, whence first it did arise;
No sooner born, but the Vile Parent dies.
[Exeunt Omnes.
EPILOGUE,
Spoken by Mrs. Mountford.
COuld Poets but foresee how Plays would take,
Then they could tell what Epilogues to make;
Whether to thank or blame their Audience most:
But that late Knowledge does much Hazard cost,
'Till Dice are thrown, there is nothing won, nor lost.
So 'till the Thief has stoll'n, he cannot know
Whether he shall escape the Law, or no.
But Poets run much greater Hazards far,
Than they who stand their Trials at the Bar;
The Law provides a Curb for its own Fury,
And suffers Judges to direct the Jury.
But in this Court, what Difference does appear!
For every one's both Judge and Jury here;
Nay, and what is worse, an Executioner.
All have a Right and Title to some Part,
Each choosing that in which he has most Art.
The dreadful Men of Learning all Confound,
Unless the Fable's good, and Moral sound.
The Vizor-Masks, that are in Pit and Gallery,
Approve, or Damn, the Repartee and Rallery.
The Lady Critics, who are better read,
Enquire if Characters are nicely bred;
If the soft things are penned and spoke with Grace:
They Judge of Action too, and Time, and Place;
In which we do not doubt but they are discerning,
For that is a kind of Assignation Learning.
Beaus judge of Dress; the Witlings judge of Songs;
The Cuckoldom, of Ancient Right, to Cits belongs.
Thus poor Poets, the Favor are denied,
Even to make Exceptions, when they are Tried.
It Is hard that they must every one admit;
Methinks I see some Faces in the Pit,
Which must of Consequence be Foes to Wit.
You who can Judge, to Sentence may proceed;
But though he cannot Write, let him be freed
At least from their Contempt, who cannot Read.
FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Jacob Tonson, at Gray's Inn Gate.
THE Campaign a Poem, to his Grace the Duke of Marlborough. Remarks on several
Parts of Italy, etc. In the Years, 1701, 1702, 1703. Both written by Mr.
Addison. A Letter to Monsieur Boileau Depreaux: Occasioned by the Victory at
Blenheim. Love for Love, Mourning Bride, and the Way of the World. Written by
Mr. Congreve. Tamerlane, Fair Penitent, Biter, and Ulysses. Written by Nicolas
Row, Esquire The False Friend, Confederacy, and the Mistake. Written by the Author
of the Relapse, Provoked Wife, and Aesop. The Christian Hero, an Argument,
proving that no Principles but those of Religion are sufficient to make a Great
Man; and that true Greatness of Mind can be maintained by none but Christian
Principles. The Funeral or Grief A-la-mode, and the Tender Husband, Comedies.
All three Written by Capt. Steel. Arsinoe, Queen of Cyprus, an Opera. All the
Poetical Works of Mr. John Milton, in Two Volumes in Octavo; Adorned with Cuts.
The Third, Fourth and Fifth Volumes of the Roman History. Containing the
Transactions of those Times: From the Removal of the Imperial Seat by
Constantine the Great, to the Taking of Constantinople by the Turks; Including
1123 Years. All Three Revised, with a Recommendatory Preface, by Laurence
Echard, A. M. Being a Continuation of his Roman History. Oeuvres Meslees De Mr.
De Saint Evremond, Publies sur les Manuscripts de l'Auteur, in 3 Vol. Ovid's
Epistles, Translated by several of the most Eminent Hands: Adorned with Cuts.
The Seventh Edition: To which is added, a Dedication to the Lady Lovisa Lenos.
Poems on several Occasions; with Valentinian, a Tragedy: Written by the Right
Honorable John late Earl of Rochester. Poems, etc. Written upon several
Occasions, and to several Persons; by Edmond Waller, Esquire the Seventh Edition,
with Additions. Poems and Translations, with the Soplus; written by the
Honorable Sir John Denham, Knight of the Bath. The Fourth Edition; to which is
added, Cato Major, of Old Age. The Works of Sir George Etheredge, containing
his Plays and Poems. The Works of the late famous Mr. John Dryden in 4. Vols.
in Fol. Containing all his Comedies, Tragedies and Opera's, with his Original
Poems and Translations. The Satyrs of Decimus Junius Juvenalis, translated into
Verse: By Mr. Dryden, and several other Eminent Hands; together with the Satyrs
of Aulus Perseus Flaccus, made English by Mr. Dryden; with Explanatory Notes at
the End of each Satyr: To which is perfix'd a Discourse concerning the Original
and Progress of Satyr. Dedicated to the Right Honorable Charles Earl of
Dorset, etc. All by Mr. Dryden. The Works of Mr. Abraham Cowley, consisting of
those which were formerly Printed, and those which he designed for the Press;
now Published out of the Author's Original Copies. The Ninth Edition: To which
is added The Cutter of Coleman-Street, and several Commendatory Copies of
Verses on the Author, by Persons of Honor. The Works of Sir John Suckling,
containing all his Poems, Love Verses, Songs, Letters, and his Tragedies, and
Comedies. Never before Printed in one Vol. Horace, Virgil, Terence, Catullus,
Tibullus and Propertius in Four large Vols. in Quarto, Printed in Cambridge.
Seneca's Morals by way of Abstract: To which is added a Discourse under the
Title of an After-Tho^ The Ninth Edition. Tully's Offices in Three Bo^ (...)
English. The Fifth Edition: To which (...) A Guide to E^ (...) Bona, and now
done into (...) ^ition. These last by Sir Roger L'Estrange, (...) A New Voyage
to (...) Account of the most remarkable Curio^ (...) Italy, Malta and Turkey;
with Histori^ (...) to the Present and Ancient State of (...) By the Sieur du
Mont. Done into English, and (...) Figures. The Fourth Edition. Thoughts on
Religion (...), by Monsieur Pascal. Translated from the (...) Corpus Christi
College, Oxon.
FINIS

