EPISTLE FROM Mr. Theophilus Cibber, Comedian, TO Mr. Thomas Sheridan,
Tragedian.

It is a Kind of Slander to trust to Rumor. B. JOHNSON. Bella! horrida Bella!
LUCAN. The Scene often rallies Follies of the Age;
Laugh, in your turn, at Follies of the Stage.
ANON. DUBLIN: Printed in the Year M.DCC.XLIII.

AN EPISTLE FROM Mr. Theophilus Cibber, Comedian, TO Mr. Thomas Sheridan,
Tragedian.
Stephen's-green, Tuesday Afternoon, July 19, 1743. Mr. SHERIDAN,
YOUR injudicious Disappointment of the Company last Thursday, who expected to
see you in the Character of CATO, and your indiscreet Attempt to dismiss the
Audience, having, as you confess, become a Town-talk, and given Rise to many
idle Falsehoods, merely calculated to injure the Innocent: You must excuse me if
I relate the Fact, strictly adhering to Truth. There were many Witnesses of
what I am about to declare; and I know none, except yourself, whose Memory is
weak enough to forget it, or will be hardy enough to deny it

When it drew near the Time proper to begin the Play, Mr. Giffard and myself
were alarmed, in the Dressing Room with a Report, that you declared you would
not play, because you had not the same Robe you wore in that Character before;
and that you said, The Audience must be dismissed. This Reason for dismissing
an Audience, (proposed by you who had no Right to dismiss them) appeared to me
so weak, I could not believe it, till you came into the Room, and swore, Unless
you had that Robe, you would not act. This Declaration I looked upon as a rash
Expression, the mere Effect of your then ruffled Temper; but could not yet
suppose you would proceed so idly as you did: You were then completely dressed
from Head to Foot (as well as ever the Character was dressed in any Theater in
Ireland or England) all but the Robe.

Upon Enquiry, it appeared, the Robes wore by Cato, Juba and Sempronius, the
first Night, were borrowed by Philips, of some Gentlewoman in this Town, who
bought them in an Auction at London, some Time since, but were by no Means the
Property of the Managers, or any one belonging to the Theater, nor were to be
got that Night: so all the Heroes were equally disappointed of those Trappings.
Your Impatience increased, and, though another Robe was brought you (the same
Robe that was made new, this Year, for Mr. Husband, in the Character of Julius
Caesar) you persisted in having the other uncomeatable Robe, or you positively
would undress, and was determined not to play. To every body's Surprise, you
did undress, and, in spite of the most friendly Remonstrances to the contrary,
you made a broken kind of Speech to the Audience; with which they were so
dissatisfied, they could not help showing it.

Before you went on, I entreated you (on the mere exchange of a Robe) not to do
so unpolitic a Thing, I might add, unpolite, as to think of disappointing the
Town of their Diversion: You replied, The Vexation had deprived you of your
Voice, and rendered you incapable of performing: I desired you to consider, the
first Act was of such a considerable Length, you might have Time enough to
recover your Temper, and your Voice would probably return with it; or if the
Defect lasted, your attempting to perform would appear so obliging, the
Audience would readily make any Allowances, when they knew you had been
ruffled, etc. but to think of giving them no Play at all, was what I could not
but conceive would offend them.

To repeat all was said to you on this Occasion, would add to the Tediousness
of this Recital: But, as near as I can remember, nothing was omitted, in the
most friendly Manner, to dissuade you from your mistaken Purpose.

I am informed you stayed afterward, just long enough to hear the
extraordinary indulgent Reception the Audience were pleased to bestow on my
proposing, with their Leave, to give them the Play, in the best Manner we
could, since it was not in our Power to give it them so well as we would. You
then ran hastily out of the House, and sent a Message afterward to the
Theater, That you would not, by any Means, have your Name delivered out for
another Play, for you would positively act no more.

I should not, Mr. Sheridan, have given you or myself this Trouble, but for the
many Reports that fly about, of which, it is said, you are the Author: And since
I have advanced so far, I must go a little farther, and make a ^w honest
Queries; then, giving you a little Advice, shall submit to the Determination of
the Public, whether I (as it has been insinuated) ever intended you the least
Prejudice; or, on the contrary, have not always acted toward you with good
Manners and good Nature?

First then, -- have I not your Letter by me, sent to me when in England,
wherein you express yourself very desirous of my acting in the same Theater
with you, and are solicitous for my coming over? -- And do you not know, your
particular Application since my Arrival, was one of my strongest Motives for
playing in Smock-Alley, where I am likely to have a Lawsuit, for my Right,
with the Managers, though I was offered the same Terms from Aungier-Street
Playhouse, where my Agreement would have been signed by a Gentleman of Honor,
whose Pay is as good as the Bank.

Have I not, on your Return to the Stage this Season, in Compliment to you,
played some inferior Characters, which, it is well known I had a long time
resigned to younger Actors, in England?

Did I omit any Care, or grudge any Pains, to keep the Audience in Temper, when
your sudden Indisposition prevented your playing, the first intended Night of
King Lear? Or could I, for a Brother, have been more Active, to silence the
Reports then made to your Prejudice? -- sed Tu Brute!

Have not I desired you, though our remaining Nights of Playing were few, and we
had large Sums at Stake, to fix the Plays to your own Mind?

Have not you been paid a large Part of that fresh Agreement you made, but did
not complete, while we are unpaid our Agreements, though, we have, it is
notorious, often solicited the Managers to release us, if they found the
emptiness of the Town would not answer their continuing our Performance? -- But
we could get neither our Liberty nor our Money.

Have not you often been an Ear-witness of these Proposals, and as often
declar^d, we behaved with the greatest Lenity, and strictest Honor?

Did not your sudden breaking off from Playing leave us in a displeasing
Dilemma? And was it not reasonable for us, to propose acting such Pieces, as
might excite the greatest Curiosity in the Town, whereby the Managers might be
enabled to pay us, and the rest of the Company?

Did I not decline ('till your positive Declaration, that you would play no
more this Season) appearing in any Character you had performed? And did you not
xpress yourself as obliged to me, on making you that Compliment, as you were
pleased to term it?

How comes it then, Mr. Sheridan, reported, that Mr. Giffard, and my self, have
intended you any injury? Or from whence is it said, that we (ridiculous! as
false!) locked up your Clothes, and did all we could to prevent your Playing?
This, Sir, has been so frequently asserted, as a Fact related by you, that you
ought as a Friend to Truth, to have fully answered such monstrous Falsehoods;
or, may we not reasonably suppose, you did spread such Reports? If you can be
the Author of such naughty Tales, what Language is fit to paint you?

The Letters I read this Day in the Dublin Journal, if not ipso facto yours,
are yet so worded, an impartial Reader cannot but see they were, at least, the
Work of some mistaken Friend, whose good Nature you had imposed on, by false
Relations: From whom, but you, could come the satisfactory Reasons, (not one of
which are mentioned) for your not performing? Or the poor low Invectives, and
mean Inuendoes therein contained? -- Whom do you mean, by Designing Wretches,
and Theatrical Politicians? Or what can you intend but to insinuate, you have
been artfully drove from the Stage, when you know your Absence from thence is
absolutely your own Act and Deed?

Fie! fie! stick to Truth, or be ashamed of such public Addresses, or to show
your Face after them.

May not one suppose, Master Sheridan, the kind and civil Intention of these
two Letters, is to create a Disturbance in the future Audiences?

But let me inform you, when a Rebuff to an Actor appears premeditated and
bespoke from Prejudice, such Treatment may put a poor Player out of Humor; but
sure, it ought not to put him out of Countenance.

If you withdraw yourself from the Theater, for a Time, must all Diversion stop
till your Return? If a Vintner has not Ortelans, or any other extraordinary
Dainties, in the Larder, will his Guests think it impertinent, if they are
entreated to take such homely Entertainment as the House affords? -- And if the
Defects of others, serve as a Foil to the Brilliancy of your Performance, why
should you be angry, at what, if you would keep your Temper, might prove so
consolable to you?

Dear Tommy, don't prove such a Dog in a Manger; if you don't choose Oats, why
should you starve the rest of the Theatrical Cattle? Have more Compassion on
your fellow Creatures, or fellow Comedians.

But, Master Tommy, may we not shrewdly suspect, though your Performances have
been hitherto mostly tragical, you have given your Mind a little Bent toward
Comedy, and, in those Studies, have taken a Hint from Congreve's Petulant? who,
to keep up an extraordinary Reputation, was notorious, under a Disguise, for
calling for himself at a Coffee-house; where he would sometimes, in a Mask,
send in for himself, wait for himself, nay, and not finding himself, would
frequently leave a Letter for himself: -- 'Faith, you are highly in Luck in
improving a Hint, I find.

But let me ask you a home Question -- Has not a great deal of that suss of
Mind, you have lately shown, been more owing to your Disappointment, that the
Audience would not depart, when you declared your high and mighty Displeasure,
because you had not the self-same gew-gaw, tinsel Train, more than from any
Fears you had of having displeased them? Or was it nangry, because any one was
permitted (under great Disadvantages) merely to attempt, what they had never in
their Lives a Thought of performing? Why this is the passionate Extravaganza of
our Brother PISTOL, who, scorning all Contradiction, or Competition, bounces
about in his Boots, kicks his Heels with Fury against the Stage, and swelled
with swaggering Rage and Nonsense cries, Shall Dunghill Curs confront with
Helicon, etc. -- Shall Pack-Horses, and hollow pampered Jades of Asia, that
cannot travel thirty Miles a day, compare with Caesar, and with Cannibals, and
with Trojan Greeks, etc. etc. But, as our Friend concludes, "Shall we fall foul
for Toys? --

Though I don't think there is any thing personally terrible about you, yet I own
you a Gentleman of great Formidability, who have the Power if you say true (and
you know you have talked at that paw-paw Rate) of calling down the Barracks, on
any one you condescend to be displeased with: Pray, do you mean the Stone
Buildings? for I cannot suppose you presume to have any Command over the
Gentlemen there, as I never heard of any Commission the King had yet honored
you with; and I believe there is hardly any there will think it worth their
while, to attend the Call of your Whistle, to a silly Riot: I am rather
inclinable to think, the worthy Spirits, there, are more impatient to attend
the Call of a Trumpet, at this glorious Juncture, and be in Actions worthy of
them -- And for the Gentlemen of the College, Sir, no Insinuation shall make me
dread ill Usage from those, whose Birth and Education will never suffer 'em to
hurt the Innocent, nor can I affront 'em with so ungenteel a Thought, that they
will be the Tools of your wrong placed Resentment. -- Mr. Sheridan, your
Behavior has extorted this from me, and as your Conscience must tell you, I
never meant you the least Injury, should you by any little Art aim through Pique
or Passion, unhospitably to hurt a Stranger, it would be an Act that wants a
Name, and require such Language to answer, as would but ill become the Mouth of
a Gentleman, or be fitting for the Ears of the Public.

As my Stay here will be very short, I but desire (what I will not doubt
meeting with) a candid Reception for the few Nights I have to play, from the
good-natured Town, whose past Favors I am proud of; to confess them is but an
Act of Gratitude: Nor will I therefore think my self liable to the Imputation
of a boasting Vanity. -- Let me, Mr. Sheridan, give you this friendly Caution,
-- Do not run into an Error most young Men, in our Business, have been too
guilty of, who think their Merits are but barely paid, when their Reception is
most favorable; and take that as their Due, which is mostly the Effect of a
generous Disposition, in the Town, to encourage, and support, a rising Genius
whenever it appears. -- Though People may be as fond of such, for a while, as
Gallants are of a new Mistress, yet, if Vanity and Caprice prevail, in such
Performer, grown wild and wanton with Success, they know when to withdraw their
Favors, nor is it easy to regain them. -- If I ever see you in England, I Will
be most unmercifully revenged of you, for your Mistakes toward me; and will
absolutely endeavor, to make your Reception there, as pleasing to you, as you
may have wished, mine should have been here displeasing to me: But, let us now
mind our Business, and no more trouble the Public with our
Theatrical-Important-Nothings. -- They will but laugh at us for our Pains.

I am yours, etc. T. C.


