THE DESERTER. A NEW MUSICAL DRAMA, As it is performed at the THEATER ROYAL IN
DRURY LANE.

DUBLIN: Printed for J. POTTS, D. CHAMBERLAIN, W. SLEATER, and R. MONCRIEFFE.
MDCCLXXIII.

To the PUBLIC.
LE DESERTEUR, is well known to have been these five years the most favorite
Musical Piece on the French stage: so great indeed has been its success, that
in this short time it has been translated into three languages; one of which
translations we have lately seen at the King's Theater in the Hay-market, under
the title of Il Desertore.

Indeed, when you once admit the circumstance of Henry's consessing himself a
deserter, nothing can be more truly interesting than some of the incidents; but
yet they were brought about in a way peculiarly calculated for the French
stage: the resolution of Henry was too sudden, too unprepared, as well as the
circumstance of the mock-wedding that precedes it; and throughout the piece
there were a number of cold inanimating occurrences, that had very little, if
any, relation to the main design; and, add to this, it was never intended for
an Opera, for the author himself calls it a Comedy, interspersed with Songs.

It was thought, therefore, that if the unnecessary incidents were expunged,
and those retained were rendered more probable; if, by making an uniform
partition between the dialogue and the songs, it could be brought more to wear
the complexion of an Opera, The Deserter might be entitled to a favorable
reception on the English stage: how far these suggestions were reasonable, the
public (who are the best judges, and by whose arbitration I shall always be
proud to abide) will determine.

With regard to the Music, as I found it a work of great invention, I should
have kept it in its original state, had it been possible; but besides the
excessive length of the songs, the continual breaks into recitative, the
frequent sudden alterations of the style, and above all, that sameness which so
particularly characterizes the French Music, I found it much too grave to stand
the least chance of success in an after-piece: I, therefore, selected what I
thought the beauties; and what I could not effect by having recourse to the
original, I have endeavored to supply myself.

In justice to the French composer, I think it absolutely necessary to declare,
that the songs, beginning " One conduct's for both love and war;" " The nymph
who in my bosom reigns;" " Mr. Simkin, I Would have you to know;" and " The whims
of folks in love;" are wholly my own; and that the first air in the piece, and
that beginning, " My life's three parts diminished," are by Philidor, a name of
no inconsiderable note in the musical world.

I have nothing to add but that I take this opportunity of making my
acknowledgments to the performers for the support they were of to this piece; I
would, indeed, but that I despair of finding words worthy the occasion, express
my gratitude to the public for their favorable reception of it.

C. Dibdin.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
HENRY, Mr. Vernon, RUSSET, Mr. Banister, SIMKIN, Mr. Dibdin, SKIRMISH, Mr.
Parsons, FLINT, Mr. Wright, FIRST SOLDIER, Mr. Ackman, SECOND SOLDIER, Mr.
Fawcet, THIRD SOLDIER, Mr. Kear, FOURTH SOLDIER, Mr. Courtney.
WOMEN.
LOUISA, Mrs. Smith, JENNY, Mrs. Wrighten, MARGARET, Mrs. Love.
THE DESERTER.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
A cottage, and a view of the French camp at a distance. Margaret knitting, and
Jenny spinning, at the door of the cottage; Simkin, and other villagers, come
on with baskets of fruit. AIR I.
Simkin. I Cannot, for my life, guess the cause of this fuss,
Why there is pipers and fiddlers; while Robin and Harry,
And Clodpole and Roger, and ten more of us,
Have pulled as much fruit as we are ably to carry.
Margaret. Why, numscull, that is nothing; her ladyship's wine,
All over the village, runs just like a fouutain;
And I heard the folks say, every dish, when they dine,
Will be swimming in claret, madeira, and mountain.
Jenny. Then for poultry, and such like -- good lord, what a store!
I saw Goodman Gander six baskets full cramming;
Then such comforts and jellies! why one such feast more
Would certainly breed, in the village, a famine.
Chorus. What the meaning can be,
We shall presently see,
For yonder is old Russet, who certainly knows;
But be what it will,
Our wish shall be still,
Joy and health to the Duchess, wherever she goes!

Sim. What can all this feasting be for?


Jenny. I Will give you, while I wind up this bottom and another, and you shall not
find it out.


Sim. Why then if you know so well, why don't you tell us what it is?


Jen. Ah, I thought you would none of you guess it; this grand seasting at the
Duchess's is because the King's coming to the camp.


Marg. Who told you so?


Jen. I had it from Gaffer Russet himself.


Sim. Does the King come to the camp today?


Marg. Why yes, I knew that.


Sim. Then as sure as can be, I know what will happen.


Jen. Why, what will happen?


Sim. There will be two weddings in the village before tomorrow night.


Marg. How so?


Sim. Why is not Henry, the young soldier, to marry Louisa, Gaffer Russet's
daughter, as soon as the review's over?


Jen. Not if I can prevent it.


Marg. Well, that is but one wedding!


Sim. Yes, but Jenny can tell you whose wedding t'other's to be.


Jen. How should I know?


Sim. Ah, you wont say any thing before folks, because you're ashamed!


Jen. What do you mean?


Sim. As if you did not know --


Jen. Not I indeed.


Sim. Why, did not you promise me, that when Henry married Louisa you would marry
me?


Jen. Yes, yes, and I Will keep my word; whenever Henry marries Louisa, I Will
marry you.


SCENE II.
Rustet, Louisa, Simkin, Margaret, Jenny and Villagers. AIR II.
Louisa. Why must I appear so deceitful?
I cannot, dear father, comply:
Ah! could I think him so ungrateful,
With anguish I surely should die.
What so tender, at parting, he told me,
Which such joy to my bosom conveyed;
When next he was doomed to behold me,
Could I think would be this way repaid?

Rus. Well, well, but child --


Lou. Indeed, father, it is impossible; I never can consent to such a thing.


Rus. Odds heart, Louisa, there is no harm in it. Neighbors, come round here,
I Will tell you the whole affair; you know what a dear good lady the Duchess is?


Marg. Ah, she is a dear good lady indeed, and we all of us ought to do every
thing she orders us.


Rus. I and my family in particular ought, for many's the good thing she has
given me, and my old dame; then how kind she was to all my poor children! she
stood god-mother to this, and had her christened after her own name.


Sim. Louisa!


Rus. Well, now we come to the point: Henry, you know who was bred up with my
girl, and intended from his infancy for her husband, is a soldier.


Sim. So he is.


Rus. And because she has a value for every thing that belongs to me, this good
lady, about three weeks ago, sent to the colonel for his discharge, that the
young folks may live at home at their ease, and be as happy as the day is long.


Marg. That will be charming and comfortable for you, neighbor.


Rus. Yes, but now comes the mischief of it; what has occasioned it, I don't
know; I never saw any harm of the lad, but there are always busy tongues in
this village, doing people ill-offices; and such reports, within these few
days, have reached the Duchess's ears, that she is determined to see further
into this business, before she gives Louisa the portion she promised her.


Jen. You may thank me for that.


Lou. But he will be here today; and so well I know his heart, that I am sure
he will clear himself to their confusion, who could so vilely traduce him.


Jen. Perhaps not.


Rus. Well, child, I am sure you cannot wish it more than I do; nothing has ever
pleased me so much as the thought of your coming together; I wish to see you
married with all my heart: for I shall then have nothing to do, but to listen
to the prattle of your children, and prepare myself to follow poor Dorothy.

AIR III.
My life's three parts diminished,
And when the sum is finished,
The parish-bell may toll,
Gra'mercy on my soul!
Ding dong!
Swing swong!
Methinks my old companions say,
That though his hairs are now grown gray,
Old Russet once, upon a day,
When all was mirth and jollity;
When sports went round, and bells did ring,
Could briskly dance, and blytbe could sing;
And then upon the green to see
His rustic feats -- 't was who but he!
I Would give this bauble, life, away,
Without a sigh, could I but stay,
To see a little infant care!
Like Henry brave, Louisa fair;
Could I see this, I Would yield content
A life, I hope, not badly spent.
But as I was telling you, the Duchess hearing of these reports, is determined
that we shall make a trial of his affections.


Lou. Indeed, father, there is no necessity for it; he loves me most sincerely.


Rus. Nay, nay, child, I really think your love carries you away too much in
this affalr; it can do no harm; it is only an innocent frolic; you are to make
believe as if you were a bride, and let me see who -- oh, you shall be the
bridegroom.


Sim. Shall I? I'cod I Am glad of that.


Rus. But above all, I must instruct you, Jenny, in your part; you are to sit
here, and tell Henry, when he comes, that Louisa and Simpkin were married
yesterday.


Jen. The very thing I wished.


Lou. I am vexed to death that this trick should be played him: I can judge by
myself what he will feel: if I was told such a thing of him, how miserable I
should be.


Rus. But he will be so much the happier, when he finds out the deceit, child.


AIR IV.
Louisa. Though prudence may press me,
And duty distress me,
Against inclination, O, what can they do!
No longer a rover,
His follies are over,
My heart, my fond heart, says my Henry is true.
The be, thus as changing,
From sweet, to sweet, raging,
A rose should be light on, never wishes to stray;
With raptures possessing,
In one every blessing,
'Till, torn from her bosom, he flies far away.

Rus. Well, well, dont't make yourself uneasy, I dare say he loves you as
sincerely as you think he does; if so, he will soon be undeceived, and we shall
finish the day as happily as we could wish: in the mean time let us think of
what we have to do; we are to pretend we came from the church; the fiddles and
bagpipes are to go first, then the lads and lasses follow; after which, mind
this now, we are to go to the Duchess's mansion in grand procession, and there
to be feasted like so many princes and princesses.


Sim. I'cod that will suit me nicely. -- But Gaffer Russet, Jenny says, you
told her, the feasting was to be for the king.


Rus. For us, and the king; yes, yes, the king, after he and his courtiers have
had an entertainment at the duchess's, goes to review the camp, where the
soldiers are all to appear under arms. -- Ah, girls! that is what none of you
know any thing about; when the king goes to the camp, then is the time -- the
drums beat -- the fifes play -- the colors are flying -- and -- and -- Lord --
Lord! what a charming thing war is!


Sim. It must be then when one comes home again, and its all over.


Rus. There Is no life like the life of a soldier: and then for love! let the
girls take care of their hearts: I remember I won my Dorothy just after I came
from such a review now as there may be today,


Marg. Ah, indeed, the soldiers make sad work with young women's hearts sure
enough.


Rus. And how can it be otherwise?

AIR V.
One conduct's for
Both love and war,
The point's to gain poffession;
For this we watch
The enemy's coast,
'Till we, sleeping, catch
Them on their post:
Then good b'ye form,
The sort we storm,
And by these arts,
Make towns or hearts
Surrender at discretion.
In love the only battery,
Which with success we play
To conquer hearts, is flattery:
No fortress can its power withstand,
Neither cannons, mortars, sword in hand,
Can make such way.
As it is in love, so it is in war,
We make believe,
Mislead, deceive;
Pray, what serve drums and trumpets for?
Cannons, and all our force of arms?
But with their thundering alarms,
To tell, not cover, our designs;
Can these to trenches, breaches, mines,
Blockades, or ambuscades, compare?
No, all agree
That policy,
Is the true art militaire.
But come, come, we must go and prepare ourselves; you have not much time to
spare, and see where he comes hurrying a-long there; there now he clambers up
yonder hill -- well done, says! -- Ah, your lovers have no gout to stop them.
Come, child -- neighbors, come along.


Lou. Cruel father!

[Exeunt.
SCENE III.
Henry. Afterward, in the wedding procession, Russet, Simkin, Louisa,
Margaret, Jenny and Villagers. AIR VI.
Henry. The nymph, who in my bosom reigns,
With such full force my heart enchains,
That nothing ever can impair,
The empire she possesses there.
Who digs for stones of radiant ray,
Finds baser matter in his way;
The worthless load he may contemn,
But prizes still and seeks the gem.
But I hear music, what can this be? All the villagers are coming this way --
it seems like a wedding -- I Will retire -- How I envy this couple!


Rus. Charming! He has hid himself -- pretend not to see him -- don't turn your
head that way -- he is looking at you now!


Lou. How cruel not to let me have one look!


Sim. No, you must look at nobody but me now; I am the bridegroom, you know.


Rus. Jenny, be sure you play your part well.


Jen. Never fear me -- My part's a much more difficult one than they imagine.


SCENE IV.
Jenny, who sits down to spinning; and Henry, who comes forward during her
song. AIR VII.
Jenny. Some how my spindle I mislaid,
And lost it underneath the grass;
Damon advancing, bowed his head,
And said, what seek you, pretty lass?
A little love, but urged with care,
Often leads a heart, and leads it far.
'Twas passing nigh yon spreading oak,
That I my spindle lost just now;
His knife then kindly Damon took,
And from the tree he cut a bough.
A little love, etc. etc.
Thus did the youth his time employ,
While me he tenderly beheld;
He talked of love; I leaped for joy,
For, ah! my heart did fondly yield.
A little love, etc. etc.

Hen. Good day, young woman.


Jen. [Sings] 'Twas passing nigh, etc.


Hen. Young woman!


Jen. [Sings] 'Twas passing nigh, etc.


Hen. Pray tell me what wedding that is?


Jen. What! that wedding?


Hen. Yes.


Jen. Do you want to know whose wedding it is?


Hen. Ay, ay.


Jen. What, that wedding that went past?


Hen. Yes, yes.


Jen. Why, it is a wedding in the village here.


Hen. But whose, I ask you?


Jen. [Sings.]
Hen. Are you making a jest of me? answer me, I beg of you.


Jen. Why I do answer you, don't I?

[Sings.]
Hen. What, again! Whose is this wedding? Whose is it? Speak, or I Will -- did
not I see amongst them? -- distraction! -- will you answer, you?


Jen. Lord, you are so impatient! why then the wedding is Louisa's, old
Russet's daughter, the invalid soldier.


Hen. Louisa's wedding!


Jen. Yes, she was married yesterday.


Hen. Married! good heavens! Are you sure of what you say? Do you know Russet?


Jen. Do I know him? to be sure I do. Why he is bailiff to the Duchess. What
makes you so uneasy? you seem as if you had an interest in it.


Hen. An interest in it! Oh!


Jen. Dear me, if I remember right, you are the young man that every body
thought she would be married to: O law! what wickedness there is in this world! I
am sure I very sincerely pity you.


Hen. I Am obliged to you for your concern.


Jen. Nay, it is not more upon your account than my own, that I am uneasy.


Hen. How so?


Jen. Why she was not content with making you miserable, but she must make me
so too: the vile wretch she is married to, has perjured himself; for he has
sworn a thousand and a thousand times to marry me.


Hen. What falsehood and treachery!


Jen. If I was you I would not bear it quietly; not but she would brazen it all
out; for I taxed her with it myself, and she only laughed in my face, and told
me that you and I might go and mourn together, like two turtles, the loss of
our mates.


Hen. Insulting creature!


Jen. Yes, and for my part I said to myself, says I, 'twould be a good joke to
take her at her word; but then again I thought that though revenge is sweet,
yet people have their likings, and their dislikings; and as for me, to be sure,
I cannot pretend to such a good young man as you.


Hen. [not regarding her] In famous wretch! well might she keep her eyes fixed
upon the ground; but I Will see her, upbraid her with her infidelity, and leave
her to the guilty reproaches of her own ungrateful heart.


Jen. Young man --


Hen. [Returning] Well, what do you say?


Jen. I believe you did not rightly hear what I said.


Hen. Oh! I have no time for trifling.


SCENE V.
Jenny, Simkin. Jen. Poor soul! how he takes it to heart; but I must follow
him; for if I lose this opportunity, I may not find it so easy to get another.
But, stay, upon second thoughts, if I can but make a tool of Simkin, and by
that means alarm Louisa, I shall every way gain my ends; for if she once
believes him capable of slighting her, I am sure she has too much spirit ever
to see him again.


Sim. Oh, Jenny, I am glad I have found you; what do you think brought me away
from Louisa and them?


Jen. I neither know nor care.


Sim. Why, I was afraid you would be jealous.


Jen. I jealous!


Sim. Why yes, you know, because I pretended to be Louisa's husband.


Jen. No, I Would have you to know, I am not jealous; I am only vexed to think I
have been such a fool, to listen to you so long, you base creature, you!


Sim. If I did not think there was something the matter, by your looking so
cross.


Jen. And enough to make one; you know I cannot help loving you, and this is the
way you return my affection.


Sim. Why you know 'twas only in play.


Jen. In play! -- I could see plain enough, how your eyes sparkled upon the
bare mention of being the bridegroom.


Sim. Now, Jenny, if you would but hear me speak --


Jen. Speak! get out of my sight, you perjured wretch! I was fool enough not to
credit what I heard of you, but I dare say it is all true.


Sim. Why, what did you hear of me?


Jen. That it was you who invented all these reports about Henry.


Sim. Me! as I am a living Christian, Jenny --


Jen. Don't say a word to me, you have made me miserable, and now you want to
insult me.


Sim. Indeed I don't; you cannot think now, how happy I could make you, if you
would only hear me three words --


Jen. Don't talk to me of happiness, for I never shall be happy again as long
as I live.


Sim. How dearly she loves me! what a pity it is she will not let me clear up this
affair.


Jen. And then that demure little minx; oh, I could tear her eyes out; I was
always afraid of it, and now I am convinced that her pretended love for Henry,
was nothing but a contrivance to blind me the easier.


Sim. Dear, dear --


Jen. But, however, you have both missed your aim, for Henry behaves as he
ought to do, and holds her arts in contempt; nay, he told me himself he had
fixed his affections upon a more worthy object.


Sim. He did!


Jen. Yes, he did, and you may go and tell her so; and as for me,

AIR VIII.
Mr. Simkin, I Would have you to know,
That for all your fine airs,
I Am not at my last prayers,
Not put to it so,
That of course I must take up with you;
For I really, Sir, think, that though husbands are few,
I need not go far off to seek,
For a better than you any day of the week.
To be sure, I must own, I was foolish enough,
To believe all the tenderness, nonsense, and stuff,
Which for ever you dinn'd in my ears;
And when for a while you have been out of my sight,
The day has been comfortless, dreary the night,
And my only companions my tears;
But now that is all over,
I hate you, despise you, will see you no more.

SCENE VI.
Sim. Why, what the deuce has got hold of her? for my share, I believe all the
folks in our village are gone mad -- mad! I'cod, I Will be hanged if any
Bedlamites are half so mad as folks in love.

AIR IX.
The whims of folks in love to know,
I believe would fairly pose Old Nick:
This moment fast -- next moment slow;
Now consenting,
Now repenting,
Nor at this, or that will stick;
But changing still,
They will not -- they will --
When they mean Yes, they will answer No;
And fume and fret,
This hour to get
What they disliked an hour ago.
If you expect to find them here,
To the other side they quickly vere;
The wind and tide,
In the same mood will longer bide:
Like two fond turtles, side by side,
This hour they woo,
And bill and coo!
Then, by and by,
No reason why,
They make the devil and all to do!

SCENE VII.
A party of Soldiers, afterward Henry. 1 Sold. I Will tell you, my boys, how the
matter stands; if we can but catch hold of him, the summum bonum of the thing
is this, he will be first tried and then shot.


2 Sold. Yes, but suppose we don't catch hold of him?


3 Sold. Why then he will neither be tried nor shot.


4 Sold. No more he will not.


2 Sold. But I have been thinking how we shall do to know him.


1 Sold. Ay, you are a fool in these matters, I Will tell you how you will know
him; here! here! I Have got his name and his marks [Reading] Hannibal Firebrand,
six foot and an inch high, of an orange tawney complexion, a Roman nose, and
the letters R. T. burnt in the palm of his hand; the devil's in it if we can
miss him.


3 Sold. Well, but you need not have taken all this pains, for you know he was
your pot companion.


1 Sold. Faith, I forgot that.


2 Sold. And would you go for to lift your hand against your friend?


1 Sold. Against my friend! ay, against my father, if he was to desert; but
stay, stand by, perhaps this is he!

[They draw back.]
Hen. Where shall I fly? the unhappy have no friends; all I meet make a scoff
of my sufferings.


2 Sold. It must be him.


1. Sold Keep back.


Hen Are the inhabitants of this place turned brutes? have they no compassion?


1 Sold. There, you see how it is, none of the people will skreen him, they are
honest, and refuse to do it; I Will take care the king shall know what good
subjects he has.


Hen. At my home, where I expected to receive so kind a welcome, I am
surrounded with enemies.


1 Sold. There! there! he says he expected to receive a kind welcome from the
enemy.


2 Sold. So he does.


Hen. To desert one so kind.


1 Sold. Ah! 'twas an infamous thing of you sure enough.


Hen. Life is not worth keeping upon such terms, and this instant could I lay
it down with pleasure.


1 Sold. Mark that!


Hen. I Will go directly, and --


1 Sold. (Stopping him) Not so fast, if you please: hey! why, this is not the
deserter, that is my friend; but no matter, one deserter's as good as another.


Hen. Do you suspect me for a deserter?


1 Sold. No, we don't suspect you; we know you for one.


Hen. Me!


1 Sold. Me! yes you! how strange you make of this matter; why, did we not hear
you confess that you expected a kind welcome from the enemy? I Will tell you
what, I am not fond of making people uneasy, but every word you have uttered
will be a bullet in your guts.


Hen. What if I favor this, and so get rid of all my woes at once -- Oh!
Louisa, you have broke my heart!


1 Sold. What are you talking to yourself about? Come, come, you are a
deserter, and must go with us.


Hen. Shall I or not? -- by heaven, I will -- I own it, I am a deserter -- lead
me where you please.


1 Sold. There, he confesses it, and we shall have the reward.


AIR X.
Henry. I Will fly these groves, this hated shade,
Each sound I hear, each thing I see,
Remind me, thou perfidious maid!
Of vows so often made by thee.
Blush! blush, Louisa! and look there;
Where Is now thy truth? oh! tell me where?
Thy constancy's no more;
And like a wretch, by tempest tossed,
My peace is gone, nay, hope is lost,
I sink in sight of shore!
First and Second Soldier. Come, brother, come.
Third and Fourth Soldier. We must be gone.
Henry. Yes, yes, I Will fly to death -- lead on.
First, Second, Third, and Fourth Soldier. Come then.
Henry. And yet, O cruel fate.
First, Second, Third, and Fourth Soldier. He Is devilish loath.
Henry. A minute stay,
One instant e're I Am dragged away.
First, Second, Third, and Fourth Soldier. You have confessed -- it is now too
late.

ACT II.
SCENE I.
A Prison, a table, and some old chairs; Flint, who while he speaks puts the
stage in order, Henry walks about disturbed; and afterward Skirmish, who comes
on, as Flint goes off the stage. Fli. There Is some water for you to drink; a
table and a chair, and yonder is your bed; but if you go on at the rate you have
begun, there will be no great trouble in making it. -- I am a deserter, I have
deserted; I believe you will find, you had better not have confessed quite so
soon: -- why, what a devil of a fellow you must be. But, come, as I said
before, there is some water for you, and if you choose to have any thing better
-- for money, do you see -- you understand me right -- for money -- and faith, if
you have any, you have no great reason to be sparing of it, for, I believe,
your business will soon be settled. -- Do you choose any wine?


Hen. No, no.


Fli. Well, very well; if you will not have wine, you must drink water.


Hen. False, false Louisa! -- Oh, heaven!


Fli. But you seem a little down in the mouth about this business; never mind
it, 'twill soon be over; you are to suffer at five; in the mean time I Will send
a lodger of mine to you, he will put you in spirits, by that you have drank a
glass together; his name is Skirmish; he is a devilish hearty fellow.

[Goes off.
Hen. That a few hours should sink me from the expectation of so much happiness
to this abyss of misery! Persidious woman!


Skir. Here, my boy, who wants me? who calls for Skirmish? Comrade, did you
want me?


Hen. Me! no.


Skir. Why, yes you did. Ho, ho, house! here, house! we'll have a glass
together; as we never saw one another before, we'll now begin to renew our
acquaintance.


Hen. Can you tell me, if I could get a sheet of writing paper?


Skir. Yes, surely, you shall have that: here, house! house, I say! where the
devil are you all? But heark'ee friend! what a confounded mistake you have made
here! A mistake! damme, you have made two mistakes! I can prove it: In the
first place, to desert at all was a mistake; then to confess it, Oh, damn it,
that was a mistake indeed! I am but a silly ignorant fellow; but had I been in
your place, had he been my sergeant, my general, nay, my corporal, I would have
said, No, I am no deserter. No, no, my lad, Skirmish scorns to desert.

AIR XI.
Though to have a bout at drinking,
When I bear the glasses chinking,
There Is nothing but I Would do, or say,
Yet Skirmish never shall run away.
For here is his motto, and so there is an end:
He Is none of your flatt'rers, who fawn and are civil;
But for country, his bottle, his king, or his friend,
Little Skirmish would go halfway to the devil.
Soldiers often fickle prove,
Who can know his mind for ever?
We forgive you false in love,
But Deserters never, never.

SCENE II.
Henry, Louisa, Skirmish, who goes off, returns, and goes off again during the
Scene, and Flint, with wine, who goes off immediately after he has spoke. Fli.
There Is a young woman without asking for a soldier [to Skirmish] I suppose it
must be you she wants.


Skir. Yes, yes, its me I warrant you; let her come in, but give me the wine
though [sets the bottle down on seeing ber.] Ah, ah, a smart wench, faith!


Hen. Good heavens! what do I see? You here!


Lou. Me, Henry!


Hen. Is it possible!


Skir. Oh, ho, I smoke this business; comrade, I Am off, I Am off; she is your
sister, I suppose, or your cousin but that is no business of mine; madam, no
offense, I hope; my name is Skirmish, I understand what good breeding is; I Am
off; brother soldier, faith, she is a fine girl! I Will go and walk a little in
the courtyard; do you mind me, I Am off -- mum.


Hen. This insult, Lonisa, is beyond enduring! Is it not enough? -- but I will
not upbraid you.


Lou. Hear me but a moment!


Hen. Away! don't I know you false? -- barbarous, faithless wretch!


Skir. [Coming on] Don't mind me; don't let me disturb you; I only come to
fetch the wine, for I believe you don't care to drink; will you take a sup? no
-- well, your servant -- I Am off again.


Hen. It is not from your hands, but from your father's, that I shall expect --


Lou. It Is true, my father! --


Hen. That infamous old man! but go -- I have no more to say. Oh, Louisa! I
dote upon you still! is it possible you can entirely have forgot me?


Lou. Believe me, Henry!


Hen. But with what assurance! -- what composure!


Lou. I should not be composed, if I was really to blame.


Hen. O thou perfidious woman!


Lou. Enjoy your error.


Hen. My error?


Lou. With one word I could convince you.


Hen. With one word! speak it then if you dare.


Lou. I am not married then.


Hen. Not married!


Lou. 'Twas entirely my father's doings; his scheme to --


Hen. O cruel! It Is to no purpose whether 'twas you or him.


Lou. The Duchess --


Hen. Don't name her; you dare not show yourself to her.


Lou. 'Twas her who ordered the whole affair?


Hen. How!


Lou. What I tell you is true; some reports to your difadvantage having reached
her, which I then knew, and we have since found to be false, she ordered this
mock-wedding (for such only it was) to prove your affections; so that every
thing you saw and heard was contrived on purpose to deceive you, and the whole
Affair was but a joke.


Hen. [Sitting down in the chair, rests his hand on the table] Was but a joke?


AIR XII.
Louisa. Ah! cease this affliction, your troubles are past,
Of care and disquiet, that sigh was your last:
How could you once harbor a doubt of my love?
The girl you conversed with, the feast and the rest,
The music and dancing was all but a jest,
A frolic designed your affections to prove.
Believe me, Louisa reluctant complied,
Her father commanded -- entreaty was vain;
Or, I swear by this hand, I would rather have died,
Than have given my Henry a moment of pain.

Hen. Oh, heavens! my heart will burst.


Lou. What means this grief, my love? do you still doubt the truth of what I
say?


Hen. No, Louisa; it is because I believe you.


Lou. Here Is my father. Oh, Sir! I am glad you are come. Ask him what is the
matter; make him tell the cause of his distress.


Rus. Henry, my dear boy, good day to you; I am overjoyed to see you; well, all
matters are cleared up, and you may take Louisa for your pains; when ever you
will, I give her to you.


Hen. I beseech you, desire your daughter to step into the courtyard for a
minute or two.


Rus. Why so?


Hen. Oblige me; only desire she will.


Rus. Louisa, we have something to say to each other; step out for a minute or
two, I Will call you back presently.


Hen. [Taking her hand as she goes out] Louisa, it is an age since I saw you
last.


Lou. And yet you send me away from you already.


Hen. You shall come back again immediately.


Rus. I was surprised to hear you was put in prison, though they tell me it is
but for a trifle. I am over-joyed to see you; the Duchess will soon get you
released, and then -- but you seem thoughtful.


Hen. Will you promise me to do whatever I request.


Rus. That I will, provided it is in my power.


Hen. I beg of you to take your daughter away with you; we must take leave of
one another.


Rus. Why I know that, don't I? you must go back to your regiment.


Hen. Well, return hither two days hence, and ask for a dragoon, named
Skirmish, he will deliver you a letter -- and for me --


Rus. O I know well enough what you mean; you will be at the camp, the king's to
be there.


Hen. Have you command enough of yourself not to betray any thing to your
daughter of what I am going to tell you?


Rus. To be sure I have.


Hen. I am afraid she will return before --


Rus. [Looking out] No, no, we are very safe.


Hen. This wedding trick --


Rus. Yes, 'twas I managed it.


Hen. It threw me into despair --


Rus. Good! very good! I knew it would.


Hen. And in my fury --


Rus. Ha, ha, ha, what you was furious then? delightful!


Lou. [Running in] O cruel father! O unfortunate accident! this wedding has
undone us all; he has confessed himself a Deserter, and is condemned to suffer
death.


Rus. What Is this I hear?


Hen. She knows it all. -- O torture!


Rus. A deserter! condemned! Henry, can this be as she says?


Hen. It Is but too true.


Rus. Good heavens!


Fli. You are wanted without.


Hen. Me?


Fli. You -- you must go directly.


Hen. Adieu, Louisa!


AIR XIII.
Henry. Adieu! adieu! my heart will break,
This torment's beyond bearing:
Louisa. Adieu! ah, why, my love? oh! speak,
And banish this despairing.
Give thy Louisa's pangs relief.
Henry. I cannot speak, oh, love! oh, grief!
Henry, Louisa, and Russet. Ye pitying powers! some comfort send:
When will our sorrows have an end?

Lou. For heavens sake, Sir! where is he gone, who wants him?


Fli. Only some friends.


Lou. Surely, it cannot be to --


Fli. Oh, no! it is not for that yet -- it is too soon awhile, about five or six
-- perhaps, it may be seven first.


Lou. Oh, support me, Sir!


Rus. No child, we may yet prevent it. I Will go to the duchess, and tell her the
whole affair.


Lou. She has brought me into this trouble.


Rus. I Will seek her this instant, do you follow me.

[Goes off.
Lou. Oh, Sir! on my knees, I beseech you.


Fli. There Is no occasion for kneeling to me; what would you have?


Lou. Is not the king to be at the camp to day?


Fli. Yes, and what then?


Lou. Tell me, Sir; in such a case, it is an act of justice; the king surely
will do justice.


Fli. Certainly; he never does otherwise.


Lou. Alas, Sir! I am poor, so very poor --


Fli. That will not hinder it a bit; the king's too good to despise folks because
they are poor.


Lou. But it is for you I mean.


Fli. For me?


Lou. To thank you with; to entreat you; here is a small ornament, of no great
value indeed; I give you this, Sir, I wish I had more to give; it is silver;
delay it but till tomorrow.


Fli. Do what, delay it! [looking at the trinket] hey! it seems to me to be
hollow: are you sure it is silver?


Lou. This suspense is dreadful.

[Goes off.
Fli. Why, I Will tell you; I cannot absolutely delay his execution: but I Will let
him have as much wine as ever he can drink: -- what gone! -- Gad, this girl has
a generous spirit.


SCENE IV.
Skirmish, who holds a bottle and glass in one hand, a sheet of paper under his
arm, and with the other drags in Simkin. Skir. Come along, what the devil are
you afraid of? Here Is a young man wants to see this soldier, and the girl that
was here: where are they?

[To Flint.
Fli. She Is gone away.


Skir. But, where is he?


Fli. He was sent for out to some friends; he will be here again.


Sim. If you please, Sir, I Will follow the gentleman.


Skir. You and I must take a glass together. -- So this soldier is your cousin,
is he?


Sim. Yes, Sir.


Skir. Sit yourself down then; and he was sent here yesterday?


Sim. Yes, Sir.


Skir. Well then, sit down, I tell you.


Sim. But, Sir.


Skir. Sit down, I say; sit down there; -- hell and fury, will you sit down
when I bid you? there! -- now we'll take a glass together; he will soon be here;
come fill.


Sim. Sir, I thank you, but I am not dry; besides I don't care much for
drinking, without knowing my company.


Skir. Without knowing your company! why, you little starved sniveling -- an't
you in company with a gentleman? but drink this minute, or I Will --


Sim. I will, Sir, if you will not be angry.


Skir. Not I; I will not be angry: so you say that --


Sim. I, Sir? I did not say any thing.


Skir. Well then, if you did not say any thing, sing: -- sing me a song.


Sim. I am not in spirits for singing.


Skir. Spirits! why, a song will raise your spirits; come, sing away.


Sim. But Sir, I cannot sing.


Skir. Ever while you live, sing.


Sim. Indeed, Sir, I cannot. --


Skir. You cannot -- why, then I will.


Sim. Well, but, Sir.


Skir. Sit still, I tell you; I am going to sing.


Sim. But -- I wish you, cousin --


Skir. He cannot be long now; hear my song.

AIR XII.
Women and wine compare so well,
They run in a perfect parallel;
For women bewitch us when they will,
And so does wine;
They make the statesman lose his skill,
The soldier, lawyer, and divine:
They put strange whims in the gravest skull,
And send their wits to gather wool;
Then since the world thus runs away,
And women and wine,
Are alike divine;
Let Us love all night, and drink all day!
There Is something like a song for you! now we'll sing together.


Sim. Together?


Skir. Ay, both together.


Sim. But, Sir, I don't know your song.


Skir. Why, who the devil wants you to sing my song?


Sim. I never saw such a man in my life: how shall I get away from him? -- Sir!


Skir. Well, what do you say?


Sim. I believe there is somebody looking for you yonder.


Skir. Is there?


[While Skirmish looks round, Simkin takes an opportunity of running off.]
Skir. O, you young dog! I Will be after you; but stay, here comes the poor
unfortunate young man, his cousin.


SCENE V.
Henry, Skirmish. Skir. How are your spirits? Take a sup of this: Oh! here is
your writing paper.


Hen. Thank you, friend; oh, my heart! I wish I could have seen Louisa once
more.

[Sits down to write.]
Skir. Ah, you're a happy man, you can write! [Loud] Oh, my cursed stars, what
a wretched fellow I am!


Hen. Why, what is the matter?

[Looking round.]
Skir. The matter? -- Confusion! -- I blush to say it; but since it must out,
what will you say to such a poor, miserable -- and but this one misfortune, fit
to be a general: if I had known how to write, I might have had a regiment five
years ago; but company is the ruin of us all; drinking with one, and drinking
with another; -- why, none here; I was in hopes here that I should be able to
study a little; but the devil a bit; no such thing as getting the bottle out of
one's hand: ah! if I could hold the pen as I have held the bottle, what a
charming hand I should have wrote by this time.


Hen. Skirmish, do me one favor.


Skir. What is it?


Hen. May I depend upon you?


Skir. To the last drop of my blood.


Hen. Promise me to deliver this letter.


Skir. I Will go directly.


Hen. You cannot go with it now; you are a prisoner, you know.


Skir. Damn it, so I am; I forgot that: well, but tomorrow I shall have my
liberty, and then --


Hen. A person, whose name is Russet, will be here to enquire after me; deliver
it to him.


Skir. May I perish, if I fail.


Hen. Let me speak to you.

[They talk apart.
SCENE VI.
Henry, Skirmish, Margaret, Jenny, and Simkin. Mar. Yes, yes, you vile hussy,
'twas all your fault.


Jen. Well, have not I confessed it?


Mar. Confessed it, indeed! is not the poor young man going to lose his life,
and all upon your account?


Jen. I own it, I own it; I never shall 'joy myself again as long as I live; I
shall see his ghost every night.


Sim. And it serves you right; and I Will tell you more news for your comfort; I
would not marry you now you have been so wicked, if you was worth your weight in
gold.


Marg. Ah! you need not talk; for you know well enough, you was told to run
after him to call him back, and you never once offered to move.


Sim. Why, how could I? I was the bridegroom, you know.


Jen. See, there he is!


Marg. Bless us, how altered he looks!


Hen. Good day, aunt; good day; [to the others] give us leave, brother soldier.


Skir. Yes, yes, I Will go; I will not disturb you; I Will go and see what they are
doing; I am afraid no good, for the time draws near.


Marg. Ah, my poor boy! can you forgive us? 'twas all our doing.


Jen. No, 'twas my doing.


Hen. Let us say no more about it; 'twas an unfortunate affair: where is Louisa,
and her father?


Marg. Ah! poor man! her father came running into the village, like one
distracted; flung himself on the ground, tore his hair; we could not get him to
speak to us.


Hen. And Louisa, who has seen her?


Sim. We none of us can tell where she is.


Hen. How! no one know where she is gone? some accident sure has happened to
her?


Marg. Don't afflict yourself so.


Hen. Aunt, if she is sound, I must rely on you to comfort her; don't suffer
her out of your sight; this is now all the service you can do me; your nephew
must die; for my sake, therefore, look upon her as your niece; she should have
been so in reality.


Marg. I promise you.


Hen. I could wish to see her again.


SCENE, the last.
Henry, Margaret, Jenny, Simkin, Flint, Skirmish, and Soldiers. Fli. Comrade, I
am sorry to bring you bad news, but you must now behave yourself like a man;
the hell hounds are coming for you.


Hen. Already?


Skir. They are, indeed; here, here, you have occasion enough for it; drink some
of this.


Hen. I am obliged to you, -- none. Aunt, adieu! tell my Louisa, I thought on
her to my last moment; and, oh, my heart! bear up a little, and I shall be rid
of this insupportable misery.

AIR XIII.
To die, is nothing; it is our end, we know;
But it is a sure release from all our woe;
It Is from the mind to set the body free,
And rid the world of wretched things like me.
A thousand ways our troubles here increase;
While care succeeding care, destroys our peace;
Why fly we then? what can such comfort give?
We cease to suffer, when we cease to live.
[During the song a messenger comes on and talks with Flint.]
Marg. Oh, Lord, what shall we do? I Would give all I have in the world to prevent
it.


Sim. And for me, I Would part with the very clothes of my back.


Jen. If you could but see Louisa!


Marg. Ay, if you could but see Louisa!


Jen. We'll give you, Sir, all the money we have, if you will only stay till we
fetch the young woman, that was here just now.


Fli. Well, I am sure no body can say, but as how I am always ready to serve
every body I can: -- what have you got?


Marg. Why, here is a little piece of gold, and some silver.


Jen. And here is my little stock: I am sure every farthing.


Sim. And there is all mine.


Fli. Well, good nature is my pride and pleasure; are you sure you have given
me all?


Marg. I am sure I have.


Jen. And so have I.


Sim. And I too, indeed.


Fli. Why then, what signifies hiding good news? the young man's reprieved.


Hen. How?


Fli. Here Is a messenger from the camp.


Hen. Let me sit down.


Marg. I shall die with pleasure.


Sim. Lord, lord, I shall leap out of my skin.


Rus. Where is he? where is my boy, my son? Louisa, Henry, has done it all! --
Louisa has saved your life!


Hen. Charming angel! tell me how, dear Sir?


Rus. As the army were returning to the camp, assisted in her resolution by her
love for you, to the astonishment of all who saw her, she rushed like lightning
through the ranks, made her way to the king himself, fell at his feet, -- and,
after modestly relating the circumstances of thy innocence, and her own
distress, vowed never to rise till she obtained the life of her lover: the
king, having heard her story with that clemency which always accompanies a
noble mind, granted thy life to her intercession; and the pomp passed on amidst
the acclamations of the people.


Hen. Charming generous creature!


Skir. Death and damnation!


Fli. Why, what ails you, Skirmish?


Skir. The king at the camp, and I not there!


Sim. I shall love my cousin Louisa for it as long as I live.


Rus. The king wept, and the nobles filled her lap with money; which she threw
to the ground, least it should retard her in her way to you.


Hen. How can I reward such tenderness?


Rus. See, see, here she comes.


Lou. My Henry!

Falling into his arms.
Hen. My Louisa!


AIR XIV.
Henry. My kind preserver! fain I Would speak,
Fain would I, what I feel, express;
But language is too poor, too weak,
To thank this goodness to express;
Brothers, companions, age and youth;
Oh! tell to all the world her fame,
And when they ask for faith and truth,
Repeat my dear Louisa's name.
Louisa. And have I saved my Henry's life?
Dear father, in my joy take part:
I now indeed shall be a wife,
Wife to the idol of my heart.
Thus when the storm, dispersing, flies,
Through which the sailor's forced to steer;
No more he dreads inclement skies,
But with the tempest leaves his fear.
Russet. Why, why, I proy you, this delay?
Children, your hands in wedlock join,
That I may pass my hours away,
In ease and peace through life's decline:
This joy's too great, my pride, my boast;
Both, both in my affection share,
May who delights the other most,
Henceforward be your only care.
Skirmish. I wish your joy may hold you long;
But yet I am not such a sot,
As not to see you all are wrong;
Why is the king to be forgot?
You had been wretched but for him;
Then follow Skirmish, dance, and sing;
Raise every voice, strain every limb,
Huzza, and cry, Long live the King.

FINIS.

