D' FOE's Answer to the Quakers Catechism: OR, A Dark LANTHORN for a Friend of
the Light.

To the READER.
A Quaker with his dark Lanthorn light.
Is here exposed to your sight;
Stripped off's nice Vizard and fair Paint,
Wherein he used to Ape a Saint.
So false Fires may delude our Eyes,
And seem like Stars to guild the Skies;
Till Reason proves they owe their Birth
To stinking vapors of the Earth.
This Hypocrite we here essay,
In's proper Colors to display;
Whose Yea and Nay in mischief goes
Beyond the Hectors damning Oaths
A Playhouse Beau, is not so Gay,
As now a Days the Yea and Nay:
Whose Wigg in Curles, with Powder Dressed,
Makes him as Wicked as the rest;
And seems to Act so very oddly,
You Would Swear he is fallen from the Godly:
For when he looks the most Precise,
He tells you damned confounded Lies.
D' Foe, etc.



London, Printed in the YEAR, 1706.

D' FOE's Answer to the Quakers CATECHISM, etc.
A Quaker is a Hogs-head of Phanaticisme drawn off to the Lees; a Common-Shore
of Heresy into which most extravagant Opinions at last Disembogue themselves
and center, the fag-end of Reformation marked with a sullen meagre-look, and
this Characteristick Thou; A Fox in a Lambskin Coat, that retains his Subtlety
though not his color, a dough-baked piece of formality that decries
Superstition, yet idolizes Garbs and Phrases. You may know him by his
diminitive-band, that looks like the Folornehope of his Shirt crawling out at
his Collar; for his purity consists only in his Dress, and his Religion is, Not
to speak like his Neighbors. His Orignal is as Obscure as the head of Nile;
some refer it to Behmen the can^ing Philosophaster of Germany. Others run his
Pedigree higher, and say he was hatched when the degraded Seraphm first took on
him to counterfeit an Angel of Light. He is a mere Composition of Contradiction
and Clownishnessana, with a sew odd Scruples of Hypocrisy to give it a
Tincture. Should the Parliament make a Law for Eating, he would Starve rather
then be Guilty of obeying it; and if you would have him do a thing, you need
only forbid it on Pain of Death: He thinks that to be Religious one is obliged
to be Uncivil, and flings his Wits over Board to make room for Inspirations.
His Dreams he Intitles Visions, and each Crapicio of his Fancy must pass for a
divine Revelation, to which he Blasphemously puts a Probatum est, The Mouth of
the Lord has spoken it. The first Article of this Creed is to keep his Hat on,
which he observes so Religiously, as if he thought vailing Bonnet to be the Sin
against the Holy Ghost; Titles of Honor he takes for infallible Marks of the
Beast, and believes the Master of the Ceremonies to be Antichrist; He would
have done rarely in the old Chaos before Nature had anked ihings in their
places, being a professed Enemy to all Order, that thinks there is no pure walking
unless it be with the Heels upwards: He bears a Grudge against Paul for saying
most noble Festus, and hates the Memory of Sarah because she called her Husband
Lord His Discourses are nothing but a Rhapsody of often repeated Nonsense; and
when he has darkened your Understanding with a Cloud of infignificant Babble,
he Cry's, Ah! Friends mind the Light! He usually begins with Raving like
Mahomet in his Falling-fit, or the Devil of Delphose's Priests, that never
delivered their Lying Oracles, but with extravagant Gestures and odd
Distortions of Body, Swear not at all, is his Motto, but Lies he holds in many
cases Venial, and in t^^o meritorious, when they make for the Interest of the
beloved Seed, or reflect Scandal on the Government. He Cheats worse then a
Long-lane Broaker, by pretending to deal at a word, and the Hook whereby he
draws in his Customers, is a far-fetcht Sigh, and plainly I tell thee Friend.

This troublesome Insect (for all his demure Looks) is deservedly suspected to
be part of the Vermin dropped from the Beast, a Puppet of Religion, contrived to
amuse the Rabble, that receives it is Motion from his Holynesses invisible Hand
behind the Curtain; for though the Jesuit and he seem Enemies, at long run
(like East and West,) they prove the same Equivocations being as common with
them both as Curses to a Gamester. Ask our trembling Saint if he believe the
Resurrection of the Dead, he shall answer yea, but tell you another time, he
meant only an arising from Sin; by Heaven and Hell he intends no more but
several Scenes Transacted within us, and abuses holy Scripture into a mystical
Romance Each of them averrs Perfection Attainable in this Life but herein they
differ, the Papist Acknowledges but one Pope in the World, the Quaker sets up
a Pope in every Individual Breast, to whom all Scripture and Reason must
Truckle; so that refusing the Polestar of Gods Word and the Churches Compass,
he will needs Steer by the wandering Motion of a Treacherous Ignus fatuus
within, subject to be blown any way, and often Extinguished by the Hurricanes of
Passion.

He makes Self the Center whereunto the Lines of all his Actions tend, and like
a Hedgehog wrapped up in his own warm down, turn out Brisles to all the World
besides; you can come on no side of him but he Pricks and Bites, and all his
Craggy and Inhospitable. He that deals with him has need of more Eyes then
Poets bestow on Argus, for he out-vies a Genoe's for Subtlety, and a Jew may
come to be an Apprentice with him; he loves the Exchange though he hates the
Church, and Admires no Preaching so much as Foxes.

For all his peaceable Sheepish Countenance, he delights in Contention, and
when he is Thou-ing a Court of Justice, thinks himself in his proper Element.
He bawls (like an Oysterwife) at other Folks Pride, and evidences his own
Humility only in defying the Pedlars Pack, Lace, Ribbons, etc. whilst he
sawcily contemns his Superiors, and prefers the Crotchets of his own giddy
Brain before the Decrees of a general Council. He hates no Whore so much as her
of Babylon, and ever and anon greatifies the old Man with a kind Green-apron'd
Friend, whom he picks up at a Conventicle by a teacherous Touch of the Hand,
under pretense of a pure Salutation, and finding by her rampant Pulse, and
tempting turning up the Whites, (which she pretends to do in Devotion) that her
desires are at Flood, they retire together for mutual Edification. He is often
Drunk, but not like his Neighbors Temporally, for Sleep cannot cure him, but
the Fumes of his spiritual Pride having Intoxicated his Head, makes his very
Soul Reel, and but his Body into a fit of Shivering; ye, will he not privately
in the company of Friends refuse the refreshing Bottle, provided it be not
known in Gath, nor published amongst the wicked of Askalon, for he confesses
the use of the Creature (especially when it comes on Free-cost) to be exceeding
Lawful. He is very curious to be in all things contrary to the common Mode,
that he may be taken notice of, for a singular Man, and having screwed his Face
into a Religious Frame, and turned his Voice to a puling sanctimonious Key, he
uses it as a Low-bell to catch Larks, or rather such Owls as will be Bubbled
out of their Money merely on the Repute of his conscientions Dealing; he
abominates our Churches, and says very well, that God must be Worshipped every
where in Spirit, yet will rather be knocked of the Head theu forsake Bull and
Mouth, here it is that he Glories in Tribulations.

In brief, a Quaker is a Cynick in Religion, one that would have Illnature
translated Grace; as if the Holy Spirit (that pure sweet gentle Dove) did
inspire Men with sullen Humors and waspish Disposition: He hates both
Magistracy and Ministry, and never speaks, well of Authority or Obedience,
but when he is going to lash his Maid or his Apprentices; for though himself
have shaken off all subjection to Superious, yet to his Domestics he is worse
then an Egyptian Taskmaster, and speaks to his Servants in a tone as imperious
as the Grand Seigniour to his Mutes; he cannot endure Ceremonies or
Complements, especially where his Belly is concerned, and therefore falls to
all meat (as Gallants do to a Wench or Oysters) without saying Grace, he is
very diligent in his Generation-work, and may therefore have many Children but
no Heirs; for his Issue comes into the World out-lawed, and can no more boast
to be born in lawful Wedlock, then the Kinchen-cove of a Gypsy got under a
Hedge by a strauling Tinker; he bannes the Banes, and i^ this Respect only
refuses License, Consummating his Marriage before it is Solemnized; for so soon
as the Spirit begins to yield to the Rebellion of the Flesh, and his Bowels
Yearn to be Multiplying, he and his willing Doxy never wait the Parsons
Leisure, but take each others Word and so to Bed.

The Devil that furnishes others with his Tare but by Retail, deals with the
Quaker by Whole sale, so many Heresies Club to his Generation that it is
Impossible to say which he Resembles most. Sure Satan had a Fancy to present
the World with an Oglio, and therefore here has Rendevouzed all his Hell bred
Errors in Epitomie, and set down a Catalogue of them in Shorthand.

By his obstinate Zeal to keep his Noddle covered, you may guess him a
Mahumetan, that resents nothing so Dishonorable as a bare Head; and indeed he
has no more Christinaity in him than a Turk: His Good Friday Looks speak him a
superstitious Anchorite; his Subtlety and Equivocations would become a Jesuit;
he Names his Children with as little Ceremony as other Folks do their Whelps;
and so far kees pace with the Anabaptist, but of a sudden he out-strips them,
and falls in with the Seekers to deny all Ordinances. From Socinus he steals
Arguments against the blessed Trinity, and learns to disown all Government from
John of Leyden. At first he was much against the Carnal-Weapon, but now begins
to be Reconciled to Fighting, and if you Anger him will rather venture a
Rubbers at fity Cuffs, then turn the other Cheek to the Smiter. He has of ^ate
so far fallen from his first pretense of Humillity that he out strips Handsome
Fielding, or any Playhouse Bully for Wig and Vanity.

It Is a prudent Maxim in the Art Military, never ^o think too Contemptibly of
an Enemy. Our Grandfathers saw that Scotch-mist Presbytery rising to bigger
then a Man's Hand, and yet how Dismally did it in few Years overspread our
whole Horison.

Consider but this Quaking Gang in it is true Dimensions, and the Arts they have
to promote their Designs, and they will appear more formidable then most of the
other Eactions.

For First, They are a People generally Subtle, Frugal, Industrious, and Wary
in their Dealing; by which and their large Pretensions to a punctual Honesty,
they have Engrossed a grand part of the Nations Trade.

Secondly, Whereas other Persuasions are divided into distinct Congregations,
and so have several particular TEACHERS, who frequently Broaching different
Whimseys, Mince them into subdivisions, whilst some dare not hear such an one,
and others scruple to Communicate with such a one, though all of a PARTY.

The QUAKERS on the contrary; though ^o two of them scarce agree in all things,
do yet generally throughout England keep themselves up ^n one entire Body,
glewed together with a strict Unity, as to Affection, and Correspondence, as is
^vident by their Weekly Collections in every Coun^y continually sent up to
London where their common Stock cannot but in so many Years as they have
Maintained it, be very vast. To which add the exact Account and Registry they
every where keep of all their Births and Burials (which are likewise duly
Transmitted up) so that in an Instant they are able to give a near Estimate of
their Number and Strength in all the three Nations. These and some other
Importants being duly weighed, render this shivering Sect not so in
considerable as the common Rabble Deluded with their specious Pretenses are apt
to think them. It Is a good Caution of a Minor Poet,

As white Powder discharges without Noise,
So may Saint-seeming Hypocrites Destroys,
Trust not too far, the soft Hand sometimes Smites
And Larks are Birds of Prey as well as Kites.
To conclude, a Quaker is a canting thing that Cozens the World by the Purity
of his Clothes, a few Close-stool Faces and whineing Expressions, his Life is
only a real Lie, his Doctrine contrary to all sober Religon, and withal so
Troublesome that I am grown quite Weary of drawing his Character and cannot but
wish him and all his Tribe fairly Embarked for terra Incognita, of the late
found Isle of Pines, under the Conduct of Penn their high Admiral.

FINIS.

