A KING or a CONSUL? A NEW SONG to the Tune of Derry down.
COME all ye brave Englishmen, list' to my story,
You who love peace and freedom, and honor and glory!
No foreign usurper they hither shall bring,
We'll be ruled by a native, our Father and King.
Derry down, down, down, derry down!
No Corsican Despot in England shall rule,
No Disciple avowed of the Mussulman school;
A Papist at Rome, and at Cairo a Turk,
Now this thing, now that thing, as best helps his work.
Derry down,
Shall Atheists rule Britons? O never, no never,
Forbid it Religion for ever and ever;
Their heathenish Consuls then let them not bring,
Our Country is Christian, and Christian our King!
Derry down,
In England when wounds are the sailor's sad lot,
Their wounds and their sufferings are never forgot;
To a Palace far nobler our Vet'rans we bring,
Than is kept for himself by our merciful King.
Derry down,
Let any compare, if my saying he blames,
The splendors of Greenwich A magnificent Hospital for Sailors.
with those of St. James.
-- Once Buoni trepanned his poor troops to the East,
Over deserts too sultry for man or for beast;
Derry down,
When the battle was over, and hundreds were found,
By the fortune of war gash'd with many a wound;
Diseased and afflicted -- now what do you think
This tender Commander obliged them to drink?
Derry down,
You fancy 'twas grog, or good flip, or good ale;
No, 'twas poison, alas! was the soldiers' regale;
See Jaffa Where French Soldiers were poisoned in the Hospital.
-- see Haslar The Royal Portsmouth Hospital where English Sailors are treated
like Princes.
-- the difference to prove,
There poison, here kindness, there murder, here love.
Derry down,
And lest we should publish his horrible tricks,
With our freedom of printing a quarrel he picks;
But we keep no secrets, each newspaper shows it,
And while we act fairly we care not who knows it.
Derry down,
To Frenchmen, O Britons, we never will trust;
Who murder their Monarch can never be just;
That freedom we boast of, the French never saw,
It Is guarded by order and bounded by law.
Derry down,
That Buoni's invincible, Frenchmen may cry,
Let Sidney the brave give each boaster the lie;
Though the arrows of Europe against us are hurled,
Be true to yourselves and you will conquer the world.
Derry down,
Though some struggles we make, let us never repine,
While we sit underneath our own fig tree and vine;
Our Fig Tree is Freedom, our Vine is Content,
Two blessings, by nature for Frenchmen not meant.
Derry down,
French liberty Englishmen never will suit,
They have planted the tree, but we feed on the fruit;
Then rail not at taxes, although they cut deep,
It Is a heavy Insurance to save the brave Ship.
Derry down,
Let narrow-soul'd party be banished the land,
And let Englishmen join with one heart and one hand;
Let each fight for his Wife, for we marry but one,
The French wed so many, they often care for none.
Derry down,
One King did not suit them, three Tyrants they chose,
And their God they renounce while their King they depose;
Then we never will submit to the Corsican's rod,
Britons want but one Wife, and one King, and one GOD.
Derry down, down, down, derry down!
BATH: Printed and sold by S. HAZARD: Sold also by Messrs. RIVINGTONS, St.
Paul's Churchyard; HATCHARD, Piccadilly, London; JAMES, Wine-street, Bristol;
and by all the Booksellers in the UNITED KINGDOM.

Price One Halfpenny, or 3s. 6d. per Hundred.


