ROBERT and RICHARD OR, THE GHOST of poor MOLLY, who was drowned in RICHARD'S
MILL POND.
To the Tune of Co^^^^^^'s Mul^erry Tree
QUOTH Richard to Bob, "let things go as they will,
"Of pleasure and fun I will still have my fill;
"In a little gay Joy I see nothing amiss,
"And though now and then tipsy, what harm is in this?
"For even Solomon says, and I vow he says truth,
"'Rejoice, O young man, in the days of thy youth' --
"I am glad" (answered Bob) "you're of Solomon's creed,
"But I beg if you quote him you will please to proceed;
"For God" (as the wise man continues to sing)
"Thy soul into Judgment for all this will bring.
"Thus a man may get plunged in a woeful abyss,
"By choosing to say, Pray what harm is in this?
"Come, Come" (says gay Richard) "don't grudge me a "Cup;
I Am resolved, while I Am able, I Will still keep it up;
"Let old Greybeards deny that in frolic's there is bliss;
"I Will game, love, and drink -- and what harm is in this?
Says Robert, "I grant if you live for today,
"You may game, love, and drink, and may frolic away;
"But then, my dear Dick, I again must contend,
"That the wise man has bid us remember the end."
Says Richard, "when sickness or peevish old age,
"Shall advance to dismiss me from life's merry stage;
"Repentance just then, Boy, may not be amiss,
"But while young I Will be jolly -- what harm is in this?"
They parted -- and Richard his pastimes begun,
'Twas Richard the Jovial, the soul of all fun;
Each dancing bout, drinking bout, Dick would attend,
And he sung and he swore -- nor once thought of the End.
Young Molly he courted, the pride of the plain,
He promised her marriage, but promised in vain;
She trusted his vows, but she soon was undone,
And when she fell weeping he thought it good fun.
Thus scorned by her Richard sad Molly run wild,
And roam'd through the woods with her destitute child;
'Till poor Molly and Molly's poor Baby were found
One evening in Richard's own mill pond both drowned.
Then his conscience grew troubled by night and by day,
But it is clamor he drowned in more drink and more play;
Still Robert exhorted, and like a true friend,
He warned him he prayed him -- to think on the End.
Now disturbed in his dreams poor Molly each night
With her babe stood before him; how sad was the sight!
O how ghastly she looked as she bade him attend,
And so awfully told him -- "Remember the End."
She talked of the woes and unquenchable fire
Which await the gay Sinner, the Drunkard, and Liar;
How he ruined more maidens she bade him beware,
Then she wept, and she groaned, and she vanished in air.
Now beggared by Gaming, distempered by Drink,
Death star'd in his face, yet he dared not to think;
Despairing of mercy, despising all truth,
He died of old age in the prime of his youth.
On his Tombstone good Robert these Verses engraved,
Which he hoped some gay fellow might read and be saved.


The EPITAPH.
HERE lies a poor Youth who called sinning his bliss,
And was ruined by saying what harm is in this?
Let each Passer-by to his error attend,
And learn of poor Dick to remember the End.
Entered at Stationers Hall.

Sold by J. MARSHALL, (PRINTER to the CHEAP REPOSITORY for Moral and Religious
Tracts) No. 17, Queen Street, Cheapside, and No. 4, Aldermary Churchyard, and
R. WHITE, Piccadilly, LONDON.

By S. HAZARD, (PRINTER to the CHEAP REPOSITORY) at BATH; and by all
Booksellers, Newsmen, and Hawkers, in Town and Country. -- Great Allowance will
be made to Shopkeepers and Hawkers.

Price an Halfpenny, or 2s 3d. per 100, 1s. 3d. for 50, 9d. for 25.


