A TREATISE ON THE GOUT; In which The CAUSE is First briefly assigned, AND
Secondly an effectual and certain CURE is pointed out.

By Arentius Ferdinand Lambrechts, M. D.

Studere, verum invenire. LONDON: Printed for J. BOUQUET, at the White-Hart in
Paternoster Row. 1754.

[Price Sixpence.]

TO My much beloved and honored Father-in-Law JOHN SCHRADER, Professor of
History, Oratory, and Poetry in the Academy at Franeker.

TO The most renowned, learned, and expert AMOS LAMBRECHTS, M. D. BINCKE
LAMBRECHTS, M. D. Practitioners at Amsterdam. DANIEL MATTHIAS LOHMAN, M. D. My
beloved Kinsmen;

Also to My much esteemed Friend CHRISTOPHER KENE, M. D. of Middelburgh in
Zeeland.

The following concise Treatise is humbly inscribed.

That by its Usefulness and Service, it may merit your Esteem, and obtain your
kind Acceptance, is the sincere Desire of the Author.

A. F. LAMBRECHTS.

THE INTRODUCTION.
THE learned Dr. Wintringham, in the Introduction to his Treatise on the GOUT
Tractatus de Podagra, in 8vo.
, very justly observes, "That the Phenomenon of this Disease have been
variously treated by Authors, and rendered intricate by the Numbers of
Hypotheses, which have wholly obscured the true Nature of this Malady; or at
least have only given us a lame and uncertain Account." Wherefore he closes it
in the following Manner: "It is clear, that this Disease as yet remains in the
Dark, which we hope, may one Day appear in its proper Light." I have already
made some small Mention concerning this Malady in my Compendium
Anatomico-Medicum Practicum, published in Latin, Anno 1747.

It is not the empty Zeal of Applause, that pushes me on to make public the
following Treatise; but the real Service of Mankind, and the Welfare of those
who are afflicted with this severe Disorder.

Benevolent Reader,

I beseech your Acceptance of this short Essay with Humanity and Candor,
humbly desiring, that any Errors you may meet with, may in a humane and
friendly Manner be set to rights.

If this should prove acceptable to Mankind, I will in a short Time make public
all my particular Observations on the GOUT.

It will be to no Purpose to detain you any longer from the Treatise itself,
therefore I close this Introduction with the following Lines.

Tu, scio, tu fateor, novisii rectius istis,
Tu, scio, tu, fateor, me meliora facis.
Sed, rogo, sufficiat tibi, cum meliora nequirem Reddere, debendi semper habere
reum.
Farewell.

A TREATISE ON THE GOUT.
THE Gout is a tensive and lacerating Pain about the Joints, chiefly returning
in Hippoc. Sect. vi. Aphorism 55.
Spring and Autumn, arising from an Obstruction in the nervous Vessels and
Acrimony of the Fluids; whence Redness, Swelling, and chalky Concretions Herm.
Boerhaave Aphoris. 1254-61, etc.
. In general it is called Arthritis, from the Greek Word (...), signifying a
Joint, because this Complaint chiefly seizes those Parts. It likewise takes its
Name from the several Parts of the Body it attacks, to wit, in the Hands,
Chiragra from (...) a Hand, and (...), a Prey or Seizure, thereby denoting its
cruel Ravages and Injury wheresoever it comes.

The Sciatica or Hip-Gout, from (...) the Hip. In the Knees Gonogra, from (...)
the Knee, and (...).

Podagra in like manner is from (...), the Foot, and (...), whence the Gout in
the Feet is so termed.

There are various other Denominations which all take their origin from the
parts affected, the Cause being still the same, sometimes seizing one Place
sometimes another.

Many are apt to believe the Rheumatism to be either Gout or Scurvy, but
improperly; it has its Name from (...), to flow, hence (...), a Rheum, thereby
denoting a Flowing of Humors to a Part, yet the Rheumatism partakes somewhat
of these Diseases.

The renowned Sydenham has well treated this Disease, yet must own in my
Opinion, he makes use of bleeding too frequently. It chiefly shows itself in
the same Places, where the Gout appears, whence in some measure the Mistake
arises.

The Lumbago was observed by the Ancients; in which the Pain in the Loins is so
great, that the Patient is obliged to sit or stand upright: If he moves to
either Side, or endeavors to bend forward or backward, then he suffers
excruciating Pains, and sometimes even Convulsions. The same Difficulties are
found in moving the Neck, if that Part is afflicted, as it often happens to be.
When it seizes the Region of the Os sacrum it is often termed the lower
rheumatic Lumbago; by some also it is called the rheumatic Gonogra, if in the
Knees: Yet this Disease may for the most part be distinguished from the Gout
and Scurvy; if the Person has not had either of these before, then I should
esteem it the Rheumatism, and not the Gout.

It is not necessary for me here to explain the Cause of the regular Fit of the
Gout, which invades a little before the vernal Equinox, and after the autumnal;
for Wintringham has learnedly treated of this Cap. iv. See also De Gorter's
Commentary in his Medicina Hippocratica on Hipp. Sect. vi. Aphorism 55.
.

The noble Willis and Heinsius also [who has wrote in Dutch a Tract of this
Malady] deserves to be read again and again; which makes good the old Proverb,

Lectio lecta placet, decies repetita placebit. The Gout under its various
Denominations is either hereditary or acquired. Its Cause is two fold,

First, From a Straitness and Rigidity or Stiffness of the nervous Vessels.

Secondly, From an Acrimony and Tenacity of the Fluids H. Boerh. Aphorism.
1262-63.
.

Hence every Fault committed in the Non-naturals To wit, Air, Meat and Drink,
Sleep and Watching, Motion and Rest, Retention and Excretion, and the Passions
of the Mind.
(as they are termed by Physicians) hasten and bring on the Fit. It principally
afflicts in Parts remote from the Brain. The Defect lies in the last Office of
Digestion. 1st. From our Food is Chyle produced, 2dly. The Serum or Whey, 3dly.
The Blood, and lastly, The nervous Spirit.

The Viscera, or Organs of the first Concoctions are good, but that ultimate or
last Effect is not properly performed. Our Master of the Faculty, the great
Boerhaave is of the same Opinion; for he saw a Patient who had about the Joint
a Swelling that broke without Pain; he forced a Needle quite through to the
Bone without any Uneasiness, and took out this chalky Matter which was made up
with the smallest Vessels, thus destroyed and changed. It is also plain, that
the Blood, Serum, etc. are not in fault, for they equally exercise their
several Functions; the gouty Subject can reason properly, and feels the Power
of Love as before: Hence I have often admired Hippocrates, where he says, the
Gout cleanses the most minute Recesses of the Blood in old Men; for after a
Fit, they, for the most part remain free and well for Months; and in this
Course, they may obtain the good old Age of Fourscore or upwards; wherefore
this Disease must not be in the Blood, but in the Ultimate (...), or Spirit of
the Blood.

Hence it is necessary (as also Paracelsus and Helmont observes) that the whole
Body be recruited in the Solids, and the Fluids mended, and corrected before
the Cure can be accomplished; but this is to be done by restorative
Medicaments, and not those of a purgative Quality.

Otto Tachenius (in his Tract de Morborum Principe) says, that a subtle
corroding Acid is the Cause of the Gout, and hence an Alcali, it being quite an
Opposite, destroying and driving out the Malady, he esteems as a Specific:
which acrid Cause, arising from too great Rigidity or Straitness in the
Vessels, Venery, etc. destroys the best and finest Part of the Nerves. He got
great Profit by this Invention, yet the Medicine did not answer. It is
inscribed on the Statue erected to the Memory of Paracelsus, that he could cure
the Gout, by which, I suppose, is to be understood, he cured the Fit by
ordering a good Diet, giving proper Anodynes, etc. But this does not root out
the Seeds of the Disease; Nature left to herself would have performed thus much.

A Man in Holland made Trial of all the Remedies he could pick up, among the
rest the Caryocostinum, but was much the worse for it, notwithstanding the
great Praises given it by its Inventor Eugenius.

In England, as well as in Holland, there is a noted Powder highly recommended
in this Disease; it is made with Germander, Ground Pine, the lesser Centaury,
the Roots of Birthworth and Gentian; and distinguished by the Title of the
Great and Noble Duke of Portland. It is true, this Powder will mitigate the
Pains; but in my Practice, I have found it to produce Obstructions in the
smaller Vessels, and cause the morbid Matter to attack fresh Places; hence if
it should retire to some of the more noble Viscera, Death in a short Time, must
be the Event. I readily own, that if the gouty Person, having this Malady, only
in a recent and slight manner, observes a good Diet, during the Use of this
Powder, he may, for a Time, have his Pains lessened and abated; but it is not
in the Power of this Remedy to eradicate the peccant Matter.

The Gout is not only dangerous in itself, but likewise of all Diseases the
most severe, and obstinate in its Continuance, tormenting poor Mortals, for the
most part, as long as Lise lasts; from whence the Saying,

Tollere nodosam nescit medicina podagram. JUVENAL. We may further add the
Words of Dr. Wintringham in the End of his Treatise, where he observes, "That
notwithstanding the vain Boastings of Empirics, it is quite evident, that no
Specific has been given, by the Help of which, this Disease has been rooted
out."

Hippocrates takes notice, "That Eunuchs have not the Gout, neither are bald or
bare-headed. Also, that Women In our Days this holds not good. But pray, can we
find no Reason for this? Crescentibus delictis crescunt paenae.

Frigora, Vina, Venus podagrant corpora nostra.


are free from it unless their natural Courses are deficient:" And further,
"That Youth have it not before they Use Venery Hipp. Sect. vi. Aph. 28, 29, and
30. H. Boerhaave Aphorism. 1268.

H. Boerhaave Aphorism. 1269.


."

Our Father Hippocrates has here declared Things worth notice, but yet he does
not say this Disease is incurable.

The excellent Boerhaave observes, "That this Disease cannot be cured, unless
by Medicines, which have Power to correct and change the bad State of the Body,
whence this Disorder arises."

The hereditary Gout, and that attended with stony Concretions are of all the
most difficult to cure. For the hereditary is the Effect of the whole Compages
of the human Machine, and shows itself in its own proper time, in like manner,
as the Secretion of the male Seed appears after Puberty, having its Origin from
the Nerves so ingendered.

The Tophi, or Chalk-stones do not happen till after all the Juices of the Body
have been infected; hence we may plainly learn, why they are the worst and most
difficult to be cured The celebrated John De Gorter (late Professor at
Harderwych, but at present of Petersburg) observes in his Chirurgia Repurgata
(Lib. ii. Cap. ii. Par. 205.) That the Tophi or Nodes, in the Lues venerea, are
to be treated in the same manner, as a Caries or Rottenness of the Bones; but
that no Remedy has been given for the gouty Tophi: There is good Reason in what
this worthy Man mentions, for Ointments, Emplasters, etc. externally applied,
do nothing; it being necessary, first to remove the Cause, and then the Tophi
will spontaneously disappear.
.

Now to the Method of treating this Disease. Herm. Boerhaave Aphorism. 1270.


During the Paroxysm or Fit, I carefully avoid every Thing which may hinder or
disturb the Evacuation of the peccant Matter. Therefore I shun bleeding, for
the Blood being lessened in Quantity, the Pressure toward the excretory
Vessels is likewise diminished; and thus the Matter which should be evacuated,
is retained, whereby grievous and heavy Symptoms ensue.

Dr. Wintringham directs Emetics and Purgatives to be repeated occasionally, in
order to clear the Primae Viae of their Crudities; but I abstain from such
Remedies, for they occasion a Tumult in the nervous Juices, draw off the more
fluid Parts, and destroy their expulsive Power Herm. Boerhaave Aph. 1271.
, whereby the natural Secretions are much hindered.

Medicines that encourage Sweat, and also those that pass by Urine, make the
Circulation of the Blood more rapid, and of Course the offending Matter is
determined in a larger Quantity to be separated and carried off, hence the
present Fit will be increased. It is best that the Concoction and Evacuation of
the gouty Matter be left to the sole Work of Nature.

I would refer the Reader to the 1273d Aphorism of the immortal Boerhaave, it
deserving a particular Regard, nay even all of them on this Subject are well
worth our perusal.

During the Fit, we can only endeavor to render the Pain as mild as possible,
by blunting the Acrimony or Sharpness of the morbid Matter, and gently helping
forward its Expulsion out of the Body. To effect this, I endeavor to dilute
and thin the Blood, that the Matter unfit for Circulation, and lodged at the
Joints, may flow with more Facility and Ease. I order a temperating Powder,
three or four Times in a Day, with a medicated Liquor to be plentifully drank.
When the Pain is severe and scarce sufferable, I give fifty, sixty or seventy
Dops of an anodyne Elixir in a large Draught of the above Drink. I never use
any outward Application during the Fit, unless the sick Person should be very
impatient and desirous of it; in which Case, I apply an anodyne Cataplasm or
Fomentation. If the gouty Matter should recoil to the internal Parts; and there
attack some of the noble Viscera or Bowels, we must immediately try all in our
Power to drive it out again to the Joints, with large Draughts of an aromatic
Decoction, Fomentations and Blisters too if requisite. Herm. Boerhaave Aphorism
1281.
By these Means many may be preserved from sudden Death.

Out of the Fit, I take Care to prevent the Increase of the gouty Matter, also
to shake off that which has, in some measure, begun to fix itself. And for that
Purpose.

First the Patient must carefully observe a good Diet, especially a milky one,
for Milk has been separated from every gross Part, having already passed
through the several Digestions in the Animal; hence it does not beget those
Crudities any other Diet is liable to.

The gouty Patient, while he is under his Course of Medicines, ought to have
the following Verse inscribed over his Chamberdoor.

Esto pius Domino, sobrius tibi, justus in omnes,
Ista tria animae causa salutis erit.
The celebrated Dolaeus writ well on this Head Encyclop. Med. p. 244.
, learn a Lesson (says he) from the rank herd of Debauchees, who, in our
Tippling-houses gorge themselves with strong Beer: What foul Savours exhale
from their impure Bodies, how are they agitated by an unquiet and restless
Life, how great a Dullness to their Wit, how benumbed their Senses, how feeble
their Limbs, how overwhelmed is that noble Part, their Brain. As when the Earth
is wet by heavy Rains, Linen and Paper grow limp and moist, standing Waters
and Sewers stink and are offensive; even so, when too much Liquor has diffused
itself through the whole Body, the Breast, etc. are beset with Catarrhs, the
Ears have a Tinkling Noise, the Eyes grow dim, a Cough invades the Lungs, the
Head is seized with Giddiness, the Nerves and Muscles are tortured with Pains
not unlike those of the Gout; and all this is the Effect of too hard drinking.

Qui vult alterius cyathis haurire salutem,
Ille lucrum referet, perdat ut ipse suum.
Ense cadunt multi, perimit sed crapula plures,
Nec facit ad multos rapula multa dies.
The great Boerhaave directs, "The Use of aromatic, bitter and antiscorbutic
Plants; lixivial fixed Salts in a small Dose, often repeated, and continued a a
long Time; nourishing Meats and Drink, that are light and easy of Digestion;
constant riding on Horseback in a pure and clear Air, with frequent Friction
and Motion of the Parts; lastly, going to bed early, and sleeping late in the
Morning Herm. Boerh. Aphorism 1275.
."

The Reader may farther compare this with the Words of Doctor Wintringham in
his beforementioned Treatise: He may also see my Dissertatio Medica de
sanitate ejusque Conservatione, where I have expressly wrote on Diet, and the
Preservation of Health.

Constant Exercise is directed by the noble Boerhaave, and very justly too; for
Sloth is Sepulcher of the Living; to stand still and be unactive is pernicious;
if the Air stagnates it becomes pestilential; if Water is without Motion, it
soon is putrid and corrupt; if the Land is not cultivated it becomes Desert and
waste; in like manner the Warrior laying aside his Arms, Rust and Canker prey
upon them; the Musician too neglecting his Instrument, the Chords of Harmony
decay and are useless; the Moth also makes his Inroads on our horded Garments:
Thus sings the Poet Ovid.

Cernis ut ignavium corrumpunt otia corpus;
Ut vitium capiunt, ni moveantur aquae.
Lib. ii. ELEG. vi. What says the old Divine Hippocrates? Indolence moistens
and renders the Body weak and flaccid; Labor and Industry throws off the
superfluous Juices, and makes it firm and robust.

The Disease of Drowsiness and unstable Judgment is the Offspring of Negligence
and want of Care Rolfinck Meth. Med. Spec. Praef. ad lect. in princip.
.

Always to sit is bad, for the pancreatic Juice and Bile, which is a Balsam
necessary to be mixed with the Chyle, is by this Inactivity precipitated in the
smaller Intestines, hence arises a Cacochylia or bad State of Chyle; wherefore
instead of a sweet nutritious Chyle, an acid aquose Fluid enters the Lacteals.

Also the Ferment in the Stomach becomes acid, which afterward changes
whatever it receives into the same Acidity, after the manner of the
Fermentation in making Bread (for a little Yeast being mingled with the Flour,
etc. soon communicates the same Ferment to the whole Mass.) Hence varirious
Diseases arise.

Blautus Palinurus In Curcurl. Act. 11. p. 167.
directs a Cappadocian (whose Blood had not a free Circulation) to walk, it
being the best Remedy for the Spleen.

Agreeable to Boerhaave, every gouty Person ought to ride in a clear, but not a
cold Air: As Chilliness or Cold is the Forerunner of Mortality, thus a due
Warmth shows the vital intestine Motion, that is so necessary to Life; for as
long as we live, we must enjoy a more or less Degree of Heat: Cold is injurious
to the Nerves as Euripides bears Testimony, where he says, (...), that is, Cold
is very hurtful to a thin or lean habit of Body.

Hippocrates also takes notice, that those who travel through Snow, or in
extreme cold Weather, so as to have their Feet, Hands, etc. benumbed thereby,
are much afflicted by their Approach to any sudden Heat, and have intolerable
Itchings, and that in some even Blisters arise, like those from a Burn, but
this happens not till after they begin to grow warm.

Cold Bathing is prejudicial, for it produces a sudden Hurry and Tumult to
Nature, because of the immediate Change from the warm Air into cold Water; thus
the Perspiration is in a Moment checked, and all the moist impure and saline
Effluvia remaining within the Pores, they putrify and inflame the whole Mass of
Blood, and so produce Fevers, Inflammations, Gout, etc. Concerning the
Disadvantages of Cold Bathing. See Oration. D. Wesserhausen de Diaeta stud. s.
8. p. 5. it. Zeil. Handb. p. 11. p. 404. Zacut. Lucit. H. Ephem. Germ. An. 1.
Obs. 84. Dol. d. 1. p. 190.


The Reason is that the Body undergoes a greater Alteration by Air from (...),
(Transpiration) or Breathing of Vapors through the Pores, than from (...)
(Inspiration) or taking Air into the Lungs; hence an (...), or Obstruction of
the natural Perspiration is the Mother of many Diseases.

It is observed that many who labor under Fevers, etc. in the Spring, if they
do not guard themselves well against the Air, though they may escape Death, yet
are subject to Relapses.

Moreover, the sick Man should be early in Bed in the Evening, and late in the
Morning, as Boerhaave observes; for Sleep is the best Specific in all Diseases,
it is a Secret in Medicine more valuable than Gems or precious Stones; and that
Physician ought to be much esteemed who can assist the Wants of Nature in this
Respect, with Security and Advantage to the Sick Croll. Basil. Chym. p. 305.
. Sleep is Health to the Body, and a Refreshment to Nature, as necessary as our
Meat and Drink: It is beautifully described in the following Lines of the Poet,
viz.

Somne, quies rerum, placidissime somne Deorum,
Pax animi, quem cara fugit, tu pectora duris
Fessa ministeriis mulces reparasque labori.
Quod caret alterna requie durabile non est;
Hic reparat vires fessaque membra levat.
Doctor Young, in his Night Thoughts, speaking of Sleep, calls it Night the
9th. Page 373.


Man's rich Restorative; his balmy Bath,
That supples, lubricates, and keps in play,
The various Movements of this nice Machine,
Which asks such frequent Periods of Repair.
When tired with vain Rotations of the Day;
Sleep winds us up for the succeding Dawn;
Fresh we spin on, till Sickness clogs our Wheels,
Or Death quite breaks the Spring, and Motion ends.
Secondly, He must every Morning rub well the gouty Parts, especially about the
Joints, with a Flannel full of the Smoke from a Suffimugation, which is made by
a Powder sprinkled on live Coals for that Use; and take one Dram of an
Arcanum antipodagricum reformatum, three Times a Day (when the Stomach is most
empty) drinking after it a Draught or two of medicated Drink.

The gouty Subject must regularly continue this Course of Medicine for a short
Time, carefully keeping to a good Regimen of Diet, and duly observing the
ensuing Verse.

Si vis incolumen, si vis te reddere sanum,
Curas toll graves, irasci creed profanum,
Parce Mero, caenato parum, non sit tibi vanum,
Surge post epulas, somnum fuge meridianum,
Nec mictum retine, nec comprime fortiter anum
Haec been si serves, in longo tempore vives.
If he will indulge me thus far; then I dare promise a complete and certain
Cure.

FINIS.
ERRATUM.
Page 16. Line 1. for Dops read Drops.


