silhouette of the bust of a man's head

SKETCH FOR A MEDICAL FDUCATON.

Printed J. Lind M.D. F.R.S. Windsor.

1800.

SKETCH for a MEDICAL EDUCATION. by J*L. M D. F R S.
After having attained a competent knowledge of the Languages necessary to
acquire those Sciences that are requisite to the study of Medicine; and to
enable the Student to read and consult the various Authors that have written on
Physic. MATHEMATICS claims his first attention.

Without the knowledge of Mathematics it is impossible to understand NATURAL
PHILOSOPHY, a Science by which the Laws, and Economy of nature, and the Human
body, can only be understood; as also the many causes that operate upon men and
all nature.

ANATOMY being the foundation of medical knowledge, it is therefore to be
studied with the greatest care and attention. Its intricacy also requires the
aid of the best Professors; and that the Pupil himself practice frequent
dissections to attain this most necessary part of a Medical Education. Without
the knowledge of Anatomy, it is impossible either to discover the seat, nature,
or cure, of Diseases. In Surgery no operation can be performed with safety or
with much probability of success to the Patient. From dissections he likewise
learns the nature of many hidden Disorders, and when similar symptoms occur to
know the Disease under which the Patient labors. It also enables, the
Physician or Surgeon when called upon by a Court of Justice, to determine with
certainty whether Death has been occasioned from a natural cause, or from
violence; hence he becomes the means of acquitting the innocent, and of
condemning the guilty; but if ignorant of Anatomy, perhaps the contrary.

CHEMISTRY is an other necessary part of a Medical Education, as without a
knowledge of it we must ever be ignorant of the various chemical Processes that
are constantly going on in the Animal economy upon whom depends health or
disease, and from a true knowledge of whom, we are greatly instucted how to
preserve the first, and to cure the latter also the Physician is liable to give
Prescriptions that cannot be compounded or if they could, He is ignorant of the
means by which it can be done. Some efficacious medicines he frequently
destroys by his injudicious compositions, while other substances even innocent
and inert ones, are rendered injurious and highly poisonous.

A knowledge of the MATERIA-MEDICA is also necessary to every practitioner of
Medicine, without which he is ignorant of the means of cure, notwithstanding
the Disease is known to him: Also, although he is acquainted with the powers of a
few medicines, he will find himself foiled for want of a more extended
knowledge of the Materia-Medica, the constitutions of some people, differing as
much from that of mankind in general: as if they were of a different Species.
Therefore what proves useful in a disease with most people, with some it may be
injurious.

The Materia-Medica being an extensive Science, requiring the aid of method,
BOTANY and NATURAL-HISTORY should therefore make a part of the education of
every Physician; the knowledge of them also helps to abridge the study of the
Materia-Medica, there being frequently an analogy in the virtues of bodies of
the same Genus.

Lectures on the THEORY of MEDICINE, may now be studied. In this course is also
taught PHYSEOLOGY and PATHOLOGY, both absolutely requisite to a Medical
Education. Although the different Systems of Physic are imperfect, yet as they
serve for a clew to guide and direct a Physician in his procedure of Cure, by
keeping him from confounding one thing with an other, they are therefore of the
greatest utility in the Practice of Medicine; more especially as all
Practitioners have a natural tendancy to empiricism.

The PRACTICE of PHYSIC is the last, and chief design, of medical study. This
part of medical knowledge is to be attained from hearing the Lectures of
eminent Professors, and by reading, but particularly by attending Hospitals,
where Clinical Lectures are delivered to the Students, in which are generally
given the History of the Disease under which the Patient labors, the purpose
proposed, for the administering, of this or that medicine, and their effects
upon the Patient pointed out; lastly if the patient dies, the cause of his
death is more evidently pointed out and shown to the Students, by the dissecton
of the morbid body.

LECTURES attended by J*L. in the University of EDINBURGH.
1752 Geometry. 1753 Conic-sections and Algebra, 1754 Natural-Philosophy.
Astronomy.
MEDICINE.
1755 Anatomy. Materia-Medica. 1756 Anatomy. Chemistry. Institutes of Medicine.
Botany. 1757 Chemistry. Materia-Medica. Practice of Medicine. Infirmary.
Botany. 1758 Chemistry. Anatomy. Practice of Medicine. Infirmary.
Clinical-Lectures. 1759 Chemistry. Midwifery. Institutes of Medicine. Practice
of Physic. Infirmary. Clinical-Lectures. 1760 Midwifery. Clinical-Lectures.
Materia-Medica.
In LONDON.
1761 Anatomy. 1764 Chemistry. Anatomy.
In EDINBURGH.
1767 Institutes of Medicine. Practice of Physic. 1768 September 12, obtained
the Degree of Doctor of Physic vide Thesaurus Medicus Edin. novus Vol. 1. p.
116.
.
Printed J. Lind M.D. F.R.S. Windsor.

1800.


