EVELINA; OR, A YOUNG LADY's ENTRANCE INTO THE WORLD.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. I.

DUBLIN: Printed for Messrs. PRICE, CORCORAN, R. CROSS, FITZSIMONS,
WHITESTONES, CHAMBERLAIN, WILLIAMS, J. HOEY, COLLES, E. CROSS, BURNET, WALKER,
JENKIN, BEATTY, EXSHAW, WHITE, and PERRIN. M.DCC.LXXIX.

TO -- --
OH author of my being! -- far more dear
To me than light, than nourishment, or rest,
Hygieia's blessings, Rapture's burning tear,
Or the life blood that mantles in my breast!
If in my heart the love of Virtue glows,
'Twas planted there by an unerring rule;
From the example the pure flame arose,
Thy life, my precept -- thy good works, my school.
Could my weak powers thy numerous virtues trace,
By filial love each fear should be repressed;
The blush of Incapacity I Would chase,
And stand, recorder of thy worth, confessed:
But since my niggard stars that gift refuse,
Concealment is the only boon I claim;
Obscure be still the unsuccessful Muse,
Who cannot raise, but would not sink, your fame.
Oh! of my life at once the source and joy!
If ever thy eyes these feeble lines survey,
Let not their folly their intent destroy;
Accept the tribute -- but forget the lay.
TO THE AUTHORS OF THE MONTHLY and CRITICAL REVIEWS.
GENTLEMEN,
THE liberty which I take in addressing to You the trifling production of a few
idle hours, will, doubtless, move your wonder, and, probably, your contempt. I
will not, however, with the futility of apologies, intrude upon your time, but
briefly acknowledge the motives of my temerity: lest, by a premature exercise
of the patience from which I hope to profit, I should abate of its benevolence,
and be myself accessory to my own condemnation.

Without name, without recommendation, and unknown alike to success and
disgrace, to whom can I so properly apply for patronage, as to those who
publicly profess themselves Inspectors of all literary performances?

The extensive plan of your critical observations, -- which, not confined to
works of utility or ingenuity, is equally open to those of frivolous amusement,
and yet worse than frivolous dullness, -- encourages me to seek for your
protection, since, -- perhaps for my sins! -- it entitles me to your
annotations. To resent, therefore, this offering, however insignificant, would
ill become the universality of your undertaking, though not to despise it may,
alas! be out of your power.

The language of adulation, and the incense of flattery, though the natural
inheritance, and constant resource, from time immemorial, of the Dedicator, to
me offer nothing but the wistful regret that I dare not invoke their aid.
Sinister views would be imputed to all I could say; since, thus situated, to
extol your judgment, would seem the effect of art, and to celebrate your
impartiality, be attributed to suspecting it.

As Magistrates of the Press, and Censors for the Public, -- to which you are
bound by the sacred ties of integrity to exert the most spirited impartiality,
and to which your suffrages should carry the marks of pure, dauntless,
irrefragable truth, -- to appeal for your MERCY, were to solicit your
dishonor; and therefore, -- though it is sweeter than frankincense, -- more
grateful to the senses than all the odorous perfumes of Arabia, -- and though
It droppeth like the gentle rain from heaven
Upon the place beneath, --
I court it not! to your justice alone I am entitled, and by that I must abide.
Your engagements are not to the supplicating author, but to the candid public,
which will not fail to crave The penalty and forfeit of your bond.


No hackneyed writer, inured to abuse, and callous to criticism, here braves
your severity; -- neither does a half-starved garretteer, Compelled by hunger,
-- and request of friends, --
implore your lenity; your examination will be alike unbiassed by partiality
and prejudice; -- no refractory murmuring will follow your censure, no private
interest be gratified by your praise.

Let not the anxious solicitude with which I recommend myself to your notice,
expose me to your derision. Remember, Gentlemen, you were all young writers
once, and the most experienced veteran of your corpse, may, by recollecting his
first publication, renovate his first terrors, and learn to allow for mine.
For, though Courage is one of the noblest virtues of this nether sphere, and
though scarcely more requisite in the field of battle, to guard the fighting
hero from disgrace, than in the private commerce of the world, to ward off that
littleness of soul which leads by steps imperceptible, to all the base train of
the inferior passions, and by which the too timid mind is betrayed into a
servility derogatory to the dignity of human nature; -- yet is it a virtue of
no necessity in a situation such as mine; a situation which removes, even from
cowardice itself, the sting of ignominy; -- for surely that Courage may easily
be dispensed with, which would rather raise disgust than admiration? Indeed, it
is the peculiar privilege of an author, to rob terror of contempt, and
pusillanimity of reproach.

Here let me rest, -- and snatch myself, while yet I am able, from the
fascination of EGOTISM, -- a monster who has more votaries than ever did homage
to the most popular deity of antiquity; and whose singular quality is, that
while he excites a blind and involuntary adoration in almost every individual,
his influence is universally disallowed, his power universally contemned, and
his worship, even by his followers, never mentioned but with abhorrence.

In addressing you jointly, I mean but to mark the generous sentiments by which
liberal criticism, to the utter annihilation of envy, jealousy, and all selfish
views, ought to be distinguished.

I have the honor to be, GENTLEMEN, Your most obedient humble servant, ***
****.

PREFACE.
IN the republic of letters, there is no member of such inferior rank, or who
is so much disdained by his brethren of the quill, as the humble Novelist: nor
is his fate less hard in the world at large, since, among the whole class of
writers, perhaps not one can be named, of whom the votaries are more numerous,
but less respectable.

Yet, while in the annals of those few of our predecessors, to whom this
species of writing is indebted for being saved from contempt, and rescued from
depravity, we can trace such names as Rousseau, Johnson, However superior the
capacities in which these great writers deserve to be considered, they must
pardon me that, for the dignity of my subject, I here rank the authors of
Rasselas and Eloise as Novelists.
Marivaux, Fielding, Richardson, and Smollet, no man need blush at starting
from the same post, though many, nay, most men, may sigh at finding themselves
distanced.

The following letters are presented to the public -- for such, by novel
writers, novel readers will be called, -- with a very singular mixture of
timidity and confidence, resulting from the peculiar situation of the editor,
who, though trembling for their success from a consciousness of their
imperfections, yet fears not being involved in their disgrace, while happily
wrapped up in a mantle of impenetrable obscurity.

To draw characters from nature, though not from life, and to mark the manners
of the times, is the attempted plan of the following letters. For this purpose,
a young female, educated in the most secluded retirement, makes, at the age of
seventeen, her first appearance upon the great and busy stage of life; with a
virtuous mind, a cultivated understanding, and a feeling heart, her ignorance
of the forms, and inexperience in the manners, of the world, occasion all the
little incidents which these volumes record, and which form the natural
progression of the life of a young woman of obscure birth, but conspicuous
beauty, for the first six months after her Entrance into the World.

Perhaps were it possible to effect the total extirpation of novels, our young
ladies in general, and boarding-school damsels in particular, might profit from
their annihilation: but since the distemper they have spread seems incurable,
since their contagion bids defiance to the medicine of advice or reprehension,
and since they are found to baffle all the mental art of physic, save what is
prescribed by the slow regimen of Time, and bitter diet of Experience, surely
all attempts to contribute to the number of those which may be read, if not
with advantage, at least without injury, ought rather to be encouraged than
contemned.

Let me, therefore, prepare for dsiappointment those who, in the perusal of
these sheets, entertain the gentle expectation of being transported to the
fantastic regions of Romance, where Fiction is colored by all the gay tints of
luxurious Imagination, where Reason is an outcast, and where the sublimity of
the Mavelous rejects all aid from sober Probability. The heroine of these
memoirs, young, artless, and inexperienced, is No faultless Monster, that the
World never saw,
but the offspring of Nature, and of Nature in her simplest attire.

In all the Arts, the value of copies can only be proportioned to the
scarceness of originals: among sculptors and painters, a fine statue, or a
beautiful picture, of some great master, may deservedly employ the imitative
talents of younger and inferior artists, that their appropriation to one spot,
may not wholly prevent the more general expansion of their excellence; but,
among authors, the reverse is the case, since the noblest productions of
literature, are almost equally attainable with the meanest. In books,
therefore, imitation cannot be shunned too sedulously; for the very perfection
of a model which is frequently seen, serves but more forcibly to mark the
inferiority of a copy.

To avoid what is common, without adopting what is unnatural, must limit the
ambition of the vulgar herd of authors: however zealous, therefore, my
veneration of the great writers I have mentioned, however 1 may feel myself
enlightened by the knowledge of Johnson, charmed with the eloquence of
Rousseau, softened by the pathetic powers of Richardson, and exhilarated by the
wit of Fielding, and humor of Smollet; I yet presume not to attempt pursuing
the same ground which they have tracked; whence, though they may have cleared
the weeds, they have also culled the flowers, and though they have rendered the
path plain, they have left it barren.

The candor of my readers, I have not the impertinence to doubt, and to their
indulgence, I am sensible I have no claim: I have, therefore, only to entreat,
that my own words may not pronounce my condemnation, and that what I have here
ventured to say in regard to imitation, may be understood, as it is meant, in a
general sense, and not be imputed to an opinion of my own originality, which I
have not the vanity, the folly, or the blindness, to entertain.

Whatever may be the fate of these letters, the editor is satisfied they will
meet with justice; and commits them to the press, though hopeless of fame, yet
not regardless of censure.

EVELINA.
LETTER I.
Lady Howard to the Rev. Mr. Villars.
Howard Grove.
CAN there, my good Sir, be any thing more painful to a friendly mind, than a
necessity of communicating disagreeable intelligence? Indeed, it is sometimes
difficult to determine, whether the relator or the receiver of evil tidings is
most to be pitied.

I have just had a letter from Madame Duval; she is totally at a loss in what
manner to behave; she seems desirous to repair the wrongs she has done, yet
wishes the world to believe her blameless. She would fain cast upon another the
odium of those misfortunes for which she alone is answerable. Her letter is
violent, sometimes abusive, and that of you! -- you, to whom she is under
obligations which are greater even than her faults, but to whose advice she
wickedly imputes all the sufferings of her much injured daughter, the late Lady
Belmont. The chief purport of her writing I will acquaint you with; the letter
itself is not worthy your notice.

She tells me that she has, for many years past, been in continual expectation
of making a journey to England, which prevented her writing for information
concerning this melancholy subject, by giving her hopes of making personal
enquiries; but family occurrences have still detained her in France, which
country she now sees no prospect of quitting. She has, therefore, lately used
her utmost endeavors to obtain a faithful account of whatever related to her
ill-advised daughter; the result of which giving her some reason to apprehend
that, upon her death bed, she bequeathed an infant orphan to the world, she
most graciously says that if you, with whom she understands the child is
placed, will procure authentic proofs of its relationship to her, you may send
it to Paris, where she will properly provide for it.

This woman is, undoubtedly, at length, conscious of her most unnatural
conduct: it is evident, from her writing, that she is still as vulgar and
illiterate as when her first husband, Mr. Evelyn, had the weakness to marry
her; nor does she at all apologize for addressing herself to me, though I was
only once in her company.

This letter has excited in my daughter Mirvan, a strong desire to be informed
of the motives which induced Madame Duval to abandon the unfortunate Lady
Belmont, at a time when a mother's protection was so peculiarly necessary for
her peace and her reputation. Notwithstanding I was personally acquainted with
all the parties concerned in that affair, the subject always appeared of too
delicate a nature to be spoken of with the principals; I cannot, therefore,
satisfy Mrs. Mirvan otherwise than by applying to you.

By saying that you may send the child, Madame Duval aims at conferring, where
she most owes obligation. I pretend not to give you advice; you, to whose
generous protection this helpless orphan is indebted for every thing, are the
best and only judge of what she ought to do; but I am much concerned for the
trouble and uneasiness which this unworthy woman may occasion you.

My daughter and my grandchild join with me in desiring to be most kindly
remembered to the amiable girl; and they bid me remind you, that the annual
visit to Howard Grove, which we were formerly promised, has been discontinued
for more than four years.

I am, dear Sir, with great regard, Your most obedient servant and friend, M.
HOWARD.

LETTER II.
Mr. Villars to Lady Howard.
Berry Hill, Dorsetshire.
YOUR Ladyship did but too well foresee the perplexity and uneasiness of which
Madame Duval's letter has been productive. However, I ought rather to be
thankful that I have so many years remained unmolested, than repine at my
present embarrassment; since it proves, at least, that this wretched woman is
at length awakened to remorse.

In regard to my answer, I must humbly request your Ladyship to write to this
effect: "That I would not, upon any account, intentionally offend Madame Duval,
but that I have weighty, nay unanswerable reasons for detaining her
granddaughter at present in England; the principal of which is, that it was
the earnest desire of one to whose will she owes implicit duty. Madame Duval
may be assured that she meets with the utmost attention and tenderness; that
her education, however short of my wishes, almost exceeds my abilities; and
that I flatter myself, when the time arrives that she shall pay her duty to her
grandmother, Madame Duval will find no reason to be dissatisfied with what has
been done for her."

Your Ladyship will not, I am sure, be surprised at this answer. Madame Duval
is by no means a proper companion or guardian for a young woman: she is at once
uneducated and unprincipled; ungentle in her temper, and unamiable in her
manners. I have long known that she has persuaded herself to harbor an
aversion for me -- Unhappy woman! I can only regard her as an object of pity!

I dare not hesitate at a request from Mrs. Mirvan, yet, in complying with it,
I shall, for her own sake, be as concise as I possibly can; since the cruel
transactions which preceded the birth of my ward, can afford no entertainment
to a mind so humane as here is.

Your Ladyship may probably have heard, that I had the honor to accompany Mr.
Evelyn, the grandfather of my young charge, when upon his travels, in capacity
of tutor. His unhappy marriage, immediately upon his return to England, with
Madame Duval, then a waiting-girl at a tavern, contrary to the advice and
entreaties of all his friends, among whom I was myself the most urgent to
dissuade him, induced him to abandon his native land, and fix his abode in
France. Thither he was followed by shame and repentance; feelings which his
heart was not formed to support: for, notwithstanding he had been too weak to
resist the allurements of beauty, which nature, though a niggard to her of
every other boon, had with a lavish hand bestowed on his wife; yet he was a
young man of excellent character, and, till thus unaccountably infatuated, of
unblemished conduct. He survived this ill-judged marriage but two years. Upon
his deathbed, with an unsteady hand, he wrote me the following note:

"My friend! forget your resentment, in favor of your humanity; -- a father,
trembling for the welfare of his child, bequeaths her to your care. -- O
Villars! hear! pity! and relieve me!"

Had my circumstances permitted, I should have answered these words by an
immediate journey to Paris; but I was obliged to act by the agency of a friend,
who was upon the spot, and present at the opening of the will.

Mr. Evelyn left to me a legacy of a thousand pounds, and the sole guardianship
of his daughter's person till her eighteenth year, conjuring me, in the most
affecting terms, to take the charge of her education till she was able to act
with propriety for herself; but in regard to fortune, he left her wholly
dependent on her mother, to whose tenderness he earnestly recommended her.

Thus, though he would not, to a woman lowbred and illiberal as Mrs. Evelyn,
trust the mind and morals of his daughter, he nevertheless thought proper to
secure to her that respect and duty which, from her own child, were certainly
her due; but, unhappily, it never occurred to him that the mother, on her part,
could fail in affection or justice.

Miss Evelyn, Madam, from the second to the eighteenth year of her life, was
brought up under my care, and, except when at school, under my roof. I need not
speak to your Ladyship of the virtues of that excellent young creature. She
loved me as her father; nor was Mrs. Villars less valued by her; while to me
she became so dear, that her loss was little less afflicting to me than that
which I have since sustained of Mrs. Villars herself.

At that period of her life we parted; her mother, then married to Monsieur
Duval, sent for her to Paris. How often have I since regretted that I did not
accompany her thither! protected and supported by me, the misery and disgrace
which awaited her, might, perhaps, have been avoided. But -- to be brief,
Madame Duval, at the instigation of her husband, earnestly, or rather
tyrannically, endeavored to effect an union between Miss Evelyn and one of his
nephews. And, when she found her power inadequate to her attempt, enraged at
her noncompliance, she treated her with the grossest unkindness, and
threatened her with poverty and ruin.

Miss Evelyn, to whom wrath and violence had hitherto been strangers, soon grew
weary of this usage; and rashly, and without a witness, consented to a private
marriage with Sir John Belmont, a very profligate young man, who had but too
successfully found means to insinuate himself into her favor. He promised to
conduct her to England -- he did. -- O, Madam, you know the rest! --
Disappointed of the fortune he expected, by the inexorable rancour of the
Duvals, he infamously burnt the certificate of their marriage, and denied that
they had ever been united!

She flew to me for protection. With what mixed transports of joy and anguish
did I again see her! By my advice she endeavored to procure proofs of her
marriage; -- but in vain: her credulity had been no match for his art.

Every body believed her innocent, from the guiltless tenor of her unspotted
youth, and from the known libertinism of her barbarous betrayer. Yet her
sufferings were too acute for her tender frame, and the same moment that gave
birth to her infant, put an end at once to the sorrows and the life of its
mother.

The rage of Madame Duval at her elopement, abated not while this injured
victim of cruelty yet drew breath. She probably intended, in time, to have
pardoned her, but time was not allowed. When she was informed of her death, I
have been told, that the agonies of grief and remorse, with which she was
seized, occasioned her a severe fit of illness. But, from the time of her
recovery to the date of her letter to your Ladyship, I had never heard that she
manifested any desire to be made acquainted with the circumstances which
attended the death of Lady-Belmont, and the birth of her helpless child.

That child, Madam, shall never, while life is lent me, know the loss she has
sustained. I have cherished, succored, and supported her, from her earliest
infancy to her sixteenth year; and so amply has she repaid my care and
affection, that my fondest wish is now bounded in the desire of bestowing her
on one who may be sensible of her worth, and then sinking to eternal rest in
her arms.

Thus it has happened that the education of the father, daughter, and
granddaughter has devolved on me. What infinite misery have the two first
caused me! Should the fate of the dear survivor be equally adverse, how
wretched will be the end of my cares -- the end of my days!

Even had Madame Duval merited the charge she claims, I fear my fortitude would
have been unequal to such a parting; but, being such as she is, not only my
affection, but my humanity recoils, at the barbarous idea of deserting the
sacred trust reposed in me. Indeed, I could but ill support her former yearly
visits to the respectable mansion at Howard Grove; pardon me, dear Madam, and
do not think me insensible of the honor which your Ladyship's condescension
confers upon us both; but so deep is the impression which the misfortunes of
her mother have made on my heart, that she does not, even for a moment, quit my
sight, without exciting apprehensions and terrors which almost overpower me.
Such, Madam, is my tenderness, and such my weakness! But she is the only tie I
have upon earth, and I trust to your Ladyship's goodness not to judge of my
feelings with severity.

I beg leave to present my humble respects to Mrs. and Miss Mirvan; and have
the honor to be,

Madam, Your Ladyship's most obedient and most humble servant, ARTHUR VILLARS.

LETTER III.
[Written some months after the last.]

Lady Howard to the Rev. Mr. Villars.
Howard Grove, March 8. Dear and Rev. Sir,
YOUR last letter gave me infinite pleasure: after so long and tedious an
illness, how grateful to yourself and to your friends must be your returning
health! You have the hearty wishes of every individual of this place for its
continuance and increase.

Will you not think I talk advantage of your acknowledged recovery, if I once
more venture to mention your pupil and Howard Grove together? Yet you must
remember the patience with which we submitted to your desire of not parting
with her during the bad state of your health, though it was with much
reluctance we forbore to solicit her company. My granddaughter, in particular,
has scarce been able to repress her eagerness to again meet the friend of her
infancy; and for my own part, it is very strongly my wish to manifest the
regard which I had for the unfortunate Lady Belmont, by proving serviceable to
her child; which seems to me the best respect that can be paid to her memory.
Permit me, therefore, to lay before you a plan which Mrs. Mirvan and I have
formed, in consequence of your restoration to health.

I would not frighten you; -- but do you think you could bear to part with your
young companion for two or three months? Mrs. Mirvan proposes to spend the
ensuing spring in London, whither, for the first time, my grandchild will
accompany her: Now, my good friend, it is very earnestly their wish to enlarge
and enliven their party by the addition of your amiable ward, who would share,
equally with her own daughter, the care and attention of Mrs. Mirvan. Do not
start at this proposal; it is time that she should see something of the world.
When young people are too rigidly sequestered from it, their lively and
romantic imaginations paint it to them as a paradise of which they have been
beguiled; but when they are shown it properly, and in due time, they see it
such as it really is, equally shared by pain and pleasure, hope and
disappointment.

You have nothing to apprehend from her meeting with Sir John Belmont, as that
abandoned man is now abroad, and not expected home this year.

Well, my good Sir, what say you to our scheme? I hope it will meet with your
approbation; but if it should not, be assured I can never be displeased at any
decision made by one who is so much respected and esteemed as yourself by,

Dear Sir, Your most faithful humble servant, M. HOWARD.

LETTER IV.
Mr. Villars to Lady Howard.
Berry Hill, March 12.
I AM grieved, Madam, to appear obstinate, and I blush to incur the imputation
of selfishness. In detaining my young charge thus long with myself in the
country, I consulted not solely my own inclination. Destined, in all
probability, to possess a very moderate fortune, I wished to contract her views
to something within it. The mind is but too naturally prone to pleasure, but
too easily yielded to dissipation: it has been my study to guard her against
their delusions, by preparing her to expect, -- and to despise them. But the
time draws on for experience and observation to take place of instruction: if I
have, in some measure, rendered her capable of using the one with discretion,
and making the other with improvement, I shall rejoice myself with the
assurance of having largely contributed to her welfare. She is now of an age
that happiness is eager to attend, -- let her then enjoy it! I commit her to
the protection of your Ladyship, and only hope she may be found worthy half the
goodness I am satisfied she will meet with at your hospitable mansion.

Thus far, Madam, I cheerfully submit to your desire. In confiding my ward to
the care of Lady Howard, I can feel no uneasiness from her absence, but what
will arise from the loss of her company, since I shall be as well convinced of
her safety, as if she were under my own roof; -- but, can your Ladyship be
serious in proposing to introduce her to the gaieties of a London life? Permit
me to ask, for what end, or what purpose? A youthful mind is seldom totally
free from ambition; to curb that, is the first step to contentment, since to
diminish expectation, is to increase enjoyment. I apprehend nothing more than
too much raising her hopes and her views, which the natural vivacity of her
disposition would render but too easy to effect. The town acquaintance of Mrs.
Mirvan are all in the circle of high life; this artless young creature, with
too much beauty to escape notice, has too much sensibility to be indifferent to
it; but she has too little wealth to be sought with propriety by men of the
fashionable world.

Consider, Madam, the peculiar cruelty of her situation; only child of a
wealthy baronet, whose person she has never seen, whose character she has
reason to abhor, and whose name she is forbidden to claim; entitled as she is
to lawfully inherit his fortune and estate, is there any probability that he
will properly own her? And while he continues to persevere in disavowing his
marriage with Miss Evelyn, she shall never, at the expense of her mother's
honor, receive a part of her right, as the donation of his bounty.

And as to Mr. Evelyn's estate, I have no doubt but that Madame Duval and her
relations will dispose of it among themselves.

It seems, therefore, as if this deserted child, though legally heiress to two
large fortunes, must owe all her rational expectations to adoption and
friendship. Yet her income will be such as may make her happy, if she is
disposed to be so in private life; though it will by no means allow her to
enjoy the luxury of a London fine lady.

Let Miss Mirvan, then, Madam, shine in all the splendour of high life, but
suffer my child still to enjoy the pleasures of humble retirement, with a mind
to which greater views are unknown.

I hope this reasoning will be honored with your approbation; and I have yet
another motive that has some weight with me; I would not willingly give offense
to any human being, and surely Madame Duval might accuse me of injustice, if,
while I refuse to let her granddaughter wait upon her, I consent to her
joining a party of pleasure to London.

In sending her to Howard Grove, not one of these scruples arise; and therefore
Mrs. Clinton, a most worthy woman, formerly her nurse, and now my housekeeper,
shall attend her thither next week.

Though I have always called her by the name of Anville, and reported in this
neighborhood that her father, my intimate friend, left her to my guardianship,
yet I have thought it necessary to let her be herself acquainted with the
melancholy circumstances attending her birth; for, though I am very desirous of
guarding her from curiosity and impertinence, by concealing her name, family,
and story, yet I would not leave it in the power of charce, to shock her gentle
nature with a tale of so much sorrow.

You must not, Madam, expect too much from my pupil. She is quite a little
rustic, and knows nothing of the world; and though her education has been the
best I could bestow in this retired place, to which Dorchester, the nearest
town, is seven miles distant, yet I shall not be surprised if you should
discover in her a thousand deficiencies of which I have never dreamt. She must
be very much altered since she was last at Howard Grove, -- but I will say
nothing of her; I leave her to your Ladyship's own observations, of which I beg
a faithful relation; and am,

Dear Madam, with great respect, Your obedient and most humble servant, ARTHUR
VILLARS.

LETTER V.
Mr. Villars to Lady Howard.
March 18. Dear Madam,
THIS letter will be delivered to you by my child, -- the child of my adoption,
-- my affection! Unblest with one natural friend, she merits a thousand. I send
her to you, innocent as an angel, and artless as purity itself: and I send you
with her the heart of your friend, the only hope he has on earth, the subject
of his tenderest thoughts, and the object of his latest cares. She is one,
Madam, for whom alone I have lately wished to live; and she is one whom to
serve I would with transport die! Restore her but to me all innocence as you
receive her, and the fondest hope of my heart will be amply gratified!

A. VILLARS.
LETTER VI.
Lady Howard to the Rev. Mr. Villars.
Howard Grove. Dear and Rev. Sir,
THE solemn manner in which you have committed your child to my care, has in
some measure dampt the pleasure which I receive from the trust, as it makes me
fear that you suffer from your compliance, in which case I shall very sincerely
blame myself for the earnestness with which I have requested this favor; but
remember, my good Sir, she is within a few days summons, and be assured I will
not detain her a moment longer than you wish.

You desire my opinion of her.

She is a little angel! I cannot wonder that you sought to monopolize her.
Neither ought you, at finding it impossible.

Her face and person answer my most refined ideas of complete beauty: and this,
though a subject of praise less important to you, or to me, than any other, is
yet so striking, it is not possible to pass it unnoticed. Had I not known from
whom she received her education, I should, at first sight of so perfect a face,
have been in pain for her understanding; since it has been long and justly
remarked, that folly has ever sought alliance with beauty.

She has the same gentleness in her manners, the same natural grace in her
motions, that I formerly so much admired in her mother. Her character seems
truly ingenuous and simple; and, at the same time that nature hus blessed her
with an excellent understanding, and great quickness of parts, she has a
certain air of inexperience and innocence that is extremely interesting.

You have no reason to regret the retirement in which she has lived; since that
politeness which is acquired by an acquaintance with high life, is in her so
well supplied by a natural desire of obliging, joined to a deportment
infinitely engaging.

I observe with great satisfaction a growing affection between this amiable
girl and my granddaughter, whose heart is as free from selfishness or conceit,
as that of her young friend is from all guile. Their attachment may be mutually
useful, since much is to be expected from emulation, where nothing is to be
feared from envy. I would have them love each other as sisters, and
reciprocally supply the place of that tender and happy relationship to which
neither of them have a natural claim.

Be satisfied, my good Sir, that your child shall meet with the same attention
as our own. We all join in most hearty wishes for your health and happiness,
and in returning our sincere thanks for the favor you have conserred on us.

I am, Dear Sir, Your most faithful servant, M. HOWARD.

LETTER VII.
Lady Howard to the Rev. Mr. Villars.
Howard Grove, March 29.
BE not alarmed, my worthy friend, at my so speedily troubling you again; I
seldom use the ceremony of waiting for answers, or writing with any regularity,
and I have at present immediate occasion for begging your patience.

Mrs. Mirvan has just received a letter from her long-absent husband,
containing the welcome news of his hoping to reach London by the beginning of
next week. My daughter and the Captain have been separated almost seven years,
and it would therefore be needless to say what joy, surprise, and consequently
confusion, his, at present, unexpected return has caused at Howard Grove. Mrs.
Mirvan, you cannot doubt, will go instantly to town to meet him; her daughter
is under a thousand obligations to attend her; I grieve that her mother cannot.

And now, my good Sir, I almost blush to proceed; -- but, tell me, may I ask --
will you permit -- that your child may accompany them? Do not think us
unreasonable, but consider the many inducements which conspire to make London
the happiest place at present she can be in. The joyful occasion of the
journey; the gaiety of the whole party; opposed to the dull life she must lead
if left here, with a solitary old woman for her sole companion, while she so
well knows the cheerfulness and felicity enjoyed by the rest of the family, --
are circumstances that seem to merit your consideration. Mrs. Mirvan desires me
to assure you, that one week is all she asks, as she is certain that the
Captain, who hates London, will be eager to revisit. Howard Grove: and Maria is
so very earnest in wishing to have the company of her friend, that, if you are
inexorable, she will be deprived of half the pleasure she otherwise hopes to
receive.

However, I will not, my good Sir, deceive you into an opinion that they intend
to live in a retired manner, as that cannot be fairly expected. But you have no
reason to be uneasy concerning Madame Duval; she has no correspondent in
England, and only gains intelligence by common report. She must be a stranger
to the name your child bears; and, even should she hear of this excursion, so
short a time as a week, or less, spent in town upon so particular an occasion,
though previous to their meeting, cannot be construed into disrespect to
herself.

Mrs. Mirvan desires me to assure you, that if you will oblige her, her two
children shall equally share her time and her attention. She has sent a
commission to a friend in town to take a house for her, and while she waits for
an answer concerning it, I shall for one from you to our petition. However,
your child is writing herself, and that, I doubt not, will more avail than all
we can possibly urge.

My daughter desires her best compliments to you, if, she says, you will grant
her request, but not else.

Adieu, my dear Sir, -- we all hope every thing from your goodness.

M. HOWARD.

LETTER VIII.
Evelina to the Rev. Mr. Villars.
Howard Grove, March 26.
THIS house seems to be the house of joy; every face wears a smile, and a laugh
is at every body's service. It is quite amusing to walk about, and see the
general confusion; a room leading to the garden is fitting up for Captain
Mirvan's study. Lady Howard does not sit a moment in a place; Miss Mirvan is
making caps; every body so busy! -- such flying from room to room! -- so many
orders given, and retracted, and given again! -- nothing but hurry and
perturbation.

Well but, my dear Sir, I am desired to make a request to you. I hope you will
not think me an incroacher; Lady Howard insists upon my writing! -- yet I
hardly know how to go on; a petition implies a want, -- and have you left me
one? No, indeed.

I am half ashamed of myself for beginning this letter. But these dear ladies
are so pressing -- I cannot, for my life, resist wishing for the pleasures they
offer me, -- provided you do not disapprove them.

They are to make a very short stay in town. The captain will meet them in a
day or two. Mrs. Mirvan and her sweet daughter both go; -- what a happy party!
Yet I am not very eager to accompany them: at least, I shall be very well
contented to remain where I am, if you desire that I should.

Assured, my dearest Sir, of your goodness, your bounty, and your indulgent
kindness, ought I to form a wish that has not your sanction? Decide for me,
therefore, without the least apprehension that I shall be uneasy, or
discontented. While I am yet in suspense, perhaps I may hope, but I am most
certain, that when you have once determined, I shall not repine.

They tell me that London is now in full splendor. Two Play Houses are open,
-- the Opera-House, -- Ranelagh, -- the Pantheon. -- You see I have learned all
their names. However, pray don't suppose that I make any point of going, for I
shall hardly sigh to see them depart without me; though I shall probably never
meet with such another opportunity. And, indeed, their domestic happiness will
be so great, -- it is natural to wish to partake of it.

I believe I am bewitched! I made a resolution when I began, that I would not
be urgent; but my pen -- or rather my thoughts, will not suffer me to keep it
-- for I acknowledge, I must acknowledge, I cannot help wishing for your
permission.

I almost repent already that I have made this confession; pray forget that you
have read it, if this journey is displeasing to you. But I will not write any
longer; for the more I think of this affair, the less indifferent to it I find
myself.

Adieu, my most honored, most reverenced, most beloved father! for by what
other name can I call you? I have no happiness or sorrow, no hope or fear, but
what your kindness bestows, or your displeasure may cause. You will not, I am
sure, send a refusal, without reasons unanswerable, and therefore I shall
cheerfully acquiesce. Yet I hope -- I hope you will be able to permit me to go.

I am, With the utmost affection, gratitude and duty, Your EVELINA --.
I cannot to you sign Anville, and what other name may I claim?



LETTER IX.
Mr. Villars to Evelina.
Berry-Hill, March 2^.
TO resist the urgency of entreaty, is a power which I have not yet acquired: I
aim not at an authority which deprives you of liberty, yet I would fain guide
myself by a prudence which should save me the pangs of repentance. Your
impatience to fly to a place which your imagination has painted to you in
colors so attractive, surprises me not; I have only to hope that the
liveliness of your fancy may not deceive you: to refuse, would be to raise it
still higher. To see my Evelina happy, is to see myself without a wish: go
then, my child, and may that Heaven which alone can, direct, preserve, and
strengthen you! To That, my love, will I daily offer prayers for your felicity;
O may it guard, watch over you! defend you from danger, save you from distress,
and keep vice as distant from your person as from your heart! And to Me, may it
grant the ultimate blessing of closing these aged eyes in the arms of one so
dear -- so deservedly beloved!

ARTHUR VILLARS.

LETTER X.
Evelina to the Rev. Mr. Villars.
Queen-Ann-Street, London, Saturday, April 2.
THIS moment arrived. Just going to Drury Lane Theater. The celebrated Mr.
Garrick performs Ranger. I am quite in extacy. So is Miss Mirvan. How
fortunate, that he should happen to play! We would not let Mrs. Mirvan rest
till she consented to go; her chief objection was to our dress, for we have had
no time to Londonize ourselves; but we teized her into compliance, and so we
are to sit in some obscure place, that she may not be seen. As to me, I should
be alike unknown in the most conspicuous or most private part of the house.

I can write no more now. I have hardly time to breathe -- only just this, the
houses and streets are not quite so superb as I expected. However, I have seen
nothing yet, so I ought not to judge.

Well, adieu, my dearest Sir, for the present; I could not forbear writing a
few words instantly on my arrival; though I suppose my letter of thanks for
your consent is still on the road.

Saturday Night.

O my dear Sir, in what raptures am I returned! Well may Mr. Garrick be so
celebrated, so universally admired -- I had not any idea of so great a
performer.

Such ease! such vivacity in his manner! such grace in his motions! such fire
and meaning in his eyes! -- I could hardly believe he had studied a written
part, for every word seemed spoke from the impulse of the moment.

His action -- at once so graceful and so free! -- his voice -- so clear, so
melodious, yet so wonderfully various in its tones -- such animation! -- every
look speaks!

I would have given the world to have had the whole play acted over again. And
when he danced -- O how I envied Clarinda! I almost wished to have jumped on
the stage and joined them.

I am afraid you will think me mad, so I will not say any more; yet I really
believe Mr. Garrick would make you mad too, if you could see him. I intend to
ask Mrs. Mirvan to go to the play every night while we stay in town. She is
extremely kind to me, and Maria, her charming daughter, is the sweetest girl in
the world.

I shall write to you every evening all that passes in the day, and that in the
same manner as, if I could see, I should tell you.

Sunday.

This morning we went to Portland chapel, and afterward we walked in the Mall
in St. James's Park, which by no means answered my expectations: it is a long
straight walk, of dirty gravel, very uneasy to the feet; and at each end,
instead of an open prospect, nothing is to be seen but houses built of brick.
When Mrs. Mirvan pointed out the Palace to me -- I think I was never much more
surprised.

However the walk was very agreeable to us; every body looked gay, and seemed
pleased, and the ladies were so much dressed, that Miss Mirvan and I could do
nothing but look at them. Mrs. Mirvan met several of her friends. No wonder,
for I never saw so many people assembled together before. I looked about for
some of my acquaintance, but in vain, for I saw not one person that I knew,
which is very odd, for all the world seemed there.

Mrs. Mirvan says we are not to walk in the Park again next Sunday, even if we
should be in town, because there is better company in Kensington Gardens. But
really if you had seen how much every body was dressed, you would not think
that possible.

We are to go this evening to a private ball, given by Mrs. Stanley, a very
fashionable lady of Mrs. Mirvan's acquaintance.

We have been a shopping, as Mrs. Mirvan calls it, all this morning, to buy
silks, caps, gauzes, and so forth.

The shops are really very entertaining, especially the mercers; there seem to
be six or seven men belonging to each shop, and every one took care, by bowing
and smirking, to be noticed; we were conducted from one to another, and carried
from room to room, with so much ceremony, that at first I was almost afraid to
follow.

I thought I should never have chosen a silk, for they produced so many, I knew
not which to fix upon, and they recommended them all so strongly that I fancy
they thought I only wanted persuasion to buy every thing they showed me. And,
indeed, they took so much trouble, that I was almost ashamed I could not.

At the milliners, the ladies we met were so much dressed, that I should rather
have imagined they were making visits than purchases. But what most diverted me
was, that we were more frequently served by men than by women; and such men! so
finical, so affected! they seemed to understand every part of a woman's dress
better than we do ourselves; and they recommended caps and ribbands with an air
of so much importance, that I wished to ask them how long they had left off
wearing them!

The dispatch with which they work in these great shops is amazing, for they
have promised me a complete suit of linen against the evening.

I have just had my hair dressed. You cannot think how oddly my head feels; full
of powder and black pins, and a great cushion on the top of it. I believe you
would hardly know me, for my face looks quite different from what it did before
my hair was dressed. When I shall be able to make use of a comb for myself I
cannot tell, for my hair is so much entangled, frizzled they call it, that I
fear it will be very difficult.

I am half afraid of this ball tonight, for, you know, I have never danced but
at school; however, Miss Mirvan says there is nothing in it. Yet I wish it was
over.

Adieu, my dear Sir; pray excuse the wretched stuff I write, perhaps I may
improve by being in this town, and then my letters will be less unworthy your
reading. Mean time I am,

Your dutiful and affectionate, though unpolished, EVELINA.
Poor Miss Mirvan cannot wear one of the caps she made, because they dress her
hair too large for them.



LETTER XI.
Evelina in continuation.
Queen-Anne-Street, April 5, Tuesday morning.
I HAVE a vast deal to say, and shall give all this morning to my pen. As to my
plan of writing every evening the adventures of the day, I find it
impracticable; for the diversions here are so very late, that if I begin my
letters after them, I could not go to bed at all.

We past a most extraordinary evening. A private ball this was called, so I
expected to have seen about four or five couple; but, Lord, my dear Sir, I
believe I saw half the world! Two very large rooms were full of company; in
one, were cards for the elderly ladies, and in the other, were the dancers. My
mamma Mirvan, for she always calls me her child, said she would sit with Maria
and me till we were provided with partners, and then join the card players.

The gentlemen, as they passed and repassed, looked as if they thought we were
quite at their disposal, and only waiting for the honor of their commands; and
they sauntered about in a careless indolent manner, as if with a view to keep
us in suspense. I don't speak of this in regard to Miss Mirvan and myself only,
but to the ladies in general; and I thought it so provoking, that I determined,
in my own mind, that, far from humouring such airs, I would rather not dance at
all, than with any one who should seem to think me ready to accept the first
partner who would condescend to take me.

Not long after, a young man, who had for some time looked at us with a kind of
negligent impertinence, advanced, on tiptoe, toward me; he had a set smile on
his face, and his dress was so foppish, that I really believe he even wished to
be stared at; and yet he was very ugly.

Bowing almost to the ground, with a sort of swing, and waving his hand with
the greatest conceit, after a short and silly pause, he said, "Madam -- may I
presume?" -- and stopped, offering to take my hand, I drew it back, but could
scarce forbear laughing. "Allow me, Madam," (continued he, affectedly breaking
off every half moment) "the honor and happiness -- if I am not so unhappy as
to address you too late -- to have the happiness and honor -- "

Again he would have taken my hand, but, bowing my head, I begged to be
excused, and turned to Miss Mirvan to conceal my laughter. He then desired to
know if I had already engaged myself to some more fortunate man? I said No, and
that I believed I should not dance at all. He would keep himself, he told me,
disengaged, in hopes I should relent; and then, uttering some ridiculous
speeches of sorrow and disappointment, though his face still wore the same
invariable smile, he retreated.

It so happened, as we have since recollected, that during this little
dialogue, Mrs. Mirvan was conversing with the lady of the house. And very soon
after another gentleman, who seemed about sixand-twenty years old, gayly, but
not soppishly, dressed, and indeed extremely handsome, with an air of mixed
politeness and gallantry, desired to know if I was engaged, or would honor him
with my hand. So he was pleased to say, though I am sure I know not what honor
he could receive from me; but these sort of expressions, I find, are used as
words of course, without any distinction of persons, or study of propriety.

Well, I bowed, and I am sure I colored; for indeed I was frightened at the
thoughts of dancing before so many people, all strangers, and, which was worse,
with a stranger; however, that was unavoidable, for though I looked round the
room several times, I could not see one person that I knew. And so, he took my
hand, and led me to join in the dance.

The minuets were over before we arrived, for we were kept late by the
milliner's making us wait for our things.

He seemed very desirous of entering into conversation with me; but I was
seized with such a panic, that I could hardly speak a word, and nothing but the
shame of so soon changing my mind, prevented my returning to my seat, and
declining to dance at all.

He appeared to be surprised at my terror, which I believe was but too
apparent: however, he asked no questions, though I fear he must think it very
odd; for I did not choose to tell him it was owing to my never before dancing
but with a schoolgirl.

His conversation was sensible and spirited; his air and address were open and
noble; his manners gentle, attentive, and infinitely engaging; his person is
all elegance, and his countenance the most animated and expressive I have ever
seen.

In a short time we were joined by Miss Mirvan, who stood next couple to us.
But how was I startled, when she whispered me that my partner was a nobleman!
This gave me a new alarm; how will he be provoked, thought I, when he finds
what a simple rustic he has honored with his choice! one whose ignorance of
the world makes her perpetually fear doing something wrong!

That he should be so much my superior every way, quite disconcerted me; and
you will suppose my spirits were not much raised, when I heard a lady in
passing us, say, "This is the most difficult dance I ever saw."

"O dear, then," cried Maria to her partner, "with your leave, I Will sit down
till the next."

"So will I too, then," cried I, "for I am sure I can hardly stand."

"But you must speak to your partner first," answered she; for he had turned
aside to talk with some gentlemen. However, I had not sufficient courage to
address him, and so away we all three tript, and seated ourselves at another
end of the room.

But, unfortunately for me, Miss Mirvan soon after suffered herself to be
prevailed upon to attempt the dance; and just as she rose to go, she cried, "My
dear, yonder is your partner, Lord Orville, walking about the room in search of
you."

"Don't leave me, then, dear girl!" cried I; but she was obliged to go. And
then I was more uneasy than ever; I would have given the world to have seen
Mrs. Mirvan, and begged of her to make my apologies; for what, thought I, can I
possibly say for myself in excuse for running away? he must either conclude me
a fool, or half mad, for any one brought up in the great world, and accustomed
to its ways, can have no idea of such sort of fears as mine.

I was in the utmost confusion, when I observed that he was every where seeking
me, with apparent perplexity and surprise; but when, at last, I saw him move
toward the place where I sat, I was ready to sink with shame and distress. I
found it absolutely impossible to keep my seat, because I could not think of a
word to say for myself, and so I rose, and walked hastily toward the
card-room, resolving to stay with Mrs. Mirvan the rest of the evening, and not
to dance at all. But before I could find her, Lord Orville saw and approached
me.

He begged to know if I was not well? You may easily imagine how much I was
confused. I made no answer, but hung my head, like a fool, and looked on my fan.

He then, with an air the most respectfully serious, asked if he had been so
unhappy as to offend me?

"No, indeed!" cried I: and then, in hopes of changing the discourse, and
preventing his further inquiries, I desired to know if he had seen the young
lady who had been conversing with me?

No; -- but would I honor him with my commands to see for her?

"O by no means!"

Was there any other person with whom I wished to speak?

I said no, before I knew I had answered at all.

Should he have the pleasure of bringing me any refreshment?

I bowed, almost involuntarily. And away he flew.

I was quite ashamed at being so troublesome, and so much above myself as these
seeming airs made me appear; but indeed I was too much confused to think or act
with any consistency.

If he had not been swift as lightning, I don't know whether I should not have
stolen away again; but he returned in a moment. When I had drank a glass of
lemonade, he hoped, he said, that I would again honor him with my hand, as a
new dance was just begun. I had not the presence of mind to say a single word,
and so I let him once more lead me to the place I had left.

Shocked to find how silly, how childish a part I had acted, my former fears of
dancing before such a company, and with such a partner, returned more forcibly
than ever. I suppose he perceived my uneasiness, for he entreated me to sit
down again, if dancing was disagreeable to me. But I was quite satisfied with
the folly I had already shown, and therefore declined his offer, though I was
really scarce able to stand.

Under such conscious disadvantages, you may easily imagine, my dear Sir, how
ill I acquitted myself. But, though I both expected and deserved to find him
very much mortified and displeased at his ill fortune in the choice he had
made, yet, to my very great relief, he appeared to be even contented, and very
much assisted and encouraged me. These people in high life have too much
presence of mind, I believe, to seem disconcerted, or out of humor, however
they may feel; for had I been the person of the most consequence in the room, I
could not have met with more attention and respect.

When the dance was over, seeing me still very much slurried, he led me to a
seat, saying that he would not suffer me to fatigue myself from politeness.

And then, if my capacity, or even if my spirits had been better, in how
animated a conversation might I have been engaged! It was then that I saw the
rank of Lord Orville was his least recommendation, his understanding and his
manners being far more distinguished. His remarks upon the company in general
were so apt, so just, so lively, I am almost surprised myself that they did not
re-animate me; but indeed I was too well convinced of the ridiculous part I had
myself played before so nice an observer, to be able to enjoy his pleasantry:
so self-compassion gave me feeling for others. Yet I had not the courage to
attempt either to defend them, or to rally in my turn, but listened to him in
silent embarrassment.

When he found this, he changed the subject, and talked of public places, and
public performers; but he soon discovered that I was totally ignorant of them.

He then, very ingeniously, turned the discourse to the amusements and
occupations of the country.

It now struck me, that he was resolved to try whether or not I was capable of
talking upon any subject. This put so great a constraint upon my thoughts, that
I was unable to go further than a monosyllable, and not even so far, when I
could possibly avoid it.

We were sitting in this manner, he conversing with all gaiety, I looking down
with all foolishness, when that fop who had first asked me to dance, with a
most ridiculous solemnity, approached, and after a profound bow or two, said,
"I humbly beg pardon, Madam, -- and of you too, my Lord, -- for breaking in
upon such agreeable conversation -- which must, doubtless, be much more
delectable -- than what I have the honor to offer -- but -- "

I interrupted him -- I blush for my folly, -- with laughing; yet I could not
help it, for, added to the man's stately foppishness, (and he actually took
snuff between every three words) when I looked round at Lord Orville, I saw
such extreme surprise in his face, -- the cause of which appeared so absurd,
that I could not for my life preserve my gravity.

I had not laughed before from the time I had left Miss Mirvan, and I had much
better have cried then; Lord Orville actually stared at me; the beau, I know
not his name, looked quite enraged. "Refrain -- Madam," (said he, with an
important air,) "a few moments refrain! -- I have but a sentence to trouble you
with. -- May I know to what accident I must attribute not having the honor of
your hand?"

"Accident, Sir!" repeated I, much astonished.

"Yes, accident, Madam -- for surely, -- I must take the liberty to observe --
pardon me, Madam, it ought to be no common one -- that should tempt a lady --
so young a one too, -- to be guilty of ill manners."

A confused idea now for the first time entered my head, something I had heard
of the rules of assemblies; but I was never at one before, -- I have only
danced at school, -- and so giddy and heedless I was, that I had not once
considered the impropriety of refusing one partner, and afterward accepting
another. I was thunderstruck at the recollection: but, while these thoughts
were rushing into my head, Lord Orville, with some warmth, said, "This lady,
Sir, is incapable of meriting such an accusation!"

The creature -- for I am very angry with him, -- made a low bow, and with a
grin the most malicious I ever saw, "My Lord, said he, far be it from me to
accuse the lady, for having the discernment to distinguish and prefer -- the
superior attractions of your Lordship."

Again he bowed, and walked off.

Was ever any thing so provoking? I was ready to die with shame. "What a
coxcomb!" exclaimed Lord Orville; while I, without knowing what I did, rose
hastily, and moving off, "I cannot imagine, cried I, where Mrs. Mirvan has hid
herself!"

"Give me leave to see," answered he. I bowed and sat down again, not daring to
meet his eyes; for what must he think of me, between my blunder and the
supposed preference?

He returned in a moment, and told me that Mrs. Mirvan was at cards, but would
be glad to see me; and I went immediately. There was but one chair vacant, so,
to my great relief, Lord Orville presently left us. I then told Mrs. Mirvan my
disasters, and she good-naturedly blamed herself for not having better
instructed me, but said she had taken it for granted that I must know such
common customs. However, the man may, I think, be satisfied with his pretty
speech, and carry his resentment no farther.

In a short time, Lord Orville returned. I consented, with the best grace I
could, to go down another dance, for I had had time to recollect myself, and
therefore resolved to use some exertion, and, if possible, appear less a fool
than I hitherto had: for it occurred to me that, insignificant as I was,
compared to a man of his rank and figure, yet, since he had been so unfortunate
as to make choice of me for a partner, why I should endeavor to make the best
of it.

The dance, however, was short, and he spoke very little; so I had no
opportunity of putting my resolution in practice. He was satisfied, I suppose,
with his former successless efforts to draw me out: or, rather, I fancied, he
has been inquiring who I was. This again disconcerted me, and the spirits I had
determined to exert, again failed me. Tired, ashamed, and mortified, I begged
to sit down till we returned home, which we did soon after. Lord Orville did me
the honor to hand me to the coach, talking all the way of the honor I had
done him! O these fashionable people!

Well, my dear Sir, was it not a strange evening? I could not help being thus
particular, because, to me, every thing is so new. But it is now time to
conclude. I am, with all love and duty,

Your EVELINA.

LETTER XII.
Evelina in continuation.
Tuesday, April 5.
THERE is to be no end to the troubles of last night. I have, this moment,
between persuasion and laughter, gathered from Maria the most curious dialogue
that ever I heard. You will, at first, be startled at my vanity; but, my dear
Sir, have patience!

It must have passed while I was sitting with Mrs. Mirvan in the card-room.
Maria was taking some refreshment, and saw Lord Orville advancing for the same
purpose himself; but he did not know her, though she immediately recollected
him. Presently after, a very gay-looking man, stepping hastily up to him,
cried, "Why, my Lord, what have you done with your lovely partner!"

" Nothing!" answered Lord Orville, with a smile and a shrug.

"By Jove, cried the man, she is the most beautiful creature I ever saw in my
life!"

Lord Orville, as he well might, laughed, but answered, "Yes, a pretty
modest-looking girl."

"O my Lord!" cried the madman, "she is an angel!"

"A silent one," returned he.

"Why ay, my Lord, how stands she as to that? She looks all intelligence and
expression."

"A poor weak girl!" answered Lord Orville, shaking his head.

"By Jove," cried the other, "I am glad to hear it!"

At that moment, the same odious creature who had been my former torment,
joined them. Addressing Lord Orville with great respect, he said, "I beg
pardon, my Lord, -- if I was -- as I fear might be the case -- rather too
severe in my censure of the lady who is honored with your protection -- but,
my Lord, ill breeding is apt to provoke a man."

"Ill-breeding!" cried my unknown champion, "impossible! that elegant face can
never be so vile a mask!"

"O Sir, as to that," answered he, "you must allow me to judge; for though I
pay all deference to your opinion -- in other things, -- yet I hope you will
grant -- and I appeal to your Lordship also -- that I am not totally despicable
as a judge of good or ill manners."

"I was so wholly ignorant," said Lord Orville gravely, "of the provocation you
might have had, that I could not but be surprised at your singular resentment."

"It was far from my intention, answered he, to offend your Lordship; but
really, for a person who is nobody, to give herself such airs, -- I own I could
not command my passions. For, my Lord, though I have made diligent enquiry -- I
cannot learn who she is."

"By what I can make out," cried my defender, "she must be a country parson's
daughter."

"He! he! he! very good, 'pon honor!" cried the fop, -- "well, so I could have
sworn by her manners."

And then, delighted at his own wit, he laughed, and went away, as I suppose,
to repeat it.

"But what the deuce is all this? demanded the other.

"Why a very foolish affair," answered Lord Orville; "your Helen first refused
this coxcomb, and then -- danced with me. This is all I can gather of it."

"O Orville," returned he, "you are a happy man! -- But, ill-bred? -- I can
never believe it? And she looks too sensible to be ignorant."

"Whether ignorant or mischievous, I will not pretend to determine, but certain
it is, she attended to all I could say to her, though I have really fatigued
myself with fruitless endeavors to entertain her, with the most immovable
gravity; but no sooner did Lovel begin his complaint, than she was seized with
a fit of Laughing, first affronting the poor beau, and then enjoying his
mortification."

"Ha! ha! ha! why there is some genius in that, my Lord, though perhaps rather
rustic."

Here Maria was called to dance, and so heard no more.

Now tell me, my dear Sir, did you ever know any thing more provoking? " A poor
weak girl!" " ignorant or mischievous!" What mortifying words! I Am resolved,
however, that I will never again be tempted to go to an assembly. I wish I had
been in Dorsetshire.

Well, after this, you will not be surprised that Lord Orville contented
himself with an enquiry after our healths this morning, by his servant, without
troubling himself to call; as Miss Mirvan had told me he would: but perhaps it
may be only a country custom.

I would not live here for the world. I don't care how soon we leave town.
London soon grows tiresome. I wish the Captain would come Mrs. Mirvan talks of
the opera for this evening; however, I am very indifferent about it.

Wednesday morning.
Well, my dear Sir, I have been pleased, against my will, I could almost say,
for I must own I went out in very ill-humour, which I think you cannot wonder
at: but the music and the singing were charming; they soothed me into a
pleasure the most grateful, the best suited to my present disposition in the
world. I hope to persuade Mrs. Mirvan to go again on Saturday. I wish the opera
was every night. It is, of all entertainments, the sweetest and most
delightful. Some of the songs seemed to melt my very soul. It was what they
call a serious opera, as the comic first singer was ill.

Tonight we go to Ranelagh. If any of those three gentlemen who conversed so
freely about me should be there -- but I will not think of it.

Thursday morning.
Well, my dear Sir, we went to Ranelagh. It is a charming place, and the
brilliancy of the lights, on my first entrance, made me almost think I was in
some enchanted castle, or fairy palace, for all looked like magic to me.

The very first person I saw was Lord Orville. I felt so confused! -- but he
did not see me. After tea, Mrs. Mirvan being tired, Maria and I walked round
the room alone. Then again we saw him, standing by the orchestra. We, too,
stopped to hear a singer. He bowed to me; I courtsied, and I am sure I colored.
We soon walked on, not liking our situation; however, he did not follow us, and
when we past by the orchestra again, he was gone. Afterward, in the course of
the evening, we met him several times, but he was always with some party, and
never spoke to us, though whenever he chanced to meet my eyes, he condescended to
bow.

I cannot but be hurt at the opinion he entertains of me. It is true, my own
behavior incurred it -- yet is himself the most agreeable, and, seemingly, the
most amiable man in the world, and therefore it is, that I am grieved to be
thought ill of by him: for of whose esteem ought we to be ambitious, if not of
those who most merit our own? -- But it is too late to reflect upon this now.
Well, I cannot help it; -- However, I think I have done with assemblies!

This morning was destined for seeing sights, auctions, curious shops, and so
forth; but my head ached, and I was not in a humor to be amused, and so I made
them go without me, though very unwillingly. They are all kindness.

And now I am sorry I did not accompany them, for I know not what to do with
myself. I had resolved not to go to the play tonight; but I believe I shall.
In short, I hardly care whether I do or not.

I thought I had done wrong! Mrs. Mirvan and Maria have been half the town
over, and so entertained! -- while I, like a fool, stayed at home to do
nothing. And, at an auction in Pall Mall, who should they meet but Lord
Orville! He sat next to Mrs Mirvan, and they talked a great deal together: but
she gave me no account of the conversation.

I may never have such another opportunity of seeing London; I am quite sorry
that I was not of the party; but I deserve this mortification, for having
indulged my ill-humour.

Thursday night.
We are just returned from the play, which was King Lear, and has made me very
sad. We did not see any body we knew.

Well, adieu, it is too late to write more.

Friday.
Captain Mirvan is arrived. I have not spirits to give an account of his
introduction, for he has really shocked me. I do not like him. He seems to be
surly, vulgar, and disagreeable.

Almost the same moment that Maria was presented to him, he began some rude
jests upon the bad shape of her nose, and called her a tall, illformed thing.
She bore it with the utmost goodhumour; but that kind and sweet-tempered woman,
Mrs. Mirvan, deserved a better lot. I am amazed she would marry him.

For my own part, I have been so shy, that I have hardly spoken to him, or he
to me. I cannot imagine why the family was so rejoiced at his return. If he had
spent his whole life abroad, I should have supposed they might rather have been
thankful than sorrowful. However, I hope they do not think so ill of him as I
do. At least, I am sure they have too much prudence to make it known.

Saturday night.
We have been to the opera, and I am still more pleased than I was on Tuesday.
I could have thought myself in paradise, but for the continual talking of the
company around me. We sat in the pit, where every body was dressed in so high a
style, that, if I had been less delighted with the performance, my eyes would
have found me sufficient entertainment from looking at the ladies.

I was very glad I did not sit next the Captain, for he could not bear the
music, or singers, and was extremely gross in his observations on both. When
the opera was over, we went into a place called the coffee-room, where ladies
as well as gentlemen assemble. There are all sorts of refreshments, and the
company walk about, and chat, with the same ease and freedom as in a private
room.

On Monday we go to a ridotto, and on Wednesday we return to Howard Grove. The
Captain says he will not stay here to be smoked with filth any longer; but, having
been seven years smoked with a burning sun, he will retire to the country, and
sink into a fair-weather chap.

Adieu, my dear Sir.
LETTER XIII.
Evelina in continuation.
Tuesday, April 12. My dear Sir,
WE came home from the ridotto so late, or rather, so early, that it was not
possible for me to write. Indeed we did not go, you will be frightened to hear
it, -- till past eleven o'clock: but nobody does. A terrible reverse of the
order of nature! We sleep with the sun, and wake with the moon.

The room was very magnificent, the lights and decorations brilliant, and the
company gay and splendid. But I should have told you, that I made very many
objections to being of the party, according to the resolution I had formed.
However, Maria laughed me out of my scruples, and so, once again -- I went to
an assembly.

Miss Mirvan danced a minuet, but I had not the courage to follow her example.
In our walks I saw Lord Orville. He was quite alone, but did not observe us.
Yet, as he seemed of no party, I thought it was not impossible that he might
join us; and though I did not wish much to dance at all, -- yet, as I was more
acquainted with him than with any other person in the room, I must own I could
not help thinking it would be infinitely more desirable to dance again with
him, than with an entire stranger. To be sure, after all that had passed, it
was very ridiculous to suppose it even probable, that Lord Orville would again
honor me with his choice; yet I am compelled to confess my absurdity, by way
of explaining what follows.

Miss Mirvan was soon engaged; and, presently after, a very fashionable,
gay-looking man, who seemed about 30 years of age, addressed himself to me, and
begged to have the honor of dancing with me. Now Maria's partner was a
gentleman of Mrs. Mirvan's acquaintance; for she had told us it was highly
improper for young women to dance with strangers, at any public assembly.
Indeed it was by no means my wish so to do; yet I did not like to confine
myself from dancing at all; neither did I dare refuse this gentleman, as I had
done Mr. Lovel, and then, if any acquaintance should offer, accept him: and so,
all these reasons combining, induced me to tell him -- yet I blush to write it
to you! -- that I was already engaged; by which I meant to keep myself at
liberty to dance or not, as matters should fall out.

I suppose my consciousness betrayed my artifice, for he looked at me as if
incredulous; and, instead of being satisfied with my answer, and leaving me,
according to my expectation, he walked at my side, and, with the greatest ease
imaginable, began a conversation, in that free style which only belongs to old
and intimate acquaintance. But, what was most provoking, he asked me a thousand
questions concerning the partner to whom I was engaged. And, at last, he said,
"Is it really possible that a man whom you have honored with your acceptance,
can fail to be at hand to profit from your goodness?"

I felt extremely foolish, and begged Mrs. Mirvan to lead to a seat, which she
very obligingly did. The Captain sat next her, and, to my great surprise, this
gentleman thought proper to follow, and seat himself next to me.

"What an insensible!" continued he, "why, Madam, you are missing the most
delightful dance in the world! The man must be either mad, or a fool. -- Which
do you incline to think him yourself?"

"Neither, Sir," answered I, in some confusion.

He begged my pardon for the freedom of his supposition, saying, "I really was
off my guard, from astonishment that any man can be so much and so
unaccountably his own enemy. But where, Madam, can he possibly be? -- has he
left the room? -- or has not he been in it?"

"Indeed, Sir," said I peevishly, "I know nothing of him."

"I don't wonder that you are disconcerted, Madam, it is really very provoking.
The best part of the evening will be absolutely lost. He deserves not that you
should wait for him."

"I do not, Sir," said I, "and I beg you not to -- "

"Mortifying, indeed, Madam," interrupted he, "a lady to wait for a gentleman!
-- O fie! -- careless fellow! -- what can detain him? -- Will you give me leave
to seek him?"

"If you please, Sir," answered I, quite terrified lest Mrs. Mirvan should
attend to him, for she looked very much surprised at seeing me enter into
conversation with a stranger.

"With all my heart," cried he; "pray what coat has he on?"

"Indeed I never looked at it."

"Out upon him!" cried he; "What! did he address you in a coat not worth
looking at? -- What a shabby dog!"

How ridiculous! I really could not help laughing, which, I fear, encouraged
him, for he went on.

"Charming creature! -- and can you really bear ill usage with so much
sweetness? -- Can you, like patience on a monument, smile in the midst of
disappointment? -- For my part, though I am not the offended person, my
indignation is so great, that I long to kick the fellow round the room! --
unless, indeed, -- (hesitating and looking earnestly at me,) unless, indeed --
it is a partner of your own creating?"

I was dreadfully abashed, and could not make any answer.

"But no!" cried he, (again, and with warmth,) "it cannot be that you are so
cruel! Softness itself is painted in your eyes: -- You could not, surely, have
the barbarity so wantonly to trifle with my misery?"

I turned away from this nonsense, with real disgust. Mrs. Mirvan saw my
confusion, but was perplexed what to think of it, and I could not explain to
her the cause, lest the captain should hear me. I therefore proposed to walk,
she consented, and we all rose; but, would you believe it? this man had the
assurance to rise too, and walk close by my side, as if of my party!

"Now," cried he, "I hope we shall see this ingrate. -- Is that he?" --
pointing to an old man, who was lame, "or that?" And in this manner he asked me
of whoever was old or ugly in the room. I made no sort of answer; and when he
found that I was resolutely silent, and walked on, as much as I could, without
observing him, he suddenly stamped his foot, and cried out, in a passion,
"Fool! idiot! booby!"

I turned hastily toward him: "O Madam," continued he, "forgive my vehemence,
but I am distracted to think there should exist a wretch who can slight a
blessing for which I would forfeit my life! -- O! that I could but meet him! --
I would soon -- But I grow angry: pardon me, Madam, my passions are violent,
and your injuries affect me!"

I began to apprehend he was a madman, and stared at him with the utmost
astonishment. "I see you are moved, Madam," said he, "generous creature! -- but
don't be alarmed, I am cool again, I am indeed, -- upon my soul I am, -- I
entreat you, most lovely of mortals! I entreat you to be easy."

"Indeed, Sir," said I very seriously, "I must insist upon your leaving me; you
are quite a stranger to me, and I am both unused, and averse to your language
and your manners."

This seemed to have some effect on him. He made me a low bow, begged my
pardon, and vowed he would not for the world offend me.

"Then, Sir, you must leave me," cried I.

"I am gone, Madam, I am gone!" with a most tragical air; and he marched away,
a quick pace, out of sight in a moment; but before I had time to congratulate
myself, he was again at my elbow.

"And could you really let me go, and not be sorry? -- Can you see me suffer
torments inexpressible, and yet retain all your favor for that miscreant who
flies you? -- Ungrateful puppy! -- I could bastinado him!"

"For Heaven's sake," my dear, cried Mrs. Mirvan, "who is he talking of?"

"Indeed -- I do not know, Madam," said I, "but I wish he would leave me."

"What Is all that there?" cried the Captain.

The man made a low bow, and said, "Only, Sir, a slight objection which this
young lady makes to dancing with me, and which I am endeavoring to obviate. I
shall think myself greatly honored, if you will intercede for me."

"That lady, Sir, said the Captain coldly, "is her own mistress." And he walked
sullenly on.

"You Madam," said the man, (who looked delighted, to Mrs. Mirvan,) "you, I
hope, will have the goodness to speak for me."

"Sir," answered she gravely, "I have not the pleasure of being acquainted with
you."

"I hope when you have, Ma'am," cried he, (undaunted,) "you will honor me with
your approbation; but while I am yet unknown to you, it would be truly generous
in you to countenance me; and, I flatter myself, Madam, that you will not have
cause to repent it."

Mrs. Mirvan, with an embarrassed air, replied, "I do not at all mean, Sir, to
doubt your being a gentleman, -- but, -- "

"But what, Madam? -- that doubt removed, why a but?"

"Well, Sir," said Mrs. Mirvan, (with a goodhumoured smile,) "I will even treat
you with your own plainness, and try what effect that will have on you: I must
therefore tell you, once for all, -- "

"O pardon me, Madam!" interrupted he eagerly, "you must not proceed with those
words, once for all; no, if I have been too plain, and though a man, deserve a
rebuke, remember, dear ladies, that if you copy, you ought, in justice, to
excuse me."

We both stared at the man's strange behavior.

"Be nobler than your sex," continued he, turning to me, "honor me with one
dance, and give up the ingrate who has merited so ill your patience."

Mrs. Mirvan looked with astonishment at us both. "Who does he speak of, my
dear? -- you never mentioned --.

"O Madam!" exclaimed he, "he was not worth mentioning -- it is pity he was
ever thought of; but let us forget his existence. One dance is all I solicit;
permit me, madam, the honor of this young lady's hand; it will be a favor I
shall ever most gratefully acknowledge."

"Sir," answered she, "favors and strangers have with me no connection."

"If you have hitherto," said he, "confined your benevolence to your intimate
friends, suffer me to be the first for whom your charity is enlarged."

"Well, Sir, I know not what to say to you, -- but -- "

He stopped her but with so many urgent entreaties, that she at last told me, I
must either go down one dance, or avoid his importunities by returning home. I
hesitated which alternative to choose; but this impetuous man at length
prevailed, and I was obliged to consent to dance with him.

And thus was my deviation from truth punished; and thus did this man's
determined boldness conquer.

During the dance, before we were too much engaged in it for conversation, he
was extremely provoking about my partner, and tried every means in his power to
make me own that I had deceived him; which, though I would not so far humble
myself, was indeed but too obvious.

Lord Orville, I fancy, did not dance at all; he seemed to have a large
acquaintance, and joined several different parties: but you will easily suppose
I was not much pleased to see him, in a few minutes after I was gone, walk
toward the place I had just left, and bow to, and join Mrs. Mirvan!

How unlucky I thought myself, that I had not longer withstood this stranger's
importunities! The moment we had gone down the dance, I was hastening away from
him, but he stopped me, and said that I could by no means return to my party,
without giving offense, before we had done our duty of walking up the dance. As
I know nothing at all of these rules and customs, I was obliged to submit to
his directions; but I fancy I looked rather uneasy, for he took notice of my
inattention, saying, in his free way, "Whence that anxiety? -- Why are those
lovely eyes perpetually averted?"

"I wish you would say no more to me, Sir," (cried I peevishly) "you have
already destroyed all my happiness for this evening."

"Good Heaven; what is it I have done? -- How have I merited this scorn?"

"You have tormented me to death; you have forced me from my friends, and
intruded yourself upon me, against my will, for a partner."

"Surely, my dear madam, we ought to be better friends, since there seems to be
something of a sympathy in the frankness of our dispositions -- And yet, were
you not an angel -- how do you think I could brook such contempt?"

"If I have offended you, cried I, you have but to leave me -- and O how I wish
you would!"

"My dear creature," (cried he, half laughing) "why where could you be
educated?"

"Where I most sincerely wish I now was!"

"How conscious you must be, all beautiful that you are, that those charming
airs serve only to heighten the bloom of your complexion!"

"Your freedom, Sir, where you are more acquainted, may perhaps be less
disagreeable; but to me -- "

"You do me justice," (cried he, interrupting me) "yes, I do indeed improve
upon acquaintance; you will hereafter be quite charmed with me."

"Hereafter, Sir, I hope I shall never -- "

"O hush! -- hush! -- have you forgot the situation in which I found you? --
Have you forgot, that when deserted, I pursued you, -- when betrayed, I adored
you? -- but for me -- "

"But for you, Sir, I might, perhaps, have been happy."

"What, then, am I to conclude that, but for me, your partner would have
appeared? -- poor fellow! -- and did my presence awe him?"

"I wish his presence, Sir, could awe you!

"His presence! -- perhaps then you see him?"

"Perhaps, Sir, I do;" cried I, quite wearied of his raillery.

"Where? -- where? -- for Heaven's sake show me the wretch!"

"Wretch, Sir?"

"O, a very savage! -- a sneaking, shame-faced, despicable puppy!"

I know not what bewitched me, -- but my pride was hurt, and my spirits were
tired, and -- in short -- I had the solly, looking at Lord Orville, to repeat,
" Despicable, you think?"

His eyes instantly followed mine; "why, is that the gentleman?"

I made no answer; I could not affirm, and I would not deny; for I hoped to be
relieved from his teizing, by his mistake.

The very moment we had done what he called our duty, I eagerly desired to
return to Mrs. Mirvan.

"To your partner, I presume, Madam?" said he, very gravely.

This quite confounded me; I dreaded lest this mischievous man, ignorant of his
rank, should address himself to Lord Orville, and say something which might
expose my artifice. Fool! to involve myself in such difficulties! I now feared
what I had before wished, and, therefore, to avoid Lord Orville, I was obliged
myself to propose going down another dance, though I was ready to sink with
shame while I spoke.

"But your partner, Ma'am?" (said he, affecting a very solemn air) "perhaps he
may resent my detaining you: if you will give me leave to ask his consent -- "

"Not for the universe."

"Who is he, Madam?"

I wished myself a hundred miles off. He repeated his question. "What is his
name?"

"Nothing -- nobody -- I don't know. -- "

He assumed a most important solemnity; "How! -- not know? Give me leave, my
dear Madam, to recommend this caution to you; never dance in public with a
stranger, -- with one whose name you are unacquainted with, -- who may be a
mere adventurer, -- a man of no character, -- consider to what impertinence you
may expose yourself."

Was ever any thing so ridiculous? I could not help laughing, in spite of my
vexation.

At this instant, Mrs. Mirvan, followed by Lord Orville, walked up to us. You
will easily believe it was not difficult for me to recover my gravity; but what
was my consternation, when this strange man, destined to be the scourge of my
artifice, exclaimed, "Ha! my Lord Orville! -- I protest I did not know your
Lordship. What can I say for my usurpation^ -- Yet, faith, my Lord, such a
prize was not to be neglected."

My shame and confusion were unspeakable. Who could have supposed or foreseen
that this man knew Lord Orville! But falsehood is not more unjustifiable than
unsafe.

Lord Orville -- well he might, -- looked all amazement.

"The philosophic coldness of your Lordship," continued this odious creature,
"every man is not endowed with. I have used my utmost endeavors to entertain
this lady, though I fear without success; and your Lordship would not be a
little flattered, if acquainted with the difficulty which attended my procuring
the honor of only one dance." Then, turning to me, who was sinking with shame,
while Lord Orville stood motionless, and Mrs. Mirvan astonished, -- he suddenly
seized my hand, saying, "Think, my Lord, what must be my reluctance to resign
this fair hand to your Lordship!"

In the same instant, Lord Orville took it of him; I colored violently, and
made an effort to recover it. "You do me too much honor, Sir, cried he," (with
an air of gallantry, pressing it to his lips ere he let it go) "however, I
shall be happy to profit by it, if this lady," (turning to Mrs. Mirvan) "will
permit me to seek for her party."

To compel him thus to dance, I could not endure, and eagerly called out, "By
no means, -- not for the world! -- I must beg -- "

"Will you honor me, Madam, with your commands," cried my tormentor; "may I
seek the lady's party?

"No, Sir," answered I, turning from him.

"What shall be done, my dear," said Mrs. Mirvan?

"Nothing, Ma'am; -- any thing, I mean. -- "

"But do you dance, or not? you see his Lordship waits."

"I hope not, -- I beg that -- I would not for the world -- I am sure I ought
to -- to -- "

I could not speak; but that confident man, determined to discover whether or
not I had deceived him, said to Lord Orville, who stood suspended, "My Lord,
this affair, which, at present, seems perplexed, I will briefly explain; --
this Lady proposed to me another dance, -- nothing could have made me more
happy -- I only wished for your Lordship's permission, which, if now granted,
will, I am persuaded, set every thing right."

I glowed with indignation. "No, Sir -- It is your absence, and that alone, can
set every thing right."

"For Heaven's sake, my dear," (cried Mrs. Mirvan, who could no longer contain
her surprise,) "what does all this mean? -- were you pre-engaged? -- had Lord
Orville? -- "

"No, Madam, cried I, -- only, -- only I did not know that gentleman, -- and
so, -- and so I thought -- I intended -- I -- "

Overpowered by all that had passed, I had not strength to make my mortifying
explanation; -- my spirits quite sailed me, and I burst into tears.

They all seemed shocked and amazed.

"What is the matter, my dearest love?" cried Mrs. Mirvan, with the kindest
concern.

"What have I done?" exclaimed my evil genius, and ran officiously for a glass
of water.

However, a hint was sufficient for Lord Orville, who comprehended all I would
have explained. He immediately led me to a seat, and said, in a low voice, "Be
not distressed, I beseech you; I shall ever think my name honored by your
making use of it."

This politeness relieved me. A general murmur had alarmed Miss Mirvan, who
flew instantly to me; while Lord Orville, the moment Mrs. Mirvan had taken the
water, led my tormentor away.

"For Heaven's sake, dear Madam," cried I, "let me go home, -- indeed I cannot
stay here any longer."

"Let us all go," cried my kind Maria.

"But the Captain -- what will he say? -- I had better go home in a chair."

Mrs. Mirvan consented, and I rose to depart. Lord Orville and that man both
came to me. The first, with an attention I had but ill merited from him, led me
to a chair,, while the other followed, pestering me with apologies. I wished to
have made mine to Lord Orville, but was too much ashamed.

It was about one o'clock. Mrs. Mirvan's servants saw me home.

And now, -- what again shall ever tempt me to an assembly? I dread to hear
what you will think of me, my most dear and honored Sir: you will need your
utmost partiality to receive me without displeasure.

This morning Lord Orville has sent to enquire after our healths: and Sir
Clement Willoughby, for that, I find, is the name of my persecutor, has called:
but I would not go down stairs till he was gone.

And now, my dear Sir, I can somewhat account for the strange, provoking, and
ridiculous conduct of this Sir Clement last night; for Miss Mirvan says, he is
the very man with whom she heard Lord Orville conversing at Mrs. Stanley's,
when I was spoken of in so mortifying a manner. He was pleased to say he was
glad to hear I was a fool, and therefore, I suppose, he concluded he might talk
as much nonsense as he pleased to me: however, I am very indifferent as to his
opinion; -- but for Lord Orville, -- if then he thought me an idiot, now, I am
sure, he must believe me both bold and presuming. Make use of his name! -- what
impertinence! -- he can never know how it happened, -- he can only imagine it
was from an excess of vanity: -- well, however, I shall leave this bad city
tomorrow, and never again will I enter it!

The Captain intends to take us tonight to the Fantocini. I cannot bear that
Captain; I can give you no idea how gross he is. I heartily rejoice that he was
not present at the disagreeable conclusion of yesterday's adventure, for I am
sure he would have contributed to my confusion; which might perhaps have
diverted him, as he seldom or never smiles but at some other person's expense.

And here I conclude my London letters; -- and without any regret, for I am too
inexperienced and ignorant to conduct myself with propriety in this town, where
every thing is new to me, and many things are unaccountable and perplexing.

Adieu, my dear Sir; Heaven restore me safely to you! I wish I was to go
immediately to Berry Hill; yet the wish is ungrateful to Mrs. Mirvan, and
therefore I will repress it. I shall write an account of the Fantocini from
Howard Grove. We have not been to half the public places that are now open,
though I dare say you will think we have been to all. But they are almost as
innumerable as the persons who fill them.

LETTER XIV.
Evelina in continuation.
Queen-Ann-street, April 13.
HOW much will you be surprised, my dearest Sir, at receiving another letter
from London of your Evelina's writing! But, believe me, it was not my fault,
neither is it my happiness, that I am still here: our journey has been
postponed by an accident equally unexpected and disagreeable.

We went last night to see the Fantocini, where we had infinite entertainment
from the performance of a little comedy, in French and Italian, by puppets, so
admirably managed, that they both astonished and diverted us all, except the
Captain, who has a fixed and most prejudiced hatred of whatever is not English.

When it was over, while we waited for the coach, a tall elderly woman brushed
quickly past us, calling out, "My God! what shall I do?"

"Why what would you do," cried the Captain.

" Ma foi, Monsieur," answered she, "I have lost my company, and in this place
I don't know nobody."

There was something foreign in her accent, though it was difficult to discover
whether she was an English or a French woman. She was very well dressed, and
seemed so entirely at a loss what to do, that Mrs. Mirvan proposed to the
Captain to assist her.

"Assist her!" cried he, "ay, with all my heart; -- let a link-boy call her a
coach."

There was not one to be had, and it rained very fast.

" Mon Dieu," exclaimed the stranger, "what shall become of me? Je suis au
desespoir!"

"Dear Sir," cried Miss Mirvan, "pray let us take the poor lady into our coach.
She is quite alone, and a foreigner --."

"She Is never the better for that," answered he: "she may be a woman of the
town, for any thing you know."

"She does not appear such," said Mrs. Mirvan, "and indeed she seems so much
distressed, that we shall but follow the golden rule, if we carry her to her
lodgings."

"You are mighty fond of new acquaintance," returned he, "but first let us know
if she be going our way."

Upon enquiry, we found that she lived in Oxford Road, and, after some
disputing, the Captain, surlily, and with a very bad grace, consented to admit
her into his coach; though he soon convinced us, that he was determined she
should not be too much obliged to him, for he seemed absolutely bent upon
quarrelling with her: for which strange inhospitality, I can assign no other
reason, than that she appeared to be a foreigner.

The conversation began, by her telling us, that she had been in England only
two days; that the gentlemen belonging to her were Parisians, and had left her,
to see for a hackney-coach, as her own carriage was abroad; and that she had
waited for them till she was quite frightened, and concluded that they had lost
themselves.

"And pray," said the Captain, "why did you go to a public place without an
Englishman?"

" Ma foi, Sir," answered she, "because none of my acquaintance is in town."

"Why then," said he, "I Will tell you what; your best way is to go out of it
yourself."

" Pardie, Monsieur," returned she, "and so I shall; for, I promise you, I
think the English a parcel of brutes; and I Will go back to France as fast as I
can, for I would not live among none of you."

"Who wants you?" cried the Captain; "do you suppose, Madam French, we have not
enough of other nations to pick our pockets already? I Will warrant you, there is
no need of you for to put in your oar."

"Pick your pockets, Sir! I wish nobody wanted to pick your pockets no more
than I do; and I Will promise you, you would be safe enough. But there is no nation
under the sun can beat the English for ill-politeness: for my part, I hate the
very sight of them, and so I shall only just visit a person of quality or two,
of my particular acquaintance, and then I shall go back again to France."

"Ay, do," cried he, "and then go to the devil together, for that is the fittest
voyage for the French and the quality."

"We'll take care, however," cried the stranger, with great vehemence, "not to
admit none of your vulgar, unmannered English among us."

"O never fear," (returned he coolly) "we shall not dispute the point with you;
you and the quality may have the devil all to yourselves."

Desirous of changing the subject of a conversation which now became very
alarming, Miss Mirvan called out, "Lord, how slow the man drives!"

"Never mind, Moll," said her father, "I Will warrant you he will drive fast enough
tomorrow, when you're going to Howard Grove."

"To Howard Grove!" exclaimed the stranger; "why, mon Dieu, do you know Lady
Howard?"

"Why, what if we do?" answered he, "that is nothing to you; she is none of your
quality, I Will promise you."

"Who told you that? cried she, "you don't know nothing about the matter;
besides, you're the ill-bredest person ever I see; and as to your knowing Lady
Howard, I don't believe no such a thing; unless, indeed, you are her steward."

The Captain, swearing terribly, said, with great fury, " you would much sooner
be taken for her wash-woman."

"Her wash-woman, indeed! -- Ha, ha, ha! -- why you have not no eyes; did you ever
see a washwoman in such a gown as this? -- besides, I Am no such mean person,
for I Am as good as Lady Howard, and as rich too; and besides, I Am now come to
England to visit her."

"You may spare yourself that there trouble," said the Captain, "she has
paupers enough about her already."

"Paupers, Mr.! -- no more a pauper than yourself, nor so much neither; -- but
you're a low, dirty fellow, and I shall not stoop to take no more notice of you."

"Dirty fellow!" (exclaimed the Captain, seizing both her wrists) "hark you,
Mrs. Frog, you would best hold your tongue, for I must make bold to tell you, if
you don't, that I shall make no ceremony of tripping you out of the window; and
there you may lie in the mud till some of your Monsieurs come to help you out
of it."

Their increasing passion quite terrified us; and Mrs. Mirvan was beginning to
remonstrate with the Captain, when we were all silenced by what follows.

"Let me go, villain that you are, let me go, or I Will promise you I Will get you
put to prison for this usage; I Am no common person, I assure you, and, ma foi,
I Will go to Justice Fielding about you; for I Am a person of fashion, and I Will
make you know it, or my name in n't Duval."

I heard no more: amazed, frightened, and unspeakably shocked, an involuntary
exclamation of Gracious Heaven! escaped me, and more dead than alive, I sunk
into Mrs. Mirvan's arms. But let me draw a veil over a scene too cruel for a
heart so compassionately tender as yours; it is sufficient that you know this
supposed foreigner proved to be Madame Duval, -- the grandmother of your
Evelina.

O, Sir, to discover so near a relation in a woman who had thus introduced
herself! -- what would become of me, were it not for you, my protector, my
friend, and my refuge?

My extreme concern, and Mrs. Mirvan's surprise, immediately betrayed me. But I
will not shock you with the manner of her acknowledging me, or the bitterness,
the grossness -- I cannot otherwise express myself, -- with which she spoke of
those unhappy past transactions you have so pathetically related to me. All the
misery of a muchinjured parent, dear, though never seen, regretted though never
known, crowded so forcibly upon my memory, that they rendered this interview --
one only excepted -- the most afflicting I can ever know.

When we stopped at her lodgings, she desired me to accompany her into the house,
and said she could easily procure a room for me to sleep in. Alarmed and
trembling, I turned to Mrs. Mirvan. "My daughter, Madam, said that sweet
woman," cannot so abruptly part with her young friend; you must allow a little
time to wean them from each other."

"Pardon me, Ma'am," answered Madame Duval, (who, from the time of her being
known somewhat softened her manners) "Miss cannot possibly be so nearly
connected to this child as I am."

"No matter for that," cried the Captain, (who espoused my cause to satisfy his
own pique, though an awkward apology had passed between them) "she was sent to
us, and so, do you see, we don't choose for to part with her."

I promised to wait upon her at what time she pleased the next day, and, after
a short debate, she desired me to breakfast with her, and we proceeded to
Queen-Ann-Street.

What an unfortunate adventure! I could not close my eyes the whole night. A
thousand times I wished I had never left Berry Hill; however, my return thither
shall be accelerated to the utmost of my power; and once more in that abode of
tranquil happiness, I will suffer no temptation to allure me elsewhere.

Mrs. Mirvan was so kind as to accompany me to Madame Duval's house this
morning. The Captain, too, offered his service, which I declined, from a fear
she should suppose I meant to insult her.

She frowned most terribly upon Mrs. Mirvan, but she received me with as much
tenderness as I believe she is capable of feeling. Indeed, our meeting seems
really to have affected her; for when, overcome by the variety of emotions
which the sight of her occasioned, I almost fainted in her arms, she burst into
tears, and said, "Let me not lose my poor daughter a second time!" This
unexpected humanity softened me extremely; but she very soon excited my warmest
indignation, by the ungrateful mention she made of the best of men, my dear,
and most generous benefactor. However, grief and anger mutually gave way to
terror, upon her avowing the intention of her visiting England was to make me
return with her to France. This, she said, was a plan she had formed from the
instant she had heard of my birth, which, she protested, did not reach her ears
till I must have been twelve years of age; but Monsieur Duval, who, she
declared, was the worst husband in the world, would not permit her to do any
thing she wished: he had been dead but three months, which had been employed in
arranging certain affairs, that were no sooner settled, than she set off for
England. She was already out of mourning, for she said nobody here could tell
how long she had been a widow.

She must have been married very early in life; what her age is, I do not know,
but she really looks to be less than fifty. She dresses very gaily, paints very
high, and the traces of former beauty are still very visible in her face.

I know not, when, or how, this visit would have ended, had not the Captain
called for Mrs. Mirvan, and absolutely insisted upon my attending her. He is
become, very suddenly, so warmly my friend, that I quite dread his
officiousness. Mrs. Mirvan, however, whose principal study seems to be healing
those wounds which her husband inflicts, appeased Madame Duval's wrath, by a
very polite invitation to drink tea and spend the evening here. Not without
great difficulty was the Captain prevailed upon to defer his journey some time
longer; but what could be done? it would have been indecent for me to have
quitted the town the very instant I discovered that Madame Duval was in it; and
to have stayed here solely under her protection -- Mrs. Mirvan, thank Heaven,
was too kind for such a thought. That she should follow us to Howard Grove, I
almost equally dreaded; it is, therefore, determined that we remain in London
for some days, or a week: though the Captain has declared that the old French
hag, as he is pleased to call her, shall fare never the better for it.

My only hope, is to get safe to Berry Hill; where, counseled and sheltered by
you, I shall have nothing more to fear. Adieu, my ever dear and most honored
Sir! I shall have no happiness till I am again with you!

LETTER XV.
Mr. Villars to Evelina.
Berry-Hill, April 16.
IN the belief and hope that my Evelina would ere now have bid adieu to London,
I had intended to have deferred writing, till I heard of her return to Howard
Grove; but the letter I have this moment received, with intelligence of Madame
Duval's arrival in England, demands an immediate answer.

Her journey hither equally grieves and alarms me: how much did I pity my
child, when I read of a discovery at once so unexpected and unwished! I have
long dreaded this meeting and its consequence; to claim you, seems naturally to
follow acknowledging you: I am well acquainted with her disposition, and have
for many years foreseen the contest which now threatens us.

Cruel as are the circumstances of this affair, you must not, my love, suffer
it to depress your spirits; remember, that while life is lent me, I will devote
it to your service; and, for future time, I will make such provision as shall
seem to me most conducive to your future happiness. Secure of my protection,
and relying on my tenderness, let no apprehensions of Madame Duval disturb your
peace; conduct yourself toward her with all the respect and deference due to
so near a relation, remembering always, that the failure of duty on her part,
can by no means justify any neglect on yours: indeed, the more forcibly you are
struck with improprieties and misconduct in another, the greater should be your
observance and diligence to avoid even the shadow of similar errors. Be
careful, therefore, that no remissness of attention, no indifference of
obliging, make known to her the independence I assure you of; but when she
fixes the time for her leaving England, trust to me the task of refusing your
attending her: disagreeable to myself I own it will be, yet to you, it would be
improper, if not impossible.

In regard to her opinion of me, I am more sorry than surprised at her
determined blindness; the palliation, which she feels the want of, for her own
conduct, leads her to seek for failings in all who were concerned in those
unhappy transactions which she has so much reason to lament. And this, as it is
the cause, so we must, in some measure, consider it as the excuse of her
inveteracy.

How grateful to me are your wishes to return to Berry Hill! your lengthened
stay in London, and the dissipation in which I find you are involved, fill me
with uneasiness: I mean not, however, that I would have you sequester yourself
from the party to which you belong, since Mrs. Mirvan might thence infer a
reproof which your youth and her kindness would render inexcusable. I will not,
therefore, enlarge upon this subject, but content myself with telling you, that
I shall heartily rejoice when I hear of your safe arrival at Howard Grove, for
which place I hope you will be preparing at the time you receive this letter.

I cannot too much thank you, my best Evelina, for the minuteness of your
communications; continue to me this indulgence, for I should be miserable if in
ignorance of your proceedings.

How new to you is the scene of life in which you are now engaged, -- balls --
plays -- operas -- ridottos -- Ah, my child! at your return hither, how will
you bear the change? My heart trembles for your future tranquillity. -- Yet I
will hope every thing from the unsullied whiteness of your soul, and the native
liveliness of your disposition.

I am sure I need not say, how much more I was pleased with the mistakes of
your inexperience at the private ball, than with the attempted adoption of more
fashionable manners at the ridotto. But your confusion and mortifications were
such as to entirely silence all reproofs on my part.

I hope you will see no more of Sir Clement Willoughby, whose conversation and
boldness are extremely disgustful to me. I was gratified by the goodnature of
Lord Orville, upon your making use of his name, but I hope you will never again
put it to such a trial.

Heaven bless thee, my dear child, and grant that neither misfortune nor vice
may ever rob thee of that gaiety of heart which, resulting from innocence,
while it constitutes your own, contributes also to the felicity of all who know
you!

ARTHUR VILLARS.

LETTER XVI.
Evelina to the Rev. Mr. Villars.
Queen-Ann-Street, Thursday morning, April 14.
BEFORE our dinner was over yesterday, Madame Duval came to tea; though it will
lessen your surprise, to hear that it was near five o'clock, for we never dine
till the day is almost over. She was asked into another room, while the table
was cleared, and then was invited to partake of the dessert.

She was attended by a French gentleman, whom she introduced by the name of
Monsieur Du Bois: Mrs. Mirvan received them both with her usual politeness; but
the Captain looked very much displeased, and, after a short silence, very
sternly said to Madame Duval, "Pray who asked you to bring that there spark
with you?"

"O," cried she, "I never go nowhere without him."

Another short silence ensued, which was terminated by the Captain's turning
roughly to the foreigner, and saying, "Do you know, Monsieur, that you're the
first Frenchman I ever let come into my house?"

Monsieur Du Bois made a profound bow. He speaks no English and understands it
so imperfectly, that he might possibly imagine he had received a compliment.

Mrs. Mirvan endeavored to divert the Captain's ill-humour, by starting new
subjects; but he left to her all the trouble of supporting them, and leant back
in his chair in gloomy silence, except when any opportunity offered of uttering
some sarcasm upon the French. Finding her efforts to render the evening
agreeable were fruitless, Mrs. Mirvan proposed a party to Ranelagh. Madame
Duval joyfully consented to it, and the Captain, though he railed against the
dissipation of the women, did not oppose it, and therefore Maria and I ran up
stairs to dress ourselves.

Before we were ready, word was brought us, that Sir Clement Willoughby was in
the drawing room. He introduced himself under the pretense of enquiring after
all our healths, and entered the room with the easy air of an old acquaintance;
though Mrs. Mirvan confesses that he seemed embarrassed, when he found how
coldly he was received, not only by the Captain, but by herself.

I was extremely disconcerted at the thoughts of seeing this man again, and did
not go down stairs till I was called to tea. He was then deeply engaged in a
discourse upon French manners with Madame Duval and the Captain, and the
subject seemed so entirely to engross him, that he did not, at first, observe
my entrance into the room. Their conversation was supported with great
vehemence; the Captain roughly maintaining the superiority of the English in
every particular, and Madame Duval warmly refusing to allow of it in any; while
Sir Clement exerted all his powers of argument and of ridicule to second and
strengthen whatever was advanced by the Captain: for he had the sagacity to
discover, that he could take no method so effectual for making the master of
the house his friend, as to make Madame Duval his enemy: and indeed, in a very
short time, he had reason to congratulate himself upon his successful
discernment.

As soon as he saw me he made a most respectful bow, and hoped I had not
suffered from the fatigue of the ridotto: I made no other answer than a slight
inclination of the head, for I was very much ashamed of that whole affair. He
then returned to the disputants, where he managed the argument so skilfully, at
once provoking Madame Duval and delighting the Captain, that I could not
forbear admiring his address, though I condemned his subtlety. Mrs. Mirvan,
dreading such violent antagonists, attempted frequently to change the subject;
and she might have succeeded but for the interposition of Sir Clement, who
would not suffer it to be given up, and supported it with such humor and
satire, that he seems to have won the Captain's heart; though their united
forces so enraged and overpowered Madame Duval, that she really trembled with
passion.

I was very glad when Mrs. Mirvan said it was time to be gone. Sir Clement
arose to take leave; but the Captain very cordially invited him to join our
party: he had an engagement, he said, but would give it up to have that
pleasure.

Some little confusion ensued in regard to our manner of setting off: Mrs.
Mirvan offered Madame Duval a place in her coach, and proposed that we four
females should go all together; however, this she rejected, declaring she would
by no means go so far without a gentleman, and wondering so polite a lady could
make so English a proposal. Sir Clement Willoughby said his chariot was waiting
at the door, and begged to know if it could be of any use. It was, at last,
decided, that a hackney-coach should be called for Monsieur Du Bois and Madame
Duval, in which the Captain, and, at his request, Sir Clement, went also; Mrs.
and Miss Mirvan and I had a peaceful and comfortable ride by ourselves.

I don't doubt but they quarrelled all the way; for when we met at Ranelagh,
every one seemed out of humor: and, though we joined parties, poor Madame
Duval was avoided as much as possible by all but me, and I did not dare quit
her for an instant: indeed I believe she was resolved I should not, for she
leant upon my arm almost all the evening.

The room was so very much crowded, that, but for the uncommon assiduity of Sir
Clement Willoughby, we should not have been able to procure a box (which is the
name given to the arched recesses which are appropriated for tea-parties) till
half the company had retired. As we were taking possession of our places, some
ladies of Mrs. Mirvan's acquaintance stopped to speak to her, and persuaded her
to take a round with them. When she returned to us, what was my surprise, to
see that Lord Orville had joined her party! The ladies walked on; Mrs. Mirvan
seated herself, and made a slight, though respectful invitation to Lord Orville
to drink his tea with us, which, to my no small consternation, he accepted.

I felt a confusion unspeakable at again seeing him, from the recollection of
the ridotto adventure: nor did my situation lessen it, for I was seated between
Madame Duval and Sir Clement, who seemed as little as myself to desire Lord
Orville's presence. Indeed, the continual wrangling and ill-breeding of Captain
Mirvan and Madame Duval, made me blush that I belonged to them. And poor Mrs.
Mirvan and her amiable daughter had still less reason to be satisfied.

A general silence ensued after he was seated: his appearance, from different
motives, gave a universal restraint to every body. What his own reasons were
for honoring us with his company, I cannot imagine, unless, indeed, he had a
curiosity to know whether I should invent any new impertinence concerning him.

The first speech was made by Madame Duval, who said, "It Is quite a shocking
thing to see ladies come to so genteel a place as Ranelagh with hats on; it has
a monstrous vulgar look: I cannot think what they wear them for. There Is no such
a thing to be seen in Paris."

"Indeed," cried Sir Clement, "I must own myself no advocate for hats; I am
sorry the ladies ever invented or adopted so tantalizing a fashion; for, where
there is beauty, they only serve to shade it, and where there is none, to
excite an unavailing curiosity. I fancy they were originally worn by some young
and whimsical coquet."

"More likely," answered the Captain, "they were invented by some wrinkled old
hag, who'd a mind for to keep the young fellows in chase, let them be never so
weary."

"I don't know what you may do in England," cried Madame Duval, "but I know in
Paris no woman need n't be at such a trouble as that, to be taken very genteel
notice of."

"Why, will you pretend for to say," returned the Captain, "that they don't
distinguish the old from the young there as well as here?"

"They don't make no distinguishments at all," said she; "they are vastly too
polite."

"More fools they!" said the Captain sneeringly.

"Would to Heaven," cried Sir Clement, "that, for our own sakes, we Englishmen
too were blessed with so accommodating a blindness!"

"Why the devil do you make such a prayer as that?" demanded the Captain: "them
are the first foolish words I Have heard you speak; but I suppose you're not much
used to that sort of work. Did you ever make a prayer before, since you were a
sniveler?"

"Ay, now," cried Madame Duval, "that is another of the unpolitenesses of you
English, to go to talking of such things as that: now, in Paris, nobody never
says nothing about religion, no more than about politics."

"Why then," answered he, "it is a sign they take no more care of their souls,
than of their country, and so both one and the other go to old Nick."

"Well, if they do," said she, "who is the worse, so long as they don't say
nothing about it? it is the tiresomest thing in the world to be always talking
of them sort of things, and nobody that is ever been abroad troubles their heads
about them."

"Pray then," cried the Captain, "since you know so much of the matter, be so
good as to tell us what they do trouble their heads about? -- hay, Sir Clement!
have not we a right to know that much?"

"A very comprehensive question," said Sir Clement, "and I expect much
instruction from the lady's answer."

"Come, Madam," continued the Captain, "never flinch; speak at once; don't stop
for thinking."

"I assure you I am not going," answered she; "for as to what they do do, why
they have enough to do, I promise you, what with one thing or another."

"But what, what do they do, these famous Monsieurs?" demanded the Captain;
"cannot you tell us? do they game? -- or drink? -- or fiddle? -- or are they
jockies? -- or do they spend all their time in slummering old women?"

"As to that, Sir, -- but indeed I shall not trouble myself to answer such a
parcel of low questions, so don't ask me no more about it." And then, to my
great vexation, turning to Lord Orville, she said, "Pray, Sir, was you ever in
Paris?"

He only bowed.

"And pray, Sir, how did you like it?"

This comprehensive question, as Sir Clement would have called it, though it
made him smile, also made him hesitate; however, his answer was expressive of
his approbation.

"I thought you would like it, Sir, because you look so like a gentleman. As to
the Captain, and as to that other gentleman, why they may very well not like
what they don't know: for I suppose, Sir, you was never abroad?"

"Only three years, Ma'am," answered Sir Clement, drily.

"Well, that is very surprising! I should never have thought it: however, I dare
say you only kept company with the English."

"Why pray, who should he keep company with?" cried the Captain: "what, I
suppose you would have him ashamed of his own nation, like some other people, not a
thousand miles off, on purpose to make his own nation ashamed of him."

"I Am sure it would be a very good thing if you would go abroad yourself."

"How will you make out that, hay, Madam? come, please to tell me, where would
be the good of that?"

"Where! why a great deal. They Would make quite another person of you."

"What, I suppose you would have me learn to cut capers? -- and dress like a
monkey? -- and palavar in French gibberish? -- hay, would you? -- And powder,
and daub, and make myself up, like some other folks?"

"I would have you learn to be more politer, Sir, and not to talk to ladies in
such a rude, old-fashion way as this. You, Sir, as have been in Paris" (again
addressing herself to Lord Orville) "can tell this English gentleman how he would
be despised, if he was to talk in such an ungenteel manner as this, before any
foreigners. Why there is n't a hair-dresser, nor a shoemaker, nor nobody, that
would n't blush to be in your company."

"Why look ye, Madam," answered the Captain, "as to your hair-pinchers and
shoe-blacks, you may puff off their manners, and welcome; and I am heartily
glad you like 'em so well; but, as to me, since you must needs make so free of
your advice, I must even tell you, I never kept company with any such gentry."

"Come, ladies and gentlemen," said Mrs. Mirvan, "as many of you as have done
tea, I invite to walk with me." Maria and I started up instantly; Lord Orville
followed; and I question whether we were not half round the room ere the angry
disputants knew that we had left the box.

As the husband of Mrs. Mirvan had borne so large a share in this disagreeable
altercation, Lord Orville forbore to make any comments upon it; so that the
subject was immediately dropped, and the conversation became calmly sociable, and
politely cheerful, and, to every body but me, must have been highly agreeable:
-- but, as to myself, I was so eagerly desirous of making some apology to Lord
Orville for the impertinence of which he must have thought me guilty at the
ridotto, and yet so utterly unable to assume sufficient courage to speak to him
concerning an affair in which I had so terribly exposed myself, that I hardly
ventured to say a word all the time we were walking. Besides, the knowledge of
his contemptuous opinion, haunted and dispirited me, and made me fear he might
possibly misconstrue whatever I should say. So that, far from enjoying a
conversation that might, at any other time, have delighted me, I continued
silent, uncomfortable, and ashamed. O Sir, shall I ever again involve myself in
so foolish an embarrassment? I am sure that if I do, I shall deserve yet
greater mortification.

We were not joined by the rest of the party till we had taken three or four
turns round the room, and then, they were so quarrelsome, that Mrs. Mirvan
complained of being fatigued, and proposed going home. No one dissented. Lord
Orville joined another party, having first made an offer of his services, which
the gentlemen declined, and we proceeded to an outward room, where we waited
for the carriages. It was settled that we should return to town in the same
manner we came to Ranelagh, and, accordingly, Monsieur Du Bois handed Madame
Duval into a hackney-coach, and was just preparing to follow her, when she
screamed, and jumpt hastily out, declaring she was wet through all her clothes.
Indeed, upon examination, the coach was found to be in a dismal condition; for
the weather proved very bad, and the rain had, though I know not how, made its
way into the carriage.

Mrs. and Miss Mirvan, and myself, were already disposed of as before; but no
sooner did the Captain hear this account, than, without any ceremony, he was so
civil as to immediately take possession of the vacant seat in his own coach,
leaving Madame Duval and Monsieur Du Bois to take care of themselves. As to Sir
Clement Willoughby, his own chariot was in waiting.

I instantly begged permission to offer Madame Duval my own place, and made a
motion to get out; but Mrs. Mirvan stopped me, saying that I should then be
obliged to return to town with only the foreigner, or Sir Clement.

"O never mind the old Beldame," cried the Captain, "she is weather-proof, I Will
answer for her; and besides, as we are all, I hope, English, why she will meet
with no worse than she expects from us."

"I do not mean to defend her," said Mrs. Mirvan; "but indeed, as she belongs
to our party, we cannot, with any decency, leave the place, till she is, by
some means, accommodated."

"Lord, my dear," cried the Captain, whom the distress of Madame Duval had put
into very good humor, "why she will break her heart, if she meets with any
civility from a filthy Englishman."

Mrs. Mirvan, however, prevailed, and we all got out of the coach, to wait till
Madame Duval could meet with some better carriage. We found her, attended by
Monsieur Du Bois, standing amongst the servants, and very busy in wiping her
negligee, and endeavoring to save it from being stained by the wet, as she
said it was a new Lions silk. Sir Clement Willoughby offered her the use of his
chariot, but she had been too much piqued by his raillery to accept it. We
waited some time, but in vain, for no hackney-coach could be procured. The
Captain, at last, was persuaded to accompany Sir Clement himself, and we four
females were handed into Mrs. Mirvan's carriage, though not before Madame Duval
had insisted upon our making room for Monsieur Du Bois, to which the Captain
only consented in preference to being incommoded by him in Sir Clement's
chariot.

Our party drove off first. We were silent and unsociable; for the difficulties
attending this arrangement had made every one languid and fatigued. Unsociable,
I must own, we continued; but very short was the duration of our silence, as we
had not proceeded thirty yards, ere every voice was heard at once, -- for the
coach broke down! I suppose we concluded of course, that we were all half
killed, by the violent shrieks that seemed to come from every mouth. The
chariot was stopped, the servants came to our assistance, and we were all taken
out of the carriage, without having been at all hurt. The night was dark and
wet; but I had scarce touched the ground, when I was lifted suddenly from it,
by Sir Clement Willoughby, who begged permission to assist me, though he did
not wait to have it granted, but carried me in his arms back to Ranelagh.

He enquired very earnestly if I was not hurt by the accident? I assured him I
was perfectly safe, and free from injury, and desired he would leave me, and
return to the rest of the party, for I was very uneasy to know whether they had
been equally fortunate. He told me he was happy in being honored with my
commands, and would joyfully execute them; but insisted upon first conducting
me to a warm room, as I had not wholly escaped being wet. He did not regard my
objections, but made me follow him to an apartment, where we found an excellent
fire, and some company waiting for carriages. I readily accepted a seat, and
then begged he would go.

And go, indeed, he did; but he returned in a moment, telling me that the rain
was more violent than ever, and that he had sent his servants to offer their
assistance, and acquaint the Mirvans of my situation. I was very mad that he
would not go himself; but as my acquaintance with him was so very slight, I did
not think proper to urge him contrary to his inclination.

Well, he drew a chair close to mine, and, after again enquiring how I did,
said, in a low voice, "You will pardon me, Miss Anville, if the eagerness I
feel to vindicate myself, induces me to snatch this opportunity of making
sincere acknowledgments for the impertinence with which I tormented you at the
last ridotto. I can assure you, Madam, I have been a true and sorrowful
penitent ever since; but -- shall I tell you honestly what encouraged me to -- "

He stopped; but I said nothing, for I thought instantly of the conversation Miss
Mirvan had overheard, and supposed he was going to tell me himself what part
Lord Orville had borne in it; and really I did not wish to hear it repeated.
Indeed, the rest of his speech convinces me that such was his intention; with
what view, I know not, except to make a merit of his defending me.

"And yet, he continued, "my excuse may only expose my own credulity, and want
of judgment and penetration. I will, therefore, merely beseech your pardon, and
hope that some future time -- "

Just then, the door was opened by Sir Clement's servant, and I had the
pleasure of seeing the Captain, Mrs. and Miss Mirvan, enter the room.

"O ho," cried the former, "you have got a good warm birth here; but we shall
beat up your quarters. Here, Lucy, Moll, come to the fire, and dry your
trumpery. But, hey-day, -- why where is old Madam French?"

"Good God," cried I, "is not Madame Duval then with you?

"With me! No, -- thank God."

I was very uneasy to know what might have become of her, and, if they would
have suffered me, I should have gone out in search of her myself; but all the
servants were dispatched to find her, and the Captain said we might be very
sure her French beau would take care of her.

We waited some time without any tidings, and were soon the only party in the
room. My uneasiness increased so much, that Sir Clement now made a voluntary
offer of seeking her. However, the same moment that he opened the door with
this design, she presented herself at it, attended by Monsieur Du Bois.

"I was this instant, Madam," said he, "coming to see for you."

"You are mighty good, truly," cried she, "to come when all the mischief's
over."

She then entered, -- in such a condition! -- entirely covered with mud, and in
so great a rage, it was with difficulty she could speak. We all expressed our
concern, and offered our assistance, -- except the Captain; who no sooner
beheld her, than he burst into a loud laugh.

We endeavored, by our enquiries and condolements, to prevent her attending to
him; and she was, for some time, so wholly engrossed by her anger and her
distress, that we succeeded without much trouble. We begged her to inform us
how this accident had happened. "How!" repeated she, -- why "it was all along
of your all going away, -- and there poor Monsieur Du Bois -- but it was n't
his fault, -- for he is as bad off as me."

All eyes were then turned to Monsieur Du Bois, whose clothes were in the same
miserable plight with those of Madame Duval, and who, wet, shivering, and
disconsolate, had crept to the fire.

The Captain laughed yet more heartily; while Mrs. Mirvan, ashamed of his
rudeness, repeated her enquiries to Madame Duval; who answered, "Why, as we
were a-coming along, all in the rain, Monsieur Du Bois was so obliging, though
I Am sure it was an unlucky obligingness for me, as to lift me up in his arms,
to carry me over a place that was ancle-deep in mud; but instead of my being
ever the better for it, just as we were in the worst part, -- I Am sure I wish
we had been fifty miles off, -- for somehow or other, his foot slipped, -- at
least, I suppose so, -- though I cannot think how it happened, for I Am no such
great weight, -- but, however that was, down we both came together, all in the
mud; -- and the more we tried to get up, the more deeper we got covered with
the nastiness, -- and my new Lions negligee, too, quite spoilt! -- however,
it is well we got up at all, for we might have laid there till now, for aught
you all cared; for nobody never came near us."

This recital put the Captain into an extacy; he went from the lady to the
gentleman, and from the gentleman to the lady, to enjoy alternately the sight
of their distress. He really shouted with pleasure; and, shaking Monsieur Du
Bois strenuously by the hand, wished him joy of having touched English ground;
and then he held a candle to Madame Duval, that he might have a more complete
view of her disaster, declaring repeatedly, that he had never been better
pleased in his life.

The rage of poor Madame Duval was unspeakable; she dashed the candle out of
his hand, stamped upon the floor, and, at last, spat in his face.

This action seemed immediately to calm them both, as the joy of the Captain
was converted into resentment, and the wrath of Madame Duval into fear; for he
put his hands upon her shoulders, and gave her so violent a shake, that she
screamed out for help; assuring her, at the same time, that if she had been one
ounce less old, or less ugly, she should have had it all returned on her own
face.

Monsieur Du Bois, who had seated himself very quietly at the fire, approached
them, and expostulated very warmly with the Captain; but he was neither
understood nor regarded, and Madame Duval was not released, till she quite
sobbed with passion.

When they were parted, I entreated her to permit the woman who has the charge
of the ladies cloaks to assist her in drying her clothes; she consented, and we
did what was possible to save her from catching cold. We were obliged to wait
in this disagreeable situation near an hour, ere a hackney-coach could be
found; and then we were disposed in the same manner as before our accident.

I am going this morning to see poor Madame Duval, and to enquire after her
health, which I think must have suffered by her last night's misfortunes;
though, indeed, she seems to be naturally strong and hearty.

Adieu, my dear Sir, till tomorrow.
LETTER XVII.
Evelina in continuation.
Friday Morning, April 15.
SIR Clement Willoughby called here yesterday at noon, and Captain Mirvan
invited him to dinner. For my part, I spent the day in a manner the most
uncomfortable imaginable.

I found Madame Duval at breakfast in bed, though Monsieur Du Bois was in the
chamber; which so much astonished me, that I was, involuntarily, retiring,
without considering how odd an appearance my retreat would have, when Madame
Duval called me back, and laughed very heartily at my ignorance of foreign
customs.

The conversation, however, very soon took a more serious turn; for she began,
with great bitterness, to inveigh against the barbarous brutality of that
fellow the Captain, and the horrible illbreeding of the English in general,
declaring she should make her escape with all expedition from so beastly a
nation.

She lamented, very mournfully, the fate of her Lions silk, and protested she
had rather have parted with all the rest of her wardrobe, because it was the
first gown she had bought to wear upon leaving off her weeds. She has a very
bad cold, and Monsieur Du Bois is so hoarse, he can hardly speak.

She insisted upon my staying with her all day, as she intended, she said, to
introduce me to some of my own relations. I would very fain have excused
myself, but she did not allow me any choice.

Till the arrival of these relations, one continued series of questions on her
side, and of answers on mine, filled up all the time we passed together. Her
curiosity was insatiable; she enquired into every action of my life, and every
particular that had fallen under my observation, in the lives of all I knew.
Again, she was so cruel as to avow the most inveterate rancour against the sole
benefactor her deserted child and grandchild have met with; and such was the
indignation her ingratitude raised, that I would actually have quitted her
presence and house, had she not, in a manner the most peremptory, absolutely
forbid me. But what, good Heaven! can induce her to such shocking injustice? O
my friend and father! I have no command of myself when this subject is started.

She talked very much of taking me to Paris, and said I greatly wanted the
polish of a French education. She lamented that I had been brought up in the
country, which, she observed, had given me a very bumpkinish air. However, she
bid me not despair, for she had known many girls, much worse than me, who had
become very fine ladies after a few years residence abroad; and she
particularly instanced a Miss Polly Moore, daughter of a chandler's-shop woman,
who, by an accident not worth relating, happened to be sent to Paris, where,
from an awkward, ill-bred girl, she so much improved, that she has since been
taken for a woman of quality.

The relations to whom she was pleased to introduce me, consisted of a Mr.
Branghton, who is her nephew, and three of his children, the eldest of which is
a son, and the two younger are daughters.

Mr. Branghton appears about forty years of age. He does not seem to want a
common understanding, though he is very contracted and prejudiced: he has spent
his whole time in the city, and I believe feels a great contempt for all who
reside elsewhere.

His son seems weaker in his understanding, and more gay in his temper; but his
gaiety is that of a foolish, overgrown schoolboy, whose mirth consists in
noise and disturbance. He disdains his father for his close attention to
business, and love of money, though he seems himself to have no talents,
spirit, or generosity, to make him superior to either. His chief delight
appears to be tormenting and ridiculing his sisters, who, in return, most
heartily despise him.

Miss Branghton, the eldest daughter, is by no means ugly, but looks proud,
ill-tempered, and conceited. She hates the city, though without knowing why;
for it is easy to discover she has lived no where else.

Miss Polly Branghton is rather pretty, very foolish, very ignorant, very
giddy, and, I believe, very good-natured.

The first half hour was allotted to making themselves comfortable, for they
complained of having had a very dirty walk, as they came on foot from Snow
Hill, where Mr. Branghton keeps a silversmith's shop; and the young ladies had
not only their coats to brush, and shoes to dry, but to adjust their head
dress, which their bonnets had totally discomposed.

The manner in which Madame Duval was pleased to introduce me to this family,
extremely shocked me. "Here, my dears," said she, "here is a relation you little
thought of; but you must know my poor daughter Caroline had this child after
she run away from me, -- though I never knew nothing of it, not I, for a long
while after; for they took care to keep it a secret from me, though the poor
child has never a friend in the world besides."

"Miss seems very tenderhearted, aunt," said Miss Polly, "and to be sure she is
not to blame for her mama's undutifulness, for she could n't help it."

"Lord, no," answered she, "and I never took no notice of it to her; for
indeed, as to that, my own poor daughter was n't so much to blame as you may
think, for she would never have gone astray, if it had not been for that meddling
old parson I told you of."

"If aunt pleases," said young Mr. Branghton, "we'll talk of somewhat else, for
Miss looks very uneasy-like."

The next subject that was chosen, was the age of the three young Branghtons
and myself. The son is twenty; the daughters upon hearing that I was seventeen,
said that was just the age of Miss Polly; but their brother, after a long
dispute, proved that she was two years older, to the great anger of both
sisters, who agreed that he was very ill-natured and spiteful.

When this point was settled, the question was put, which was tallest? -- We
were desired to measure, as the Branghtons were all of different opinions.
They, none of them, however, disputed my being the tallest in the company, but,
in regard to one another, they were extremely quarrelsome: the brother insisted
upon their measuring fair, and not with heads and heels; but they would by no
means consent to lose these privileges of our sex, and therefore the young man
was cast, as shortest; though he appealed to all present upon the injustice of
the decree.

This ceremony over, the young ladies, began, very freely, to examine my dress,
and to interrogate me concerning it. "This apron's your own work, I suppose,
Miss? but these sprigs a'n't in fashion now. Pray, if it is not impertinent,
what might you give a yard for this lutestring? -- Do you make your own caps,
Miss? -- " and many other questions equally interesting and well-bred.

They then asked me how I liked London? and whether I should not think the
country a very dull place, when I returned thither? "Miss must try if she cannot
get a good husband," said Mr. Branghton, "and then she may stay and live here."

The next topic was public places, or rather the theaters, for they knew of no
other; and the merits and defects of all the actors and actresses were
discussed: the young man here took the lead, and seemed to be very conversant
on the subject. But, during this time, what was my concern, and suffer me to
add, my indignation, when I found, by some words I occasionally heard, that
Madame Duval was entertaining Mr. Branghton with all the most secret and cruel
particulars of my situation! The eldest daughter was soon drawn to them by the
recital; the youngest and the son still kept their places, intending, I
believe, to divert me, though the conversation was all their own.

In a few minutes, Miss Branghton, coming suddenly up to her sister, exclaimed,
"Lord, Polly, only think! Miss never saw her papa!"

"Lord, how odd!" cried the other; "why then, Miss, I suppose you would n't
know him?"

This was quite too much for me; I rose hastily, and ran out of the room: but I
soon regretted I had so little command of myself, for the two sisters both
followed, and insisted upon comforting me, notwithstanding my earnest
entreaties to be left alone.

As soon as I returned to the company, Madame Duval said, "Why, my dear, what
was the matter with you? why did you run away so?"

This question almost made me run again, for I knew not how to answer it. But
is it not very extraordinary, that she can put me in situations so shocking,
and then wonder to find me sensible of any concern?

Mr. Branghton, junior, now enquired of me, whether I had seen the Tower, or
St. Paul's church? and, upon answering in the negative, they proposed making a
party to show them to me. Among other questions, they also asked if I had ever
seen such a thing as an Opera? I told them I had. "Well," said Mr. Branghton,
"I never saw one in my life, so long as I Have lived in London, and I never
desire to see one, if I live here as much longer."

"Lord, Papa," cried Miss Polly, "why not? you might as well for once, for the
curiosity of the thing: besides, Miss Pomfret saw one, and she says it was very
pretty."

"Miss will think us very vulgar," said Miss Branghton, "to live in London, and
never have been to an Opera; but it is no fault of mine, I assure you, Miss,
only Papa don't like to go."

The result was, that a party was proposed, and agreed to, for some early
opportunity. I did not dare oppose them; but I said that my time, while I
remained in town, was at the disposal of Mrs. Mirvan. However, I am sure I will
not attend them, if I can possibly avoid so doing.

When we parted, Madame Duval desired to see me the next day; and the
Branghtons told me, that the first time I went toward Snow Hill, they should
be very glad if I would call upon them.

I wish we may not meet again till that time arrives.

I am sure I shall not be very ambitious of being known to any more of my
relations, if they have any resemblance to those whose acquaintance I have been
introduced to already.

LETTER XVIII.
Evelina in continuation.
I Had just finished my letter to you this morning, when a violent rapping at
the door made me run down stairs; and who should I see in the drawing room, but
Lord Orville!

He was quite alone, for the family had not assembled to breakfast. He
enquired, first of mine, then of the health of Mrs. and Miss Mirvan, with a
degree of concern that rather surprised me, till he said that he had just been
informed of the accident we had met with at Ranelagh. He expressed his sorrow
upon the occasion with the utmost politeness, and lamented that he had not been
so fortunate as to hear of it in time to offer his services. "But, I think," he
added, "Sir Clement Willoughby had the honor of assisting you?"

"He was with Captain Mirvan, my Lord."

"I had heard of his being of your party."

I hope that flighty man has not been telling Lord Orville he only assisted me?
however, he did not pursue the subject, but said, "This accident, though
extremely unfortunate, will not, I hope, be the means of frightening you from
gracing Ranelagh with your presence in future?"

"Our time, my Lord, for London is almost expired already."

"Indeed! do you leave town so very soon?"

"O yes, my Lord, our stay has already exceeded our intentions."

"Are you, then, so particularly partial to the country?"

"We merely came to town, my Lord, to meet Captain Mirvan."

"And does Miss Anville feel no concern at the idea of the many mourners her
absence will occasion?"

"O, my Lord, -- I Am sure you don't think -- " I stopped there, for, indeed, I
hardly knew what I was going to say. My foolish embarrassment, I suppose, was
the cause of what followed; -- for he came to me, and took my hand, saying, "I
do think, that whoever has once seen Miss Anville, must receive an impression
never to be forgotten."

This compliment, -- from Lord Orville, -- so surprised me, that I could not
speak; but felt myself change color, and stood, for some moments, silent and
looking down: however, the instant I recollected my situation, I withdrew my
hand, and told him that I would see if Mrs. Mirvan was not dressed. He did not
oppose me, so away I went.

I met them all on the stairs, and returned with them to breakfast.

I have since been extremely angry with myself for neglecting so excellent an
opportunity of apologizing for my behavior at the Ridotto: but, to own the
truth, that affair never once occurred to me during the short tete-a-tete which
we had together. But, if, ever we should happen to be so situated again, I will
certainly mention it; for I am inexpressibly concerned at the thought of his
harboring an opinion that I am bold or impertinent, and I could almost kill
myself for having given him the shadow of a reason for so shocking an idea.

But was it not very odd, that he should make me such a compliment? I expected
it not from him; -- but gallantry, I believe, is common to all men, whatever
other qualities they may have in particular.

Our breakfast was the most agreeable meal, if it may be called a meal, that we
have had since we came to town. Indeed, but for Madame Duval I should like
London extremely.

The conversation of Lord Orville is really delightful. His manners are so
elegant, so gentle, so unassuming, that they at once engage esteem, and diffuse
complacence. Far from being indolently satisfied with his own accomplishments,
as I have already observed many men here are, though without any pretensions to
his merit, he is most assiduously attentive to please and to serve all who are
in his company; and, though his success is invariable, he never manifests the
smallest degree of consciousness.

I could wish that you, my dearest Sir, knew Lord Orville, because I am sure
you would love him; and I have felt that wish for no other person I have seen
since I came to London. I sometimes imagine, that, when his youth is flown, his
vivacity abated, and his life is devoted to retirement, he will, perhaps,
resemble him whom I most love and honor. His present sweetness, politeness,
and diffidence, seem to promise in future the same benevolence, dignity, and
goodness. But I must not expatiate upon this subject.

When Lord Orville was gone, -- and he made but a very short visit, -- I was
preparing, most reluctantly, to wait upon Madame Duval; but Mrs. Mirvan
proposed to the Captain, that she should be invited to dinner in
Queen-Ann-Street, and he readily consented, for he said he wished to ask after
her Lions negligee.

The invitation is accepted, and we expect her every moment. But to me, it is
very strange, that a woman, who is the uncontrolled mistress of her time,
fortune, and actions, should choose to expose herself voluntarily to the
rudeness of a man who is openly determined to make her his sport. But she has
very few acquaintance, and, I fancy, scarce knows how to employ herself.

How great is my obligation to Mrs. Mirvan, for bestowing her time in a manner
so disagreeable to herself, merely to promote my happiness! every dispute in
which her undeserving husband engages, is productive of pain, and uneasines s
to herself; of this I am so sensible, that I even besought her not to send to
Madame Duval, but she declared she could not bear to have me pass all my time,
while in town, with her only. Indeed she is so infinitely kind to me, that one
would think she was your daughter.

LETTER XIX.
Evelina in continuation.
Saturday Morning, April 16.
MADAME Duval was accompanied by Monsieur Du Bois. I am surprised that she
should choose to introduce him where he is so unwelcome; and, indeed, it is
strange that they should be so constantly together: though I believe I should
not have taken notice of it, but that Captain Mirvan is perpetually rallying me
upon my grandmama's beau.

They were both received by Mrs. Mirvan with her usual good-breeding; but the
Captain, most provokingly, attacked her immediately, saying, "Now, Madam, you
that have lived abroad, please to tell me this here; Which did you like best,
the warm room at Ranelagh, or the cold bath you went into afterward? though, I
assure you, you look so well that I should advise you to take another dip."

" Ma foi, Sir," cried she, "nobody asked for your advice, so you may as well
keep it to yourself: besides, it is no great joke to be splashed, and to catch
cold, and spoil all one's things, whatever you may think of it."

" Splashed, quoth-a! -- why I thought you were soused all over. -- Come, come,
don't mince the matter, never spoil a good story; you know you had n't a dry
thread about you -- Before George, I shall never think on it without hallooing!
such a poor, forlorn, draggle-tailed -- gentlewoman! and poor Monsieur French,
here, like a drowned rat, by your side!"

"Well, the worse pickle we was in, so much the worser in you not to help us,
for you knowed where we was fast enough, because, while I laid in the mud, I Am
pretty sure I heard you snigger; so it is like enough you jostled us down
yourself, for Monsieur Du Bois says, that he is sure he had a great jolt given
him, or he should n't have fell."

The Captain laughed so immoderately, that he really gave me also a suspicion
that he was not entirely innocent of the charge: however, he disclaimed it very
peremptorily.

"Why then," continued she, "if you did n't do that, why did n't you come to
help us?"

"Who, I? -- what, do you suppose I had forgot I was an Englishman, a filthy,
beastly Englishman?"

"Very well, Sir, very well; but I was a fool to expect any better, for it is
all of a piece with the rest; you know you wanted to fling me out of the
coach-window, the very first time ever I see you: but I Will never go to Ranelagh
with you no more, that I Am resolved; for I dare say, if the horses had runn'd
over me, as I laid in that nastiness, you would never have stirred a step to save
me?"

"Lord, no, to be sure, Ma'am, not for the world! I know your opinion of our
nation too well, to affront you by supposing a Frenchman would want my
assistance to protect you. Did you think that Monsieur here, and I, had changed
characters, and that he should pop you into the mud, and I help you out of it?
Ha, ha, ha!"

"O, very well, Sir, laugh on, it is like your manners; however, if poor
Monsieur Du Bois had n't met with that unlucky accident himself, I should n't
have wanted nobody's help."

"O, I promise you, Madam, you would never have had mine; I knew my distance
better; and as to your being a little ducked, or so, why, to be sure, Monsieur
and you settled that between yourselves; so it was no business of mine."

"What, then, I suppose, you want to make me believe as Monsieur Du Bois served
me that trick of purpose?"

"OF purpose! ay, certainly, who ever doubted that? Do you think a Frenchman
ever made a blunder? If he had been some clumsy-footed English fellow, indeed,
it might have been accidental: but what the devil signifies all your hopping
and capering with your dancing-masters, if you cannot balance yourselves
upright?"

In the midst of this dialogue, Sir Clement Willoughby made his appearance. He
affects to enter the house with the freedom of an old acquaintance, and this
very easiness, which, to me, is astonishing, is what most particularly
recommends him to the Captain. Indeed, he seems very successfully to study all
the humors of that gentleman.

After having heartily welcomed him, "You are just come in time, my boy," said
he, "to settle a little matter of a dispute between this here gentlewoman and
I; do you know, she has been trying to persuade me, that she did not above half
like the ducking Monsieur gave her the other night?"

"I should have hoped," (said Sir Clement, with the utmost gravity) "that the
friendship subsisting between that lady and gentleman, would have guarded them
against any actions professedly disagreeable to each other; but, probably, they
might not have discussed the matter previously; in which case, the gentleman, I
must own, seems to have been guilty of inattention, since, in my humble
opinion, it was his business first to have enquired whether the lady preferred
soft, or hard ground, before he dropped her."

"O very fine, Gentlemen, very fine," cried Madame Duval, "you may try to set
us together by the ears as much as you will; but I Am not such an ignorant
person as to be made a fool of so easily; so you need n't talk no more about
it, for I sees into your designs.

Monsieur Du Bois, who was just able to discover the subject upon which the
conversation turned, made his defense, in French, with great solemnity; he
hoped, he said, that the company would at least acknowledge, he did not come
from a nation of brutes, and consequently, that to wilfully offend any lady,
was, to him, utterly impossible; but that, on the contrary, in endeavoring, as
was his duty, to save and guard her, he had himself suffered, in a manner which
he would forbear to relate, but which, he greatly apprehended, he should feel
the ill effects of for many months; and then, with a countenance exceedingly
lengthened, he added, that he hoped it would not be attributed to him as
national prejudice, when he owned that he must, to the best of his memory,
aver, that his unfortunate fall was owing to a sudden, but violent push, which,
he was shocked to say, some malevolent person, with a design to his injury,
must certainly have given him; but whether with a view to mortify him, by
making him let the lady fall, or whether merely to spoil his clothes, he could
not pretend to determine.

This disputation was, at last, concluded by Mrs. Mirvan proposing that we
should all go to Cox's Museum. Nobody objected, and carriages were immediately
ordered.

In our way down stairs, Madame Duval in a very passionate manner, said, " Ma
foi, if I would n't give fifty guineas, only to know who gave us that shove!"

This Museum is very astonishing, and very superb; yet, it afforded me but
little pleasure, for it is a mere show, though a wonderful one.

Sir Clement Willoughby, in our walk round the room, asked me what my opinion
was of this brilliant spectacle.

"It is very fine and very ingenious," answered I, "and yet -- I don't know how
it is, -- but I seem to miss something."

"Excellently answered!" cried he, "you have exactly defined my own feelings,
though in a manner I should never have arrived at. But I was certain your taste
was too well formed, to be pleased at the expense of your understanding."

" Pardie," cried Madame Duval, "I hope you two is difficult enough! I Am sure
if you don't like this, you like nothing; for it is the grandest, prettiest,
finest sight that ever I see, in England."

"What," (cried the Captain, with a sneer) "I suppose this may be in your
French taste? it is like enough, for it is all kickshaw work. But, pry'thee,
friend," (turning to the person who explained the devices) "will you tell me
the use of all this? for I Am not enough of a conjurer to find it out."

"Use, indeed!" (repeated Madame Duval disdainfully) "Lord, if every thing's to
be useful! -- "

"Why, Sir, as to that, Sir," said our conductor, "the ingenuity of the
mechanism, -- the beauty of the workmanship, -- the -- undoubtedly, Sir, any
person of taste may easily discern the utility of such extraordinary
performances."

"Why then, Sir," answered the Captain, "your person of taste must be either a
coxcomb, or a Frenchman; though, for the matter of that, it is the same thing."

Just then, our attention was attracted by a pineapple, which, suddenly
opening, discovered a nest of birds, who immediately began to sing. "Well,"
cried Madame Duval, "this is prettier than all the rest! I declare, in all my
travels, I never see nothing eleganter."

"Hark ye, friend," said the Captain, "have never another pineapple?"

"Sir? -- "

"Because, if thou have, pry'thee give it us without the birds; for, do you see,
I Am no Frenchman, and should relish something more substantial."

This entertainment concluded with a concert of mechanical music: I cannot
explain how it was produced, but the effect was pleasing. Madame Duval was in
extacies; and the Captain flung himself into so many ridiculous distortions, by
way of mimicking her, that he engaged the attention of all the company; and, in
the midst of the performance of the Coronation Anthem, while Madame Duval was
affecting to beat time, and uttering many expressions of delight, he called
suddenly for salts, which a lady, apprehending some distress, politely handed
to him, and which, instantly applying to the nostrils of poor Madame Duval, she
involuntarily snuffed up such a quantity, that the pain and surprise made her
scream aloud. When she recovered, she reproached him, with her usual vehemence;
but he protested he had taken that measure out of pure friendship, as he
concluded, from her raptures, that she was going into hysterics. This excuse by
no means appeased her, and they had a violent quarrel; but the only effect her
anger had on the Captain, was to increase his diversion. Indeed, he laughs and
talks so terribly loud in public, that he frequently makes us ashamed of
belonging to him.

Madame Duval, notwithstanding her wrath, made no scruple of returning to dine
in Queen-Ann-street. Mrs. Mirvan had secured places for the play at Drury Lane
Theater, and, though ever uneasy in her company, she very politely invited
Madame Duval to be of our party; however, she had a bad cold, and chose to
nurse it. I was sorry for her indisposition, but I knew not how to be sorry she
did not accompany us, for she is -- I must not say what, but very unlike other
people.

LETTER XX.
Evelina in continuation.
OUR places were in the front row of a sidebox. Sir Clement Willoughby, who
knew our intention, was at the door of the Theater, and handed us from the
carriage.

We had not been seated five minutes, ere Lord Orville, who we saw in the
stage-box, came to us; and he honored us with his company all the evening.
Miss Mirvan and I both rejoiced that Madame Duval was absent, as we hoped for
the enjoyment of some conversation, uninterrupted by her quarrels with the
Captain: but I soon found that her presence would have made very little
alteration, for so far was I from daring to speak, that I knew not where even
to look.

The play was Love for Love, and though it is fraught with wit and
entertainment, I hope I shall never see it represented again; for it is so
extremely indelicate, -- to use the softest word I can, -- that Miss Mirvan and
I were perpetually out of countenance, and could neither make any observations
ourselves, nor venture to listen to those of others. This was the more
provoking, as Lord Orville was in excellent spirits, and exceedingly
entertaining.

When the Play was over, I flattered myself I should be able to look about me
with less restraint, as we intended to stay the Farce; but the curtain had
hardly dropped when the box-door opened, and in came Mr. Lovel, the man by
whose foppery and impertinence I was so much teazed at the ball where I first
saw Lord Orville.

I turned away my head, and began talking to Miss Mirvan, for I was desirous to
avoid speaking to him! -- but in vain, for as soon as he had made his
compliments to Lord Orville and Sir Clement Willoughby, who returned them very
coldly, he bent his head forward, and said to me, "I hope, Ma'am, you have
enjoyed your health since I had the honor -- I beg ten thousand pardons, but I
protest I was going to say the honor of dancing with you -- however, I mean
the honor of seeing you dance?"

He spoke with a self-complacency that convinced me he had studied this
address, by way of making reprisals for my conduct at the ball: I therefore
bowed slightly, but made no answer.

After a short silence, he again called my attention, by saying, in an easy,
negligent way, "I think, Ma'am, you was never in town before?"

"No, Sir."

"So I did presume. Doubtless, Ma'am, every thing must be infinitely novel to
you. Our customs, our manners, and les etiquettes de nous autres, can have very
little resemblance to those you have been used to. I imagine, Ma'am, your
retirement is at no very small distance from the capital?"

I was so much disconcerted at this sneering speech, that I said not a word;
though I have since thought my vexation both stimulated and delighted him.

"The air we breathe here, however, Ma'am, (continued he, very conceitedly)
"though foreign to that you have been accustomed to, has not, I hope, been at
variance with your health?"

"Mr. Lovel," said Lord Orville, "could not your eye have spared that question?"

"O, my Lord," answered he, "if health were the only cause of a lady's bloom,
my eye, I grant, had been infallible from the first glance; but -- "

"Come, come," cried Mrs. Mirvan, "I must beg no insinuations of that sort;
Miss Anville's color, as you have successfully tried, may, you see, be
heightened; -- but I assure you, it would be past your skill to lessen it."

"'Pon honor, Madam," returned he, "you wrong me; I presumed not to infer that
rouge was the only succedaneum for health; but, really, I have known so many
different causes for a lady's color, such as flushing, -- anger, -- mauvaise
honte, -- and so forth, that I never dare decide to which it may be owing."

"As to such causes as them there," cried the Captain, "they must belong to
those that they keep company with."

"Very true, Captain," said Sir Clement; "the natural complexion has nothing to
do with occasional sallies of the passions, or any accidental causes."

"No, truly," returned the Captain, "for now here is me, why I look like any
other man just now; and yet, if you were to put me in a passion, before George,
you would soon see me have as fine a high color as any painted Jezebel in all this
place, be she never so bedaubed."

"But," said Lord Orville, "the difference of natural and of artificial color,
seems to me very easily discerned; that of Nature, is mottled, and varying;
that of art, set, and too smooth; it wants that animation, that glow, that
indescribable something which, even now that I see it, wholly surpasses all my
powers of expression."

"Your Lordship," said Sir Clement, "is universally acknowledged to be a
connoisseur in beauty."

"And you, Sir Clement," returned he, "an enthusiast."

"I am proud to own it," cried Sir Clement; "in such a cause, and before such
objects, enthusiasm is simply the consequence of not being blind."

"Pr'ythee a truce with all this palavering," cried the Captain, "the women are
vain enough already; no need for to puff 'em up more."

"We must all submit to the commanding officer," said Sir Clement, "therefore
let us call another subject. Pray, Ladies, how have you been entertained with
the play?"

"Want of entertainment," said Mrs. Mirvan, "is its least fault; but I own
there are objections to it, which I should be glad to see removed."

"I could have ventured to answer for the Ladies," said Lord Orville, "since I
am sure this is not a play that can be honored with their approbation."

"What, I suppose it is not sentimental enough!" cried the Captain, "or else
it is too good for them; for I Will maintain it is one of the best comedies in the
language, and has more wit in one scene, than there is in all the new plays put
together."

"For my part," said Mr. Lovel, "I confess I seldom listen to the players: one
has so much to do, in looking about, and finding out one's acquaintance, that,
really, one has no time to mind the stage. Pray, -- (most affectedly fixing his
eyes upon a diamond-ring on his little finger) pray -- what was the play
tonight?"

"Why, what the D -- l," cried the Captain, "do you come to the play, without
knowing what it is?

"O yes, Sir, yes, very frequently; I have no time to read play-bills; one
merely comes to meet one's friends; and show that one's alive."

"Ha, ha, ha! -- and so," cried the Captain, "it costs you five shillings a
night, just to show that you're alive! Well, faith, my friends should all think
me dead and under ground, before I Would be at the expense for 'em. Howsomever,
this here you may take from me; -- they will find you out fast enough, if you have
any thing to give 'em. And so you have been here all this time, and don't know
what the play was?"

"Why, really, Sir, a play requires so much attention, -- it is scarcely
possible to keep awake, if one listens; -- for, indeed, by the time it is
evening, one has been so fatigued, with dining, -- or wine, -- or the house, --
or studying, -- that it is -- it is perfectly an impossibility. But, now I
think of it, I believe I have a bill in my pocket; O, ay, here it is -- Love
for Love, ay, -- true, -- ha, ha, -- how could I be so stupid!

"O, easily enough as to that, I warrant you," said the Captain; "but, by my
soul, this is one of the best jokes I ever heard! Come to a play, and not know
what it is! -- Why, I suppose you would n't have found it out, if they had
fob'd you off with a scraping of fiddlers, or an opera? -- Ha! ha! ha! -- why
now, I should have thought you might have taken some notice of one Mr. Tattle
that is in this play?

This sarcasm, which caused a general smile, made him color: but, turning to
the Captain with a look of conceit, which implied that he had a retort ready,
he said, "Pray, Sir, give me leave to ask, -- what do you think of one Mr. Ben,
who is also in this play?

The Captain, regarding him with the utmost contempt, answered in a loud voice,
"Think of him! -- why I think he is a man!" And then, staring full in his face,
he struck his cane on the ground, with a violence that made him start. He did
not, however, choose to take any notice of this; but, having bit his nails some
time, in manifest confusion, he turned very quick to me, and, in a sneering
tone of voice, said, "For my part, I was most struck with the country young
lady, Miss Prue; pray what do you think of her, Ma'am?"

"Indeed, Sir," cried I, very much provoked, "I think -- that is, I do not
think any thing about her."

"Well, really, Ma'am, you prodigiously surprise me! -- mais, apparemment ce
n'est qu'un facon a parler? -- though I should beg your pardon, for probably
you do not understand French?"

I made no answer, for I thought his rudeness intolerable; but Sir Clement,
with great warmth, said, "I am surprised that you can suppose such an object as
Miss Prue would engage the attention of Miss Anville even for a moment."

"O, Sir," returned this fop, it is the first character in the piece! -- so well
drawn, -- so much the thing! -- such true country-breeding, -- such rural
ignorance! -- ha! ha! ha! -- it is most admirably hit off, 'pon honor!"

I could almost have cried, that such impertinence should be levelled at me;
and yet, chagrined as I was, I could never behold Lord Orville and this man at
the same time, and feel any regret for the cause I had given of displeasure.

"The only character in the play," said Lord Orville, "worthy of being
mentioned to these ladies is Angelica."

"Angelica," cried Sir Clement, "is a noble girl; she tries her lover severely,
but she rewards him generously."

"Yet, in a trial so long," said Mrs. Mirvan, "there seems rather too much
consciousness of her power."

"Since my opinion has the sanction of Mrs. Mirvan's," added Lord Orville," "I
will venture to say, that Angelica bestows her hand rather with the air of a
benefactress, than with the tenterness of a mistress. Generosity without
delicacy, like wit without judgment, generally gives as much pain as pleasure.
The uncertainty in which she keeps Valentine, and her manner of trifling with
his temper, give no very favorable idea of her own."

"Well, my Lord," said Mr. Lovel, "it must, however, be owned, that uncertainty
is not the ton among our ladies at present; nay, indeed, I think they say,
though, faith," taking a pinch of snuff, "I hope it is not true -- but they
say, that we now are most shy and backward."

The curtain then drew up, and our conversation ceased. Mr. Lovel finding we
chose to attend to the players, lest the box. How strange it is, Sir, that this
man, not contented with the large share of foppery and nonsense which he has
from nature, should think proper to affect yet more! for what he faid of Tattle
and of Miss Prue, convinced me that he really had listened to the play, though
he was so ridiculous and foolish as to pretend ignorance.

But how malicicious and impertinent in this creature to talk to me in such a
manner! I am sure I hope I shall never see him again. I should have despised
him heartily as a fop, had he never spoken to me at at all; but now, that he
thinks proper to resent his supposed ill usage, I am really quite afraid of him.

The entertainment was, The Deuce is in him, which Lord Orville observed to be
the most finished and elegant petite piece that was ever written in English.

In our way home, Mrs. Mirvan put me into some consternation, by saying it was
evident, from the resentment which this Mr. Lovel harbors of my conduct, that
he would think it a provocation sufficiently important for a duel, if his
courage equalled his wrath.

I am terrified at the very idea. Good Heaven! that a man so weak and frivolous
should be so revengeful! However! if bravery would have excited him to affront
Lord Orville, how much reason have I to rejoice, that cowardice makes him
contented with venting his spleen upon me! But we shall leave town soon, and, I
hope, see him no more.

It was some consolation to me, to hear, from Miss Mirvan, that, while he was
speaking to me so cavalierly, Lord Orville regarded him with great indignation.

But, really, I think there ought to be a book, of the laws and customs
a-la-mode, presented to all young people, upon their first introduction into
public company.

To night we go to the opera, where I expect very great pleasure. We shall have
the same party as at the play; for Lord Orville said he should be there, and
would look for us.

LETTER XXI.
Evelina in continuation.
I HAVE a volume to write, of the adventures of yesterday.

In the afternoon, -- at Berry Hill, I should have said the evening, for it was
almost six o'clock, -- while Miss Mirvan and I were dressing for the opera, and
in high spirits, from the expectation of great entertainment and pleasure, we
heard a carriage stop at the door, and concluded that Sir Clement Willoughby,
with his usual assiduity, was come to attend us to the Hay-market; but, in a
few moments, what was our surprise, to see our chamber door flung open, and the
two Miss Branghtons enter the room! They advanced to me with great familiarity,
saying, "How do you do, cousin? -- so we have caught you at the glass! -- well,
I Am determined I Will tell my brother of that!"

Miss Mirvan, who had never before seen them, and could not, at first, imagine
who they were, looked so much astonished, that I was ready to laugh myself,
till the eldest said, "We Are come to take you to the opera, Miss; papa and my
brother are below, and we are to call for your grand-mama as we go along."

"I am very sorry," answered I, "that you should have taken so much trouble, as
I am engaged already."

"Engaged! Lord, Miss, never mind that," cried the youngest, "this young lady
will make your excuses, I dare say; it is only doing as one would be done by,
you know."

"Indeed, Ma'am," said Miss Mirvan, "I shall myself be very sorry to be
deprived of Miss Anville's company this evening."

"Well, Miss, that is not so very good-natured in you," said Miss Branghton,
"considering we only come to give our cousin pleasure; it is no good to us; it is
all upon her account; for we came, I don't know how much round about to take
her up."

"I am extremely obliged to you," said I, "and very sorry you have lost so much
time; but I cannot possibly help it, for I engaged myself without knowing you
would call."

"Lord, what signifies that?" said Miss Polly, "you're no old maid, and so you
need n't be so very formal: besides, I dare say those you are engaged to, a'n't
half so near related to you as we are."

"I must beg you not to press me any further, for I assure you it is not in my
power to attend you."

"Why we came all out of the city on purpose: besides, your grand-mama expects
you; -- and, pray, what are we to say to her?"

"Tell her, if you please, that I am much concerned, -- but that I am
pre-engaged."

"And who to?" demanded the abrupt Miss Branghton.

"To Mrs. Mirvan, -- and a large party."

"And, pray, what are you all going to do, that it would be such a mighty
matter for you to come along with us?"

"We are going to -- to the opera."

"O dear, if that be all, why cannot we go all together?"

I was extremely disconcerted at this forward and ignorant behavior, and yet
their rudeness very much lessened my concern at refusing them. Indeed, their
dress was such as would have rendered their scheme of accompanying our party
impracticable, even if I had desired it; and this, as they did not themselves
find out, I was obliged, in terms the least mortifying I could think of, to
tell them.

They were very much chagrined, and asked where I should sit?

"In the pit," answered I.

"In the pit!" repeated Miss Branghton, "well, really, I must own I should
never have supposed that my gown was not good enough for the pit: but come,
Polly, let us go; if Miss does not think us fine enough for her, why to be sure
she may choose."

Surprised at this ignorance, I would have explained to them that the pit at
the opera required the same dress as the boxes; but they were so much
affronted, they would not hear me, and, in great displeasure, left the room,
saying they would not have troubled me, only they thought I should not be so
proud with my own relations, and that they had at least as good a right to my
company as strangers.

I endeavored to apologize, and would have sent a long message to Madame
Duval; but they hastened away without listening to me; and I could not follow
them down stairs, because I was not dressed. The last words I heard them say,
were, "Well, her grand-mama will be in a fine passion, that is one good thing."

Though I was extremely mad at this visit, yet I so heartily rejoiced at their
going, that I would not suffer myself to think gravely about it.

Soon after, Sir Clement actually came, and we all went down stairs. Mrs.
Mirvan ordered tea; and we were engaged in a very lively conversation, when the
servant announced Madame Duval, who instantly followed him into the room.

Her face was the color of scarlet, and her eyes sparkled with fury. She came
up to me with a hasty step, saying, "So, Miss, you refuses to come to me, do
you? And pray who are you, to dare to disobey me?"

I was quite frightened; -- I made no answer; -- I even attempted to rise, and
could not, but sat still, mute and motionless.

Every body, but Miss Mirvan, seemed in the utmost astonishment; and the
Captain, raising and approaching Madame Duval, with a voice of authority, said,
"Why how now, Mrs. Turkey Cock, what is put you into this here fluster?"

"It Is nothing to you," answered she, "so you may as well hold your tongue, for
I sha'n't be called to no account by you, I assure you."

"There you're out, Madam Fury," returned he, "for you must know I never suffer
any body to be in a passion in my house, but myself."

"But you shall," cried she, in a great rage, "for I Will be in as great a
passion as ever I please, without asking your leave, so don't give yourself no
more airs about it. And as for you, Miss," again advancing to me "I order you
to follow me this moment, or else I Will make you repent it all your life." And,
with these words, she flung out of the room.

I was in such extreme terror at being addressed and threatened in a manner to
which I am so wholly unused, that I almost thought I should have fainted.

"Don't be alarmed, my love," cried Mrs. Mirvan, "but stay where you are, and I
will follow Madame Duval, and try to bring her to reason."

Miss Mirvan took my hand, and most kindly endeavored to raise my spirits: Sir
Clement, too, approached me, with an air so interested in my distress, that I
could not but feel myself obliged to him; and, taking my other hand, said, "For
Heaven's sake, my dear Madam, compose yourself; surely the violence of such a
wretch ought merely to move your contempt: she can have no right, I imagine, to
lay her commands upon you, and I only wish that you would allow me leave to
speak to her."

"O no! not for the world! indeed, I believe, -- I am afraid -- I had better
follow her."

"Follow her! Good God, my dear Miss Anville, would you trust yourself with a
mad woman? for what else can you call a creature whose passions are so
insolent? No, no; send her word at once to leave the house, and tell her you
desire that she will never see you again."

"O Sir! you don't know who you talk of! -- it would ill become me to send
Madame Duval such a message."

"But why," cried he, (looking very inquisitive,) " why should you scruple to
treat her as she deserves?"

I then found that his aim was to discover the nature of her connection with
me; but I felt so much ashamed of my near relationship to her, that I could not
persuade myself to answer him, and only entreated that he would leave her to
Mrs. Mirvan, who just then entered.

Before she could speak to me, the Captain called out, "Well, Goody, what have
you done with Madame French? is she cooled a little? 'cause, if she be n't,
I Have just thought of a most excellent device to bring her to."

"My dear Evelina," said Mrs. Mirvan, "I have been vainly endeavoring to
appease her; I pleaded your engagement, and promised your future attendance:
but I am sorry to say, my love, that I fear her rage will end in a total breach
(which I think you had better avoid) if she is any further opposed."

"Then I will go to her, Madam," cried I, "and, indeed, it is now no matter,
for I should not be able to recover my spirits sufficiently to enjoy much
pleasure any where this evening."

Sir Clement began a very warm expostulation, and entreaty, that I would not
go; but I begged him to desist, and told him, very honestly, that, if my
compliance were not indispensably necessary, I should require no persuasion to
stay. He then took my hand, to lead me down stairs; but the Captain desired him
to be quiet, saying he would 'squire me himself, "because," he added exultingly
rubbing his hands,) "I have a wipe ready for the old lady, which may serve her
to chew as she goes along."

We found her in the parlour. "O, you're come at last, Miss, are you? -- fine
airs you give yourself, indeed! -- ma foi, if you had n't come, you might have
stayed, I assure you, and have been a beggar for your pains."

"Heyday, Madam," cried the Captain, prancing forward, with a look of great
glee,) "what, a'n't you got out of that there passion yet? why then, I Will tell
you what to do to cool yourself; call upon your old friend, Monsieur Slippery,
who was with you at Ranelagh, and give my service to him, and tell him, if he
sets any store by your health, that I desire he will give you such another souse
as he did before: he will know what I mean, and I Will warrant you he will do it for
my sake."

"Let him, if he dares!" cried Madame Duval; "but I sha'n't stay to answer you
no more; you are a vulgar fellow, -- and so, child, let us leave him to
himself."

"Hark ye, Madam," cried the Captain, "you would best not call names, because, do you
see, if you do, I shall make bold to show you the door."

She changed color, and, saying, " Pardie, I can show it myself," hurried out
of the room, and I followed her into a hackney-coach. But, before we drove off,
the Captain, looking out of the parlour window, called out, "Do You hear, Madam,
-- don't forget my message to Monsieur."

You will believe, our ride was not the most agreeable in the world; indeed, it
would be difficult to say which was least pleased, Madame Duval or me, though
the reasons of our discontent were so different: however, Madame Duval soon got
the start of me; for we had hardly turned out of Queen-Anne-street, when a man,
running full speed, stopped the coach. He came up to the window, and I saw he was
the Captain's servant. He had a broad grin on his face, and panted for breath.
Madame Duval demanded his business; "Madam," answered he, "my master desires
his compliments to you, and -- and -- and he says he wishes it well over with
you. He! he! he! -- "

Madame Duval instantly darted forward, and gave him a violent blow on the
face; "Take that back for your answer, sirrah," cried she, "and learn to grin
at your betters another time. Coachman, drive on!"

The servant was in a violent passion, and swore terribly; but we were soon out
of hearing.

The rage of Madame Duval was greater than ever, and she inveighed against the
Captain with such fury, that I was even apprehensive she would have returned to
his house, purposely to reproach him, which she repeatedly threatened to do;
nor would she, I believe, have hesitated a moment, but that, notwithstanding
her violence, he has really made her afraid of him.

When we came to her lodgings, we found all the Branghtons in the passage,
impatiently waiting for us, with the door open.

"Only see, here is Miss!" cried the brother.

"Well, I declare I thought as much!" said the younger sister.

"Why, Miss," said Mr. Branghton, "I think you might as well have come with
your cousins at once; it is throwing money in the dirt, to pay two coaches for
one fare."

"Lord, father," cried the son, "make no words about that; for I Will pay for the
coach that Miss had."

"O, I know very well," answered Mr. Branghton, "that you're always more ready
to spend than to earn."

I then interfered, and begged that I might myself be allowed to pay the fare,
as the expense was incurred upon my account; they all said no, and proposed
that the same coach should carry us on to the opera.

While this passed, the Miss Branghtons were examining my dress, which, indeed,
was very improper for my company; and, as I was extremely unwilling to be so
conspicuous amongst them, I requested Madame Duval to borrow a hat or bonnet
for me of the people of the house. But she never wears either herself, and
thinks them very English and barbarous; therefore she insisted that I should go
full dressed, as I had prepared myself for the pit, though I made many
objections.

We were then all crowded into the same carriage; but when we arrived at the
opera-house, I contrived to pay the coachman. They made a great many speeches;
but Mr. Branghton's reflection had determined me not to be indebted to him.

If I had not been too much chagrined to laugh, I should have been extremely
diverted at their ignorance of whatever belongs to an opera. In the first
place, they could not tell at what door we ought to enter, and we wandered
about for some time, without knowing which way to turn: they did not choose to
apply to me, though I was the only person of the party who had ever before been
at an opera; because they were unwilling to suppose that their country cousin,
as they were pleased to call me, should be better acquainted with any London
public place than themselves. I was very indifferent and careless upon this
subject, but not a little uneasy at finding my dress, so different from that of
the company to which I belonged, attracted general notice and observation.

In a short time however we arrived at one of the door-keeper's bars. Mr.
Branghton demanded for what part of the house they took money? They answered
the pit, and regarded us all with great earnestness. The son then advancing,
said, "Sir, if you please, I beg that I may treat Miss."

"We'll settle that another time," answered Mr. Branghton, and put down a
guinea.

Two tickets of admission were given to him.

Mr. Branghton, in his turn, now stared at the doorkeeper, and demanded what
he meant by giving him only two tickets for a guinea?

"Only two, Sir!" said the man, "why don't you know that the tickets are half a
guinea each?"

"Half a guinea each!" repeated Mr. Branghton, "why I never heard of such a
thing in my life! And pray, Sir, how many will they admit?"

"Just as usual, Sir, one person each."

"But one person for half a guinea! -- why I only want to sit in the pit,
friend."

"Had not the Ladies better sit in the gallery, Sir; for they will hardly choose
to go into the pit with their hats on?"

"O, as to that," cried Miss Branghton, "if our hats are too high, we'll take
them off when we get in. I sha'n't mind it, for I did my hair on purpose."

Another party then approaching, the doorkeeper coul no longer attend to Mr.
Branghton, who, taking up the guinea, told him it should be long enough before
he would see it again, and walked away.

The young ladies, in some confusion, expressed their surprise, that their papa
should not know the opera prices, which for their parts they had read in the
papers a thousand times.

"The price of stocks" said he, "is enough for me to see after; and I took it
for granted it was the same thing here as at the playhouse."

"I knew well enough what the price was," said the son, "but I would not speak,
because I thought perhaps they would take less, as we are such a large party."

The sisters both laughed very contemptuously at this idea, and asked him if he
ever heard of people's abating any thing at a public place?

"I don't know whether I have or no," answered he, "but I Am sure if they would,
you would like it so much the worse."

"Very true, Tom, cried Mr. Branghton; "tell a woman that any thing is
reasonable, and she will be sure to hate it."

"Well," said Miss Polly, "I hope that Aunt and Miss will be of our side, for
Papa always takes part with Tom."

"Come, come," cried Madam Duval, "if you stand talking here, we sha'n't get no
place at all."

Mr. Branghton then enquired the way to the gallery, and, when we came to the
doorkeeper, demanded what was to pay.

"The usual price, Sir," said the man.

"Then give me change," cried Mr. Branghton, again putting down his guinea.

"For how many, Sir?"

"Why -- let us see, -- for six."

"For six, Sir? why you have given me but a guinea."

" But a guinea! why how much would you have? I suppose it i'n't half a guinea
apiece here too?"

"No, Sir, only five shillings."

Mr. Branghton again took up his unfortunate guinea, and protested he would
submit to no such imposition. I then proposed that we should return home, but
Madame Duval would not consent, and we were conducted, by a woman who sells
books of the Opera, to another gallery-door, where, after some disputing, Mr.
Branghton at last paid, and we all went up stairs.

Madame Duval complained very much of the trouble of going so high, but Mr.
Branghton desired her not to hold the place too cheap, "for, whatever you may
think," cried he, "I assure you I paid pit price; so don't suppose I come here
to save my money."

"Well, to be sure," said Miss Branghton, "there is no judging of a place by the
outside, else, I must needs say, there is nothing very extraordinary in the
staircase."

But, when we entered the gallery, their amazement and disappointment became
general. For a few instants, they looked at one another without speaking, and
then they all broke silence at once.

"Lord, Papa, exclaimed Miss Polly, "why you have brought us to the
one-shilling gallery!"

"I Will be glad to give you two shillings, though," answered he, "to pay. I was
never so fooled out of my money before, since the hour of my birth. Either the
door-keeper's a knave, or this is the greatest imposition that ever was put
upon the public."

" Ma foi," cried Madame Duval, "I never sat in such a mean place in all my
life; -- why it is as high! -- we sha'n't see nothing."

"I thought, at the time," said Mr. Branghton, "that three shillings was an
exorbitant price for a place in the gallery, but as we'd been asked so much
more at the other doors, why I paid it without many words; but then, to be
sure, thinks I, it never can be like any other gallery, -- we shall see some
crinkum-crankum or other for our money; -- but I find it is as arrant a take-in
as ever I met with."

"Why it is as like the twelvepenny gallery at Drury Lane," cried the son, "as
two peace are one to another. I never knew father so bit before."

"Lord, "said Miss Branghton, "I thought it would have been quite a fine place,
-- all over I don't know what, -- and done quite in taste."

In this manner they continued to express their dissatisfaction till the
curtain drew up; after which, their observations were very curious. They made
no allowance for the customs, or even for the language of another country, but
formed all their remarks upon comparisons with the English theater.

Notwithstanding all my vexation at having been forced into a party so very
disagreeabl, and that, too, from one so much ^so very much the contrary -- yet,
would they have suffered me to listen, I should have forgotten every thing
unpleasant, and selt nothing but delight, in hearing the sweet voice of Signor
Millico, the first singer; but they tormented me with continual talking."

"What a jabbering they make!" cried Mr. Branghton; "there is no knowing a word
they say. Pray what is the reason they cannot as well sing in English? -- but I
suppose the fine folks would not like it, if they could understand it."

"How unnatural their action is!" said the son; "why now who ever saw an
Englishman put himself in such out-of-the-way postures?"

"For my part," said Miss Polly, "I think it is very pretty, only I don't know
what it means."

"Lord, what does that signify?" cried her sister; "may not one like a thing
without being so very particular? -- You may see that Miss likes it, and I
don't suppose she knows more of the matter than we do."

A gentleman, soon after, was so obliging as to make room in the front row for
Miss Branghton and me. We had no sooner seated ourselves, than Miss Branghton
exclaimed, "Good gracious! only see! -- why, Polly, all the people in the pit
are without hats, dressed like any thing!"

"Lord, so they are, cried Miss Polly, "well, I never saw the like! -- it is
worth coming to the Opera if one saw nothing else."

I was then able to distinguish the happy party I had left; and I saw that Lord
Orville had seated himself next to Mrs. Mirvan. Sir Clement had his eyes
perpetually cast toward the five shilling gallery, where I suppose he
concluded that we were seated; however, before the Opera was over, I have
reason to believe that he had discovered me, high and distant as I was from
him. Probably he distinguished me by my head-dress.

At the end of the first act, as the green curtain dropped, to prepare for the
dance, they imagined that the Opera was done, and Mr. Branghton expressed great
indignation that he had been tricked out of his money with so little trouble.
"Now if any Englishman was to do such an impudent thing as this," said he, "why
he would be pelted; -- but here, one of these outlandish gentry may do just what he
pleases, and come on, and squeak out a song or two, and then pocket your money
without further ceremony."

However, so determined he was to be dissatisfied, that, before the conclusion
of the third act, he found still more fault with the Opera for being too long,
and wondered whether they thought their singing good enough to serve us for
supper.

During the symphony of a song of Signor Millico's, in the second act, young
Mr. Branghton said, "It Is my belief that that fellow's going to sing another
song! -- why there is nothing but singing! -- I wonder when they will speak."

This song, which was slow and pathetic, caught all my attention, and I leaned
my head forward to avoid hearing their observations, that I might listen
without interruption; but, upon turning round, when the song was over, I found
that I was the object of general diversion to the whole party; for the Miss
Branghtons were tittering, and the two gentlemen making signs and faces at me,
implying their contempt of my affectation.

This discovery determined me to appear as inattentive as themselves; but I was
very much provoked at being thus prevented enjoying the only pleasure, which,
in such a party, was within my power.

"So, Miss," said Mr. Branghton, "you're quite in the fashion, I see; -- so you
like Operas? well, I Am not so polite; I cannot like nonsense, let it be never so
much the taste."

"But pray, Miss, said the son, "what makes that fellow look so doleful while
he is singing?"

"Probably because the character he performs is in distress."

"Why then I think he might as well let alone singing till he is in better cue:
it is out of all nature for a man to be piping when he is in distress. For my
part, I never sing but when I Am merry; yet I love a song as well as most
people."

When the curtain dropped, they all rejoiced.

"How do you like it? -- and how do you like it?" passed from one to another
with looks of the utmost contempt. "As for me," said Mr. Branghton, "they have
caught me once, but if ever they do again, I Will give 'em leave to sing me to
Bedlam for my pains: for such a heap of stuff never did I hear; there is n't
one ounce of sense in the whole Opera, nothing but one continued squeaking and
squalling from beginning to end."

"If I had been in the pit," said Madame Duval, "I should have liked it vastly,
for music is my passion; but sitting in such a place as this, is quite
unbearable."

Miss Branghton, looking at me, declared, that she was not genteel enough to
admire it.

Miss Polly confessed, that, if they would but sing English, she should like it
very well.

The brother wished he could raise a riot in the house, because then he might
get his money again.

And, finally, they all agreed, that it was monstrous dear.

During the last dance, I perceived, standing near the gallery-door, Sir
Clement Willoughby. I was extremely vexed, and would have given the world to
have avoided being seen by him: my chief objection was, from the apprehension
that he would hear Miss Branghton call me cousin. -- I fear you will think this
London journey has made me grow very proud, but indeed this family is so
low-bred and vulgar, that I should be equally ashamed of such a connection in
the country, or any where. And really I had already been so much chagrined that
Sir Clement had been a witness of Madame Duval's power over me, that I could
not bear to be exposed to any further mortification.

As the seats cleared, by parties going away, Sir Clement approached nearer to
us; the Miss Branghtons observed with surprise, what a fine gentleman was come
into the gallery, and they gave me great reason to expect, that they would
endeavor to attract his notice, by familiarity with me, whenever he should
join us; and so, I formed a sort of plan, to prevent any conversation. I am
afraid you will think it wrong; and so I do myself, now, -- but, at the time, I
only considered how I might avoid immediate humiliation.

As soon as he was within two seats of us, he spoke to me, "I am very happy,
Miss Anville, to have sound you, for the Ladies below have each an humble
attendant, and therefore I am come to offer my services here."

"Why then," cried I, (not without hesitating) "if you please, -- I will join
them."

"Will you allow me the honor of conducting you?" cried he eagerly; and,
instantly taking my hand, he would have marched away with me: but I turned to
Madame Duval, and said, "As our party is so large, Madam, if you will give me
leave, I will go down to Mrs. Mirvan, that I may not crowd you in the coach."

And then, without waiting for an answer, I suffered Sir Clement to hand me out
of the gallery.

Madame Duval, I doubt not, will be very angry, and so I am with myself, now,
and therefore I cannot be surprised: but Mr. Branghton, I am sure, will easily
comfort himself, in having escaped the additional coach expense of carrying me
to Queen-Ann-street; as to his daughters, they had no time to speak, but I saw
they were in utter amazement.

My intention was to join Mrs. Mirvan, and accompany her home. Sir Clement was
in high spirits and good humor; and, all the way we went, I was fool enough to
rejoice in secret at the success of my plan; nor was it till I got down stairs,
and amidst the servants, that any difficulty occurred to me of meeting with my
friends.

I then asked Sir Clement how I should contrive to acquaint Mrs. Mirvan that I
had left Madame Duval?

"I fear it will be almost impossible to find her, answered he; "but you can
have no objection to permitting me to see you safe home."

He then desired his servant, who was waiting, to order his chariot to draw up.

This quite startled me; I turned to him hastily, and said that I could not
think of going away without Mrs. Mirvan.

"But how can we meet with her?" cried he; "you will not choose to go into the
pit yourself; I cannot send a servant there; and it is impossible for me to go
and leave you alone?"

The truth of this was indisputable, and totally silenced me. Yet, as soon as I
could recollect myself, I determined not to go in his chariot, and told him I
believed I had best return to my party up stairs.

He would not hear of this; and earnestly entreated me not to withdraw the
trust I had reposed in him.

While he was speaking, I saw Lord Orville, with several ladies and gentlemen,
coming from the pit passage: unfortunately, he saw me too, and, leaving his
company, advanced instantly toward me, and, with an air and voice of surprise,
said, "Good God, do I see Miss Anville!"

I now most severely felt the folly of my plan, and the aukwardness of my
situation; however, I hastened to tell him, though in a hesitating manner, that
I was waiting for Mrs. Mirvan! but what was my disappointment, when he
acquainted me that she was already gone home!

I was inexpressibly distressed; to suffer Lord Orville to think me satisfied
with the single protection of Sir Clement Willoughby, I could not bear; yet I
was more than ever averse to returning to a party which I dreaded his seeing: I
stood some moments in suspense, and could not help exclaiming, "Good Heaven,
what can I do!"

"Why, my dear Madam," cried Sir Clement, "should you be thus uneasy? -- you
will reach Queen-Ann street almost as soon as Mrs. Mirvan, and I am sure you
cannot doubt being as safe."

I made no answer, and Lord Orville then said, "My coach is here; and my
servants are ready to take any commands Miss Anville will honor me with for
them. I shall myself go home in a chair, and therefore -- "

How grateful did I feel for a proposal so considerate, and made with so much
delicacy! I should gladly have accepted it, had I been permitted, but Sir
Clement would not let him even finish his speech; he interrupted him with
evident displeasure, and said, "My Lord, my own chariot is now at the door."

And just then the servant came, and told him the carriage was ready. He begged
to have the honor of conducting me to it, and would have taken my hand, but I
drew it back, saying, "I cannot -- I cannot indeed! pray go by yourself -- and as
to me, let me have a chair."

"Impossible!" (cried he with vehemence) "I cannot think of trusting you with
strange chairmen, -- I cannot answer it to Mrs. Mirvan, -- come, dear Madam, we
shall be home in five minutes."

Again I stood suspended. With what joy would I then have compromised with my
pride, to have been once more with Madame Duval and the Branghtons, provided I
had not met with Lord Orville! However, I flatter myself that he not only saw,
but pitied my embarrassment, for he said, in a tone of voice unusually
softened, "To offer my services in the presence of Sir Clement Willoughby would
be superfluous; but I hope I need not assure Miss Anville, how happy it would
make me to be of the least use to her."

I courtsied my thanks. Sir Clement with great eagerness pressed me to go; and
while I was thus uneasily deliberating what to do, the dance, I suppose,
finished, for the people crowded down stairs. Had Lord Orville then repeated
his offer, I should have accepted it, notwithstanding Sir Clement's repugnance;
but I fancy he thought it would be impertinent. In a very few minutes I heard
Madame Duval's voice, as she descended from the gallery; "Well," cried I,
hastily, "if I must go -- ". I stopped, but Sir Clement immediately handed me
into his chariot, called out "Queen-Ann-street," and then jumped in himself.
Lord Orville, with a bow and a half smile, wished me good night.

My concern was so great, at being seen and left by Lord Orville in so strange
a situation, that I should have been best pleased to have remained wholly
silent during our ride home: but Sir Clement took care to prevent that.

He began by making many complaints of my unwillingness to trust myself with
him, and begged to know what could be the reason. This question so much
embarrassed me, that I could not tell what to answer, but only said, that I was
sorry to have taken up so much of his time.

"O Miss Anville," (cried he, taking my hand) "if you knew with what transport
I would dedicate to you not only the present but all the future time allotted
to me, you would not injure me by making such an apology."

I could not think of a word to say to this, nor to a great many other equally
fine speeches with which he ran on, though I would fain have withdrawn my hand,
and made almost continual attempts; but in vain, for he actually grasped it
between both his, without any regard to my resistance.

Soon after, he said that he believed the coachman was going the wrong way, and
he called to his servant, and gave him directions. Then addressing himself to
me, "How often, how assiduously have I sought an opportunity of speaking to
you, without the presence of that brute Captain Mirvan! Fortune has now kindly
favored me with one, and permit me," (again seizing my hand) "permit me to use
it, in telling you that I adore you!"

I was quite thunderstruck at this abrupt and unexpected declaration. For some
moments I was silent, but, when I recovered from my surprise, I said, "Indeed,
Sir, if you were determined to make me repent leaving my own party so
foolishly, you have very well succeeded."

"My dearest life," cried he, "is it possible you can be so cruel? Can your
nature and your countenance be so totally opposite? Can the sweet bloom upon
those charming cheeks, which appears as much the result of good humor as of
beauty -- "

"O, Sir, cried I, interrupting him, "this is very fine; but I had hoped we had
had enough of this sort of conversation at the Ridotto, and I did not expect
you would so soon resume it."

"What I then said, my sweet reproacher, was the effect of a mistaken, a
profane idea, that your understanding held no competition with your beauty;
but now, now that I find you equally incomparable in both, all words, all
powers of speech, are too feeble to express the admiration I feel of your
excellencies."

"Indeed," cried I, "if you did not talk in one language, and think in another,
you would never suppose that I could give credit to praise so very much above
my desert."

This speech, which I made very gravely, occasioned still stronger
protestations, which he continued to pour forth, and I continued to disclaim,
till I began to wonder that we were not in Queen-Ann-Street, and begged he
would desire the coachman to drive faster.

"And does this little moment," cried he, "which is the first of happiness I
have ever known, does it already appear so very long to you?"

"I am afraid the man has mistaken the way," answered I, "or else we should ere
now have been at our journey's end. I must beg you will speak to him."

"And can you think me so much my own enemy? -- if my good genius has inspired
the man with a desire of prolonging my happiness, can you expect that I should
counteract its indulgence?"

I now began to apprehend that he had himself ordered the man to go a wrong
way, and I was so much alarmed at the idea, that, the very instant it occurred
to me, I let down the glass, and made a sudden effort to open the chariot-door
myself, with a view of jumping into the street; but he caught hold of me,
exclaiming, "For Heaven's sake, what is the matter?"

"I -- I don't know," cried I, (quite out of breath) "but I am sure the man
goes wrong, and, if you will not speak to him, I am determined I will get out
myself."

"You amaze me," answered he, (still holding me) "I cannot imagine what you
apprehend. Surely you can have no doubts of my honor?"

He drew me toward him as he spoke. I was dreadfully frightened, and could
hardly say, "No, Sir, no, -- none at all, -- only Mrs. Mirvan, -- I think she
will be uneasy."

"Whence this alarm, my dearest angel? -- What can you fear? -- my life is at
your devotion, and can you, then, doubt my protection?"

And so saying, he passionately kissed my hand.

Never, in my whole life, have I been so terrified. I broke forcibly from him,
and, putting my head out of the window, called aloud to the man to stop. Where
we then were I knew not, but I saw not a human being, or I should have called
for help.

Sir Clement, with great earnestness, endeavored to appease and compose me;
"If you do not intend to murder me," cried I, "for mercy's, for pity's sake,
let me get out!"

"Compose your spirits, my dearest life," cried he, "and I will do every thing
you would have me." And then he called to the man himself, and bid him make
haste to Queen-Ann-Street. "This stupid fellow," continued he, "has certainly
mistaken my orders; but I hope you are now fully satisfied."

I made no answer, but kept my head at the window, watching which way he drove,
but without any comfort to myself, as I was quite unacquainted with either the
right or the wrong.

Sir Clement now poured forth abundant protestations of honor, and assurances
of respect, entreating my pardon for having offended me, and beseeching my good
opinion: but I was quite silent, having too much apprehension to make
reproaches, and too much anger to speak without.

In this manner we went through several streets, till at last, to my great
terror, he suddenly ordered the man to stop, and said, "Miss Anville, we are
now within twenty yards of your house; but I cannot bear to part with you, till
you generously forgive me for the offense you have taken, and promise not to
make it known to the Mirvans."

I hesitated between fear and indignation.

"Your reluctance to speak, redoubles my contrition for having displeased you,
since it shows the reliance I might have on a promise which you will not give
without consideration."

"I am very, very much distressed," cried I, "you ask a promise which you must
be sensible I ought not to grant, and yet dare not refuse."

"Drive on!" cried he to the coachman; -- "Miss Anville, I will not compel you;
I will exact no promise, but trust wholly to your generosity."

This rather softened me; which advantage he no sooner perceived, than he
determined to avail himself of, for he flung himself on his knees, and pleaded
with so much submission, that I was really obliged to forgive him, because his
humiliation made me quite ashamed: and, after that, he would not let me rest
till I gave him my word that I would not complain of him to Mrs. Mirvan.

My own folly and pride, which had put me in his power, were pleas which I
could not but attend to in his favor. However, I shall take very particular
care never to be again alone with him.

When, at last, we arrived at our house, I was so overjoyed, that I should
certainly have pardoned him then, if I had not before. As he handed me up
stairs, he scolded his servant aloud, and very angrily, for having gone so much
out of the way. Miss Mirvan ran out to meet me, -- and who should I see behind
her, but -- Lord Orville!

All my joy now vanished, and gave place to shame and confusion; for I could
not endure that he should know how long a time Sir Clement and I had been
together, since I was not at liberty to assign any reason for it.

They all expressed great satisfaction at seeing me, and said they had been
extremely uneasy and surprised that I was so long coming home, as they had
heard from Lord Orville that I was not with Madame Duval. Sir Clement, in an
affected passion, said that his booby of a servant had misunderstood his
orders, and was driving us to the upper end of Piccadilly. For my part, I only
colored, for though I would not forfeit my word, I yet disdained to confirm a
tale in which I had myself no belief.

Lord Orville, with great politeness, congratulated me that the troubles of the
evening had so happily ended, and said, that he had found it impossible to
return home, before he enquired after my safety.

In a very short time he took leave, and Sir Clement followed him. As soon as
they were gone, Mrs. Mirvan, though with great softness, blamed me for having
quitted Madame Duval. I assured her, and with truth, that for the future I
would be more prudent.

The adventures of the evening so much disconcerted me, that I could not sleep
all night. I am under the most cruel apprehensions, left Lord Orville should
suppose my being on the gallery-stairs with Sir Clement was a concerted scheme,
and even that our continuing so long together in his chariot, was with my
approbation, since I did not say a word on the subject, nor express any
dissatisfaction at the coachman's pretended blunder.

Yet, his coming hither to wait our arrival, though it seems to imply some
doubt, shows also some anxiety. Indeed Miss Mirvan says, that he appeared
extremely anxious, nay uneasy and impatient for my return. If I did not fear to
flatter myself, I should think it not impossible but that he had a suspicion of
Sir Clement's design, and was therefore concerned for my safety.

What a long letter is this! however, I shall not write many more from London,
for the Captain said this morning, that he would leave town on Tuesday next.
Madame Duval will dine here today, and then she is to be told his intention.

I am very much amazed that she accepted Mrs. Mirvan's invitation, as she was
in such wrath yesterday. I fear that today I shall myself be the principal
object of her displeasure; but I must submit patiently, for I cannot defend
myself.

Adieu, my dearest Sir. Should this letter be productive of any uneasiness to
you, more than ever shall I repent the heedless imprudence which it recites.

LETTER XXII.
Evelina in continuation.
Monday Morning, April 18.
MRS. Mirvan has just communicated to me an anecdote concerning Lord Orville,
which has much surprised, half pleased, and half pained me.

While they were sitting together during the Opera, he told her that he had
been greatly concerned at the impertinence which the young lady under her
protection had suffered from Mr. Lovel; but that he had the pleasure of
assuring her, she had no future disturbance to apprehend from him.

Mrs. Mirvan, with great eagerness, begged he would explain himself, and said
she hoped he had not thought so insignificant an affair worthy his serious
attention.

"There is nothing," answered he, "which requires more immediate notice than
impertinence, for it ever encroaches when it is tolerated." He then added, that
he believed he ought to apologize for the liberty he had taken of interfering,
but that, as he regarded himself in the light of a party concerned, from having
had the honor of dancing with Miss Anville, he could not possibly reconcile to
himself a patient neutrality.

He then proceeded to tell her, that he had waited upon Mr. Lovel the morning
after the play; that the visit had proved an amicable one, but the particulars
were neither entertaining nor necessary; he only assured her, Miss Anville
might be perfectly easy, since Mr. Lovel had engaged his honor never more to
mention, or even to hint at what had passed at Mrs. Stanley's assembly.

Mrs. Mirvan expressed her satisfaction at this conclusion, and thanked him for
his polite attention to her young friend.

"It would be needless," said he, "to request that this affair may never
transpire, since Mrs. Mirvan cannot but see the necessity of keeping it
inviolably secret; but I thought it incumbent upon me, as the young lady is
under your protection, to assure both you and her of Mr. Lovel's future
respect."

Had I known of this visit previous to Lord Orville's making it, what dreadful
uneasiness would it have cost me! Yet that he should so much interest himself
in securing me from offense, gives me, I must own, an internal pleasure greater
than I can express, for I feared he had too contemptuous an opinion of me, to
take any trouble upon my account. Though, after all, this interference might
rather be to satisfy his own delicacy, than from thinking well of me.

But how cool, how quiet is true courage! Who, from seeing Lord Orville at the
play, would have imagined his resentment would have hazarded his life? yet his
displeasure was evident, though his real bravery and his politeness equally
guarded him from entering into any discussion in our presence.

Madame Duval, as I expected, was most terribly angry yesterday; she scolded me
for I believe two hours, on account of having left her, and protested she had
been so much surprised at my going, without giving her time to answer, that she
hardly knew whether she was awake or asleep. But she assured me, that if ever I
did so again, she would never more take me into public. And she expressed an
equal degree of displeasure against Sir Clement, because he had not even spoken
to her, and because he was always of the Captain's side in an argument. The
Captain, as bound in honor, warmly defended him, and then followed a dispute
in the usual style.

After dinner, Mrs. Mirvan introduced the subject of our leaving London. Madame
Duval said she should stay a month or two longer. The Captain told her she was
welcome, but that he and his family should go into the country on Tuesday
morning.

A most disagreeable scene followed; Madame Duval insisted upon keeping me with
her; but Mrs. Mirvan said, that as I was actually engaged on a visit to Lady
Howard, who had only consented to my leaving her for a few days, she could not
think of returning without me.

Perhaps if the Captain had not interfered, the good-breeding and mildness of
Mrs. Mirvan might have had some effect upon Madame Duval; but he passes no
opportunity of provoking her, and therefore made so many gross and rude
speeches, all of which she retorted, that, in conclusion, she vowed she would
sooner go to law, in right of her relationship, than that I should be taken
away from her.

I heard this account from Mrs. Mirvan, who was so kindly considerate as to
give me a pretense for quitting the room, as soon as this dispute begun, lest
Madame Duval should refer to me, and insist on my obedience.

The final result of the conversation, was, that, to soften matters for the
present, Madame Duval should make one in the party for Howard Grove, whither we
are positively to go next Wednesday.

Mrs. Mirvan is now writing to Lady Howard, to excuse bringing this unexpected
guest, and to prevent the disagreeable surprise, which must, otherwise, attend
her reception. This dear lady seems eternally studying my happiness and
advantage.

Tonight we go to the Pantheon, which is the last diversion we shall partake
of in London, for tomorrow --

This moment, my dearest Sir, I have received your kind letter.

If you thought us too dissipated the first week, I almost fear to know what
you will think of us this second; -- however, the Pantheon this evening will
probably be the last public place which I shall ever see.

The assurance of your support and protection in regard to Madame Duval, though
what I never doubted, excites my utmost gratitude: how, indeed, cherished under
your roof, the happy object of your constant indulgence, how could I have borne
to become the slave of her tyrannical humors? -- pardon me that I speak so
hardly of her, but, whenever the idea of passing my days with her occurs to me,
the comparison which naturally follows, takes from me all that forbearance,
which, I believe, I owe her.

You are already displeased with Sir Clement: to be sure, then, his behavior
after the opera will not make his peace with you. Indeed, the more I reflect
upon it, the more angry I am. I was entirely in his power, and it was cruel in
him to cause me so much terror.

O my dearest Sir, were I but worthy the prayers and the wishes you offer for
me, the utmost ambition of my heart would be fully satisfied! but I greatly
fear you will find me, now that I am out of the reach of your assisting
prudence, more weak and imperfect than you could have expected.

I have not now time to write another word, for I must immediately hasten to
dress for the evening.

LETTER XXIII.
Evelina in continuation.
Queen-Ann-street, Tuesday, April 19.
THERE is something to me half melancholy in writing an account of our last
adventures in London; however, as this day is merely appropriated to packing,
and preparations for our journey, and as I shall shortly have no more
adventures to write, I think I may as well complete my town journal at once.
And, when you have it all together, I hope, my dear Sir, you will send me your
observations and thoughts upon it to Howard Grove.

About eight o'clock we went to the Pantheon. I was extremely struck with the
beauty of the building, which greatly surpassed whatever I could have expected
or imagined. Yet, it has more the appearance of a chapel, than of a place of
diversion; and, though I was quite charmed with the magnificence of the room, I
felt that I could not be as gay and thoughtless there as at Ranelagh, for there
is something in it which rather inspires awe and solemnity, than mirth and
pleasure. However, perhaps it may only have this effect upon such a novice as
myself.

I should have said, that our party consisted only of Captain, Mrs. and Miss
Mirvan, as Madame Duval spent the day in the city: -- which I own I could not
lament.

There was a great deal of company; but the first person we saw was Sir Clement
Willoughby. He addressed us with his usual ease, and joined us for the whole
evening. I felt myself very uneasy in his presence; for I could not look at
him, nor hear him speak, without recollecting the chariot adventure; but, to my
great amazement, I observed that he looked at me without the least apparent
discomposure, though certainly he ought not to think of his behavior without
blushing. I really wish I had not forgiven him, and then he could not have
ventured to speak to me any more.

There was an exceeding good concert, but too much talking to hear it well.
Indeed I am quite astonished to find how little music is attended to in
silence; for though every body seems to admire, hardly any body listens.

We did not see Lord Orville, till we went into the tea-room, which is large,
low, and under ground, and serves merely as a foil to the apartments above; he
then sat next to us; he seemed to belong to a large party, chiefly of ladies;
but, among the gentlemen attending them, I perceived Mr. Lovel.

I was extremely irresolute whether or not I ought to make any acknowledgments
to Lord Orville for his generous conduct in securing me from the future
impertinence of that man; and I thought, that as he had seemed to allow Mrs.
Mirvan to acquaint me, though no one else, of the measures which he had taken,
he might perhaps suppose me ungrateful if silent: however I might have spared
myself the trouble of deliberating, as I never once had the shadow of an
opportunity of speaking unheard by Sir Clement. On the contrary, he was so
exceedingly officious and forward, that I could not say a word to any body, but
instantly he bent his head forward, with an air of profound attention, as if I
had addressed myself wholly to him: and yet, I never once looked at him, and
would not have spoken to him on any account.

Indeed, Mrs. Mirvan herself, though unacquainted with the behavior of Sir
Clement after the opera, says it is not right for a young woman to be seen so
frequently in public with the same gentleman; and, if our stay in town was to
be lengthened, she would endeavor to represent to the Captain the impropriety
of allowing his constant attendance; for Sir Clement, with all his easiness,
could not be so eternally of our parties, if the Captain was less fond of his
company.

At the same table with Lord Orville, sat a gentleman, -- I call him so only
because he was at the same table, -- who, almost from the moment I was seated,
fixed his eyes steadfastly on my face, and never once removed them to any other
object during tea-time, notwithstanding my dislike of his staring must, I am
sure, have been very evident. I was quite surprised, that a man whose boldness
was so offensive, could have gained admission into a party of which Lord
Orville made one; for I naturally concluded him to be some low-bred, and
uneducated man; and I thought my idea was indubitably confirmed, when I heard
him say to Sir Clement Willoughby, in an audible whisper, -- which is a mode of
speech very distressing and disagreeable to bystanders, -- "For Heaven's sake,
Willoughby, who is that lovely creature?"

But what was my amazement, when, listening attentively for the answer, though
my head was turned another away, I heard Sir Clement say, "I am sorry I cannot
inform your Lordship, but I am ignorant myself."

Lordship! -- how extraordinary! that a nobleman, accustomed, in all
probability, to the first rank of company in the kingdom, from his earliest
infancy, can possibly be deficient in good manners, however faulty in morals
and principles! Even Sir Clement Willoughby appeared modest in comparison with
this person.

During tea, a conversation was commenced upon the times, fashions, and public
places, in which the company of both tables joined. It began by Sir Clement's
enquiring of Miss Mirvan and of me if the Pantheon had answered our
expectations.

We both readily agreed that it had greatly exceeded them.

"Ay, to be sure," said the Captain, "why you don't suppose they would confess they
did n't like it, do you? Whatever's the fashion, they must like of course; --
or else I Would be bound for it they would own, that there never was such a dull place
as this here invented."

"And has, then, this building," said Lord Orville, "no merit that may serve to
lessen your censure? Will not your eye, Sir, speak something in its favor?"

"Eye," cried the Lord, (I don't know his name,) "and is there any eye here,
that can find any pleasure in looking at dead walls or statues, when such
heavenly living objects as I now see demand all their admiration?"

"O, certainly," said Lord Orville, "the lifeless symmetry of architecture,
however beautiful the design and proportion, no man would be so mad as to put
in competition with the animated charms of nature: but when, as tonight, the
eye may be regaled at the same time, and in one view, with all the excellence
of art, and all the perfection of nature, I cannot think that either suffer by
being seen together."

"I grant, my Lord," said Sir Clement, "that the cool eye of unimpassioned
philosophy may view both with equal attention, and equal safety; but, where the
heart is not so well guarded, it is apt to interfere, and render, even to the
eye, all objects but one insipid and uninteresting."

"Aye, aye," cried the Captain, "you may talk what you will of your eye here,
and your eye there, and, for the matter of that, to be sure you have two, --
but we all know they both squint one way."

"Far be it from me," said Lord Orville, "to dispute the magnetic power of
beauty, which irresistibly draws and attracts whatever has soul and sympathy:
and I am happy to acknowledge, that though we have now no gods to occupy a
mansion professedly built for them, yet we have secured their better halves,
for we have goddesses to whom we all most willingly bow down." And then, with a
very droll air, he made a profound reverence to the ladies.

"They Would need be goddesses with a vengeance," said the Captain, "for they are
mortal dear to look at. Howsomever, I should be glad to know what you can see
in ever a face among them that is worth half a guinea for a sight."

"Half a guinea," exclaimed that same Lord, "I would give half I am worth, for
a sight of only one, provided I make my own choice. And, prithee, how can money
be better employed than in the service of fine women?"

"If the ladies of his own party can pardon the Captain's speech," said Sir
Clement, "I think he has a fair claim to the forgiveness of all."

"Then you depend very much, as I doubt not but you may," said Lord Orville,
"upon the general sweetness of the sex; -- but, as to the ladies of the
Captain's party, they may easily pardon, for they cannot be hurt."

"But they must have a devilish good conceit of themselves, though," said the
Captain, "to believe all that. Howsomever, whether or no, I should be glad to
be told, by some of you who seem to be knowing in them things, what kind of
diversion can be found in such a place as this here, for one who has had, long
ago, his full of face-hunting?"

Every body laughed, but nobody spoke.

"Why look you there, now," continued the Captain, "you're all at a dead stand!
-- not a man among you can answer that there question. Why, then, I must make
bold to conclude, that you all come here for no manner of purpose but to stare
at one another's pretty faces; -- though, for the matter of that, half of 'em
are plaguey ugly, -- and, as to the other half, -- I believe it is none of God's
manufactory."

"What the ladies may come hither for, Sir," said Mr. Lovel, (stroking his
ruffles, and looking down,) "it would ill become us to determine; but as to we
men, doubtless we can have no other view, than to admire them."

"If I be n't mistaken," cried the Captain, (looking earnestly in his face,)
"you are that same person we saw at Love for Love the other night; -- be n't you?"

Mr. Lovel bowed.

"Why then, Gentlemen," continued he, with a loud laugh, "I must tell you a
most excellent good joke; -- when all was over, as sure as you're alive, he
asked what the play was! Ha, ha, ha!"

"Sir," said Mr Lovel, coloring, "if you were as much used to a town life as I
am, -- which, I presume, is not precisely the case, -- I fancy you would not
find so much diversion from a circumstance so common."

"Common! what, is it common?" repeated the Captain; "why then, before George,
such chaps are more fit to be sent to school, and well disciplined with a cat
of nine tails, than to poke their heads into a playhouse. Why, a play is the
only thing left, nowadays, that has a grain of sense in it; for as to all the
rest of your public places, do you see, if they were all put together, I would
n't give that for 'em!" snapping his fingers. "And now we are talking of them
sort of things, there is your operas, -- I should like to know, now, what any of
you can find to say for them."

Lord Orville, who was most able to have answered, seemed by no means to think
the Captain worthy an argument, upon a subject concerning which he had neither
knowledge nor feeling: but, turning to us, he said, "The ladies are silent, and
we seem to have engrossed the conversation to ourselves, in which we are much
more our own enemies than theirs. But," addressing himself to Miss Mirvan and
me, "I am most desirous to hear the opinions of these young ladies, to whom all
public places must, as yet, be new."

We both, and with eagerness, declared that we had received as much, if not
more pleasure, at the opera than any where: but we had better have been silent;
for the Captain, quite displeased, said, what signifies asking them girls? Do
you think they know their own minds yet? Ask 'em after any thing that is called
diversion, and you're sure they will say it is vastly fine; -- they are set of
parrots, and speak by rote, for they all say the same thing: but ask 'em how
they like making puddings and pies, and I Will warrant you will pose 'em. As to
them operas, I desire I may hear no more of their liking such monsense; and for
you, Moll," to his daughter, "I charge you, as you value my favor, that you will
never again be so impertinent as to have a taste of your own before my face.
There are fools enough in the world, without your adding to their number. I Will
have no daughter of mine affect them sort of megrims. It is a shame they a'n't
put down; and if I Would my will, there is not a magistrate in this town, but should
be knocked of the head for suffering them. If you have a mind to praise any
thing, why you may praise a play, and welcome, for I like it myself."

This reproof effectually silenced us both for the rest of the evening. Nay,
indeed, for some minutes it seemed to silence every body else; till Mr. Lovel,
not willing to lose an opportunity of returning the Captain's sarcasm, said,
"Why, really, Sir, it is but natural, to be most pleased with what is most
familiar, and, I think, of all our diversions, there is not one so much in
common between us and the country, as a play. Not a village but has its barns
and comedians; and as for the stagebusiness, why it may be pretty equally done
any where; and even in regard to us, and the canaille, confined as we all are
within the semicircle of a theater, there is no place where the distinction is
less obvious."

While the Captain seemed considering for Mr. Lovel's meaning, Lord Orville,
probably with a view to prevent his finding it, changed the subject to Cox's
Museum, and asked what he thought of it?

"Think! -- " said he, "why I think as how it i'n't worth thinking about. I
like no such jem cracks. It is only fit, in my mind, for monkeys, -- though,
for I aught I know, they too might turn up their noses at it."

"May we ask your Lordship's own opinion?" said Mrs. Mirvan.

"The mechanism," answered he, "is wonderfully ingenious: I am sorry it is
turned to no better account; but its purport is so frivolous, so very remote
from all aim at instruction or utility, that the sight of so fine a show, only
leaves a regret on the mind, that so much work, and so much ingenuity, should
not be better bestowed."

"The truth is," said the Captain, "that in all this huge town, so full as it
is of folks of all sorts, there i'n't so much as one public place, besides the
playhouse, where a man, that is to say a man who is a man, ought not to be
ashamed to show his face. The Other day, they got me to a ridotto; but I believe
it will be long enough before they get me to another. I knew no more what to do
with myself, than if my ship's company had been metamorphosed into Frenchmen.
Then, again, there is your famous Ranelagh, that you make such a fuss about, --
why what a dull place is that! -- its the worst of all."

"Ranelagh dull!" -- "Ranelagh dull!" was echoed from mouth to mouth, and all
the ladies, as if of one accord, regarded the Captain with looks of the most
ironical contempt.

"As to Ranelagh," said Mr. Lovel, "most indubitably, though the price is
plebeian, it is by no means adapted to the plebeian taste. It requires a
certain acquaintance with high life, and -- and -- and something of -- of --
something d'un vrai gout, to be really sensible of its merit. Those whose --
whose connections, and so forth, are not among les gens comme il faut, can feel
nothing but ennui at such a place as Ranelagh.

"Ranelagh!" cried Lord --, "O, it is the divinest place under heaven, -- or,
indeed, -- for aught I know --."

"O you creature!" cried a pretty, but affected young lady, patting him with
her fan, "you shall not talk so; I know what you are going to say; but,
positively, I will not sit by you, if you're so wicked."

"And how can one sit by you, and be good?" said he, "when only to look at you
is enough to make one wicked -- or wish to be so?"

"Fie, my Lord!" returned she, "you are really insufferable. I don't think I
shall speak to you again these seven years."

"What a metamorphosis," cried Lord Orville, "should you make a patriarch of
his Lordship!"

"Seven years!" said he: "dear Madam, be contented with telling me you will not
speak to me after seven years, and I will endeavor to submit."

"O, very well, my Lord," answered she, "pray date the end of our speaking to
each other as early as you please, I Will promise to agree to your time."

"You know, dear Madam," said he, sipping his tea, "you know I only live in
your sight."

"O yes, my Lord, I have long known that. But I begin to fear we shall be too
late for Ranelagh this evening."

"O no, Madam," said Mr. Lovel, looking at his watch, "it is but just past ten."

"No more!" cried she, "O then we shall do very well."

All the ladies then started up, and declared they had no time to lose.

"Why what the D -- l," cried the Captain, (leaning forward with both his arms
on the table,) are you going to Ranelagh at this time of night?"

The ladies looked at one another, and smiled.

"To Ranelagh?" cried Lord --, "Yes, and I hope you are going too; for we
cannot possibly excuse these ladies."

"I go to Ranelagh? -- if I do, I Will be --."

Every body now stood up, and the stranger Lord, coming round to me, said, "
You go, I hope?"

"No, my Lord, I believe not."

"O you cannot, must not be so barbarous." And he took my hand, and ran on
saying such fine speeches and compliments, that I might almost have supposed
myself a goddess, and him a pagan, paying me adoration. As soon as I possibly
could, I drew back my hand; but he frequently, in the course of conversation,
contrived to take it again, though it was extremely disagreeable to me; and the
more so, as I saw that Lord Orville had his eyes fixed upon us, with a gravity
of attention that made me uneasy.

And, surely, my dear Sir, it was a great liberty in this Lord, notwithstanding
his rank, to treat me so freely. As to Sir Clement, he seemed in misery.

They all endeavored to prevail with the Captain to join the Ranelagh party;
and this Lord told me, in a low voice, that it was tearing his heart out to go
without me.

During this conversation, Mr. Lovel came forward, and assuming a look of
surprise, made me a bow, and enquired how I did, protesting, upon his honor,
that he had not seen me before, or would sooner have paid his respects to me.

Though his politeness was evidently constrained, yet I was very glad to be
thus assured of having nothing more to fear from him.

The Captain, far from listening to their persuasions of accompanying them to
Ranelagh, was quite in a passion at the proposal, and vowed he would sooner go
to the Black-hole in Calcutta.

"But," said Lord --, "if the ladies will take their tea at Ranelagh, you may
depend upon our seeing them safe home, for we shall all be proud of the honor
of attending them."

"May be so," said the Captain; "but I Will tell you what, if one of these places
be n't enough for them tonight, why tomorrow they shall go to never a one."

We instantly declared ourselves very ready to go home.

"It is not for yourselves that we petition," said Lord --, "but for us; if you
have any charity, you will not be so cruel as to deny us; we only beg you to
prolong our happiness for a few minutes, -- the favor is but a small one for
you to grant, though so great a one for us to receive."

"To tell you a piece of my mind," said the Captain, surlily, "I think you
might as well not give the girls so much of this palaver: they will take it all
for gospel. As to Moll, why she is well enough, but nothing extraordinary,
though, perhaps, you may persuade her that her pug-nose is all the fashion: and
as to the other, why she is good white and red, to be sure; but what of that? --
I Will warrant she will moulder away as fast as her neighbors."

"Is there," cried Lord --, "another man in this place, who, seeing such
objects, could make such a speech?"

"As to that there," returned the Captain, "I don't know whether there be or
no, and, to make free, I don't care; for I sha'n't go for to model myself by
any of these fair-weather chaps, who dare not so much as say their souls are
their own, -- and, for aught I know, no more they ben't. I Am almost as much
ashamed of my countrymen, as if I was a Frenchman, and I believe in my heart
there i'n't a pin to choose between them; and, before long, we shall hear the
very sailors talking that lingo, and see never a swabber without a bag and a
sword."

"He, he, he! -- well, 'pon honor," cried Mr. Lovel "you gentlemen of the
ocean have a most severe way of judging."

"Severe! before George, that is impossible; for, to cut the matter short, the
men, as they call themselves, are no better than monkeys; and as to the women,
why they are mere dolls. So, now you have got my opinion of this subject; and so
I wish you good night."

The ladies, who were very impatient to be gone, made their courtsies, and
tripped away, followed by all the gentlemen of their party, except the Lord I
have beforementioned, and Lord Orville, who stayed to make enquiries of Mrs.
Mirvan concerning our leaving town; and then saying, with his usual politeness,
something civil to each of us, with a very grave air, he quitted us.

Lord -- remained some minutes longer, which he spent in making a prosusion of
compliments to me, by which he prevented my hearing distinctly what Lord
Orville said, to my great vexation, especially as he looked -- I thought so, at
least, -- as if displeased at his particularity of behavior to me.

In going to an outward room, to wait for the carriage, I walked, and could not
possibly avoid it, between this nobleman and Sir Clement Willoughby; and, when
the servant said the coach stopped the way, though the latter offered me his
hand, which I should much have preferred, this same Lord, without any ceremony,
took mine himself; and Sir Clement, with a look extremely provoked, conducted
Mrs. Mirvan.

In all ranks and all stations of lise, how strangely do characters and manners
differ! Lord Orville, with a politeness which knows no intermission, and makes
no distinction, is as unassuming and modest, as if he had never mixed with the
great, and was totally ignorant of every qualification he possesses; this other
Lord, though lavish of compliments and fine speeches, seems to be an entire
stranger to real good breeding; whoever strikes his fancy, engrosses his whole
attention. He is forward and bold, has an air of haughtiness toward men, and a
look of libertinism toward women, and his concious quality seems to have given
him a freedom in his way of speaking to either sex, that is very little short
of rudeness.

When we returned home, we were all lowspirited; the evening's entertainment
had displeased the Captain, and his displeasure, I believe, disconcerted us all.

And here I thought to have concluded my letter; but, to my great surprise,
just now we had a visit from Lord Orville. He called, he said, to pay his
respects to us before we left town, and made many enquiries concerning our
return; and, when Mrs. Mirvan told him we were going into the country without
any view of again quitting it, he expressed his concern in such terms -- so
polite, so flattering, so serious -- that I could hardly forbear being sorry
myself. Were I to go immediately to Berry Hill, I am sure I should feel nothing
but joy; -- but, now we are joined by this Captain, and by Madame Duval, I must
own I expect very little pleasure at Howard Grove.

Before Lord Orville went Sir Clement Willoughby called. He was more grave than
I had ever seen him, and made several attempts to speak to me in a low voice,
and to assure me that his regret upon the occasion of our journey, was entirely
upon my account. But I was not in spirits, and could not bear to be teazed by
him. However, he has so well paid his court to Captain Mirvan, that he gave him
a very hearty invitation to the Grove. At this, he brightened, -- and, just
then, Lord Orville took his leave!

No doubt but he was disgusted at this ill-timed, ill-bred partiality; for
surely it was very wrong to make an invitation before Lord Orville, in which he
was not included! I was so much chagrined that, as soon as he went, I left the
room; and I shall not go down stairs till Sir Clement is gone.

Lord Orville cannot but observe his assiduous endeavors to ingratiate himself
into my favor; and does not this extravagant civility of Captain Mirvan, give
him reason to suppose, that it meets with our general approbation? I cannot
think upon this subject, without inexpressible uneasiness; -- and yet, I can
think of nothing else.

Adieu, my dearest Sir. Pray write to me immediately. How many long letters has
this one short fortnight produced! More than I may, probably, ever write again:
I fear I shall have tired you with reading them, but you will now have time to
rest, for I shall find but little to say in future.

And now, most honored Sir, with all the follies and imperfections which I
have thus faithfully recounted, can you, and with unabated kindness, suffer me
to sign myself

Your dutiful, and most affectionate EVELINA?

LETTER XXIV.
Mr. Villars to Evelina.
Berry Hill, April 22.
HOW much do I rejoice that I can again address my letters to Howard Grove! My
Evelina would have grieved, had she known the anxiety of my mind, during her
residence in the great world. My apprehensions have been inexpressibly
alarming; and your journal, at once exciting and relieving my fears, has almost
wholly occupied me, since the time of your dating it from London.

Sir Clement Willoughby must be an artful, designing man; I am extremely
irritated at his conduct. The passion he pretends for you has neither sincerity
nor honor; the manner and the opportunities he has chosen to declare it, are
bordering upon insult.

His unworthy behavior after the opera, convinces me, that, had not your
vehemence frightened him, Queen-Ann-Street would have been the last place
whither he would have ordered his chariot. O my child, how thankful am I for
your escape! I need not now, I am sure, enlarge upon your indiscretion and want
of thought, in so hastily trusting yourself with a man so little known to you,
and whose gaiety and flightiness should have put you on your guard.

The nobleman you met at the Pantheon, bold and forward as you describe him to
be, gives me no apprehension; a man who appears so openly licentious, and who
makes his attack with so little regard to decorum, is one who, to such a mind
as my Evelina's, can never be seen but with the disgust which his manners ought
to excite.

But Sir Clement, though he seeks occasions to give real offense, contrives to
avoid all appearance of intentional evil. He is far more dangerous, because
more artful; but I am happy to observe, that he seems to have made no
impression upon your heart, and therefore a very little care and prudence may
secure you from those designs which I fear he has formed.

Lord Orville appears to be of a better order of beings. His spirited conduct
to the meanly impertinent Lovel, and his anxiety for you after the opera, prove
him to be a man of sense and of feeling. Doubtless he thought there was much
reason to tremble for your safety, while exposed to the power of Sir Clement;
and he acted with a regard to real honor, that will always incline me to think
well of him, in so immediately acquainting the Mirvan family with your
situation. Many men of this age, from a false and pretended delicacy to a
friend, would have quietly pursued their own affairs, and thought it more
honorable to leave an unsuspecting young creature to the mercy of a libertine,
than to risk his displeasure by taking measures for her security.

Your evident concern at leaving London, is very natural; and yet it afflicts
me. I ever dreaded your being too much pleased with a life of dissipation,
which youth and vivacity render but too alluring; and I almost regret the
consent for your journey, which I had not the resolution to withhold.

Alas, my child, the artlessness of your nature, and the simplicity of your
education, alike unfit you for the thorny paths of the great and busy world.
The supposed obscurity of your birth and situation, makes you liable to a
thousand disagreeable adventures. Not only my views, but my hopes for your
future life, have ever centered in the country. Shall I own to you, that,
however I may differ from Captain Mirvan in other respects, yet my opinion of
the town, its manners, inhabitants, and diversions, is much upon a level with
his own? Indeed it is the general harbor of fraud and of folly, of duplicity
and of impertinence; and I wish few things more fervently, than that you may
have taken a lasting leave of it.

Remember, however, that I only speak in regard to a public and a dissipated
life; in private families, we may doubtless find as much goodness, honesty, and
virtue, in London as in the country.

If contented with a retired station, I still hope I shall live to see my
Evelina the ornament of her neighborhood, and the pride and delight of her
family: giving and receiving joy from such society as may best deserve her
affection, and employing herself in such useful and innocent occupations as may
secure and merit the tenderest love of her friends, and the worthiest
satisfaction of her own heart.

Such are my hopes, and such have been my expectations. Disappoint them not, my
beloved child, but cheer me with a few lines, that may assure me, this one
short fortnight spent in town, has not undone the work of seventeen years spent
in the country.

ARTHUR VILLARS.

LETTER XXV.
Evelina to the Rev. Mr. Villars.
Howard Grove, April 25.
NO, my dear Sir, no; the work of seventeen years remains such as it was, ever
unworthy your time and your labor, but not more so now, -- at least I hope
not, -- than before that fortnight which has so much alarmed you.

And yet, I must confess, that I am not half so happy here at present, as I was
ere I went to town: but the change is in the place, not in me. Captain Mirvan
and Madame Duval have ruined Howard Grove. The harmony that reigned here, is
disturbed, our schemes are broken, our way of life is altered, and our comfort
is destroyed. But do not suppose London to be the source of these evils; for,
had our excursion been any where else, so disagreeable an addition to our
household, must have caused the same change at our return.

I was sure you would be displeased with Sir Clement, and therefore I am by no
means surprised at what you say of him: but for lord Orville -- I must own I
had greatly feared, that my weak and imperfect account would not have procured
him the good opinion which he so well deserves, and which I am delighted to
find you seem to have of him. O, Sir, could I have done justice to the merit of
which I believe him possessed, -- could I have painted him to you such as he
appeared to me, -- then, indeed, you would have had some idea of the claim
which he has to your approbation!

After the last letter which I wrote in town, nothing more passed previous to
our journey hither, except a very violent quarrel between Captain Mirvan and
Madame Duval. As the Captain intended to travel on horseback, he had settled
that we four females should make use of his coach. Madame Duval did not come to
Queen Ann-street, till the carriage had waited some time at the door, and then,
attended by Monsieur Du Bois, she made her appearance.

The Captain, impatient to be gone, would not suffer them to enter the house,
but insisted that we should immediately get into the coach. We obeyed; but were
no sooner seated than Madame Duval said, "Come, Monsieur Du Bois, these girls
can make very good room for you; sit closer, children."

Mrs. Mirvan looked quite confounded, and M. Du Bois, after making some
apologies about crowding us, actually got into the coach, on the side with Miss
Mirvan and me. But no sooner was he seated than the Captain, who had observed
this transaction very quietly, walked up to the coachdoor, saying, "What
neither with your leave, nor by your leave?"

M. Du Bois seemed rather shocked, and began to make abundance of excuses; but
the Captain neither understood nor regarded him, and, very roughly said,
"Look'ee, Monsieur, this here may be a French fashion, for aught I know; -- but
Give and Take is fair, in all nations; and so now, do you see, I Will make bold to
show you an English one."

And then seizing his wrist, he made him jump out of the coach.

M. Du Bois instantly put his hand upon his sword, and threatened to resent
this indignity. The Captain, holding up his stick, bid him draw at his peril.
Mrs. Mirvan, greatly alarmed, got out of the coach, and standing between them,
entreated her husband to re-enter the house.

"None of your clack!" cried he, angirly, "what the D -- l, do you suppose I
cannot manage a Frenchman?"

Mean time, Madame Duval called out to M. Du Bois, " Eh, laissez-le, mon ami,
ne le corriger pas; c' est un vilain beat qui ne vaut pas la peine."

" Monsieur le Captain," cried M. Du Bois, " voulez-vous bien me demander
pardon?"

"O ho, you demand pardon; do you?" said the Captain, "I thought as much; I
thought you would come to; -- so you have lost your relish for an English
salutation, have you?" strutting up to him with looks of defiance.

A crowd was now gathering, and Mrs. Mirvan again besought her husband to go
into the house.

"Why what a plague is the woman afraid of? -- did you ever know a Frenchman
that could not take an affront? -- I warrant Monsieur knows what he is about;
-- don't you, Monsieur?"

M. Du Bois, not understanding him, only said, " plait-il, Monsieur?

"No, nor dish me, neither," answered the Captain; "but be that as it may, what
signifies our parleying here? if you have any thing to propose, speak at once; if
not, why let us go on our journey without more ado."

" Parbleu, je n'entends rien, moi!" cried M. Du Bois, shrugging his shoulders,
and looking very dismal.

Mrs. Mirvan then advanced to him, and faid, in French, that she was sure the
Captain had not any intention to affront him, and begged he would desist from a
dispute which could only be productive of mutual misunderstanding, as neither
of them knew the language of the other.

This sensible remonstrance had the desired effect, and M. Du Bois, making a
bow to every one, except the Captain, very wisely gave up the point, and took
leave.

We then hoped to proceed quietly on our journey; but the turbulent Captain
would not yet permit us: he approached Madame Duval with an exulting air, and
said, "Why how is this, Madam? what, has your champion deserted you? why I
thought you told me that you old gentlewomen had it all your own way, among
them French sparks?"

"As to that, Sir," answered she, "it is not of no consequence what you thought;
for a person who can behave in such a low way, may think what he pleases for
me, for I sha'n't mind."

"Why, then, Mistress, since you must needs make so free," cried he, "please to
tell me the reason why you took the liberty for to ask any of your followers
into my coach, without my leave? Answer me to that."

"Why then, pray, Sir," returned she, "tell me, the reason why you took the
liberty to treat the gentleman in such a impolite way, as to take and pull him
neck and heels out? I Am sure he had n't done nothing to affront you, nor nobody
else; and I don't know what great hurt he would have done you, by just sitting
still in the coach; he would not have eat it."

"What, do you think, then, that my horses have nothing to do, but to carry
about your snivelling Frenchmen? If you do, Madam, I must make bold to tell
you, you are out, for I Will see 'em hanged first."

"More brute you, then! for they have never carried nobody half so good"

Why, look'ee, Madam, if you must needs provoke me, I Will tell you a piece of my
mind; you must know, I can see as far into a millstone as another man; and so,
if you thought for to fob me off with one of your smirking French puppies for a
son-in-law, why you will find yourself in a hobble, -- that is all."

"Sir, you're a -- but I will not say what; -- but, I protest, I had n't no such a
thought, no more had n't Monsieur Du Bois."

"My dear," said Mrs. Mirvan, "we shall be very late."

"Well, well," answered he, get away then; off with you, as fast as you can,
it is high time. As to Molly, she is fine lady enough in all conscience; I want
none of your French chaps to make her worse."

And so saying, he mounted his horse, and we drove off. And I could not but
think with regret of the different feelings we experienced upon leaving London,
to what had belonged to our entering it!

During the journey, Madame Duval was so very violent against the Captain, that
she obliged Mrs. Mirvan to tell her, that, when in her presence, she must beg
her to choose some other subject of discourse.

We had a most affectionate reception from Lady Howard, whose kindness and
hospitality cannot fail of making every body happy, who is disposed so to be.

Adieu, my dearest Sir. I hope, though I have hitherto neglected to mention it,
that you have always remembered me to whoever has made any enquiry concerning
me.

LETTER XXVI.
Evelina to the Rev. Mr. Villars.
Howard Grove, April 27.
O MY dear Sir, I now write in the greatest uneasiness! Madame Duval has made a
proposal which terrifies me to death, and which was as unexpected, as it is
shocking.

She had been employed for some hoursthis afternoon in reading letters from
London, and, just about tea-time, she sent for me into her room, and said, with
a look of great satisfaction, "Come here, child, I Have got some very good news
to tell you: something that will surprise you, I Will give you my word, for you
have not no notion of it."

I begged her to explain herself; and then, in terms which I cannot repeat, she
said she had been considering what a shame it was, to see me such a poor
country, shame-faced thing, when I ought to be a fine lady; and that she had
long, and upon several occasions, blushed for me, though she must own the fault
was none of mine: for nothing better could be expected from a girl who had been
so immured. However, she assured me she had, at length, hit upon a plan, which
would make quite another creature of me.

I waited, without much impatience, to hear what this preface led to; but I was
soon awakened to more lively sensations, when she acquainted me, that her
intention was to prove my birthright, and to claim, by law, the inheritance of
my real family!

It would be impossible for me to express my extreme consternation, when she
thus unfolded her scheme. My surprise and terror were equally great. I could
say nothing; I heard her with a silence which I had not the power to break.

She then expatiated very warmly upon the advantages I should reap from her
plan; talked in a high style of my future grandeur; assured me how heartily I
should despise almost every body and every thing I had hitherto seen; predicted
my marrying into some family of the first rank in the kingdom; and, finally,
said I should spend a few months in Paris, where my education and manners might
receive their last polish.

She enlarged also upon the delight she should have, in common with myself,
from mortifying the pride of certain people, and showing them, that she was not
to be slighted with impunity.

In the midst of this discourse I was relieved by a summons to tea. Madame
Duval was in great spirits; but my emotion was too painful for concealment, and
every body enquired into the cause. I would fain have waved the subject, but
Madame Duval was determined to make it public. She told them, that she had it
in her head to make something of me, and that they should soon call me by
another name than that of Anville, and yet that she was not going to have the
child married neither.

I could not endure to hear her proceed, and was going to leave the room;
which, when Lady Howard perceived, she begged Madame Duval would defer her
intelligence to some other opportunity; but she was so eager to communicate her
scheme, that she could bear no delay, and therefore they suffered me to go,
without opposition. Indeed, whenever my situation or affairs are mentioned by
Madame Duval, she speaks of them with such bluntness and severity, that I
cannot be enjoined a task more cruel than to hear her.

I was afterward acquainted with some particulars of the conversation by Miss
Mirvan, who told me that Madame Duval informed them of her plan with the utmost
complacency, and seemed to think herself very fortunate in having suggested it;
but soon after, she accidentally betrayed, that she had been instigated to the
scheme by her relations the Branghtons, whose letters, which she received
today, first mentioned the proposal. She declared that she would have nothing
to do with any roundabout ways, but go openly and instantly to law, in order to
prove my birth, real name, and title to the estate of my ancestors.

How impertinent and officious, in these Branghtons, to interfere thus in my
concerns! You can hardly imagine what a disturbance this plan has made in the
family. The Captain without enquiring into any particulars of the affair, has
peremptorily declared himself against it, merely because it has been proposed
by Madame Duval, and they have battled the point together with great violence.
Mrs. Mirvan says she will not even think, till she hears your opinion. But Lady
Howard, to my great surprise, openly avows her approbation of Madame Duval's
intention: however, she will write her reasons and sentiments upon the subject
to you herself

As to Miss Mirvan, she is my second self, and neither hopes nor fears but as I
do. And as to me, -- I know not what to say, nor even what to wish; I have
often thought my fate peculiarly cruel, to have but one parent, and from that
one to be banished for ever; -- while, on the other side, I have but too well
known and felt the propriety of the separation. And yet, you may much better
imagine than I can express the internal anguish which sometimes oppresses my
heart, when I reflect upon the strange indifferency, that must occasion a
father never to make the least enquiry after the health, the welfare, or even
the life of his child!

O Sir, to me, the loss is nothing! -- greatly, sweetly, and most benevolently
have you guarded me from seeling it; -- but for him, I grieve indeed! -- I must
be divested, not merely of a filial piety, but of all humanity, could I ever
think upon this subject, and not be wounded to the soul.

Again I must repeat, I know not what to wish: think for me, therefore, my
dearest Sir, and suffer my doubting mind, that knows not which way to direct
its hopes, to be guided by your wisdom and unerring counsel.

EVELINA.

LETTER XXVII.
Lady Howard to the Rev. Mr. Villars.
Howard Grove. Dear Sir,
I Cannot give a greater proof of the high opinion I have of your candor, than
by the liberty I am now going to take, of presuming to offer you advice, upon a
subject concerning which you have so just a claim to act for yourself: but I
know you have too unaffected a love of justice to be partially tenacious of
your own judgment.

Madame Duval has been proposing a scheme which has put us all in commotion,
and against which, at first, in common with the rest of my family, I exclaimed;
but upon more mature consideration, I own my objections have almost wholly
vanished.

This scheme is no other than to commence a lawsuit with Sir John Belmont, to
prove the validity of his marriage with Miss Evelyn; the necessary consequence
of which proof, will be securing his fortune and estate to his daughter.

And why, my dear Sir, should not this be? I know that, upon first hearing,
this plan conveys ideas that must shock you; but I know too, that your mind is
superior to being governed by prejudices, or to opposing any important cause on
account of a few disagreeable attendant circumstances.

Your lovely charge, now first entering into life, has merit which ought not to
be buried in obscurity. She seems born for an ornament to the world. Nature has
been bountiful to her of whatever she had to bestow; and the peculiar attention
you have given to her education, has formed her mind to a degree of excellence,
that, in one so young, I have scarce ever seen equalled. Fortune, alone, has
hitherto been sparing of her gifts; and she, too, now opens the way which leads
to all that is left to wish for her.

What your reasons may have been, my good Sir, for so carefully concealing the
birth, name, and pretensions of this amiable girl, and forbearing to make any
claim upon Sir John Belmont, I am totally a stranger to; but without knowing, I
respect them, from the high opinion I have of your character and judgment: but
I hope they are not insuperable; for I cannot but think, that it was never
designed, for one who seems meant to grace the world, to have her life devoted
to retirement.

Surely Sir John Belmont, wretch as he has shown himself, could never see his
accomplished daughter, and not be proud to own her, and eager to secure her the
inheritance of his fortune. The admiration she met with in town, though merely
the effect of her external attractions, was such that Mrs. Mirvan assures me,
she would have had the most splendid offers, had there not seemed to be some
mystery in regard to her birth, which, she was well informed, was assiduously,
though vainly, endeavored to be discovered.

Can it be right, my dear Sir, that this promising young creature should be
deprived of the fortune and rank of life, to which she is lawfully entitled,
and which you have prepared her to support and to use her so nobly? -- To
despise riches, may, indeed, be philosophic, but to dispense them worthily,
must surely be more beneficial to mankind.

Perhaps a few years, or indeed, a much shorter time, may make this scheme
impracticable: Sir John, though yet young, leads a life too dissipated for long
duration; and, when too late, we may regret that something was not sooner done;
for it will be next to impossible, after he is gone, to settle or prove any
thing with his heirs and executors.

Pardon the earnestness with which I write my sense of this affair; but your
charming ward has made me so warmly her friend, that I cannot be indifferent
upon a subject of such importance to her future life.

Adieu, my dear Sir; -- send me speedily an answer to this remonstrance, and
believe me to be, etc.

M. HOWARD.

LETTER XXVIII.
Mr. Villars to Lady Howard.
Berry Hill, May 2.
YOUR letter, Madam, has opened a source of anxiety to which I look forward
with dread, and which to see closed, I scarcely dare expect. I am unwilling to
oppose my opinion to that of your Ladyship, nor, indeed, can I, but by
arguments which, I believe, will rather rank me as a hermit, ignorant of the
world, and fit only for my cell, than as a proper guardian, in an age such as
this, for an accomplished young woman. Yet, thus called upon, it behooves me to
explain, and endeavor to vindicate, the reasons by which I have been hitherto
guided.

The mother of this dear child, -- who was led to destruction by her own
imprudence, the hardness of heart of Madame Duval, and the villainy of Sir John
Belmont, -- was once, what her daughter is now, the best beloved of my heart;
and her memory, so long as my own holds, I shall love, mourn, and honor! On
the fatal day that her gentle foul left its mansion, and not many hours ere she
ceased to breathe, I solemnly plighted my faith, That her child, if it lived,
should know no father, but myself, or her acknowledged husband.

You cannot, Madam, suppose that I found much difficulty in adhering to this
promise, and forbearing to make any claim upon Sir John Belmont. Could I feel
an affection the most paternal for this poor sufferer, and not abominate her
destroyer? Could I wish to deliver to him, who had so basely betrayed the
mother, the helpless and innocent offspring, who, born in so much sorrow,
seemed entitled to all the compassionate tenderness of pity?

For many years, the name alone of that man, accidentally spoken in my hearing,
almost divested me of my christianity, and scarce could I forbear to execrate
him. Yet I sought not, neither did I desire, to deprive him of his child, had
he, with any appearance of contrition, or indeed of humanity, endeavored to
become less unworthy such a blessing; but he is a stranger to all parental
feelings, and has, with a savage insensibility, forborne to enquire even into
the existence of this sweet orphan, though the situation of his injured wife
was but too well known to him.

You wish to be acquainted with my intentions. -- I must acknowledge, they were
such as I now perceive would not be honored with your Ladyship's approbation:
for though I have sometimes thought of presenting Evelina to her father, and
demanding the justice which is her due, yet, at other times, I have both
disdained and feared the application; disdained, lest it should be refused, and
feared, lest it should be accepted!

Lady Belmont, who was firmly persuaded of her approaching dissolution,
frequently and earnestly besought me, that if her infant was a female, I would
not abandon her to the direction of a man so wholly unfit to take the charge of
her education; but, should she be importunately demanded, that I would retire
with her abroad, and carefully conceal her from Sir John, till some apparent
change in his sentiments and conduct should announce him less improper for such
a trust. And often would she say, "Should the poor babe have any feelings
correspondent with its mother's, it will have no want, while under your
protection." Alas! she had no sooner quitted it herself, than she was plunged
into a gulf of misery, that swallowed up her peace, reputation, and life.

During the childhood of Evelina, I suggested a thousand plans for the security
of her birthright; -- but I as oftentimes rejected them. I was in a perpetual
conflict, between the desire that she should have justice done her, and the
apprehension that, while I improved her fortune, I should endanger her mind.
However, as her character began to be formed, and her disposition to be
displayed, my perplexity abated; the road before me seemed less thorny and
intricate, and I thought I could perceive the right path from the wrong: for,
when I observed the artless openness, the ingenuous simplicity of her nature;
when I saw that her guileless and innocent soul fancied all the world to be
pure and disinterested as herself, and that her heart was open to every
impression with which love, pity, or art might assail it; -- then did I flatter
myself, that to follow my own inclination, and to secure her welfare, was the
same thing; since, to expose her to the snares and dangers inevitably
encircling a house of which the master is dissipated and unprincipled, without
the guidance of a mother, or any prudent and sensible female, seemed to me no
less than suffering her to stumble into some dreadful pit, when the sun was in
its meridian. My plan, therefore, was not merely to educate and to cherish her
as my own, but to adopt her the heiress of my small fortune, and to bestow her
upon some worthy man, with whom she might spend her days in tranquillity,
cheerfulness, and good humor, untainted by vice, folly, or ambition.

So much for the time past. Such have been the motives by which I have been
governed; and I hope they will be allowed not merely to account for, but also
to justify the conduct which has resulted from them. It now remains to speak of
the time to come.

And here, indeed, I am sensible of difficulties which I almost despair of
surmounting according to my wishes. I pay the highest deference to your
Ladyship's opinion, which it is extremely painful to me not to concur with;
yet, I am so well acquainted with your goodness, that I presume to hope it
would not be absolutely impossible for me to offer such arguments as might lead
you to think with me, that this young creature's chance of happiness seems less
doubtful in retirement, than it would be in the gay and dissipated world: but
why should I perplex your Ladyship with reasoning that can turn to so little
account? for, alas! what arguments, what persuasions can I make use of, with
any prospect of success, to such a woman as Madame Duval? Her character, and
the violence of her disposition, intimidate me from making the attempt: she is
too ignorant for instruction, too obstinate for entreaty, and too weak for
reason.

I will not, therefore, enter into a contest from which I have nothing to
expect but altercation and impertinence. As soon would I discuss the effect of
sound with the deaf, or the nature of colors with the blind, as aim at
illuminating with conviction a mind so warped by prejudice, so much the slave
of unruly and illiberal passions. Unused as she is to control, persuasion
would but harden, and opposition incense her. I yield therefore, to the
necessity which compels my reluctant acquiescence, and shall now turn all my
thoughts upon considering of such methods for the conducting this enterprise as
may be most conducive to the happiness of my child, and least liable to wound
her sensibility.

The lawsuit, therefore, I wholly and absolutely disapprove.

Will you, my dear Madam, forgive the freedom of an old man, if I own myself
greatly surprised, that you could, even for a moment, listen to a plan so
violent, so public, so totally repugnant to all female delicacy? I am satisfied
your Ladyship has not weighed this project. There was a time, indeed, when, to
assert the innocence of Lady Belmont, and to blazon to the world the wrongs,
not guilt, by which she suffered, I proposed, nay attempted, a similar plan:
but then, all assistance and encouragement was denied. How cruel to the
remembrance I bear of her woes, is this tardy resentment of Madame Duval! She
was deaf to the voice of Nature, though she has hearkened to that of Ambition.

Never can I consent to have this dear and timid girl brought forward to the
notice of the world by such a method; a method which will subject her to all
the impertinence of curiosity, the sneers of conjecture, and the stings of
ridicule. And for what! -- the attainment of wealth, which she does not want,
and the gratification of vanity, which she does not seel. -- A child to appear
against a father! -- no, Madam, old and infirm as I am, I would even yet sooner
convey her myself to some remote part of the world, though I were sure of dying
in the expedition.

Far different had been the motives which would have stimulated her unhappy
mother to such a proceeding; all her felicity in this world was irretrievably
lost; her life was become a burden to her, and her fair fame, which she had
early been taught to prize above all other things, had received a mortal wound:
therefore to clear her own honor, and to secure from blemish the birth of her
child, was all the good which Fortune had reserved herself the power of
bestowing. But even this last consolation was withheld from her!

Let milder measures be adopted; and -- since it must be so, -- let application
be made to Sir John Belmont; but as to a lawsuit, I hope, upon this subject,
never more to hear it mentioned.

With Madame Duval, all pleas of delicacy would be ineffectual; her scheme must
be opposed by arguments better suited to her understanding. I will not,
therefore, talk of its impropriety, but endeavor to prove its inutility. Have
the goodness, then, to tell her, that her own intentions would be frustrated by
her plan, since, should the lawsuit be commenced, and even should the cause be
gained, Sir John Belmont would still have it in his power, and, if irritated,
no doubt in his inclination, to cut off her granddaughter with a shilling.

She cannot do better, herself, than to remain quiet and inactive in the
affair: the long and mutual animosity between her and Sir John, will make her
interference merely productive of debates and ill will. Neither would I have
Evelina appear till summoned. And as to myself, I must wholly decline acting,
though I will, with unwearied zeal, devote all my thoughts to giving counsel:
but, in truth, I have neither inclination nor spirits adequate to engaging
personally with this man.

My opinion is, that he would pay more respect to a letter from your Ladyship
upon this subject, than from any other person. I therefore advise and hope,
that you will yourself take the trouble of writing to him, in order to open the
affair. When he shall be inclined to see Evelina, I have for him a posthumous
letter, which his much-injured lady left to be presented to him, if ever such a
meeting should take place.

The views of the Branghtons, in suggesting this scheme, are obviously
interested; they hope, by securing to Evelina the fortune of her father, to
induce Madame Duval to settle her own upon themselves. In this, however, they
would probably be mistaken, for little minds have ever a propensity to bestow
their wealth upon those who are already in affluence, and therefore, the less
her grandchild requires her assistance, the more gladly she will give it.

I have but one thing more to add, from which, however, I can by no means
recede: my word so solemnly given to Lady Belmont, that her child should never
be owned but with herself, must be inviolably adhered to.

I am, dear Madam, with great respect, Your Ladyship's most obedient servant,
ARTHUR VILLARS.

LETTER XXIX.
Mr. Villars to Evelina.
Berry Hill, May 2.
HOW sincerely do I sympathise in the uneasiness and concern which my beloved
Evelina has so much reason to feel! The cruel scheme in agitation is equally
repugnant to my judgment and my inclination, -- yet to oppose it, seems
impracticable. To follow the dictates of my own heart, I should instantly recall
you to myself, and never more consent to your being separated from me; but the
manners and opinion of the world demand a different conduct. Hope, however, for
the best, and be satisfied you shall meet with no indignity; if you are not
received into your own family as you ought to be, and with the distinction that
is your due, you shall leave it for ever; and, once again restored to my
protection, secure your own tranquillity, and make, as you have hitherto done,
all the happiness of my life!

LETTER XXX.
Evelina to the Rev. Mr. Villars.
Howard Grove, May 6.
THE die is thrown, and I attend the event in trembling. Lady Howard has
written to Paris, and sent her letter to town, to be forwarded in the
ambassador's packet, and in less than a fortnight, therefore, she expects an
answer. O Si^, with what anxious impatience shall I await its arrival! upon it
seems to depend the fate of my future life. My solicitude is so great, and my
suspense so painful, that I cannot rest a moment in peace, or turn my thoughts
into any other channel.

Deeply interested as I now am in the event, most sincerely do I regret that
the plan was ever proposed: methinks it cannot end to my satisfaction; for
either I must be torn from the arms of my more than father, -- or I must have
the misery of being finally convinced, that I am cruelly rejected by him who
has the natural claim to that dear title; a title, which to write, mention, or
think of, fills my whole soul with filial tenderness.

The subject is discussed here eternally. Captain Mirvan and Madame Duval, as
usual, quarrel whenever it is started: but I am so wholly engrossed by my own
reflections, that I cannot even listen to them. My imagination changes the
scene perpetually: at one moment, I am embraced by a kind and relenting parent,
who takes me to that heart from which I have hitherto been benished, and
supplicates, through me, peace and forgiveness from the ashes of my mother! --
at another, he regards me with detestation, considers me as the living image of
an injured saint, and repulses me with horror! -- But I will not afflict you
with the melancholy phantasms of my brain. I will endeavor to compose my mind
to a more tranquil state, and forbear to write again, till I have, in some
measure, succeeded.

May Heaven bless you, my dearest Sir! and long, long may it continue you on
earth, to bless

Your grateful EVELINA!

LETTER XXXI.
Lady Howard to Sir John Belmont, Bart.
Howard-Grove, May 5. SIR,
YOU will, doubtless, be surprised at receiving a letter from one who had for
so short a period the honor of your acquaintance, and that at so great a
distance of time; but the motive which has induced me to take this liberty, is
of so delicate a nature, that were I to commence making apologies for my
officiousness, I fear my letter would be too long for your patience.

You have, probably, already conjectured the subject upon which I mean to
treat. My regard for Mr. Evelyn and his amiable daughter, was well known to
you: nor can I ever cease to be interested in whatever belongs to their memory
or family.

I must own myself somewhat distressed in what manner to introduce the purport
of my writing; yet, as I think that, in affairs of this kind, frankness is the
first requisite to a good understanding between the parties concerned, I will
neither torment you nor myself with punctilious ceremonies, but proceed
instantly and openly to the business which occasions my giving you this trouble.

I presume, Sir, it would be superfluous to tell you, that your child resides
still in Dorsetshire, and is still under the protection of the Reverend Mr.
Villars, in whose house she was born: for, though no enquiries concerning her
have reached his ears, or mine, I can never suppose it possible you have
forborne to make them. It only remains, therefore, to tell you, that your
daughter is now grown up; that she has been educated with the utmost care, and
the utmost success; and that she is now a most deserving, accomplished, and
amiable young woman.

Whatever may be your view for her future destination in life, it seems time to
declare it. She is greatly admired, and, I doubt not, will be very much sought
after: it is proper, therefore, that her future expectations, and your pleasure
concerning her, should be made known.

Believe me, Sir, she merits your utmost attention and regard. You could not
see and know her, and remain unmoved by those sensations of affection which
belong to so near and tender a relationship. She is the lovely resemblance of
her lovely mother; -- pardon me, Sir, that I mention that unfortunate lady, but
I think it behooves me, upon this occasion, to show the esteem I felt for her;
allow me, therefore, to say, and be not offended at my freedom, that the memory
of that excellent lady has but too long remained under the aspersions of
calumny; surely it is time to vindicate her fame! -- and how can that be done
in a manner more eligible, more grateful to her friends, or more honorable to
yourself, than by openly receiving as your child, the daughter of the late Lady
Belmont?

The venerable man who has had the care of her education, deserves your warmest
acknowledgments, for the unremitting pains he has taken, and attention he has
shown in the discharge of his trust. Indeed she has been peculiarly fortunate
in meeting with such a friend and guardian: a more worthy man, or one whose
character seems nearer to perfection, does not exist.

Permit me to assure you, Sir, she will amply repay whatever regard and favor
you may hereafter show her, by the comfort and happiness you cannot fail to
find in her affection and duty. To be owned properly by you, is the first wish
of her heart; and I am sure, that to merit your approbation will be the first
study of her life.

I fear that you will think this address impertinent; but I must rest upon the
goodness of my intention to plead my excuse.

I am, Sir, Your most obedient humble servant, M. HOWARD.

LETTER XXXII.
Evelina to the Rev. Mr. Villars.
Howard Grove, May 10.
OUR house has been enlivened today, by the arrival of a London visitor; and
the necessity I have been under of concealing the uneasiness of my mind, has
made me exert myself so effectually, that I even think it is really diminished;
or, at least, my thoughts are not so totally, so very anxiously occupied by one
only subject, as they lately were.

I was strolling this morning with Miss Mirvan, down a lane about a mile from
the grove, when we heard the trampling of horses; and, fearing the narrowness
of the passage, we were turning hastily back, but stopped upon hearing a voice
call out, "Pray, Ladies, don't be frightened, for I will walk my horse." We
turned again, and then saw Sir Clement Willoughby. He dismounted, and
approaching us, with the reins in his hand, presently recollected us. "Good
Heaven," cried he, with his usual quickness, "do I see Miss Anville? -- and
you, too, Miss Mirvan?"

He immediately ordered his servant to take charge of his horse, and then,
advancing to us, took a hand of each, which he pressed to his lips, and said a
thousand fine things concerning his good fortune, our improved looks, and the
charms of the country, when inhabited by such rural deities. "The town, Ladies,
has languished since your absence, -- or, at least, I have so much languished
myself, as to be absolutely insensible to all it had to offer. One refreshing
breeze, such as I now enjoy, awakens me to new vigor, life, and spirit. But I
never before had the good luck to see the country in such perfection."

"Has not almost every body left town, Sir?" said Miss Mirvan.

"I am ashamed to answer you, Madam -- but indeed it is as full as ever, and
will continue so, till after the birthday. However, you ladies, were so little
seen, that there were but few who know what it has lost. For my own part, I
felt it too sensibly, to be able to endure the place any longer."

"Is there any body remaining there, that we were acquainted with?" cried I.

"O yes, Ma'am." And then he named two or three persons we had seen when with
him; but he did not mention Lord Orville, and I would not ask him, lest he
should think me curious. Perhaps, if he stays here some time, he may speak of
him by accident.

He was proceeding in this complimentary style, when we were met by the
Captain; who no sooner perceived Sir Clement, than he hastened up to him, gave
him a hearty shake of the hand, a cordial slap on the back, and some other
equally gentle tokens of satisfaction, assuring him of his great joy at his
visit, and declaring he was as glad to see him as if he had been a messenger
who brought news that a French ship was sunk. Sir Clement, on the other side,
expressed himself with equal warmth, and protested he had been so eager to pay
his respects to Captain Mirvan, that he had left London in its full luster, and
a thousand engagements unanswered, merely to give himself that pleasure.

"We shall have rare sport," said the Captain, "for do you know the old
French-woman is among us? Before George, I have scarce made any use of her yet,
by reason I have had nobody with me that could enjoy a joke: howsomever, it
shall go hard but we'll have some diversion now."

Sir Clement very much approved of the proposal; and we then went into the
house, where he had a very grave reception from Mrs. Mirvan, who is by no means
pleased with his visit, and a look of much discontent from Madame Duval, who
said to me, in a low voice, "I Would as soon have seen Old Nick as that man, for
he is the most impertinentest person in the world, and is n't never of my side."

The Captain is now actually occupied in contriving some scheme which, he says,
is to play the old Dowager off; and so eager and delighted is he at the idea,
that he can scarcely constrain his raptures sufficiently to conceal his design,
even from herself. I wish, however, since I do not dare put Madame Duval upon
her guard, that he had the delicacy not to acquaint me with his intention.

LETTER XXXIII.
Evelina in continuation.
May 13th.
THE Captain's operations are begun, -- and, I hope, ended; for indeed poor
Madame Duval has already but too much reason to regret Sir Clement's visit to
Howard Grove.

Yesterday morning, during breakfast, as the Captain was reading the
news-paper, Sir Clement suddenly begged to look at it, saying he wanted to know
if there was any account of a transaction, at which he had been present the
evening before his journey thither, concerning a poor Frenchman, who had got
into a scrape which might cost him his life.

The Captain demanded particulars; and then Sir Clement told him a long story,
of being with a party of country friends, at the Tower, and hearing a man call
out for mercy in French; and that, when he enquired into the occasion of his
distress, he was informed, that he had been taken up upon suspicion of
treasonable practices against the government. "The poor fellow," continued he,
"no sooner found that I spoke French, than he besought me to hear him,
protesting that he had no evil designs; that he had been but a short time in
England, and only waited the return of a Lady from the country, to quit it for
ever."

Madame Duval changed color, and listened with the utmost attention.

"Now, though I by no means approve of so many foreigners continually flocking
into our country," added he, addressing himself to the Captain, "yet I could
not help pitying the poor wretch, because he did not know enough of English to
make his defense: however, I found it impossible to assist him, for the mob
would not suffer me to interfere. In truth I am afraid he was but roughly
handled."

"Why, did they duck him?" said the Captain.

"Something of that sort," answered he.

"So much the better! so much the better!" cried the Captain, "an impudent
French puppy! -- I Will bet you what you will he was a rascal. I only wish all
his countrymen were served the same."

"I wish you had been in his place, with all my soul!" cried Madame Duval,
warmly; -- "but pray, Sir, did n't nobody know who this poor gentleman was?"

"Why I did hear his name spoke," answered Sir Clement, "but I cannot recollect
it."

"It was n't, -- it was n't -- Du Bois?" stammered out Madame Duval.

"The very name!" answered he, "yes, Du Bois, I remember it now."

Madame Duval's cup fell from her hand, as she repeated "Du Bois! Monsieur Du
Bois, did you say?"

"Du Bois! why that is my friend, cried the Captain, "that is Monsieur Slippery,
i'n't it? -- Why he is plaguey fond of sousing work; howsomever, I Will be sworn
they gave him his fill of it."

"And I Will be sworn," cried Madame Duval, "that you're a -- but I don't believe
nothing about it, so you need n't be so overjoyed, for I dare say it was no
more Monsieur Du Bois than I am."

"I thought at the time," said Sir Clement, very gravely, "that I had seen the
gentleman before, and now I recollect, I think it was in company with you,
Madam."

"With me, Sir!" cried Madame Duval.

"Say you so!" said the Captain, "why then, it must be he, as sure as you're
alive! -- Well but, my good friend, what will they do with poor Monsieur?"

"It is difficult to say," answered Sir Clement, very thoughtfully, "but, I
should suppose, that if he has not good friends to appear for him, he will be
in a very unpleasant situation; for these are serious sort of affairs.'

"Why, do you think they will hang him?" demanded the Captain.

Sir Clement shook his head, but made no answer.

Madame Duval could no longer contain her agitation; she started from her
chair, repeating, with a voice half choked, "Hang him! -- they cannot, -- they
sha'n't -- let them at their peril! -- however, it is all false, and I will not
believe a word of it; -- but I Will go to town this very moment, and see M. Du
Bois myself; -- I will not wait for nothing."

Mrs. Mirvan begged her not to be alarmed; but she flew out of the room, and up
stairs into her own apartment. Lady Howard blamed both the gentlemen for having
been so abrupt, and followed her. I would have accompanied her, but the Captain
stopped me; and, having first laughed very heartily, said he was going to read
his commission to his ship's company.

"Now, do you see," said he, "as to Lady Howard, I sha'n't pretend for to
enlist her into my service, and so I shall even leave her to make it out as
well as she can; but as to all you, I expect obedience and submission to
orders; I am now upon a hazardous expedition, having undertaken to convoy a
crazy vessel to the shore of Mortification; so, do you see, if any of you have
any thing to propose, that will forward the enterprise, -- why speak and
welcome; but if any of you, that are of my chosen crew, capitulate, or enter
into any treaty with the enemy, -- I shall look upon you as mutinying, and turn
you adrift."

Having finished this harangue, which was interlarded with many expressions,
and sea-phrases, that I cannot recollect, he gave Sir Clement a wink of
intelligence, and left us to ourselves.

Indeed, notwithstanding the attempts I so frequently make of writing some of
the Captain's conversation, I can only give you a faint idea of his language;
for almost every other word he utters is accompanied by an oath, which, I am
sure, would be as unpleasant for you to read, as for me to write. And, besides,
he makes use of a thousand sea-terms, which are to me quite unintelligible.

Poor Madame Duval sent to enquire at all probable places, whether she could be
conveyed to town in any stage-coach; but the Captain's servant brought her for
answer, that no London stage would pass near Howard Grove till today. She then
sent to order a chaise; but was soon assured that no horses could be procured.
She was so much inflamed by these disappointments, that she threatened to set
out for town on foot, and it was with difficulty that Lady Howard dissuaded her
from this mad scheme.

The whole morning was filled up with these enquiries. But, when we were all
assembled to dinner, she endeavored to appear perfectly unconcerned, and
repeatedly protested that she gave not any credit to the report, as far as it
regarded M. Du Bois, being very certain that he was not the person in question.

The Captain used the most provoking efforts to convince her that she deceived
herself; while Sir Clement, with more art, though not less malice, affected to
be of her opinion; but, at the same time that he pretended to relieve her
uneasiness, by saying that he doubted not having mistaken the name, he took
care to enlarge upon the danger to which the unknown gentleman was exposed, and
expressed great concern at his perilous situation.

Dinner was hardly removed, when a letter was delivered to Madame Duval. The
moment she had read it, she hastily demanded from whom it came? "A country boy
brought it," answered the servant, "but he would not wait."

"Run after him this instant!" cried she, "and be sure you bring him back. Mon
Dieu! quel avanture! que ferai-je?"

"What Is the matter? what is the matter?" said the Captain.

"Why nothing, -- nothing's the matter. O mon Dieu!"

And she rose, and walked about the room.

"Why, what -- has Monsieur sent to you?" continued the Captain: "is that there
letter from him?

"No, -- it i'n't; -- besides, if it is, it is nothing to you."

"O then, I Am sure it is! Pray now, Madame, don't be so close; come, tell us
all about it, -- what does he say? how did he relish the horsepond? -- which
did he find best, sousing single or double? -- Before George, 'twas plaguey
unlucky you was not with him!"

"It Is no such a thing, Sir," cried she, very angrily, "and if you're so very
fond of a horsepond, I wish you would put yourself into one, and not be always a
thinking about other people's being served so."

The man then came in, to acquaint her they could not overtake the boy. She
scolded violently, and was in such perturbation, that Lady Howard interfered,
and begged to know the cause of her uneasiness, and whether she could assist
her?

Madame Duval cast her eyes upon the Captain, and Sir Clement, and said she
should be glad to speak to her Ladyship, without so many witnesses.

"Well, then, Miss Anville," said the Captain, turning to me, "do you and Molly
go into another room, and stay there till Mrs. Duval has opened her mind to us."

"So you may think, Sir," cried she, "but who is fool then? no, no, you need n't
trouble yourself to make a ninny of me, neither, for I Am not so easily taken in
I Will assure you."

Lady Howard then invited her into the dressingroom, and I was desired to
attend her.

As soon as we had shut the door, "O my Lady," exclaimed Madame Duval, "here is
the most cruellest thing in the world has happened! -- but that Captain is such
a beast, I cannot say nothing before him, -- but it is all true! poor M. Du Bois
is tooked up!"

Lady Howard begged her to be comforted, saying that as M. Du Bois was
certainly innocent, there could be no doubt of his ability to clear himself.

"To be sure, my Lady," answered she, "I know he is innocent; and to be sure
they will never be so wicked as to hang him for nothing?"

"Certainly not;" replied Lady Howa:d, "you have no reason to be uneasy. This
is not a country where punishment is inflicted without proof."

"Very true, my Lady; but the worst thing is this; I cannot bear that that
fellow, the Captain, should know about it; for if he does, I sha'n't never hear
the last of it; -- no more will not poor M. Du Bois."

"Well, well," said Lady Howard, "show me the letter, and I will endeavor to
advise you."

The letter was then produced. It was signed by the clerk of a country justice;
who acquainted her, that a prisoner, then upon trial for suspicion of
treasonable practices against the government, was just upon the point of being
committed to jail, but having declared that he was known to her, this clerk had
been prevailed upon to write, in order to enquire if she really could speak to
the character and family of a Frenchman who called himself Pierre Du Bois.

When I heard the letter, I was quite amazed at its success. So improbable did
it seem, that a foreigner should be taken before a country justice of peace,
for a crime of so dangerous a nature, that I cannot imagine how Madame Duval
could be alarmed, even for a moment. But, with all her violence of temper, I
see that she is easily frightened, and, in fact, more cowardly than many who
have not half her spirit; and so little does she reflect upon circumstances, or
probability, that she is continually the dupe of her own -- I ought not to say
ignorance, but yet, I can think of no other word.

I believe that Lady Howard, from the beginning of the transaction, suspected
some contrivance of the Captain, and this letter, I am sure, must confirm her
suspicion: however, though she is not at all pleased with his frolic, yet she
would not hazard the consequence of discovering his designs: her looks, her
manner, and her character, made me draw this conclusion from her apparent
perplexity; for not a word did she say, that implied any doubt of the
authenticity of the letter. Indeed there seems to be a sort of tacit agreement
between her and the Captain, that she should not appear to be acquainted with
his schemes; by which means she at once avoids quarrels, and supports her
dignity.

While she was considering what to propose, Madame Duval begged to have the use
of her Ladyship's chariot, that she might go immediately to the assistance of
her friend. Lady Howard politely assured her that it would be extremely at her
service; and then Madame Duval besought her not to own to the Captain what had
happened, protesting that she could not endure he should know that poor M. Du
Bois had met with so unfortunate an accident. Lady Howard could not help
smiling, though she readily promised not to inform the Captain of the affair.
As to me, she desired my attendance; which I was by no means rejoiced at, as I
was certain she was going upon a fruitless errand.

I was then commissioned to order the chariot.

At the foot of the stairs I met the captain, who was most impatiently waiting
the result of the conference. In an instant we were joined by Sir Clement. A
thousand enquiries were then made concerning Madame Duval's opinion of the
letter, and her intentions upon it: and when I would have left them, Sir
Clement, pretending equal eagerness with the Captain, caught my hand, and
repeatedly detained me, to ask some frivolous question, to the answer of which
he must be totally indifferent. At length, however, I broke from them; they
retired into the parlour, and I executed my commission.

The carriage was soon ready, and Madame Duval, having begged Lady Howard to
say she was not well, stole softly down stairs, desiring me to follow her. The
chariot was ordered at the garden door; and when we were seated, she told the
man, according to the clerk's directions, to drive to Mr. Justice Tyrell's,
asking, at the same time, how many miles off he lived?

I expected he would have answered that he knew of no such person; but, to my
great surprise, he said, "Why 'Squire Tyrell lives about nine miles beyond the
park."

"Drive fast, then," cried she, "and you sha'n't be no worse for it."

During our ride, which was extremely tedious, she tormented herself with a
thousand fears for M. Du Bois' safety; and piqued herself very much upon having
escaped unseen by the Captain, not only that she avoided his triumph, but
because she knew him to be so much M. Du Bois' enemy, that she was sure he
would prejudice the Justice against him, and endeavor to take away his life.
For my part, I was quite ashamed of being engaged in so ridiculous an affair,
and could only think of the absurd appearance we should make upon our arrival
at Mr. Tyrell's.

When we had been out near two hours, and expected every moment to stop at the
place of our destination, I observed that Lady Howard's servant, who attended
us on horseback, rode on forward till he was out of sight, and soon after
returning, came up to the chariot-window, and delivering a note to Madame
Duval, said he had met a boy, who was just coming with it to Howard Grove, from
the clerk of Mr. Tyrell.

While she was reading it, he rode round to the other window, and, making a
sign for secrecy, put into my hand a slip of paper, on which was written,
"Whatever happens, be not alarmed, -- for you are safe, -- though you endanger
all mankind!"

I readily imagined that Sir Clement must be the author of this note, which
prepared me to expect some disagreeable adventure: but I had no time to ponder
upon it, for Madame Duval had no sooner read her own letter, than, in an angry
tone of voice, she exclaimed, "Why now what a thing is this! here we are come
all this way for nothing!"

She then gave me the note, which informed her, that she need not trouble
herself to go to Mr. Tyrell's, as the prisoner had had the address to escape. I
congratulated her upon this fortunate incident; but she was so much concerned
at having rode so far in vain, that she seemed less pleased than provoked.
However, she ordered the man to make what haste he could home, as she hoped, at
least to return before the Captain should suspect what had passed.

The carriage turned about, and we journeyed so quietly for near an hour, that
I began to flatter myself we should be suffered to proceed to Howard Grove
without further molestation, when, suddenly, the footman called out, "John, are
we going right?"

"Why I a'n't sure," said the coachman, "but I Am afraid we turned wrong."

"What do you mean by that, Sirrah?" said Madame Duval, "why if you lose your
way we shall be all in the dark."

"I think we should turn to the left," said the footman.

"To the left!" answered the other, "No, no, I Am partly sure we should turn to
the right."

"You had better make some enquiry," said I.

" Ma foi," cried Madame Duval, "we are in a fine hole, here! -- they neither of
them know more than the post. However, I Will tell my Lady, as sure as you're
born, so you would better find the way."

"Let Us try this lane," said the footman.

"No," said the coachman, "that is the road to Canterbury; we had best go
straight on."

"Why that is the direct London road," returned the footman, "and will lead us
twenty miles about."

" Pardie," cried Madame Duval, "why they will not go one way nor the other! and,
now we are come all this jaunt for nothing, I suppose we sha'n't get home
tonight!"

"Let Us go back to the public-house," said the footman, "and ask for a guide."

"No, no," said the other, "if we stay here a few minutes, somebody or other
will pass by; and the horses are almost knocked up already."

"Well, I protest," cried Madame Duval, "I Would give a guinea to see them sots
both horse-whipped! As sure as I Am alive, they are drunk! Ten to one but they will
overturn us next!"

After much debating, they, at length, agreed to go on, till we came to some
inn, or met with a passenger who could direct us. We soon arrived at a small
farm-house, and the footman alighted, and went into it.

In a few minutes he returned, and told us we might proceed, for that he had
procured a direction; "But," added he, "it seems there are some thieves
hereabouts; and so the best way will be for you to leave your watches and
purses with the farmer, who I know very well, and who is an honest man, and a
tenant of my Lady's."

"Thieves!" cried Madame Duval, looking aghast, "the Lord help us! -- I Have no
doubt but we shall be all murdered!"

The farmer came to us, and we gave him all we were worth, and the servants
followed our example. We then proceeded, and Madame Duval's anger so entirely
subsided, that, in the mildest manner imaginable, she entreated them to make
haste, and promised to tell their Lady how diligent and obliging they had been.
She perpetually stopped them, to ask if they apprehended any danger; and was,
at length, so much overpowered by her fears, that she made the footman fasten
his horse to the back of the carriage, and then come and seat himself within
it. My endeavors to encourage her were fruitless; she sat in the middle, held
the man by the arm, and protested that if he did but save her life, she would
make his fortune. Her uneasiness gave me much concern, and it was with the
utmost difficulty I forbore to acquaint her that she was imposed upon; but the
mutual fear of the Captain's resentment to me, and of her own to him, neither
of which would have any moderation, deterred me. As to the footman, he was
evidently in torture from restraining his laughter, and I observed that he was
frequently obliged to make horrid grimaces, from pretended fear, in order to
conceal his risibility.

Very soon after, "The robbers are coming!" cried the coachman.

The footman opened the door, and jumped out of the chariot.

Madame Duval gave a loud scream.

I could no longer preserve my silence, "For Heaven's sake, my dear Madam,"
said I, don't be alarmed, -- you are in no danger -- you are quite safe, there
is nothing but -- "

Here the chariot was stopped, by two men in masks, who, at each side, put in
their hands, as if for our purses. Madame Duval sunk to the bottom of the
chariot, and implored their mercy. I shrieked involuntarily, although prepared
for the attack: one of them held me fast, while the other tore poor Madame
Duval out of the carriage, in spite of her cries, threats, and resistance.

I was really frightened, and trembled exceedingly. "My angel!" cried the man
who held me, "you cannot surely be alarmed, -- do you not know me? -- I shall
hold myself in eternal abhorrence, if I have really terrified you."

"Indeed, Sir Clement, you have," cried I, -- "but, for Heaven's sake, where is
Madame Duval? -- why is she forced away?"

"She is perfectly safe; the Captain has her in charge: but suffer me now, my
adored Miss Anville, to take the only opportunity that is allowed me, to speak
upon another, a much dearer, much sweeter subject."

And then he hastily came into the chariot, and seated himself next to me. I
would fain have disengaged myself from him, but he would not let me; "Deny me
not, most charming of women," cried he, "deny me not this only moment that is
lent me, to pour forth my soul into your gentle ears, -- to tell you how much I
suffer from your absence, -- how much I dread your displeasure, -- and how
cruelly I am affected by your coldness!"

"O Sir, this is no time for such language, -- pray leave me, pray go to the
relief of Madame Duval, -- I cannot bear that she should be treated with such
indignity."

"And will you, -- can you command my absence? -- When may I speak to you, if
not now? -- does the Captain suffer me to breathe a moment out of his sight? --
and are not a thousand impertinent people for ever at your elbow?"

"Indeed, Sir Clement, you must change your style, or I will not hear you. The
impertinent people you mean, are among my best friends, and you would not, if
you really wished me well, speak of them so disrespectfully."

"Wish you well! -- O, Miss Anville, point but out to me how, in what manner, I
may convince you of the fervor of my passion, -- tell me but what services you
will accept from me, and you shall find my life, my fortune, my whole soul at
your devotion."

"I want nothing, Sir, that you can offer; -- I beg you not to talk to me so --
so strangely. Pray leave me, and pray assure yourself, you cannot take any
method so successless to show any regard for me, as entering into schemes so
frightful to Madame Duval, and so disagreeable to myself."

"The scheme was the Captain's; I even opposed it: though, I own, I could not
refuse myself the so-long-wished-for happiness, of speaking to you once more,
without so many of -- your friends to watch me. And I had flattered myself that
the note I had charged the footman to give you would have prevented the alarm
you have received."

"Well, Sir, you have now, I hope, said enough; and, if you will not go
yourself to see for Madame Duval, at least suffer me to enquire what is become
of her."

"And when may I speak to you again?"

"No matter when, -- I don't know, -- perhaps -- "

"Perhaps what, my angel?"

"Perhaps never, Sir, -- if you torment me thus."

"Never! O Miss Anville, how cruel, how piercing to my soul is that icy word!
-- Indeed, I cannot endure such displeasure."

Then, Sir, you must not provoke it. Pray leave me directly."

"I will, Madam: but let me, at least, make a merit of my obedience, -- allow
me to hope, that you will, in future, be less averse to trusting yourself for a
few moments alone with me."

I was surprised at the freedom of this request; but while I hesitated how to
answer it, the other mask came up to the chariot door, and in a voice almost
stifled with laughter, said, "I Have done for her! the old buck is safe; -- but
we must sheer off directly, or we shall be all a-ground."

Sir Clement instantly left me, mounted his horse, and rode off. The Captain,
having given some directions to the servants, followed him.

I was both uneasy and impatient to know the fate of Madame Duval, and
immediately got out of the chariot to seek her. I desired the footman to show
me which was she was gone; he pointed with his finger, by way of answer, and I
saw that he dared not trust his voice to make any other. I walked on, a very
quick pace, and soon, to my great consternation, perceived the poor lady,
seated upright in a ditch. I flew to her, with unfeigned concern at her
situation. She was sobbing, nay, almost roaring, and in the utmost agony of
rage and terror. As soon as she saw me she redoubled her cries, but her voice
was so broken, I could not understand a word she said. I was so much shocked,
that it was with difficulty I forbore exclaiming against the cruelty of the
Captain, for thus wantonly ill-treating her; and I could not forgive myself for
having passively suffered the deception. I used my utmost endeavors to comfort
her, assuring her of our present safety, and begging her to rise, and return to
the chariot.

Almost bursting with passion, she pointed to her feet, and with frightful
violence, she actually beat the ground with her hands.

I then saw, that her feet were tied together with a strong rope, which was
fastened to the upper branch of a tree, even with an hedge which ran along the
ditch where she sat. I endeavored to untie the knot, but soon sound it was
infinitely beyond my strength. I was, therefore, obliged to apply to the
footman; but being very unwilling to add to his mirth, by the sight of Madame
Duval's situation, I desired him to lend me a knife; I returned with it, and
cut the rope. Her feet were soon disentangled, and then, though with great
difficulty, I assisted her to rise. But what was my astonishment, when, the
moment she was up, she hit me a violent slap on the face! I retreated from her
with precipitation and dread, and she then loaded me with reproaches, which,
though almost unintelligible, convinced me that she imagined I had voluntarily
deserted her; but she seemed not to have the slightest suspicion that she had
not been attacked by real robbers.

I was so much surprised and confounded at the blow, that, for some time, I
suffered her to rave, without making any answer; but her extreme agitation, and
real suffering, soon dispelled my anger, which all turned into compassion. I
then told her, that I had been forcibly detained from following her, and
assured her of my real sorrow at her ill usage.

She began to be somewhat appeased; and I again entreated her to return to the
carriage, or give me leave to order that it should draw up to the place where
we stood. She made no answer, till I told her, that the longer we remained
still, the greater would be the danger of our ride home. Struck with this hint,
she suddenly, and with hasty steps, moved forward.

Her dress was in such disorder, that I was quite sorry to have her figure
exposed to the servants, who all of them, in imitation of their master, hold
her in derision: however, the disgrace was unavoidable.

The ditch, happily, was almost quite dry, or she must have suffered still more
severely; yet, so forlorn, so miserable a figure, I never before saw. Her
head-dress had fallen off; her linen was torn; her negligee had not a pin left
in it; her petticoats she was obliged to hold on; and her shoes were
perpetually slipping off. She was covered with dirt, weeds, and filth, and her
face was really horrible, for the pomatum and powder from her head, and the
dust from the road, were quite pasted on her skin by her tears, which, with her
rouge, made so frightful a mixture, that she hardly looked human.

The servants were ready to die with laughter, the moment they saw her; but not
all my remonstrances could prevail upon her to get into the carriage, till she
had most vehemently reproached them both, for not rescuing her. The footman,
fixing his eyes on the ground, as if fearful of again trusting himself to look
at her, protested that the robbers had vowed they would shoot him, if he moved
an inch, and that one of them had stayed to watch the chariot, while the other
carried her off; adding, that the reason of their behaving so barbarously, was
to revenge our having secured our purses. Notwithstanding her anger, she gave
immediate credit to what he said, and really imagined that her want of money
had irritated the pretended robbers to treat her with such cruelty. I
determined, therefore, to be carefully upon my guard, not to betray the
imposition, which could now answer no other purpose, than occasioning an
irreparable breach between her and the Captain.

Just as we were seated in the chariot, she discovered the loss which her head
had sustained, and called out, "My God! what is become of my hair? -- why the
villain has stole all my curls!"

She then ordered the man to run and see if he could find any of them in the
ditch. He went, and presently returning, produced a great quantity of hair, in
such a nasty condition, that I was amazed she would take it; and the man as he
delivered it to her, found it impossible to keep his countenance; which she had
no sooner observed, than all her stormy passions were again raised. She flung
the battered curls in his face, saying, "Sirrah, what do you grin for? I wish
you would been served so yourself, and you would n't have found it no such joke:
you are the impudentest fellow ever I see, and if I find you dare grin at me
any more, I shall make no ceremony of boxing your ears."

Satisfied with the threat, the man hastily retired, and we drove on.

Her anger now subsiding into grief, she began most sorrowfully to lament her
case. "I believe, she cried, "never nobody was so unlucky as I am! and so here,
because I have not had misfortunes enough already, that puppy has made me lose my
curls! -- Why, I cannot see nobody without them: -- only look at me, -- I was
never so bad off in my life before. Pardie, if I Would know'd as much, I Would have
brought two or three sets with me: but I Would never a thought of such a thing as
this."

Finding her now somewhat pacified, I ventured to ask an account of her
adventure, which I will endeavor to write in her own words.

"Why, child, all this misfortune comes of that puppy making us leave our money
behind us; for as soon as the robber see I did not put nothing in his hands, he
lugged me out of the chariot, by main force, and I verily thought he would have
murdered me. He was as strong as a lion; I was no more in his hands than a
child. But I believe never nobody was so abused before, for he dragged me down
the road, pulling and hawling me all the way, as if I Would no more feeling than a
horse. I Am sure I wish I could see that man cut up and quartered alive!
however, he will come to the gallows, that is one good thing. So, as soon as we'd
got out of sight of the chariot, -- though he need n't have been afraid, for if
he would beat me to a mummy, those cowardly fellows would n't have said nothing to
it. -- So, when I was got there, what does he do, but, all of a sudden, he
takes me by both the shoulders, and he gives me such a shake! -- Mon Dieu! I
shall never forget it, if I live to be an hundred. I Am sure I dare say I Am out
of joint all over. And, though I made as much noise as ever I could, he took no
more notice of it than nothing at all, but there he stood, shaking me in that
manner, as if he was doing it for a wager. I Am determined, if it costs me all
my fortune, I Will see that villain hanged. He shall be found out, if there is
e're a justice in England. So when he had shooked me till he was tired, and I
felt all over like a jelly, without saying never a word, he takes and pops me
into the ditch! I Am sure I thought he would have murdered me, as sure as I ever
thought any thing in my life, for he kept bumping me about, as if he thought
nothing too bad for me. However, I Am resolved I Will never leave my purse behind
me again, the longest day I have to live. So when he could n't stand over me no
longer, he holds out his hands again for my money; but he was as cunning as he
could be, for he would n't speak a word, because I should n't swear to his
voice; however, that shall not save him, for I Will swear to him any day in the
year, if I can but catch him. So, when I told him I had no money, he fell to
jerking me again, just as if he had but that moment begun! And, after that he
got me close by a tree, and out of his pocket he pulls a great cord! -- It Is a
wonder I did not swoon away, for as sure as you're alive, he was going to hang
me to that tree. I screamed like any thing mad, and told him if he would but
spare my life, I Would never prosecute him, nor tell nobody what he would done to me:
so he stood some time quite in a brown study, a thinking what he should do. And
so, after that, he forced me to sit down in the ditch, and he tied my feet
together, just as you see them, and then, as if he had not done enough, he
twitched off my cap, and, without saying nothing, got on his horse, and left me
in that condition, thinking, I suppose, that I might lie there and perish."

Though this narrative almost compelled me to laugh, yet I was really irritated
with the Captain, for carrying his love of tormenting, -- sport, he calls it,
-- to such barbarous and unjustifiable extremes. I consoled and soothed her as
well as I was able, and told her that, since M. Du Bois had escaped, I hoped,
when she recovered from her fright, all would end well.

"Fright, child!" repeated she, "why, that is not half; -- I promise you, I wish
it was; but here I Am bruised from top to toe, and it is well if ever I have the
right use of my limbs again. However, I Am glad the villain got nothing but his
trouble for his pains. But here the worst is to come, for I cannot go out,
because I have got no curls, and so he will be escaped, before I can get to the
Justice to stop him. I Am resolved I Will tell Lady Howard how her man served me,
for if he had'nt made me fling 'em away, I dare say I could have pinned them up
well enough for the country."

"Perhaps Lady Howard may be able to lend you a cap that will wear without
them."

"Lady Howard, indeed! why, do you think I Would wear one of her dowdies? No, I Will
promise you, I shall not put on no such disguisement. It Is the unluckiest thing in
the world that I did not make the man pick up the curls again; but he put me in
such a passion, I could not think of nothing. I know I cannot get none at Howard
Grove for love nor money, for of all the stupid places ever I see, that Howard
Grove is the worst! there is never no getting nothing one wants."

This sort of conversation lasted till we arrived at our journey's end; and
then, a new distress occurred; Madame Duval was eager to speak to Lady Howard
and Mrs. Mirvan, and to relate her misfortunes, but she could not endure that
Sir Clement or the Captain should see her in such disorder, for she said they
were so ill-natured, that instead of pitying her, they would only make a jest
of her disasters. She therefore sent me first into the house, to wait for an
opportunity of their being out of the way, that she might steal up stairs
unobserved. In this I succeeded, as the gentlemen thought it most prudent not
to seem watching for her; though they both contrived to divert themselves with
peeping at her as she passed.

She went immediately to bed, where she had her supper. Lady Howard and Mrs.
Mirvan both of them very kindly sat with her, and listened to her tale with
compassionate attention; while Miss Mirvan and I retired to our own room, where
I was very glad to end the troubles of the day in a comfortable conversation.

The Captain's raptures, during supper, at the success of his plan, were
boundless. I spoke, afterward, to Mrs. Mirvan, with the openness which her
kindness encourages, and begged her to remonstrate with him upon the cruelty of
tormenting Madame Duval so causelessly. She promised to take the first
opportunity of starting the subject, but said he was at present, so much elated
that he would not listen to her with any patience. However should he make any
new efforts to molest her, I can by no means consent to be passive. Had I
imagined he would have been so violent, I would have risked his anger in her
defense much sooner.

She has kept her bed all day, and declares she is almost bruised to death.

Adieu, dear Sir. What a long letter have I written! I could almost fancy I
sent it you from London!

LETTER XXXIV
Evelina in continuation.
Howard Grove, May 15.
THIS insatiable Captain, if left to himself, would not, I believe, rest, till
he had tormented Madame Duval into a fever. He seems to have no delight but in
terrifying or provoking her, and all his thoughts apparently turn upon
inventing such methods as may do it most effectually.

She had her breakfast again in bed yesterday morning; but during ours, the
Captain with a very significant look at Sir Clement, gave us to understand,
that he thought she had now rested long enough to bear the hardships of a fresh
campaign.

His meaning was obvious, and, therefore, I resolved to endeavor immediately
to put a stop to his intended exploits. When breakfast was over, I followed
Mrs. Mirvan out of the parlour, and begged her to lose no time in pleading the
cause of Madame Duval with the Captain. "My love," answered she, I have already
expostulated with him; but all I can say is fruitless, while his favorite Sir
Clement contrives to urge him on."

"Then I will go and speak to Sir Clement," said I, "for I know he will desist,
if I request him."

"Have a care, my dear," said she, smiling, "it is sometimes dangerous to make
requests to men, who are too desirous of receiving them."

"Well then, my dear Madam, will you give me leave to speak myself to the
Captain?

"Willingly; nay, I will accompany you to him."

I thanked her, and we went to seek him. He was walking in the garden with Sir
Clement. Mrs. Mirvan most obligingly made anopening for my purpose, by saying,
"Mr. Mirvan, I have brought a petitioner with me."

"Why, what is the matter now?" cried he.

I was fearful of making him angry, and stammered very much, when I told him, I
hoped he had no new plan for alarming Madame Duval.

" New plan!" cried he, "why, you don't suppose the old one would do again, do
you? Not but what it was a very good one, only I doubt she would n't bite."

"Indeed, Sir, said I, "she has already suffered too much, and I hope you will
pardon me, if I take the liberty of telling you, that I think it my duty to do
all in my power to prevent her being again so much terrified."

A sullen gloominess instantly clouded his face, and, turning short from me, he
said, I might do as I pleased, but that I should much sooner repent than repair
my officiousness.

I was too much disconcerted at this rebuff, to attempt making any answer, and,
finding that Sir Clement warmly espoused my cause, I walked away, and left them
to discuss the point together.

Mrs. Mirvan, who never speaks to the Captain when he is out of humor, was
glad to follow me, and, with her usual sweetness, made a thousand apologies for
her husband's ill-manners.

When I left her, I went to Madame Duval, who was just risen, and employed in
examining the clothes she had on the day of her ill usage.

"Here Is a sight! cried she. Come here, child, -- only look -- Pardie, so long
as I Have lived, I never see so much before! Why all my things are spoilt, and,
what is worse, my sacque was as good as new. Here Is the second negligee I Have
used in this manner! -- I am sure I was a fool to put it on, in such a lonesome
place as this; however, if I stay here these ten years, I Will never put on
another good gown, that I Am resolved."

"Will you let the maid try if she can iron it out, or clean it, Ma'am?

"No, she will only make bad worse. -- But look here, now, here is a cloak! Mon
Dieu! why it looks like a dish-clout! Of all the unluckinesses that ever I met,
this is the worst! for, do you know, I bought it but the day before I left
Paris? -- Besides, into the bargain, my cap's quite gone; where the villain
twitched it, I don't know, but I see no more of it from that time to this Now
you must know this was the becomingest cap I had in the world, for I Have never
another with pink ribbon in it; and, to tell you the truth, if I had n't
thought to have seen M. Du Bois, I Would no more have put it on than I Would have
flown; for as to what one wears in such a stupid place as this, it signifies no
more than nothing at all."

She then told me, that she had been thinking all night of a contrivance to
hinder the Captain's finding out her loss of curls; which was, having a large
gauze handkerchief pinned on her head as a hood, and saying she had the
toothache.

"To tell you the truth," added she, "I believe that Captain is one of the
worst men in the world; he is always making a joke of me; and as to his being a
gentleman, he has no more manners than a bear, for he is always upon the grin
when one's in distress, and, I declare, I Would rather be done any thing to than
laughed at, for, to my mind, it is one or other the disagreeablest thing in the
world."

Mrs. Mirvan, I found, had been endeavoring to dissuade her from the design
she had formed, of having recourse to the law, in order to find out the
supposed robbers; for she dreads a discovery of the Captain, during Madame
Duval's stay at Howard Grove, as it could not fail being productive of infinite
commotion. She has, therefore, taken great pains to show the inutility of
applying to justice, unless she were more able to describe the offenders
against whom she would appear, and has assured her, that as she neither heard
their voices, nor saw their faces, she cannot possibly swear to their persons,
or obtain any redress.

Madame Duval, in telling me this, extremely lamented her hard fate, that she
was thus prevented from revenging her injuries; which, however, she vowed she
would not be persuaded to pocket tamely, "because," added she, "if such
villains as these are let to have their own way, and nobody takes no notice of
their impudence, they will make no more ado than nothing at all of tying people
in ditches, and such things as that: however, I shall consult with M. Du Bois,
as soon I can ferret out where he is hid himself. I Am sure I Have a right to his
advice, for it is all along of his gaping about at the Tower that I Have met with
these misfortunes."

"M. Du Bois, said I, will, I am sure, be very sorry when he hears what has
happened."

"And what good will that do now? -- that will not unspoil all my clothes; I can
tell him, I a'n't much obliged to him, though it is no fault of his; -- yet it
i'n't the less provokinger for that. I Am sure, if he had been there, to have
seen me served in that manner, and put neck and heels into a ditch, he would no
more have thought it was me, than the Pope of Rome. I Will promise you, whatever
you may think of it, I sha'n't have no rest, night nor day, till I find out
that rogue."

"I have no doubt, Madam, but you will soon discover him."

" Pardie, if I do, I Will hang him, as sure as fate! -- but what is the oddest,
is that he should take such a 'special spite against me, above all the rest! it
was as much for nothing, as could be, for I don't know what I have done, so
particular bad, to be used in that manner: I Am sure, I had n't given him no
offense, as I know of, for I never see his face all the time; and as to
screaming a little, I think it is very hard if one must n't do such a thing as
that, when one's put in fear of one's life."

During this conversation, she endeavored to adjust her head-dress, but could
not at all please herself. Indeed, had I not been present, I should have
thought it impossible for a woman at her time of life to be so very difficult
in regard to dress. What she may have in view, I cannot imagine, but the labor
of the toilette seems the chief business of her life.

When I left her, in my way down stairs, I met with Sir Clement, who, with
great earnestness, said he must not be denied the honor of a moment's
conversation with me; and then, without waiting for an answer, he led me to the
garden, at the door of which, however, I absolutely insisted upon stopping.

He seemed very serious, and said, in a very grave tone of voice, "At length,
Miss Anville, I flatter myself that I have hit upon an expedient that will
oblige you, and therefore, though it is death to myself, I will put it in
practice."

I begged him to explain himself.

"I saw your desire of saving Madame Duval, and scarce could I refrain giving
the brutal Captain my real opinion of his savage conduct; but I am unwilling to
quarrel with him, lest I should be denied entrance into a house which you
inhabit: I have been endeavoring to prevail with him to give up his absurd new
scheme, but I find him impenetrable; -- I have therefore determined to make a
pretense for suddenly leaving this place, dear as it is to me, and containing
all I most admire and adore; -- and I will stay in town till the violence of
this boobyish humor is abated."

He ssopped; but I was silent, for I knew not what I ought to say. He took my
hand, which he pressed to his lips, saying, "And must I, then, Miss Anville,
must I quit you -- sacrifice voluntarily my greatest felicity, -- and yet not
be honored with one word, one look of approbation?" --

I withdrew my hand, and said, with a half laugh, "You know so well, Sir
Clement, the value of the favors you confer, that it would be superfluous for
me to point it out."

"Charming, charming girl! how does your wit, your understanding rise upon me
daily! and must I, can I part with you? -- will no other method -- "

"O Sir, do you so soon repent the good office you had planned for Madame
Duval?"

"For Madame Duval! -- cruel creature, and will you not even suffer me to place
to your account the sacrifice I am about to make?"

"You must place it, Sir, to what account you please; but I am too much in
haste now to stay here any longer."

And then I would have left him, but he held me, and, rather impatiently, said,
"If, then, I cannot be so happy as to oblige you, Miss Anville, you must not be
surprised, should I seek to oblige myself. If my scheme is not honored with
your approbation, for which alone it was formed, why should I, to my own
infinite dissatisfaction, pursue it?"

We were then, for a few minutes, both silent; I was really unwilling he should
give up a plan, which would so effectually break into the Captain's designs,
and, at the same time, save me the pain of disobliging him; and I should
instantly and thankfully have accepted his offered civility, had not Mrs.
Mirvan's caution made me fearful. However, when he pressed me to speak, I said,
in an ironical voice, "I had thought, Sir, that the very strong sense you have
yourself of the favor you propose to me, would sufficiently have repaid you,
but, as I was mistaken, I must thank you myself. And now," making a low
courtesy, "I hope, Sir, you are satisfied."

"Loveliest of thy sex -- " he began, but I forced myself from him, and ran up
stairs.

Soon after, Miss Mirvan told me that Sir Clement had just received a letter,
which obliged him instantly to leave the Grove, and that he had actually
ordered a chaise. I then acquainted her with the real state of the affair.
Indeed, I conceal nothing from her, she is so gentle and sweettempered, that it
gives me great pleasure to place an entire confidence in her.

At dinner, I must own, we all missed him; for though the flightiness of his
behavior to me, when we are by ourselves, is very distressing, yet, in large
companies, and general conversation, he is extremely entertaining and
agreeable. As to the Captain, he has been so much chagrined at his departure,
that he has scarce spoken a word since he went: but Madame Duval, who made her
first public appearance since her accident, was quite in raptures that she
escaped seeing him.

The money which we left at the farm-house, has been returned to us. What pains
the Captain must have taken to arrange and manage the adventures which he chose
we should meet with! Yet he must certainly be discovered, for Madame Duval is
already very much perplexed, at having received a letter this morning from M.
Du Bois, in which he makes no mention of his imprisonment. However, she has so
little suspicion, that she imputes his silence upon the subject, to his fears
that the letter might be intercepted.

Not one opportunity could I meet with, while Sir Clement was here, to enquire
after his friend Lord Orville: but I think it was strange he should never
mention him unasked. Indeed, I rather wonder that Mrs. Mirvan herself did not
introduce the subject, for she always seemed particularly attentive to him.

And now, once more, all my thoughts involuntarily turn upon the letter I so
soon expect from Paris. This visit of Sir Clement has, however, somewhat
diverted my fears, and therefore I am very glad he made it at this time. Adieu,
my dear Sir.

LETTER XXXV.
Sir John Belmont to Lady Howard.
Paris, May 11. Madam,
I Have this moment the honor of your Ladyship's letter, and I will not wait
another, before I return an answer.

It seldom happens that a man, though extolled as a saint, is really without
blemish; or that another, though reviled as a devil, is really without
humanity. Perhaps the time is not very distant, when I may have the honor to
convince your Ladyship of this truth, in regard to Mr. Villars and myself.

As to the young Lady, whom Mr. Villars so obligingly proposes presenting to
me, I wish her all the happiness to which, by your Ladyship's account, she
seems entitled; and if she has a third part of the merit of her to whom you
compare her, I doubt not but Mr. Villars will be more successful in every other
application he may make for her advantage, than he can ever be in any with
which he may be pleased to favor me.

I have the honor to be, Madam, your Ladyship's most humble and most obedient
servant JOHN BELMONT.

LETTER XXXVI.
Evelina to the Rev. Mr. Villars.
Howard Grove, May 18.
WELL, my dear Sir, all is now over! the letter so anxiously expected, is at
length arrived, and my doom is fixed. The various feelings which oppress me, I
have not language to describe; nor need I, -- you know my heart, you have
yourself formed it, -- and its sensations upon this occasion, you may but too
readily imagine

Outcast as I am; and rejected for ever by him to whom I of right belong, --
shall I now implore your continual protection? -- no, no, -- I will not offend
your generous heart (which, open to distress, has no wish but to relieve it)
with an application that would seem to imply a doubt. I am more secure than
ever of your kindness, since you now know upon that is my sole dependence.

I endeavor to bear this stroke with composure, and in such a manner as if I
had already received your counsel and consolation. Yet, at times, my emotions
are almost too much for me. O Sir, what a letter for a parent to write! must I
not myself be deaf to the voice of Nature, if I could endure to be thus
absolutely abandoned, without regret? I dare not, even to you, nor would I,
could I help it, to myself, acknowledge all that I think; for, indeed, I have,
sometimes, sentiments upon this rejection, which my strongest sense of duty can
scarcely correct. Yet, suffer me to ask, -- might not this answer have been
softened? -- was it not enough to disclaim me for ever, without treating me
with contempt, and wounding me with derision?

But, while I am thus thinking of myself, I forget how much more he is the
object of sorrow, than I am! Alas, what amends can he make himself, for the
anguish he is hoarding up for time to come! My heart bleeds for him, whenever
this reflection occurs to me.

What is said of you, my protector, my friend, my benefactor! -- I dare not
trust myself to comment upon. Gracious Heaven! what a return for goodness so
unparalleled!

I would fain endeavor to divert my thoughts from this subject, but even that
is not in my power; for, afflicting as this letter is to me, I find that it
will not be allowed to conclude the affair, though it does all my expectations:
for Madame Duval has determined not to let it rest here. She heard the letter
in great wrath, and protested she would not be so easily answered; she
regretted her facility, in having been prevailed upon to yield the direction of
this affair to those who knew not how to manage it, and vowed she would herself
undertake and conduct it in future.

It is in vain that I have pleaded against her resolution, and besought her to
forbear an attack, where she has nothing to expect but resentment; especially
as there seems to be a hint, that Lady Howard will one day be more openly dealt
with: she will not hear me; she is furiously bent upon a project which is
terrible to think of, -- for she means to go go herself to Paris, take me with
her, and there, face to face, demand justice!

How to appease or to persuade her, I know not; but for the universe would I
not be dragged, in such a manner, to an interview so awful, with a parent I
have never yet beheld!

Lady Howard and Mrs. Mirvan are both of them infinitely shocked at the present
situation of affairs, and they seem to be even more kind to me than ever; and
my dear Maria, who is the friend of my heart, uses her utmost efforts to
console me, and, when she fails in her design, with still greater kindness, she
sympathises in my sorrow.

I very much rejoice, however, that Sir Clement Willoughby had left us before
this letter arrived. I am sure the general confusion of the house would,
otherwise, have betrayed to him the whole of a tale which I now, more than
ever, wish to have buried in oblivion.

Lady Howard thinks I ought not to disoblige Madame Duval, yet she acknowledges
the impropriety of my accompanying her abroad upon such an enterprise. Indeed I
would rather die, than force myself into his presence. But so vehement is
Madame Duval, that she would instantly have compelled me to attend her to town,
in her way to Paris, had not Lady Howard so far exerted herself, as to declare
she could by no means consent to my quitting her house, till she gave me up to
you, by whose permission I had entered it.

She was extremely angry at this denial; and the Captain, by his sneers and
raillery, so much increased her rage, that she has positively declared, should
your next letter dispute her authority to guide me by her own pleasure, she
will, without hesitation, make a journey to Berry Hill, and teach you to know
who she is.

Should she put this threat in execution, nothing could give me greater
uneasiness, for her violence and volubility would almost distract you.

Unable as I am to act for myself, or to judge what conduct I ought to pursue,
how grateful do I feel myself, that I have such a guide and director to counsel
and instruct me as yourself!

Adieu, my dearest Sir! Heaven, I trust, will never never let me live to be
repulsed and derided by you, to whom I may now sign myself

Wholly your EVELINA.

LETTER XXXVII.
Mr. Villars to Evelina.
Berry Hill, May 25.
LET not my Evelina be depressed by a stroke of fortune for which she is not
responsible. No breach of duty on your part, has incurred the unkindness which
has been shown you, nor have you, by any act of imprudence, provoked either
censure or reproach. Let me entreat you, therefore, my dearest child, to
support yourself with that courage which your innocence ought to inspire; and
let all the affliction you allow yourself, be for him only, who not having that
support, must one day be but too severely sensible how much he wants it.

The hint thrown out concerning myself, is wholly unintelligible to me: my
heart, I dare own, fully acquits me of vice, but without blemish, I have never
ventured to pronounce myself. However, it seems his intention to be hereafter
more explicit, and then, -- should any thing appear, that has, on my part,
contributed to those misfortunes we lament, let me, at least, say, that the
most partial of my friends cannot be so much astonished as I shall myself be,
at such a discovery.

The mention, also, of any future applications I may make, is equally beyond my
comprehension. But I will not dwell upon a subject which almost compels from me
reflections that cannot but be wounding to a heart so formed for filial
tenderness as my Evelina's. There is an air of mystery throughout the letter,
the explanation of which I will await in silence.

The scheme of Madame Duval is such as might be reasonably expected from a
woman so little inured to disappointment, and so totally incapable of
considering the delicacy of your situation. Your averseness to her plan gives
me pleasure, for it exactly corresponds with my own. Why will she not make the
journey she projects by herself? She would not have even the wish of an
opposition to encounter. And then, once more, might my child and myself be left
to the quiet enjoyment of that peaceful happiness, which she alone has
interrupted. As to her coming hither, I could, indeed, dispense with such a
visit; but, if she will not be satisfied with my refusal by letter, I must
submit to the task of giving it her in person.

My impatience for your return is increased by your account of Sir Clement
Willoughby's visit to Howard Grove. I am but little surprised at the
perseverance of his assiduities to interest you in his favor; but I am very
much hurt that you should be exposed to addresses, which, by their privacy,
have an air that shocks me. You cannot, my love, be too circumspect; the
slightest carelessness on your part, will be taken advantage of, by a man of
his disposition. It is not sufficient for you to be reserved; his conduct even
calls for your resentment: and should he again, as will doubtless be his
endeavor, contrive to solicit your favor in private, let your disdain and
displeasure be so marked, as to constrain a change in his behavior. Though,
indeed, should his visit be repeated while you remain at the Grove, Lady Howard
must pardon me if I shorten yours.

Adieu, my child. You will always make my respects to the hospitable family to
which we are so much obliged.

LETTER XXXVII.
Mr. Villars to Lady Howard.
Berry-Hill, May 27. Dear Madam,
I BELIEVE your Ladyship will not be surprised at hearing I have had a visit
from Madame Duval, as I doubt not her having made known her intention before
she left Howard Grove. I would gladly have excused myself this meeting, could I
have avoided it decently; but, after so long a journey, it was not possible to
refuse her admittance.

She told me, that she came to Berry Hill, in consequence of a letter I had
sent to her granddaughter, in which I had forbid her going to Paris. Very
roughly, she then called me to account for the authority which I assumed! and,
had I been disposed to have argued with her, she would very angrily have
disputed the right by which I used it. But I declined all debating. I therefore
listened very quietly, till she had so much fatigued herself with talking, that
she was glad, in her turn, to be silent. And then I begged to know the purport
of her visit.

She answered, that she came to make me relinquish the power I had usurped over
her granddaughter, and assured me she would not quit the place till she
succeeded.

But I will not trouble your Ladyship with the particulars of this disagreeable
conversation; nor should I, but on account of the result, have chosen so
unpleasant a subject for your perusal. However, I will be as concise as I
possibly can, that the better occupations of your ladyship's time may be the
less impeded.

When she found me inexorable in refusing Evelina's attending her to Paris, she
peremptorily insisted, that she should, at least, live with her in London, till
Sir John Belmont's return. I remonstrated against this scheme with all the
energy in my power; but the contest was vain; she lost her patience, and I my
time. She declared that if I was resolute in opposing her, she would instantly
make a will, in which she would leave all her fortune to strangers, though,
otherwise, she intended her granddaughter for her sole heiress.

To me, I own, this threat seemed of little consequence; I have long accustomed
myself to think, that, with a competency, of which she is sure, my child might
be as happy as in the possession of millions: but the incertitude of her future
fate, deters me from following implicitly the dictates of my present judgment.
The connections she may hereafter form, the style of life for which she may be
destined, and the future family to which she may belong, are considerations
which give but too much weight to the menaces of Madame Duval. In short, Madam,
after a discourse infinitely tedious, I was obliged, though very reluctantly,
to compromise with this ungovernable woman, by consenting that Evelina should
pass one month with her.

I never made a concession with so bad a grace, or so much regret. The violence
and vulgarity of this woman, her total ignorance of propriety, the family to
which she is related, and the company she is likely to keep, are objections so
forcible to her having the charge of this dear child, that nothing less than my
diffidence of the right I have of depriving her of so large a fortune, would
have induced me to listen to her proposal. Indeed we parted, at last, equally
discontented, she, at what I had refused, I, at what I had granted.

It now only remains for me to return your Ladyship my humble acknowledgments
for the kindness which you have so liberally shown to my ward, and to beg you
would have the goodness to part with her, when Madame Duval thinks proper to
claim the promise which she has extorted from me. I am,

Dear Madam, etc. ARTHUR VILLARS.

LETTER XXXIX.
Mr. Villars to Evelina.
Berry Hill, May 28.
WITH a reluctance which occasions me inexpressible uneasiness, I have been
almost compelled to consent that my Evelina should quit the protection of the
hospitable and respectable Lady Howard, and accompany Madame Duval to a city to
which I had hoped she had bid an eternal adieu. But alas, my dear child, we are
the slaves of custom, the dupes of prejudice, and dare not stem the torrent of
an opposing world, even though our judgments condemn our compliance! however,
since the die is cast, we must endeavor to make the best of it.

You will have occasion, in the course of the month you are to pass with Madame
Duval, for all the circumspection and prudence you can call to your aid: she
will not, I know, propose any thing to you which she thinks wrong herself; but
you must learn not only to judge but to act for yourself; if any schemes are
started, any engagements made, which your understanding represents to you as
improper, exert yourself resolutely in avoiding them, and do not, by a too
passive facility, risk the censure of the world, or your own future regret.

You cannot too assiduously attend to Madame Duval herself; but I would wish
you to mix as little as possible with her associates, who are not likely to be
among those whose acquaintance would reflect credit upon you. Remember, my dear
Evelina, nothing is so delicate as the reputation of a woman: it is, at once,
the most beautiful and most brittle of all human things.

Adieu, my beloved child; I shall be but ill at ease till this month is elapsed.

A. V.

LETTER XL.
Evelina to the Rev. Mr. Villars.
London, June 6.
ONCE more, my dearest Sir, I write to you from this great city. Yesterday
morning, with the truest concern, I quitted the dear inhabitants of Howard
Grove, and most impatiently shall I count the days till I see them again. Lady
Howard and Mrs. Mirvan took leave of me with the most flattering kindness; but
indeed I knew not how to part with Maria, whose own apparent sorrow redoubled
mine. She made me promise to send her a letter every post. And I shall write to
her with the same fre^^om, and almost the same confidence, you allow me to make
use of to yourself.

The Captain was very civil to me, but he wrangled with poor Madame Duval to
the last moment; and, taking me aside, just before we got into the chaise, he
said, "Hark'ee, Miss Anville, I Have a favor for to ask of you, which is this;
that you will write us word how the old gentlewoman finds herself, when she
sees it was all a trick; and what the French lubber says to it, and all about
it."

I answered that I would obey him, though I was very little pleased with the
commission, which, to me, was highly improper: but he will either treat me as
an informer, or make me a party in his frolic.

As soon as we drove away, Madame Duval, with much satisfaction, exclaimed "
Dieu merci, we have got off at last! I Am sure I never desire to see that place
again. It Is a wonder I Have got away alive; for I believe I Have had the worst luck
ever was known, from the time I set my foot upon the threshold. I know I wish
I Would never a gone. Besides, into the bargain, it is the most dullest place in all
Christendom: there is never no diversions, nor nothing at all."

Then she bewailed M. Du Bois, concerning whose adventures she continued to
make various conjectures during the rest of our journey.

When I asked her what part of London she should reside in, she told me that
Mr. Branghton was to meet us at an inn, and would conduct us to a lodging.
Accordingly, we proceeded to a house in Bishopsgate-street, and were led by a
waiter into a room where we found Mr. Branghton.

He received us very civilly, but seemed rather surprised at seeing me, saying
"Why I did n't think of your bringing Miss; however she is very welcome."

"I Will tell you how it was," said Madame Duval; "you must know I Have a mind to
take the girl to Paris, that she may see something of the world, and improve
herself a little; besides, I Have another reason, that you and I will talk more
about; but do you know, that meddling old parson as I told you of, ^ould not
let her go: however, I Am resolved I Will be even with him, for I shall take her
on with me, without saying never a word more to nobody."

I started at this intimation, which very much surprised me. But I am very glad
she has discovered her intention, as I shall be carefully upon my guard not to
venture from town with her.

Mr. Branghton then hoped we had passed our time agreeably in the country.

"O Lord, Cousin," cried she, "I Have been the miserablest creature in the world!
I Am sure all the horses in London shall not drag me into the country again of one
while: why how do you think I Have been served? -- only guess."

"Indeed, Cousin, I cannot pretend to do that."

"Why then I Will tell you. Do you know, I Have been robbed! -- that is, the
villain would have robbed me if he could, only I Would secured all my money."

"Why then, Cousin, I think your loss cannot have been very great."

"O Lord, you don't know what you're a saying; you're talking in the
unthinkingest manner in the world: why it was all along of not having no money,
that I met with that misfortune."

"How Is that, Cousin? I don't see what great misfortune you can have met with,
if you would secured all your money."

"That Is because you don't know nothing of the matter; for there the villain
came to the chaise, and because we had n't got nothing to give him, though he would
no more right to our money than the man in the moon, yet, do you know, he fell
into the greatest passion ever you see, and abused me in such a manner, and put
me in a ditch, and got a rope, of purpose to hang me, -- and I Am sure, if that
was n't misfortune enough, why I don't know what is."

"This is a hard case, indeed, Cousin. But why don't you go to justice
Fielding?"

"O, as to that, I Am a going to him directly; but only I want first to see poor
M. Du Bois, for the oddest thing of all is, that he has wrote to me, and never
said nothing of where he is, nor what is become of him, nor nothing else."

"M. Du Bois! why he is at my house at this very time."

"M. Du Bois at your house! well, I declare this is the surprisingest part of
all! however, I assure you, I think he might have comed for me, as well as you,
considering what I have gone through on his account; for, to tell you the
truth, it was all along of him that I met with that accident; so I don't take
it very kind of him, I promise you."

"Well but, Cousin, tell me some of the particulars of this affair."

"As to the particulars, I Am sure they would make your hair stand an end to hear
them; however, the beginning of it all was through the fault of M. Du Bois: but,
I Will assure you, he may take care of himself in future, since he don't so much
as come to see if I Am dead or alive; -- but there I went for him to a justice
of peace, and rode all out of the way, and did every thing in the world, and
was used worser than a dog, and all for the sake of serving him, and now, you
see, he don't so much -- well, I was a fool for my pains, -- however, he may
get somebody else to be treated so another time, for if he is taken up every day
in the week, I Will never go after him no more."

This occasioned an explanation, in the course of which, Madame Duval, to her
utter amazement, heard that M. Du Bois had never left London during her
absence! nor did Mr. Branghton believe that he had ever been to the Tower, or
met with any kind of accident.

Almost instantly, the whole truth of the transaction seemed to rush upon her
mind, and her wrath was inconceivably violent. She asked me a thousand
questions in a breath, but, fortunately, was too vehement to attend to my
embarrassment, which must, otherwise, have betrayed my knowledge of the deceit.
Revenge was her first wish, and she vowed she would go the next morning to
Justice Fielding, and enquire what punishment she might lawfully inflict upon
the Captain for his assault.

I believe we were an hour in Bishopsgate-street, ere poor Madame Duval could
allow any thing to be mentioned but her own story; at length, however, Mr.
Branghton told her, that M. Du Bois, and all his own family, were waiting for
her at his house. A hackney-coach was then called, and we proceeded to
Snow-hill.

Mr. Branghton's house is small and inconvenient, though his shop, which takes
in all the ground floor, is large and commodious. I believe I told you before
that he is a silver-smith.

We were conducted up two pair of stairs, for the dining room, Mr. Branghton
told us, was let. His two daughters, their brother, M. Du Bois, and a young
man, were at tea. They had waited some time for Madame Duval, but I found they
had not any expectation that I should accompany her; and the young ladies, I
believe, were rather more surprised than pleased when I made my appearance; for
they seemed hurt that I should see their apartment. Indeed I would willingly
have saved them that pain, had it been in my power.

The first person who saw me was M. Du Bois: " Ah, mon Dieu!" exclaimed he,
voila Mademoiselle!"

"Goodness," cried young Branghton, if there is n't Miss!"

"Lord, so there is," said Miss Polly; "well, I Am sure I should never have
dreamed of Miss's coming."

"Nor I neither, I Am sure," cried Miss Branghton, "or else I would not have
been in this room to see her; I Am quite ashamed about it, -- only not thinking
of seeing any body but my aunt -- however, Tom, it is all your fault, for you
know very well I wanted to borrow Mr. Smith's room, only you were so grumty,
you would not let me."

"Lord, what signifies;" said the brother, "I dare be sworn Miss has been up
two pair of stairs before now; -- Have Not you, Miss?"

I begged that I might not give them the least disturbance, and assured them
that I had not any choice in regard to what room we sat in.

"Well," said Miss Polly, "when you come next, Miss, we'll have Mr. Smith's
room; and it is a very pretty one, and only up one pair of stairs, and nicely
furnished, and every thing."

"To say the truth," said Miss Branghton, "I thought that my cousin would not,
upon any account, have come to town in the summer time; for it is not at all the
fashion, -- so, to be sure, thinks I, she will stay till September, when the
play houses open."

This was my reception, which I believe you will not call a very cordial one.
Madame Duval, who, after having severely reprimanded M. Du Bois for his
negligence, was just entering upon the story of her misfortunes, now wholly
engaged the company.

M. Du Bois listened to her with a look of the utmost horror, repeatedly
lifting up his eyes and hands, and exclaiming, " O ciel! quel barbare!" The
young ladies gave her the most earnest attention; but their brother, and the
young man, kept a broad grin upon their faces during the whole recital. She
was, however, too much engaged to observe them: but, when she mentioned having
been tied in a ditch, young Branghton, no longer able to constrain himself,
burst into a loud laugh, declaring that he had never heard any thing so funny
in his life! His laugh was heartily re-echoed by his friend; the Miss
Branghtons could not resist the example; and poor Madame Duval, to her extreme
amazement, was absolutely overpowered and stopped by the violence of their
mirth.

For some minutes the room seemed quite in an uproar; the rage of Madame Duval,
the astonishment of M. Du Bois, and the angry interrogatories of Mr. Branghton,
on one side; the convulsive tittering of the sisters, and the loud laughs of
the young men, on the other, occasioned such noise, passion, and confusion,
that had any one stopped an instant on the stairs, he must have concluded
himself in Bedlam. At length, however, the father brought them to order; and,
half laughing, half frightened, they made Madame Duval some very awkward
apologies. But she would not be prevailed upon to continue her narrative, till
they had protested they were laughing at the Captain, and not at her. Appeased
by this, she resumed her story; which, by the help of stuffing handkerchiefs
into their mouths, the young people heard with tolerable decency.

Every body agreed, that the ill usage the Captain had given her was
actionable, and Mr. Branghton said he was sure she might recover what damages
she pleased, since she had been put in fear of her life.

She then, with great delight, declared, that she would lose no time in
satisfying her revenge, and vowed she would not be contented with less than
half his fortune: "For though," said she, "I don't put no value upon the money,
because, Dieu merci, I have not no want of it, yet I don't wish for nothing so
much as to punish that fellow; for, I Am sure, whatever's the cause of it, he
owes me a great grudge, and I know no more what it is for than you do, but he is
always been doing me one spite or other, ever since I knew him."

Soon after tea, Miss Branghton took an opportunity to tell me, in a whisper,
that the young man I saw was a lover of her sister's, that his name was Brown,
and that he was a haberdasher, with many other particulars of his circumstances
and family; and then she declared her utter aversion to the thoughts of such a
match; but added, that her sister had no manner of spirit or ambition, though
for her part, she would ten times rather die an old maid, than marry any person
but a gentleman. And, for that matter," added she, "I believe Polly herself
don't care much for him, only she is in such a hurry, because, I suppose, she is
a mind to be married before me; however, she is very welcome, for I Am sure, I
don't care a pin's point whether I ever marry at all; -- it is all one to me."

Some time after this, Miss Polly contrived to tell her story. She assured me,
with much tittering, that her sister was in a great fright, lest she should be
married first, "So I make her believe that I will," continued she, "for I love
dearly to plague her a little; though, I declare, I don't intend to have Mr.
Brown in reality; I Am sure I don't like him half well enough, -- do you, Miss?"

"It is not possible for me to judge of his merits, said I, as I am entirely a
stranger to him."

"But what do you think of him, Miss?"

"Why, really, I -- I don't know -- "

"But do you think him handsome? Some people reckon him to have a good pretty
person, -- but, I Am sure, for my part, I think he is monstrous ugly: -- don't
you, Miss?"

"I am no judge, -- but I think his person is very -- very well --."

" Very well! -- Why, pray, Miss," in a tone of vexation, "what fault can you
find with it?"

"O, none at all!"

"I Am sure you must be very ill-natured if you could. Now there is Biddy says
she thinks nothing of him, -- but I know it is all out of spite. You must know,
Miss, it makes her as mad as can be, that I should have a lover before her, but
she is so proud, that nobody will court her, and I often tell her she will die an
old maid. But, the thing is, she has taken it into her head, to have a liking
for Mr. Smith, as lodges on the first floor; but, Lord, he will never have her,
for he is quite a fine gentleman; and besides, Mr. Brown heard him say, one day,
that he would never marry as long as he lived, for he would no opinion of matrimony."

"And did you tell your sister this?"

"O, to be sure I told her directly; but she did not mind me; however, if she
will be a fool, she must."

This extreme want of affection, and goodnature, increased the distaste I
already felt for these unamiable sisters; and a confidence so entirely
unsolicited and unnecessary, manifested equally their folly and their want of
decency.

I was very glad when the time for our departing arrived. Mr. Branghton said
our lodgings were in Holborn, that we might be near his house, and neighbourly.
He accompanied us to them himself.

Our rooms are large and not inconvenient; our landlord is an hosier. I am sure
I have a thousand reasons to rejoice that I am so little known; for my present
situation is, in every respect, very unenviable, and I would not, for the
world, be seen by any acquaintance of Mrs. Mirvan.

This morning Madame Duval, attended by all the Branghtons, actually went to a
Justice in the neighborhood, to report the Captain's ill usage of her. I had
great difficulty in excusing myself from being of the party, which would have
given me very serious concern. Indeed, I was extremely anxious, though at home,
till I heard the result of the application; for I dread to think of the
uneasiness which such an affair would occasion the amiable Mrs. Mirvan. But,
fortunately, Madame Duval has received very little encouragement to proceed in
her design, for she has been informed that, as she neither heard the voice, nor
saw the face of the person suspected, she will find it difficult to cast him
upon conjecture, and will have but little probability of gaining her cause,
unless she can procure witnesses of the transaction. Mr. Branghton, therefore,
who has considered all the circumstances of the affair, is of opinion, that the
lawsuit will not only be expensive, but tedious and hazardous, and has advised
against it. Madame Duval, though very unwillingly, has acquiesced in his
decision; but vows that if ever she is so affronted again, she will be
revenged, even if she ruins herself. I am extremeiy glad that this ridiculous
adventure seems now likely to end without more serious consequences.

Adieu, my dearest Sir. My direction is at Mr. Dawkins's, a hosier, in High
Holborn.

LETTER XLI.
Evelina to Miss Mirvan.
June 7th.
I HAVE no words, my sweet friend, to express the thankfulness I feel for the
unbounded kindness which you, your dear mother, and the much-honoured Lady
Howard, have shown me; and still less can I find language to tell you with what
reluctance I parted from such dear and generous friends, whose goodness
reflects, at once, so much honor on their own hearts, and on her to whom it
has been so liberally bestowed. But I will not repeat what I have already
written to the kind Mrs. Mirvan; I will remember your admonitions, and confine
to my own breast that gratitude with which you have filled it, and teach my pen
to dwell upon subjects less painful to my generous correspondent.

O Maria, London now seems no longer the same place where I lately enjoyed so
much happiness; every thing is new and strange to me; even the town itself has
not the same aspect: -- my situation so altered! my home so different! -- my
companions so changed! -- But you well know my averseness to this journey.

Indeed, to me, London now seems a desert; that gay and busy appearance it so
lately wore, is now succeeded by a look of gloom, fatigue, and lassitude; the
air seems stagnant, the heat is intense, the dust intolerable, and the
inhabitants illiterate and under-bred. At least, such is the face of things in
the part of the town where I at present reside.

Tell me, my dear Maria, do you never retrace in your memory the time we past
here when together? to mine, it recurs for ever! And yet, I think I rather
recollect a dream, or some visionary fancy, than a reality. -- That I should
ever have been known to Lord Orville, -- that I should have spoken to -- have
danced with him, -- seems now a romantic illusion: and that elegant politeness,
that flattering attention, that high-bred delicacy, which so much distinguished
him above all other men, and which struck us with such admiration, I now
retrace the remembrance of, rather as belonging to an object of ideal
perfection, formed by my own imagination, than to a being of the same race and
nature as those with whom I at present converse.

I have no news for you, my dear Miss Mirvan, for all that I could venture to
say of Madame Duval, I have already written to your sweet mother; and as to
adventures, I have none to record. Situated as I now am, I heartily hope I
shall not meet with any; my wish is to remain quiet and unnoticed.

Adieu! excuse the gravity of this letter, and believe me,

Your most sincerely affectionate and obliged EVELINA ANVILLE.

LETTER XLII.
Evelina to the Rev. Mr. Villars.
Holborn, June 9th.
YESTERDAY morning, we received an invitation to dine and spend the day at Mr.
Branghton's; and M. Du Bois, who was also invited, called to conduct us to
Snow-hill.

Young Branghton received us at the door, and the first words he spoke were,
"Do you know, "Sisters a'n't dressed yet?"

Then, hurrying us into the house, he said to me, "Come, Miss, you shall go up
stairs and catch 'em, -- I dare say they are at the glass."

He would have taken my hand, but I declined his civility, and begged to follow
Madame Duval. Mr. Branghton then appeared, and led the way himself. We went, as
before, up two pair of stairs; but the moment the father opened the door, the
daughters both gave a loud scream. We all stopped, and then Miss Branghton
called out, "Lord, Papa, what do you bring the company up here for? why, Polly
and I a'n't half dressed."

"More shame for you," answered he, here is your aunt, and cousin, and M. Du
Bois, all waiting, and never a room to take them to."

"Who'd have thought of their coming so soon?" cried she: "I Am sure for my part
I thought Miss was used to nothing but quality hours."

"Why, I shall not be ready this half-hour yet," said Miss Polly; "cannot they stay
in the shop till we are dressed?"

Mr. Branghton was very angry, and scolded them violently; however, we were
obliged to descend, and stools were procured for us in the shop, where we found
the brother, who was highly delighted, he said, that his sisters had been
catched; and he thought proper to entertain me with a long account of their
tediousness, and the many quarrels they all had together.

When, at length, these ladies were equipped to their satisfaction, they made
their appearance; but before any conversation was suffered to pass between them
and us, they had a long and most disagreeable dialogue with their father, to
whose reprimands, though so justly incurred, they replied with the utmost
pertness and rudeness, while their brother, all the time, laughed aloud.

The moment they perceived this, they were so much provoked, that, instead of
making any apologies to Madame Duval, they next began a quarrel with him. "Tom,
what do you laugh for? I wonder what business you have to be always a laughing
when Papa scolds us."

"Then what business have you to be such a while getting on your clothes?
You're never ready, you know well enough."

"Lord, Sir, I wonder what that is to you! I wish you would mind your own affairs,
and not trouble yourself about ours. How should a boy like you know any thing?"

"A boy, indeed! not such a boy, neither; I Will warrant you will be glad to be as
young, when you come to be old maids."

This sort of dialogue we were amused with till dinner was ready, when we again
mounted up two pair of stairs.

In our way, Miss Polly told me that her sister had asked Mr. Smith for his
room to dine in, but he had refused to lend it; "because," she said, "one day
it happened to be a little greased: however, we shall have it to drink tea in,
and then, perhaps, you may see him, and I assure you he is quite like one of the
quality, and dresses as fine, and goes to balls and dances, and every thing
quite in taste; -- and besides, Miss, he keeps a footboy of his own, too."

The dinner was ill-served, ill-cooked, and illmanaged. The maid who waited had
so often to go down stairs for something that was forgotten, that the
Branghtons were perpetually obliged to rise from table themselves, to get
plates, knives and forks, bread, or beer. Had they been without pretensions,
all this would have seemed of no consequence; but they aimed at appearing to
advantage, and even fancied they succeeded. However, the most disagreeable part
of our fare was, that the whole family continually disputed whose turn it was
to rise, and whose to be allowed to sit still.

When this meal was over, Madame Duval, Mr. Branghton, and, in broken English.
M. Du Bois, entered into an argument concerning the French nation; and Miss
Polly, then addressing herself to me, said, "Don't you think, Miss, it is very
dull sitting up stairs here? we'd better go down to shop, and then we shall see
the people go by."

"Lord, Poll," said the brother, "you're always wanting to be staring and
gaping; and I Am sure you need n't be so fond of showing yourself, for you're
ugly enough to frighten a horse."

"Ugly, indeed! I wonder which is best, you or me. But, I tell you what, Tom,
you have no need to give yourself such airs, for if you do, I Will tell Miss of you
know what --."

"Who cares if you do? You may tell what you will; I don't mind -- "

"Indeed," cried I, "I do not desire to hear any secrets."

"O, but I Am resolved I Will tell you, because Tom's so very spiteful. You must
know, Miss, the other night -- "

"Poll," cried the brother, "if you tell of that, Miss shall know all about
your meeting young Brown, -- you know when! -- So I Will be quits with you, one
way or another."

Miss Polly colored, and again proposed our going down stairs till Mr. Smith's
room was ready for our reception.

"Aye, so we will," said Miss Branghton; "I Will assure you, Cousin, we have some
very genteel people pass by our shop sometimes. Polly and I always go and sit
there, when we have cleaned ourselves."

"Yes, Miss," cried the brother, "they do nothing else all day long, when
father don't scold them. But the best fun is, when they have got all their dirty
things on, and all their hair about their ears, sometimes I send young Brown up
stairs to them; and then, there is such a fuss! -- there they hide themselves,
and run away, and squeal and squall like any thing mad: and so then I puts the
two cats into the room, and I gives 'em a good whipping, and so that sets them
a squalling too; so there is such a noise, and such an uproar! -- Lord, you
cannot think, Miss, what fun it is!"

This occasioned a fresh quarrel with the sisters; at the end of which, it was,
at length, decided that we should go to the shop.

In our way down stairs, Miss Branghton said aloud, "I wonder when Mr. Smith's
room will be ready."

"So do I," answered Polly; "I Am sure we should not do any harm to it now."

This hint had not the desired effect; for we were suffered to proceed very
quietly.

As we entered the shop, I observed a young man, in deep mourning, leaning
against the wall, with his arms folded, and his eyes fixed on the ground,
apparently in profound and melancholy meditation: but the moment he perceived
us, he started, and, making a passing bow, very abruptly retired. As I found he
was permitted to go quite unnoticed, I could not forbear enquiring who he was.

"Lord!" answered Miss Branghton, "he is nothing but a poor Scotch poet."

"For my part," said Miss Polly, "I believe he is just starved, for I don't find
he has any thing to live upon."

"Live upon!" cried the brother, "why he is a poet, you know, so he may live
upon learning."

"Aye, and good enough for him too," said Miss Branghton, "for he is as proud as
he is poor."

"Like enough," replied the brother, "but, for all that, you will not find he will
live without meat and drink: no, no, catch a Scotchman at that if you can! why,
they only come here for what they can get."

"I Am sure," said Miss Branghton, "I wonder Papa 'll be such a fool as to let
him stay in the house, for I dare say he will never pay for his lodging."

"Why, no more he would, if he could get another Lodger: you know the bill's
been put up this fortnight. Miss, if you should hear of a person that wants a
room, I assure you it is a very good one, for all it is up three pair of
stairs."

I answered, that as I had no acquaintance in London, I had not any chance of
assisting them: but both my compassion and my curiosity were excited for this
poor young man: and I asked them some further particulars concerning him.

They then acquainted me, that they had only known him three months. When he
first lodged with them, he agreed to board also; but had lately told them, he
would eat by himself, though they all believed he had hardly ever tasted a
morsel of meat since he left their table. They said, that he had always
appeared very low-spirited, but, for the last month, he had been duller than
ever, and, all of a sudden, had put himself into mourning, though they knew not
for whom, nor for what, but they supposed it was only for convenience, as no
person had ever been to see or enquire for him since his residence amongst
them: and they were sure he was very poor, as he had not paid for his lodgings
the last three weeks: and finally, they concluded he was a poet, or else
half-crazy, because they had, at different times, found scraps of poetry in his
room.

They then produced some unfinished verses, written on small pieces of paper,
unconnected, and of a most melancholy cast. Among them was the fragment of an
ode, which, at my request, they lent me to copy; and, as you may perhaps like
to see it, I will write it now.

O LIFE! thou lingering dream of grief, of pain,
And every ill that nature can sustain,
Strange, mutable, and wild!
Now flattering with Hope most fair,
Depressing now with fell Despair,
The nurse of Guilt, the slave of Pride,
That, like a wayward child,
Who, to himself a foe,
Sees joy alone in what is denied,
In what is granted, woe!
O thou poor, feeble, fleeting power,
By Vice seduced, by Folly wooed,
By Misery, Shame, Remorse pursued!
And as thy toilsome steps proceed,
Seeming to Youth the fairest flower,
Proving to Age the rankest weed,
A gilded, but a bitter pill,
Of varied, great, and complicated ill!
These lines are harsh, but they indicate an internal wretchedness which, I
own, affects me. Surely this young man must be involved in misfortunes of no
common nature: but I cannot imagine what can induce him to remain with this
unfeeling family, where he is, most unworthily, despised for being poor, and,
most illiberally, detested for being a Scotchman. He may, indeed, have motives
which he cannot surmount, for submitting to such a situation. Whatever they
are, I most heartily pity him, and cannot but wish it were in my power to
afford him some relief.

During this conversation, Mr. Smith's foot boy came to Miss Branghton, and
informed her, that his master said she might have the room now when she liked
it, for that he was presently going out.

This very genteel message, though it perfectly satisfied the Miss Branghtons,
by no means added to my desire of being introduced to this gentleman: and upon
their rising, with intention to accept his offer, I begged they would excuse my
attending them, and said I would sit with Madame Duval till the tea was ready.

I therefore once more went up two pair of stairs, with young Branghton, who
insisted upon accompanying me; and there we remained, till Mr. Smith's footboy
summoned us to tea, when I followed Madame Duval into the dining room.

The Miss Branghtons were seated at one window, and Mr. Smith was lolling
indolently out of the other. They all approached us at our entrance, and Mr.
Smith, probably, to show he was master of the apartment, most officiously
handed me to a great chair, at the upper end of the room, without taking any
notice of Madame Duval, till I rose, and offered her my own seat.

Leaving the rest of the company to entertain themselves, he, very abruptly,
began to address himself to me, in a style of gallantry, equally new and
disagreeable to me. It is true, no man can possibly pay me greater compliments,
or make more fine speeches, than Sir Clement Willoughby, yet his language,
though too flowery, is always that of a gentleman, and his address and manners
are so very superior to those of the inhabitants of this house, that to make
any comparison between him and Mr. Smith would be extremely unjust. This latter
seems very desirous of appearing a man of gaiety and spirit; but his vivacity
is so low bred, and his whole behavior so forward and disagreeable, that I
should prefer the company of dullness itself, even as that goddess is described
by Pope, to that of this sprightly young man.

He made many apologies, that he had not lent his room for our dinner, which,
he said, he should certainly have done, had he seen me first; and he assured
me, that when I came again, he should be very glad to oblige me.

I told him, with sincerity, that every part of the house was equally
indifferent to me.

"Why, Ma'am, the truth is, Miss Biddy and Polly take no care of any thing
else. I Am sure, they should be always welcome to my room; for I Am never so
happy as in obliging the ladies, -- that is my character, Ma'am; -- but, really,
the last time they had it, every thing was made so greasy and so nasty, that,
upon my word, to a man who wishes to have things a little genteel, it was quite
cruel. Now, as to you, Ma'am, its quite another thing; for I should not mind if
every thing I had was spoilt, for the sake of having the pleasure to oblige
you; and, I assure you, Ma'am, it makes me quite happy, that I have a room good
enough to receive you."

This elegant speech was followed by many others, so much in the same style,
that to write them would be superfluous; and, as he did not allow me a moment
to speak to any other person, the rest of the evening was consumed in a painful
attention to this irksome young man, who seemed to intend appearing before me
to the utmost advantage.

Adieu, my dear Sir. I fear you will be sick of reading about this family; yet
I must write of them, or not of any, since I mix with no other. Happy shall I
be, when I quit them all, and again return to Berry Hill!

LETTER XLIII.
Evelina in continuation.
June 10th.
THIS morning, Mr. Smith called, on purpose, he said, to offer me a ticket for
the next Hampstead assembly. I thanked him, but desired to be excused accepting
it; he would not, however, be denied, nor answered, and in a manner both
vehement and free, pressed and urged his offer till I was wearied to death:
but, when he found me resolute, he seemed thunderstruck with amazement, and
thought proper to desire I would tell him my reasons.

Obvious as they must, surely, have been to any other person, they were such as
I knew not how to repeat to him; and, when he found I hesitated, he said,
"Indeed, Ma'am, you are too modest; I assure you the ticket is quite at your
service, and I shall be very happy to dance with you; so pray don't be so coy."

"Indeed, Sir," returned I, "you are mistaken; I never supposed you would offer
a ticket, without wishing it should be accepted; but it would answer no purpose
to mention the reasons which make me decline it, since they cannot possibly be
removed."

This speech seemed very much to mortify him, which I could not be concerned
at, as I did not choose to be treated by him with so much freedom. When he was,
at last, convinced that his application to me was ineffectual, he addressed
himself to Madame Duval, and begged she would interfere in his favor,
offering, at the same time, to procure another ticket for herself.

" Ma foi, Sir," answered she, angrily, "you might as well have had the
complaisance to ask me before, for, I assure you, I don't approve of no such
rudeness: however, you may keep your tickets to yourself, for we don't want
none of 'em.

This rebuke almost over set him; he made many apologies, and said that he
should certainly have first applied to her, but that he had no notion the young
lady would have refused him, and, on the contrary, had concluded that she would
have assisted him to persuade Madame Duval herself.

This excuse appeased her; and he pleaded his cause so successfully, that, to
my great chagrin, he gained it; and Madame Duval promised that she would go
herself, and take me to the Hampstead assembly whenever he pleased.

Mr. Smith then, approaching me with an air of triumph, said, "Well, Ma'am,
now, I think, you cannot possibly keep to your denial."

I made no answer, and he soon took leave, though not till he had so
wonderfully gained the favor of Madame Duval, that she declared, when he was
gone, he was the prettiest young man she had seen since she came to England.

As soon as I could find an opportunity, I ventured, in the most humble manner,
to entreat Madame Duval would not insist upon my attending her to this ball;
and represented to her, as well as I was able, the impropriety of my accepting
any present from a young man so entirely unknown to me: but she laughed at my
scruples, called me a foolish, ignorant, country girl, and said she should make
it her business to teach me something of the world.

This ball is to be next week. I am sure it is not more improper for, than
unpleasant to me, and I will use every possible endeavor to avoid it. Perhaps
I may apply to Miss Branghton for advice, as I believe she will be willing to
assist me, from disliking, equally with myself, that I should dance with Mr.
Smith.

July 11th.

O, my dear Sir! I have been shocked to death, -- and yet, at the same time,
delighted beyond expression, in the hope that I have happily been the
instrument of saving a human creature from destruction!

This morning, Madame Duval said she would invite the Branghton family to
return our visit tomorrow; and, not choosing to rise herself, -- for she
generally spends the morning in bed, -- she desired me to wait upon them with
her message. M. Du Bois, who just then called, insisted upon attending me.

Mr. Branghton was in the shop, and told us that his son and daughters were
out; but desired me to step up stairs, as he very soon expected them home. This
I did, leaving M. Du Bois below. I went into the room where they had dined the
day before, and, by a wonderful chance, I happended so to seat myself, that I
had a view of the stairs, and yet could not be seen from them.

In about ten minutes time, I saw, passing by the door, with a look perturbed
and affrighted, the same young man I mentioned in my last letter. Not heeding,
as I suppose, how he went, in turning the corner of the stairs, which are
narrow and winding, his foot slipped, and he fell, but, almost instantly
rising, I plainly perceived the end of a pistol, which started from his pocket,
by hitting against the stairs.

I was inexpressibly shocked. All that I had heard of his misery occurring to
my memory, made me conclude, that he was, at that very moment, meditating
suicide! Struck with the dreadful idea, all my strength seemed to fail me; -- I
sat motionless; -- I lost all power of action, -- and grew almost stiff with
horror.

He moved on slowly, -- yet I soon lost sight of him. I then trembled so
violently, that my chair actually shook under me; till, recollecting that it
was yet possible to prevent the fatal deed, all my faculties seemed to return,
with the hope of saving him.

My first thought was to fly to Mr. Branghton, but I feared that an instant of
time lost, might for ever be rued; and therefore, guided by the impulse of my
apprehensions, as well as I was able, I followed him up stairs, stepping very
softly, and obliged to support myself by the banisters.

When I came within a few stairs of the landingplace, I stopped, for I could
then see into his room, as he had not yet shut the door.

He had put the pistol upon a table, and had his hand in his pocket, whence, in
a few moments, he took out another: He then emptied something on the table from
a small leather bag; after which, taking up both the pistols, one in each hand,
he dropped hastily upon his knees, and called out "O God! -- Forgive me!"

In a moment, strength and courage seemed lent me as by inspiration: I started,
and rushing precipitately into the room, just caught his arm, and then,
overcome by my own fears, I fell down at his side, breathless and senseless. My
recovery, however, was, I believe, almost instantaneous; and then the sight of
this unhappy man, regarding me with a look of unutterable astonishment, mixed
with concern, presently restored to me my recollection. I arose, though with
difficulty; he did the same; the pistols, as I soon saw, were both on the floor.

Unwilling to leave them, and, indeed, too weak to move, I leant one hand on
the table, and then stood perfectly still: while he, his eyes cast wildly
toward me, seemed too infinitely amazed to be capable of either speech or
action.

I believe we were some minutes in this extraordinary situation; but, as my
strength returned, I felt myself both ashamed and awkward, and making a slight
courtesy, I moved toward the door. Pale, and motionless, he suffered me to
pass, without changing his posture, or uttering a syllable; and, indeed, He
looked a bloodless image of despair! Pope's Iliad.



When I reached the door, I turned round; I looked fearfully at the pistols,
and, impelled by an emotion I could not repress, I hastily stepped back, with
an intention of carrying them away: but their wretched owner, perceiving my
design, and recovering from his astonishment, darting suddenly down, seized
them both himself.

Wild with fright, and scarce knowing what I did, I caught, almost
involuntarily, hold of both his arms, and exclaimed "O Sir! have mercy on
yourself!"

The guilty pistols fell from his hands, which, disengaging from me, he
fervently clasped, and cried, "Sweet Heaven! is this thy angel?"

Encouraged by such gentleness, I again attempted to take the pistols, but,
with a look half frantic, he again prevented me, saying, "What would you do?"

"Awaken you," I cried, with a courage I now wonder at, "to worthier thoughts,
and rescue you from perdition."

I then seized the pistols; he said not a word, -- he made no effort to stop
me; -- I glided quick by him, and tottered down stairs, ere he had recovered
from the extremest amazement.

The moment I reached again the room I had so fearfully left, I threw away the
pistols, and flinging myself on the first chair, gave free vent to the feelings
I had most painfully stifled, in a violent burst of tears, which, indeed,
proved a happy relief to me.

In this situation I remained some time; but when, at length, I lifted up my
head, the first object I saw, was the poor man who had occasioned my terror,
standing, as if petrified, at the door, and gazing at me with eyes of wild
wonder.

I started from the chair, but trembled so excessively, that I almost instantly
sunk again into it. He then, though without advancing, and in a faltering
voice, said, "Whoever or whatever you are, relieve me, I pray you, from the
suspense under which my soul labors -- and tell me if indeed I do not dream?"

To this address, so singular and so solemn, I had not then the presence of
mind to frame any answer; but, as I presently perceived that his eyes turned
from me to the pistols, and that he seemed to intend regaining them, I exerted
all my strength, and saying "O for Heaven's sake, forbear!" I rose and took
them myself.

"Do my senses deceive me!" cried he, "do I live --? and do you --?"

As he spoke, he advanced toward me, and I, still guarding the pistols,
retreated, saying "No, no, -- you must not -- must not have them!" --

"Why -- for what purpose, tell me! -- do you withhold them?"

"To give you time to think, to save you from eternal misery, -- and, I hope,
to reserve you for mercy and forgiveness."

"Wonderful!" cried he, with uplifted hands and eyes, "most wonderful!"

For some time, he seemed wrapped in deep thought, till a sudden noise of
tongues below, announcing the approach of the Branghtons, made him start from
his reverie: he sprung hastily forward, -- dropped on one knee, -- caught hold of
my gown, which he pressed to his lips, and then, quick as lightning, he rose,
and flew up stairs to his own room.

There was something in the whole of this extraordinary and shocking adventure,
really too affecting to be borne; and so entirely had I spent my spirits and
exhausted my courage, that, before the Branghtons reached me, I had sunk on the
ground, without sense or motion.

I believe I must have been a very horrid sight to them, on their entrance into
the room; for, to all appearance, I seemed to have suffered a violent death,
either by my own rashness, or the cruelty of some murderer; as the pistols were
fallen close by my side.

How soon I recovered, I know not, but, probably, I was more indebted to the
loudness of their cries, than to their assistance; for they all concluded that
I was dead, and, for some time, did not make any effort to revive me.

Scarcely could I recollect where or, indeed, what I was, ere they poured upon
me such a torrent of questions and enquiries, that I was almost stunned with
their vociferation. However, as soon and as well as I was able, I endeavored
to satisfy their curiosity, by recounting what had happened as clearly as was
in my power. They all looked aghast at the recital, but, not being well enough
to enter into any discussions, I begged to have a chair called, and to return
instantly home.

Before I left them, I recommended, with great earnestness, a vigilant
observance of their unhappy lodger, and that they would take especial care to
keep from him, if possible, all means of self-destruction.

M. Du Bois, who seemed extremely concerned at my indisposition, walked by the
side of the chair, and saw me safe to my own apartment.

The rashness and the misery of this ill-fated young man, engross all my
thoughts. If, indeed, he is bent upon destroying himself, all efforts to save
him will be fruitless. How much do I wish it were in my power to discover the
nature of the malady which thus maddens him, and to offer or to procure
alleviation to his sufferings! I am sure, my dearest Sir, you will be much
concerned for this poor man, and were you here, I doubt not but you would find
some method of awakening him from the error which blinds him, and of pouring
the balm of peace and comfort into his afflicted soul!

LETTER XLIV.
Evelina in continuation.
Holborn, June 13th.
YESTERDAY all the Branghtons dined here. Our conversation was almost wholly
concerning the adventure of the day before. Mr. Branghton said, that his first
thought was instantly to turn his lodger out of doors, "Lest," continued he,
"his killing himself in my house, should bring me into any trouble; but then, I
was afraid I should never get the money he owes me, whereas, if he dies in my
house, I have a right to all he leaves behind him, if he goes off in my debt.
Indeed, I would put him in prison -- but what should I get by that? he could
not earn any thing there to pay me. So I considered about it some time, and
then I determined to ask him, point blank, for my money out of hand. And so I
did, but he told me he would pay me next week: however, I gave him to understand,
that though I was no Scotchman, yet I did not like to be overreached any more
than he; so then, he gave me a ring, which, to my certain knowledge, must be
worth ten guineas, and told me he would not part with it for his life, and a
good deal more such sort of stuff, but that I might keep it till he could pay
me."

"It is ten to one, Father, said young Branghton, if he came fairly by it."

"Very likely not," answered he, "but that will make no great difference; for I
shall be able to prove my right to it all one."

What principles! I could hardly stay in the room.

"I Am determined," said the son, "I Will take some opportunity to affront him
soon, now I know how poor he is, because of the airs he gave himself to me when
he first came."

"And pray how was that, child?" said Madame Duval.

"Why you never knew such a fuss in your life as he made, because, one day at
dinner, I only happened to say, that I supposed he had never got such a good
meal in his life, before he came to England: there he fell in such a passion as
you cannot think; but, for my part, I took notice of it, for to be sure, thinks
I, he must needs be a gentleman, or he would never go to be so angry about it.
However, he will not put his tricks upon me again, in a hurry."

"Well, said Miss Polly, he is grown quite another creature to what he was, and
he does n't run away from us, nor hide himself, nor any thing: and he is as
civil as can be, and he is always in the shop, and he saunters about the stairs,
and he looks at every body who comes in."

"Why you may see what is after plain enough, said Mr. Branghton; he wants to
see Miss again."

"Ha, ha, ha! Lord, how I should laugh," said the son, "if he should have fell
in Love with Miss!"

"I Am sure," said Miss Branghton, "Miss is welcome; but, for my part, I should
be quite ashamed of such a beggarly conquest."

Such was the conversation till tea time, when the appearance of Mr. Smith gave
a new turn to the discourse.

Miss Branghton desired me to remark with what a smart air he entered the room,
and asked me if he had not very much a quality look?

"Come," cried he, advancing to us, "you ladies must not sit together; wherever
I go, I always make it a rule to part the ladies."

And then, handing Miss Branghton to the next chair, he seated himself between
us.

"Well, now, ladies, I think we sit very well. What say you? for my part, I
think it was a very good motion."

"If my Cousin likes it," said Miss Branghton, "I Am sure I Have no objection."

"O," cried he, "I always study what the ladies like, -- that is my first
thought. And, indeed, it is but natural that you should like best to sit by the
gentlemen, for what can you find to say to one another?"

"Say!" cried young Branghton, "O, never you think of that, they will find enough
to say, I Will be sworn. You know the women are never tired of talking."

"Come, come, Tom," said Mr. Smith, "don't be severe upon the ladies; when I Am
by; you know I always take their part."

Soon after, when Miss Branghton offered me some cake, this man of gallantry
said, "Well, if I was that lady, I Would never take any thing from a woman."

"Why not, Sir?"

"Because I should be afraid of being poisoned for being so handsome."

"Who is severe upon the ladies now?" said I.

"Why, really, Ma'am, it was a slip of the tongue; I did not intend to say such
a thing; but one cannot always be on one's guard."

Soon after, the conversation turning upon public places, young Branghton asked
if I had ever been to George's at Hampstead?

"Indeed I never heard the place mentioned."

"Did n't you, Miss?" cried he, eagerly, "why then you have a deal of fun to
come, I Will promise you; and, I tell you what, I Will treat you there some Sunday
soon. So now, Bid and Poll, be sure you don't tell Miss about the chairs, and
all that, for I Have a mind to surprise her; and if I pay, I think I Have a right
to have it my own way."

"George's at Hampstead!" repeated Mr. Smith, contemptuously, "how came you to
think the young Lady would like to go to such a low place as that? But, pray,
Ma'am, have you ever been to Don Saltero's at Chelsea?"

"No, Sir"

"No! -- No! -- nay, then, I must insist on having the pleasure of conducting
you there before long. I assure you, Ma'am, many genteel people go, or else, I
give you my word, I should not recommend it."

"Pray, Cousin," said Mr. Branghton, "have you been to Sadler's Wells, yet?"

"No, Sir."

"No! why then you have seen nothing!"

"Pray, Miss," said the Son, "how do you like the Tower of London?"

"I have never been to it, Sir."

"Goodness!" exclaimed he, "not seen the Tower! -- why may be you have not been
of top of the Monument, neither?"

"No, indeed, I have not."

"Why then you might as well not have come to London, for aught I see, for
you have been no where."

"Pray, Miss," said Polly, "have you been all over Paul's Church, yet?"

"No, Ma'am."

"Well, but, Ma'am," said Mr. Smith, "how do you like Vauxhall and Marybone?"

"I never saw either, Sir."

"No! -- God bless me! -- you really surprise me, -- why Vauxhall is the first
pleasure in life! -- I know nothing like it. -- Well, Ma'am, you must have been
with staange people, indeed, not to have taken you to Vauxhall. Why you have
seen nothing of London yet. -- However, we must try if we cannot make you
amends."

In the course of this catechism, many other places were mentioned of which I
have forgotten the names; but the looks of surprise and contempt that my
repeated negatives incurred, were very diverting.

"Come," said Mr. Smith, after tea, "as this Lady has been with such a queer
set of people, let us show her the difference; suppose we go somewhere tonight?
-- I love to do things with spirit! -- Come, Ladies, where shall we go? For my
part I should like Foote's, -- but the Ladies must choose; I never speak myself."

"Well, Mr. Smith is always in such spirits!" said Miss Branghton.

"Why yes, Ma'am, yes, thank G --, pretty good spirits; -- I have not yet the
cares of the world upon me, -- I am not married, -- ha, ha, ha, -- you will
excuse me, Ladies, -- but I cannot help laughing! -- "

No objection being made, to my great relief, we all proceeded to the little
theater in the Haymarket, where I was extremely entertained by the performance
of the Minor and the Commissary.

They all returned hither to supper.

LETTER XLV.
Evelina in continuation.
June 15th.
YESTERDAY morning, Madame Duval again sent me to Mr. Branghton's, attended by
M. Du Bois, to make some party for the evening; because she had had the vapors
the preceding day, from staying at home.

As I entered the shop, I perceived the unfortunate North Briton, seated in a
corner, with a book in his hand. He cast his melancholy eyes up, as we came in,
and, I believe, immediately recollected my face, for he started and changed
color. I delivered Madame Duval's message to Mr. Branghton; who told me I
should find Polly up stairs, but that the others were gone out.

Up stairs, therefore, I went; and, seated on a window, with Mr. Brown at her
side, sat Miss Polly. I felt a little awkward at disturbing them, and much more
so, at their behavior afterward: for, as soon as the common enquiries were
over, Mr. Brown grew so fond, and so foolish, that I was extremely disgusted.
Polly, all the time, only rebuked him with "La, now, Mr. Brown, do be quiet,
cannot you? -- you should not behave so before company. -- Why now what will
Miss think of me?" -- while her looks plainly showed not merely the pleasure,
but the pride which she took in his caresses.

I did not, by any means, think it necessary to punish myself by witnessing
their tenderness, and, therefore, telling them I would see if Miss Branghton
was returned home, I soon left them, and again descended into the shop.

"So, Miss, you have come again," said Mr. Branghton, "what, I suppose, you have a
mind to sit a little in the shop, and see how the world goes, hay, Miss?"

I made no answer; and M. Du Bois instantly brought me a chair.

The unhappy stranger, who had risen at my entrance, again seated himself; and,
though his head leant toward his book, I could not help observing, that his
eyes were most intently and earnestly turned toward me.

M. Du Bois, as well as his broken English would allow him, endeavored to
entertain us, till the return of Miss Branghton and her brother.

"Lord, how tired I am!" cried the former, "I have not a foot to stand upon."
And then, without any ceremony, she flung herself into the chair from which I
had risen to receive her.

"You tired!" said the brother, "why then what I must be, that have walked
twice as far?" And with equal politeness, he paid the same compliment to M. Du
Bois which his sister had done to me.

Two chairs and three stools completed the furniture of the shop, and Mr.
Branghton, who chose to keep his own seat himself, desired M. Du Bois to take
another; and then, seeing that I was without any, called out to the stranger,
"Come, Mr. Macartney, lend us your stool."

Shocked at their rudeness, I declined the offer, and approaching Miss
Branghton, said, "If you will be so good as to make room for me on your chair,
there will be no occasion to disturb that gentleman."

"Lord, what signifies that?" cried the brother, "he has had his share of
sitting, I Will be sworn."

"And if he has not," said the sister, he has a chair up stairs; and the shop
is our own, I hope."

This grossness so much disgusted me, that I took the stool, and carrying it
back to Mr. Macartney myself, I returned him thanks, as civilly as I could, for
his politeness, but said that I had rather stand.

He looked at me as if unaccustomed to such attention, bowed very respectfully,
but neither spoke, nor yet made use of it.

I soon found that I was an object of derision to all present, except M. Du
Bois, and, therefore, I begged Mr. Branghton would give me an answer for Madame
Duval, as I was in haste to return.

"Well, then, Tom, -- Biddy, -- where have you a mind to go tonight? your Aunt
and Miss want to be abroad and amongst them."

"Why then, Papa," said Miss Branghton, "we'll go to Don Saltero's. Mr. Smith
likes that place, so may be he will go along with us."

"No, no," said the son, "I Am for White-Conduit House; so let us go there."

"White-Conduit House, indeed!" cried his sister, "no, Tom, that I will not."

"Why then let it alone; nobody wants your company; -- we shall do as well
without you, I Will be sworn, and better too."

"I Will tell you what, Tom, if you don't hold your tongue, I Will make you repent
it, -- that I assure you."

Just then, Mr. Smith came into the shop, which he seemed to intend passing
through; but when he saw me, he stopped and began a most courteous enquiry
after my health, protesting that, had he known I was there, he should have come
down sooner. "But, bless me, Ma'am," added he, "what is the reason you stand?"
and then he flew to bring me the seat from which I had just parted.

"Mr. Smith, you are come in very good time," said Mr. Branghton, "to end a
dispute between my son and daughter, about where they shall all go tonight."

"O fie, Tom, -- dispute with a lady!" cried Mr. Smith, "Now, as for me, I Am
for where you will, provided this young Lady is of the party, -- one place is
the same as another to me, so that it be but agreeable to the ladies, -- I
would go any where with you, Ma'am," (to me) "unless, indeed, it were to
church; -- ha, ha, ha, -- you will excuse me, Ma'am, but, really, I never could
conquer my fear of a parson; -- ha, ha, ha, -- really, ladies, I beg your
pardon, for being so rude, but I cannot help laughing for my life!"

"I was just saying, Mr. Smith," said Miss Branghton, "that I should like to go
to Don Saltero's; -- now pray where should you like to go?"

"Why really, Miss Biddy, you know I always let the ladies decide; I never fix
any thing myself; but I should suppose it would be rather hot at the
coffee-house, -- however, pray, Ladies, settle it among yourselves, -- I Am
agreeable to whatever you choose."

It was easy for me to discover, that this man, with all his parade of
conformity, objects to every thing that is not proposed by himself: but he is
so much admired, by this family, for his gentility, that he thinks himself a
complete fine gentleman!

"Come," said Mr. Branghton, "the best way will be to put it to the vote, and
then every body will speak their minds. Biddy, call Poll down stairs. We'll
start fair."

"Lord, Papa," said Miss Branghton, "why cannot you as well send Tom? -- you're
always sending me of the errands."

A dispute then ensued, but Miss Branghton was obliged to yield.

When Mr. Brown and Miss Polly made their appearance, the latter uttered many
complaints of having been called, saying she did not want to come, and was very
well where she was.

"Now, Ladies, your votes;" cried Mr. Smith, "and so, Ma'am," (to me) "we'll
begin with you. What place shall you like best?" and then, in a whisper, he
added, "I assure you, I shall say the same as you do, whether I like it or not."

I said, that as I was ignorant what choice was in my power, I must beg to hear
their decisions first. This was reluctantly assented to; and then Miss
Branghton voted for Saltero's Coffee-house; her sister, for a party to Mother
Red Cap's; the brother, for White-Conduit House; Mr. Brown, for Bagnigge Wells;
Mr. Branghton for Sadler's Wells; and Mr. Smith for Vauxhall.

"Well now, Ma'am," said Mr. Smith, "we have all spoken, and so you must give
the casting vote. Come, what will you fix upon?"

"Sir," answered I, "I was to speak last."

"Well, so you will," said Miss Branghton, "for we have all spoke first."

"Pardon me," returned I, "the voting has not yet been quite general."

And I looked toward Mr. Macartney, to whom I wished extremely to show that I
was not of the same brutal nature with those by whom he was treated so grossly.

"Why pray," said Mr. Branghton, "who have we left out? would you have the cats
and dogs vote?"

"No, Sir," cried I, with some spirit, "I would have that gentleman vote, --
if, indeed, he is not superior to joining our party."

They all looked at me, as if they doubted whether or not they had heard me
right: but, in a few moments, their surprise gave way to a rude burst of
laughter.

Very much displeased, I told M. Du Bois that if he was not ready to go, I
would have a coach called for myself.

O yes, he said, he was always ready to attend me.

Mr. Smith then advancing, attempted to take my hand, and begged me not to
leave them till I had settled the evening's plan.

"I have nothing, Sir," said I, "to do with it, as it is my intention to stay
at home; and therefore Mr. Branghton will be so good as to send Madame Duval
word what place is fixed upon, when it is convenient to him."

And then, making a slight courtesy, I left them.

How much does my disgust for these people increase my pity for poor Mr.
Macartney! I will not see them when I can avoid so doing; but I am determined
to take every opportunity in my power, to show civility to this unhappy man,
whose misfortunes, with this family, only render him an object of scorn. I was,
however, very well pleased with M. Du Bois, who, far from joining in their
mirth, expressed himself extremely shocked at their ill-breeding.

We had not walked ten yards, ere we were followed by Mr. Smith, who came to
make excuses, and to assure me they were only joking, and hoped I took nothing
ill, for, if I did, he would make a quarrel of it himself with the Branghtons,
rather than I should receive any offense.

I begged him not to take any trouble about so immaterial an affair, and
assured him I should not myself. He was so officious, that he would not be
prevailed upon to return home, till he had walked with us to Mr. Dawkin's.

Madame Duval was very much displeased that I brought her so little
satisfaction. White-Conduit House was, at last, fixed upon; and,
notwithstanding my great dislike of such parties and such places, I was obliged
to accompany them.

Very disagreeable, and much according to my expectations, the evening proved.
There were many people all smart and gaudy, and so pert and low-bred, that I
could hardly endure being amongst them; but the party to which, unfortunately,
I belonged, seemed all at home.

LETTER XLVI.
Evelina in continuation.
Holburn, June 17th.
YESTERDAY Mr. Smith carried his point, of making a party for Vauxhall,
consisting of Madame Duval, M. Du Bois, all the Branghtons, Mr. Brown, himself,
-- and me! -- for I find all endeavors vain to escape any thing which these
people desire I should not.

There were twenty disputes previous to our setting out; first, as to the time
of our going: Mr. Branghton, his son, and young Brown, were for six o'clock;
and all the ladies and Mr. Smith were for eight; -- the latter, however,
conquered.

Then, as to the way we should go; some were for a boat, others for a coach,
and Mr. Branghton himself was for walking: but the boat, at length, was decided
upon. Indeed this was the only part of the expedition that was agreeable to me,
for the Thames was delightfully pleasant.

The Garden is very pretty, but too formal; I should have been better pleased,
had it consisted less of strait walks, where Grove nods at grove, each alley
has its brother.
the trees, the numerous lights, and the company in the circle around the
orchestra make a most brilliant and gay appearance; and, had I been with a
party less disagreeable to me, I should have thought it a place formed for
animation and pleasure. There was a concert, in the course of which the
hautbois concerto was so charmingly played, that I could have thought myself
upon enchanted ground, had I had spirits more gentle to associate with. The
hautboy in the open air is heavenly.

Mr. Smith endeavored to attach himself to me, with such officious assiduity,
and impertinent freedom, that he quite sickened me. Indeed, M. Du Bois was the
only man of the party to whom, voluntarily, I ever addressed myself. He is
civil and respectful, and I have found nobody else so since I left Howard
Grove. His English is very bad, but I prefer it to speaking French myself,
which I dare not venture to do. I converse with him frequently, both to
disengage myself from others, and to oblige Madame Duval, who is always pleased
when he is attended to.

As we were walking about the orchestra, I heard a bell ring, and, in a moment,
Mr. Smyth, flying up to me, caught my hand, and, with a motion too quick to be
resisted, ran away with me many yards before I had breath to ask his meaning,
though I struggled as well as I could to get from him. At last, however, I
insisted upon stopping; "Stopping, Ma'am!" cried he, "why, we must run on, or
we shall lose the cascade!

And then again, he hurried me away, mixing with a crowd of people, all running
with so much velocity, that I could not imagine what had raised such an alarm.
We were soon followed by the rest of the party; and my surprise and ignorance
proved a source of diversion to them all, that was not exhausted the whole
evening. Young Branghton, in particular, laughed till he could hardly stand.

The scene of the cascade I thought extremely pretty, and the general effect
striking and lively.

But this was not the only surprise which was to divert them at my expense; for
they led me about the garden, purposely to enjoy my first sight of various
other deceptions.

About ten o'clock, Mr. Smith having chosen a box in a very conspicuous place,
we all went to supper. Much fault was found with every thing that was ordered,
though not a morsel of any thing was left; and the dearness of the provisions,
with conjectures upon what profit was made by them, supplied discourse during
the whole meal.

When wine and cider were brought, Mr. Smith said, "Now let us enjoy ourselves;
now is the time, or never. Well, Ma'am, and how do you like Vauxhall?"

"Like it!" cried young Branghton, "why, how can she help liking it? she has
never seen such a place before, that I Will answer for."

"For my part," said Miss Branghton, I like it, because it is not vulgar."

"This must have been a fine treat for you, Miss," said Mr. Branghton; "why, I
suppose, you was never so happy in all your life before?"

I endeavored to express my satisfaction with some pleasure, yet I believe
they were much amazed at my coldness.

"Miss ought to stay in town till the last night," said young Branghton, "and
then, it is my belief, she would say something to it! Why, Lord, it is the best night
of any; there is always a riot, -- and there the folks run about, -- and then
there is such squealing and squalling! -- and there all the lamps are broke, --
and the women run skimper scamper; -- I declare I would not take five guineas
to miss the last night!"

I was very glad when they all grew tired of sitting, and called for the waiter
to pay the bill. The Miss Branghtons said they would walk on, while the
gentlemen settled the account, and asked me to accompany them; which, however,
I declined.

"You girls may do as you please," said Madame Duval, "but as to me, I promise
you, I sha'n't go no where without the gentlemen."

"No more, I suppose, will my Cousin," said Miss Branghton, looking
reproachfully toward Mr. Smith.

This reflection, which, I feared, would slatter his vanity, made me, most
unfortunately, request Madame Duval's permission to attend them. She granted
it, and away we went, having promised to meet in the room.

To the room, therefore, I would immediately have gone; but the sisters agreed
that they would first have a little pleasure, and they tittered, and talked so
loud, that they attracted universal notice.

"Lord, Polly," said the eldest, "suppose we were to take a turn in the dark
walks!"

"Ay, do," answered she, "and then we'll hide ourselves, and then Mr. Brown
will think we are lost."

I remonstrated very warmly against this plan, telling them, that it would
endanger our missing the rest of the party all the evening.

"O dear," cried Miss Branghton, "I thought how uneasy Miss would be, without a
beau!"

This impertinence I did not think worth answering; and, quite by compulsion, I
followed them down a long alley, in which there was hardly any light.

By the time we came near the end, a large party of gentlemen, apparently very
riotous, and who were hallowing, leaning on one another, and laughing
immoderately, seemed to rush suddenly from behind some trees, and, meeting us
face to face, put their arms at their sides, and formed a kind of circle, that
first stopped our proceeding, and then our retreating, for we were presently
entirely enclosed. The Miss Branghtons screamed aloud, and I was frightened
exceedingly: our screams were answered with bursts of laughter, and, for some
minutes, we were kept prisoners, till, at last, one of them, rudely, seizing
hold of me, said I was a pretty little creature.

Terrified to death, I struggled with such vehemence to disengage myself from
him, that I succeeded, in spite of his efforts to detain me; and immediately,
and with a swiftness which fear only could have given me, I flew rather than
ran up the walk, hoping to secure my safety by returning to the lights and
company we had so foolishly left: but, before I could possibly accomplish my
purpose, I was met by another party of men, one of whom placed himself so
directly in my way, calling out, "Whither so fast, my love?" -- that I could
only have proceeded, by running into his arms.

In a moment both my hands, by different persons, were caught hold of; and one
of them, in a most familiar manner, desired to accompany me in a race, when I
ran next; while the rest of the party stood still and laughed.

I was almost distracted with terror, and so breathless with running, that I
could not speak, till another advancing, said, I was as handsome as an angel,
and desired to be of the party. I then just articulated "For Heaven's sake,
Gentlemen, let me pass!"

Another then, rushing suddenly forward, exclaimed, "Heaven and earth! what
voice is that? -- "

"The voice of the prettiest little actress I have seen this age," answered one
of my persecutors.

"No, -- no, -- no, -- " I panted out, "I am no actress, -- pray let me go, --
pray let me pass --."

"By all that is sacred," cried the same voice, which I then knew for Sir
Clement Willoughby's, "'it is herself!"

"Sir Clement Willoughby!" cried I. "O Sir, assist -- assist me -- or I shall
die with terror! -- "

"Gentlemen," cried he, disengaging them all from me in an instant, "pray leave
this lady to me."

Loud laughs proceeded from every mouth, and two or three said, " Willoughby
has all the luck!" But one of them, in a passionate manner, vowed he would not
give me up, for that he had the first right to me, and would support it.

"You are mistaken," said Sir Clement, "this lady is -- I will explain myself
to you another time; but, I assure you, you are all mistaken."

And then, taking my willing hand, he led me off, amidst the loud acclamations,
laughter, and gross merriment of his impertinent companions.

As soon as we had escaped from them, Sir Clement with a voice of surprise,
exclaimed, "My dearest creature, what wonder, what strange revolution, has
brought you to such a spot as this?"

Ashamed of my situation, and extremely mortified to be thus recognized by him,
I was for some time silent, and when he repeated his question, only stammered
out, "I have, -- I hardly know how, -- lost myself from my party. -- "

He caught my hand, and eagerly pressing it, in a passionate voice, said, "O
that I had sooner met with thee!"

Surprised at a freedom so unexpected, I angrily broke from him, saying, "Is
this the protection you give me, Sir Clement?"

And then I saw what the perturbation of my mind had prevented my sooner
noticing, that he had led me, though I know not how, into another of the dark
alleys, instead of the place whither I meant to go.

"Good God!" I cried, "where am I? -- what way are you going?"

"Where," answered he, "we shall be least observed."

Astonished at this speech, I stopped short, and declared I would go no further.

"And why not, my angel?" again endeavoring to take my hand.

My heart beat with resentment; I pushed him away from me with all my strength,
and demanded how he dared treat me with such insolence?

"Insolence!" repeated he.

"Yes, Sir Clement, insolence; from you, who know me, I had a claim for
protection, -- not to such treatment as this."

"By Heaven," cried he with warmth, "you distract me, -- why, tell me, -- why
do I see you here? -- Is this a place for Miss Anville? -- these dark walks! --
no party! -- no companion! -- by all that is good, I can scarce believe my
senses!"

Extremely offended at this speech, I turned angrily from him, and, not
deigning to make any answer, walked on toward that part of the garden whence I
perceived the lights and company.

He followed me; but we were both some time silent.

"So you will not explain to me your situation?" said he, at length.

"No, Sir," answered I, disdainfully.

"Nor yet -- suffer me to make my own interpretation --?"

I could not bear this strange manner of speaking; it made my very soul
shudder, -- and I burst into tears.

He flew to me, and actually flung himself at my feet, as if regardless who
might see him, saying, "O Miss Anville -- loveliest of women -- forgive my --
my -- I beseech you forgive me; -- if I have offended, -- if I have hurt you I
could kill myself at the thought! -- "

"No matter, Sir, no matter," cried I, "if I can but find my friends, -- I will
never speak to -- never see you again!"

"Good God! -- good Heaven! -- my dearest life, what is it I have done? -- What
is it I have said?"

"You best know, Sir, what and why; -- but don't hold me here, -- let me be
gone, and do you!"

"Not till you forgive me! -- I cannot part with you in anger."

"For shame, for shame, Sir!" cried I indignantly, "do you suppose I am to be
thus compelled? -- do you take advantage of the absence of my friends, to
affront me?"

"No, Madam," cried he, rising, "I would sooner forfeit my life than act so
mean a part. But you have flung me into amazement unspeakable, and you will not
condescend to listen to my request of giving me some explanation."

"The manner, Sir," said I, "in which you spoke that request, made and will
make me scorn to answer it."

"Scorn! -- I will own to you, I expected not such displeasure from Miss
Anville."

"Perhaps, Sir, if you had, you would less voluntarily have merited it."

"My dearest life, surely it must be known to you, that the man does not
breathe, who adores you so passionately, so fervently, so tenderly as I do! --
why then will you delight in perplexing me? -- in keeping me in suspense -- in
torturing me with doubt?" --

"I, Sir, delight in perplexing you! -- You are much mistaken. -- Your
suspense, your doubts, your perplexities, -- are of your own creating; and,
believe me, Sir, they may offend but they can never delight me: -- but, as you
have yourself raised, you must yourself satisfy them."

"Good God! -- that such haughtiness and such sweetness can inhabit the same
mansion!"

I made no answer, but quickening my pace, I walked on silently and sullenly;
till this most impetuous of men, snatching my hand, which he grasped with
violence, besought me to forgive him, with such earnestness of supplication,
that merely to escape his importunities, I was forced to speak, and, in some
measure to grant the pardon he requested: though it was accorded with a very
ill grace; but, indeed, I knew not how to resist the humility of his
entreaties: yet never shall I recollect the occasion he gave me of displeasure,
without feeling it renewed.

We now soon arrived in the midst of the general crowd, and my own safety being
then insured, I grew extremely uneasy for the Miss Branghtons, whose danger,
however imprudently incurred by their own folly, I too well knew how to tremble
for. To this consideration all my pride of heart yielded, and I determined to
seek my party with the utmost speed; though not without a sigh did I recollect
the fruitless attempt I had made, after the opera, of concealing from this man
my unfortunate connections, which I was now obliged to make known.

I hastened therefore, to the room, with a view of sending young Branghton to
the aid of his sisters. In a very short time, I perceived Madame Duval, and the
rest, looking at one of the paintings. I must own to you honestly, my dear Sir,
that an involuntary repugnance seized me, at presenting such a set to Sir
Clement, -- he, who had been used to see me in parties so different! -- My pace
slackened as I approached them, -- but they presently perceived me.

" Ah, Mademoiselle!" cried M. Du Bois, " Que je suis charm de vous voir!"

"Pray, Miss," cried Mr. Brown, "where is Miss Polly?"

"Why, Miss, you have been a long while gone," said Mr. Branghton; "we thought
you would been lost. But what have you done with your cousins?"

I hesitated, -- for Sir Clement regarded me with a look of wonder.

" Pardie," cried Madame Duval, "I sha'n't let you leave me again in a hurry.
Why, here we have been in such a fright! -- and all the while, I suppose you have
been thinking nothing about the matter."

"Well," said young Branghton, "as long as Miss is come back, I don't mind, for
as to Bid and Poll, they can take care of themselves. But the best joke is, Mr.
Smith is gone all about a looking for you."

These speeches were made almost all in a breath: but when, at last, they
waited for an answer, I told them, that in walking up one of the long alleys,
we had been frightened and separated.

"The long alleys!" repeated Mr. Branghton, "and, pray, what had you to do in
the long alleys? why, to be sure, you must all of you have had a mind to be
affronted!"

This speech was not more impertinent to me, than surprising to Sir Clement,
who regarded all the party with evident astonishment. However, I told young
Branghton that no time ought to be lost, for that his sisters might require his
immediate protection.

"But how will they get it?" cried this brutal brother; "if they have a mind to
behave in such a manner as that, they ought to protect themselves; and so they
may for me."

"Well," said the simple Mr. Brown, "whether you go or no, I think I may as
well see after Miss Polly."

The father then, interfering, insisted that his son should accompany him; and
away they went.

It was now that Madame Duval first perceived Sir Clement; to whom turning with
a look of great displeasure, she angrily said, " Ma foi, so you are comed here,
of all the people in the world! -- I wonder, child, you would let such a --
such a person as that keep company with you."

"I am very sorry, Madam," said Sir Clement, in a tone of surprise, "if I have
been so unfortunate as to offend you; but I believe you will not regret the
honor I now have of attending Miss Anville, when you hear that I have been so
happy as to do her some service."

Just as Madame Duval, with her usual Ma foi, was beginning to reply, the
attention of Sir Clement was wholly drawn from her, by the appearance of Mr.
Smith, who suddenly coming behind me, and freely putting his hands on my
shoulders, cried, "O ho, my little runaway, have I found you at last? I have
been scampering all over the gardens for you; for I was determined to find you,
if you were above ground. -- But how could you be so cruel as to leave us?"

I turned round to him, and looked with a degree of contempt that I hoped would
have quieted him; but he had not the sense to understand me; and, attempting to
take my hand, he added, "Such a demure looking lady as you are, who'd have
thought of your leading one such a dance? -- Come, now, don't be so coy, --
only think what a trouble I have had in running after you!"

"The trouble, Sir," said I, "was of your own choice -- not mine." And I walked
round to the other side of Madame Duval.

Perhaps I was too proud, -- but I could not endure that Sir Clement, whose
eyes followed him with looks of the most surprised curiosity, should witness
his unwelcome familiarity.

Upon my removal, he came up to me, and, in a low voice, said, "You are not,
then, with the Mirvans?"

"No, Sir."

"And pray -- may I ask, -- have you left them long?

"No, Sir,"

"How unfortunate I am! -- but yesterday I sent to acquaint the Captain I
should reach the Grove by tomorrow noon! However I shall get away as fast as
possible. Shall you be long in town?"

"I believe not, Sir."

And then, when you leave it, -- which way -- will you allow me to ask, which
way you shall travel?"

"Indeed, -- I don't know."

"Not know! -- But do you return to the Mirvans any more?"

"I -- I cannot tell, Sir."

And then, I addressed myself to Madame Duval, with such a pretended
earnestness, that he was obliged to be silent.

As he cannot but observe the great change in my situation, which he knows not
how to account for, there is something in all these questions, and this
unrestrained curiosity, that I did not expect from a man, who when he pleases
can be so wellbred, as Sir Clement Willoughby. He seems disposed to think that
the alteration in my companions authorizes an alteration in his manners. It is
true, he has always treated me with uncommon freedom, but never before with so
disrespectful an abruptness. This observation, which he has given me cause to
make, of his changing with the tide, has sunk him more in my opinion, than any
other part of his conduct.

Yet I could almost have laughed, when I looked at Mr. Smith, who no sooner saw
me addressed by Sir Clement, than, retreating aloof from the company, he seemed
to lose at once all his happy self-sufficiency and conceit; looking now at the
baronet, now at himself, surveying, with sorrowful eyes, his dress, struck with
his air, his gestures, his easy gaiety; he gazed at him with envious
admiration, and seemed himself, with conscious inferiority, to shrink into
nothing.

Soon after, Mr. Brown, running up to us, called out, "La, what, i'n't Miss
Polly come yet?"

"Come!" said Mr. Branghton, "why, I thought you went to fetch her yourself did
n't you?"

"Yes, but I could n't find her; -- yet I dare say I Have been over half the
garden."

"Half! but why did not you go over it all?"

"Why, so I will: but only I thought I Would just come and see if she was here
first?"

"But where is Tom?"

"Why, I don't know; for he would not stay with me, all as ever I could say;
for we met some young gentlemen of his acquaintance, and so he bid me go and
look by myself, for he said, says he, I can divert myself better another way,
says he."

This account being given, away again went this silly young man; and Mr.
Branghton, extremely incensed, said he would go and see after them himself.

"So now," cried Madame Duval, "he is gone too! why, at this rate we shall have
to wait for one or other of them all night!"

Observing that Sir Clement seemed disposed to renew his enquiries, I turned
toward one of the paintings, and, pretending to be very much occupied in
looking after it, asked M. Du Bois some questions concerning the figures.

"O, Mon Dieu!" cried Madame Duval, "don't ask him; your best way is to ask Mr.
Smith, for he is been here the oftenest. Come, Mr. Smith, I dare say you can
tell us all about them."

"Why, yes, Ma'am," said Mr. Smith, who, brightening up at this application,
advanced toward us, with an air of assumed importance (which, however, sat
very uneasily upon him) and begged to know what he should explain first; "For I
have attended," said he, "to all these paintings, and know every thing in them
perfectly well; for I am rather fond of pictures, Ma'am; and, really, I must
say, I think a picture is a -- a very -- is really a very -- is something very
pretty -- "

"So do I too," said Madame Duval, "but pray now, Sir, tell us who that is
meant for," pointing to a figure of Neptune.

"That! -- why that, Ma'am, is, -- Lord bless me, I cannot think how I come to
be so stupid, but really I have forgot his name, -- and yet, I know it as well
as my own, too, -- however, he is a general, Ma'am, they are all generals."

I saw Sir Clement bite his lips; and, indeed, so did I mine.

"Well," said Madame Duval, "it is the oddest dress for a general ever I see!"

"He seems so capital a figure," said Sir Clement to Mr. Smith, "that I imagine
he must be generalissimo of the whole army."

"Yes, Sir, yes," answered Mr. Smith, respectfully bowing, and highly delighted
at being thus referred to, "you are perfectly right, -- but I cannot for my
life think of his name; -- perhaps, Sir, you may remember it?"

"No really," replied Sir Clement, "my acquaintance among the generals is not
so extensive."

The ironical tone of voice in which Sir Clement spoke, entirely disconcerted
Mr. Smith; who, again retiring to an humble distance, seemed sensibly mortified
at the failure of his attempt to recover his consequence.

Soon after, Mr. Branghton returned with his youngest daughter, whom he had
rescued from a party of insolent young men; but he had not yet been able to
find the eldest. Miss Polly was really frightened, and declared she would never
go into the dark walks again. Her father, leaving her with us, went in quest of
her sister.

While she was relating her adventures, to which nobody listened more
attentively than Sir Clement, we saw Mr. Brown enter the room. "O la!" cried
Miss Polly, "let me hide myself, and don't tell him I Am come."

She then placed herself behind Madame Duval, in such a manner that she could
not be seen.

"So Miss Polly is not come yet!" said the simple swain; "well, I cannot think
where she can be! I Have been a looking, and looking, and looking all about, and
I cannot find her, all I can do."

"Well but, Mr. Brown," said Mr. Smith, "sha'n't you go and look for the lady
again?"

"Yes, Sir," said he, sitting down, "but I must rest me a little bit first. You
cannot think how tired I am."

"O fie, Mr. Brown, fie," cried Mr. Smith, winking at us, "tired of looking for
a lady! Go, go, for shame!"

"So I will, Sir, presently; but you would be tired too, if you would walked so far:
besides, I think she is gone out of the garden, or else I must have seen
something or other of her."

A he, he, he! of the tittering Polly, now betrayed her, and so ended this
ingenious little artifice.

At last appeared Mr. Branghton and Miss Biddy, who, with a face of mixed anger
and confusion, addressing herself to me, said, "So Miss, so you ran away from
me! Well, see if I don't do as much by you, some day or other! But I thought
how it would be, you would no mind to leave the gentlemen, though you would run away
from me."

I was so much surprised at this attack, that I could not answer her for very
amazement; and she proceeded to tell us how ill she had been used, and that two
young men had been making her walk up and down the dark walks by absolute
force, and as fast as ever they could tear her along; and many other
particulars, which I will not tire you with relating. In conclusion, looking at
Mr. Smith, she said, "But, to be sure, thought I, at least all the company will
be looking for me; so I little expected to find you all here, talking as
comfortably as ever you can. However, I know I may thank my cousin for it!"

"If you mean me, Madam," said I, very much shocked, "I am quite ignorant in
what manner I can have been accessory to your distress."

"Why, by running away so. If you would stayed with us, I Will answer for it, Mr.
Smith and M. Du Bois would have come to look for us; but I suppose they could
not leave your ladyship."

The folly and unreasonableness of this speech would admit of no answer. But
what a scene was this for Sir Clement! his surprise was evident; and, I must
acknowledge, my confusion was equally great.

We had now to wait for young Branghton, who did not appear for some time; and,
during this interval, it was with difficulty that I avoided Sir Clement, who
was on the rack of curiosity, and dying to speak to me.

When, at last, the hopeful youth returned, a long and frightful quarrel ensued
between him and his father, in which his sisters occasionally joined,
concerning his neglect; and he defended himself only by a brutal mirth, which
he indulged at their expense.

Every one, now, seemed inclined to depart, -- when, as usual, a dispute arose,
upon the way of our going, whether in a coach or a boat. After much debating,
it was determined that we should make two parties, one by the water and the
other by land; for Madame Duval declared she would not, upon any account, go
into a boat at night.

Sir Clement then said, that if she had no carriage in waiting, he should be
happy to see her and me safe home, as his was in readiness.

Fury started into her eyes, and passion inflamed every feature, as she
answered, " Pardie, no, -- you may take care of yourself, if you please; but as
to me, I promise you I sha'n't trust myself with no such person."

He pretended not to comprehend her meaning, yet, to wave a discussion,
acquiesced in her refusal. The coach party fixed upon consisted of Madame
Duval, M. Du Bois, Miss Branghton, and myself.

I now began to rejoice, in private, that, at least, our lodgings would be
neither seen, nor known, by Sir Clement. We soon met with an hackney-coach,
into which he handed me, and then took leave.

Madame Duval, having already given the coachman her direction, he mounted the
box, and we were just driving off, when Sir Clement exclaimed, "By Heaven, this
is the very coach I had in waiting for myself!"

"This coach, your honor!" said the man, "no, that it i'nt."

Sir Clement, however, swore that it was, and, presently, the man, begging his
pardon, said he had really forgotten that he was engaged.

I have no doubt but that this scheme occurred to him at the moment, and that
he made some sign to the coachman, which induced him to support it: for there
is not the least probability that the accident really happened, as it is most
likely his own chariot was in waiting.

The man then opened the coach-door, and Sir Clement advancing to it, said, "I
don't believe there is another carriage to be had, or I would not incommode
you: but, as it may be disagreeable to you to wait here any longer, I beg you
will not get out, for you shall be set down before I am carried home, if you
will be so good as to make a little room."

And so saying, in he jumpt, and seated himself between M. Du Bois and me,
while our astonishment at the whole transaction was too great for speech. He
then ordered the coachman to drive on, according to the directions he had
already received.

For the first ten minutes, no one uttered a word; and then, Madame Duval, no
longer able to contain herself, exclaimed, " Ma foi, if this is n't one of the
impudentest things ever I see!"

Sir Clement, regardless of this rebuke, attended only to me; however, I
answered nothing he said, when I could possibly avoid so doing. Miss Branghton
made several attempts to attract his notice, but in vain, for he would not take
the trouble of paying her any regard.

Madame Duval, during the rest of the ride, addressed herself to M. Du Bois in
French, and in that language exclaimed with great vehemence against boldness
and assurance.

I was extremely glad when I thought our journey must be nearly at an end, for
my situation was very uneasy to me, as Sir Clement perpetually endeavored to
take my hand. I looked out of the coach-window, to see if we were near home;
Sir Clement, stooping over me did the same, and then, in a voice of infinite
wonder, called out, "Where the d -- l is the man driving to? -- why we are in
Broad St. Giles's!"

"O, he is very right," cried Madame Duval, "so never trouble your head about
that, for I shall not go by no directions of yours, I promise you."

When, at last, we stopped, at an Hosier's in High Holborn, -- Sir Clement said
nothing, but his eyes, I saw, were very busily employed in viewing the place,
and the situation of the house. The coach he insisted upon settling himself, as
he said it belonged to him; and then he took leave. M. Du Bois walked home with
Miss Branghton, and Madame Duval and I retired to our apartments.

How disagreeable an evening's adventure! not one of the party seemed
satisfied, except Sir Clement, who was in high spirits: but Madame Duval was
enraged at meeting with him; Mr. Branghton, angry with his children; the
frolic of the Miss Branghtons had exceeded their plan, and ended in their own
distress; their brother was provoked that there had been no riot; Mr. Brown was
tired; and Mr. Smith mortified. As to myself, I must acknowledge, nothing could
be more disagreeable to me, than being seen by Sir Clement Willoughby with a
party at once so vulgar in themselves, and so familiar to me.

And you, too, my dear Sir, will, I know, be sorry that I have met him;
however, there is no apprehension of his visiting here, as Madame Duval is far
too angry to admit him.

END OF VOL. I.

