PLAIN DIRECTIONS FOR THE TREATMENT of WOUNDS in general.

WITH METHODS OF STOPPING VIOLENT BLEEDINGS In Cases of large Wounds in the
Legs, Thighs, or Arms, from Gunshot, Carpenters Tools, or other Accidents: TO
WHICH ARE ADDED REMARKS ON SUSPENDED ANIMATION, And some general Observations
on the Treatment of the apparently Dead from accidental Causes.

ALSO A LIST of MEDICINES contained in a CHEST, with ample Instructions for
their Use and Application, prepared under the Direction of a regular
Practitioner in Medicine.

BY BERNARD OGDEN, CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST, Opposite Church-Street, SUNDERLAND.

SUNDERLAND: Printed by T. REED, BOOKSELLER.

MDCCXCVII.

PREFACE.
AS it is the wish of the Editor of these Observations to render them generally
useful, pains have been taken to draw them up in such language as shall be
generally understood; with this view all technical terms and medical phrases
have been avoided as much as possible; where they have necessarily occured they
are accompanied with such explanations as it is hoped will render them
perfectly intelligible to every capacity.

In treating of wounds a good deal of minuteness has been employed; but he
believes not more than is required when the importance of the subject is
considered. To point out the properest method of stopping violent bleedings, it
was necessary to say something on the relative situation of the veins and
arteries, he trusts this has been done in as clear a manner as the subject will
admit of; and doubts not but a little attention will render it perfectly
understood.

In describing the use and application of the medicines the same perspicuity
has been attempted; and he hopes not attempted in vain. The doses mentioned are
for a grown person; the discretion of the person administering them will
generally be sufficient to direct him in any variation from the rules here laid
down, that may be called for by particular circumstances, such as the patient's
age, strength, etc.

To captains of ships this small chest, with the remarks contained in this
pamphlet, are particularly recommended. When at s^a they and their crews are
cut off from the rest of the world, and are indeed a little society of
themselves. Thus circumstanced the health and vigor of every individual
becomes an object of considerable importance; in fact it is then a common
concern, as few vessels carry more people than are required, the exertions of
every one is necessary in order to perform the common duties of the ship; and
the want of one man, disabled by sickness or accident, where the number of the
crew is by no means superfluous, may prove in the end of very serious
consequence.

To families at a distance from any town they are also calculated to be
serviceable. -- By an attentive perusal of the pamphlet little doubt is
entertained but the meanest capacity will be enabled to hand relief in many
instances, where much suffering and danger might be the consequence of the
delay occasioned by waiting the arrival of a medical person from the distance
of perhaps several miles, independent of the chance of his being from home, or
engaged when sent for.

The Editor wishes to be understood that it is not in any manner his intention
to suggest the inexpediency of calling in medical aid in every case which has
the appearance of danger, or from which there may be a chance of danger
resulting; on the contrary he strongly recommends it. He wishes to impress the
minds of those who may read this with the necessity of early medical advice in
every such case; and repeats that it is to those only whose situation renders
it impossible immediately to procure such help, or to cases which are slight
and well understood, that this Medicine Chest is particularly adapted.

WOUNDS.
On the use of the Tourniquet or Bandage, and manner of stepping violent
Bleedings.
IN treating of the management of wounds the first thing that demands our
consideration is the bleeding with which most of them are attended. When the
blood is not poured out with great force, though the quantity should even be
considerable, it generally proceeds from wounded veins, and may be stopped by
pressing a piece of scraped lint, either alone or dipped in fine flour or
Turlington's Balsam, upon the wound with the fingers. But when the Hood is
thrown out with great force, and especially if it springs out by jerks, it
proceeds from wounded artcries, and requires the most serious attention.

To direct us in this case, we must consider the arteries as strong branched
pipes or tubes through which the blood is forced from the heart at each beat to
every part of the trunk of the body, to the head, to the arms, and to the legs.
-- The veins spring in small branches from all the parts the arteries carry
blood to; they pursue their course toward the heart; joining with each other,
forming gradually larger and larger veins, till they reach the heart in one
large trunk. The heart may be compared to a sort of forcing pump, throwing the
blood along the arteries with such force, that we can feel the jerk or pulse
wherever an artery lies: and the blood losing its impulse as it passes along,
makes its way, without any pulse or beating, into the veins, through which it
returns to the heart, completing what is called the circulation of the Hood.

From these simple principles the method of putting a stop to a bleeding from a
wounded artery is exceedingly plain; that is, it must be compressed between the
heart and the wound.

In wounds of the foot or leg the bleeding may be stopped by casting a knot in
the middle of a handkerchief, placing the knot in the ham or hollow behind the
knee, tying it tight before, and twitching it sufficiently by means of a stick,
put between the place where we tie it and the thigh. The handkerchief should be
tightened as quickly as p^ssible after it is put on, otherwise the veins will
be painfully stretched. For a very slight pressure on a vein stops the course
of the blood in its return to the heart, whilst the artery requiring more force
to obstruct it, keeps throwing blood into the veins of the limb, distending
them as when we tie an arm up for bleeding.

When the wound is in any part of the thigh a handkerchief must be firmly
knoted round the limb, between the place of the wound and the body; and must be
twitched with a stick as before directed. But should the wound be so high up as
to leave no room for tying the handkerchief above it, a firm pressure must be
made, with the hand, on that part of the groin where the watch lies when the
wound is of the right thigh, and on the left groin when the wound is of the
left thigh.

If an artery in the hand or arm is pouring out blood, we stop it by casting a
knot in a handkerchief, placing the knot on any part of that side of the arm
which is next the body between the elbow and armpit, tying it round, and
twitching it with a stick as in wounds of the leg. And here it must be
observed, that in dangerous bleedings, from wounds of the limbs, there is
neither time nor necessity for stripping the part we apply the ligature to; for
there is no doubt of lives having been lost by attempts to undress the limb
when an expeditious appheation of the handkerchief above the clothes, but
higher up than the wound, might have saved them.

In wounds of the head or trunk of the body we command the bleeding by pressing
firmly with our singers on that border of the wound the blood springs from; and
when we cannot determine which side the blood comes from, we press one side
after another till we succeed.

By these means, which it is every man's duty to be acquainted with, the most
violent bleeding may be stopped for some time; and where a surgeon can be had
no more should be attempted. But when it unfortunately happens that the wound
is received at sea, or where no surgical assistance can be obtained, a manly
resolution must be put on to save the sufferer's life, which it is hoped the
following directions will assist.

A temporary stop being put to the bleeding by one or other of the
forementioned methods, the wound should be cleared of clotted blood, or
whatever else may happen to stick to it, by washing it gently with a sponge and
milkwarm water. It should next be dried, and the pressure removed from the
artery, by raising the finger, in cases of wounds of the head or body, and by
untwisting the stick of the handkerchief or tourniquet in wounds of the limbs,
in order that the flow of blood may direct us to the mouth of the wounded
artery. We now take notice of the place the blood springs from, and immediately
renew the pressure by the fingers or twitch; and by again washing the sore
endeavor to find the opening, which will seldom be difficult when the wound is
large and open, and the artery of any consequence. If the blood proceeds from a
wound in the side of an artery, the wounded part of it may be raised up by
means of a large needle, so as to allow a piece of double waxed thread to be
passed under it on the side next the heart, and firmly tied round the artery,
taking care to leave the ends of the thread so long as to hang quite out of the
wound. -- The same should be done on the other end of the opening if the artery
is large. But when an artery is quite cut in two, the ends soon shrink amongst
the flesh, so that the bleeding is sometimes stopped in both of them; almost
always in that most distant from the heart; for then no blood passes into it
but by small branches between it and the other arteries of the limb.

For the most part, however, the upper end in large arteries, continues to
throw out dangerous quantities of blood, which we must endeavor to stop by
drawing it out with a needle, and tying it firmly with a double waxed thread.

When the end of a limb is carried away by a cannon ball the bleeding is seldom
very alarming, for even large arteries are, in that case, closed up by the
bruised parts. But we should not entirely depend upon this, as the larger ones
generally break out again in a short time when we are not aware of it, and so
prove fatal. We are, therefore, to put the twitch round the limb, but without
tighteaing it, to wash away the clotted blood with a sponge and warm water, in
order to discover the end of the artery, that it may be tied as before directed.

This method of securing wounded arteries is certainly the safest and best when
it can be followed; but cases may occur where, either from want of courage, or
of dexterity, it does not answer; in these recourse must be had to the
following:

Having discovered, by the means already described, the mouth of the bleeding
artery, or at least the part of the wound in which it is situated, we press a
piece of sponge of a convenient size firmly upon it; over this we lay a piece
of scraped lint, folded up and dipped in Turlington's Balsam, and then some
pieces of linen rag, folded up as if for bleeding, each a little larger than
that laid on before it, till a pile is raised an inch or two above the edges of
the wound according to the size of the wound; binding the whole firmly down
with a bandage of linen about three inches broad, and so long as to cover the
limb with two or three plies, extending at least four inches each way from the
wound.

The sufferer must now be laid in bed, in such a manner that the wounded part
may lie easy and undisturbed, and not too much covered with bedeloaths. Nor
where the wounded artery is large must the handkerchief be removed from the
upper part of the limb for three or four days; nor must the patient be left
alone during that period for any length of time, since startings of the part,
or many other causes, may give rise to repeated bleedings, which might be
prevented from proving fatal by immediately tightening the handkerchief or
tourniquet. In this state the wound must remain for the space of four or five
days, or until the dressings are loosened by the formation of matter, when it
must be managed in the same manner as other wounds with loss of substance,
which we shall fully describe under the next head.

TREATMENT OF WOUNDS.
HITHERTO we have confined ourselves to the means of stopping the discharge of
blood from wounded arteries, we are next to consider the most proper mode of
dressing every variety of wounds; and for the sake of method begin with those
most easy of cure.

Of this kind are clean flesh-wounds running in the direction of the limbs on
which they are situated; for here we can avail ourselves of the disposition
which the edges of such wounds have to grow together when they touch each other
constantly, by what is called adhesive inflammation, and by which the healing
of a considerable wound will sometimes be effected in three or four days, so as
to require no farther care than avoiding such accidents as might tear it open
again before the part regains its strength.

In every clean wound therefore where there is no bleeding artery, or where we
have been able to tie it, as this method is admissible recourse should be had
to it. The first thing to be done is to make the wound as clean as possible by
means of a sponge and warm water; and having absorbed as much as we can of the
blood from its surface, the surrounding skin must be dried with a cloth, and
whilst another person holds the edges of the wound nicely and closely together
with his fingers, but so as to be out of our way, strips of sticking plaster,
from three to six inches in length, and from a quarter to half an inch in
breadth, are to be laid right across the wound, a straw's breadth distant from
each other; warming them as they are applied, to make them stick more readily,
and carefully drying the skin wherever the least moisture appears.

If an artery has been tied in the wound the ends of the thread must he brought
out at that edge they are nearest to, and should be left of such a length as to
reach an inch beyond it, when the wound must be closed, and the strips of
plaster applied as before. And here it may be useful to observe that the
person who assists us should lay his singers on the strips as we proceed to
secure them more effectually. The tract of the wound must now be covered with a
piece of seraped lint, and over this we must lay a piece of the same thinly
spread with cerate, and so large as to reach half an inch in every direction
beyond the first piece. And lastly, this dressing must be secured by binding
the part neatly up with a linen bandage, reaching a hand's-breadth each way
from the wound. The wound being thus dressed it must be kept quite easy and
unmoved till the fourth day, when the bandage must be cantiously unfolded,
softening it with a sponge and warm water if it is glued together with the
blood. The lint must be next removed, and if there are threads hanging out from
tied arteries they may be very gently drawn; but if they are not disposed to
come away easily they must not be forced, but tried at each fature dressing
till they are quite loose. After examining the threads, the sticking plasters
must be removed; and having gently wiped away any matter that may be found on
the sore, or on the adjoining skin, they may be renewed but in less number, and
also the lint, the lint spread with cerate, and the handage. This mode of
dressing must be repeated daily, and continued so long as the threads remain,
any matter appears on the wound, or its edges continue tender; but when these
appearances cease, allowing the same dressing to remain, a few days will
complete the cure.

We have dwelt particularly on this mode of curing wounds, as it is the most
satisfactory in its consequences, the most desirable when ever it can be used,
and may serve as a model for some part of the treatment of the description of
wounds we are next to consider.

Wherever there is a loss of substance in wounds, or where there is such a
vacancy left between the sides of the wound, by the shrinking of the divided
skin and flesh, as renders it impossible to keep them together by strips of
sticking plaster or bandages, a disserent and much more tedious method of cure
alone remains for us. A bruised or ragged wound, or one we have been obliged to
sill with scraped lint, sponge, etc. for restraining the discharge of blood
must be treated exactly in the same manner.

The process which nature follows in the repair of these injuries is admirable,
and must be attended to before we can manage the treatment of them.

The first thing observable in wounds whose edges are lest open is, that the
surface of the wound is in every instance thrown off by the formation of matter
under it. Sometimes this surface is so thin as almost to escape notice; at
others thick, and is then called a slough or sitfast. And where much violence
has been done to the structure of the part by a bruise, or where the habit of
body is faulty, the slough is sometimes of a very serious size as happens in
cases of gangrene. The color of sloughs varies with their degree of
importance; the slight ones, when they are not tinged with blood, are of a buff
dolor; the more serious ones are ash colored, mixed here and there with
black, brown, green, and yellow. No sooner are these sloughs discharged than
the matter becomes creamcoloured and thick; the surface of the fore looks red
and clean; the cavity of the wound gradually fills up with tender granulations,
or now flesh, to the level of the adjoining skin; and lastly, a thin rind
begins to form round the edges, which extending inwards, becomes the future
skin.

Having taken this slight view of the healing process, in wounds whose edges
are left open, we are prepared to enter upon their treatment. Clean wounds of
this kind must be filled lightly with scraped lint; ragged or bruised ones with
the same dipped in Turlington's Balsam. Over this a pledgit of basilicon,
spread upon sine tow, must be laid, and then a nice bolster of tow, binding the
whole on with a bandage. In this state the part must remain till the fourth
day, when the matter generally loosens the dressings so as to make their
removal easy. At this time we take away all that is loose, or can be rendered
so by moistening with warm milk and water; but clip off the ends of those
pieces of lint that still stick to the sore. We lay on a little fresh lint,
renew the plaster, bolster of tow and bandage, and change this dressing daily,
gently wiping the edges of the sore with a piece of tow, to remove any
superfluous matter, and taking care not to cram it with the lint. And when the
cavity is filled up we must change the basilicon pledgit for one of cerate,
covering the surface with a single piece of lint rather larger than the sore,
and laid with its softest side downwards, still dressing once a day till the
cure is complete.

When a wound is attended with a high degree of inflammation and swelling, or
its edges are hard and projecting, white bread poultices must be applied once
or twice a day above the pledgit instead of the bolster and bandage, and in
that case the patient may take a cooling purge, such as salts.

But when, on the other band, the surface of the skin around the sore looks
flabby and soft, is covered with blisters, or the sloughs are thick and ill
colored, the discharge thin, dark, and very offensive to the smell, the bark
must be given freely in the manner directed under that article in the
directions. Toward the conclusion of the cure of sores the new granulations
sometimes rise above the surface of the sound skin, forming what is called
fungous, or proud flesh, this may be kept down by touching it occasionally with
a piece of wetted blue vitriol, which will in such a case amazingly hasten the
healing.

Balls, splinters of wood, bone, or glass, pieces of the clothes, or any kind
of extraneous substance found in a wound, must be immediately removed if that
can be done by gentle means, as they for the most part absolutely prevent the
cure, and are often productive of distressing and dangerous consequences. But
where their removal is difficult they must be suffered to remain till they are
loosened by the digestion of the wound, or till the case comes under the
management of a skilful surgeon, whose assistance these few directions are
never designed to supersede.

SCALDS AND BURNS.
SLIGHT scalds may be smeared three or four times a day with a mixture of three
spoonfuls of olive oil, one ocerate, and thirty drops of Goulard's Extract, and
covered with a piece of soft rag moistened with the same. If a few small
blisters should rise do not disturb them for a day or two, when the pain and
inflammation will probably be gone, they may then be discharged by snipping
them in places with a pair of scissars, and the sore must afterward be dressed
with cerate only.

For more violent scalds where the skin comes off directly, or where very large
blisters are raised at first, as happens when boiling water is long applied to
the part, or where they are occasioned by hot grease or oil, the blisters may
be cut immediately, and the part dressed with equal parts of basilicon and
cerate, spread on linen rag, once or twice a day according to the quantity of
the discharge.

Violent burns always destroy the texture of the part to some depth; in this
case they must be treated in the same manner as wounds with the loss of
substance, as described at page 11.

APPARENT DEATH.
THE instances of apparent death most frequently met with, and which come most
within the plan of this work, are those arising from drowning, hanging,
excessive drinking, or breathing air which is unfit for the purposes of animal
life, by being impregnated with noxious particles, as by charcoal burning in a
close place, the vapor from sulphur, mine damps, etc. As instances of this
kind from one or other of these causes are frequently occuring, we shall
endeavor to give some general remarks on each head.

DROWNING.
WHEN a body is taken out of the water apparently dead there are two material
objects to which our attention must be immediately turned, viz. to restore
breathing, and to keep up or bring back a natural degree of warmth. To effect
these important purposes, after the body has been stripped and laid upon a bed,
with the head and shoulders a little raised, we must "put the pipe of a pair of
bellows into one of the nostrils, the other nostril and the mouth being closed
by an assistant, and blow gently till the breast be ^ little raised. Let the
mouth and nostril then be left fre^ and an easy pressure be made upon the
breast. Repeat thi^ imitation of natural breathing, at short intervals, for an
hou^ or longer. If no bellows be at hand, let an assistant blo^^ into the
nostrils of the drowned person with his brea^^ through a quill, reed, or any
other small pipe."

Whilst these attempts are making other assistants may "dr^^^ the body
completely with warm cloths, and afterward ru^ it diligently, but gently, with
hot flannels on the left sid^ near the heart. Apply to the hands and feet
cloths wru^^ out of hot water, and heated bricks, or bottles, or bladders half
filled with hot water, or bags of hot grains or sand to the stomach and
armpits."

These efforts must be continued for at least two hours, as there have been
instances of recovery after a length of time has past without any appearance of
reanimation.

HANGING.
HANGING occasions death by compressing the windpipe, and consequently stopping
the breathing, and obstructing the return of the blood to the heart by the
jugular veins. If the unhappy person is discovered whilst the body is still
warm and pliable there are generally some hopes of recovery; and as apparent
death has been occasioned principally by the breathing being stopped, the
method of attempting recovery is clearly pointed out. We must endeavor to
restore the breathing as quickly as possible in the same manner as directed in
cases of drowning.

Should any person be present who understands bleeding, the patient may be bled
to the extent of a tea-cup full, more or less according to his strength, or a
cupping glass may be applied to the neck. Should it happen that none present
will attempt bleeding some pains must be taken to lessen the quantity of blood
collected in the head and neck, by keeping the body almost upright. Attention
must be paid to prevent the patient becoming cold, or if already cold, to
restore the natural warmth by means directed under the article drowning.

EXCESSIVE DRINKING.
THE effects of excessive drinking are frequently satal, from little or no
attention being paid to the unfortunate, and frequently helpless object. The
vulgar notion, that nothing can hurt a drunken man, has been the loss of many a
life. From this erroneous opinion, when a person is become what is termed dead
drunk, he is suffered to tumble and roll about almost without notice. He is
then in the greatest danger. The quantity which he has drank generally begets
an inclination to vomit; in attempting which, he gets his head over the side of
the bed, or into some other position, with his head downwards, and not being
attended 10, that situation, added to the tightness of his shirt-neck or
neckcloth, produces suffocation; and we have seen many instances where the
unhappy person has been found next morning quite dead.

From these considerations it will appear evident how necessary it is to pay
some attention to people in this condition. The first step should be to loosen
the neckcloth, shirt-neck, nightcap strings, or any thing which is about the
neck, and to place the body in a suitable position. The best position is
laying, with the head and shoulders raised; if the patient is suffered to sit
there is a danger of his head hanging down too much upon his breast, by which
the circulation of the blood in the neck is obstructed, and an apoplectic state
is brought on.

During the time that he is so extremely drunk he must not be left alone lest
be tumble out of bed in his struggling. If notwithstanding these precautions he
should sensibly become cold, and appear to be growing worse, a clyster may be
given without delay, composed equal parts of wine and hot water, with a small
table spoonful of flour of mustard, or a tea spoonful of powdered ginger or
pepper. Rum, brandy, or gin, mixed with six times its quantity of hot water,
with the addition of mustard, etc. may be used instead of wine. To keep up a
proper degree of warmth the same means must be used as directed under the
article drowning.

The excessive degree of thirst occasioned by drinking strong liquors often
induce people to quench it by taking what is hurtful. The safest drink after a
debauch is water with a toast, barley water, or tea.

Excessive drinking is a failing we cannot sufficiently condemn. Of its effects
we can hardly say too much; as it is impossible to say what are the
consequences which arise from it not only to the individual himself but to the
community at large. A person who gives himself up to hard drinking greatly
hazards his own existence, and renders himself incapable of fulfilling the
duties of his station in life. If he is in a situation of trust he ill merits
the confedence reposed in him. If a seafaring parson such a conduct is more
especially blameable, as the success of his voyage is thereby rendered
precarious, and the property of his employers, and the lives and safety of
those under him, are frequently exposed through his misconduct to imminent
peril.

NOXIOUS VAPORS AND LIGHTNING.
IT frequently happens that in eases of apparent death from noxious vapors, or
being struck down by lightning, if the person is discovered soon, that the heat
of the body is even greater than that of a living person. In this case good
effects have been observed from dashing the face and the whole body with cold
water, thrown in small quantities, and with some force. The effect will be
still greater if the body be dried at intervals, and then the sprinkling
repeated.

Every thing must be removed from the neck, and pains must be taken to lessen
the quantity of blood collected in the head by the means recommended under the
article hanging. But if the body instead of being warmer than natural should
feel cold, or should be gradually turning colder, warmth must be kept up by the
means already directed under the article drowning.

EXPOSURE TO EXTREME COLD.
ONE of the effects of long exposure to severe cold in sleepiness; this is
produced by the cold gradually extinguishing the vital principle. In cases of
shipwreck, and in very severe winters, it will sometimes happen that people are
exposed for such a length of time as to produce the effect we have just
mentioned; every exertion should then be made to keep awake, as there is reason
to suppose that death might be the consequence of falling a-sleep at such a
time. A body found apparently dead from this cause must be treated with the
greatest caution. It would appear most eligible to many to attempt the
restoration of life by the immediate application of warmth; but experience has
proved this to be an erroneous and dangerous mode of proceeding. The body must
be got into a house as speedily as possible, but not near the fire, and rubbed
for a length of time with cold cloths, after which warmth and breathing may be
gradually attempted in the manner already directed.

CONTENTS OF THE MEDICINE CHEST.
Spirit of Hartshorn Spirit of Nitre Basilicon Ointment Cerate Opodeldoc
Rhubarb Tincture of Rhubarb Blue Vitriol Goulard's Extract Purging Pills
Glauber's Salts Olive Oil Lint, Tow, and Sponge Ipecacuan Antimonial Powders
Camomile Flowers Jalap Turlington's Balsam Mint Water Anodyne Tincture Sticking
Plaster Peruvian Bark Magnesia Scales and Weights
The weights are marked thus: Half a Scruple A Scruple Half a Dram Two Scruples
A Dram Two Dramo


The grain weights have each a certain number of round marks denoting the
number of grains, besides which there is a stamp on each, thus is six grains:

Directions for their Use and Application.
SPIRIT OF HARTSHO^^. -- Useful in headachs and faintings; it may be held to
the n^se, or a feather dipped in it may be put up the nostril. Half a tea
spoonful of it may be mixed with half a cup of water, and taken in faintings
and fits. One table spoonful of it and two of olive oil, well mixed, by shaking
them together in a hottle, make a lintment very useful for rubbing on parts
swelled from rheumatism, for sore throats, or swellings of the face from
exposure to severe cold, and for sprains where there is no unusual heat or
inflammation. The part should be rubbed three or four times a day, and covered
with flannel.

SPIRIT OF NITRE. -- Six tea spoonfuls of this and one of spirit of hartshorn
may be mixed, and a tea spoonful taken in a little barley water every three
hours where sweating is required. Its effect will be greatly promoted by
drinking freely of barley water, thin gruel, or balm tea.

BASILIGON OINTMENT. -- Useful in the first stage of every wound whose edges
cannot be brought together. It promotes the formation of good matter, which may
be known by its being thick and of a crean, color. It is the most proper
dressing for boils and collections of matter after they burst. As we have
already had occasion to allude to the use of this article in the treatment of
wounds we consider it unnecessary to say more in this place.

CERATE. -- A very proper dressing for such slight hurts as consist only of a
loss of skin. Also in burns and sealds. This article is also alluded to in the
treatment of wounds, which see.

OPODELDOC. -- For bruises and sprains. The part affected may be rubbed with it
three or four times a day, and covered with flannel.

RHUBARB. -- A purging medicine. Dose from half a dram to a dram, in a little
mint water.

TINCTURE OF RHUBARB. -- For colicky complaints and gripings. Two table
spoonfuls, with an equal quantity of mint water, and a small tea spoonful of
the anodyne tinctures may be taken for a dose, and repeated in two hours should
^he pain continue either with or without vomiting. In the ^eal colic, which is
attended with costiveness or a want of passage through the bowels, an excessive
pain and twisting about the navel, and often a severe vomiting, having used ^he
last mentioned remedy without essect, and the belly having been bound for some
days, two of the purging pills may be given every two hours till they operate.
The belly should have large pieces of woollen cloth, wrung out of hot water as
hot as the hands can well manage, applied to it, and renewed as fast as they
cool for the space of a quarter of in hour at a time, and repeated
occasionally. Where the pain is very great and the person strong, bleeding
would be proper. If the vomiting is so great that the pills are thrown up, and
are seen, they must be repeated directly, washing them down with a tea spoonful
of the anodyne tincture in two table spoonfuls of mint water. Drinking much
must be avoided at this time, as taking any liquid will increase the
inclination to vomit.

In order to prevent a return of the colic costiveness must be avoided. The
belly should be opened by taking occasionally half a dram of rhubarb and an
equal quantity of magnesia in the morning fasting, in a little mint water.

STICKING PLASTER. -- May be used for parts where the skin is rubbed off, also
as a strengthening plaster. It is very useful in many wounds as already
described.

OLIVE OIL. -- Useful in rheumatism, sore throats, and swellings, (see spirit
of hartshorn) also in scalds as already mentioned. For coughs moisten a piece
of loaf sugar in it, and let it dissolve slowly in the mouth whenever the cough
is troublesome. For pains in the ear mix equal parts of olive oil and anodyne
tincture, dip a piece of lint in it and put into the ear.

LINT AND TOW. -- Their uses are already described in treating of wounds.

IPECACUAN. -- For vomits. Dose from a scruple to half a dram, taken in half a
cup of water, and worked off with camomile tea.

CAMOMILE FLOWERS. -- For working off vormits. A handful may be mixed with
three pints of boiling water, and allowed to sland a quarter of an hour.

ANTIMONIAL POWEDERS. -- In the beginning of feverish disorders, which are
distinguished by a sudden loss of strength, pain all over the body, but more
particularly in the back and knees, shiverings and hot fits by turns, sickness,
thirst pain in the head, beating in the temples and giddiness, with a sense of
weight or oppression over the breast. One of the powders may be dissolved in a
gill of water, and two table spoonfuls taken every four hours, shaking the
bottle. The first or second dose will commonly occasion sickness or even
vomiting. The common drink should be barley water, and the spirit of nitre may
be taken as directed under that article, to promote sweating, and the patient
should continne in bed, When by these means the fever is removed, or when it
returus only by sits once a day, the bark should be taken in doses of a tea
spoonful, mixed with the same quantity of gin, and two spoonfuls of mint water
every three or four hours.

JALAP. -- A purging medicine. Dose from a scruple to half a dram, or two
scruples; it may be taken in tea.

TURLINGTON'S BALSAM AND BLUE VITRIOL. -- Their uses are already spoken of in
the treatment of wounds.

ANODYNE TINCTURE. -- Dose one tea spoonful in mint water for vomiting,
attended with pain in the stomach on boweis. Also for looseness attended with
severe griping. For its use in colic see tincture of rhubarb. In no ease
whatever must it be given oftener than thrice in the course of the day, and
then only in violent cases.

GOULARD'S EXTRACT. -- Useful in sealds, (which see) A tea spoonful, mixed with
a gill of water, and two table spoonfuls of opodeloc, is proper for bruises
attended with much swelling or inflammation. Without the opodeldoc but merely
mixed with water, it is proper for bathing an enslamed eye.

PERUVTAN BARK. -- For agues. Before beginning its use take a vomit of
ipeencuan an hour before the approach of the cold fit is expected; should this
prevent its taking place, ^^ having waited till the sw^ating fit is over, take
a tea spoonful every two hours as long as the next cold sit keeps off. In cases
of wounds, where it is required, a tea spoonful may be taken every three hours
as directed in fevers, (see antimonial powders.)

PURGING PILLS. -- See tincture of rhubarb.

MAGNESIA. -- For the heartburn and complaints of the stomach, arising from
sourness, a tea spoonful may be taken in mint water. Where the belly is bound,
and the stomach and bowels disordered with wind, half a dram of magnesia, with
about ten grains of rhubarb, may be taken in mint water occasionally at bed
time, so as to keep the bowels geutly open.

GLAUBER'S SALTS. -- Proper wherever a cooling purge is required. The common
dose a large table spoonful dissolved in warm water, and drank whilst warm.


