PUBLIC GOOD, BEING AN EXAMINATION Into the Claim of Virginia to the VACANT
WESTERN TERRITORY, AND OF THE RIGHT OF The United States to the Same.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, Proposals for laying off a new State, TO BE APPLIED AS A
FUND FOR CARRYING ON THE WAR, OR REDEEMING THE NATIONAL DEBT.

BY THE AUTHOR OF COMMON SENSE.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by JOHN DUNLAP, in Market street,

M,DCC,LXXX.

THE PREFACE.
THE following pages are on a subject hitherto little understood, but highly
interesting to the United States.

They contain an investigation of the claims of Virginia to the vacant western
territory, and of the right of the United States to the same; with some
outlines of a plan for laying out a new state, to be applied as a fund, for
carrying on the war, or redeeming the national debt.

The reader, in the course of this publication, will find it studiously plain,
and, as far as I can judge, perfectly candid. What materials I could get at I
have endeavored to place in a clear line, and deduce such arguments therefrom
as the subject required. In the prosecution of it, I have considered myself as
an advocate for the right of the states, and taken no other liberty with the
subject than what a counsel would, and ought to do, in behalf of a client.

I freely confess that the respect I had conceived, and still preserve, for the
character of Virginia, was a constant check upon those sallies of imagination,
which are fairly and advantageously indulged against an enemy, but ungenerous
when against a friend.

If there is any thing I have omitted or mistaken, to the injury of the
intentions of Virginia or her claims, I shall gladly rectify it; or if there is
any thing yet to add, should the subject require it, I shall as cheerfully
undertake it; being fully convinced, that to have matters fairly discussed, and
properly understood, is a principal means of preserving harmony and
perpetuating friendship.

THE AUTHOR.

PUBLIC GOOD, etc.
WHEN we take into view the mutual happiness and united interests of the states
of America, and consider the important consequences to arise from a strict
attention of each, and of all, to every thing which is just, reasonable and
honorable; or the evils that will follow from an inattention to those
principles; there cannot, and ought not, to remain a doubt, but that the
governing rule of right and mutual good must in all public cases finally
preside.

The hand of providence has cast us into one common lot, and accomplished the
independence of America, by the unanimous consent of the several parts,
concurring at once in time, manner and circumstances. No superiority of
interest, at the expense of the rest, induced the one, more than the other,
into the measure. Virginia and Maryland, it is true, might foresee, that their
staple commodity, tobacco, by being no longer monopolized by Britain, would
bring them a better price abroad: for as the tax on it in England was treble
its first purchase from the planter, and they being now no longer compelled to
send it under that obligation, and in the restricted manner they formerly were;
it is easy to see, that the article, from the alteration of the circumstances
of trade, will, and daily does, turn out to them with additional advantages.

But this being a natural consequence, produced by that common freedom and
independence of which all are partakers, is therefore an advantage they are
entitled to, and on which the rest of the states can congratulate them without
feeling a wish to lessen, but rather to extend it. To contribute to the
increased prosperity of another, by the same means which occasion our own, is
an agreeable reflection; and the more valuable any article of export becomes,
the more riches will be introduced into and spread over the continent.

Yet this is an advantage which those two states derive from the independence
of America superior to the local circumstances of the rest; and of the two it
more particularly belongs to Virginia than Maryland, because the staple
commodity of a considerable part of Maryland is flour, which, as it is an
article that is the growth of Europe as well as of America, cannot obtain a
foreign market but by under selling, or at least by limiting it to the current
price abroad. But tobacco commands its own price. It is not a plant of almost
universal growth, like wheat. There are but few soils and climes that produce
it to advantage, and before the cultivation of it in Virginia and Maryland, the
price was from four to sixteen shillings sterling a pound in England. See sir
Dalby Thomas's historical account of the rise and growth of the West India
colonies.


But the condition of the vacant western territory of America makes a very
different case to that of the circumstances of trade in any of the states.
Those very lands, formed, in contemplation, the fund by which the debt of
America would in a course of years be redeemed. They were considered as the
common right of all; and it is only till lately that any pretension of claims
has been made to the contrary.

That difficulties and differences will arise in communities ought always to be
looked for. The opposition of interests, real or supposed; the variety of
judgments; the contrariety of temper; and, in short, the whole composition of
man, in his individual capacity, is tinctured with a disposition to contend;
but in his social capacity there is either a right which, being proved,
terminates the dispute, or a reasonableness in the measure, where no direct
right can be made out, which decides or compromises the matter.

As I shall have frequent occasion to mention the word right, I wish to be
clearly understood in my definition of it. There are various senses in which
this term is used, and custom has, in many of them, afforded it an introduction
contrary to its true meaning. We are so naturally inclined to give the utmost
degree of force to our own case, that we call every pretension, however
founded, a right; and by this means the term frequently stands opposed to
justice and reason.

After Theodore was elected king of Corsica, not many years ago, by the mere
choice of the natives, for their own convenience in opposing the Genoese, he
went over into England, run himself into debt, got himself into jail, and on
his release therefrom by the benefit of an act of insolvency, he surrendered
up, what he called, his kingdom of Corsica, as a part of his personal property,
for the use of his creditors; some of whom may hereafter call this a charter,
or by any other name more fashionable, and ground thereon what they may term a
right to the sovereignty and property of Corsica. But does not justice abhor
such an action, both in him and them, under the prostituted name of a right,
and must not laughter be excited where ever it is told.

A right, to be truly so, must be right in itself; yet many things have
obtained the name of rights, which are originally founded in wrong. Of this
kind are all rights by mere conquest, power or violence. In the cool moments of
reflection we are obliged to allow, that the mode by which such right is
obtained, is not the best suited to that spirit of universal justice which
ought to preside equally over all mankind. There is something in the
establishment of such a right that we wish to slip over as easily as possible,
and say as little about as can be. But in the case of a right founded in right
the mind is carried cheerfully into the subject, feels no compuction, fuffers
no distress, subjects its sensations to no violences, nor sees any thing in its
way which requires an artificial smoothing.

From this introduction I proceed to examine into the claims of Virginia; first
as to the right, secondly as to the reasonableness, and lastly as to the
consequences.

The name, Virginia, originally bore a different meaning to what it does now.
It stood in the place of the word North America, and seems to have been
intended as a name comprehensive of all the English settlements or colonies on
the continent, and not descriptive of any one as distinguishing it from the
rest. All to the southward of Chesapeak, as low as the Gulf of Mexico, was
called South-Virginia, and all to the northward North-Virginia, in a similar
line of distinction, as we now call the whole continent North and
South-America. Oldmixon's history of Virginia.


The first charter or patent was to sir Walter Rawleigh by Queen Elizabeth, of
England, in the year 1583, and had neither name nor bounds. Upon sir Walter's
return, the name Virginia, was given to the whole country, including the now
United States. Consequently the present Virginia, either as a province or a
state, can sit up no exclusive claim to the western territory under this
patent, and that for two reasons; first, because the words of the patent run to
sir Walter Rawleigh, and such persons as he should nominate, themselves and
their successors; which is a line of succession Virginia does not pretend to
stand in; and secondly, because a prior question would arise, namely, who are
to be understood by Virginians under this patent? and the answer would be, all
the inhabitants of America, from New England to Florida.

This patent, therefore, would destroy their exclusive claim, and invest the
right collectively in the thirteen states.

But it unfortunately happened, that the settlers under this patent, partly
from misconduct, the opposition of the Indians, and other calamities.
discontinued the process, and the patent became extinct.

After this James the first, who, in the year 1602, succeeded Elizabeth, issued
a new patent, which I come next to describe.

This patent differed from the former in this essential point, that it had
limits, whereas the other had none: the former was intended to promote
discoveries where ever they could be made, which accounts why no limits were
affixed, and this to settle discoveries already made, which likewise assigns a
reason why limits should be deseribed.

In this patent were incorporated two companies, called the South-Virginia
company, and the North-Virginia company, and sometimes the London company, and
the Plymouth company.

The South-Virginia or London company was composed chiefly of London
adventurers; the North-Virginia or Plymouth company was made up of adventurers
from Plymouth in Devonshire, and other persons of the western parts of England.

Though they were not to fix together, yet they were allowed to choose their
places of settlement any where on the coast of America, then called Virginia,
between the latitudes of 34 and 45 degrees, which was a range of 760 miles: the
south company was not to go below 34 degrees, nor the north company above 45
degrees. But the patent expressed, that as soon as they had made their choice,
each was to become limited to 50 miles each way on the coast, and 100 up the
country; so that the grant to each company was a square of 100 miles, and no
more. The North-Virginia or Plymouth company settled to the eastward, and in
the year 1614 changed the name, and called that part New England. The
South-Virginia or London company settled near cape Henry.

This then cannot be the patent of boundless extent, and that for two reasons;
first, because the limits are described, namely, a square of 100 miles; and
secondly, because there were two companies of equal rights included in the same
patent.

Three years after this, that is, in the year 1609, the South-Virginia company
applied for new powers from the Crown of England, which were granted them in a
new patent, and the boundaries of the grant enlarged; and this is the charter
or patent on which some of the present Virginians ground their pretension to
boundless territory.

The first reflection that presents itself on this enlargement of the grant is,
that it must be supposed to bear some intended degree of reasonable comparison
to that which it superceded. The former could not be greater than a square of
one hundred miles; and this new one being granted in the lieu of that, and that
within the space of three years, and by the same person, James the first, who
was never famed either for profusion or generosity, cannot, on a review of the
time and circumstances of the grant, be supposed a very extravagant or very
extraordinary one. If a square of one hundred miles was not sufficiently large,
twice that quantity was as much as could well be expected or solicited: but to
suppose that he, who had caution enough to confine the first grant within
moderate bounds, should in so short a space as three years, supercede it by
another grant of many million times greater content, is, on the face of the
affair, a circumstantial nullity.

Whether this patent or charter was in existence or not at the time the
revolution commenced, is a matter I shall hereafter speak to, and confine
myself in this place to the limits which the said patent or charter lays down.

The words are as follow: Beginning from the cape or point of land called cape
or point Comfort, thence all along the sea coast to the NORTHWARD 200 miles;
and from the said point or cape Comfort all along the sea coast to the
southward 200 miles; and all that space or circuit of land lying from the sea
coast of the precinct aforesaid up into the land throughout, from sea to sea,
WEST and northwest.

The first remark I shall offer on the words of this grant is, that they are
uncertain, obscure and unintelligible, and may be construed into such a variety
of contradictory meanings as to leave at last no meaning at all.

Whether the 200 miles each way, from cape Comfort, were to be on a straight
line, or ascertained by following the indented line of the coast, that is, "all
along the sea coast," in and out as the coast lay, cannot now be fully
determined; because, as either will admit of supposition, and nothing but
supposition can be produced, therefore neither can be taken as positive. Thus
far may be said, that had it been intended to be a straight line, the word
straight ought to have been inserted, which would have made the matter clear;
but as no inference can well be drawn to the advantage of that which does not
appear against that which does, therefore the omission implies negatively in
favor of the coast indented line, or that the 400 miles were to be traced on
the windings of the coast, that is, "all along the sea coast."

But what is meant by the words "west and north-west" is still more
unintelligible. Whether they mean a west line and a north-west line, or whether
they apply to the general lying of the land from the Atlantic, without regard
to lines, cannot again be determined. But if they are supposed to mean lines to
be run, then a new difficulty of more magnitude than all the rest arises;
namely, From which end of the extent on the coast is the west line and the
north-west line to be set off; as the difference in the content of the grant,
occasioned by transposing them is many hundred million of acres; and either
includes or excludes a far greater quantity of land than the whole thirteen
United States contain?

In short, there is not a boundary in this grant that is clear, fixed and
defined. The coast line is uncertain, and that being the base on which the
others are to be formed, renders the whole uncertain. But even if this line was
admitted, in either shape, the other boundaries would still be on supposition,
till it might be said there is no boundary at all, and consequently no charter;
for words which describe nothing can give nothing.

The advocates for the Virginia claim, laying hold of these ambiguities, have
explained the grant thus:

Four hundred miles on the sea coast, and from the south point a west line to
the great south sea, and from the north point a north-west line to the said
south sea. The figure which these lines produce will be thus: West line to the
South Sea 3000 miles.

200 S.

Cape Comfort.

200 N.

North-west line endless.

New York. New England.



But why, I ask, must the west land line be set off from the south point, any
more than from the north point? The grant or patent does not say from which it
shall be, neither is it clear that a line is the thing intended by the words:
but admitting it is, on what grounds do the claimants proceed in making this
choice? the answer, I presume, is easily given, namely, because it is the most
beneficial explanation to themselves they can possibly make; as it takes in
many thousand times more extent of country than any other explanation would.
But this, though it be a very good reason to them, is a very bad reason to us;
and though it may do for the claimants to hope upon, will not answer to plead
upon; especially to the very people, who, to confirm the partiality of the
claimants choice, must relinquish their own right and interest.

Why not set off the west land line from the north end of the coast line, and
the north-west line from the south end of the same? there is some reason why
this should be the construction and none why the other should.

First, because, if the line of two hundred miles each way from cape Comfort,
be traced by following the indented line of the coast, which seems to be the
implied intention of the words, and a west line be set off from the north end,
and a north-west line from the south end, these lines will all unite, (which
the other construction never can) and form a complete triangle, the content of
which will be about twenty nine or thirty millions of acres, or something
larger than Penusylvania: and

Secondly, because this construction is following the order of the lines as
expressed in the grant; for the first mentioned coast line, which is that to
the northward of cape Comfort, and the first mentioned land line, which is the
west line, have a numerical relation, being the first mentioned of each; and
implies, that the west line was to be set off from the north point and not from
the south point: and consequently the two last mentioned of each have the same
numerical relation, and again implies that the north-west line was to be set
off from the south point, and not from the north point. But why the claimants
should break through the order of the lines, and, contrary to implication, join
the first mentioned of the one, to the last mentioned of the other, and thereby
produce a shapeless monster, for which there is no name nor any parallel in the
world, either as to extent of soil or sovereignty, is a construction that
cannot be supported.

The figure produced by following the order of the lines is as under.

N. B. If the reader will cast his eye again over the words of the patent on
page 10 he will perceive the namerical relation alluded to, by observing, that
the first mentioned coast line and the first mentioned land line are
distinguished by CAPITALS. And the last mentioned of each by italics, which I
have chosen to do to illustrate the explanation.

North-west Line.

200 S.

Cape Comfort.

200 N.

West Line.



I presume that if four hundred miles be traced by fol lowing the inslexes of
any sea shore, that the two extremes will not be more than three hundred miles
distant from each other, on a straight line. Therefore to find the content of a
triangle whose base is three hundred miles, multiply the length of the base
into half the perpendicular, which, in this case is the west line, and the
product will be the answer:

300 miles length of the base. 150 half the perpendicular, (supposing it a
[right angled triangle) 15000 300 45,000 content of the grant in square miles.
640 acres in a square mile. 1800000 270000 28,800,000 content in square acres.

Now will any one undertake to say, that this explanation is not as fairly
drawn, (if not more so) from the words themselves, as any other that can be
offered, because it is not only justified by the exact words of the patent,
grant, or charter, or any other name by which it may be called, but by their
implied meaning; and is likewise of such a content, as may be supposed to have
been intended; whereas the claimants explanation is without bounds, and beyond
every thing that is reasonable. Yet after all, who can say what were the
precise meaning of terms and expressions so loosely formed, and capable of such
a variety of contradictory interpretations?

Had the order of the lines been otherwise than they are in the patent, the
reasonableness of the thing must have directed the manner in which they should
be connected: but as the claim is founded in unreasonableness, and that
unreasonableness endeavored to be supported by a transposition of the lines,
there remains no pretense for the claim to stand on.

Perhaps those who are interested in the claimants explanation will say, that
as the south sea is spoken of, the lines must be as they explain them, in order
to reach it.

To this I reply; first, that no man then knew how far it was from the Atlantic
to the south sea, as I shall presently show, but believed it to be but a short
distance: and,

Secondly, that the uncertain and ambiguous manner in which the south fea is
alluded to, (for it is not mentioned by name, but only " from sea to sea")
serves to perplex the vatent, and not to explain it: and as no right can be
founded on an arobiguity, but on some proof cleared of ambiguity, therefore the
allusive introduction of "sea to sea," can yield no service to the claim.

There is likewise an ambiguous mention made of two lands in this patent, as
well as of two seas; viz. "and all that space or circuit of land lying from the
sea coast of the precinct oforesaid up into the land throughout from sea to sea.

On which I remark, that the two lauds here mentioned have the appearance of a
major and a minor, or the greator out of which the less is to be taken: and the
term from "sea to sea" may be said to apply descriptively to the land
throughout, and not to the space or circuit of land patented to the company: in
a similar manner that the former patent described a major of 760 miles extent,
out of which the minor, or square of one hundred miles, was to be chosen.

But to suppose, that because the south sea is darkly alluded to, it must
therefore, (at whatever distance it might be, which then nobody knew, or for
whatever purpose it might be introduced) be made a certain boundary, and that
without regard to the reasonableness of the matter, or the order in which the
lines are arranged, which is the only implication the patent gives for setting
off the land lines, is a supposition that contradicts every thing which is
reasonable.

The figure produced by following the order of the lines will be complete in
itself, let the distance to the south sea be more or less: because, if the land
throughout from sea to sea had not been sufficiently extensive to admit the
west land line and the north-west land line to close, the south sea, it that
case, would have eventually become a boundary: but if the extent of the land
throughout from sea to sea, was so great, that the lines closed without
reaching the said south sea, the figure was complete without it.

Wherefore, as the order of the lines, when raised on the indented coast line,
produces a regular figure of reasonable dimensions, and of about the same
content, though not of the same shape, which Virginia now holds within the
Allegany Mountains; and by transposing them another sigure is produced, for
which there is no name, and cannot be completed, as I shall presently explain,
and of an extent greater than one half of Europe, it is needless to offer any
other arguments to show that the order of the lines must be the rule, if any
rule can be drawn from the words, for ascertaining from which point the west
line and north-west line were to be set off. Neither is it possible to suppose
any other rule could be followed; because a north-west line set off two hundred
miles above cape Comfort, would not only never touch the south sea, but would
form a spiral line or infinite windings round the globe, and after passing over
the northern parts of America and the frozen ocean, and then into the northern
parts of Asia, would, when eternity should end and not before, terminate in the
north pole.

This is the only manner in which I can express the effect of a north-west
line, set off as above; because as its direction must always be between the
north and the west, it consequently can never get into the pole nor yet come to
a rest; and on the principle, that matter or space is capable of being
eternally divided, must proceed on for ever.

But it was a prevailing opinion, at the time this patent was obtained, that
the South sea was at no great distance from the Atlantic, and therefore it was
needless, under that supposition, to regard which way the lines should be run;
neither need we wonder at this error in the English government respecting
America then, when we see so many and such glaring ones now, for which there
are less excuse.

Some circumstances favored this mistake. Admiral sir Francis Drake not long
before this, had, from the top of a mountain in the Isthmus of Darien, which is
the center of North and South America, seen both the South sea and the
Atlantic; the width of the part of the continent where he then was, not being
above 70 miles, whereas its width opposite Chesapeak-bay is as great, if not
greater, than in any other part, being from sea to sea, about the distance it
is from America to England. But this could not then be known, because only two
voyages had been made across the South sea; the one by the ship in which
Magellan sailed, who died in his passage, and which was the first ship that
failed round the world, and the other by sir Francis Drake: but as neither of
these sailed into a northern latitude in that ocean, high enough to fix the
longitude of the western coast of America from the eastern; the distance across
was entirely on supposition, and the errors they then ran into appear laughable
to us who now know what the distance is.

That the company expected to come at the South sea without much trouble or
traveling, and that the great body of land which intervened, so far from being
their view in obtaining the charter, became their disappointment, may be
collected from a circumstance mentioned in Stith's history of Virginia.

He relates, that, in the year 1608, which was at the time the company were
soliciting this patent, they fitted up in England "a barge for captain
Newport," (who was afterward one of the joint deputy governors under the very
charter we are now treating of) which, for convenience of carriage, might be
taken into five pieces, and with which he and his company were instructed to go
up James River as far as the falls thereof, to discover the country of the
Monakins, and from thence they were to proceed, carrying their barge beyond the
falls to convey them to the south sea; being ordered not to return without a
lump of gold, or a certainty of the said sea.

And Hutchinson, in his history of New England, which was called North-Virginia
at the time this patent was obtained, says, the geography of this part of
America was less understood than at present. A line to the Spanish settlements
was imagined much shorter than it really was. Some of Champlain's people, in
the beginning of the last century, who had been but a few days march from
Quebec, returned with great joy, supposing that from the top of a high mountain
they had discovered the South Sea.

From these matters, which are evidences on record, it appears that the
adventurers had no knowledge of the distance it was to the South Sea, but
supposed it to be no great way from the Atlantic; and also, that great extent
of territory was not their object, but a short communication with the southern
ocean, by which they might get into the neighborhood of the Gold Coast, and
likewise carry on a commerce with the East Indies.

Having thus shown the confused and various interpretations this charter is
subject to, and that it may be made to mean any thing and nothing; I now
proceed to show, that, let the limits of it be more or less, the present
Virginia does not, and cannot, as a matter of right, inherit under it.

I shall open this part of the subject by putting the following case:

Either Virginia stands in succession to the London company, to whom the
charter was granted, or to the Crown of England. If to the London company, then
it becomes her, as an outset in the matter, to show who they were, and likewise
that they were in possession at the commencement of the revolution. -- If to
the Crown, then the charter is of consequence superseded; because the Crown did
not possess territories by charter, but by prerogative without charter. The
notion of the Crown chartering to itself is a nullity; and in this case, the
unpossessed lands, be they little or much, are in the same condition as if they
never had been chartered at all; and the sovereignty of them devolves to the
sovereignty of the United States.

The charter or patent of 1609 as well as that of 1606 was to Sir Thomas Gates,
Sir George Summers, the reverend Richard Hackluit, prebend of Westminster, and
others; and the government was then proprietary. Those proprietors, by virtue
of the charter of 1609, chose Lord Delaware for their governor, and Sir Thomas
Gates, Sir George Summers, and captain Newport, (the person who was to go with
a boat to the South sea, joint deputy governors.

Was this the form of government either as to soil or constitution at the time
the present revolution commenced? if not, the charter was not in being; for it
matters not to us how it came to be out of being, so long as the present
Virginians, or their ancestors, neither are nor were sufferers by the change
then made.

But suppose it could be proved to be in being, which it cannot, because being
in a charter is power, it would only prove a right in behalf of the London
company of adventurers, but how that right is to be disposed of is another
question. We are not defending the right of the London company deceased 150
years ago, but taking up the matter at the place where we found it, and so far
as the authority of the Crown of England was exercised when the revolution
commenced.

The charter was a contract between the Crown of England and those adventurers
for their own emolument, and not between the Crown and the people of Virginia;
and whatever was the occasion of the contract becoming void, or surrendered up,
or superceded, makes no part of the question now. It is sufficient that when
the United States succeeded to sovereignty they found no such contract in
existence or even in litigation. They found Virginia under the authority of the
Crown of England, both as to soil and government, subject to quit-rents to the
Crown and not to the company, and had been so for upwards of 150 years: and
that an instrument or deed of writing, of a private nature, as all proprietary
contracts are so far as land is concerned, and which is now only historically
known, and in which Virginia was no party, and to which no succession in any
line can be proved, and have ceased for 150 years, should now be raked from
oblivion and held up as a charter whereon to assume a right to boundless
territory, and that by a perversion of the order of it, is something very
singular and extraordinary.

If there was any innovation on the part of the crown, the contest rested
between the crown and the proprietors, the London company, and not between
Virginia and the said crown. It was not her charter; it was the company's
charter, and the only parties in the case were the crown and the company.

But why, if Virginia contends for the immutability of charters, has she
selected this in preference to the two former ones? All her arguments arising
from this principle must go to the first charter and not to the last; but by
placing them to the last, instead of the first, she admits a fact against her
principle; because, in order to establish the last, she proves the first to be
vacated by the second in the space of 23 years, the second to be vacated by the
third in the space of 3 years; and why the third should not be vacated by the
fourth form of government, issuing from the same power with the former two, and
which took place about 25 years after, and continued in being for 150 years
since, and under which all her public and private business was transacted, her
purchases made, her warrants for survey and patents for land obtained, is too
mysterious to account for.

Either the re-assumption of the London company's charter into the hands of the
crown was an usurpation, or it was not. If it was, then, strictly speaking, is
every thing which Virginia has done under that usurpation illegal, and she may
be said to have lived in the most curious species of rebellion ever known;
rebellion against the London company of adventurers. For if the charter to the
company (for it was not to the Virginians) ought to be in being now, it ought
to have been in being then; and why she should admit its vacation then, and
reject it now, is unaccountable; or why she should esteem her purchases of
lands good which were then made contrary to this charter, and now contend for
the operation of the same charter to possess new territory by, are
circumstances which cannot be reconciled.

But whether the charter, as it is called, ought to be extinct or not, cannot
make a question with us. All the parties concerned in it are deceased, and no
successors, in any regular line of succession, appear to claim. Neither the
London company of adventurers, their heirs or assigns, were in possession of
the exercise of this charter at the commencement of the revolution; and
therefore the state of Virginia does not, in point of fact, succeed to and
inherit from the company.

But say they, we succeed to and inherit from the Crown of England, which was
the immediate possessor of of the sovereignty at the time we entered, and had
been so for 150 years.

To say this, is to say there is no charter at all. A charter is an assurance
from one party to another, and cannot be from the same party to itself.

But before I enter further on this case I shall concisely state how this
charter came to be reassumed by the power which granted it, the Crown of
England.

I have already stated that it was a proprietary charter, or grant, to sir
Thomas Gates and others, who were called the London company, and sometimes the
South-Virginia company, to distinguish them from those who settled to the
eastward (now New England) and were then called the North-Virginia or Plymouth
company.

Oldmixon's history of Virginia (in his account of the British empire in
America) published in the year 1708, gives a concise progress of the affair. He
attributes it to the misconduct, contentions and mismanagement of the
proprietors, and their innovations upon the Indians, which had so exasperated
them, that they fell on the settlers and destroyed at one time 334 men, women,
and children.

"Some time after this massacre, says he, several gentlemen in England procured
grants of land from the company, and others came over on their private accounts
to make settlements; among the former was one captain Martin, who was named to
be of the council. This man raised so many differences among them, that new
distractions followed, which the Indians observing, took heart and once more
fell upon the settlers on the borders, destroying, without pitying either age,
sex, or condition.

"These and other calamities, being chiefly imputed to the mismanagement of the
proprietors, whose losses had so discouraged most of their best members, that
they sold their shares, and Charles the first on his accession to the throne
dissolved the company, and took the colony into his own immediate direction. He
appointed the governor and council himself, ordered all patents and process to
issue in his own name, and reserved a quit-rent of two shillings sterling for
every hundred acres."

Thus far our author. Now it is impossible for us at this distance of time to
say what were all the exact causes of the change; neither have we any business
with it. The company might surrender it, or they might not, or they might
forfeit it by not fulfilling conditions, or they might sell it, or the Crown
might, as far as we know, take it from them. But what are either of these cases
to Virginia, or any other which can be produced. She was not a party in the
matter. It was not her charter, neither can she ingraft any right upon it or
suffer any injury under it.

If the charter was vacated it must have been by the London company; if it was
surrendered it must be by the same; If it was sold nobody else could sell it,
and if it was taken from them nobody else could lose it; and yet Virginia calls
this her charter, which it was not within her power to hold, to sell, to
vacate, or to lose.

But if she puts her right upon the ground that it never was sold, surrendered,
lost, or vacated, by the London company, she admits that if they had sold,
surrendered, lost, or vacated it, that it would have become extinct, and to her
no charter at all. And in this case, the only thing to prove is the fact, which
is, Has this charter been the rule of government, and of purchasing or
procuring unappropriated lands in Virginia, from the time it was granted to the
time of the revolution? Answer, the charter has not been the rule of
government, nor of purchasing or procuring lands, neither has any lands been
purchased or procured under its sanction or authority for upwards of 150 years.

But if she goes a step further, and say that they could not vacate, surrender,
sell, or lose it, by any act they could do, so neither could they vacate,
surrender, sell, or lose that of 1606, which was three years prior to this; and
this argument, so far from establishing the charter of 1609, would destroy it;
and in its stead confirm the preceding one which limited the company to a
square of 100 miles. And if she still goes back to that of sir Walter Rawleigh,
that only places her in the light of Americans in common with all.

The only fact that can be clearly proved, is, that the Crown of England
exercised the power of dominion and government in Virginia, and of the disposal
of the lands, and that the charter had neither been the rule of government or
purchasing lands for upwards of 150 years, and this places Virginia in
succession to the Crown and not to the Company. Consequently it proves a lapse
of the charter into the hands of the crown by some means or other.

Now to suppose that the charter could return into the hands of the crown and
yet remain in force, is to suppose that a man could be bound by a bond of
obligation to himself.

Its very being in the hands of the crown from which it issued is a cessation
of its existence; and an effectual unchartering all that part of the Grant
which was not before disposed of. And consequently the state of Virginia
standing thus in succession to the crown, can be entitled to no more extent of
country as a state under the union, than what it possessed as a province under
the crown. And all lands exterior to these bounds as well of Virginia as the
rest of the states, devolve, in the order of succession to the sovereignty of
the United States for the benefit of all.

And this brings the case to what were the limits of Virginia as a province
under the crown of England.

Charter it had none. It Is limits then rested at the discretion of the
authority to which it was subjest. Maryland and Pennsylvania became it is
boundary to the eastward and northward and North Carolina to the southward,
therefore the boundary to the westward was the only principal line to be
ascertained.

As Virginia from a proprietary soil and government was become what then bore
the name of a royal one, the extent of the province, as the order of things
then stood (for something must always be admitted whereon to form a beginning)
was wholly at the disposal of the crown of England, who might enlarge, or
diminish, or erect new governments to the westward, by the same authoritative
right that Virginia now can divide a county into two; if too large, or too
inconvenient.

To say, as has been said, that Pennsylvania, Maryland and North Carolina, were
taken out of Virginia, is no more than to say, they were taken out of America;
because Virginia was the common name of all the country, north and south: and
to say they were taken out of the chartered limits of Virginia, is likewise to
say nothing; because after the dissolution or extinction of the proprietary
company, there was nobody to whom any provincial limits became chartered. The
extinction of the company was the extinction of the chartered limits. The
patent could not survive the company, because it was to them a right, which,
when they expired ceased to be any body's else in their stead.

But to return to the western boundary of Virginia at the commencement of the
revolution.

Charters, like proclamations, were the sole act of the crown, and if the
former were adequate to fix limits to the lands which it gave away, sold, or
otherways disposed of, the latter were equally adequate to fix limits or
divisions to those which it retained; and therefore, the western limits of
Virginia, as the proprietary company was extinct and consequently the patent
with it, must be looked for in the line of proclamations.

I am not fond of quoting these old remains of former arrogance, but as we must
begin somewhere, and as the states have agreed to regulate the right of each
state to territory, by the condition each stood in with the crown of England at
the commencement of the revolution, we have no other rule to go by; and any
rule which can be agreed on is better than none.

From the proclamation then of 1763, the western limits of Virginia, as a
province under the crown of England, are described so as not to extend beyond
the heads of any of the rivers which empty themselves into the Atlantic, and
consequently the limits did not pass over the Allegany Mountain.

Extract from the proclamation of 1763 so far as respects boundary:

"AND WHEREAS it is just and reasonable, and essential to our interest, and the
security of our colonies, that the several nations or tribes of Indians, with
whom we are connected, and who live under our protection, should not be
molested or disturbed in the possession of such parts of our dominions and
territories, as, not having been ceded to or purchased by us, are reserved to
them or any of them as their hunting grounds; we do therefore, with the advice
of our privy council, declare it to be our royal will and pleasure, that no
governor, or commander in chief, in any of our colonies of Quebec, east
Florida, or west Florida, do presume, upon any pretense whatever, to grant
warrants of survey, or pass any patents for lands beyond the bounds of their
respective governments, as described in their commissions; As ALSO that no
governor or commander in chief of our other colonies or plantations in America,
do presume, for the present, and until our further pleasure be known, to grant
warrants of survey, or pass patents for any lands beyond the heads or sources
of any of the rivers which fall into the Atlantic ocean from the west or
north-west, or upon any lands whatever, which not having been ceded to, or
purchased by us, as aforesaid, are reserved unto the said Indians or any of
them.

"And we do further declare it to be our royal will and pleasure, for the
present, as aforesaid, to reserve under our sovereignty, protection, and
dominion, for the use of the said Indians all the lands and territories, not
included within the limits of our said three new governments, or within the
limits of the territory granted to the Hudson's-Bay company; as also, all the
lands and territories lying to the westward of the sources of the rivers, which
fall into the sea from the west and north-west as aforesaid; and we do hereby
strictly forbid, on pain of our displeasure, all our loving subjects from
making any purchases or settlements whatever, or taking possession of any of
the lands above reserved, without our especial leave and license for that
purpose first obtained:

"And we do further strictly enjoin and require all persons whatever, who have
either wilfully or inadvertently seated themselves upon any lands within the
countries above described, or upon any other lands, which, not having been
ceded to, or purchased by us, are still reserved to the said Indians, as
aforesaid, forthwith to remove themselves from such settlements."

It is easy for us to understand, that the frequent and plausible mention of
the Indians was only speciousness to create an idea of the humanity of
government. The object and intention of the proclamation was the western
boundary, which is here signified not to extend beyond the heads of the rivers:
and these, then, are the western limits which Virginia had as a province under
the crown of Britain.

And agreeable to the intention of this proclamation and the limits described
thereby, lord Hilsborough, then secretary of state in England, addressed an
official letter of the 31st of July, 1770, to lord Bottetourt, at that time
governor of Virginia, which letter was laid before the council of Virginia by
Mr. president Nelson, and by him answered on the 18th of October in the same
year, of which the following are extracts:

"On the evening of the day your lordship's letter to the governor was
delivered to me, and as it contains matters of great variety and importance, it
was read in council, and, together with the several papers enclosed, it has
been maturely considered, and I now trouble your lordship with theirs as well
as my own opinion upon the subject of them.

"We do not presume to say to whom our gracious sovereign shall grant his
vacant lands," and "with respect to the establishment of a new colony on the
back of Virginia, it is a subject of too great political importance for me to
presume to give an opinion upon, however, permit me, my lord, to observe, that
when that part of the country shall become sufficiently populated it may be a
wise and prudent measure."

On the death of lord Bottetourt, lord Dunmore was appointed to the government,
and he, either from ignorance of the subject, or other motives, made a grant of
some lands on the Ohio to certain of his friends and favorites, which produced
the following letter from lord Dartmouth, who succeeded lord Hilsborough as
secretary of state:

"I think fit to enclose your lordship a copy of lord Hilsborough's letter to
lord Bottetourt, of the 31st of July, 1770, the receipt of which was
acknowledged by Mr. president Nelson, a few days after lord Bottetourt's death,
and appears by his answer to it, to have been laid before the council. That
board, therefore, could not be ignorant of what has passed here upon Mr.
Walpole's application, nor of the king's express command, contained in lord
Hilsborough's letter, that no lands should be granted beyond the limits of the
royal proclamation of 1763, until the king's further pleasure was signified;
and I have only to observe, that it must have been a very extraordinary neglect
in them not to have informed your lordship of that letter and those orders."

On these documents I shall make no remarks. They are their own evidence, and
show what the limits of Virginia were while a British province; and as there
was then no other authority by which they could be fixed, and as the grant to
the London company could not be a grant to any but themselves, and of
consequence ceased to be when they ceased to exist, it remained a matter of
choice in the crown, on its re-assumption of the lands, to limit or divide them
into separate governments, as it judged best, and from which there was not, and
could not in the order of government, be any appeal. Neither was Virginia, as a
province, affected by it, because the moneys, in any case, arising from the
sale of lands, did not go into her treasury; and whether to the crown or to the
proprietors was to her indifferent. And it is likewise evident, from the
secretary's letter, and the president's answer, that it was in contemplation to
lay out a new colony on the back of Virginia, between the Allegany Mountains
and the Ohio.

Having thus gone through the several charters, or grants, and their relation to
each other, and shown that Virginia cannot stand in succession to a private
Grant, which has been extinct for upwards of 150 years; and that the western
limits of Virginia, at the commencement of the revolution, were at the heads of
the rivers emptying themselves into the Atlantic, none of which are beyond the
Allegany Mountains; I now proceed to the second part, namely,

The reasonableness of her claims:

Virginia, as a British province, stood in a different situation with the crown
of England to any of the other provinces, because she had no ascertained
limits, but such as arose from the laying off new provinces and the
proclamation of 1763. For the name, Virginia, as I have before mentioned, was
the general name of all the country, and the dominion out of which the several
governments were laid off: and in strict propriety, conformable to the origin
of names, the province of Virgiginia was taken out of the dominion of Virginia.
For the term, dominion, could not appertain to the province, which retained the
name of Virginia, but to the crown, and from thence was applied to the whole
country, and signified its being an appendage to the crown of England, as they
now say "our dominion of Wales."

It is not possible to suppose there could exist an idea, that Virginia, as a
British province, was to be extended to the south sea at the distance of three
thousand miles. The dominion, as appertaining at that time to the crown, might
be claimed to extend so far, but as a province the thought was not
conceiveable, nor the practice possible. And it is more than probable, that the
deception made use of to obtain the patent of 1609, by representing the fouth
sea to be near where the Allegany Mountains are, was one cause of its becoming
extinct; and it is worthy of remarking, that no history (at least that I have
met with) mentions any dispute or litigation, between the crown and the company
in consequence of the extinction of the patent, and the re-assumption of the
lands; and therefore the negative evidence corroborating with the positive,
make it, as certain as such a case can possibly be, that either the company
received a compensation for the patent, or quitted it quietly, ashamed of the
imposition they had acted, and their subsequent mal-administration. Men are not
inclined to give up a claim where there is any ground to contend on, and the
silence in which the patent expired is a presumptive proof that its fate, from
whatever cause, was just.

There is one general policy which seems to have prevailed with the English in
laying off new governments, which was, not to make them larger than their own
country, that they might the easier hold them manageable: this was the case
with every one except Canada, the extension of whose limits was for the
political purpose of recognizing new acquisition of territory, not immediately
convenient for colonization.

But, in order to give this matter a chance through all its cases, I will admit
what no man can suppose, which is, that there is an English charter that fixes
Virginia to extend from the Atlantic to the south sea, and contained within a
due west line, set off two hundred miles below cape Comfort, and a north west
line, set off two hundred miles above it. Her side, then, on the, atlantic
(according to an explanation given in Mr. Bradsord's Paper of September 29th,
1779, by an advocate for the Virginia claims) will be four hundred miles; her
side to the south three thousand; her side to the west four thousand; and her
north west line about five thousand; and the quantity of land contained within
these dimensions will be almost 4,000,000,000, that is, four thousand million
of acres, which is more than ten times the quantity contained within the
present United States, and above an hundred rimes greater than the kingdom of
England.

To reason on a case like this is such a waste of time, and such an excess of
solly that it ought not to be reasoned upon. It is impossible to suppose that
any patent to private persons could be so intentionally absurd, and the claim
grounded thereon is as wild as any thing the imagination of man ever conceived.

But if, as I before mentioned, there was a charter which bore such an
explanation, and that Virginia stood in succession to it, what would that he to
us any more than the will of Alexander, had he taken it in his head to have
bequeathed away the world? Such a charter or grant must have been obtained by
imposition and a false representation of the country, or granted in error, or
both; and in any of, or all these cases, the United States must reject the
matter as something they can know nothing of, for the merits will not bear an
argument, and the pretention of right stands upon no better ground.

Our case is an original one; and many matters attending it must be determined
on their own merits and reasonableness. The territory of the rest of the states
is in general within known bounds of moderate extent, and the quota which each
state is to furnish toward the expense and service of the war, must be
ascertained upon some rule of comparison. The number of inhabitants of each
state formed the first rule; and it was naturally supposed that those numbers
bore nearly the same proportion to each other, which the territory of each
state did. Virginia, on this scale, would be about one fifth larger than
Pennsylvania, which would be as much dominion as any state could manage with
happiness and convenience.

When I first began this subject, my intention was to be extensive on the
merits, and concise on the matter of right; instead of which, I have been
extensive on the matter of right, and concise on the merits or reasonableness:
and this alteration in my design arose consequentially from the nature of the
subject; for as a reasonable thing the claim can be supported by no argument,
and therefore needs none to refute it; but as there is a strange propensity in
mankind to shelter themselves under the sanction of a right, however
unreasonable that supposed right may be, I found it most conducive to the
interest of the case, to show, that the right stands upon no better grounds
than the reason. And shall therefore proceed to make some observations on

The consequences of the claim.

The claim being unreasonable in itself and standing on no ground of right, but
such as, if true, must from the quarter it is drawn be offensive, has a
tendency to create disgust and sour the minds of the rest of the states Those
lands are capable, under the management of the United States, of repaying the
charges of the war, and some of which, as I shall hereafter show, might, I
presume, be made an immediate advantage of.

I distinguish three different descriptions of lands in America at the
commencement of the revolution. Proprietary or chartered lands, as was the case
in Pennsylvania. Crown lands, within the described limits of any of the crown
governments; and crown residuary lands that were without or beyond the limite
of any province; and those last were held in reserve whereon to erect new
governments and lay out new provinces; as appears to have been the design by
lord Hillsborough's letter and the president's answer, wherein he says with
respect to the establishment of a new colony on the back of Virginia, it is a
subject of too great political imporportance for me to presume to give an
opinion upon; however permit me, my lord, to observe, that when that part of
the country shall become populated it may bea wise and prudent measure.

The expression is a new colony on the back of Virginia"; and referred to lands
between the heads of the rivers and the Ohio. This is a proof that those lands
were not considered within but beyond the limits of Virginia as a colony; and
the other expression in the letter is equally descriptive, namely, "We do not
presume to say to whom "our gracious sovereign shall grant his vacant lands".
Certainly then, the same right, which, at that time, rested in the crown rests
now in the more supreme authority of the United States; and therefore
addressing the president's letter to the circumstances of the revolution it
will run thus.

We do not presume to say to whom the sovereign United States shall grant their
vacant lands, and with respect to the settlement of a new colony on the back of
Virginia it is a matter of too much political importance for me to give an
opinion upon; however, permit me to observe, that when that part of the country
shall become peopled it may be a wise and prudent measure.

It must occur to every person on reflection that those lands are too distant
to be within the government of any of the present states; and, I may presume to
suppose, that were a calculation justly made, Virginia has lost more by the
decrease of taxables than she has gained by what lands she has made sale of;
therefore she is not only doing the rest of the states wrong in point of
equity, but herself and them an injury in point of strength, service and
revenue.

It is only the United States, and not any single State, that can lay off new
states and incorporate them in the union by representation; therefore the
situation which the settlers on those lands will be in, under the assumed right
of Virginia, will be hazardous and distressing, and they will feel themselves
at last like alliens to the common wealth of Israel, their habitations unsafe
and their title precarious.

And when men reflect on that peace, harmony, quietude, and security which is
necessary to prosperity, especially in making new settlements, and think that
when the war shall be ended, their happiness and safety will depend on a union
with the states, and not a scattered people, unconnected with, and politically
unknown to the rest, they will feel but little inclination to put themselves
selves in a sitnation, which, however solitary and recluse, it may appear, at
present, will then be uncertain and unsafe, and their troubles will have to
begin where those of the United States shall end.

It is probable that some of the inhabitants of Virginia may be inclined to
suppose, that the writer of this, by taking up the subject in the manner he has
done, is arguing unfriendly against their interest. To this he wishes to reply*

That the most extraordinary part of the whole is, that Virginia should
countenance such a claim. For it is worthy of observing, that, from the
beginning of the contest with Britain, and long after, there was not a people
in American who discovered, through all the variety and multiplicity of public
business, a greater fund of true wisdom, fortitude, and disinterestedness, than
the then colony of Virginia. They were loved -- They were reverenced. Their
investigation of the assumed rights of Britain had a sagacity which was
uncommon. Their reasonings were piercing, difficult to be equalled and
impossible to be refuted, and their public spirit was exceeded by none. But
since this unfortunate land scheme has taken place, their powers seem to be
absorbed. A Torpor has overshaded them, and every one asks what is become of
Virginia*

It seldom happens that the romantic schemes of extensive dominion are of any
service to a government, and never to a people. They assuredly end at last in
loss, trouble, division, and disappointment. And was even the title of Virginia
good, and the claim admissible, she would derive more lasting and real benefit
by participating it, than by attempting the management of an object so
infinitely beyond her reach. Her share with the rest, under the supremacy of
the United States, which is the only authority adaquate to the purpose, would
be worth more to her, than what the whole would produce under the management of
herself alone, and that for several reasons.

First, because her claim not being admissible nor yet manageable, she cannot
make a good title to the purchasers, and consequently can get but little for
the lands. Secondly, because the distance the settlers will be at from her,
will immediately put them out of all government and protection, so far, at
least, as relates to Virginia: and by this means she will render her frontiers
a refuge to desperadoes, and a hiding place from justice; and the consequence
will be perpetual unsafety to her own peace and that of the neighboring
states. Thirdly, Because her quota of expense for carrying on the war,
admitting ber to engross such an immensity of territory, would be greater than
she can either support or supply, and could not be less, upon a reasonable rule
of proportion, than nine tenths of the whole. And Lasty, because she must
sooner or later relinquish them, and therefore to see her own interest wisely
at first, is preferable to the alternative of finding it out by misfortune at
last.
I have now gone through my examination of the claims of Virginia in every case
which I proposed; and for several reasons wish the lot had fallen to another
person.

But as this is a most important matter, in which all are interested, and the
substantial good of Virginia not injured but promoted, and as few men have
leisure, and still fewer have inclination, to go into intricate investigation,
I have at last ventured on the subject.

The succession of the United States to the vacant western territory is a right
they originally sat out upon, and in the pamphlet, Common Sense, I frequently
mentioned those lands as a national fund for the benefit of all; therefore,
resuming the subject, where I then left off, I shall conclude with concisely
reducing to system what I then only hinted.

In my last piece, the Crisis Extraordinary, I estimated the annual amount of
the charge of the war and the support of the several governments at two
millions pounds sterling, and the peace establishment at three quarters of a
million, and, by a comparison of the taxes of this country with those of
England, proved that the whole yearly expense to us, to defend the country, is
but a third of what Britain would have drawn from us by taxes, had she
succeeded in her attempt to conquer; and our peace establishment only an eighth
part; and likewise showed, that it was within the ability of the states to
carry on the whole of the war by taxation without having recourse to any other
modes or funds. To have a clear idea of taxation is necessary to every country,
and the more funds we can discover and organize the less will be the hope of
the enemy, and the readier their disposition to peace, which it is now their
interest more than ours to promote.

I have already remarked that only the United States and not any particular
state can lay off new states and incorporate them in the union by
representation; keeping, therefore, this idea in view, I ask, might not a
substantial fund be quickly created by laying off a new state, so as to contain
between twenty and thirty million of acres, and opening a land office in all
the countries in Europe for hard money, and in this country for supplies in
kind at a certain price.

The tract of land that seems best adapted to answer this purpose is contained
between the Allegany Mountain and the river Obio, as far north as the
Pennsylvania line, thence extending down the said river to the falls thereof,
thence due south into the latitude of the North Carolina line, and thence east
to the Allegany Mountain aforesaid. -- I the more readily mention this tract
because it is fighting the enemy at their own weapons, as it includes the same
ground on which a new colony would have been erected for the emolument of the
crown of England, as appears by lord Hilsborough's and Dartmouth's letters, had
not the revolution prevented its being carried into execution.

It is probable there may be some spots of private property within this tract,
but to incorporate them into some government will render them more profitable
to the owners and the condition of the scattered settlers more eligible and
happy than at present.

If twenty millions of acres of this new state be patented and sold at twenty
pounds sterling per hundred acres they will produce four million pounds
sterling, which, if applied to continental expenses only will support the war
for three years should Britain be so unwise to herself to prosecute it against
her own direct interest and against the interest and policy of all Europe. The
several states will then have to raise taxes for their internal government
only, and the continental taxes as soon as the fund begins to operate will
lessen, and if sufficiently productive will cease.

Lands are the real riches of all the habitable world and the natural funds of
America. The funds of other countries are, in general, artificially
constructed; the creatures of necessity and contrivance; dependent upon credit,
and always exposed to hazard and uncertainty. But lands can neither be
annihilated nor lose their value; on the contrary the universally rise with
population, and rapidly so, when under the security of effectual government.
But this it is impossible for Virginia to give, and, therefore, that which is
capable of defraying the expenses of the empire, will, under the management of
any single state, produce only a fugitive support to wandering individuals.

I shall now enquire into the effects which the laying out a new state, under
the authority of the United States, will have upon Virginia.

It is the very circumstance she ought to and must wish for when she examines
the matter through all its cases and consequences.

The present settlers being beyond her reach, and her supposed authority over
them remaining in herself, they will appear to her as revolters, and she to
them as oppressors; and this will produce such a spirit of mutual dislike that
in a little time a total disagreement will take place, to the disadvantage of
both.

But under the authority of the United States the matter is manageable, and
Virginia will be eased of a disagreeable consequence.

Besides this, a sale of the lands, continentally, for the purpose of
supporting the expense of the war, will save her a greater share of taxes, than
what the small sale she could make herself, and the small price she could get
for them, would produce.

She would likewise have two advantages which no other state in the union
enjoys, first, a frontier state for her defense against the incursions of the
Indians; and the second is, that the laying out and peopling a new state on the
back of an old one, situated as the is, is doubling the quantity of its trade.

The new state, which is here proposed to be laid our, may send its exported
own the Missisippi, but its imports must come through Chesapeak Bay, and
consequently Virginia will become the market for the new state; because, though
there is a navigation from it, there is none into it, on account of the
rapidity of the Missisippi.

There are certain circumstances that will produce certain events whether men
think of them or notes. The events do not depend upon thinking, but are the
natural consequence of acting; and according to the system which Virginia has
gone upon, the issue will be, that she will get involved with the back settlers
in a contention about rights till they dispute with her her own claims, and,
soured by the contention, will go to any other state for their commerce; both
of which may be prevented, a perfect harmony established, the strength of the
states increased, and the expenses of the war derrayed, by settling the matter
now on the plan of a general right; and every day it is delayed the difficulty
will be increased and the advantages lessened.

But if it should happen, as it possibly may that the war should end before the
money which the new state may produce be expended, the remainder of the lands
therein may be set apart to reimburse those, whose houses have been burnt by
the enemy, as this is a species of suffering which it was impossible to
prevent, because houses are not moveable property: and it ought not to be, that
because we cannot do every thing, that we ought not to do what we can.

Having said thus much on the subject, I think it necessary to remark, that the
prospect of a new fund, so far from abating our endeavors in making every
immediate provision for the supply of the army, ought to quicken us therein;
for should the states see it expedient to go upon the measure, it will be at
least a year before it can be productive. I the more freely mention this,
because, there is a dangerous species of popularity, which, I fear, some men
are seeking from their constituents by giving them grounds to believe, that if
they are elected they will lighten the taxes; a measure, which, in the present
state of things, cannot be done without exposing the country to the ravages of
the enemy by disabling the army from defending it.

Where knowledge is a duty ignorance is a crime; and if any man whose duty it
was to know better has encouraged such an expectation, he has either deceived
himself or them: besides, no country can be defended without expense, and let
any man compare his portion of temporary inconveniences arising from taxations,
with the real distresses of the army for the want of supplies, and the
difference is not only sufficient to strike him dumb, but make him thankful
that worse consequences have not followed.

In advancing this doctrine, I speak with an honest freedom to the country; for
as it is their good to be defended, so it is their interest to provide that
defense, at least, till other funds can be organized.

As the laying out new states will some time or other be the business of the
country, and as it is yet a new business to us; and as the influence of the war
has scarcely afforded leisure for reflecting on distant circumstances, I shall
throw together a few hints for facilitating that measure, whenever it may be
proper for adopting it.

The United States now standing on the line of sovereignty, the vacant
territory is their property collectively, but the persons by whom it may
hereafter be peopled will have an equal right with ourselves; and therefore, as
new states shall be laid off and incorporated with the present, they will
become partakers of the remaining territory with us who are already in
possession. And this consideration ought to heighten the value of lands to new
emigrants; because, in making purchases, they not only gain an immediate
property, but become initiated into the right and heirship of the states to a
property in reserve, which is an additional advantage to what any purchasers
under the late government of England enjoyed.

The setting off the boundary of any new state will naturally be the first
stop, and as it must be supposed not to be peopled at the time it is laid off,
a constitution must be formed, by the United States, as the rule of government
in any new state, for a certain term of years, (perhaps tea) or until the state
become peopled to a certain number of inhabitants; after which, the whole and
sole right of modelling their government to rest with themselves.

A question may arise, whether a new state should immediately possess an equal
right with the present ones in all cases which may corae before Congress.

This, experience will best determine; but at first view of the matter it
appears thus; That it ought to be immediately incorporated into the union on
the ground of a family right, such a state landing in the line of a younger
child of the same stock; but as new emigrants will have something to learn when
they first come to America, and a new state requiring aid rather than cap^^l^
of giving it, it might be most convenient to admit its immediate representation
into Congress, there to sit, hear, and debate, on all questions and matters,
but not to vote on any till after the expiration of seven years.

I shall in this place take the opportunity of renewing a hint which I formerly
threw out in the pamphlet Common Sense, and which the several states will,
sooner or later, see the convenience, if not the necessicy, of adopting; which
is, that of electing a Continental Convention, for the purpose of forming a
Continental Constitution, defining and describing the powers and authority of
Congress.

Those of entering into treaties, and making peace, they naturally possess, in
behalf of the states, for their separate as well as their united good: but the
internal control and dictatorial powers of Congress are not sufficiently
defined, and appear to be too much in some cases, and too little in others; and
therefore, to have them marked legally out will give additional energy to the
whole, and new confidence to the several parts.


