THE RIOT; OR, HALF A LOAF IS BETTER THAN NO BREAD. IN A DIALOGUE BETWEEN JACK
ANVIL AND TOM HOD.
To the Tune of "A Cobbler there was," etc.
TOM. COME, neighbors, no longer be patient and quiet
Come let us go kick up a bit of a riot;
I am hungry, my lads, but I Have little to eat,
So we'll pull down the mills, and seize all the meat:
I Will give you good sport, boys, as ever (...) saw,
So a fig for the Justice, a fig for the law.
Derry down.

Then his pitchfork Tom seized -- hold a moment says Jack,
I Will show thee thy blunder, brave boy, in a crack.
And if I don't prove we had better be still,
I Will assist thee straitway to pull down every mill;
I Will show thee how passion thy reason does cheat,
Or I Will join thee in plunder for bread and for meat.
Derry down.
What a whimsey to think thus our bellies to fill,
For we stop all the grinding by breaking the mill?
What a whimsey to think we shall get more to eat
By abusing the butchers who get us the meat!
What a whimsey to think we shall mend our spare diet
By breeding disturbance, by murder and riot!
Derry down.
Because I am dry, 'twould be foolish, I think
To pull out my tap and to spill all my drink;
Because I am hungry and want to be fed.
That is sure no wise reason for wasting my bread;
And just such wise reasons for mending their diet
Are used by those blockheads who rush into riot.
Derry down.
I would not take comfort from others distresses,
But still I would mark how God our land blesses;
For though in Old England the times are but sad,
Abroad I am told they are ten times as bad;
In the land of the Pope there is scarce any grain,
And it is still worse, they say, both in Holland and Spain.
Derry down.
Let us look to the harvest our wants to beguile,
See the lands with rich crops how they every where smile!
Mean time to assist us, by each Western breeze,
Some corn is brought daily across the salt seas,
We'll drink little tea, no whisky at all,
But patiently wait, and the prices will fall.
Derry down.
But, if we are not quiet, then let us not wonder
If things grow much worse by our riot and plunder;
And let us remember, whenever we meet,
The more ale we drink, boys, the less we shall eat.
On those days spent in riot, no bread you brought home,
Had you spent them in labor you must have had (...)
Derry down.
A dinner of herbs, says the wise man, with quiet
Is better than beef amid discord and riot.
If the thing cannot be helped, I Am a foe to all strife,
And pray for a peace every night of my life;
But in matters of state not an inch will I budge,
Because I conceive I Am no very good judge.
Derry down.
But though poor, I can work, my brave boys, with the best,
Let the King and the Parliament manage the rest;
I lament both the War and the Taxes together,
Though I verily think they don't alter the weather.
The King, as I take it with very good reason,
May prevent a bad law, but cannot help a bad season.
Derry down.
The Parliament Men, although great is their power,
Yet they cannot contrive us a bit of a shower;
And I never yet heard, though our Rulers are wise;
That they know very well how to manage the skies;
For the best of them all, as they found to their cost,
Were not able to hinder last Winter's hard frost.
Derry down.
Besides, I must share in the wants of the times,
Because I have had my full share in it is crimes;
And I Am apt to believe the distress which is sent,
Is to punish and cure us of all discontent.
-- But harvest is coming -- Potatoes will come!
Our prospect clears up; Ye complainers be dumb!
Derry down.
And though I Have no money, and though I Have no lands,
I Have a head on my shoulders, and a pair of good hands;
So I Will work the whole day, and on Sundays I Will seek
At church how to bear all the wants of the week.
The Gentlefolks too will afford us supplies;
They Will subscribe -- and they will give up their puddings and pies.
Derry down.
Then before I Am induced to take part in a Riot,
I Will ask this short question -- What shall I get by it?
So I Will even wait a little till cheaper the bread,
For a mittimus hangs over each Rieters head;
And when of two evils I Am asked which is best,
I Would rather be hungry than be hanged, I protest.
Derry down.
Quoth Tom, thou art right: If I rise, I Am a Turk,
So he threw down his pitchfork, and went to his work.
Z.

P^^th, Printed by R. (...)


