portrait of Anna Matilda (Hannah Cowley) ANNA MAT^
B^ton Published Belknap and Hall 179^



THE BRITISH ALBUM. A COLLECTION OF POEMS.

Often from her careless hand the Wandering Muse
Scatters luxuriant sweets, which well might form
A living wreath to deck the brows of Time.
ANON. BELKNAP AND HALL's EDITION. printer's or publisher's device

PRINTED AT THE Apollo Press, IN BOSTON, BY BELKNAP AND HALL. SOLD AT THEIR
OFFICE STATE STREET, AND AT THE SEVERAL BOOKSTORES. MDCCXCIII.

THE BRITISH ALBUM. CONTAINING THE POEMS OF DELLA CRUSCA, ANNA MATILDA, ARLEY,
BENEDICT, THE BARD, etc. etc. etc.

REVISED AND CORRECTED BY THEIR RESPECTIVE AUTHORS.

FIRST AMERICAN EDITION, FROM THE FOURTH LONDON EDITION.

BOSTON: PRINTED BY AND FOR BELKNAP AND HALL, STATE STREET. 1793.

TO RICHARD BR INSLEY SHERIDAN, ESQUIRE.
SIR,
As these Poems were originally inscribed, by permission, with your name, I beg
leave to offer them to you again in a more complete, finished, and correct
state.

By so doing, I not only gratify the private sentiments of respect, which I
feel for your character and talents, but I render justice also to the superior
excellence of the Poetry itself; for those Productions will necessarily be
allowed to possess intrinsic merit, and to deserve their fame, which have
received the sanction of the best Critic, the first Scholar, and the most
admired Genius of the Age.

I have the honor to be, SIR, Your most obedient humble Servant, THE EDITOR.
Dec. 20, 1789.
PREFACE.
THE reputation of the following POEMS is so well established, that it would be
useless to say more of them at present, than what may be necessary to gratify
future curiosity. It is therefore sufficient to observe, that through the
medium of a DAILY PRINT, they were first presented to the Public, and obtained
that general notice, to which they are so eminently, and so justly entitled.

It ought, however, to be recorded, of the celebrated correspondence between
DELLA CRUSCA and ANNA MATILDA, that its genuine enthusiasm arose entirely from
poetical Sympathy; for till immediately before the publication of The
Interview, they were totally unacquainted with each other, and reciprocally
unknown.

THE ADIEU AND RECALL TO LOVE.
Go, idle Boy! I quit thy power;
Thy couch of many a thorn and flower;
Thy twanging bow, thine arrow keen,
Deceitful Beauty's timid mien;
The feigned surprise, the roguish leer,
The tender smile, the thrilling tear,
Have now no pangs, no joys for me,
So fare thee well, for I am free!
Then flutter hence on wanton wing,
Or lave thee in yon lucid spring,
Or take thy bev'rage from the rose,
Or on Louisa's breast repose:
I wish thee well for pleasures past,
Yet bless the hour, I Am free at last.
But sure, methinks, the altered day
Scatters around a mournful ray;
And chilling every zephyr blows,
And every stream untuneful flows;
No rapture swells the linnet's voice,
No more the vocal groves rejoice;
And even thy song, sweet Bird of Eve!
With whom I loved so often to grieve,
Now scarce regarded meets my ear,
Unanswered by a sigh or tear.
No more with devious step I choose
To brush the mountain's morning dews;
"To drink the spirit of the breeze,"
Or wander midst o'er-arching trees;
Or woo with undisturbed delight,
The pale-cheek'd Virgin of the Night,
That piercing through the leafy bower,
Throws on the ground a silv'ry shower.
Alas! is all this boasted ease
To lose each warm desire to please,
No sweet solicitude to know,
For others' bliss, for others' woe,
A frozen apathy to find,
A sad vacuity of mind?
O hasten back, then, heavenly Boy,
And with thine anguish bring thy joy!
Return with all thy torments here,
And let me hope, and doubt, and fear.
O rend my heart with every pain!
But let me, let me love again.
DELLA CRUSCA.
June 29, 1787.
TO DELLA CRUSCA. THE PEN.
O! SEIZE again thy golden quill,
And with its point my bosom thrill;
With magic touch explore my heart,
And bid the tear of passion start.
Thy golden quill APOLLO gave --
Drenched first in bright Aonia's wave:
He Snatched it fluttering through the sky,
Borne on the vapor of a sigh;
It fell from Cupid's burnished wing
As forcefully he drew the string;
Which sent his keenest, surest dart
Through a rebellious frozen heart;
That had till then defied his power,
And vacant beat through each dull hour.
Be worthy then the sacred loan;
Seated on Fancy's air-built throne;
Immerse it in her rainbow hues,
Nor, what the Godheads bid, refuse.
APOLLO, CUPID, shall inspire,
And aid thee with their blended sire.
The one, poetic language give,
The other, bid thy passion live;
With soft ideas fill thy lays,
And crown with LOVE thy wintry days!
ANNA MATILDA.
July 10, 1787.
TO ANNA MATILDA.
I KNOW thee well, enchanting Maid,
I Have marked thee in the silent glade,
I Have seen thee on the mountain's height,
I Have met thee in the storms of night;
I Have viewed thee on the wild beach run
To gaze upon the setting sun;
Then stop aghast, his ray no more,
To hear the impetuous surge's roar.
Have thou not stood with rapt'ious eye
To trace the stary worlds on high,
TO observe the moon's weak crescent throw
Over hills, and woods, a glimmering glow:
Or, all beside some wizard stream,
To watch its undulating beam?
O well thy form divine I know --
When youthful errors brought me woe;
When all was dreary to behold,
And many a bosom-friend grew cold;
Thou, thou unlike the summer crew
That from my adverse fortune flew,
Came with melodious voice, to cheer
My throbbing heart, and check the tear.
From thee I learnt, 'twas vain to scan
The low ingratitude of Man;
Thou bad'st me Fancy's wilds to rove,
And seek the extatic bower of Love.
When on his couch I threw me down,
I saw thee weave a myrtle crown,
And blend it with the shining hair
Of her the Fairest of the Fair.
For this, may every wandering gale
The essence of the rose exhale.
And pour the fragrance on thy breast,
And gently fan thy charms to rest.
Soon as the purple slumbers sly
The opening radiance of thine eye,
Strike, strike again the magic lyre,
With all thy pathos, all thy fire;
With all that sweetly-warbled grace,
Which proves thee of celestial race.
O then, in varying colors dressed,
And living glory stand confessed,
Shake from thy locks ambrosial dew,
And thrill each pulse of joy anew;
With glowing ardours rouse my soul,
And bid the tides of Passion roll.
But think no longer in disguise
To screen thy beauty from mine eyes;
Nor deign a borrowed name to use,
For well I know thou art the MUSE!
DELLA CRUSCA.
July 31, 1787.
TO DELLA CRUSCA.
THOU bid'st! -- " my purple slumbers fly!"
Day's radiance pours upon my eye,
I wake -- I live! the sense o'erpays,
The trivial griefs of early days.
What! though the rose-bud on my cheek
Has shed its leaves, which late so sleek,
Spoke youth, and joy -- and careless thought,
By guilt, or fear, or shame un-smote:
My blooming soul is yet in youth,
Its lively sense attests the truth.
O! I can wander yet, and taste
The beauties of the flowery waste;
The nightingale's deep swell can feel,
Whilst from my lids the soft drops steal;
Rapt! gaze upon the gem-deck'd night,
And mark the clear moon's silent flight;
Whilst the slow river's crumpled wave
Repeats the quivering beams she gave.
Not yet, the pencil strives in vain,
To wake upon the canvas plain,
All the strong passions of the mind,
Or hint the sentiment refined;
To its sweet magic yet I bow,
As when Youth decked my polished brow.
The chisel's feath'ry touch to trace,
Through the nerv'd form, or softened grace,
Is lent me still. Still I admire,
And kindle at the Poet's fire --
My torch, at Della Crusca's light,
And distant follow his superior flight.
O Time! since these are left me still,
Of lesser thefts even take thy fill:
Yes, steal the luster from my eye,
And bid the soft Carnation fly:
My tresses sprinkle with thy snow,
Which boasted once the auburn glow;
Warp the slim form that was adored
By him, so loved my bosom's Lord --
But leave me, when all these you steal,
The mind to taste, the nerve to feel!
ANNA MATILDA.
Aug. 4, 1787.
TO ANNA MATILDA.
AND art thou then, alas! like me,
OFFSPRING of frail mortality?
Must ruthless Time's rude touch efface
Each lovely feature's varying grace?
And must toward earth that form incline,
And even those eyes forbear to shine?
Yet, when with icy hand he throws,
Amongst thine auburn locks, his snows,
The freezing influence never shall dart,
To chill thy warmly-beating heart;
And scorning Death's oblivious hour,
Thou shall exult -- beyond his power.
Methinks, as Passion drives along,
As frantic grown, I feel thy Song;
Eager I Would traverse LYBIA's plain,
The tawny Lion's dread domain
To meet thee there: nor flagging Fear,
Should ever on my cheek appear:
For even the Forest King obeys
Majestic WOMAN's potent gaze.
Or left on some resourceless shore,
Where never ceasing billows roar;
Which teeming clouds, and heavy hail,
And furious hurricanes assail,
Far to the Pole -- while half the year,
On Ebon throne sits NIGHT severe;
And to her solitary court,
Sea-fowl, and monsters fierce resort --
Even there, MATILDA! there with thee,
Impending horrors all should flee;
Thy luster of poetic ray,
Should wake an artificial day.
Sure thou were never doomed to know
What pangs from care and danger flow;
But fairest scenes thy thoughts employ,
And Art, and Science, bring thee joy.
The quickening sense, the throb divine,
Fancy, and feeling, all are thine;
It Is thine, by blushing Summer led,
A shower of roses round thee shed,
To hie thee forth at Morn's advance,
In wild excess of rapturous trance;
And see the Sun's proud deluge stream,
In copious tides of golden beam;
While faint his Sister-orb on high,
Fades to a vapor of the sky.
When gradual evening comes, to hide,
In sabling shades, CREATION's pride;
When heaving hills, and forests drear,
And lessening towns, but scarce appear;
While the last lingering western glow,
Hangs on the lucid lake below.
Then trivial joys (I deem) forgot,
Thou love to seek the humble cot,
To scatter Comfort's balm around,
And heal pale Poverty's deep wound;
Drive sickness from the languid bed,
Raise the lorn Widow's drooping head:
Render the new-made Mother blessed,
And snatch the infant to thy breast.
O ANNA, then, if true thou say,
Thy radiant beauties steal away,
Yet shall I never fail to find
Eternal beauties in thy mind.
To those I offer up my vows,
And Love which Virtue's self allows;
Unknown, again thou art adored
As once by him, thy bosom's "Lord."
DELLA CRUSCA.
Aug. 21, 1787.
ELEGY, Written on the PLAIN OF FONTENOY.
CHILL blows the blast, and Twilight's dewy hand
Draws in the West her dusky veil away;
A deeper shadow steals along the land,
And NATURE muses at the DEATH OF DAY!
Near this bleak Waste no friendly mansion rears
Its walls, where Mirth, and social joys resound,
But each dim object melts the soul to tears,
While Horror treads the scattered bones around.
As thus, alone and comfortless I roam,
Wet with the driz'ling shower; I sigh sincere,
I cast a fond look toward my native home,
And think what valiant BRITONS perished here.
Yes, the time was, nor very far the date,
When carnage here her crimson toil began;
When Nations' Standards waved in threatening state,
And Man the murderer, met the murderer Man.
For WAR is MURDER, though the voice of Kings
Has styled it Justice, styled it Glory too!
Yet from worst motives, fierce Ambition springs,
And there, fixed prejudice is all we view.
But sure, it is Heaven's immutable decree,
For thousands every age in fight to fall;
Some NATURAL CAUSE prevails, we cannot see,
And that is FATE, which we Ambition call.
O let the aspiring warrior think with grief,
That as produced by CHYMIC art refined;
So glittering CONQUEST, from the laurel-leaf
Extracts a GENERAL POISON for Mankind.
Here let him wander at the midnight hour,
These morbid rains, these gelid gales to meet;
And mourn like me, the ravages of Power!
And feel like me, that victory is defeat!
Nor deem, ye vain! that ever I mean to swell
My feeble verse with many a sounding Name;
Of such, the mercenary Bard may tell,
And call such dreary desolation, Fame.
The genuine Muse removes the thin disguise,
That cheats the World, whenever she deigns to sing;
And full as meritorious to her eyes
Seems the Poor Soldier, as the Mighty king!
Alike I shun in labored strain to show,
How BRITAIN more than triumphed, though she fled,
Where LOUIS stood, where stalked the column slow;
I turn from these, and DWELL UPON THE DEAD.
Yet much my beating breast respects the brave;
Too well I love them, not to mourn their fate,
Why should they seek for greatness in the Grave?
Their hearts are noble -- and in life they are great.
Nor think it is but in war the Brave excel, --
TO VALOR EVERY VIRTUE IS ALLIED!
Here faithful Friendship 'mid the Battle fell,
And Love, true Love, in bitter anguish died.
Alas! the solemn slaughter I retrace,
That checks life's current circling through my veins;
Bathed in moist sorrow, many a beauteous face;
And gave a grief, perhaps that still remains.
I can no more -- an agony too keen
Absorbs my senses, and my mind subdues;
Hard were that heart which here could beat serene,
Or the just tribute of a pang refuse.
But lo! through yonder opening clouds afar
Shoots the bright planet's sanguinary ray
That bears thy name, FICTITIOUS LORD OF WAR!
And with red luster guides my lonely way.
Then FONTENOY, farewell! Yet much I fear,
(Wherever chance my course compels) to find
Discord and blood -- the thrilling sounds I hear,
"The noise of battle hurtles in the wind."
From barbarous Turkey to Britannia's shore,
Opposing interests into rage increase:
Destruction rears her scepter, tumults roar,
Ah! where shall hapless man repose in peace!
DELLA CRUSCA.
Oct. 15, 1787.
STANZAS TO DELLA CRUSCA.
HUSHED, be each ruder note! -- Soft silence spread,
With ermine hand, thy cobweb robe around;
Attention! pillow my reclining head,
Whilst eagerly I catch the golden sound.
Ha! What a tone was that, which floating near,
Seemed Harmony's full soul -- whose is the lyre?
Which seizing thus on my enraptured ear,
Chills with its force, yet melts me with its fire.
Ah, dull of heart! thy Minstrel's touch not know,
What Bard but DELLA CRUSCA boasts such skill?
From him alone, those melting notes can flow --
He, only knows adroitly thus to trill.
Well have I left the Groves, which sighing wave
Amidst November's blasts their naked arms,
Whilst their red leaves fall fluttering to their grave,
And give again to dust May's vernal charms.
Well have I left the air-embosom'd hills,
Where sprightly Health in verdant buskin plays;
Forsaken fallow meads, and circling mills,
And thyme-dress'd heaths, where the soft stock yet strays.
Obscuring smoke, and air impure I greet,
With the coarse din that Tread and Folly form,
For here the Muse's Son again I meet --
I catch his notes amidst the vulgar storm.
His notes now bear me, pensive, to the Plain,
Clothed by a verdure drawn from Britain's heart;
Whose heroes bled superior to their pain,
Sunk, crowned with glory, and contemned the smart.
Soft, as he leads me round the ensanguin'd fields,
The laureled shades forsake their grassy tomb,
The bursting sod its palid inmate yields,
And over the immortal waste their spirits roam.
Obedient to the Muse the acts revive
Which Time long past had veiled from mortal ken
Embattled squandrons rush, as when alive,
And shadowy fulchions gleam over shadowy men.
Ah, who art thou, who thus with frantic air
Fly'st fearless to support that bleeding youth:
Bind'st his deep gashes with thy glowing hair,
And die beside him, to attest thy truth?
"His Sister I: an orphan'd pair, we grieved,
For Parents long at rest within the grave,
By a false Guardian of our wealth bereaved --
The little ALL parental care could save.
Chill looked the world, and chilly grew our hearts,
Oh! where shall Poverty expect a smile?
Gross lawless Love assumed its ready arts,
And all beset was I, with fraud and Guile.
My Henry sought the war, and dropped the tears
Of love fraternal as he bade farewell;
But fear, soon made me rise above my fears,
I followed -- and Fate tolls our mutual knell,"
Chaste Maiden rest; and brighter spring the green,
That decorates the turf thy bloom will feed!
And oh, in softest mercy 'twas I ween,
To worth like thine, a Brother's grave's decreed.
The dreadful shriek of Death now darts around,
The hollow winds repeat each tortured sigh,
Deep bitter groans, still deeper groans resound,
Whilst Fathers, Brothers, Lovers, Husbands die.
Turn from this spot, blessed Bard! thy mental eye;
To hamlets, cities, empires bend its beam!
'Twill there such multiplying deaths descry,
That all before thee'll but an abstract seem.
Why waste thy tears over this contracted Plain?
The sky which canopies the sons of breath,
Sees the whole Earth one scene of mortal pain,
The vast, the universal BED OF DEATH!
Where, do not Husbands, Fathers, dying moan?
Where, do not Mothers, Sisters, Orphans weep?
Where, is not heard the last expiring groan,
Or the deep throttle of the deathful Sleep!
If as Philosophy does often muse,
A state of war, is natural state to man,
BATTLE's the sickness bravery would choose --
Noblest DISEASE in Nature's various plan!
Let vulgar souls stoop to the fever's rage,
Or slow, beneath pale atrophy depart,
With Gout and Scroupula weak variance wage,
Or sink, with sorrow cank'ring at the heart;
These, be to common Minds, the unwish'd decree!
The FIRM select an illness more sublime;
By languid pains, scorn their high souls to free,
But seek the Sword's swift edge, and spurn at Time.
ANNA MATILDA.
Sat. Nov. 17th, 1787.
TO ANNA MATILDA.
ON the seashore with folded arms I stood,
The Sun just sinking shot a level ray,
Luxuriant crimson glowed upon the flood,
And the curled turf was tinged with golden spray.
Far off I faintly track'd the feath'ry sail;
When thy sweet numbers caught my yielded ear,
Borne on the bosom of the fluttering gale,
They struck my heart -- and roused me to a tear.
Yet flowed no bitter anguish from mine eye,
A while remembrance left my wayward state;
And the soft cadence of thy warbled sigh,
Poured healing balm into the wounds of Fate.
What though grim Winter's desolating frown,
The wild waves uproar when rough Eurus blows,
The tangled forest, and the desert down,
Be all the folace DELLA CRUSCA knows:
Yet from MATILDA's pure celestial fire,
One ruby spark shall to his gloom be given,
Lured by its light, his fancy may aspire,
And catch a ray of bliss -- a glimpse of Heaven.
Vain in the morn of life, and thoughtless too,
He rushed impetuous, as strong passion drove,
But soon each flattering prospect fled his view,
Deceived by Friendship much, but more by Love.
Yes, he has loved to Transport's dire excess,
Has felt the potent eye inflict the wound;
Has felt the female voice each pulse oppress,
And grown a breathless statue at the sound.
But why recall the moments that are fled?
For ever fled, like yonder sweeping blast;
With Love, each active principle is dead,
And all, except its sad regret, is past.
Ah! had he met thee in his happier hour,
Ere yet he languish'd in the gripe of Care,
Thy Minstrel then had fondly owned thy power,
Thy Minstrel then might have escaped Despair.
O different lot! for he who daily grieves,
Then with thy beauty blessed, and generous mind,
Had not, like sallow Autumn's falling leaves,
Been shrunk, alas! and scattered in the wind.
Happily, he had not roam'd for lingering years
On many a rugged Alp, and foreign shore;
He never had known the cause of all his tears,
The cherished cause, that bids him -- hope no more.
He would have led thee with attentive gaze,
Where the brown Hamlet's neighboring shades retire,
Have hung entranced upon thy living lays,
And swept with feebler hand a kindred lyre.
While the dear Song stress had melodious stole
Over every sense, and charmed each nerve to rest,
Thy Bard, in silent ecstasy of soul.
Had strained the dearer Woman to his breast.
Or had she said, that War's the worthiest grave,
He would have felt his proud heart burn the while
Have dared, perhaps, to rush among the brave,
Have gained, perhaps, the glory -- of a smile.
And it is most true, while Time's relentless hand,
With sickly grasp drags others to the tomb,
The Soldier scorns to wait the dull command,
But springs impatient to a nobler doom.
Though on the plain he lies, outstretch'd and pale,
Without one friend his steadfast eyes to close
Yet on his honored corse shall many a gale,
Waft the moist fragrance of the weeping rose.
Over that dread spot, the melancholy Moon
Shall pause awhile, a sadder beam to shed,
And starry Night, amidst her awful noon,
Sprinkle light dews upon his hallowed head.
There too the solitary Bird shall swell
With long-drawn melody her plaintive throat,
While distant echo from responsive cell,
Shall often with fading force return the note.
Such recompense be Valor's due alone!
To me, no proffered meed must ever belong,
To me, who trod the vale of life unknown,
Whose proudest boast was but an idle song.
DELLA CRUSCA.
Dec. 5, 1787.
TO DELLA CRUSCA.
I HATE the tardy Elegiac lay --
Choose me a measure jocund as the day!
Such days as near the ides of June
Meet the Lark's elab'rate tune,
When his downy fringed breast
Ambitious on a cloud to rest,
He soars aloft; and from his gurgling throat
Darts to the earth the piercing note --
Which softly falling with the dews of morn
(That bless the scented pink, and snowy thorn)
Expands upon the Zephyr's wing,
And wakes the burnished finch, and linnet sweet to sing.
And be thy lines irregular and free,
Poetic chains should fall before such Bards as thee.
Scorn the dull laws that pinch thee round,
Raising about thy verse a mound,
Over which thy muse, so lofty! dares not bound.
Bid her in verse meand'ring sport;
Her footsteps quick, or long, or short,
Just as her various impulse wills --
Scorning the frigid square, which her fine fervor chills.
And in thy verse meand'ring wild,
Thou, who art FANCY's favorite Child,
May sweetly paint the long past hour,
When, the slave of Cupid's power,
Thou could the tear of rapture weep,
And feed on Agony, and banish Sleep.
Ha! did thou, favored mortal, taste
All that adorns our life's dull waste?
Have THOU known Love's enchanting pain --
Its hopes, its woes, and yet complain?
Thy senses, at a voice, been lost,
Thy madd'ning soul in tumults tossed?
Ecstatic wishes fire thy brain --
These, have thou known, and yet complain?
Thou then deserve never more to FEEL; --
Thy nerves be rigid, hence, as steel!
Their fine vibrations all destroyed,
Thy future days a tasteless void!
Never shall thou know again to sigh,
Or, on a soft idea die;
Never on a recollection gasp;
Thy arms, the air -- drawn charmer, never grasp.
Vapid Content her poppies round thee strew,
Whilst to the bliss of TASTE thou bidst adieu!
To vulgar comforts be thou hence confined,
And the shrunk bays be from thy brow untwin'd.
Thy statue torn from Cupid's hallowed niche
But in return thou shall be dull, and rich;
The Muses hence disown thy rebel lay --
But thou in Aldermanic gown, their scorn repay;
Crimsoned, and furred, the highest honors dare,
And on thy laurels tread -- a PLUMP LORD MAYOR!
ANNA MATILDA.
Dec. 20, 1787.
ODE TO PRUDENCE.
WHERE did thou hide thee, CAUTIOUS POWER,
When first my venurous Youth began?
Thou came not to the festive bower,
Nor at the genial board were found;
And when the liquid grape went round,
Thou never show'dst thy warning face,
The wantonness of mirth to chase,
And tell of short life's shad'wy span:
Nor then did prophesy of woe,
To chill my breast's impetuous glow;
But provident, and shrewd, from me afar,
THOU SUNK'ST TO SOBER REST, WITH DAY'S RETIRING STAR!
It Is true, indeed, I thought with scorn,
Thy miserable maxims quaint,
Were but of sour Suspicion born:
"Let selfish souls," I madly cried,
"Submit to such a coward guide,
Be It mine to seek the sportive vale,
With Friends, whose truth can never fail,
And banish thence each base restraint!"
Dull that I was -- I feel it now,
And offer late the imploring vow:
Too well convinced, who dare thy vengeance urge,
Can never, alas! escape an agonizing scourge!
Ah! will thou, deign then, to receive
Thy Foe, professed for many a year?
And will thou teach him, not to grieve?
Forget the weakness of past time,
When frantic Passion was his crime;
When to imperious charms a prey,
His Morn of Life stole swift away,
Yet gemm'd by Love's delicious Tear,
That bathed his Bosom with delight;
Though sometimes on the Gales of Night,
He heard thy whispered threat aspire,
How could he heed it then -- was not his heart on fire?
But now to gain thy frugal smile,
Each wonted transport I forego,
No more shall Beauty's self beguile,
Although her blue Orbs softer stream
Than the clear Moon's enchanting beam;
Though her still varying charms arise,
As to the hastening Trav'ller's eyes,
HELVETIA's summer prospects show:
Or should MEEK WORTH to me repair,
And tell a Tale of deep Despair,
I Would strive to bid each fond emotion sleep,
Yes, I would turn away! -- BUT I WOULD TURN TO WEEP!
Then, as with decent step and mien,
I tread the path of fair repute,
Thy Civic hand shall often be seen,
To freight me with the sordid Ore,
Which most thy Votaries adore,
Then, then shall FLAGGING FANCY die,
Then all my loved illusions fly,
Then will I break my rustic Flute:
And as the marble-hearted crowd,
Be vainly rich, and meanly proud;
Until I fix, like yonder blighted Thorn,
That, decked WITH GOLDEN BEAMS, NO VERNAL SWEETS ADORN.
DELLA CRUSCA.

ODE TO DEATH.
THOU, whose remorseless rage,
Nor vows, nor tears assuage,
TRIUMPHANT DEATH! -- to thee I raise
The bursting notes of dauntless praise! --
Methinks on yonder murky cloud
Thou sit'st, in majesty severe!
Thy regal robe a ghastly shroud!
Thy right arm lifts the insatiate spear!
Such was thy glance, when, erst as from the plain,
Where INDUS rolls his burning sand,
Young AMMON led the victor train,
In glowing lust of fierce command:
As vain he cried with thundering voice,
" The World is mine, rejoice, rejoice,
" The World I Have won!" Thou gav'st the withering nod,
Thy FIAT smote his heart, -- he sunk, -- a senseless clod!
" And art thou great?" -- Mankind replies
With sad assent of mingling sighs!
Sighs, that swell the biting gales
Which sweep over LAPLAND's frozen vales!
And the red TROPICS' whirlwind heat
Is with the sad assent replete!
How fierce yon Tyrant's plumy crest!
A blaze of gold illumes his breast,
In pomp of threatening power elate,
He madly dares to spurn at Fate!
But -- when Night, with shadowy robe,
Hangs upon the darkened globe,
In his chamber, -- sad, -- alone,
By starts, he pours the fearful groan!
From flattering crowds retired -- he bows the knee,
And mutters forth a prayer -- because he THINKS OF THEE.
GAYLY smiles the NUPTIAL BOWER,
Bedecked with many an odorous flower!
While the spousal pair advance,
Mixing often the melting gaze,
In fondest ecstacy of praise.
Ah! short delusive trance!
What though the festival be there; --
The rapt Bard's warblings fill the air;
And joy and harmony combine!
TOUCH BUT THY TALISMAN, and ALL IS THINE!
The insensate lovers fix in icy fold,
And on his throbbing lyre, the Minstrel's hand is cold!
It Is THOU can quench the Eagle's sight
That stems the cataract of light!
Forbid the vernal buds to blow --
Bend the obedient forest low --
And tame the monsters of the main!
Such is thy potent reign!
Over earth, and air, and sea!
Yet, art thou still DISDAINED BY ME.
And, I have reason for my scorn; --
Do I not hate the rising morn!
The garish noon; the eve serene;
The fresh'ning breeze; the sportive green;
The painted pleasures' thronged resort;
And all the splendors of the court!
And has not SORROW chose to dwell
Within my hot heart's central cell;
And are not Hope's weak visions over,
Can Love, or Rapture reach me more?
Then though I scorn thy stroke -- I call thee FRIEND,
For in thy calm embrace, my weary woes shall end.
DELLA CRUSCA.

ELEGY ON THE THIRTY-FIRST OF DECEMBER, MDCCLXXXVII.
YES, I will climb yon rough Rock's giddy height,
That over the Ocean bends his brow severe; --
And as I muse on TIME'S NEGLECTED FLIGHT,
Wait the last sunshine of the parting Year!
Why do the winds so sadly seem to rave?
Why broods such solemn horror over the deep?
It is, that FANCY points the yawning grave; --
And sickening, shudders at the ponderous sleep!
For O! since LAST DECEMBER's hoary head
Bowed to Oblivion's wave, and sunk beneath,
From this strange World what fluttering crowds are fled
To throng the caverns of relentless Death!
And every transitory shade is lost,
That in its course was fondly called "TODAY!"
Spring's sweets are gone! and Summer's flowery boast!
And Autumn's purple honors passed away!
And now, though WINTER, in rude mantle dressed,
Extends his icy scepter over the plain!
Soon shall he sink on APRIL's dewy breast!
And laughing MAY shall reassume her reign!
But MAN, when once his bright day's slush is over,
And Youth's too-fleeting pleasures take their wing,
Must on life's scene re-vegetate no more,
But leap its gulf, to find a second Spring.
And can that something each man calls "HIMSELF,"
'Midst this wide miracle of earth and sky,
Waste the swift moments in the toil for pelf, --
Nor raise one thought to Nature's Majesty;
On the Globe's surface creep, a groveling worm!
Nor joy the noontide radiance to behold, --
Nor trace the Mighty Hand that guides the storm, --
But deem existence relative to gold?
Ah! since this awful Now remains for me,
To think, to breathe, to wonder at the whole,
To move, to touch, to taste, to hear, to see,
To call the mystic consciousness, my Soul;
Fain would I seek awhile the sportive shade,
Ere the scene close upon this doubtful state;
Catch every painted phantom ere it fade,
And leave the vast Uncertainty to Fate.
But GRIEF IS MINE -- yet can I quit the crew
Whose bosoms burn with avarice and pride,
In yon blue vault to quench my thirsty view,
Or tell my feelings to the boisterous tide.
For are there not, as journeying on we go,
With pilgrim step through an unfriendly vale,
Oppression, Malice, Cruelty, and Woe,
And do not Falsehood's venomed shafts assail?
Were it not nobler far, with social love,
As fellow-trav'lers in a rugged road,
That each the other's evils should remove,
And with joint force sustain the general load?
O! while such fancied happiness I trace,
A glow of gladness runs through every vein;
Rapture's warm tear steals silent down my face,
And thus I wake the philanthropic strain.
Long, long, may Britain's generous Isle be blessed
With foreign fame, domestic joys increase;
At every insult, shake the warlike crest;
Then weave her laurels in the Bower of Peace!
Blessed be her Sons in hardy valor bold,
And all who haunt meek Learning's sacred shade;
The aspiring young; and the reposing old;
The modest matron; and the enchanting maid!
And may the BARD upon HIMSELF bestow
One humble wish, that soon his cares shall end;
With the dead year, resign his weight of woe!
Or with the thorns of life, at least some roses blend!
DELLA CRUSCA.

INVOCATION TO HORROR.
FAR be removed each painted scene!
What is to me the sapphire sky?
What is to me the earth's soft dye?
Or fragrant vales which sink between
Those velvet hills? yes, there I see --
(Why do those beauties burst on me?)
Pearl-dropping groves bow to the sun;
Seizing his beams, bright rivers run
That dart redoubled day:
Hope ye vain scenes, to catch the mind
To torpid sorrow all resigned,
Or bid my heart be gay?
False are those hopes! -- I turn -- I fly,
Where no enchantment meets the eye,
Or soft ideas stray.
HORROR! I call thee from the mouldering tower,
The murky churchyard, and forsaken bower,
Where 'midst unwholesome damps
The vap'ry gleamy lamps
Of ignes fatui, show the thick-wove night,
Where morbid MELANCHOLY sits,
And weeps, and sings, and raves by fits,
And to her bosom strains, the fancied sprite.
Or, if amidst the arctic gloom
Thou toilest at thy sable loom,
Forming the hideous phantoms of Despair --
Instant thy grisly labors leave,
With raven wing the concave cleave,
Where floats, self borne, the dense noctural air.
Oh! bear me to the impending cliff,
Under whose brow the dashing skiff
Beholds Thee seated on thy rocky throne;
There, 'midst the shrieking wild wind's roar,
Thy influence, HORROR, I Will adore,
And at thy magic touch congeal to stone.
Oh! hide the Moon's obtrusive orb,
The gleams of every star absorb,
And let CREATION be a moment thine!
Bid billows dash; let whirlwinds roar,
And the stern, rocky-pointed shore,
The stranded bark, back to the waves resign!
Then, whilst from yonder turbid cloud,
Thou roll'st thy thunders long, and loud,
And lightenings flash upon the deep below,
Let the expiring Seaman's cry,
The Pilot's agonizing sigh
Mingle, and in the dreadful chorus flow!
HORROR! far back thou dat'st thy reign;
Ere KINGS the historic page could stain
With records black, or deeds of lawless power:
Ere empires Alexanders cursed,
Or Faction, madd'ning Caesar's nursed,
The srighted World received thy awful dower!
Whose pen JEHOVAH's self inspired;
He, who in eloquence attired,
Led Israel's squadrons over the earth,
Grandly terrific paints thy birth.
The ALMIGHTY 'midst his fulgent seat on high,
Where glowing Seraphs round his footstool fly,
Beheld the wanton cities of the plain,
With acts of deadly name his laws disdain;
He gave the irrevocable sign,
Which marked to man the hate divine;
And sudden from the starting sky,
The Angels of his wrath did fly!
Then HORROR! thou presided'st over the whole,
And filled, and rapt, each self-accusing soul!
Thou did ascend to guide the burning shower;
On THEE the Omnipotent bestowed the hour!
'Twas thine to scourge the sinful land,
'Twas thine to toss the fiery brand;
Beneath thy glance the temples fell
And mountains crumbled at thy yell.
ONCE MORE thou wilt triumph in a fiery storm
ONCE MORE the Earth behold thy direful form;
Then shall thou seek, as holy prophets tell,
Thy native throne, amidst the eternal shades of HELL!
ANNA MATILDA.

TO ANNA MATILDA.
To THEE, a Stranger dares address his theme!
To thee, proud Mistress of APOLLO's lyre;
One ray emitted from the golden gleam,
Prompted by LOVE, would " set the World on fire."
Adorn then LOVE, in fancy-tinctur'd vest,
Camelion like, anon of various hue;
By " Penseroso," and " Allegro" dressed --
Such Genius claimed, when she Idalia drew.
I see the Pencil on the canvas shine!
REYNOLDS admires! in Science then proceed;
The name of Poet, Painter, both are thine,
We view the speaking painting -- as we read.
REUBEN.

TO REUBEN.
'MIDST the proud fervor of the day,
Whilst the sun darts a torrid ray,
The humble daisy sinks her head
And faints upon her lowly bed;
But when moist eve has quenched his fire,
And treads the fields in cool attire,
The daisy spreads again her bloom,
And offers up her mild persume.
Thus your recuscitating praise,
Breathed life upon my dying lays.
REYNOLDS ADMIRES! flattery so sweet,
With blushing vanity I meet;
But, Bard polite! how hard the task,
Which with such elegance you ask.
When DIDO bade ENEAS tell
The woes he knew to paint so well --
Did he not tell the Queen, she tore
His closing wounds, and drew fresh gore
From stabs that time had almost healed? --
Such, REUBEN, such, the thorn concealed.
Within your verses' slow'ry spell,
Which, barbarous! dares my pen compel.
Yet how describe the various god,
TO whom PROTEUS' self's a heavy clod?
Differing in every differing heart,
Scorning to play a constant part.
A tiger! -- tyrant! -- such is he,
Whom painted with bandeau you see,
With downy wings, and childish face,
As though of the blessed Cherub's race --
But oh! a serpent in disguise,
And as the lynx, his piercing eyes!
A raging fire, a deadly pain,
That gentlest heart strings most will strain;
A fever, tempest, madness he --
Of all life's ills -- A DREAD EPITOME!
Ha! do thou fear, and will thou run?
The little monster try to shun?
And will thou REUBEN, too succeed --
And shall thy bosom never bleed,
Never his poisoned ranckling dart
Quiver within thy burning heart?
Oh, hapless man! -- oh, wretched fate!
Fly to love's altar ere too late,
And deprecate the doom accursed,
Or bid that heart with sorrow burst.
Welcome the deadly fiery pain,
That gentlest heart strings most will strain --
MADNESS IS HIS -- but it is replete
With all that makes life's blessings sweet; --
A TYRANT he, but oh! his chains
Are richer than an empire's gains!
Sweet the delirium which by love is spread,
Whatever the paths his raptured vot'ries tread!
He paints the mist which hangs upon the eve.
With colors clearer than the sun can give;
It Is he who lends the nightingale its trills,
When her rich pipe the Empyrean fills;
Oh! it is the softness in his heart
Which makes the lover in her song take part.
And faint upon each touching pause,
And lengthen out each added clause,
Till rapt attention, strained too high,
Rolls down its gushing tear, and breathes its gentle sigh.
Charming to LOVE is MORNING's hour,
When, from her crystal roseate tower,
She sees the Goddess HEALTH pursue
The skimming breeze through fields of dew;
Charming, the flaming hour of noon,
When the sunk Linnet's fading tune
Allures him to the beechy grove;
Or when some cragg'd grotesque alcove
Sounds in his ear its tinkling rill,
And tempts him to its moss-grown sill;
Most charmed when on his tranced mind
Is whispered in the passing wind
The name of her, whose name is bliss;
Or when he all unseen can kiss
The fringed bank where late she lay,
Hidden from the imperious day.
Oh, ye rapt glades, which glittering LUNA decks,
Whose stretching shadows her resulgence checks!
Oh, ye soft floods, that hang upon the peak
Of lofty rocks, and bound in wanton freak,
Where thirsty meads your rushing streamlets crave
And crowd their flowers around to drink your wave --
What are ye all, should love withhold the dart?
Which wakes nice feelings in the torpid heart?
Where is the heart, that would such feelings fly,
Or fear the enchanting MADD'NING CUP to try?
Must I speak more of love! the boundless theme
Might run beyond the edge of life's short dream:
His spells are blessings -- witch'ries so sublime,
They triumph over distress, and fate, and time.
Would ask the joys of love? Oh! change the prayer,
Thou little know his power, to fasten there!
Let the mean bosom crave its love's return,
Thine shall with more distinguished ardors burn:
To know the passion -- yes, be that thy strain,
Invoke the god of the mysterious pain?
Whatever thy nature -- gentle -- fiery -- rough --
To LOVE -- learn but TO LOVE -- and thou have bliss enough!
ANNA MATILDA.

ODE TO MRS. SIDDONS.
THEE, Queen of Pathos, shall my proud Verse hail,
Illustrious SIDDONS; should I go,
Whether to Zembla's waste of snow,
Or Aetna's cavern'd height, or Tempe's vaunted vale;
Or where on Caucasus the fierce storm blows,
Or near the violated flood
Of Ganges, blushing often with blood;
Or where his rainbow arch loud Niagara throws.
For, not the exulting Monarch on his throne,
Though grateful nations round him bow,
Is more a Potentate than thou:
Feeling, and Sense, and Worth, and Virtue are thy own;
And even thy mighty spell the soul can sway:
While Sympathy with melting eye,
Hangs on thy bosom's fervid sigh,
And finds the unbidden tear down her hot cheek to stray.
Lo! at thy voice, from solitary cave,
With hair erect, peeps forth pale FEAR,
Nor will he longer wait to hear,
But flies with culprit haste a visionary grave.
Amongst the hollow mountain's shadowy cells,
Dark-brow'd REVENGE, that strangely walks,
And to himself low-mutt'ring talks,
While with convulsive throb his breast unsated swells.
And gelid HORROR in the haunted hall,
That with dread pause, and eye stretched wide,
Marks the mysterious spectre glide,
Nor dare his flagging knees obey the Phantom's call.
And lost DESPAIR with desolating cry,
That headlong darts from some tall tower
On fire, at thick Night's saddest hour,
When not a watchman wakes, and not an aid is nigh.
These own thy power -- and baresool MADNESS too,
Dancing upon the flinty plain,
As though 'twere gay to suffer pain,
That sees his tyrant Moon, and raving runs to woo.
Alike the mild, benevolent desires,
That wander in the pensive grove,
Pity, and generous-minded Love,
To thrill thy kindred pulse, shoot their electric fires.
Ah! let not then my fond admiring Muse
Restrain the ardor of her song,
In silent wonder fixed so long,
Nor thou! from humble hands the homage meet refuse.
And I will hasten often from short repose,
To wake the lily on moist bed,
Reclining meek her folded head;
And chase with amorous touch the slumber of the rose.
Then will I bathe them in the tears of Morn,
That they, a fresher gale may breathe,
Then will I form a votive wreath
To bind thy sacred brows, -- to deprecate thy scorn.
But should thou still disdain these proffered lays,
Which choked, alas! with weedy woe
Like yon dull stream can scarcely flow --
Take from BRITANNIA's HARP, the Triumph of thy praise.
DELLA CRUSCA.

ODE TO SIMPLICITY.
Addressed to MRS. WELLS.
O COME, ye fragrant gales that sweep
The surface of the summer deep,
Nor yet refuse to waft my lay,
And with it fan the breast of May;
For humble though it be,
It hails benign Simplicity.
Why do we haunt the Mountain's side,
Ere yet the curly vapors glide?
Why mark the opening buds of SPRING,
Or trace the shrill Lark's quivering wing?
It is, that then we see
Meek NATURE's sweet Simplicity.
The lengthened shades that Evening draws,
Of calm repose the general pause,
The Stream that winds yon meads along,
The Nightingale's transcendent song,
Borrow each charm from thee,
O soft-ey'd Nymph, Simplicity!
Then to thy brow, loved WELLS! is due,
A lasting wreath, of various hue,
Hung with each perfumed flower that blows,
But chief, the Cowslip and the Rose:
For surely thou art she!
THYSELF -- benign Symplicity!
And when thy MIMIC Powers are shown,
Each other's talents are thy own,
Appropriate to thyself we find,
The Thrilling voice, the wounded mind;
The starting tear we see
In Nature's pure Simplicity.
Have thou beheld the infant Moon
Hie to her couch, ere Night's full noon?
Then have thou heard the Lover train,
In tones of sad regret complain;
So absent, all agree,
To mourn for lost Simplicity.
So when upon thy well-wrought scene,
The curtain drops its closing green,
We grieve the mirthful hour is past,
And murmur that it fled so fast;
We wish again to see
The Beauties of Symplicity.
And Loveliness delights to dwell,
Upon thy bosoms's snowy swell,
To bid the streamy lightnings fly,
In liquid peril from thine eye;
And to each heart decree
The Triumph of Simplicity.
Ah! though I venurous pour the verse,
Unskilled thy praises to rehearse;
Yet may thou kindly smile to hear,
For O, the Tribute is sincere!
The offering paid by me,
In genuine TRUTH's Simplicity.
DELLA CRUSCA.

ODE TO MISS FARREN.
FROM her own garden, BEAUTY chose,
In all its bloomy pride, the ROSE,
And from the feathered race, the DOVE;
Then, FARREN! on thy cheek she threw
The blushing Flow'r's enchanting hue,
Then formed thy temper from the Bird of Love.
Ah! though I Am doomed to roam afar,
Yet shall the Morning's beamy star,
Yet shall the placid glow of Eve
Recall thy charms to bless my mind:
Dear charms! with dearer virtues joined,
So shall my heart at times forget to grieve,
And often will I loit'ring stay,
Till the dark mountains veil the Day,
While thus delicious Fancy cheers --
For then more sweet on every plain
The Linnet trills her farewell strain,
And then more lovely NATURE's self appears.
And sure the happy Youths who gaze
Upon thine Eyes resistless blaze,
Where gay Life's polished circles shine,
Or view amid the Comic Scene,
Thy dimpled smiles, and graceful mien,
Shall find "their bosoms sympathize with mine."
Whether thou show'st with matchless skill,
Unsteady Fashion's froward will,
As heartless Maid, or heedless Wife,
Truth, Nature, Sentiment prevail,
And through the Mirth-inspiring Tale,
All FICTION seems absorbed in REAL LIFE.
Oh, what delight to hourly trace
The fine expression of thy face,
Thy winning elegance, and ease;
To see those teeth, of lust'rous pearl,
Thy locks profuse of many a curl,
And hear thy voice, omnipotent to please!
With thee to pace the mountain's side,
Or mark the rushy riv'let glide,
That murmuring rolls a scanty stream;
Till winding in the vale below,
It seems t'exult with vainer glow,
And gaily wanton in the lunar beam.
Still might the seasons change -- with thee,
Not Winter's self could dreary be,
Nor sultry Summer's heats offend.
The howling winds the pelting shower,
Could not disturb my rapturous hour,
Nor ever gloom my mind -- with such a friend.
At midnight then no more I Would stand,
Where Ocean's surges lash the land,
Nor fondly list the Screech-owl's tongue --
Ah me! I dream -- the illusion's over --
Henceforth in silence I Will adore,
And thou, sweet Nymph! forgive the ardent song.
DELLA CRUSCA.

THE SLAVES. AN ELEGY.
IF late I paused upon the Twilight plain
Of FONTENOY, to weep the FREEBORN BRAVE;
Sure Fancy now may cross the Western Main,
And melt in sadder pity for the SLAVE.
Lo! where to yon PLANTATION drooping goes,
The SABLE HERD of Human Kind, while near
Stalks a pale DESPOT, and around him throws
The scourge that wakes -- that punishes the Tear.
Over the far Beach the mournful murmur strays,
And joins the rude yell of the tumbling tide,
As faint they labor in the solar blaze,
To feed the luxury of BRITISH PRIDE!
Even at this moment, on the burning gale
Floats the weak wailing of the female tongue;
And can that Sex's softness naught avail --
Must naked WOMAN shriek amid the throng?
Are drops of blood the HORRIBLE MANURE
That fills with luscious juice, the TEEMING CANE?
And must our fellow creatures thus endure,
For traffic vile, the indignity of pain?
Yes, their keen sorrows are the sweets we blend
With the green bev'rage of our morning meal,
The while to love meek Mercy WE pretend,
Or for fictitious ills affect to feel.
Yes, it is their anguish mantles in the bowl,
Their sighs excite the Briton's drunken joy;
Those ign'rant suff'rers know not of a SOUL,
That we enlightened may its hopes destroy.
And there are MEN, who leaning on the LAWS,
What they have purchased, claim a right to hold --
Cursed be the tenure, cursed its cruel cause --
FREEDOM's a dearer property than gold!
And there are Men, with shameless front have said,
That Nature formed the NEGROES for Disgrace;
That on their limbs subjection is displayed --
The doom of slavery stamped upon their face.
Send your stern gaze from Lapland to the Line,
And every Region's natives faily scan,
Their forms, their force, their faculties combine,
And own the VAST variety OF MAN!
Then why suppose Yourselves the chosen few,
To deal Oppression's poisoned arrows round,
To gall with iron bonds the weaker crew,
Enforce the labor, and inflict the wound.
It Is SORDID INTEREST guides you; bent on gain,
In profit only can ye reason find;
And pleasure too: -- but urge no more in vain,
The selfish subject, to the social mind.
Ah! how can He whose daily lot is grief,
Whose mind is vilify'd beneath the Rod,
Suppose his MAKER has for him relief,
Can he believe the tongue that speaks of GOD!
For when he sees the Female of his Heart,
And his loved daughters torn by Lust away,
His sons, the poor inheritors of smart --
-- HAD HE RELIGION, THINK YE HE COULD PRAY?
Alas! He steals him from the loathsome shed,
What time moist Midnight blows her venomed breath,
And Musing, how he long has toiled and bled,
DRINKS THE DIRE BALSAM OF CONSOLING DEATH!
Haste, haste, ye Winds, on swiftest pinions fly,
Ere from this World of Misery he go,
Tell him his wrongs bedew a NATION'S EYE,
Tell him, BRITANNIA blushes for his Woe!
Say that in future, NEGROES SHALL BE BLESSED,
Ranked even as Men, and Men's just rights enjoy;
No more be either Purchased, or Oppressed --
No griefs shall wither, and no stripes destroy!
Say, that fair Freedom bends her Holy Flight
To cheer the Infant, and console the Sire;
So shall He, wondering, prove at last, delight,
And in a throb of ecstacy expire.
Then shall proud ALBION'S CROWN, where Laurels twine,
Torn from the bosom of the raging sea,
Boast 'midst the glorious leaves, a Gem divine,
The radient Gem of PURE HUMANITY!
DELLA CRUSCA.

MONODY.
Addressed to MR. T --
IF ever for fictitious grief
My soul a transient sorrow knew;
If sometimes I have heaved a sigh,
But to behold the virgin leaf
Of the lost LILY withering die!
Sure tenderest sympathy is due
To THEE, from whom each cherished bliss is fled,
Who mourn'st by day and night, thy own MARIA dead;
O T --! in the murmuring gale,
Often have I found thy plaintive voice prevail;
When the wet fingers of the morn,
Shook the cold pearl-drops from the bending thorn;
Or, when, at close of day,
To the lone vale I took my way,
The sad vibration of faint ECHO 's breath,
Brought to my heart the dirge of Death.
Then all dejected, have I paused to hear,
And felt a kindred pang sincere;
Sincere as erst thy Father's PARENT proved,
When for the Addison.
Friend he loved,
He wove a cypress wreath, and poured the verse,
That soothed the Poet's shade, and hung upon his hearse.
Ah! let me take my simple reed,
And seek the moonlight mead;
Or where amongst rocks, the headlong stream,
Flashes the lucid beam:
Woo calm REFLECTION in her sober bower,
As pond'ring at the midnight hour,
She flings her solace on each passing wind,
That wafts the heavenly balm to heal the wounded mind.
So may her mighty spell,
Thy desolating anguish quell,
So may thou quit at length the Forest's gloom,
Nor thus for ever dwell upon the Sainted Tomb.
O think, when wandering on the shore,
Thou mark'st with musing eye,
Over the rude cliffs the tempest fly,
And rouse to sudden rage the howling main.
Think, SHE thou love, has left a World,
Where jarring elements are hurled,
And where contending atoms roar,
To join, 'midst endless joy, the adoring Seraph's strain!
Yes, she was mild and lovely as the star
That in the Western hemisphere afar,
Lifts its pure lamp above the mountain's head,
To light meek Evening to her dewy bed.
And as the waning Moon displays,
With mirror clear, Morn's rising rays,
She, in decay, showed VIRTUE'S ORB refined,
Reflected fairer from her angel mind;
Till at the last, too fierce a blaze was given,
And then she shrunk from sight, and FADED into HEAVEN.
Yet do not mourn, be grief away,
For see how swift the dark clouds go;
Soon silence drinks the Linnet's lay,
And yonder sapphire waves shall cease to flow,
Scared by the hissing brand,
Of thirsty Summer's sultry hand.
From the lorn wood the leaves descend,
And all of Nature, as of Art, must end.
Sad Consolation, true! yet why,
If soon must close the languid eye,
Since a short moment but remains,
For all our fears, and all our pains,
Why should we fondly brood on care,
Ah! why devote us to despair!
But time assiduous loves to urge
Our footsteps to his utmost verge,
Because that there a rapturous scene appears,
Where ANGUISH never throbs, nor SORROW sinks in tears.
Meanwhile, forbear not to disclose,
The Scions of that beauteous Stem;
And though the PARENT ROSE,
Was prematurely lost,
By a remorseless frost;
O view the opening Buds, and smile at least for them!
DELLA CRUSCA.

ODE TO INDIFFERENCE.
OH Nymph, long sought of placid mien,
With careless steps, and brow serene!
I woo thee from the tufted bowers,
Where listless pass thy easy hours --
Or, if a Naiade of the silver wave
Thou rather love thy pearly limbs to lave
In some clear lake, whose fascinating face
Lures the soft willow to its pure embrace;
Or, if beneath the gelid rock
Thy smiles all human sorrows mock,
Wherever thou art, in earth or air,
Oh! come, and chase the fiend DESPAIR!
Have I not marked thee on the green
Roving, by vulgar eyes unseen?
Have I not watched thy lightsome dance
When Evening's softened glows advance?
Dear Goddess yes! and whilst the Rustic's mirth
Proclaims the hour which gives wild gambols birth,
Supine, I Have found thee in the elm row's shade,
Lulled by the hum returning bees have made,
Who, chary of their golden spoils,
Finish their fragrant, rosy toils,
With rest-inviting slumb'rous song,
As to their waxen couch they throng.
Chaste Nymph! the Temple let me seek
Where thou resid'st in luster meek;
My future life to thee I give --
Irradiate every hour I live!
It Is true no glowing bliss thy vot'ries know,
From thee no poignant ecstacy can flow,
But oh! thou shield'st the heart from rankling pain,
And Misery strikes, when blessed with thee, in vain;
Wan Jealousy's empoisoning tooth,
And Love, which feeds upon our youth,
And holy Friendship's broken tie,
Never dim the luster of thy eye.
For thee it is all nature blooms,
For thee, the spring new charms assumes,
Nor vainly slings her blossoms round,
Nor vainly bids her groves resound;
Her music, colors, odours, all are thine,
To thee her months their richest gifts consign;
To thee the morn is bright, and sweet the ray
That marks the progress of the sinking day;
Each change is grateful to thy soul,
For its fine taste no woes control,
The powers of Nature, and of Art,
Alike entrance the easy heart.
And oh! beneath thy gentle dome
Which the calm comforts make their home,
That cruel imp is never found
Whose fame such idle songs resound --
Dread SENSIBILITY! -- Oh! let me fly
Where Greenland darkness drinks the beamy sky,
Or where the Sun, with downward torrid ray
Kills, with the barbarous glories of the day!
I Would dare the excess of every clime,
Grasp every evil known by Time,
Ere live beneath that Witch's spells
With whom no lasting pleasure dwells.
Her lovely form deceives the heart,
The tear, for ever prompt to start,
The tender look, the ready sigh,
And soft emotion always nigh;
And yet Content the insiduous fiend forbids --
Oh! she has torn the slumbers from my lids:
Often roused my torpid sense to living woe,
And bid chill anguish to my bosom grow.
She seals her prey! -- in vain the Spring
Wakes Rapture, through her groves to sing;
The roseate Morn's hygean bloom,
Fades down, unmarked, to Evening's gloom.
Oh SENSIBILITY! thy scepter sad
Points, where the frantic glance proclaims THEE MAD!
Strained to excess, Reason is chained thy slave,
Or the poor victim shuns thee in the grave;
To thee each crime, each evil owes its birth,
That in gigantic horror treads the earth!
SAVAGE UNTAMED! she smiles to drink our tears,
And where is no solid ill, she wounds with fears;
Riots in sighs, is soothed when most we smart --
Now, while she guides my pen, her FANG's within my heart.
ANNA MATILDA.
Jan. 16, 1788.
ODE TO ANNA MATILDA.
O CEASE MATILDA! Cease the strain
That wooes INDIFFERENCE to thy arms;
For what are all her boasted charms?
But only to be free from pain!
And would thou then her torpid ease,
Her listless apathy to know,
Renounce the magic POWER to PLEASE;
And lose the LUXURY of WOE?
Why does thy stream of sweetest song,
In many a wild maze wind along;
Foam on the Mountain's murmuring side;
Or through the vocal covert glide;
Or among fairy meadows steal? --
It is because thy HEART can FEEL!
Alas! if peace must be unknown,
Till every nerve is turned to stone,
Till not a tear-drop wets the eye;
Nor throbs the breast for Sorrow's sigh.
O may I never find relief,
But PERISH, in the PANG of GRIEF!
Think not I reason thus, my Fair!
A stranger to corroding Care!
Ah! if Thou, seldom find'st repose,
" I, rest not on a bed of rose."
DESPAIR, cold Serpent, loves to twine
About this helpless heart of mine!
Yet, though neglected and forlorn,
I scarce can check the smile of Scorn,
When those the VULGAR call the GREAT,
Bend the important brow of state;
And strive a consequence to find
By seeming more than human kind.
Well, let them strut their hour away,
Till grinning death demand his prey!
Meanwhile, my ANNA! let us rove
The scented vale, the bending grove,
Mix our hot tears with evening dews
And live for FRIENDSHIP and the MUSE!
Yes, let us hasten hand in hand,
Where the blue billows lave the land,
And as they quick recoiling fly,
Send on the surf a lengthened sigh,
That strikes the soul, with truth sublime
As 'twere the whispering TONGUE of TIME;
For thus our short Life's ebbing day
Murmurs awhile, and hastes away!
Or let us seek the mouldering wall
Of some lone Abbey's Gothic Hall;
Recline upon the knee-worn stone,
And catch the North Wind's dismal moan,
That 'midst his sorrows, seems to boast
Of many a gallant vessel lost!
Friends and Lovers sunk in death --
By the fury of his breath!
What though at the imagined Tale,
Thy altered cheek be sadly pale;
Never can such SYMPATHY annoy;
For it is the price of dearest JOY!
When far off the Night Storm flies,
Let us ponder on the SKIES!
Where countless stars are ever rolled,
Which yet our weak eyes dare behold;
Adore the SELF-EXISTING CAUSE
That gives to each its separate laws;
That, when the impetuous comet runs
Athwart a wilderness of Suns;
Tells it what mandate to obey,
Nor ever wander from its way;
Till back it hastens whence 'twas brought,
Beyond the boundaries of thought!
Let not the studious Seer reply,
" Attraction regulates the Sky,
And lends each orb the secret force,
That urges on, or checks its course."
Or with his Orrery expound
Creation's vainly fancied round.
Ah! quit thy toil, presumptuous Sage!
Destroy thy calculating page;
No more on Second Causes plod;
It Is not ATTRACTION, but it is GOD!
And what the UNIVERSE we call,
Is but a POINT, compared to ALL.
SUCH BLISS the sensate bosom knows,
Such bliss Indiff'rence never bestows;
Though small the circle we can trace,
In the abyss of time and space;
Though learning has its limits got,
The feelings of the soul have not.
Their vast excursions find no end;
And RAPTURE needs not comprehend!
It Is true, we are ign'rant how the Earth
Wakes the first principles of birth,
With vegetative moisture feeds
To different purpose, different seeds;
Gives to the Rose, such balmy sweet,
Or fills the golden ear of Wheat,
Paints the ripe Peach with velvet bloom,
Or weaves the thick Wood's mingling gloom --
YET we can wander in the bower;
Can taste the fragrance of the flower;
Drink the rich fruit's nectareous juice,
And bend the harvest to our use. --
Then give thy pure perceptions scope,
And sooth thy heaving heart with hope.
HOPE shall instruct my sorr'wing Friend;
The soul's fine fervor never can end;
But when her limbs by Death are laid
Beneath some yew-tree's hallowed shade,
Then shall her soaring spirit know
The Seraphim's ecstatic glow.
Then shall the ESSENTIAL MIND confess,
That ANGUISH has the power to BLESS,
That FEELING was in BOUNTY given,
And own THE SACRED TRUTH -- IN HEAVEN.
DELLA CRUSCA.
Jan. 30, 1788.
ODE TO DELLA CRUSCA.
O THOU!
Who from " a wilderness of Suns"
Can stoop to where the low brook runs!
Through space with rapid comets glow;
Or mark where, soft, the snow-drops grow!
O THOU!
Whose burning Pen now rapture paints!
Then moralizes, cold, with Saints!
Now trembling ardors can infuse --
Then, seems as dipped in cloistered dews --
O say! thy BEING quick declare?
Art thou a Son of Earth, or Air?
Celestial Bard! though thy sweet song
Might to a Seraph's strains belong,
Its wondrous beauty, and its art
Can only touch, not change, my heart.
So Heaven-sent lightning powerless plays,
And wanton, throws its purple rays;
It leaps through Night's scarce pervious gloom
Attracted by the Rose's bloom,
The illumined shrub then quivering round,
It seems each scented bud to wound:
Morn shakes her locks, and see the Rose
In renovated beauty blows!
Smiles at the dart which past away,
And flings her perfume on the day.
Thy lightning Pen it is thus I greet,
Fearless its subtle point I meet;
Never shall its spells my sad heart move,
From the calm state it vows to love.
All other bliss I Have proved is vain --
All other bliss is dashed with pain.
My waist with myrtles has been bound,
MY BROW WITH LAURELS HAS BEEN CROWNED;
LOVE, has sighed hopeless at my feet,
LOVE, on my couch, has poured each sweet;
All these I Have known, and now I sly
With thee, INDIFFERENCE, to die!
Nor is thy gift " dull torpid ease,"
The Mind's quick powers thou do not freeze:
No! blessed by Thee, the soul expands,
And darts over new-created lands;
Springs from the confines of the earth
To where new systems struggle into birth;
The germ of future Worlds beholds,
The secrets of dark space unfolds;
Can watch how far the ERRATIC runs,
And gaze on DELLA CRUSCA's Suns;
In some new orb can meet!" his starry mail,"
And him, on earth unknown, in Heaven with transport hail!
ANNA MATILDA.
Feb. 2, 1788.
TO ANNA MATILDA.
NOR will I more of Fate complain;
For I have lived to feel thy strain;
To feel its sun-like force divine,
Swift darting through the clouds of woe,
Shoot to my soul a sainted glow.
Yet, yet MATILDA, spare to shin!
One moment be the blaze suppressed!
Lest from this clod my spirit spring,
And borne by Zephyrs' trembling wing,
Seek a new Heaven upon thy BREAST.
But say, does calm INDIFFERENCE dwell
On the low ^ead or mountain swell,
Or at gray Evening's solemn gloom,
Bend her bosom to the tomb?
Or when the weak dawn's orient rose,
In silv'ry foliage decked, appears;
Tell me, if perchance she goes
To the fresh garden's proud array,
Where, doubtful of the coming day,
Each drooping flow'ret sheds translucent tears.
Ah! tell me, tell me where,
For thou shall find me there,
Like her own son, in vestment pure,
With deep disguise of smile secure:
So shall I once thy form descry,
For once, hold converse with thine eye.
Vain is the thought, for at thy sight,
Soon as thy potent voice were found,
Could I conceal the vast delight,
Could I be tranquil at the sound,
Could I repress quick Rapture's start,
Or hide the bursting of my heart?
Let but thy lyre impatient seize,
Departing Twilight's filmy breeze,
That winds the enchanted chords among,
In lingering labyrinth of song:
Anon, the amorous Bird of Woe,
Shall steal the tones that quivering flow,
And with them sooth the sighing woods,
And with them charm the flumb'ring floods;
Till, all exhausted by the lathe
He hang in silence on the spray,
Drop to his idol flower beneath,
And, 'midst her blushes, cease to breathe. This alludes to the idea of the
Nightingale being enamoured of the Rose, so frequently expressed in Persian
Poetry.

Warned by his Fate, 'twere surely well,
To shun the fascinating spell;
Nor still, presumptuous, dare to fling
My rude hand over the sounding string;
As though I fondly would aspire,
To match MATILDA's heavenly fire.
Yet may I sometimes, far remote,
Hear the loved cadence of her note,
And though the Laurel I resign,
O may the bliss of TASTE be mine!
DELLA CRUSCA.
March 5, 1788.
" -- Does calm Indifference dwell,
On the low mead, or mountain swell?
O tell me where,
For thou shall find me there."

TO DELLA CRUSCA.
YES, on the mountain's haughty swell,
And in the prostrate dell,
And where the Dryades fling their shades --
There may thou meet the Maid serene,
Or trace her on the zephyr'd green,
Whilst Day's carnation gently fades.
Does Nature make the prospect vast,
With rocks o'erhang, and rivers cast,
Tumbling headlong to their base?
Do seas stretch out their foamy plains,
Compelling with their crystal chains
Wide Continents to embrace?
All these attract the smooth brow'd fair;
Or where can Art evince her powers,
Where Science strew immortal flowers,
And gay Indifference -- haste not there?
Whilst PASSION narrows up the heart,
TASTE can no ray of bliss impart,
One strong idea grasps the mind,
Extends itself through all the soul,
Through every vein its furies roll,
And tears with fangs unkind.
When NEWTON trod the starry roads,
And viewed the dwellings of the Gods,
And measured every Orb --
Did silly Love his steps attend,
His mighty purposes suspend,
Or his grand mind absorb?
When intellectual LOCK explored
The Soul's sad vacuum, where no hoard
Of budding young ideas lay --
Oh tell, thus robbed in Wisdom's stole,
Did Love's coarse torch his view control,
Or light him in the darksome way?
Ha! DELLA CRUSCA, cease to feign,
Thy cheek with red repentance stain,
For having feigned so long;
Quick seize thy Lyre, sweep each bold string,
Over every chord thy music fling --
To calm INDIFFERENCE raise the Song!
Propitiate first, then with her haste
Over the Globe's peopled, motley waste;
Watch CHARACTER wherever it runs;
Drink newer air, see fiercer suns:
Seek the bland realms where first the Morn
Pours dawn-light from her beamy horn;
Pours scent and colors over the vale,
And wakes its song, and wakes its tale.
Mark how CONFUCIUS' feeble race,
(Whose records vast fail not to trace)
To Imitation still confine
Their powers, nor deviate from its line.
Their fourteen thousand glowing springs
Passing through their yearly rings,
Not one Suggestion left behind,
No Art, nor Virtue more refined;
Philosophy no inroads made,
But mute, within its awful shade,
Its thoughts occult arrang'd --
Whilst Learning, blindfold in its pen,
This costly precept gave to men --
"BE WISE, but be unchanged."
Haste! -- leave the insipid herd -- away!
Where EGYPT's sons imbrown the day,
For there primeval Wisdom formed her wreath,
And Science first was taught to breathe.
O linger here! the Classic clime
Demands, and will reward thy time.
Here shall thou seek the immortal Dome
Where Pleasure triumphed over ROME;
And tread where CLEOPATRA trod,
And moisten with thy tear the sod
Where Taste and Love their banners waved,
Snatching from the grave Old Time --
Whose life fast-fading, Rapture saved,
And Phoenix-like renewed its prime.
Then find the myrtled tomb,
The now unenvied Lover's home;
But, lest thy pensive steps should stray,
To guide thee in the unknown way,
The Moon her bright locks quick unshrouds,
Her veil of gossamour, thin clouds,
Dissolves to air, and her soft eye
Through the Palm Grove's haughty shade,
And the lofty Aloed glade
Shall guide thee where thy long-ow'd sigh
Breathed over the mingling Lover's dust,
Shall gratify their hovering souls
Beyond an EMPIRE's votive Bust.
Is a soft willow bending near,
Whose drooping leaves speak grief sincere?
Its drooping leaves, ah! instant seize,
The happy violence will please --
Bend its tender flaccid boughs
(Murmuring soft mysterious vows)
Into garlands -- leave them there
OFFERINGS to the love-lost pair!
These duties paid, with lingering look,
With heart by silent Sorrow shook,
The marbled desert next explore
Where Beauty's glance, and Learning's lore,
Ages long past the soul beguiled --
Oh think! in that unlettered wild
LONGINUS wrote, ZENOBIA smiled!
Where now a humbled column lies,
Streamed radiance from impassioned eyes;
The roof where odious Night Birds rest,
Once sheltered Wit, once echoed Jest;
Where Peasants' cumbrous oxenstall,
THERPSICHORE swam through the ball;
Serpents convolve, where Music trill'd,
And lost Palmyra's fate's fulfilled.
Does splendid scenes thy light heart prize?
Fly to Italia's downy skies!
Where Fancy's richest strokes abound,
Where Nature's happiest points are found;
The pleasures here -- a rosy band!
Linked to her car with flowery chains,
Bear their rapt Goddess over the plains
And strew their glories over her land.
The dulcet groves, burst with rich notes,
Caught by a thousand trembling throats,
The wavey rivers as they fly --
Their soft embroder'd bounds between,
Whose glowing tints be-gem the green,
Bear on their curls the extatic sigh; --
The breeze detained rests its pure wing,
To hear blessed Love its triumphs sing.
And ah! be Italy never named
Without a pause to those so famed --
The glorious MEDICIS!
Oh SCULPTURE! lift thy pillar high,
And grave the name amidst the sky!
Its base, let marble sorrows tend,
And chisel'd woes in high relief,
Look their unutterable grief,
And mute Despair its tresses rend!
Blessed POETRY! compel thy lyre
To sound the loud immortal praise
Of those who cherished thy proud bays,
And fed thy near extinguished fire!
Thy pencil, PAINTING! dip in shades
To last till Europe's Glory fades --
Thy trophy'd canvas shall be Fame
To those who nursed thy infant Art.
And bear to mightier shores the Name!
Swiftly, my DELLA CRUSCA, turn,
To where the Medicean Urn,
The once proud City hallows still,
There thy fine taste may drink its fill.
To FLORENCE fly --
O, no! for ever shun her tempting skies,
For there, if right I ween, the Maid INDIFFERENCE dies!
ANNA MATILDA.
April 2, 1788.
TO ANNA MATILDA.
Age, jam meorum,
Finis amorum.

AND have I strove in vain to move
Thy Heart, fair Phantom of my Love?
And could thou think 'twas my design,
Calmly to list thy Notes Divine,
That I responsive Lays might send,
To gain a cold Platonic Friend?
Far other hopes thy Verse inspired,
And all my breast with passion fired.
For Fancy to my mind had given
Thy form, as of the forms of Heaven --
Had bathed thy lips with vermil dew;
Had touched thy cheek with morning's hue!
And down thy neck had sweetly rolled
Luxuriant locks of mazy gold.
Yes I had hopes, at last to press,
And lure thee to the chaste caress:
Catch from thy breath the quivering sigh,
And meet the murder of thine eye.
Ah! when I deemed such joys at hand,
Remorseless comes the stern command,
Nor calls my wandering footsteps home;
But far, and farther bids me roam;
And then thy vestal notes dispense
The meed of COLD INDIFFERENCE!
Cursed Power! that to myself unknown,
Still turns the heart I love, to stone!
Dwells with the Fair, whom most I prize,
And scorns my tears, and mocks my sighs.
Yes ANNA! I will hasten forth
To the bleak regions of the North,
Where Erickson, immortal Lord!
Poured on the Dane his vengeful sword;
Or where wide over the barbarous plain,
Fierce Rurick held his ancient reign.
Then once more will I trace the Rhine,
And mark the Rhone's swift billows shine;
Once more on VIRGIL's tomb I Will muse,
And Laura's, gemm'd with evening dews?
Once more ROME's Via Sacra tread,
And ponder on the mighty dead.
More Eastward then direct my way,
To thirsty Egypt's deserts stray,
Fix in wonder, to behold
The Pyramids renowned of old;
Fallen near one of which, I ween,
The Hieroglyphic Sphinx is seen!
The The overslowing of the Nile always happens when the Sun is in Leo and
Virgo^
Lion Virgin Sphinx, that shows
What time the rich Nile overflows,
Then will I sail the Egean tide,
Or seek Scamander's tuneful side;
Wander the sacred groves among,
Where HOMER waked the immortal song:
Traverse the Nemaean wood,
Mark the spot where Sparta stood;
Or at humbled Athens see
Its still remaining Majesty! --
Yet to Indiff'rence ever a foe,
May Beauty other joys bestow;
Her rapturous Science I Will pursue,
The Science NEWTON never knew.
Now blows the wind with melancholy force,
And over the Baltic points my weary course;
Loud shout the Mariners, the white sails swell --
ANNA MATILDA! fare thee, fare thee well!
Farewell whoever thou art, and may thou find
Health and repose, and lasting peace of mind;
Still pour the various Verse with fancy clear,
To thrill the pulse, and charm the attentive ear;
Nor may relentless Care thy days destroy,
But every hope be ripened into joy!
And O! farewell to distant Britain's shore,
Which I perhaps are doomed to see no more;
Where Valor, Wisdom, Taste, and Virtue dwell,
Dear Land of Liberty, alas! farewell! --
Yet often, even there, by wild Ambition tossed,
The Soul's best season settles in a frost.
Yet even there, desponding, late I knew,
That Friendship foreign-form'd, is rarely true.
For they, whom most I loved, whose kindness saved
My shattered Bark when erst the tempest raved:
At Home, even with the common herd could fly,
Gaze on the wounded Deer, and pass him by!
Nor yet can Pride subdue my pangs severe,
But Scorn itself evap'rates in a Tear.
Thou too, delusive Maid! whose winning charms
Seduced me first from slow Wealth's beck'ning arms;
Sweet POETRY! my earliest, falsest Friend,
Here shall my frantic adoration end.
Take back the simple flute thy treach'ry gave,
Take back, and plunge it in Oblivion's wave,
So shall its sad notes hence no malice raise --
The Bard unknown -- forgotten be the Lays.
But should with ANNA's Verse, his hapless Rhyme,
In future meet the impartial eye of Time,
Say, that thy wretched victim long endured
Pains, which are seldom felt, and never cured!
Say 'midst the lassitude of hopes overthrown,
MATILDA's strain could comfort him alone.
Yet was the veil mysterious never removed,
From him the admiring, and from her the loved.
And no kind intercourse the song repaid,
But each to each remained -- a Shadow and a Shade.
DELLA CRUSCA.
May 15, 1788.
TO DELLA CRUSCA.
OH stay, oh stay! thy rash speed check,
Not yet ascend the flying deck;
Nor Europe's Hemisphere forsake,
Nor from THY NATION's pleasures take
A bliss so exquisite and chaste --
A feast so dear, to polished taste,
As that thy Lyre correctly flings,
As that they feel when DELLA CRUSCA sings.
Alas! you are gone, and to my straining eye
Thy Bark seems buoyant on the distant sky; --
See! in the clouds its mast it proudly laves,
Scorning the aid of Ocean's humble waves:
Well may it soar and bear aloft the prize
Whose verse immortal links him to the skies;
Well may it scorn rough Neptune's rocky way,
Which bears the Genius of the GOD OF DAY!
And now, MATILDA, bind thy lyre
With cypress wreathes! the lambent fire
Thou kindlest at his fervid rays
Can gleam no more; thy future days
Lost to the Muses and to Taste,
Each torpid hour will joyless waste.
In vain each morning now will glow --
In vain, soft MAIA's music flow,
And to my pillow force its way,
And on my wak'ning senses play.
Her notes my wak'ning senses fill,
And conscious slumbers own the trill;
But when at length Remembrance bids
The filmy slumber quit my lids,
Saying "THE WORLD its wit has brought,
Its various point, its well turned thought,
But DELLA CRUSCA lends no ray" --
Oh what is Morning -- what is May?
Yet hold! some solace yet remains,
And pensive joys await my pains
I too must leave this laureled coast
Which all, that ROME adorned, can boast;
But not like thee, for GRECIAN shores; --
Ah no! my humbler prow explores
The sea unsung, which lies between
Dover's proud cliffs, and France serene.
Thou Wilt skim the Egean's brilliant tide,
I, over the British channel glide,
Thou, all enthusiast! fondly trace
The Isle where PHAON's beauteous face
Gave birth to SAPPHO's glorious art --
Illum'd her name, but tore her heart:
Thy SAPPHO seek the shores vicine,
Where England's lovely great-soul'd QUEEN
Sublimely knelt, and snatched from blushing Fate
The Godlike victims of her Edward's hate.
Thou, at AONIA's sacred feet
Wilt duly pour libations meet;
I roam over GALLIA's sportive plains,
Where thoughtless Pleasure ever reigns.
But it is not sportive GALLIA's plains,
Though Pleasure there for ever reigns,
Which promises the boasted bliss --
No, BARD BELOVED! the hope is this,
That there thy footsteps I may tread,
Press the same turf where sunk thy head;
Sip the quick stream thy thirst has slaked,
And greet the Dawn where thou have waked,
Fancy'ng her waves of mazy gold
Never with such rich refulgence rolled;
And when her tints of various dye
Burst from the pallid sickly sky,
There rush in violet, there in green,
Here in soft red imbue the scene;
Then lose themselves by growing bright,
Till swallowed up in one vast flood of light --
Thus shall I say, HE saw her rays,
Thus was he roused to adore and praise!
Oh, SYMPATHY, of birth divine,
Descend, and round my heart strings twine!
Touch the fine nerve whenever I breathe
Where DELLA CRUSCA dropped his wreath!
Lead me the sacred way of ROME,
Lead me to kneel at Virgil's tomb,
Where he the enduring marble round
With fresh wove laurels, graceful bound.
Then guide where still with sweeter note
Than flowed from Petrach's tuneful throat,
On Laura's grave he poured the lay
Amidst the sighs of sinking day:
Then point where on the sod his tear
Fell from its crystal source so clear,
That there my mingling tear may sink,
And the same dust its moisture drink.
Thus dying Swans are said to sing,
And their last breath in numbers fling
Over the dear liquid shining plains,
Which nursed their joys, and soothed their pains.
Like them my Muse pines fast away,
And this her last, her closing day.
When one blessed word her lips has sealed,
In lasting silence she will be veiled.
Expiring, still her note's the same,
She murmurs DELLA CRUSCA's name! --
The SACRED WORLD! ye heard it spoke; --
Her Book is closed -- her Lyre is broke!
ANNA MATILDA.
May 17th, 1788.
A TALE FOR JEALOUSY.
A Recent Event in CATALONIA.
LOUD shrieked the wind; hoarse struck the hour,
When from his couch, Alphonso rose;
Bedecked with gold his splendid bower --
Gold, had his couch, but not repose!
The Night sat brooding on the hill:
Beneath, the sable rivers rolled,
Not glist'ring, now, the tinkling rill;
Its stream opaque, its spirit cold.
His chamber long, with restless feet,
The Lord Alphonso traversed over;
Here once he tasted slumbers sweet,
But slumber sweet he knows no more!
His roused domestics strait obey
The signal of their Lord, unlov'd;
Their torches flash a second day,
As through the costly rooms they moved.
His favorite, from the obsequious train
Was to his inmost closet led;
There heard confessed the amorous pain
Which tore him from his midnight bed.
Oh, thou were near, Alphonso cries,
When in the progress late we made,
Gonsalve's daughter in our eyes
Bade every other virgin fade.
Her noble mien, her blushes mild,
The burnish of her traces bright;
Her age -- but just no longer Child,
Her rosy mouth, her graceful height;
All these have in my time-worn heart,
Lighted a youthful, amorous fire --
I sink beneath the poignant smart,
I faint with eager, strong desire.
Often did I try her soul to melt,
But ign'rant she of Cupid's power --
His ecstacies she never felt --
But now is come her fated hour.
With flames illicit I essayed
To touch her iced, unwaken'd heart;
Let Hymen sooth the bashful maid,
She Will wakened, play a softer part.
Strait to her father's, speed thy way,
The fleetest mules with haste prepare;
And ere tomorrow scans his day,
Thou Wilt reach the village of my fair.
These pearls, these di'monds speak my truth,
Woo her with treasures to my arms;
When love no longer boasts of youth,
Riches may plead their meaner charms.
Oh how unlike the rapturous hour,
When love is bought by love alone;
When a soft look, a touch, a flower,
Is prized beyond IND's brightest stone.
But go, and to her parents bear
Thy Lord's designs -- his hopes unfold;
Plead with due force his meaning fair,
And in thy promises be bold.
Much more the Lord Alphonso spoke;
His servant's mind the whole retains,
Whose lashes soon the mules provoke;
The mules skim over the distant plains.
The awakened night with streaks of gold
Her jetty robes begun to lace;
Her drowsy car far off she rolled --
The blithe Sun urging to the race;
And ere his wheels had run behind
The Western mountain's giddy slope;
Julia, with meekness all resigned,
Had listened to Alphonso's hope.
Not so resigned but that her thought
Recoiled at such unequal love,
Till by parental wisdom taught,
She learned to bear, and then approve,
The Sire attends his darling child,
For so Alphonso's pride allows;
And with the transport almost wild,
Saw her receive a Grandee's vows.
He saw that form where speaking grace
Gave soul to beauty most refined,
The robe of dignity embrace,
By taste magnificent designed.
Her hair, which floated over her dress,
A dress, which to be seen demands
Its rich luxuriance to repress,
They tie in folds with diamond bands.
But the soft curls which hap'ly fell
Upon her bosom's heaving snow,
Were suffered there, unbound, to dwell,
And spread their wavy golden glow.
Thus the fond parent saw her rove,
Through gaudy halls and rooms of state;
Whilst humble trains at distance move,
And from her nod receive their fate.
Succinct the time in which such joy
Around his aged heart might play;
Bitter, oh! bitter the alloy!
And set full soon his Pleasure's day:
For Lord Alphonso names the hour,
When he the sumptuous dome must quit,
And seek again the humble bower --
For birth like his a mansion fit:
Tells him to take a last farewell,
Of her more dear than sense or light;
Bids him never hope again to dwell
Where filial Julia blessed his sight.
His daughter, overwhelmed with woe,
The haughty cruel order hears;
She sees her mournful parent go,
And bathes his last steps with her tears.
Now slow and sadden'd rolls the time
Which late flew rapid with delight;
Heedless is she of Morning's prime,
Nor hails the soft approach of Night.
Her only solace was to roam
'Midst the deep wood's embosom'd calm,
Where distant from her gaudy home
Meek solitude bestowed its balm.
There, on a river's fringy side,
Which snatched her breath as stealing by,
She Would watch its curled, unequal glide.
And swell with here is the zephyr's sigh:
Mark with what truth it objects drew,
When ruffling zephyr ceased to breathe,
Its surface polished to the view --
A phantom forest underneath.
Two drooping willows there displayed
Their foliage to the painting wave;
Which in their pensive green arrayed
Would still their jutting bare roots lave.
These, by her hands, in garlands dressed,
She Would sometimes chide the low-bent branch,
Which would its blooming fragrant vest
Upon the escaping river launch.
Thus was she one bright eve employed,
Whilst carols sad her sweet voice sung;
Evening's own bird her note enjoyed --
When from its shades a soldier sprung.
His form, like that Apollo wears,
When from his bow the swift dart sings;
Or when the discus through the air
With equal force and grace he flings.
Martial his step; his beamy eye
Bright as fair Julia's own appears;
Strait to each other's arms they fly --
They mingle joy -- they mingle tears.
'Twas Julia's brother whom she saw,
'Twas Julia whom her brother pressed;
Both dear by Nature's dearest law,
For twins they were, who thus caressed.
From Calpe's glorious rock he came --
Immortal monument decreed
Of English ELIOTT's laureled name;
Where English heroes often shall bleed.
And there his blood did Gusman shed
Amongst the boldest ever found,
By sacred thirst of honor led --
Nor shunned the deaths that flew around.
But when bright Peace her silver flute
Had sounded through wide Europe's skies,
And when the voice of war was mute,
Sped by fond duty, home he flies.
There he first learned his sister's fate,
How elevated -- and how cursed!
Heard, that amidst her brilliant state
Her heart consuming sorrow nursed.
Her husband's tyrant law revealed,
No dear relation to behold;
Obliged him thus in shades concealed,
His sister to his heart to fold.
And often he mourned her cruel lot,
And often he dried her tears away,
When from the interesting spot
They each were warned by closing day.
Adieu, my Gusman, Julia cries!
Yet let me see thee once again;
Tomorrow bless thy sister's eyes,
Then seek our dear paternal plain:
From forth my little treasured hoard,
Fond tokens to my mother bear;
No miser is my cruel Lord,
And gifts, like these, I well can spare.
Gusman, with pure, fraternal love,
Kissed either beauteous, fading cheek,
Vowing, when Morn should light the grove
In its mild haunts her steps held seek.
Now Evening hung its silv'ry dews,
On every shrub that decked the glades;
And fainter scents the flowers effuse --
As loath to greet with sweets, her shades.
Often had fair Julia lingered there
In hours like these -- and traced the beam,
Which sent from Luna's brilliant sphere.
Shot through the wood a shivered gleam.
Marked how each sound stole soft away,
As gliding off to shores more bright;
Bribed by the gaudy tumid day,
To fly the dove-ey'd, tender night.
By Julia these are all forgot,
For pleasure has her soul suffused;
Blind to the beauties of the spot,
She deigns not now to be amused.
Braced with young joy, the sportive fawn
Pursues her dam, with motion fleet,
Regardless of the sprinkled lawn
That weaves its flowers around her feet.
So speeds the fair one to her home,
Whose towers return the moon's broad glare;
Whilst to point out the distant dome,
They flash their gold vanes through the air.
On her soft pillow soon reclined,
Round her, the slumbers spun their veil;
And over her placid gentle mind,
The softest dreams their phantoms steal,
At morning's dawn, her Lord commands,
Her placid slumbers must be broke;
He grasped in his her trembling hands,
He led her forth, but never spoke.
And oh! these horrid sounds, she cried --
Those piteous shrieks, which tear the ear!
With terror struck, she faintly sighed,
And sunk, at length, over power'd with fear.
He dragged her on; the screams of pain,
More piercing as they nearer grow
Left her scarce power to sustain
Her crimson life's unequal flow.
There, wretch, behold! Alphonso cried,
As wide he threw the grating gate:
There feast thy loose adulterous eyes,
See there, thy paramour's just fate!
There, stretched upon the racking wheel,
She saw her brother's tortured form;
From his torn flesh the jagged steel,
Bade rush the blood, with life yet warm.
She saw -- but oh! she spoke no more!
The agony too fierce to bear;
Groaning, she sunk upon the floor,
And breathed her spirit on the air.
Sister! the writhing Gusman said --
Oh, Sister! plead -- then swoon'd with pain!
On his gash'd bosom sunk his head,
His limbs convulsed, the cords still strain.
Alphonso, when he heard the sound,
Leapt sudden to the deathful wheel;
With eager haste the youth's unbound,
And stern Alphonso learns to feel.
He raves, he sinks, he strikes his breast,
But oh! the guilty deed is past,
The victims pure are now at rest --
Thy tortures shall for ever last!
Vain is all art, for life no more
Can lift their pulse, their cheeks can paint;
Thou'st freed their souls, they quit the shore --
Each seeks its God -- a murdered Saint!
There, tyrant, lie! and let the fangs
Of deep remorse thy bosom tear!
Each wak'ning morn awake new pangs --
Teach thee to pity, and despair!
ANNA MATILDA.

portrait of Della Crusca (Robert Merry) DELLA CRUSCA


AMBITIOUS VENGEANCE; A TRAGIC-DRAMA. IN THREE ACTS.

BY DELLA CRUSCA.

CHARACTERS.
CLOTILDA, Mother of Alberto. THERESA, Duchess of Milan. LUCINDA, an attendant
Lady.
ALBERTO, Bastard of the late Duke of Milan. PRINCE CARLO, Son of the King of
Naples. ARNALDI, a distressed Nobleman. ANTONIO, Companion of Carlo. Neapolitan
Lord.
SCENE in and near Milan. AMBITIOUS VENGEANCE; A TRAGIC-DRAMA. This
Tragic-Drama was written prior to any of the other Poems.

ACT I. SCENE I.
A Hall in the Ducal Palace at Milan. THERESA, CLOTILDA, ALBERTO, and others,
composing a Court. THERESA. NOW thriving peace scatters her liberal stores
Over happy Lombardy; the Peasant now
May careless carol to the morning breeze,
As on he drives his ploughshare's patient toil,
Nor dread the rapine, nor the rage of war.
Returning Autumn shall not force the sigh
From his torn breast, nor leave him to deplore
His ruined olives, and his rifled vines.
No more, Alberto! we demand thy aid
To lead our valiant troops to victory;
But still Theresa claims her brother's care,
Yes, I require thy counsel, to direct
My maiden weakness; it is thou must curb
The womanish spirit in me, teach me how
To govern wisely, steadily, and justly:
Consult the people's good, and rule in mercy.
So shall we be in fact two sovereigns,
The real thou, and I the ostensible.

Alb. 'Twere better, generous sister! thou should choose
Some youthful prince of honor, and renown,
To share the splendid toil of government,
And be thy wedded friend than stoop to me,
A heedless soldier, hot, impolitic;
O rather think of Naples' royal heir,
Illustrious Carlo! let your charms reward
His well-prov'd valor, for in him unites
All that is noble, worthy and engaging;
Then is it just and proper he receive
All that is virtuous, lovely, and benign.
Perchance, his last year's residence at Milan
Gave thee occasion to remark him well,
And to esteem his matchless excellence.
What says Theresa? -- why that rising blush?

There. I thank thy kind attention, good Alberto
And feel the pointed merriment; but yet,
Methinks, I shall prefer my single state,
Which is perhaps, best suited to my mind,
And gives me greater power to do thee service.

Alb. O let no thought of me impede thy bliss,
For I am unambitious, and require
But ease, and freedom, with society;
And be assured my wishes were complete
In my dear sister's nuptial happiness.

Clot. How! [Aside.
Ignoble youth! thou should aspire to all.

There. Thou too, my father's well-belov'd Clotilda!
Shall not regret, or splendour, or respect,
Due to thy merit, and my father's memory.
Unslaken'd honor shall attend thy steps,
And thy heart's every wish be gratified.

Clot. Gracious Theresa!
Alas! my tongue wants power to speak my thanks.
Say thou, my wishes gratified! but that [Aside.
Can never be, while humbled by thy bounty.

There. And you, the lords and ladies of my court!
Show me how best I may express my love,
And gain your hearts, and that way I Will pursue.
Yet, yet I feel it is most arduous
To rule and satisfy, for all have views
To aggrandize themselves, while those who fail
In rising to the summit of their aim,
Turn bitt'rest enemies; nay, I fear that most
Hate whom they flatter, and the giddy crowd
Wish for eternal change. Naught can suffice
To gratify ambition's endless rage,
To fill the coffers of pale avarice,
Or deal out favors with so rich a hand
To equal each man's wishes; for alas!
The sovereign power is bounded, whereas hope
Is without bounds, and each succeeding day
Bestows fresh force, and hightens its impatience.

Alb. Thou reason'st wisely, and with truth, Theresa!
But how did thou acquire such sage reslection?

There. Often would our father pour into my ear
This sage instruction, which I still received
With due attention though with heavy heart.
Nor can I choose but tremble when I think
That all the power of evil, and of good,
Centres in me; each error I commit,
Loads me with secret curses, and vile hate,
Yet will I labor for the general good,
And my intention shall at least be pure,
So those, alas! I may not chance to please,
Shall but unjustly murmur.

Clot. Long may thou reign in glory, royal maid!
And acting from such generous sentiment,
Revive the sad, and suffering multitude,
Like Heaven's fresh dew that cheers the languid plain.
O that the dew of Heaven might sall to night
Upon thy sepulcher. [Aside.

There. But yet, Clotilda! I could wish to be
Placed in a station not so eminent,
Where all my weakness, and perhaps my faults,
Would neither injure, trouble, nor offend.
Born in some humble cottage, I had known
No wild commotion of exalted care,
But cheerful hied me forth at early morn,
Though the bleak north wind swept the mountain's side;
Or when warm summer soothed the vocal grove,
At ruddy eve, my occupation done,
Have jocund danced upon the verdant lawn.

Alb. Thou would have been a charming shepherdess,
Driving with flowery crook thy whitened flock
To crop the wild thyme on the fragrant down,
And list the humming bell, that seems to shake
The distant dome, and with sad-ling'ring note
Pants on the dying gale. Young Carlo, too,
Sold have been there, a gentle, rural swain,
To take his plaintive pipe, and fondly pour
The song of suff'rance, to subdue thy heart;
Or have been seen at infant dawn's first gleam,
Carving thy name upon the polished beach,
The boast, the wonder of the rustic race,
For comeliness, and manly strength, and song.

There. Nor would it have displeased me, for truly
I think there does not live a nobler youth.
His actions vaunt, and not his tongue, of glory.
Generous as love, and stranger to offense,
He wins each heart, nor proudly ever pretends
To gain by mimic affability:
The common error of our princely tribe!
Unmatched in virtue, sense, and dignity,
And every charm of youthful manliness.
If aught that is mortal can approach perfection,
It Is Carlo -- and I do not blush to own it.

Alb. This honest frankness well becomes thee, sister!
And gives a sweeter luster to thine eye,
Than all the tricks of timid bashfulness.
I much rejoice that he will soon be here,
For well I know, his promise is an oath
He would not break for worlds; then let me hope
His meed may be thy hand, and more thy heart.

There. Thanks for thy mirthful wishes, but at present
I shall retire; and recollect, Clotilda!
Thou may command my utmost power to serve thee,
Now fare ye well awhile.
[Exit.
The Court retires. Manent CLOTILDA and ALBERTO. Clot. [Aside.] It is thy death
I would command, and that
I will procure without thy kind consent --
Besides, methinks, when royal Carlo here
Shall sway the scepter as thy wedded lord,
The power of serving me will be transferred
To him, who, should caprice incline, may veil
In clouds and darkness all my starry hopes,
And, scorning the condition of my baseness,
Breed a dire tempest over my hated head.
I must a speedy vengeance execute.

Alb. Thou seem absorbed in anxious thought, Clotilda.

Clot. I have at times a wandering mind, and often
Imagination, with her fairy train,
Leads me to fountains, or enameled meads,
To cull an humble garland of fresh flowers.
Or, on the promontory's h eight, I seem
To wander, at the midnight hour, and catch
The thrilling sounds of the far distant wreck.
The voice of coming war, with sudden burst,
Perhaps then strikes my ear: Anon, I view
The ransacked town, the agonizing band
Of hapless females with dishevelled locks,
Piercing the air with cries; and then, methinks,
I am a queen, and hush their clamorous fears,
Change desperate terror into rapturous joy,
And govern with a prosperous moderation.
When thus my mind's bewildered, I remain
Lively, or sad, or fixed in solemn thought,
As the wild-woven visions interest.

Alb. Much, much I fear that something troubles thee,
For I have oftentimes observed of late,
You Are absent even amidst society;
As though the busy laboring of thy breast,
Taught thee to scorn attentive ceremony.
O, pr'ythee dissipate the lowering gloom
That hangs oppressive on thy pensive spirits,
And deck thy face in smiles and gentleness:
For all should smile beneath Theresa's reign.
[Exit.
CLOTILDA sola. I doubt Alberto's unaspiring nature
May not be roused to deeds of dreadful greatness:
True he is brave, and no mean personal fear
Ever touched his heart, yet will he surely shrink
From treacherous daring, and intrepid crime.
Then let me not unbosom me to him,
But mask the intention from his piercing eyes,
And be myself the bloody executor,
So he in tranquil innocence shall enjoy
The dazzling 'vantage of Supreme command.

Enter ARNALDI. Arn. Not always thus in humble garb arrayed,
I trod with timid step these spacious halls.
But time, that fleets along on restless wing,
Bears human happiness for ever away,
So has it mine. -- Yet will I seek Clotilda,
For once she did not scorn me; hah! it is she,
Alone in deep reflection; the hour suits well. --
Madam! if wretchedness may plead excuse
For this abrupt intrusion, I surely
May be forgiven, for alas! my woes,
Are seldom paralleled. Hither I come
To throw me at your feet, implore your aid
To lift me from a state of groveling sorrow,
And bid returning fortune smile upon me.

Clot. I know thee not, intruder! quit my sight.

Arn. I am Arnaldi, fallen, lost Arnaldi!
Who once enjoyed your tenderness and friendship.

Clot. I do remember, and now greet thee kindly;
Then give thy woes an utterance.

Arn. It is thou
Can turn the youthful mind of fair Theresa
To justice and compassion, tell her, that
There was a time, when splendidly I flourished
In the bright ray of our late sov'reign's favor;
His confidant, and friend; until at length
By treachery undermined, by malice ruined,
Each post of profit, and of high import,
Forced I resigned, and uncondemn'd I bear
The stigma of suspicion. Then I found
My youthful patrimony, near consumed,
Was all that I retained, which scarcely serves
To conquer hunger, and subdue my thirst,
Or throw a rustic covering over my limbs.
O Madam! think how cruel it is to bear
Such sad reverse of fortune; fallen thus
From wealth and power, to lowest poverty.

Clot. [Aside.] This man may suit my purpose; -- true Arnaldi!
I have full often deplored thy fate, and prayed
A pardon for thee, though I prayed in vain.
And when thy house was humbled, and thyself
Thrown unregarded on the scornful world,
I wept the suff'rance I could not prevent:
For thou had always interest in my thoughts.
But say, Arnaldi! have thy silent scorn,
Or open satire, ever provoked Theresa?

Arn. With all humility, and loyal heart,
I looked for justice from her hand, but never
Disclosed the bitter anguish of my soul
By marked disdain, or public murmuring.

Clot. O then it is most mavelous, to see
How she abhors thy name; within her breast,
The apparent seat of mercy and of love,
Dwell rancour and destructive cruelty.
Thou might as easy check the ebbing force
Of foaming Neptune with thy naked breast,
As try to bid her settled hate subside.
I fear, my friend! that greater grief awaits thee,
And not forgiveness.

Arn. O Heavens!

Clot. Yet, yet methinks, there is a road may lead
Thy footsteps to prosperity; but perhaps
Thou with a coward's patience do prefer
To bear thy wrongs, than manfully avenge them.
O can thou, nursed in wealth, and trained to glory,
Accustomed to behold a cringing crowd
Court thy protecting smile, and bend before thee,
Now wander up and down in threadbare sorrow,
This altered town, to meet the cold neglect
Of unobserving greatness, and encounter
The wretch's humor of equality?
Were thy lot mine far other thoughts would rouse
My burning breast, and settled deep revenge
Should be the polar star to guide my course
Through the rough waves of misery and despair.

Arn. Nor is my mind dead to a glorious vengeance,
Did any luring prospect of success,
Or hopes of happier days encourage it.

Clot. That Is nobly said, pursue the heroic thought;
And if thou find but any means to crush
The glittering asp that lurks on Milan's throne,
That midst the fragrant flowers of courtesy
Prepares to wound us all with venomed sting,
I here pronounce thy fortunes shall be raised
To their accustomed splendour, for the deed
Will place the scepter in Alberto's hand,
And I can bend his pliant disposition
To my desires. If I but give the word,
My enemies shall vanish from my sight,
Like earthly mists before the morning blast;
And where I point my favor, shall descend,
A copious shower of all-refreshing bounty.

Arn. Thy words, thus pouring in my heart, are oil,
That makes the latent fire rush forth in blaze:
Give thy commands, and I with promptitude,
And steady resolution, will perform them,
Whatever they may be. Acquainted long
With narrow suff'iance, pains contemptible,
And all the rending littleness of want,
I gaze upon a greatly impious deed,
And thinkit glory: fear alike is fled
With moulder'd wealth, and faded reputation.
Then bid me seek the solitary cave,
Where sleeps the brinded wolf in grim repose,
To drag him forth, and I Will not hesitate;
Or plant a dagger in the lily breast
Of timid innocence, and I Will obey thee.

Clot. We must be speedy in all desperate acts --
Consider wisely, firmly execute. --
Receive this key, it opes a secret door
In the lone wall near St. Antonio's dome;
Thence comes a secret passage to my chamber;
Which thou will traverse, at the silent hour,
When solemn Midnight spreads her dark'ning wings;
And naught his heard, save the fierce felon's tread
Pacing to meet his comrades; O Arnaldi!
Haste to me then, and let thy bosom burn
With dire revenge, and unrelenting rage,
For I shall have an action to propose,
That will require a heart of adamant.

Arn. Doubt me not,
I am not to be shaken; but explain. --

Clot. Are we unnoticed, hangs no listening ear
Attentive on the purport of my words?
Know then, I will prepare a cordial drink
Shall calm for ever Theresa's restless spirit:
The which thy hand shall minister. -- How Is this?
Thy abject eye seems bursting with dismay;
And pallid terror trembles on thy cheek;
Have thou forgot her hatred, and thy wrongs,
Or certain recompense I promised?

Arn. No,
I am wound up to execute; my soul
Recoiled a moment from the dire attempt,
And now returns again with double firmness.
But how shall I gain entrance to her bed?

Clot. She occupies the chamber of her father,
From mine to which there is a hidden way,
The duke's contrivance, only known to me,
Made for convenience of our sportful hours.
So shall thou gain admittance to thy prey,
And from behind the arras steal upon her;
Then either force her drain the oblivious cup,
Or fix a mortal poignard in her heart.
I would myself have done it; but I fear
A momentary weakness of my sex
Might shake my purpose, at the very time
When hesitation would be my destruction:
This faithfully performed, thou shall be raised
To Milan's proudest honors, and thy house
Shall back retort the scorn it has received,
Upon the heads of all thy enemies.

Arn. This night it shall be done; and why should I
Let weak compassion turn me from the deed?
For none can pity me! then let me wade
With daring step through crimes, until I reach
The wish-for port, when, like the fortunate,
I Will damn the humble villain, turn to scorn
The baleful vices of necessity,
And grant no virtue in the man that errs,
Whatever the fatal cause or circumstance.

Clot. Thou have much injury t'inflame thy rage,
And I to urge it, as thou soon shall know;
But leave me now Arnaldi! lest my son
Chance to return, and to behold thee here,
Might raise suspicion to disturb hereafter.
Has no one marked thy entrance?

Arn. O no; disguised in poverty, I passed
With others through the gate, while the stern guard
Disdained to challenge such a wretch as I.
All unobserved I hither bent my course.

Clot. Then hasten to you chamber for a while,
There lie concealed, and I will meet thee soon;
When we will sagely meditate, and prepare,
The necessary prelude to our greatness.
Thence thou may hie thee home the way I mentioned,
And so return at midnight.

Arn. It shall be done.
[Exit.
Clot. So pliant is the virtue of the poor.
The fallen poor, who once have known the sweets
Of better time; not those, whose industry,
Though hardly exercised in humblest toil,
Gives daily bread, and careless independence
It Is well I profit by this wretch's want,
And save myself the horror of the deed.
No longer Milan's scepter shall elude
Alberto's grasp, for on Theresa's death
He is the appointed heir, and must be duke.
O ^ble Night! bring quick the important hour
To ratify the intent; for thou, dread queen!
Although to frequency of crimes inured
Shall view an act of gloomiest dignity.
So when thy rival, fresh Aurora, opes
Her laughing eyes beneath the front of Heaven,
She shall behold Clotilda's power complete.

END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II. SCENE I.
A Bedchamber in the Palace. CLOTILDA sola. A Lamp burning. CLOTILDA. IS it,
alas!
The penalty and sad concomitant of guilt,
That time for ever now must labor on,
With secret workings of unbosom'd pain?
Ah, no! the tyrant conscience soon throws by
His blunted shafts, and reason laughs to scorn
Each servile fear. -- He said it should be done
Ere light appeared, nor is the day yet broke
Nor have the busy race of toil begun
Their early murmurings; Milan's late-throng'd streets
Seem like some lonely cloister's pensive aisles.
Perhaps the attempt has failed, then dark despair
And shame must fall upon me; and my son
Bow the base knee to his own father's daughter,
Because her birth was fanction'd by the priest,
And his unlicens'd. O forbid it pride!
Ambition too prevent it! -- Ha! who is there?

Enter ALBERTO. Alb. O grant me pardon, mother, at this hour! --
What means that star, the look of wild dismay,
This early watchfulness? it is very strange!

Clot. Be not surprised,
For often when the night-flies break my rest,
Or shrill winds whistle, or the cricket cries,
I quit an irksome bed, and to and fro
Traverse my room till daylight, fancy then
Teems with wild thought, and each slight noise alarms me.
But, say, my son! at this unsual hour,
Why do thou seek me? -- for though always joy
Attends thy presence, now it is mixed with wonder.
Would he were gone before Arnaldi comes. [Aside.

Alb. After you left the table, for awhile
Theresa staid, being in a merry mood;
And by her gay discourse, and artless wit,
Won every hearer's love; the old she charmed,
Pointing her mirthful satire at the vain,
The foplings of her court; while they themselves,
For some were present, laughed with willing heart,
To find their foibles drolly singular;
For in her ridicule was no disgrace.
The spacious hall, with echo of her praise
Resounded; when I, with voice prophetic,
Cried, to retort her humor, gentle sister!
Would princely Carlo, were but here to tame thee!

Clot. And can thou thus lavish thy praises forth
On her, who mars thy fortune?

Alb. Attend the sequel, -- scarce had she retired,
When through the palace arch, with rattling hoof,
A swift steed brings the wished for messenger;
For 'twas with news of Carlo that he came.
By this, the prince is near, for day and night
He has pursued his journey, like a lover
Warm and sincere, and worthy of Theresa.
These tidings pleased me so, I would not sleep,
But rather chose with watchful readiness,
To wait the coming of my friend, my brother.

Clot. Thy friend! thy brother!

Alb. My friend he is, for we have fought together!
And will be soon my brother! but, Clotilda!
Excuse my rash intrusion, since you know
The rapturous cause that urged it.

Clot. O! call it not intrusion, for the tidings
Have struck me deeply -- with delight -- but now
I must require thee -- leave me to repose --
That sinking nature claims.

Alb. You do well.
Compose yourself a little, for you're pale,
And something overpow'rs you; when you're better,
Go to Theresa, it is a pleasing task,
And wake the heavenly maid to love and transport.
Meanwhile I Will hasten to prepare a welcome
For noble minded Carlo -- so adieu.
[Exit.
Clot. Thanks to indulgent fortune thou art gone; --
How did thy presence, at this pregnant time
Of busy mischief, shake each secret nerve.
It Is very like, perhaps I Am pale -- O Chance!
This is thy cruel sport, young Carlo comes
Flushed with the mingled, pleasing expectation,
To wed Theresa, and to reign in Milan.
But he shall find her in the arms of Death;
And the proud dukedom fallen to my son
By legal course; for so his father willed,
In case the maiden died. Yet it is unlucky,
For the too prying prince, burning with love,
And stung to fury by his baffled hopes,
May happen to suspect; well let him then,
For I will 'scape suspicion, my hot tears
Shall glide unnumber'd, and my sea-like breast
Shall labor with a tempest of affliction,
'Till half the pity to Theresa due,
Be turned on me her melancholy mourner.
But O! perhaps she lives, Arnaldi's false --
If so, ambition be his curse, for then
My schemes are vain, Alberto's greatness gone. --
Now, now he comes, my fate is on his lips.

Enter ARNALDI, by a private door. Arn. Theresa sleeps for ever!

Clot. It Is well, but tell me all.

Arn. 'Twas three hours after midnight, as thou know,
When with a creeping sacrilegious step
The private stairs I mounted to her chamber.
Just as I passed the opening toward the garden,
Methought her father's spectre threat'ned me,
And as I cautious turned thy traitor key,
The lonely Night-fowl shrieked the note of death;
Then my limbs trembled, and my hair uprose.

Clot. Did thou recoil?

Arn. I paused a moment only, and then entered --
But O! what forceful language can describe
The innocent beauty of the sleeping fair!
Had thou been there, it would have changed thy heart,
And melted thee to mercy.

Clot. Is she not dead then?

Arn. The quivering lamp, as conscious of the deed,
Even strove to hide its light; and the carved cupids
That adorn her bed, seemed to plead for her.

Clot. Did thou refuse?

Arn. No, I determined stood,
Like some relentless tiger of the desert,
To gaze awhile upon my destined prey.

Clot. And when you woke her, was she not in fear?

Arn. Her cheek grew whiter than her throbbing breast,
Her eye looked frantic, and with falt'ring tongue
She cried, what would thou here? I answered,
Peace, listen, and obey, -- accept this cup,
Thy brother's mother sends it. Here she scream'd,
Then with uplifted dagger I pursued;
Shriek not, Theresa -- or within thy heart
This steel shall rankle; since thou needs must die,
Drain the calm cup, and die without a pain.

Clot. And so she drank it?

Arn. After a shower of tears, and many prayers,
To change my stubborn heart,
Finding all hope was vain, she drank it up:
Implored forgiveness on thy head and mine,
Then turned her with a piteous sigh and slept.

Clot. What made thee loiter when the act was over?

Arn. A giddy horror seized my brain, and then
Cold fearful stupor sunk me to the floor:
Where long I lay, if so my absence seem.
When sense renewed the consciousness of crime,
I with a coward's agitated step,
Quitted the murdered lovliness of virtue,
And hither came to tear my villain's hair,
Beat my mean breast, and curse my poverty.

Clot. Thanks to thy manly firmness, bold Arnaldi!
Which let no idle agony disgrace; --
Have thou not heard of Carlo's near arrival?

Arn. Of Carlo's near arrival, say thou? no;
That may promote enquiry, and breed danger.

Clot. To us it cannot, we are sovereign now,
And Justice waits our nod; but yet beware,
Nor ever in discourse appear mysterious;
But mask thy secret thoughts with open brow.
And when at table, or in public talk,
Cold observation whispers forth his doubts,
And Malice prattles of Theresa's death;
Bestow a casual heed, but no remarks;
Like one to whom such great events import not.
Soon as the general wonder shall subside,
And new ideas turn to common thoughts;
When brave Alberto shall be firmly fixed
Upon the throne, thy recompense shall come.

Arn. I trust me to thy bounty and protection,

Clot. Expect thy just reward.

Arn. So fare thee well.
[Exit.
Clot. And thou shall have thy just reward, Arnald^
For to thy guard I will not trust my honor,
Hard-hearted murderer! thou can nothing urge
In poor extenuation of thy deed
But avarice, and base servility;
While I can plead, in the dark acts excuse,
Maternal love, ambition, pride, and hate.
Then shall thy death appease Theresa's shade,
And thus my justice wipe away my crime.
Now will I seek my couch, that when the news
Of young Theresa's death shall shake the palace,
I may be found in seeming calm repose.
CLOTILDA throws herself upon the Bed, and the Scene closes.
SCENE II.
In the Palace. Enter ALBERTO, and a Neapolitan Lord. Alb. Left you his
highness far behind, my lord?

Lord. Another hour will bring him to your gates,
And willingly he speeds, for he admires
The hospitable manners of your town,
Your beauteous ladies, and your valiant youths.
Yet most his spirit languishes to view
Your royal sister, -- her he loves sincere,
And her alone: but eight short months are gone
Since last he left her; yet he often will talk
Of ages past in absence. The gay court
Of Naples found him, on return, no more
The laughter-loving prince, who sported wild
Midst social mirth, and liveliest dissipation,
But sad, and pensive; fond of solitude,
He only chose to seek the cypress grove,
What time unruffled evening's dewy hand
Bedecks in blushing robe her favorite star.

Alb. It Is true he loves,
Often have I seen him dwell with raptured eye
On every varying charm of fair Theresa --
Nor does he need our pity. -- It were well
She knew of his approach, lest joy, perchance,
To meet him unexpected, should appear
Like sorrow, and dissolve in tears.
Who waits there?

Enter Attendant. Alb. Go tell the ladies of her highness' chamber
To give her information, when she wake,
That royal Carlo hastens to her court.

Attend. It shall be so, my Lord.

Alb. O! he is a noble, and a generous youth,
Open of heart, benevolent, and valiant.

Lord. Next to Theresa, most he loves Alberto,
And boasts thy friendship with a manly pride,
Protesting in the circle of this world,
For virtue, honor, spirit, feeling, truth,
There lives not thy superior.

Alb. His praise to merit, and to share his friendship,
Is all I ask, and the chief bliss, I wish him,
The dear possession of Theresa's beauty:
For she is as the counterpart of him,
Lovely and perfect.

Enter LUCINDA. Luc. O direful fate, O miserable hour!
She Is gone, she is gone, dead, dead! [Faints.

Alb. Dead, dead! Ah, who! what do thou mean, Lucinda?
Now she revives, down, down my breaking heart!

Luc. Alas! Alberto, must I tell thee all,
And plant a dagger in thy soul, but O!
My royal mistress, thy beloved sister
Is lost, is gone for ever!

Alb. Theresa dead! speak not the fatal word!
My tender sister, my fond heart's delight!
And must my Carlo thus be welcomed here,
Feel what I feel? there is madness in the thought!
And have I escaped the rage of war for this?

Lord. Too much I prove the anguish of his heart,
To offer comfort; I Will retire, and weep.
[Exit.
Enter CLOTILDA. Clot. Ah me, Alberto! how shall I support
These dreadful tidings? poor Theresa's death,
So unexpected, loads my heart with grief,
And turns my eyes to sluices, whence flows out
A stream of useless pity; O my son!
It Is just we mourn, yet should we reason too,

Enter Attendant. Attend. My Lord, prince Carlo is arrived.
[Exit.
Alb. I cannot, will not see him; let me fly
To some cold cavern, desolate, and drear,
Far from the haunts of men, where hated light
Shall be for ever excluded, far from love,
And social intercourse, and friendship's ties,
Where I may wander like the raging wolf,
Howling my midnight sorrows all alone.
Madam you seem to bear this matter coolly,
And reason down your feelings, you may therefore
Receive ill-fated Carlo, and unfold
The horrible despair, while I escape
The dreadful shock to see a suffering friend,
Without a power to help him.
[Exit.
Clot. Gentle Lucinda! suffer not your grief
To overpower you thus, be more composed;
My bosom struggles with a cruel load,
Heavy as thine, yet will I not despair;
Despair is impious, it is to call in doubt
The eternal justice of the Lord of all.

Luc. 'Twas sad to see how tranquilly she lay,
Her features settled, not her visage changed,
As though exulting innocence had chose
To make death lovely. -- O! my heart will break!
[Exit.
Clot. Now for another blustering scene with Carlo,
Of rending hair and beating breast, and rage,
And all is over. Yet it is well I Have ordered
Theresa's body to be laid in peace,
Midst the cold relicts of her ancestors.
Exit.
SCENE III.
A Chamber in the Palace. ALBERTO solus. I must believe it so, for I have marked
Her gaze with envious eye on my poor sister,
Who never knew suspicion, or design.
Thou fain would make me Duke, base, base Clotilda!
Little thou knew'st my heart, if thou could think
That it was fashioned so, first to approve,
And then to profit by the desperate act.
But from the secret longings of thy soul,
Thou did conceive of me. Beetle-ey'd ambition,
With headlong fury, winds his eager flight
Against each abhorred crime. O mother, mother!
And must I still confess myself thy son!
Had I not all the vainest could desire,
Wealth, power, and honor, dignity, respect?
Placed in the palace, I did more than reign,
Through the bright medium of Theresa's virtue.
Nay, even thou were treated like a sovereign.
Yet, if you are innocent, I suspect thee vilely!
Ah no! it is true beyond the hope of error,
Else why that haggard cheek, that downcast eye
With which I found thee at the very time
My hapless sister perished? O Clotilda!
Thou had much reason then to look confused;
Well might thou shake, for then the gentle maid
Perhaps was struggling with the damned design;
Or on her knees, in unavailing tears,
Striving to melt her butcher. Heavenly powers!
I Will see her lovely body as it lies,
The senseless prey of all-devouring death,
And should my tears permit me, will observe
If she have suffered aught of violence.
How did the thought escape me! Ho, who is there?

Enter Servant. Alb. Haste, lead me to the melancholy chamber
Where lie Theresa's sad remains.

Serve. My lord! even now with decent privacy,
To the sepulchral vault of Milan's house,
The corse was borne by order of Clotilda,
Who said some future day should be appointed
For public rites, religious ceremony,
And the due requiem of her parted soul.

Alb. It Is enough! away.
[Exit Servant. That shall not screen thee, madam! yet indeed
'Twas wondrous expeditous -- but I Will think on it.

Enter CLOTILDA. Clot. My son, Alberto!
Rouse from thy lethargy of grief, nor let
Thy private cares 'ercome all public spirit.
Know that the senate wait in reverence due
Thy royal presence to proclaim thee Duke.

Alb. How fares prince Carlo, madam?

Clot. Alas! unequal to the sudden shock, --
His reason left him, at the very time
He had most need of all his fortitude.
Strangely he raved with incoherent speech,
And frantic gesture; while the noble lords
Of his illustrious train, with soothing sorrow,
Conveyed him to his chamber; where they strive
To calm and comfort him -- though much I fear,
They long may strive in vain.

Alb. Ill-fated Carlo!
Thy suff'rance throws fresh misery on my heart,
That was o'ercharg'd before. Clotilda! Madam!

Clot. My son!

Alb. Observe me well, meet with a steady look
My searching eye; nay, nay, thou do not tremble,
Yet art thou pale; -- do not turn pale, lest I
Should think thee guilty of some horrid crime.

Clot. What do thou mean, Alberto?

Alb. Some crime so dark, so cruel, and so base,
That it must take from Heaven the right of mercy,
And doom the agent to eternal pain,
At thought of which, my opening pores distill
A deadly dew, and every sensible nerve
Thrills with a strange vibration.

Clot. Surely thy reason wavers also!

Alb. Mark my words,
Much do I pity those, who killed Theresa
But more abhor them -- let not that alarm thee.
Thou art an innocent woman, and my mother,
And thou would wish to see thy son advanced,
Thyself in power; but there perhaps thou wilt fail.
While all thy high-built, guilty expectations,
Shall quit thee ere the hour of consummation.

Clot. Will thou not deign, proud youth, to rule in Milan?

Alb. Since you are so eager, madam! in this business,
Haste to the senate make my pleasure known,
If it befit thy sex, and thy condition!
That, being troubled with a froward mind,
And little able to direct the state,
I am beside less willing -- I refuse,
Without the shadow of hypocrisy,
All proffered honors, titles, dignities --

Clot. This grief effeminate, these groveling thoughts
But ill become --

Alb. Now, by my soul, though Milan were the world,
I would not be seduced to mount the throne.
What, shall I view my sister torn away
By ruffian violence, and shall I profit
Of the black deed? -- no, hear my last resolve,
Not all the charms of fortune, or of power,
The entreating clamours of the populace,
Nor yet my boasted right, nor more, my duty,
Shall ever induce me to be sovereign here.
I am a bastard of but little worth,
Yet much I fear me, worthier than my mother,
And therefore will not bring my faults to light
Amid the dazzling splendour of a throne.
Nor shall thy gentle shade, Theresa! see
Alberto rise to greatness by thy murder!

Clot. [kneeling.] O let me thus implore thee on my knees
To act more nobly; look on her who bore thee,
And change thy --

Alb. Kneel not to me, but go and kneel to Heaven,
And do it with contrition; to obtain
Mercy, and pardon; but for me I Am fixed --
Yet, ere we part; -- Theresa's sepulture,
By thy command, so hasty and unhonour'd,
Occasions wonder; -- think upon my words.
[Exit.
Clot. Go, vent thy malice on the embattled plain,
Or bid thy soldiers shake. I heed thee not.
Yet do thou scorn the dukedom, base Alberto!
Have I then loaded thus my soul with sin
To lift thee into greatness, but in vain?
And torn the scepter from Theresa's hand,
To cast it to the people? who, beside,
Will quickly work my downfall, for they hate me,
And hitherto have paid me cold respect,
Unwillingly, because I dwelt in favor.
But since my hopes are ruined by my son,
Through mere caprice of over-acted honor,
My bright day's star is set, and I must fall.
For ever then I tear him from my love,
And here devote him to severest vengeance;
Consoling vengeance! thee I invocate,
Wrapped in terrific mystery, and rage,
To sooth me with thy horror-breathing smile;
I am thy vot'ry now, be thou my guide!

END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III. SCENE I.
Another Chamber in the Palace. CARLO, ANTONIO. CARLO. I WILL not wrong him,
for I know my friend,
And that he would not act the traitor's part,
Though every kingdom should unite its crown
To diadem his head. Is he not brave?
And say did ever selfish meanness dwell
In the rich circle of a brave man's heart?
Then we will join in sorrows to discover
The loathed author of our mutual woe;
The wretch who tore Theresa from my arms,
And stole the loveliest jewel of the world

Ant. It Is wisely judged, never could Alberto stoop
To work a deed so foul.

Enter CLOTILDA. Clot. O let me claim thy private ear awhile,
Illustrious prince! for I have that to say
Requires a solemn, and severe attention.
Far better suited to my fearful tale,
Were charnels dismal, and the noon of night,
Than this still-lingering cheerfulness of day.
For it is not crude suspicion bids me speak,
But clear and awful confirmation shakes
My agonizing breast; whereof the purport
I would disclose to thee alone.

Car. My lord! be pleased to leave us.
[Exit ANTONIO.
Clot. How strong the mother working at my heart,
Combats with justice! O, ye spirits impure!
Who hover over this earth, whose business is
To numb the feelings of the assassin's soul,
Dry up each pity-flowing tear, and change
Meek nature's tenderness to cruelty.
O breathe a portion of your fury here,
That this parental weakness may not check
My duty to my country, and mankind!

Car. what means Clotilda?

Clot. I scarcely know myself, for in my mind
Confusion reigns, and unavailing grief.
Detested murder! to the common eye
That seem most shocking, how do thou appear
Viewed through the anguish of a mother's love!

Car. Alas! thy words strike terror to my soul.

Clot. Ah me! it is I who caused Theresa's death,
By hearing such a monster; so 'twere just,
I should receive the bursting punishment
Due to his crimes.

Car. Quick, quick, Clotilda! free my laboring breast
Of this severe suspense.

Clot. In yon blue vault, methinks Theresa sits,
Calmly resplendent, as the full orb'd moon,
When rising from the watery waste, she throws
Her lustrous pearls upon the tossing waves.
Yet sadness hangs upon the maiden's brow,
To mark the torments of her brother's guilt,
And base ambition's triumph over virtue.
Perchance, she raises now some hallowed hymn,
'Midst glowing seraphim, and cherub pure,
TO implore the mercy of all pitying Heaven
Upon her murderer.

Car. O speak thy thoughts, lest cruel expectation
Break my sad heart before I know the worst.

Clot. I must not, will not screen him, though he is
Dearer to me than life, or life's best joys.
Nor will I see his bloody hands defile
The crown of Milan -- it is Theresa's voice,
From the chill sepulcher, that eries for justice,
And I Will obey the call of her, and truth.
Know then, most royal Carlo yesternight,
When my loved sovereign took her slight to Heaven,
As chance I lay a stranger to repose,
I heard a shrill shriek issue from the chamber
Where slept the royal maid. I started up,
And opening cautiously my door, beheld
Alberto quit her room, with silent tread;
And as he passed me by, he inly muttered,
"The deed is done, my hopes are ratified!"

Car. Why did thou not inform me so before
At our first interview; for had I known it
One hour ago, ere this he would been in hell.

Clot. Think on the struggles of a parent's weakness
That could not suddenly devote her child
To sure destruction, and dark infamy.
And now I do repent of what I Have done,
For desperate anger frowns upon thy brow,
And evil will betide him. Do not, Carlo!
Snatch my poor son from penitence, and prayer,
For he has need of utmost length of days.
To mourn his crimes, and make his peace above.
I must retire -- but O be merciful!
[Exit.
Car. And could ambition thus defile thy soul,
Once brave Alberto! could the tinsel train
Of servile courtiers, or the bauble crown,
Allure thy spirit to so damned a deed?
O man! how weak is all thy boasted virtue!
When strong temptation urges thee to wrong;
Nay, since my once-lov'd friend is sunk thus low,
I of myself am void of confidence.
Yet here I tear all friendship from my breast,
And pledge myself to vindicate the wrongs
Of loved Theresa -- yes, my sword shall pierce
The unrelenting traitor's coward heart.

Enter ALBERTO. Alb. My noble friend! it is to thee I come
To ease my throbbing breast, and share thy woes?
So shall soft sympathy, perhaps, beguile
The grief that knows no cure; how, how is this?
Methinks with vengeful brow, and fierce disdain.
Thou look reproaches on me. Righteous Heaven!
I recollect me now, his brain's disturbed. [Aside.
O call me to thy mind, illustrious Carlo!
I am Alberto, who has fought beside thee.

Car. Do not, Alberto! calm thy guilty fears
With supposition that my reason errs;
It en'd alone' when I conceived thee just,
Friendly and honorable; but it knows thee now.
A soul-contracted hypocrite, and a villain.

Alb. Alas! poor youth, he thinks not what he says,
Lost in a labyrinth of mingled woe.
Subdue thy rage, my best-beloved Carlo!
Nor wound my ears with such afflictive sounds
Of vile upbraidings, and discordant frenzy.

Car. Attend my words -- when first my soul received.
The dreadful tidings of Theresa's death;
As right I deemed, by treachery procured;
Convulsive nature owned a sudden weakness;
And sunk beneath a momentary madness;
But now I know myself; thee too I know,
I know thee for a low ambitious coward,
False to thy friend, thy country, and thy sister,
A traitor every way, and more, a murderer.

Alb. No further tempt my moderation, Carlo!
Nor cast such false indignities upon me:
Lest I forgetful of all tender ties,
Should scorn the social bonds of host and friend,
And punish thee for such unjust suspicion.
I am no traitor, and no coward I.

Car. Say, was it noble, generous and brave,
To steal at midnight, with a ruffian's step,
And bathe thy hangman's hands in innocent blood?
Was it a brother's love, a soldier's pride,
That urged the deed? 'twas damnable ambition;
Which bade thy shameless spirit wish to reign.
Go, reign a slave, and be thy state thy curse.
But first I dare thee draw thy tarnish'd sword
In vile support of crime, while I will come
Armed with the fury of despairing love,
And rage of injured friendship to the combat.

Alb. Then be it so, I shall not wish to fail thee.

Car. Name thou some hour and place of solitude,
Sacred to gloomy death, and grim revenge,
Fit for the solemn conflict; there to prove
If infamy, or justice, shall prevail.
I once did love thee well, that time is over,
And now I call thee forth with deadly hate;
For be assured, or thou, or I must fall.
Then if to me the victory belong,
Theresa from her blessed abode shall smile.

Alb. It Is like she may; and let me add, I praise
Thy val'rous bearing as a soldier should.
Nor will I shrink through consciousness of crime,
Or dread of all thy haughty menaces. --
Near to the ivy-crowned mausoleum
Of Milan's royal race, where wither now
The beauties of Theresa, is a spot
That suits our purpose well; I Will there confront thee,
It Is just without the gates, and soon as ever
The sickly moon shall raise her blunted horns
Above the horizon, and around be heard
The far wolf's famished howlings, that awake
The flitting screach-owl's melancholy cry,
There shall thy wished for triumph be complete.

Car. Nor shall it wait me long, for even now,
Over the still landscape beams the crystal orb,
Whose funeral lamp, shall light thee to thy grave.
I go to meet thee, so till then, adieu.
[Exeunt
SCENE II.
Moonlight. The Mausoleum of the Dukes of Milan. Enter CLOTILDA. Clot. O how
congenial to my gloomy soul
Are these dumb horrors! hide thy lucid face,
Thou melancholy moon! for sure thou throw'st
With too much luxury, thy glittering beams,
TO adorn this mouldering mansion of the dead. --
O rather rise, ye rending hurricanes!
Loaded with lamentation, and despair,
And sooth my ear with desolating song.
Such is the music I require to breathe
In solemn unison with my dark designs;
And ye unconscious relicts! that repose
In silent satire of magnificence,
That free from human cares, and wild desires,
Own the relentless tyrant's putrid sway,
All hail! I come to rouse your dull abode
With busy crime! And thou, Theresa's shade!
Let me appease thee now, for here I wait
To slay the base destroyer, and to place
Thy murdered murderer beside thy corse,
Methinks the victim lingers! haste, Arnaldi!
Receive thy recompense, for lo! the end
[Puts her Hand upon a Dagger. Of all thy expectations meets thee here.
Yonder he comes, I hear his eager step --
O let me steel my bosom to its purpose!

Enter ARNALDI. Arn. Obedient to thy wish, behold me here;
But tell me why thou did appoint a time
When all the virtuous court the arms of sleep,
And mischief wanders forth? why this drear scene,
Where silence watches the remains of death?
It is most strange. Alas! my mind forebodes
Some over-hanging evil: Speak, Clotilda!

Clot. Hear then, Theresa in this tomb reposes;
A few hours past interred; for so I ordered;
Lest by delay might be incurred some danger. --
Now, in the hurry of the time, with her
The richest diamond of the state was buried;
Which sparkled on her finger; that to obtain,
I prayed thy presence here; afraid to explore
Alone, the darksome vault of grisly Death.
Then guide my steps, Arnaldi! and protect me
From apprehension of creative terror;
So shall the jewel in reward be thine.
Here, take the key, and wrench the iron bolt.
That holds in bondage vile the race of Milan.

Arn. It Is well that I, the minister of death,
Should from the dead receive my just reward.
Thou dreary chamber! open thy hungry jaw,
[He unlocks the (...) And let the living enter; -- Ha! see there,
Yon glimmering lamp a paly luster sheds
On cold Theresa's cheek; outstretch'd she lies
In deep repose I gave; -- within my breast,
Ten thousand horrors dwell, and sad remorse
Sits throned a tyrant -- mark, in awful range,
The sovereign house of far-renowned Milan.
Lie side by side in social nothingness.
And, lo! Theresa! still she seems to reign
Over the dull kingdom of relentless death;
Herself the bridal partner of his sway.
I cannot enter, for my trembling knees
Forget their office, and unusual dread
Hangs on my spirits -- forward brave Clotilda!
And tear the glowing jewel from her hand,
While I await thee here.

Clot. Do thou, inured to crimes of blackest dye,
Schooled in villainy, and lost to shame,
Presume to shudder now, and hesitate,
Like a young maiden, over her lover's grave?
Come on then, boldly -- when I lead the way,
Thou sure may follow. Hark! I hear the steps
Of some approaching, let us quick retire
From curious observation.
[They go into the Mausoleum and shut the (...)
Enter ALBERTO and CARLO. Alb. This is the sepulcher where sleeps Theresa,
And her illustrious ancestors; and here,
If chance thy arm should vindicate her wrongs,
I too shall rest. --

Car. Draw, draw thy sword, nor work upon my friendship,
But be the noble youth my love once spoke thee,
Ere thou had lost thyself, and killed Theresa.

Alb. I scorn to talk of innocence to thee,
Since that thou know me not; yet much I mourn
The deep regret, and anguish thou prepar'st thee.

Car. War not with words, Alberto! I despise
Such mean, unmanly murm'rings; draw thy sword, --
Theresa's injuries rising to my thought,
Inflame my rage, and shall direct my blade
To the cursed bosom of her base destroyer.
[They fight, ALBERTO throws himself upon the Sword of CARLO, and falls.
Alb. Thanks to thy sword, my Carlo! it is done,
And I no longer shall offend thy fight,
Nor suffer thy upbraidings; -- yet it is strange,
In youth's gay prime to close the languid eye
Upon the splendid picture of the world,
And break each fond attachment: but, farewell!
The various interests of active life,
The social intercourse of friendly men,
And glory's luring charms, all, all farewell!
I now must be a banquet for the worm.

Car. Why did thou throw thee on my sword
Without a contest? did thou wish to die,
And spare thy once loved friend? But O! forgive
The vengeful stroke, that robs thee of thy life.
And leaves me to despair; so gracious Heaven
May pardon thee the murder of Theresa.
Yet while thou can, confess the fatal deed
For which I pierced thy bosom, so shall I
Better compose my mind, -- thou die the better.

Alb. Suppose me guilty, Carlo! of the act
For which I die, lest grief and sad remorse,
Prey on thy youthful days: I love thee well,
And wish thee happy, and may Heaven bestow
Mercy on me, as freely I forgive thee.
Thou'st acted nobly, Carlo! as became thee!
And if thou ever should think that thou have en'd
Remember, error is the lot of man.
I bleed apace, and visionary forms
Crowd over my senses, -- I must pause awhile.

Car Spare me, ye minist'ring powers
Of Heaven's high vengeance! rather, rather crush me --
He Is innocent! O mark his dying brow,
Free from all symptom of disturbing guilt;
Yes, he is innocent, and I myself
Am the dark-minded, monster, and the murderer.
[A shriek is heard in the Mausoleum, which opens, and CLOTILDA is seen ^ing
from THERESA, who advances in her sepulchral robe. CARLO starts, and ALBERTO
raises himself in amazement.
Colt. O glare not on me thus, thine eye's reproach
Is worse than hell -- I cannot bear thy sight.
Though torments wait me at the hour of death,
Yet, while I live, thou have no power to punish.

There. Where am I! do I live! what means this scene
Of desolation, sepulchers, and death?
There Is one does bleed near the cold couch I left,
And here is another.

Car. It is herself! it is the beauteous maid
Who lives and speaks! O welcome from the tomb
To thy own Carlo's arms, who hither comes
To screen thee ever from a brother's rage.

There. My thoughts return, though wavering reason hangs
In wild uncertainty on all I see,
And all I hear, -- but, thus let me enfold
The youth I love -- yet 'twas no brother's rage
That drove me to the tomb; it was Clotilda
Sent the dull cup Arnaldi's hand presented,
And which I drank in part, but poured aside
The remnant unobserved: since then I Have slept.

Car. Now malice you are content -- my sum of ill
Cannot be greater, nor my punishment
Exceed my just deserving -- O Alberto!

Clot. A curse attend thy parted soul, Arnaldi!
For inattention; all had been secure
If she had drank the calming bev'rage up.
But I have had my premature revenge;
Yonder Arnaldi lies; 'twas I that killed him.
Why did I come to open thy prison gates,
Abhorred Theresa? else thou would surely perished
Ye furies fierce, who bathe your snaky locks
In liquid flame! Clotilda is your own.

There. O! do not rave thus bitterly!
I will forgive thee all; nor shall revenge
Tempt aught against thy life or thy repose.

Clot. Curse on thy mimic moderation,
Thy shallow virtues and offensive goodness.
I hate thy clemency, thy pardon scorn,
And fly from such humanity to hell.
[Stabs herself and (...) What have we here? Alberto slain! it is he!
[^eing Alberto. This must be Carlo's deed -- I triumph now.
Gentle Theresa! view this bleeding youth,
Who loved thee tenderly; I die revenged. Oh!
[Dies
There. What say thou, does my dear Alberto die?

Car. Inhuman fiend! 'twas thou did point my sword
[Carlo to Clotilda. Against his life; yet stay, O stay my friend!
[To Alberto. And I will wash thy wound with my heart's blood.
Wretch that I was to give implicit faith
To such apparent, shallow artifice.
Is there no fiery bolt of righteous Heaven
To end my woes, and save me from distraction?

There. Did Carlo wound thy generous breast, Alberto!
[Kneeling. Then must each hope of future happiness
Fade in the blossom. Therefore will I seek
Some holy monastery's lone retreat,
And pour at early dawn the fervent hymn
For thy dear soul's repose -- and all night long
Will I solicit mercy for my Carlo!
Yet, yet thine eye has luster, thou have breath,
Could thou but live, this were a world of joy!

Alb. The hand of death weighs ponderous at my heart,
And life's vain dream is over; yet, ere I go,
O hear me and assent. Theresa, Carlo!
I pray you check your tears, and promise me,
That you will wed -- It Is true, indeed, my friend!
Thou gav'st the stroke, but it was I that sought it.
Thou, like an honorable prince, desy'dst me,
TO avenge the imagined murder; I too proud
To pause, explain, or lead thee from thy error,
Treated accommodation with disdain,
But rushed upon thy sword to prove my truth.
O! then, Theresa! here accept thy husband,
If that thou would my spirit should have peace.

Car. It is too much!

There. I will accept him at thy hand, Alberto!
And cherish love amidst eternal sorrow.

Alb. And will thou! Carlo! will thou take this maid?

Car. Yes; I receive this offered excellence
With gratitude and mingled admiration
Of more than human greatness. O! Theresa!
Here let me hold thee, till my life shall end,
With sad contrition for my past offense. --
Tumultuous grief returns, I scarce can utter.
Once more thy pardon, noble-minded friend.

Alb. Name it not, Carlo! for no dark resentment
Glooms my calm breast; it was a deed of chance,
And mutual hastiness. My blessing on you --
Long may you reign in peace, and each new day
Greet you with happiness! But, for Clotilda, O
Pity! nay more, forgive her, Royal Pair!
Implore Heaven's mercy on her guilty soul,
And strive by frequent prayer to melt its justice, --
It Is all I ask -- nor is it pain to die.
[Dies.
STANZAS ON FRIENDSHIP.
O, FRIENDSHIP! source of every good!
How seldom art thou understood;
How often for interest, or for fame,
We prostitute thy sacred name.
It Is not Ambition's pageant hour,
The proud parade of empty power;
It Is not the Monarch's sceptered hand,
Thy faithful service can command;
The heartfelt joy, the social sigh,
No power can force, no wealth can buy,
Nor pride, nor avarice ever can know,
Exalted Frindship's fervent glow.
When haughty great-ones condescend,
To patronize the humble friend,
Who every feeling must resign --
The servile contract is not thine.
When venal age, in hopes of gain,
Would bind the mercenary chain;
Each generous purpose there unknown
The sordid motive thou wilt disown.
Nor pleased with Youth's unawed career,
Amid the gust of transient cheer;
Where Folly forms the short-lived tie,
Will thou the slender cord supply.
Averse to Guile, though gilded over,
Thou shun'st the midnight loud uproar;
And seeking Virtue's peaceful cell,
With calm content delight'st to dwell.
Yet, should asslicted worth entreat,
Thou Wilt fearless quit thy tranquil seat,
To pierce the dungeon's dreary gloom,
Or mourn at midnight round the tomb.
In life's unwelcome, cheerless hour,
When all around misfortunes lour;
Thou Wilt seek the Wanderer in distress,
And sharing sorrows, make them less.
When affluence crowns successful toil,
And Fate propitious wears a smile;
Thy influence aids the sweet employ,
And gives a zest to every joy:
For what are all delights below,
Which fortune, Honors, Fame bestow;
Unless with these we strive to blend
The social solace of a friend?
The flow of youth, the charms of Love,
But momentary transports prove;
Friendship alone secures Content,
More placid, but more permanent.
ARLEY.

VERSES TO A YOUNG LADY AT BATH,
In whose Pocketbook the AUTHOR had, at a very early Period of Life, written
some Lines.
IN earlier years, when Anna's face,
Could only boast an infant grace;
When artless tresses decked her brow,
In many a wild untutored row;
Ere yet upon her baby cheek,
The conscious blush had learned to speak;
In that calm, unsuspicious day,
The Muse attun'd her willing lay;
And sung of Anna's ripening charms,
When Anna could feel no alarms;
That tranquil hour, unknown to Fear,
When I might say, and she might hear. --
The Hint transpir'd -- and swift as thought,
The favored Pocketbook was brought,
While kind advice, and caution sage,
Stood pencil'd over the virgin page;
Her little hands received the toy,
And her young heart proclaimed her joy.
Will Anna now, maturer grown,
The sweets of infant years disown?
And will she now unkind despise
The song that once she deigned to prize?
No -- Anna's heart shall still approve
The song that once she deigned to love:
Still shall the Muse her steps attend --
Still will she prize her early friend.
And now, in Beauty's lovliest bloom,
Though circled in the splendid room --
While rival fops around her wait,
With false applause, and senseless prate;
And while the vaunts of self they hold --
And while the unmeaning tale is told;
Anna shall wish the folly over,
Shall fly to Memory's valued store;
There foundly trace her childish age,
And call to mind the virgin page.
ARLEY.

THE COMPLAINT.
TO LORD *****.
AND does my friend with kindly ray,
My humble verse regard?
And does he prize the artless lay,
And does he prize the Bard?
The Bard, who often in Pleasure's bower,
Has turned his early song;
When Love led on the sportive hour,
And fired the youthful throng?
And shall he now, in Reason's reign,
The well-known theme forego?
And shall he not resume the strain;
And must it cease to flow?
Ah me! the scenes of fond delight,
That wont to charm, are over;
And now no more the Muse invite,
And wake the lyre no more:
For hard Suspicion's angered eye,
Deems all it sees unjust;
And jaundic'd Envy, lowering by,
Supports the foul mistrust.
Even She, whose breast with kindness glows,
That kindness does suspend;
She too the shaft of censure throws,
And points it at her friend;
That shaft, which hurled in open air,
When proud defiance calls,
With manly fortitude we bear,
Regardless where it falls;
That shaft, which veiled in friendship's band,
Inflicts severer smart,
Flies doubly fierce from friendship's hand,
And deeper stabs the heart.
And yet forbid, my plaintive song,
Should seem too prompt to blame;
For slander's sting has found me long,
And long has pierced my fame:
And many an idle tale has run,
And much has been believed,
Of broken vows, and maids undone,
Abandoned, and deceived.
Peace to all such -- yet here I swear,
And thou wilt the warmth excuse,
The garb which knaves and villains wear,
Through life I Have scorned to use:
Though Love, with all its soft pursuits,
Has claimed my yielding hours;
Though often I Have culled its fairest fruits,
And plucked its choicest flowers --
Those flowers, those fruits, were nobly won,
Not fraudulently stole,
Love taught me how the race to run,
But Truth secured the goal.
Then deem not hard, that now the Muse
Laments her favorite strain:
That thus she ventures to accuse;
Accusing, to complain:
For much she joy'd, the nymphs among,
To waste the frolic day;
To form for them the grateful song,
And carol time away.
But now no more the heaving sigh,
Shall force the tear to start;
But now no more the glist'ning eye,
Shall speak the softened heart:
The tender scenes of earlier years,
To harsher views shall yield;
And Pride, her pageant scepter rears,
And Avarice takes the field: --
These shall the sterner mind possess,
To no past maxims true;
Cold to them all, my Lord, unless
To Friendship, and to you.
ARLEY.

ODE To ****.
PRAISE to the men who boldly dare,
Their undissembled thoughts declare;
Who speak the sentiments they feel,
And loud proclaim the crimes they might conceal.
Who nobly zealous daily try,
To pluck the mask from villainy;
By neither threat nor promise swayed,
By power unawed, by danger undismayed --
Who Justice's sacred sword unsheath,
To guard fair Freedom's valued wreath;
Yet careful shun the deed which draws,
The unwelcome shout of popular applause.
Who, blessed with talents to persuade,
Exert them for their Country's aid;
By virtue, not ambition fired,
For worth beloved, not pageantry admired --
It Is theirs with kind and bounteous hand,
To scatter plenty over the land;
To bid distress and sorrow smile,
And crown with due reward the Artist's toil:
It Is theirs to ease the Widow's fears,
To wipe the friendless Orphan's tears;
Redress the wrongs the weak endure,
Punish the guilty, and protect the poor.
Theirs is the noblest boon below,
The purest bliss the mind can know!
That tranquil undisturbed serene,
Resulting from the conscious peace within.
For them each grateful voice shall ring,
For them each Muse her tribute bring;
And in the hour which levels all,
Death with complacence shall await their call.
ARLEY.

PRAYER TO VENUS.
KIND Venus, hear thy suppliant's prayer,
Hear, and indulgent grant;
For love I ask -- you well may spare
The little I shall want.
No storms of passion I desire,
No boundless transports claim,
Give me that gentle doubtful fire,
Which feeds a sportive flame.
For oh! I Have known the soft delights,
That warm the breast sincere;
The anxious days and sleepless nights
That nurse the tender fear.
Have shared the fond endearing kiss,
Which mutual ardour fires,
And tasted often that genuine bliss,
Which mutual truth inspires.
I Have felt the fierce extreme of love,
Which utterance would destroy;
When speechless raptures silent prove,
The soul's sublimest joy.
But then its bitterest pangs I Have borne,
Deprest with tenfold care;
And many an hour with anguish torn,
Sat brooding over Despair.
Whelmed with such violence of woe,
Would melt a heart of steel,
Which only those who love can know,
Who lose can only feel.
Hence, let me calmly view the sex,
Contented to enjoy
That bliss, which absence cannot vex,
Or Perfidy destroy:
O Venus! let me favor win,
Secure from Cupid's dart,
Still let it gently pierce my skin,
But never probe my heart!
ARLEY.

COMPLIMENTARY VERSES.
Some years ago, at the house of a deceased Nobleman, several complimentary
Verses to the brilliancy of the Hon. Mrs. N -- H's Eyes were written; --
amongst the rest the following:

GIVE me to see that spark of heavenly fire,
At which all tremble -- but which all admire:
That gentle gleam, which in Contentment's hour,
Cheers every vale and brightens every bower.
That ray terrific -- which when anger glooms,
Darts dreadful flame, and as it darts, consumes;
Strong blaze of light -- which fires wherever it falls,
Exalts, dejects, revivifies, appalls;
Show me that power which thus with Fate can vie,
Turn, and behold it lives in -- LAURA's eye!
ARLEY.

STANZAS
Written on the Children of Lady CRAVEN, performing a PLAY, before her at
Queensbury House some years ago.
NYMPHS and Shepherds hither haste,
Here the purest joys we taste;
Reason guides our rustic play,
Tunes the pipe and forms the lay.
Lovely MIRA is our queen,
Guardian of the silvan scene;
Nature's charming handmaid, she
Thus proclaims her soft decree:
Come ye little smiling train,
Cheer with sports my happy plain;
Come, while yet the infant year,
Proves both smile and sport sincere.
Blooming in the morn of life,
Strangers yet to care and strife;
Free from art, and free from blame,
You can paint me as I am.
What though on your baby brows,
Marked expression faintly glows;
Artless look, and native strain,
All my feelings best explain.
Soon shall Time, with iron sway,
Harden youths' maturer day;
Then no longer taught by me,
You Will scorn my sweet simplicity.
ARLEY.

THE RETROSPECT.
AMID the scenes of noise and strife,
That sadly sorrow human life
And cause continual woes;
What soft sensation sooths my breast,
Bids every jarring passion rest,
And transient bliss bestows.
It Is faithful Memory's friendly hand,
That waves her all-enlivening wand,
And brings to fancy's view;
What time when winged with gay delight,
Each thoughtless day and easy night,
On pleasure's pinions flew.
Wafts me to S -- 's fertile plains,
Where, first I sung my infant strains,
A rude, unpolished boy;
Where, fraught with innocence and Truth,
The lively sports of early youth,
Produced a guiltless joy.
There, pleased I trace the flowery mead,
And round the well-known elm-trees tread,
Where often I Have careless played;
And sure my choicest days were spent,
Cheered with the smiles of glad Content,
Beneath their peaceful shade.
The distant view of N -- 's hills,
My breast with exultation fills,
Long time the bounded walk;
There often I Have shared the sweet regale,
Partook the allotted cakes and ale,
And held the sprightly talk.
The church, the yard, the neighboring yew,
All join to warm my heart anew,
And pastimes past recall;
'Twas here I lashed the murmuring top,
Here drove the tile with eager hop,
There struck the bounding ball.
Nor shall fair Learning's sacred spot,
Be by the grateful Muse forgot,
Or heedless left unsung;
Where dawning Reason first began
The deeds of ancient dead to scan,
And urge th'enquiring tongue.
Where, studious still maturing age,
Explored the long instructive page,
And emulous of fame,
Consuming often the evening oil,
Enjoyed a pleasing-painful toil
To raise a future name.
Hail, happy state of infant years!
There lovely Peace her temple rears,
And smiling stands confessed:
There Virtue holds her cheerful court,
And youthful, gay desires resort
To charm the tranquil breast.
No lawless passions Wound the mind,
There pleasures leave no sting behind,
Sad source of other's care;
Nor fell Remorse, nor envious ire,
Nor black Revenge, with purpose dire,
Occasion dark despair.
Their's is the rosy bloom of health,
The boundless transport snatched by stealth,
The heart devoid of guile;
What riper manhood seldom knows,
The peaceful undisturbed repose,
And undissembled smile.
Regardless of tomorrow's doom,
They feel no dread of ills to come,
Nor Pleasure's feast forego;
The playful day their great relief,
The task unlearned their only grief.
The rod their only foe.
Ah, ever to be envied hours!
When no sad thought of future fours --
No distant fears annoy;
No past reflections intervene
To pain the bosom's calm serene,
Or damp the present joy.
Affliction's load they seldom bear,
It Is theirs to shed the short-lived tear
For sorrows soon forgot;
The sweets that from Contentment flow,
That health and peace of mind bestow,
Complete their happy lot.
ARLEY.

STANZAS TO ILL NATURE.
FIEND abhorred! Mankind's worst foe! --
Hence, thy darksome crew among --
Haste, -- and with thy jaundic'd brow,
Fly the Muse's vengeful song!
Often the hapless Muse has borne
Deep within the wounded heart,
Fell Detraction's venomed thorn,
Pointed by thy treacherous art.
Born of Envy, nursed by Spleen,
Reared in Passion's blighting storm:
Sorrow, anguish, care, chagrin,
Mark thy hideous hateful form.
Fraud and falsehood swell thy train,
Discord is thy sole employ,
Baffled malice, all thy pain,
Sated rancour, all thy joy.
Does the Muse with sportive power,
Strive the gloom of life to cheer,
Thou Wilt arraign the harmless hour,
Stifle peace, and nurture fear.
Does the flow of joy, or ease,
Some endearing scenes supply;
Every little wish to please
Rouses thy malignity!
Humble genius, slender grace,
Small desert may wait the Muse,
Yet, if any spark we trace,
Thy severest hate ensues.
Blackened by thy foul report,
Mirth is mischief, laughter guile;
Snares are seen in every sport;
Perfidy in every smile.
Still thy arts, malicious fiend --
Still thy hell-born schemes would fail,
Did not often the valued friend,
Listen to thy specious tale.
Vain were each insidious charge,
Effort feeble as unjust,
Did alas! the world at large,
Only hear, and only trust.
Did not often the secret lie
Break the bond of private peace,
Bid domestic comfort fly,
Love subside, and friendship cease?
Did not often thy breath destroy,
Fair Contentment's blooming flower,
Wither every social joy,
And corrode life's dearest hour?
Did not often thy poisoned shaft,
Pierce the breast that most we prize,
And on fading faith engraft
Doubt, constraint, and sad surmise? --
Luckless is that child of care,
Who beneath thy scourge must live,
Doomed from early youth to bear
All the torments thou can give.
Once thy fatal influence spread,
Candor takes no further part;
Ignorance suspects the head,
Prejudice belies the heart.
Hard and cruel is his lot,
Every merit is denied;
All his virtues are forgot,
All his errors magnified.
Fiend relentless -- Tyrant grim --
Yet awhile, and all is over;
When the lamp of life is dim,
Thou will be observed no more.
When the sad, the funeral knell,
Shall his parted breath proclaim,
Faithful Memory then shall tell,
Whether he deserved such blame.
Love, perhaps, may over his tomb,
Drop a tender silent tear;
Friendship too lament a doom,
Enmity may think severe,
ARLEY.

THE CONFESSION.
TO MISS ****.
IN vain I strive my heart to shield,
Spite of myself that heart will yield;
In vain would hide a thousand ways
What every conscious look betrays: --
The jest assumed, the averted eye,
Poorly conceal the stifled sigh;
Each stolen touch, which love impels,
The heart's emotion trembling tells.
Yet not Eliza's charms alone,
Could ruling reason thus dethrone;
Her blooming graces, though with pain,
My cautious bosom might sustain.
But armed with that enchanting mien,
Which speaks the feeling mind within;
How can my softened breast be free,
Thus caught by Sensibility?
Yet not for me the tear will start,
Which proves Eliza's tender heart;
Yet not for me the smile will speak,
Which brightens in Eliza's cheek;
Lost in the whirl of fashioned life,
Where Nature is with Joy at strife;
Her unembarrass'd looks declare,
That Love is not triumphant there: --
Lured by the hope of gaudier days,
The pompous banners Wealth displays:
Each fond emotion distant keeps,
And all her native softness sleeps.
ARLEY.

PROLOGUE TO THE COMEDY OF THE PROVOKED HUSBAND.
Spoken some time ago at a Private Performance at WEYBRIDGE.
ERE yet the Comic Muse, with sprightly power,
Provokes the laugh, and leads the mirthful hour,
Permit the Bard, in serious mood awhile
To wake remembrance, and suspend the smile:
Our scenes tonight no novel merit claim,
Long-tried desert has fixed their lasting fame;
The Characters that mark our chosen page
Have long engrossed the veterans of the Stage.
Who was not charmed, when BARRY held to view
The matchless portraiture which CIBBER drew?
Each eye bestowed, while he sustained the part,
The melting tribute of the feeling heart:
Pitied alike the Husband and the Peer,
Felt his distress, and shared his manly tear:
But when Compassion taught his breast to glow --
When fond Forgiveness beamed upon his brow --
When with discordant pangs no more at strife,
He caught with transport his repentant Wife:
Chased with a kiss the sorrows from her cheek,
And told in looks, what language could not speak;
Relieved from silent agony the mind,
Like heaving Aetna, when no more confined, --
True to itself, and fired in Nature's cause,
Burst in the torrent of extreme applause.
Not so our hope -- although no frown we fear,
Your gentle plaudits will content us here.
For here we meet, though envious Factions lower,
To pass with pleasantry life's leisure hour --
To snatch relief from ombre and quadrille;
Employ the moments -- not the time to kill --
To vent our feelings, give fair Friendship birth,
And bind it with the rosy wreath of mirth:
Pleased, if our simple store, and artless toil,
Can light in Beauty's cheek one grateful smile --
More pleased, if when our softer scenes appear,
We draw from Beauty's eye one tender tear.
ARLEY.

THE INVITATION.
TO DELIA.
THY youthful charms, bright Maid, inspire,
And grace my favorite theme,
Whose person kindles soft desire;
Whose mind secures esteem.
O! hear me then, my flame avow,
And fill my breast with joy,
A flame, which taught by time to grow,
No time can ever destroy:
My tender suit with smiles approve,
And share the sweets of mutual love.
No false delusive arts I use,
As do the courtly throng,
It Is Nature kindly aids my muse,
And dictates to my song;
Would thou, she cries, true bliss ensure,
Make haste the town to leave,
Where Pleasure's gilded baits allure,
And charm but to deceive:
With me, through flowery medows rove,
And share the sweets of mutual love.
Forsake, where all upright appear,
Yet most perfidious prove,
Where knaves the mask of friendship wear,
Or feign the voice of love.
So shall thy inexperienc'd years,
No source of sorrow know;
Nor shed Affliction's homefelt tears,
Nor weep for others woe:
Haste then, from faithless crowds remove,
And share the sweets of mutual love.
Ah! would my Fair this plan pursue,
How happy should I be,
Since all that brings content to you,
Is ecstacy to me.
Yet ever the public scenes you quit,
Increase my fond delight,
And deign your humble swain to admit
The partner of your flight;
And while the varying seasons move,
To share the sweets of mutual love,
When Autumn yields her ripened corn,
Or Winter dark'ning low'rs,
With tenderest care, I Will sooth thy morn,
And cheer thy evening hours:
Again, when smiling Spring returns,
We'll breath the vernal air,
And still, when Summer sultry burns,
To woodland walks repair:
There seek Retirement's sheltered grove,
And share the sweets of mutual love.
What though no costly arts display,
The splendor of a court,
Yet rich in Nature's neat array,
We'll join the rural sport;
Where, seated on the verdant grass,
From daily labor freed,
Each shepherd wooes his favorite lass,
And tunes his oaten reed,
Remarks the tender turtle dove,
And sings the sweets of mutual love.
No revels there the night consume,
Which often the Fair undo,
Make beauty lose its lovely bloom,
And often virtue too;
There, free from discontent and strife,
Each undesigning youth
Strives to relieve the cares of life,
With constancy and truth;
Haste then, the fleeting hours improve,
And share the sweets of mutual love.
For can that destiny be just,
That innocence and health
Be yielded up a prey to lust,
Or sacrifice to wealth?
Or shall the mind, where honor dwelt,
Deplore that honor gone,
Which still for others pitying felt,
Itself unpitied mourn?
Forbid it, all ye powers above,
And grant her ever mutual love!
ARLEY.

STANZAS ON A YOUNG LADY's BIRTHDAY. In the Month of November.
SINCE all to Beauty's ripening bloom
Their cheerful homage pay,
Be not displeased, that I presume
To hail thy natal day.
Though careless joke, and empty mirth,
My thoughtless hours employ,
I Will greet the day which gave thee birth,
With undissembl'd joy.
And while the Muse's softest strains
In artless numbers flow;
That smiles may recompense her pains
The fervent wish shall glow.
Henceforward now shall disappear
Dull Winter's cheerless gloom;
November's month shall charm the year,
And wear an annual bloom;
Fresh flowerets shall unfading blow,
Fresh verdure deck the green;
The meads their choicest beauties show,
To honor Beauty's Queen.
But should the season now refuse
To act the change I sing;
Sold Winter scorn to aid the Muse,
Declared the foe to Spring;
The roses that thy cheeks adorn,
Shall hastening youth prolong;
Shall yearly grace thy birthday morn,
And witness to my song:
Or if by Time's all conqu'ring-hand,
Their bloom must wear away;
The roses of thy mind shall stand,
And never know decay.
ARLEY.

LINES SENT TO A FRIEND WITH A WATCH.
ACCEPT, my friend, and kindly deem
This offering of the Bard;
His token of sincere esteem,
And tribute of regard.
What though no trappings I allow;
The Watch thus unadorned;
Believe me, when I dare avow,
Its worth should not be scorned.
Companion of my earliest youth,
I Have often its value known!
Unsway'd its probity and truth,
By Fortune's smile, or frown.
In infant state, when learning's lore,
For Pastime was forgot,
It whispered often the hastening hour,
And task remembered not.
Obedient still to riper age,
When Pleasure leads astray;
'Twill Reason's cool reproof engage,
And chide the ill-spent day.
Remind us, Time unceasing wears,
However its loss we mourn;
And bid us nurse the passing years,
Which never can return.
ARLEY.

SONG.
Addressed to A YOUNG LADY.
SHOULD you ask me, what female desert I require
To relish the conjugal life;
Nor beauty, nor titles, nor wealth I desire,
To bias my choice in a wife:
The charms of a face may occasion a sigh;
The costly allurements of Art
May yield a short moment of joy to the eye,
But give no delight to the heart.
Would equipage, splendour, or noble descent
Bring comfort wherever they fall,
Could these add a drop to the cup of Content,
I Would gladly partake of them all;
But vain the assistance proud riches bestow,
The raptures that beauty impart,
To soften the painful reflections of woe,
Or banish distress from the heart.
Then give me the temper unclouded and gay,
The countenance ever serene,
To cheer with sweet converse as youth wears away,
And dissipate anger and spleen;
Whose smiles may endear and enliven the hours
Retirement shall often set apart;
Whose virtues may sooth when disquietude sours,
And tenderness cherish the heart.
For Fortune, be Honor her portion assigned,
For Beauty, bright Health's rosy bloom,
Let Justice and Candor ennoble her mind,
And Cheerfulness Sorrow consume:
Thus formed would she share with me life's little store,
It Is mixture of pleasure and smart.
She Would ever continue, 'till both were no more,
The constant delight of my heart.
ARLEY.

BALLAD, FOUNDED ON FACT.
ELIZA was beyond compare,
The pride of all the plain,
Fair, yet beloved by every fair,
Adored by every swain.
Though Nature had each charm combined
The beauteous Maid to grace;
And bade the sweetness of her mind
Stand pictured in her face;
Yet Fortune, from her earliest years,
A fate disastrous wove;
And doomed her to an age of tears,
For one short hour of love.
In childhood's helpless state, bereft
Of parents' watchful care;
Her inexperienc'd youth was left
A prey to every snare.
One only fault the Maid proffess'd --
-- If that a fault we deem --
A tender, unsuspecting breast,
Too lavish of esteem.
Unvers'd in woes that others find,
In wiles that others fear;
Artless herself, she thought mankind
Were, like herself, sincere.
But ah! ere yet the luckless Maid
Had fifteen summers run,
Her faith and honor were betrayed --
Her virtue was undone.
Young HENRY, with successful art,
To win her favor strove;
Long practiced on her youthful heart,
And early gained her love.
Fraught with each soft resistless charm,
With each persuasive power,
He stilled Discretion's kind alarm,
And cropp'd the virgin flower.
Her orphan state, her tender years,
Her pure, unspotted fame,
Served but to hush his guilty fears,
And fan his lawless flame.
By Honor's dictates unrestrained,
By Faith, nor Justice swayed;
That confidence his vows obtained
His perfidy betrayed. --
So poor ELIZA's hapless fate
Filled HENRY's breast with care;
Nor could the vain parade of state
Protect him from despair.
He saw the beauties once he prized
All wither in their bloom,
By lawless passion sacrificed
Untimely to the tomb.
For how could injured honor look
Its Author in the face?
Or how could suffering virtue brook
Invective and disgrace?
No sorrows could afford relief,
No penitence atone;
The sigh she gave to others' grief,
She wanted for her own.
The partners of her youthful years,
Unpitying her distress,
Nor kindly helped to dry her tears,
Nor strove to make them less.
Her loved companions turned away
To former friendship cold;
And left her in Affliction's day,
Uncherish'd, unconsol'd.
So ever through the World we find
Each breast at woe recoils,
And all the favors of mankind
But last while fortune smiles.
Too just, life's guilty joys to endure,
Too weak its thorns to brave;
No friend but Death she could procure,
No comfort but the Grave.
Awhile she Heaven's forgiveness prayed,
For errors long confessed;
Then sought the solitary shade,
And silent sunk to rest.
Hard-fortun'd sex! in every state,
From custom's rigid power,
Years of remorse cannot expiate
One inadvertent hour.
Unskilled in Life's precarious way,
Should Love their bosoms burn,
And yielding Nature chance to stray,
They never can return.
In vain they with repentant sighs,
Their sad experience mourn;
Even those, who ought to sympathize,
Abandon them with scorn.
Say why, ye Virgins, who bestow
On most, Compassion's tear;
The pangs alone yourselves may know,
You thus refuse to cheer?
O rather kindly condescend
To aid the drooping fair;
Your mercy with your justice blend,
And snatch them from despair.
ELIZA's death, when HENRY heard,
He gave a piteous groan;
The censure of the World he feared,
But more he feared his own.
In vain he flew to crowds and courts,
Guilt every bliss destroys;
Intruded on his morning sports,
And damped his evening joys.
At length, with constant grief overcome,
With anguish, and dismay;
He hied him to the lonely tomb
Which held ELIZA's clay:
There weeping over the turf-clad ground,
Of all existence tired:
He cast his streaming eyes around,
And mournfully expired.
Thus warned, ye Fair, with caution arm
Against Man's perfidious arts:
Since Youth and Beauty vainly charm
When Honor once departs.
Let Hymen's sacred bands unite,
Where Passion is declared;
Give sanction to approved delight,
And authorize regard.
So shall no rankling cares annoy,
No tears unceasing flow;
So shall you feel a Mother's joy,
Without a Mother's woe.
ARLEY.

The following Lines were the earliest offering to a Young Lady, whose Theatric
talents once formed the ornament of the Stage on which (...) ^peared and whose
Memory will be honored by the Drama which she adorned.

TO LAURA.
GO, faithful Muse! to LAURA fly,
And with thee bear this tender sigh;
Tell her it is honest -- free from art,
And acts in concert with my heart:
If soft she looks, nor frowns the while,
'Twill take the semblance of a smile;
But if unkind she scorns it -- swear
Twill melt that moment to a tear: --
Fly, Muse, and let the Fair one know,
It Is here is to fix my weal or woe;
Arrayed in Beauty's lovliest bloom,
She stamps my bliss, or seals my doom.
Bid her recall that happy hour,
When to the box the wand she bore;
And having played her public part,
Came privately to steal my heart.
Go, Muse, and ask the charming Maid,
If pond'ring since on what I said,
She ever wished nor would disdain,
To pass the halcyon hour again?
While all were on the scene intent,
My thoughts alone on her were bent,
Her smiles to kingdoms I Would prefer,
And I could only gaze on her.
Haste, haste, my Muse, once more intrude
And ask if LAURA thought me rude?
Ask, if that sweet engaging brow
To every Swain is always so?
Ask, if those looks were only meant,
As cold respect and compliment?
Ask, if her heart was wholly free,
Or felt one partial glow for me?
Perhaps that youthful bosom yet,
Has no endearing object met;
Ah me! what transports he must prove,
Who raptured wins her Virgin Love!
For me, unskilled, unused to plead,
My humble Verse may ill succeed;
Yet LAURA, to that Verse attend,
And in the Lover mark the Friend.
While life's transcendant morn is yours,
While Beauty blooms, and Youth endures;
A thousand Swains will hourly kneel,
And what they fancy, swear they feel.
Lascivious age will round thee press,
And shock thy early tenderness;
Will dare to bribe the freeborn Mind,
And give you gold to have you kind.
Ah, LAURA! shun the treacherous foe,
Who'd sink thy feeling heart so low;
Such wretches scorn, and him approve,
Who only offers Love for Love.
ARLEY.

ELEGY.
To the LADY who will best remember it.
WHEN strong Affliction deeply wounds the breast,
When Sorrow sits within the moistened eye;
When the heart sinks, with ponderous grief oppressed,
And the sad bosom heaves with many a sigh;
Lost to all life, averse from every joy,
Disdaining comfort, scorning all repose,
The pensive Soul can brook but one employ --
Brooding in gloomy Silence over its woes.
Come then, thou Partner of my cheerless hour,
Come, faithful Muse, and seek the lonely grove,
Retire with me to yon sequestered bower,
And mark the story of my luckless love.
For thou, the truest, tenderest, best of friends,
The fond companion of my earliest youth,
Wilt share each anguish that my bosom rends,
Untir'd wilt listen, and unseen wilt sooth.
Often have thou tried, and often with kind success,
To smooth the sorrows of my aching brow;
But ah! I never felt severe distress,
Or proved the extreme of misery till now.
Full well thou know in life's unripen'd morn,
With thoughtless ease I passed the frolic day;
Plucked every rose, and where I found a thorn,
Threw, careless threw, the unheeded flower away.
Resolved the roving restless mind to cure,
And guide the future different from the past,
I sought for sweets that might through life endure,
And fondly fancied they were found at last.
I saw the lovliest Rose, that graced the land,
With blooming fragrance gladd'ning all around,
Too bold, perhaps, I thrust the forward hand,
Missed the fair flower, and only felt the wound.
Felt! did I say! deep rankling in my heart
No time can mitigate my suffering there;
Hope lends no friendly balsam for the smart,
And all my black'ning prospects frown despair,
And yet loved Maid, if partial to my Muse,
Her artless numbers thou will deign to hear;
If, softly-sighing, thou will not refuse,
To shed with her one sympathizing tear;
That single tear that dews ELIZA's cheek,
Shall for a moment wash my griefs away;
That sigh, though half suppressed, shall more than speak,
And gild the evening of each mournful day.
Then shall I think 'twas not ELIZA's heart,
'Twas not her gentle breast refused to glow;
'Twas not ELIZA's self who made us part,
The World, the unfeeling World pronounced it so.
The unfeeling World that thinks where riches roll,
Where titles blazon, joys can never cease;
That waves each soft emotion of the soul,
And builds on public clamor private peace.
And yet, ELIZA, thou may live to prove,
And thy fond heart may own it with a sigh,
That the endearing sweets of mutual Love,
No Wealth, no State, no Splendor can supply.
Formed as thou art, with every outward grace,
With every inward virtue richly fraught,
Think, if thy tenderness thou should misplace,
Pride, Pomp, and Grandeur may be dearly bought.
Though Honor's nobles circle thou wilt adorn,
And dignify in every sphere the Wife,
ELIZA, or I much mistake, was born
To shine amidst the softened joys of life.
For me, whom poignant woes must still depress,
Each future hour to sorrow I resign;
Death only can alleviate my distress,
And the last parting moment shall be Thine!
ARLEY.

LOVE RENEWED, A SONNET.
LIGHT fly the hours, attendant joy,
Gay mirth, and every sweet employ,
Chasing the short-lived moments, prove
The blissful state of glowing Love.
New to the heart, the youthful Fair,
First learns to feel a tenderer care;
A fond solicitude which says,
How poor the calm of former Days!
Then hope and fear, alternate reign,
Transition of delight and pain;
That dear distress, that charming strife,
Which interests every scene of life:
The cheek suffus'd the downcast brow,
The sigh escaped we know not how;
The soft rebuke, the unwilling blame,
Triumphant Nature all proclaim.
Sweet is the Passion thus pursued,
But sweeter far is Love Renewed
That Love, which, when the bosom thrilled,
Suspense the icy hand has chilled;
Has doomed to sit the mournful day,
And weep the ling ring time away;
The heart's best prospects, once so fair,
Changed in an instant to despair. --
How hard! to view the budding Rose
In Life's glad morn its sweets disclose;
Then in the fond expectant hour,
To lose the lovely yielding flower.
How sweet! when hope was scarce alive,
To see that hour again revive;
The long-lost Rose once more to view,
With ripened fragrance bloom anew;
Then Love, with soft-ey'd Pity blends.
Then, Memory all her aid extends;
Past sorrow, heightens present joy,
And rapture lives without alloy.
ARLEY.

CHARACTERISTIC SONG.
Supposed to be sung by a SAILOR's LASS, to her FAVORITE; who has been
treating her rather unkindly.
YOUR MOLLY has never been false, she declares,
Since last time we parted at Wapping Old Stairs;
When I swore that I still would continue the same,
And gave you the 'Bacco-Box, marked with my name.
When I passed a whole fortnight between decks with you,
Did I ever give a Buss, TOM, to one of the crew?
To be useful and kind to my THOMAS I staid,
For his Trowsers I washed, and his Bumbo I made.
Though threatened last Sunday to walk in the Mall
With SUSAN, from Deptford, and Billing sgate SAL,
In silence I stood, your unkindness to hear,
And only upbraided my TOM with a tear.
Still faithful and fond from the first of my life,
Though I boast not the Name, I Have the truth of a Wife;
For falsehood in Wedlock too often is prized,
And the Heart that is constant should not be despised.
ARLEY.

The following POEM, in a distant part of the Wo^ld, (...) for its Foundation.
The Lovers thus described, parted, with (...) emotions the Story gives them.
The Dialogue only is fanciful. It is the form which the Author adopted, as the
best Method of conveying to the Public.

THE REPENTANCE OF PASSION.
HE. AND does my Harriet still adhere,
To wear Affliction's garb alone;
Still does she hold her Spoiler dear,
And prize his peace who broke her own?
Still will she strive his pangs to heal,
Who all her youthful honors tore,
And near his pillow constant kneel,
When every power to please is over?

SHE. And does my Love, unkind, suppose
I ever would leave his lonely bed;
Forsake the Youth my heart has chose,
And fly, because his health has fled?
And will he, sunk in sad despair,
Believe his Harriet loves no more;
Or think, while she can sooth one care,
That every power to please is over.

HE. Ah! cease to sooth my woe-worn head!
Shun the sad wretch thou can not save;
Nor hover round that guilty bed
Where martyred Virtue found its grave:
Here sunk the glories of thy youth,
Each blooming honor doomed to fall,
Here, Treachery triumphed over Truth,
And here, sterh Death, shall expiate all.

SHE. Ah! cease to wound my heart anew!
Still if thou bend'st at Sorrow's shrine,
Again thy Harriet thou wilt undo,
For Harriet's life is wrapped in thine; --
Had I ten thousand wrongs endured,
And that loved cheek one tear let fall,
That single tear cach pang had cured;
-- One tender sigh would expiate all.

HE. O spurn me! -- Case thy heart in steel --
Give just resentment all its force;
Not by such kindness, make me feel
The torture of severe remorse.
Why, in life's early happy day,
When health and joy gave means to bless;
Why did I heedless turn away,
From her who loved to such excess?

SHE. Lament no more, my bosom's friend; --
Thy errors past, thy cares should cease;
Corroding thought awhile suspend,
And nurtured Hope shall teem with peace;
Thy kind, thy gentle Harriet sues,
Clings round thy arm with fond caress;
Nature will every fault excuse,
And sweetly pardon Love's excess.

HE. Too tender, too relenting Fair!
My fault can never be forgot;
Unpitying Love would scorn my prayer,
And injured Nature owns me not;
When, in the fond ingenuous hour,
Thy native tenderness was shown,
How did I meanly sport with power,
Betray thy love, and shame my own.

SHE. Hear me, thou persevering man!
Hear, what thy Harriet firmly swears --
If courted death must be thy plan,
Remember, 'twill but prelude hers:
Here will she wait thy final doom --
Then drenched in tears, and desperate grown,
Stretched over thy corse, in life's first bloom,
Forgot thy love, and end her own.

HE. Lend me thy aid, to combat Fate;
For thy dear sake I Will strive to live;
Draw near me, -- help, oh! it is too late --
Take the last kiss I now can give:
Wan is that cheek you often have pressed,
And dim those eyes you loved so well;
And the hard pang that rends my breast,
My falt'ring tongue can scarcely tell.

SHE. Here -- on this bosom, rest thy head --
Speak -- look upon me -- breathe once more --
His pulse is still -- oh God! he is dead --
Fate, do thy worst, -- the conflict's over:

Weep for their woes ye tender few --
You Will pity what you feel so well!
My humble pen but paints for you;
How just the trickling tear shall tell.
ARLEY.

DIVERSITY. A POEM.
'TWAS on a mountain's airy spire,
With eye that flashed celestial fire,
That quenched the dawn's expanding ray,
And pre-assumed the day,
Immortal GENIUS slood.
Anon, his sapphire wings unfold
With ample spread, and starr'd with beamy gold;
His loose hair hovered over the prostrate flood,
And on each bounding billow threw
A quivering shade of deeper blue.
Sudden he darts a lightning smile,
And "blessed (he cries) be BRITAIN's isle,
Dear proud Asylum of my favored race!
Where Contemplation joys to trace
The classic feature, and the form of sense,
And hail the MUSE SUBLIME, and PATRIOI ELOQUENCE.
These are the plains that FANCY loves,
Over these white cliffs she wanders free,
And scatters in the floating gale,
Her long array of fairy pageantry.
While MELODY, in some far vale,
Weaves on the air a lengthening line
Of cadence soft, and swell divine;
What time the maniac RAPTURE roves,
His jet locks dripping with the vap'ry shower,
That EVENING weeps upon each solded flower,
As down the shad'wy hills her lessening car
Tracks the slow progress of her idol star.
Then here, in sweet delirium will I stay,
And meet on every blast a variegated lay."
LURED by the voice, from solemn glade
The ^ying Maid,
Extatic POETRY, was seen
To pace the upland green --
With many a curl luxuriant flowing,
Cheeks with light purpureal glowing,
While her long-unsettled gaze
That VARYING PASSION's force displays,
Fixed on him she most adored,
HER SACRED SOUL'S ETERNAL LORD.
Ha! as she swept with wild'ring hand
Her charmed harp, over sea and land
Fleet ZEPHYR bore each melting tone,
That MELANCHOLY thought her own,
That frolic PLEASURE smiled to hear,
And MADNESS welcomed with a tear:
While VALOR, rushing at the sound,
Dashed his burning eye balls round,
And as far off his shield he hurled
WITH NAKED BREAST DEFIED THE WORLD!
Scarce was the mystic strain begun,
When from his eastern tent the SUN
Leapt forth in arms,
And reared his crest sublime,
THE PROTOTYPE OF TIME!
How lovely then were NATURE'S CHARMS!
Glittering OCEAN never ending,
Ruby ROCKS, and FORESTS bending,
Bending to the lawns below,
Where countless flowerets countless tints bestow;
Wide LAKES their lucid mirrors spread,
Upon whose banks the white flocks fed,
And seemed their silv'ry fleeces to adorn
With the last luster of the moon of morn.
Art, alike transported straying,
Was her rival power displaying;
Over the sleek wave she bade a NUMEROUS SAIL
Stretched the fair canvas to the wafting gale; --
From shelving hills triumphant CITIES rise,
And towers and column'd domes usurp the skies; --
Bade meadows smile with many a cultured bower,
And bursting fountains toss the spangled shower;
Such was the scene when the rapt maiden sung,
Ah, who shall tell the music of her tongue!
The undulation of the stream
Low murmuring on the pebbly shores,
The warble of her favorite theme,
That PHILOMEL incessant pours,
From solitary, loved retreat,
When STARLIGHT drops a tissued veil
Over the clear brook, and moistened dale; --
Such sounds, were never half so sweet,
As when SHE told, of roseate blisses,
Tender smiles and vermil kisses,
Nor half so thrilling Battle's call
That sends defiance from the assaulted wall,
As when she told of HONOR's merit,
Glories that the BRAVE inherit,
How, the exulting breast, disdains
Selfish pleasures -- selfish pains!
From couch where downy Peace had spread
A jasmine pillow for his head,
Borne upon translucent wings,
LOVE, the wanton Cherub springs;
And flutters round in mazy play,
Enthusiastic at the lay!
But soon he hies him to the cypress grove,
Where JEALOUSY retires to rove,
And chase soft slumbers from the virgin's brow.
And tell her timid heart of many a broken vow.
Then the BENIGN CONSOLER leads
Her fearful steps over fringed meads,
Where HOPE indulgent freely throws
Fresh either from enchanted rose!
He brings her to the tear-bath'd stone,
Where, all repentant and alone,
In settled anguish of despair,
Her Lover lies -- he brings her there!
And on quick pinion brushing by,
Breathes the languor of a sigh:
The Youth revives, -- with eager bound,
Clasps his speechless Fair-one round,
While from her eye the swift drop rusnes,
In vain to quench her burning blushes!
O now the Goddess of the potent lyre,
Proves at her heart the sympathetic fire,
Invokes the DRYAD and the FAWN,
The fabled people of each wood and lawn,
And those that in the bright stream lave
Their glossy breasts, or skim the occean wave,
She wooes them to the scene, to show
How near allied are BLISS AND WOE,
How sweetly powerful to move,
The silent sentiment of LOVE!
But soon the measure changed, and slow she draws
Her elegiac trill, with doleful sweep,
And at each sadly-penetrating pause,
Teaches the meek morality to weep.
She sung of those, to happiest fortune born,
Whose downcast looks a dire reverse reveal,
Who long, too long neglected and forlorn,
Had known to suffer, and had learnt to feel;
By ling ring sorrow softened to excess,
Of many a genial consolation flown,
Who still regretted most, the power to bless,
And others' pangs lamented as their own.
Of those, who often, when Day's proud torch was sped,
Held wayward converse with the wintry wind,
Who found on some cold rock their craggy bed,
And met a season suited to their mind.
They, like the plant with vegetative sense,
That silent droops when touches rude annoy,
Shrunk from the pressure of a World's offense,
Yet gained from Pity what they lost of Joy.
Of such as schooled in Life's sad scene, too well,
Had cherished scorn amid the wilds of woe,
Or charmed by SUICIDE's opprobrious spell,
Had barred their bosoms to his tempting blow.
"And where (she cried) does mild Compassion stray,
Must that fell tyrant grant alone relief,
Drive the wet crystal from their lids away,
This very beautiful line is taken from Mr. JERNINGHAM.
And close the bleeding artery of grief?"
Now more subdued, she sunk -- a keener pain
Stole to her inmost feeling, for she thought
Of all the sacred melancholy train,
That ever here her inspiration caught,
From rugged CHAUCER, with uncouthest phrase,
To the chaste clasic race of later days.
And when on AVON'S BARD her Fancy dwelt,
Her bosom 'gan to heave, and glow, and melt,
For he was of her offspring dearest far,
In her own hemisphere the solar star.
Whether some strange horrific tale he wove,
Or showed the pangs, the exstacies of love,
Or pierced with daring wing the heavenly height,
And soared beyond the Theban eagle's flight,
Most EXCELLENT WAS HE -- then, too, a tear
Dropped for her hallowed DRYDEN's injured bier;
And OTWAY, luckless OTWAY! sad she viewed,
Withered by deep distress, in anguish go
To Death's dark cavern, through the gates of woe;
And POPE, his strong unrivaled sense renewed, --
And SPENSER shook a magic banner bright,
And sainted COLLINS came in meekness due,
"With sky-worn robes of tenderest blue,
And eyes of dewy light."
Nor was not MILTON mourned, unmatched! -- To pour
Magnificently wild, the seraph lay! --
GOLDSMITH, and GRAY she wept, and gentle GAY --
And THOMSON, potent in description's pride --
Light PRIOR -- solemn YOUNG -- inventive AKENSIDE:
And all who on the calm, autumnal heath,
Had ever listened to her tuneful breath,
And bade from silver lute responsive measures fly;
For these she gave a retrospective sigh;
Nor were thou then forgotten, hapless MORE! SIR JOHN HENRY MORE, Bart. who
died in the year 1780, at about the age of twenty-five. His true poetical
powers cannot be better proved than by the following lines, which he wrote to a
Lady, a few months before his death, being in an evident decay. If in that
breast, so good, so pure,
Compassion ever loved to dwell,
Pity the sorrows I endure,
The cause I must not -- dare not tell.
The grief that on my quiet preys,
That tends my heart, that checks my tongue,
I fear will last me all my days,
But feel -- it will not last me long.


Her last-lost son, dead in thy very prime!
Yet sure among the friends who wished thee well,
Sure one remains to tell
That thou could sing, "and build the lofty rhyme."
And that, if fate had kindly spared thy days,
Few would kave matched, and none excelled thy lays.
Sure He may speak, who often in TAPLOW's grove,
With thee was wont the Summer noon to rove,
Or aid thee with his feath'ring oar, to guide
Thy buoyant skiff on Thames' meand'ring tide;
Or at thy social board delighted sit,
And watch the animation of thy wit,
Pleased when he heard thee boast the valued name
Of ELLIS, GEORGE ELLIS, Esquire.
then prophetic of his fame.
He, who yet lingering on this weary scene,
Has never found thy equal; never known
A heart so pure, so generous as thy own!
Who, when he saw thee borne across the green
To the cold grave, a helpless statue stood,
While the deep murmur of each neighboring wood,
In desolating language joined
Sad unison with his distracted mind.
O! do not then, DEAR SHADE! the grief disdain,
That constant flows, although it flows in vain.
Now the strong meridian beam
Downward pours a fiercer stream,
And bounding over each russet hill,
MIRTH with LAUGHTER at his side,
In jovial freak, and careless pride,
Comes of sport to take his fill.
With eager step he seeks to measure
Every labyrinth of PLEASURE, --
Who, coy Nymph! abashed appears,
And hides her in a veil of tears,
Such tears as often at morning speed
To call to life the languid mead,
Or on the teeming harvest rolled,
With pearls bedeck its wavy gold.
Yet alluring glances fly
From her soft enamored eye,
That soon discover, though she shun, --
She Would fain to his embraces run!
But again his course he changes,
And each varying landscape ranges,
Till amidst a wild of sweets,
The mighty QUEEN OF SONG he greets.
Then lowly bows the suppliant knee,
In well dissembled mockery,
While shaking LAUGHTER offers up,
Sweet liquor of Circean cup.
The Goddess taste -- a sportive ray
Drives every mournful thought away,
And as the sad reflections go, --
Thus, her livelier numbers flow.
"No longer my vot'ries shall desolate rave,
In the depth of the forest, or gloom of the grave,
But far different cares shall they hasten to prove
And press the rich grapes of the vintage of love.
Then let us not languish, my friends! though it is true,
That when you want others, they never want you.
Though pleasures will pass, yet the short time they stay,
To shun them is error, it is sense to be gay.
Does the full-moon less sweetly enamel the plain,
Because she is inconstant, and destined to wane,
Or do flowers, when gathered, less odor bestow,
Than those that are suffered to fade as they grow?
In the calm of enjoyment then think not of sorrow,
Nor brood on the storm that may threaten tomorrow."
She paused, for Genius waved his head,
And straight the wild illusion fled,
The fev'rish vapors from her brain depart,
And sober reason settles at her heart.
'Twas then obedient to her sov'reign's will,
She finds obtrusive rage her bosom fill,
On Folly's monster offspring darts her gaze,
Lifts a SATIRIC SCOURGE, and thus indignant says: --
"BRITAIN! behold a Sourc'ress is come forth,
Child of the Tropic heat, and frozen North,
In whose dull breast contrasted evils jar,
And wage with Common Sense perpetual war,
Out-smiling truth, and even out-blushing shame,
She reigns and AFFECTATION is her name!
Lo! now methinks on yonder porcelain throne,
Glazed over in France, but all the dirt your own,
With mimic mien of majesty she sits,
And smirks, and prattles, and looks grave by fits,
Then seems so destitute of hope and fear,
As life itself, were nothing but a sneer.
And mark what crowds advance to swell her state,
In pompons nonsense miserably great;
Grim Doctors, Men of study, Men of gold,
The Moralizing Young, and Vicious Old,
And stale Coquets, with ogles feebly sent,
And musing Members of the Parliament!
See, see, how quick, how numerous they glide,
All unsubstantial as the rainbow's pride!
Like Banquo's shades before the King that past,
And each fresh fool more solemn to the last;
In their dear Idol's honor they declaim,
Poets unknown, and idiots with a name.
Slow-lab'ring logic, and discussion bare,
And Mangled Metaphor, alas! is there.
Pert Pun, quaint Epigram, smart Repartee,
And weak Conundrum, and loose Ribaldry;
While Blockheads praise, what livelier Blockheads spoke,
And nodding Nabobs analyze each joke
O MODEST LIT'RATURE! must thou too feel
The assassin vengeance of this tyrant's steel,
Must thou no longer, liberal and free,
Lose all thy nature's genuine dignity?
Catch every gewgaw of the vulgar tribe,
Thy fame a mumm'ry! and thy bays, a bribe?
Must vain pretenders throng thy fair abode, --
And simp'ring Smatt'rers pen the patchwork ode?
Who though unschool'd, yet eager to prevail,
Snatch the glib Eel of Learning by the tail,
And as their filthy fingers smeer the rhyme,
Admire the gloss and glitter of the slime.
O scorned be those who each emotion hide
In lordly littleness, and pampered pride,
To Affectation raise alone their eyes,
Contrive their smiles and fabricate their sighs.
O scorned be such! but may the true combine
TO attack the enchantress, and deface her shrine,
To dart their arrows at her tinsel brow,
And lay the Necromantic monster low.
Then shall SIMPLICITY, sweet Maid! appear
Fresh with the blushes of the vernal year,
Her generous impulse to mankind impart,
And own no law but nature, and the heart,
Till every wish still verging to one end,
Each object, virtue, and each man, a friend,
TRIUMPHANT REASON, shed its potent ray,
To drive distorted Prejudice away,
Cheer the lone hamlet, the gay court illume,
And BLESSING LIFE, BEATIFY THE TOMB!
Peace, peace, (the GODHEAD cries) nor more
Dwell on failings of this HAPLESS SHORE,
Observe the VIRTUES! still they rise --
In meek expansion to the skies!
See CHASTITY, with purest mien,
That loves to bless the rural scene,
And in CONTENT's domestic bower,
To guard AFFECTION's modest flower!
Here soft-ey'd PITY duly sends
Her tenderest look to solace woe,
And as a balmy wreath she blends,
Her silent sacred sorrows slow. --
Nor think that thou, DEAR NYMPH! alone
Can call my influence thy own,
Though full of me, -- in madd'ning trance,
When early Twilight's streaks advance,
By the clear fount, or sheltering wood,
By the loud torrent's foamy flood,
Thou love to stray -- or when the night-blasts sweep,
With pilgrim footsteps, wind the dreary steep,
There near some bending beech reclined,
While moral musings fill thy mind,
The world's best joys like meteors seem,
And all its boast a fading dream.
Though at thy mandate Nature rears
A wizard wand of hopes and fears,
That as she waves amid the blaze of day,
Wakes into birth -- the sad -- the gay --
And every jocund Phantom fair,
And every Spectre of despair.
Though such my hallowed boon to thee;
Unnumber'd, rival vot'ries ^ee!
In SCULPTURE, PAINTING; every ART
That charms the senses, or the heart,
And those who form each passing age,
The impressive Children of the Stage.
Ah! let me not too proud! explain
The triumph of the exalted train --
Long were the task, the flaming orb
Again his rising course might run,
Again the West his beams absorb,
Nor would the lengthening tale be done.
To naught confined I ever range
In wild propensity of change,
When first CREATION filled the void,
I, was the minister employed,
'Twas I, that fixed yon central light,
And, blessed with all its gems the night!
But WHAT ART THOU, who loit'ring near,
Where these mysterious forests lower,
Giv'st to my tongue a listening ear,
And steal'st upon this sacred hour?
PRESUMPTUOUS BARD! think not, from me,
TO attract the glowing spark of energy,
Or with frail touch, and imitative tone,
To draw sweet numbers from thy tuneless lyre;
It Is darkness all, unless I lend my fire!
And MUSIC wakes at my command alone.
FOND CHILD OF DUST! thy hopes forego,
And reconcile thy soul to woe!
But never imagine that I bear a part,
In the deep anguish of thy struggling heart;
Nor idly look for FAME -- her breath
IS FOUND BUT IN THE GALES OF DEATH!
She seeks the slumb'rous Raven's gloom,
To whisper over the lonely tomb! --
Deigning, at last, that praise to give,
Which none might ever receive, and live!
HARD IS THE POET'S LOT! -- in vain
He pours an inoffensive strain,
To cheer the Woodlark brooding on her nest,
Or sooth the secret sorrows of his breast;
Though but a Shepherd's song it flow,
In every vale he meets a foe,
While even amid the peasant throng,
Shall hiss pale Envy's viper tongue!
Or could his pen, with strength sublime,
To high perfection lift the rhyme; --
Or teach instructive truth to doubly please,
With Mrs. HESTER LYNCH PIOZZI, a Lady well known for her Genies, and literary
acquirements.
HESTER's brilliant wit, and learned ease;
Still would DULL MALICE shout around,
Still fix the inevitable wound. --
Still would DETRACTION point the lance,
And bid her harpy sons advance. --
Rather, with weeds thy temples bind;
And mourn thy faults, -- thy follies, past, --
Mourn thy rash youth, -- that fled so fast,
And mourn the fever of thy mind: --
SUBMISSIVE YIELD TO STEADFAST FATE'S DECREE,
AND LEARN TO PITY BASE MALIGNITY! --
So, when I view thee at declining eve
Bathe thy hot bosom in the lunar tide,
Or near yon cataract hear thee grieve, --
Down my sad cheek, perchance, a tear shall glide."
HE SPOKE -- AND DARTING UPWARDS FROM THE SIGHT,
SAILED THROUGH THE IMMENSE ABYSS AND VANISHED INTO LIGHT!
SONNET. TO THE MUSE.
CAELESTIAL spirit! who do deign to shed
Thy mystic visions over my raptured soul,
And with thy tuneful numbers do control
The horrid cares which haunt my lonely bed;
Come! -- fill my laboring breast with sacred fire;
Such fire as glowed in PETRARCH's tender line,
When Love, and heavenly LAURA's charms divine,
Claimed the soft sorrows of his gentle Lyre.
-- O grant my prayer! and fair MELISSA's fame,
Shall rival LAURA's in the roll of Time;
Her virtues shall be known in every clime,
And Bards unborn shall quote her Poet's name!
Blessed, who deserve the meed the MUSE can give,
For whom she favors will for ever live.
BENEDICT.
July 3, 1788.
SONNET. TO MELISSA's LIPS.
DEAR balmy lips of her who holds my heart
In the soft bondage of a love sincere! --
Dear balmy lips! your cherub smiles impart
To your adoring suppliant's earnest prayer.
Not the fresh rose-bud, charged with vernal dew,
Nor the warm crimson of the blushing morn,
Nor the gay blossoms of the summer thorn,
Are half so glowing, or so sweet as you!
Dear lips! -- permit my trembling lips to press
Your ripened softness in a tender kiss:
And, while my throbbing heart avows the bliss,
Will you -- (dear lips!) the eager stranger bless?
"Ah, fond request!" -- the beauteous owner cries
"Cease, wayward youth! -- whoever touches, dies!"
BENEDICT.

SONNET. THE VALENTINE OF HOPELESS LOVE!
WAKED by the breath of spring, in every vale
The latent primrose rears her sickly head;
The virgin snow-drop decks the verdant bed,
And vi'lets blue perfume the passing gale.
The tuneful linnet plumes her speckl'd wing,
The tender stock-dove cooes in every grove,
The soaring lark chaunts loud the song of love; --
All Nature owns thy influence, genial spring!
All, all but I! -- condemned by wayward fate
To bear Love's keenest arrow in my breast;
It Is vain to wish -- to hope, alas! too late --
No change of season gives my bosom rest!
A tear from thee is all the boon I crave,
To dew the withered sod that marks my grave!
BENEDICT.

SONNET. MELISSA'S RETIREMENT.
All me! why heaves my breast with frequent sighs?
What chills my heart with such unusual fear?
Why steal the tears, unbidden, from my eyes?
Why sink my wearied spirits in despair? --
The fatal cause, alas! I know too well!
Far from my arms, you, cruel! mean to go:
Hence, hence my unavailing sorrows flow:
But, -- can I live to hear you say "farewell!"
Yes, I shall live, to grief a wretched prey --
For, when your presence cheers the calm retreat,
My moans the widowed dove will often repeat,
And every gale will sighs of mine convey!
Then go! -- But think of him, who, sad, forlorn --
Here pines and sickens for your dear return!
BENEDICT

SONNET. TO MAY.
IN vain, soft May, thy fragrant flowers blow;
In vain, thy feathered minstrels pour the strain
Of praise and love. -- I wretched, still remain
The child of suff'rance, and the prey of woe!
The faint Narcissus, and the musky rose,
I Have often wooed to my delighted breast;
The primrose, and the vi'let too, I chose,
And in one nosegay all their sweets compressed.
The lark's wild hymn, the linnet's artless lay,
Often "tuned to ecstacy" my youthful heart! --
But now! -- thy blossoms, and thy birds, soft May,
To this sad breast no rapture can impart!
MELISSA's frowns, thy gentle power control,
And spread the clouds of Winter over my soul.
BENEDICT.

SONNET. TO MELISSA.
WHENEVER thy angel-form salutes my eye,
What tender spasms convulse my beating heart!
My trembling limbs but small support impart;
My aching bosom heaves the deep-drawn sigh!
A wild confusion overwhelms my brain --
My falt'ring tongue cleaves to the parching roof,
My spirits fail! -- ah, melancholy proof
How well you are loved; -- though loved, alas! in vain!
-- Impelled by sorrow, should my lovely Maid
Bend her slow footsteps to the silent spot,
Where this distracted head shall soon be laid
In Death's chill clasp, by all -- but her -- forgot!! --
Oh! let her bid my wandering Spirit rest,
And the green sod lie lightly on my Breast.
BENEDICT.

SONNET. TO MELISSA.
THROUGH all the woes which destiny severe,
Has doomed this wretched bosom to sustain,
One tender thought still moderates its pain,
And saves my laboring mind from dire despair!
-- When far from thee by hopeless sorrow led,
Over stormy seas, and foreign lands thy love shall stray;
Though urged by want to ask precarious bread,
One tender thought shall cheer the toilsome way!
And when, at last, worn out by ceaseless care,
I seek lorn Melancholy's quiet cell,
For THEE I Will earnest breathe my latest prayer,
On thee my latest thought shall fondly dwell!
'Till the last sigh shall from my lips depart,
I Will keep the dear idea cherished in my heart!
BENEDICT.

SONNET. THE INVITATION.
COME, dear Melissa, come, where A Brook in Kent.
Craia pours
Her silver urn in murmuring lapse serene,
Near Bexley's humble fane, where every green
Shall join their foliage to refresh thy bowers.
Often by the winding stream thy love shall stray,
To lure with harmless guile the finny race;
Often too at eve, the dewy meeds he will trace,
And offer, at thy board, the speckl'd prey.
Pity, I know thy gentle breast will move,
For the dumb children of the teeming flood;
-- But they are formed for man's delight and good,
By Providence divine, and heavenly love.
My angel come! while summer wakes the strain,
And corn-flow'rs blow, and amorous doves complain.
BENEDICT.

SONNET. MELISSA!
HER dark-brown tresses negligently slow
In curls luxuriant, to her bending waist;
Her darker brows, in perfect order placed,
Guard her bright eyes, that mildly beam below.
The Roman elegance her nose displays --
Her cheeks soft blushing, emulate the rose,
Her witching smiles, the orient pearls disclose:
And over her lips, the dew of Hybla strays.
Her liberal mind, the gentler virtues own;
Her chasten'd wit, instructive lore impart;
Her lovely breast is soft Compassion's throne,
And Honor's temple is her glowing heart.
But I, like Patriarch Moses, praise and bless
The Canaan which I never shall possess!
BENEDICT.

SONNET. TO THE RIVER USK, IN MONMOUTHSHIRE.
OH, stream beloved! within whose gelid caves,
The Naiads sport the fervid noontide hour!
What bliss was mine, when in my native bower,
I sung my simple sonnet to thy waves!
Thy rocks romantic, and thy woods sublime,
Where erst the Druid watched the sacred oak,
And the rapt bard his lyre prophetic struck,
Filled the rough cadence of my artless rhyme.
When vernal suns dissolved the mountain snow,
And all the Nymphs were frighted from thy shore,
I loved to see thy flood, majestic flow,
And hear thy bold resistless current roar.
But now! -- far from thy banks, I hapless rove,
The slave of fair MELISSA and of Love!
BENEDICT.

SONNET. TO GENERAL ELLIOTT, ON HIS ARRIVAL FROM GIBRALTAR.
THOUGH Gratitude no arch triumphal rears
To grace the laureled HERO's late return;
And though no blazing trophies vainly burn,
Or mob tumultuous at thy car appears,
Yet shall thy name, and martial deeds be read,
While CALPE's rock defies the sea and wind!
THY NAME! -- the admiration of mankind,
The Briton's pride, and swarthy Spaniards dread!
Trust to the heavenly Muse thy well earned fame:
Hark! -- lovely SEWARD strikes the Horatian lyre.
On Trenta's bank with more than Roman fire,
And gives to endless Time thy GLORIOUS NAME!
ELLIOTT! accept this verse -- and it will be
Immortal too, because addressed to THEE.
BENEDICT.

PARTING ADDRESS TO DELLA CRUSCA.
Et vix sustinuit dicere lingua, vale!
Ovid.
AH, tuneful BARD! whose loss the world must grieve,
A last farewell, from one unknown, receive;
Could but my pen with magic force prevail,
Never should DELLA CRUSCA spread the sail;
Never seek in foreign climes repose to find,
Nor leave the Fair MATILDA's form behind:
But should thou, driven by adverse fortune, go,
Be thine the pleasure, ours alone the woe:
May thou be favored with some faithful friend,
May roseate Health on all thy steps attend;
Safely conduct thee to thy couch at eve,
And in the morn thy first salute receive;
And if sweet peace of mind can ever dwell
Where Love, Almighty LOVE, has fixed his spell,
Be peace of mind, and every joy thy guest,
While none buxt Love's soft transports warm thy breast.
And sure, if DELLA CRUSCA should once more,
By prosperous gales be borne to ALBION's shore,
His muse again will tune the vocal lay,
And gently steal the listening soul away: --
Again will sweetly charm the attentive throng,
With all the elegance of Classic Song!
Cold were the unfeeling breast which could refuse
A parting tribute to so sweet a muse;
Envious the hand that would attempt to tear
The laurel chaplet from thy flowing hair;
Not such his wish, who now attempts the lyre --
Warmed by a Spark of thy celestial fire,
Inspired by thee, his Muse has dared the flight,
Pays homage to thy lays -- then sinks in endless night.
THEODOSIUS.

THE AFRICAN BOY.
AH, tell me, little mournful MOOR,
Why still you llnger on the shore?
Haste to your play-mates, haste away,
Nor loiter here with fond delay:
When Morn unveiled her radiant eye,
You hailed me as I wandered by,
Returning at the approach of Eve,
Your meek salute I still receive.
Benign Enquirer, thou shall know
Why here my lonesome moments flow;
It Is said thy Countrymen (no more
Like rav'ning sharks that haunt the shore)
Return to bless, to raise, to cheer,
And pay Compassion's long arrear.
It Is said the numerous Captive Train,
Late bound by the degrading Chain,
Triumphant comes, with swelling sails,
'Mid smiling skies, and western gales;
They come with festive heart and glee.
Their hands unshackled -- minds as free;
They come at Mercy's great command,
To repossess their native land.
The gales that over the Ocean stray,
And chase the waves in gentle play,
Methinks they whisper as they fly,
JUELLEN soon will meet thine eye!
It Is this that soothes her little Son,
Blends all his wishes into one:
Ah! were I clasped in her embrace,
I would forgive her past disgrace;
Forgive the memorable hour
She fell a prey to tyrant power;
Forgive her lost, distracted air,
Her sorrowing voice, her kneeling prayer;
The suppliant tears that galled her cheek,
And last her agonizing shriek.
Locked in her hair, a ruthless hand
Trail'd her along the flinty strand;
A ru^^ian train, with clamours rude,
The impious spectacle pursued:
Still as she moved in accents wild
She cried aloud, My child! my child!
The lofty bark she now ascends;
With screams of woe, the air she rends:
The vessel lessening from the shore,
Her piteous wails I heard no more
Now as I stretched my last survey,
Her distant form dissolved away.
That day is past: I cease to mourn --
Succeeding joy shall have its turn,
Beside the hoarse-resounding deep,
A pleasing anxious watch I keep:
For when the morning clouds shall break,
And darts of day the darkness streak;
Perchance along the glittering main,
(Oh may this hope not throb in vain)
To meet these long-desiring eyes,
JUELLEN and the Sun may rise.
These elegant little Poems signed THE BARD we understand to be from the pen of
Mr. JERNINGHAM.
THE BARD.

TO MISS FARREN, ON HER BEING ABSENT FROM CHURCH.
WHILE wondering Angels, as they looked from high,
Observed thine Absence with an holy sigh,
To them a bright exalted Seraph said,
"Blame not the conduct of the absent Maid!
Wherever she goes, her steps can never stray,
RELIGION walks Companion of her way:
She goes with every virtuous thought impressed,
HEAVEN on her FACE, and HEAVEN within her BREAST."
THE BARD.

THE VOICE WE LOVE.
SOFT is the Zephyr's breezy wing;
And balmy is the breath of SPRING,
When over the silent dewy Vale
Its variegated sweets exhale,
Stolen from the fresh'ned flower,
Glist'ning with an evening shower,
From the VI'LET's nectar'd dew --
From the ROSE of blushing hue;
And from sweet THYME, empurpling all the ground,
It gathers rich perfume, and sheds the odours round:
Yet say, what sweets can half so fragrant prove,
As the soft Breath of those we fondly love?
Go listen to the softest Lute --
The most persuasive, magic song,
And hear the sweet responsive slute
The wild melodious strains prolong;
Attend awhile, the soft impassioned lyre,
That melts the frozen heart, and kindles fond desire.
SIMPLICITY, thy steps shall lead,
To the simple, verdant mead;
For to humble plains belong
The Oaten Pipe, and Past'ral Song:
Untutored in the School of Art,
They breathe the impulse of the heart! --
Hear the strain, and mark it well --
There true LOVE and HONOR dwell.
Whispering from among the trees,
Sighing to the passing wind,
Echoing back the evening breeze,
The soft Eolian Harp you will find.
Mark its wild, uncertain measure,
This is FANCY's sweetest treasure,
There she reigns, and while she sings,
Fairy fingers kiss the strings --
There the Blue-eyed PLEASURES meet --
There is LOVE's most favorite seat --
There of HOPE, the loved retreat,
And every thing that is soft, and every thing that is sweet.
Of all the rapt melodious tones,
That Heaven-descended MUSIC owns,
Recall the dear, the magic strain,
That seemed to vib'rate on thine heart,
And could a transient joy impart,
As the wild numbers lingered through the plain.
Then say, fond YOUTH, upon thy pensive breast,
Is not this truth indelibly impressed --
"No dulcet sounds can so harmonious prove,
As the soft accents of the Voice we love?"
CESARIO.

HENRY DECEIVED.
GOD OF THE BOW! how blind art thou!
Surely the fillet on thy brow
Is coarser wove, than was the case
When Mortals viewed thee face to face.
For well we know thine Eyes celestial,
When seen of old by Belles terrestrial,
Were decked with bandeau light and airy,
As might become a Summer Fairy.
Their soft blue orbs so slight were bound,
Thy piercing glance no hind'rance found;
The Gossamour's transparent skin
Reposing on the lucid air,
Appeared no longer light or thin,
If with thy veil it should compare.
Then was thy sight like Eagles' keen!
Nor Gods nor Men escaped thine eye,
Nor cavern dark, nor beamy sky --
Nay, Thoughts, scarce born, by thee were seen.
But now -- oh dull of eye and heart!
Thou know not WHENCE Love's ardours start;
And when stiff * *'s lines appear,
Thou whisper'st in my HENRY's ear
That they are EMMA's!!
HENRY believes -- HENRY admires;
He thinks he sees his EMMA's fires
Dart vigorous through each labored page --
He knows, and feels her tender rage;
Then asks -- " And can a Man like me,
Call forth such Poetry in thee?"
Believing that the pen is mine,
He faints with rapturous pause, on each delusive line.
Thou, HENRY, never can learn the wounds I felt,
Whilst you, unconscious, such barbed Satire dealt.
Midst your fond praise, my pierced heart inly bled,
And shame bowed down your EMMA's sorrowing head.
What! to be loved for Wit I never owned!
And by a STRANGER's Verse to be dethroned!
How did I hate the graces of her song --
The clustered sweets that round her soft lute throng;
Which like the Bees of Hybla's yellow woods,
Appeared to pour their wealth in golden floods.
My fancy pictured richer notes than fell
From him of old, who to the verge of hell
Led forth the wife he loved; -- but ah! when read,
Mad jealousy, and childish envy fled;
The harmless lines I saw, without one sigh,
And SMILING WONDER flashed across my eye.
Mistaking HENRY look once more;
Again read * *'s Verses over!
Should I complain of love betrayed?
I, write like some forsaken Maid --
Whilst the warm blood within thy veins
Flows but for ME? Whilst EMMA reigns
Supreme within thy inmost soul,
And distant, yet can still control
Its inmost movements, and desires,
And knows HERSELF sole object of its fires
Should She in dismal ditties mourn,
Whilst Love and Truth so brightly burn?
Mistaking HENRY, look once more --
Again read * *'s Verses over!
Were I the Poet, Thou the theme,
Think thou like here is my Verse would gleam:
With sunny rays, and misty hills,
Any myrtle groves, and foamy rills?
Oh no, THYSELF -- HENRY, Thyself alone
Should stand confessed on Love's ETERNAL THRONE;
Round THEE the brightness of my Verse should shine,
Round THEE my living Lays for ever, ever twine!
If Verse descriptive warms thy heart,
If that, bids throbs of Passion start,
I could seize Fancy's various clue;
Untired, her shifting steps pursue.
I Would call Night's Lamp a Crystal Bow --
Bid her, her silv'ry shafts bestow
Upon the tufted emerald plain,
Or shower them over the shining main:
Or when the full orb'd jolly Moon
Rode dull, and thoughtless to her noon,
I Would swear she dressed her white-lock'd hours
In choicest hue; -- and called forth flowers
Of softer tint, and mild perfume,
Wove in her own translucent loom,
To deck the world over which she hung --
An amorous, ray-crown'd, hovering Dove!
But when all this is said or sung,
It is not, foolish HENRY, LOVE.
I Would bear thee to the mountain's height,
Reared, midst the sparkling dome of night;
Observe the Court of Heaven hung round
With drops of flame on azure ground;
Show where bright VENUS rolls her car,
And where chill SATURN -- monstrous Star!
Through thirty years drives torpid on,
And all these Summers counts as ONE.
Bid Thee regard almost with scorn
Our trisling System; -- where is borne
In fond Attraction's airy chain
THE MIGHTY PLANETARY TRAIN.
For oh, beyond that System's bounds --
Where that, in all its various rounds
Never shed the faintest ray --
Where the vast Sun's unmeasured light
In rushing floods, in boundless flight,
Never imitated Day;
Far, far beyond new orbits trace
In wider heavens, in grander space,
Their gorgeous way in flame!
And these, again, in turn shall shrink,
Abashed, amidst CREATION sink,
And hardly own a name.
All these may ADORATION move --
With strong Devotion touch the soul,
Bid Piety her incense roll --
But still, my HENRY, it is not LOVE.
In future know, when vagrant Verse
Shall any other strain rehearse,
Though the rapt Pen may nicely blend
All TRUTH or FICTION ever could lend
To elevate the Lay.
Though all APOLLO's fire should seem
TO illume the Page with sacred beam,
And bless the Bard with bays --
Yet, if LOVE thrills not in each turn,
Nor seems along the line to burn,
Nor gives each verse the touch divine --
They are not wrote to THEE, nor are their glories MINE.
EMMA.

TO EMMA.
WAS it the SHUTTLE of the MORN
That wove upon the Cobweb'd Thorn
Thy airy Lay? -- Or did it rise
In thousand rich enameled dies,
To greet the Noonday Sun -- and glow
With brighter beams, than he can throw?
Or, was it wafted by the AUSTRAL BREEZE,
That bathes him in the wild perfume
Of every Rose's liquid bloom --
That hangs upon the Lily's lip --
Her silken beverage to sip --
Tell me -- O TELL ME, EMMA, which of these?
How burst the Music on my ear!
The only Music HENRY bears to hear!
I felt it! -- each strong nerve inflame!
Like a new soul usurp my heart,
And rage and burn in every part!
Ah! sure, not even Death's cold spell
Could the fierce fury of my passion quell!
But springing from this earthly dross,
Far, to the winds, my cares I Would toss,
And swear, before the living Shrine
Where Seraphs worship Truth Divine,
That still I LOVED BUT THEE -- and THOU WERE STILL THE SAME.
Ah! wonder not, a STRANGER SONG
Should cheat me thus -- I own it wrong.
Low, in the dust, my head I bow,
As if, I COULD, HAVE FALSIFY'D MY VOW!
Yes -- banish from thy thoughts surprise --
For, THOU art ever present to my eyes,
At each successive, varying hour!
THOU, whisper'st in the softening shower --
The Linnet's trill -- but tells of THEE!
THOU, smil'st upon the Summer's Sea!
And when "the Jolly Full Moon" laughs
In her clear Zenith to behold
The envious Stars, withdraw their gleams of gold,
It Is to THY HEALTH, she stooping quaffs
The Sapphire Cup that FAIRY ZEPHYRS bring,
Which, gay, intoxicating BLISS
With dewy glances paused to kiss,
Where FROLIC LOVE has dipped his purple wing!
Then let the HARP thy mad touch prove,
And SING -- and SING AGAIN -- of LOVE
Sing -- till FAINT EVENING drops to rest,
On WEEPING TWILIGHT'S DOWNY BREAST;
Till grey-hair'd MELANCHOLY DAWN,
Culls the loose vapors from the Shadowy Lawn!
And only check the rapture-breathing sound,
When faithful HENRY at thy feet is found!
YES, YES, I COME, wit lightning speed I fly,
To meet the Enchantment of thy melting eye!
To kneel before thee -- to subdue thy blame,
For still I LOVE BUT THEE -- and THOU ART STILL THE SAME!
HENRY.

We preserve the following poetry in this Edition for TWO reasons. It was the
FIRST poetic Offering ever made to the Memory of the UNFORTUNATE it mourns; and
because it came from a pen whose fervor and tenderness would prove it, without
a Signature, to be that of ANNA MATILDA.

MONOLOGUE.
O CHATTERTON! for thee the pensive song I raise,
Thou object of my wonder, pity, envy, praise!
Bright star of Genius! -- torn from life and fame,
My tears, my verse, shall consecrate thy name!
Ye Muses, who around his natal bed
Triumphant sung, and all your influence shed;
APOLLO! thou who rapt his infant breast,
And, in his daedal numbers, shone confessed,
Ah! why, in vain, such mighty gifts bestow
-- Why give fresh tortures to the Child of Woe?
Why thus, with barbarous care, illume his mind,
Adding new sense to all the ills behind?
Thou haggard! Poverty! whose cheerless eye
Transforms young rapture to the ponderous sigh;
In whose dear cave no Muse ever struck the lyre,
Nor Bard ever madden'd with poetic fire;
Why all thy spells for CHATTERTON combine?
His thought creative, why must thou confine?
Subdued by thee, his pen no more obeys,
No longer gives the song of ancient days;
Nor paints in glowing tints from distant skies,
Nor bids wild scen'ry rush upon our eyes --
Ceck'd in her flight, his rapid genius cowers,
Drops her sad plumes, and yields to thee her powers
Behold him, Muses! see your favorite son
The prey of WANT, ere manhood is begun!
The bosom ye have filled with anguish torn --
The mind you cherished drooping and forlorn!
And now Despair her sable form extends,
Creeps to his couch, and over his pillow bends.
Ah, see! a deadly bowl the fiend concealed,
Which to his eye with caution is revealed,
Seize it, APOLLO! -- seize the liquid snare!
Dash it to earth, or dissipate in air!
Stay, hapless Youth! refrain -- abhor the draught,
With pangs, with racks, with deep repentance fraught!
Oh hold! the cup with woe ETERNAL flows,
More -- more than Death the poisonous juice bestows!
In vain! -- he drinks -- and now the searching sires
Rush through his veins, and writhing he expires!
No sorrowing friend, no sister, parent, nigh,
To sooth his pangs, or catch his parting sigh;
Alone, unknown, the Muses' darling dies,
And with the vulgar dead unnoted lies!
Bright star of Genius! -- torn from life and fame,
My tears, my verse, shall consecrate thy name!
ANNA MATILDA.

A FRAGMENT.
ADDRESSED TO ***.
TOUCHED by thy wit my soul's on fire,
My bosom throbs with young desire.
What! though thy form I never saw,
Is there to man devulg'd a law
That only what he sees must touch his heart?
The vulgar rule I disallow,
And in my passion feel even now,
That wit, like beauty, gives the tender smart.
Methinks thy form I would not know,
Nor to thy face the pleasure owe
Of these delicious melting pains,
Which when a mortal once attains,
He knows the greatest bliss for man designed.
No, to my fancy I Will apply,
There find thy form, thy air, thy eye,
And feast my frenzy with a zest refined.
When in a pensive mood I sit,
And Melancholy takes her sit,
Mild, tender, soft, thou shall appear,
Like the first blossoms of the year:
But when in brisker tides my spirits run,
L'Allegro shall the pencil take,
Describe thy look, thy step, thy make,
And show the vivid as bright MAIA's son.
* * * * * * * * * *
* * * * * * * * * *
ANNA MATILDA.

The above Lines were written at an early age; after having read some exquisite
Poetry from the Pen of Mr. FOX. They are preserved at the end of the MAID OF
ARRAGON; without the information we now give.

The following Lines were addressed to Mr. HUMPHREY, the celebrated Miniature
Painter, on his

PORTRAIT OF MISS FARREN.
BY LORD DERBY.
O THOU, whose pencil all the Graces guide,
Whom Beauty, conscious of her fading bloom,
So often implores, alas! with harmless pride,
To snatch the transient treasure from the tomb.
Pleased, I behold the Fair, whose comic art
The unwearied eye of taste and judgment draws;
Who charms with Nature's elegance the heart,
And claims the loudest thunder of applause.
Such, such alone should prompt thy pencil's toil:
Of saving Folly give thy labor over;
Fools never will be wanting to our isle,
Perhaps a Farren may appear no more.
GENERAL CONWAY's ELEGY ON THE DEATH OF MISS CAROLINE CAMPBELL, Daughter of the
RIGHT HON. WILLIAM CAMPBELL.
SINCE it is the will of all-disposing Heaven,
To seize the boon its kinder hand had given:
Whether on earth thy friendly spirit rove,
Midst the once happy partners of thy love;
(Scenes where thy virtues reigned, thy talents shone,
And fond affection made each heart thy own;)
Or, bounding swift, has winged its airy flight
To the pure regions of eternal light;
Look down, fair Saint, and O, with pity see,
Where sad Remembrance lifts each thought to thee.
Accept the heaving sigh, the trickling tear;
The last, best offerings of a heart sincere.
What though no costly hecatcombs should bleed,
Nor lengthened train in sable pomp succeed;
Yet shall the sweetest flowers thy grave adorn,
Washed by the kindliest tears of dewy morn.
There shall each friend, thy heavenly virtues made,
With pious dirge invoke thy gentle shade;
Like fragrant incense the soft breath shall rise
And smooth thy passage to thy kindred skies.
Severely kind, O why did adverse fate
Grant such vast bounties with so scant a date?
Give such sweet fragrance to this short-lived flower,
The virtues of an age to last an hour!
It gave her wit might grace a Muse's tongue,
The charm of numbers, and the power of song;
The angelic touch to strike the trembling string,
And tune such notes as Heaven's own seraphs sing.
But O! o'er-bounteous with that sacred art,
It gave each nicer movement to the heart;
And her soft breast with strong sensation fired,
Felt the keen impulse which those arts inspired.
Too great a portion of celestial flame
Strained the frail texture of her weaker frame;
The subtle fire too powerful forced its way
Through the soft yielding mould of mortal clay;
As the clear air in crystal prison pent,
Often bursts its fair but brittle tenement;
While in the dust the glittering fragments lie,
The purer ether gains its native sky.
Ere the stern Sisters cut the vital thread,
I saw, and kissed her on the fatal bed,
Just as her gentle spirit took its slight,
And her faint eyelids closed in endless night;
No strong convulsions shook her parting breath;
No tremors marked the cold approach of Death:
Her heart still heaved with vital spirit warm,
And each soft feature wore its wonted charm.
Ah me! in this perplexing maze of fate;
This doubtful, erring, varying restless state;
Though guilt with swelling fail elate shall steer,
With pomp and pleasure crowned, its full career;
Though worth like thine no pitying power shall save,
From sickness, pain, and an untimely grave:
Yet stay, rash mortal, nor presume to scan,
By thy imperfect rule the Almighty's plan.
O censure not his Sovereign, high behest,
But prostrate own, whatever is, is best:
Judgment's the part of Heaven; Submission, thine:
We may lament; but we must not repine.
Each has his lot (for so does Heaven ordain)
His stated share of happiness and pain;
And mortals, best its just commands fulfill,
When they enjoy the good, and patient bear the ill.
EPITAPH ON MISS CAROLINE CAMPBELL.
O pensive PASSENGER! do not deny
To pause awhile, and weep upon this tomb;
For here the cold remains of CAMPBELL lie --
This narrow spot the vernal Maiden's doom.
With her, alas! the fairest talents fell --
And now her Harp's melodious song is over;
Gone is that Pulse, which PITY loved to swell,
And all her Virtues are on Earth no more.
Yes, she was gentle as the twilight breath,
That on the fainting Violet's bosom blows,
Meekly she bowed her to the Frost of Death,
In faded semblance of the Silver Rose.
And often low bending over this hallowed ground,
Shall the pure Angel, INNOCENCE appear;
And FRIENDSHIP, like a Hermit, shall be found,
To bathe the circling Sod with many a Tear.
AMICUS.

MARQUIS TOWNSHEND's VERSES ON HIS NIECE MISS GARDENER.
AS late FLORINDA on her deathbed lay,
And felt composed, each vital power decay;
No longer science could her bloom sustain,
And KINDRED TEARS The kindred tears, in the 4th line, are those of the
Marchioness of Townshend. This is the Incident painted by Mrs. Cosway.
in showers fall in vain:
The sun meridian glimmer'd to her eye,
And panting breath announc'd her end was nigh:
She turned, and smiling asked, "When shall I die?
In realms above my long-mourn'd mother join?
See, see her arms stretched out to meet with mine!"
Adieu, pure SOUL! with rapture take thy slight,
Quit thy dark mansion for Eternal Light! --
For bliss eternal! whilst at Heaven's gate
Thy sister Angels thy arrival wait,
Swift to conduct thee to thy parent's breast;
For Heaven has heard, and granted thy request.
Advertisement.
Since the Printing of the first Edition of these Works, the Correspondence
between DELLA CRUSCA and ANNA MATILDA has been renewed; -- THE EDITOR,
therefore, thinks it proper to continue their respective Writings up to the
present time; as also to insert the beautiful Poems by LAURA, and the one she
called forth from LEONARDO, etc. These latter Additions are necessary, on
account of the subsequent allusions to them, and because the lines signed
LEONARDO appear to have been produced by the pen of DELLA CRUSCA.

TO ANNA MATILDA.
IN VAIN I FLY THEE -- it is in vain,
The swift bark bears me over the boisterous main;
For mid the giant shades that sweep
The heaving bosom of the deep,
When rushing clouds, lashed by the gale,
Spread over the sun their transient veil,
THY FORM APPEARS! -- I see thee haste
Lightly athwart the wild'ring waste!
And shake thy burnished locks, and smile,
I see thee -- and adore the while.
Do I adore thee? -- ah, my Fair!
Since first thy sweet song soothed my heart,
I Have never known a bliss, a care,
But thou, MATILDA, gav'st a part!
When in HELVETIA's groves I lay,
For thee my hot sighs stole away,
And often with thee, methought at " morning's hour,
Seated in crystal roseate tower,
I saw the Goddess Health pursue
The skimming Breeze, through fields of Dew;"
While the high lark with quivering poize,
Told the gay story of his vernal joys!
And often as Twilight on the western edge,
Had twined his hoary hair with sabling sedge,
IMAGINATION fondly turned to thee,
And sought the solace of dear SYMPATHY.
Nor yet the yellow RHINE's impetuous wave,
A short oblivion of my passion gave;
Heedless I trod the sportive banks of RHONE,
For ANNA! O I live, I live for thee alone!
And when to LAURA's tomb I came,
Glowing with PETRARCH's purest flame,
As the first drop my pity shed,
I started as if thou were dead!
But hark! what cruel sounds are these,
Which float upon the languid breeze,
Which fill my mind with jealous fear,
Ah! See (...), and ANNA MATILDA's Answer, which are inserted (...) forty forth
p^ges, but which DELLA CRUSCA had never read (...) before his writing the above.
REUBEN is the name I hear.
For him my faithless ANNA weaves
A wreath of Rose, and Myrtle leaves;
On which the winged, amorous Boy
Has freely wept with tears of joy --
And binding soft her fav'rite's brows,
She mingles her too-tender vows.
Hence sounds severe! -- no more intrude --
Leave me to Peace and Solitude,
Leave me to tread Life's varying slope --
Leave me awhile to cherish Hope!
For even cold Critics have conceived,
So much alike our measures run,
And even the gentle have believed,
That ANNA AND THAT I WERE ONE --
Would it were so! -- we then might prove
The Sacred, settled unity of Love.
O supposition vain! alas!
I Have seen seven fleeting lustres pass,
And now the flush of life is over,
And if I ever could please, I please no more,
Yet though my hasty youth is flown,
ANNA! I worship thee unknown --
And check for thee my wandering course,
And yield to thy mysterious force --
And I again will take my flute
When slumbering Nature's self is mute,
Save where perchance the Aspin wood
That whispers over yon Midnight flood,
Shall drop its shattered honors round,
In seeming sorrow at the sound.
And as my faithful voice I raise,
With all the fervency of praise,
O may I lure thee from thy secret bower
To cheer once more my melancholy hour --
So shall I grateful bless strong Fate's decree,
That bids me still RETURN TO POETRY -- and THEE.
DELLA CRUSCA.
October 28, 1788.
TO HIM WHO WILL UNDERSTAND IT.
THOU art no more my bosom's Friend;
Here must the sweet delusion end
That charmed my Senses many a year,
Through smiling Summers -- Winters drear.
O FRIENDSHIP! am I doomed to find
Thou art a Phantom of the Mind --
A glittering Shade, an empty Name,
An air-born Vision's vap'rish Flame?
And yet the dear Deceit so long
Has waked to joy my Matin Song,
Has bid my tears forget to flow,
Chased every Pain, soothed every Woe;
That TRUTH, unwelcome to my ear,
Swells the deep sigh, recals the tear,
Gives to the sense the keenest smart,
Checks the warm pulses of the heart,
Darkens my fate, and steals away
Each gleam of joy through life's sad day.
BRITAIN, farewell! I quit thy shore;
My Native Country charms no more;
No guide, to mark the toilsome road,
No destined clime, no fixed abode,
Alone and sad, ordained to trace,
The vast expanse of endless space;
To view upon the mountain's height,
Through varied shade of glimmering light,
The distant landscape fade away
In the last gleam of parting day;
Or in the quivering lucid stream,
To watch the pale Moon's silver beam;
Or, when in sad and plaintive strains
The Mournful PHILOMEL complains,
In dulcet notes bewails her fate,
Deserted by a FAITHLESS MATE;
Inspired by Sympathy divine,
I Will weep her Woes -- FOR THEY ARE MINE.
Driven by my fate, wherever I go,
Over burning sands, over hills of snow;
Or on the bosom of the wave,
The howling tempest doomed to brave;
Wherever my lonely course I bend,
Thy image shall my steps attend;
Each object I am doomed to see,
Shall bid remembrance PICTURE THEE.
Yes, I shall VIEW THEE in each flower
That changes with the transient hour;
Thy wandering fancy I shall find
Borne on the wings of every wind;
Thy wild impetuous passions trace,
Over the white wave's tempestuous space;
In every changing season prove,
An emblem of thy wavering Love.
Torn from my Country, Friends, and YOU,
The world lies open to my view;
New objects shall my mind engage,
I will explore the HISTORIC PAGE;
Sweet POETRY shall sooth my soul,
PHILOSOPHY each pang control;
The MUSE I Will seek -- her lambent fire
My soul's quick senses shall inspire I
With finer nerves my heart shall beat,
Touched by Heaven's own Promethean heat;
ITALIA's gales shall bear my song
In soft-link'd notes her woods among;
Upon the blue hill's misty side,
Through trackless deserts, waste and wide;
Over craggy rocks, whose torrents flow;
Upon the silver sands below;
Sweet LAND of MELODY, it is thine
The softest passions to refine;
Thy myrtle groves thy melting strains,
Shall harmonize and sooth my pains.
Nor will I cast one thought behind,
On Foes relentless -- Friends unkind; --
I feel, I feel their poisoned dart
Pierce the life nerve within my heart,
It Is mingled with the vital heat
That bids my throbbing pulses beat;
Soon shall that vital heat be over,
Those throbbing pulses BEAT no more --
No! -- I will breathe the spicy gale,
Plunge the clear stream, new health exhale;
Over my pale cheek diffuse the rose,
And DRINK OBLIVION TO MY WOES!
This Poem was written by Mrs. ROBINSON.
LAURA.
Nov. 29, 1788.
TO LAURA.
LAURA! I heard thy warbled woes,
At fading Twilight's solemn close:
They met me in yon dreary vale,
Just as the Ringdove ceased her tale.
A tale like thine, which seemed to speak,
That soon her wounded heart would break!
Was it, perhaps, she sought the grove,
In lone solicitude of Love?
Was it, like thee, a faithless mate
She mourned too sadly, and too late?
Surely it was -- for with the note
I found such melting anguish float,
That watery vapors dimmed my eye,
And ALL MY SOUL WAS SYMPATHY.
Nor wonder that I so was moved.
For I have suffered I have loved,
Have felt the truest passion burn,
Have known the ecstatic blessed return,
Have watched the look of languor cast,
To show the rig'rous hour was past:
Then have I pressed the blushing Fair,
With pangs -- how different from despair!
Yet was the bliss so pure, so chaste,
That Seraphs might the rapture taste.
Alas! the joy was doomed to fade,
Like Day's proud flush in Evening shade --
The EYE, so settled once, would range --
The long-fix'd HEART began to change!
Ah! then, I thought with thee -- to try
The only refuge left -- and fly.
On many a foreign shore to roam,
And leave my rending cares at home.
Yes, I have trod the ALPINE steep,
By rushing PO have stopped to weep;
On the loud DANUBE's banks have stood,
And Eastward crossed the CASPIAN flood.
It Is but ILLUSION; -- yet remains
Unfaded memory of pains,
The circle wid'ning for relief,
Has still the central point of grief!
Then from the alluring thought recoil --
It Is desolating fruitless toil!
But most avoid ITALIA's coast,
Where every sentiment is lost,
Where TREACH'RY reigns, and base DISGUISE,
And MURDER -- looking to the Skies,
While sordid SELFISHNESS appears
In low redundancy of scars.
O! what can MUSIC's voice bestow,
Or SCULPTURED GRACE, or TITIAN GLOW,
To recompense the feeling mind
For British virtues left behind?
Here rather here, thy ills confound,
To list the billows roar around,
To see the misty Phantoms glide,
On the choked river's willowy side,
When the YOUNG MOON aspires to stream
Her scanty Crescent's feeblest beam.
Then, wistful mark the drenching showers
That foil gav Summer's fairest flowers;
Scorn the fierce storm, the season dare,
And learn to TRIUMPH, or to BEAR!
But if thy sorrow softened heart
In vain resists the venomed dart,
With mine thy deep afflictions blend,
And for a LOVER LOST, receive a FRIEND.
This Poem, though signed LEONARDO, is from the Pen of DILLA CRUSCA.
LEONARDO.
Dec. 23, 1788.
TO DELLA CRUSCA.
"And Time, and Youth, and LOVE, must pass away."
Creech.
WHILST I danced gaily in the round
Of Folly, on her fairy ground;
And played, and sung, and laughed away
The feath'ry hours of Life's short day,
Thy INVOCATION, like the flame
Which starts from the Electric frame,
Struck on my heart! I sighed, I turned,
And ANNA yet for DELLA CRUSCA mourned.
When wounded PRIDE sussus'd its blush,
And over my nerves its tremors rush.
Never will I " leave my secret bower,
To cheer thy melancholy hour."
Secure within I will remain,
And smile at thy factitious pain;
And when thy Poetry so sweet
Shall next my wandering glances meet,
I Will spare a sigh to moments fled --
But ANNA shall to thee be dead.
See -- to my couch I laughing turn --
Poetic Passions vainly burn!
The freshest Rose-leaves for my head
Shall form a blushing scented bed;
The elastic Camomile unprest,
Invite the sickening heart to rest.
FLORA shall every gift shower round,
And bid her bright gems deck the ground,
The MYRTLE only there
Shall never unfold its odorous boughs,
Never flaunt its blossoms fair,
Frail, and alluring as thy vows!
It Is Love's devoted tree --
Oh! bid it seek some other home,
Nor spread its sweets for me,
Nor shed its poison round my Dome!
Hah! did thou hope I should not trace
The mental features of thy face?
Did thou believe the thickest veil
Could DELLA CRUSCA's brow conceal?
Oh! how impossible a task
To hide thy radiance in a mask!
Thy living fires destroy the skreen,
Thou stand'st contest! -- thy form is seen.
Yes, write to LAURA! speed thy sighs,
Tell her, her DELLA CRUSCA dies;
In sweetest measures sing thy woes,
And speak thy hot LOVE's ardent throes; --
And when it next shall please thy heart
Toward some other Fair to start,
The gentle Maiden's versed in cures
For every ill, fond Love endures.
She " drinks Oblivion" to its pains --
And vows to stain her pallid cheek
With juices of red Grapes so sleek,
And sings adieus in Bacchanalian strains.
FALSE Lover! TRUEST Poet! now farewell!
Hark! in yon Curfews sound is tolled the knell
Of our departed Loves. The pensive tale
The surging aother floats across the vale;
The Elegiac sound sooths my sad ear,
And the moist lid sustains a trembling tear.
The crimson veil which decked yon mountain's brow,
And glided into gentlest tints, but now,
Already blackens down its swelling side,
And soon the beauties of the plain will hide --
The outstretch'd beauties! where salubrious to^
Calls food, and riches from the sterile soil.
O! wondrous magic! shall great Labor's name,
Remain unhallowed by the voice of Fame?
CREATIVE LABOR! whose all-bounteous hand
Drops slow'rs, and fruits, and forests over the land;
Who bids the indented river curving sly,
Or fix, a silv'ry lake beneath the eye!
But these all sink before the falling Night,
Who tries to sezie the flitting beams of light,
But the proud light its amorous touch eludes,
And a dim shadow over the landscape broods.
Soft drizzling rain, the patter'd trees confess,
And chilling breezes on my bosom press.
My hair, whose curls, late floated over my breast,
Weighty with moisture, clings around my vest --
Where -- where is the hand to press those tresses dry,
The fond encircling arm, the cheering eye?
Why sigh the winds tumultuous through the woods,
Why weeps the Night in such impetuous floods?
It is the loss of DELLA CRUSCA's Muse,
Which thus with sorrow every plant imbues;
For never shall again his " Golden Quill,"
With magic passion every bosom thrill.
He yet may write, but ANNA 'twas alone
Lured down his guardian Goddess from her throne;
Who whilst she poured the richest of her store,
And charmed his heart with bright poetic lore,
Phophetic, thus his future history read,
And wreathed it in the laurels for his head:
"If false, thou ever MATILDA's heart should wring,
And to another nymph presume to sing,
My inspiration thou no more shall know,
My fire in thee, no more divinely flow."
The Goddess spoke, her words were marked by fate,
And DELLA CRUSCA mourns his ANNA's wrongs, too late!
ANNA MATILDA.
Feb. 26, 1789.
LAURA TO ANNA MATILDA.
O ANNA, since thy graceful song
Can wind the cadence soft among
The heart's fine nerves, and ravish thence
The wondering Poet's captive sense;
'Till warmed by thy electric fire,
His yielding soul, with fond desire,
Glows but for thee -- dispel thy fears,
Nor stain thy downy cheek with tears.
O quit thy "blushing scented bed,"
Pluck the pale roses from thy head,
Again with native luster shine,
And round thy polished brow the unfading MYRTLE twine.
Subdue the haggard WITCH, whose em'rald eye
Darts fell Revenge, and pois'ning Jealousy;
Mark, where amidst her ebon hair,
The scaly serpents mingling twine
While darting through the infected air,
The murderous vapors shine!
O turn thee, ANNA, quickly turn,
Where DELLA CRUSCA's torch shall burn
For thee alone; his harp is strung,
To the soft music of thy tongue;
No Verse of mine his song inspired; --
Thy notes so loved, so long admired,
Still vibrate in his glowing heart,
Where every chord is tuned to thy poetic Art.
Ah! let me, for repose, repair,
Where Sorrow steals to weep her care,
Deep in some cave, or craggy cell,
Where the lone Screech Owl loves to dwell.
And O! my cheerless couch I Will spread,
While spangled with the lunar dew,
The Nightshade, and the baneful Yew,
Shall wind about my head.
There will I breathe a strain forlorn,
And like a lingering wint'ry morn,
Pale and with chilling rays appear,
Cold glimmering through a crystal tear,
Yet let me DELLA CRUSCA's lays admire,
Still gaze with hallowed rapture on his fire;
List his soft tones of melting mood,
Sweeter than Ringdove ever coo'd,
Tuneful as METASTASIO's tongue,
Or plaintive PETRARCH's witching song.
I feel no wish, no selfish joy,
Another's transports to destroy;
Ambition is not worth the name,
That meanly shines with borrowed fame.
No counterfeited bliss my heart shall own,
The conscious Mourner sighs for BAYARD's vows alone.
Since his loved voice first caught my ear,
Often have I tried to calm my woe,
Often have I brushed away the tear --
The tear his numbers taught to flow.
I seize the Lyre, to sooth my grief,
Court mazy Science for relief; --
Vain is the effort, it is in vain --
The fierce vibration fills my brain,
Burns through each aching nerve with poignant smart,
And riots cureless in my bleeding heart.
It Is not "the Bacchanalian bowl,"
Can free from pain the sickening soul;
The "brewed enchantment's" poison fell!
The mellow grape's nectareous juice
Suits the base mind; its baleful use
Throws over the sense, a torpid spell.
But LETHE's pure and limpid stream,
Shall calm the thought, from passion's dream,
It Is there my breast shall seek repose,
And drink "Oblivion to its woes."
LAURA.
March 1, 1789.
TO ANNA MATILDA.
-- At her footstool stands
An altar burning with eternal fire,
Unsullied, unconsumed.
Akenside.
HEAVEN OF MY HEART! again I hear
Thy long-lost voice, but ah! the tear
Steals from my lids, and deadly pain
Creeps in cold langour through each gasping vein.
And can that mind I love so well,
Thy Soul's deep tone, thy Thought's high swell,
The proud poetic fervor, known
But in thy breast's prolific zone,
Can these combine to curse me? can that gaze,
In whose rich orb the FAIRY FANCY plays,
Through which, the charms that ART and NATURE show,
Spring to the judgment, and there brighter glow;
Can that be changed to anger? can thou doom
My future wish to dwell upon the tomb?
Can thou, SO KEEN OF FEELING! urge my fate
And bid me mourn thee, yes, and MOURN TOO LATE?
O rash severe decree! my madd'ning brain
Cannot the ponderous agony sustain,
But forth I rush, as varying Frenzy leads,
To cavern'd lakes, or to the diamond meads,
Over which the sultry noon-beams wide dissuse,
And slake their eager thirst with lingering dews;
Or to yon sullen slope that shuns the light,
Where the black forest weaves meridian night,
Disordered, lost, from hill to plain I run,
And with my Mind's thick gloom obscure the Sun!
For naught to me, alas! can now avail
The fresh'ning vapors of the perfumed dale,
The distant sea-waves' variegated green
Or the soft anguish of Night's eye serene,
They cannot yield me comfort, though the Spring
Should shake spontaneous beauty from her wing,
Or guide my footsteps to the enchanted lawn,
Where blushing pleasure hymns the birth of dawn,
Still would I pause to weep, still would I turn
From scenes like these, to the neglected Urn
That mid some grove in solemn ruin lies,
And tells, how the forsaken Lover dies!
There would I fondly clasp the broken stone,
And whisper every mental pang I Have known,
Repeat the dread inexorable word,
That stern MATILDA spoke -- MATILDA! most adored!
When at the last year's close of May,
From thy sweet chains I burst away,
And dashed my woe-worn Harp upon the ground,
Still in my flight Love's rapturous hope was found.
But now all soothing Hope is past; in vain
I checked my progress on the midland main,
In vain to EUROPE'S CONTINENT I came,
Lured by the light of thy poetic flame,
In vain I bade my wandering toil be over,
And on MATILDA called with trembling tongue ONCE MORE.
And think thou, ANNA! that my love,
Like thine, could ever faithless prove,
That in some female REUBEN's praise,
I the impassioned verse could raise;
That I so quickly led astray,
Could wake the warm inconstant lay?
No -- though concealed, I struck my lyre,
When by dull EVENING's fading fire
Pale ECHO sat; who as she caught the sound,
Gave the week murmur to the woods around;
Yet, 'twas thy Image filled my mind --
I heard a tuneful Phantom in the wind,
I saw it watch the rising Moon afar,
Wet with the weepings of the twilight Star,
Assiduous Zephyr told me it was thou,
And wondering, NOT DECEIVED, I breathed the friendly vow.
If I have wronged thee, my hot tears
Shall melt thy rage, or flow for years;
For oh! till then my days shall go
In deep regret, unaltered woe,
In mute reflection, heavy care,
And SOLITUDE's supreme despair!
But still for thee my breast shall beat
With the most faithful honest heat;
Then save me, save me, let thy radiant smile
Again restore me, or again beguile;
With melting music calm my bosom's groan,
O deign to pity him, who loves but thee alone!
And whither shall I turn from thee?
For in thy absense all things fade;
FRIENDSHIP, I know, is but a glittering shade,
A sweet deception -- strange uncertainty!
Nor could AMBITION's busy rage
An anguish such as mine assuage,
Vain must the world's best glories prove,
To fill the vacuum in the heart of love.
How brightly spreads the opening flower!
What beauteous life informs the bower!
How fair the streams of curling silver glide!
How rich the harvest waves its golden pride!
It Is LIGHT's creation all -- when that retires,
The pictures perish, and the charm expires.
So the faint colors of my mimic lays,
Drew their false luster from MATILDA's blaze;
But soon the tints shall vanish -- it is decreed,
And endless darkness come, if SHE recede.
THEN HEAR MY WORD, by that fierce Orb,
Whose flame scarce all the skies absorb,
By every winged blast that goes
To its full banquet on the Rose;
By truth, eternal, undefiled,
By gentlest Sorrow's warblings wild;
By the gay tresses of the morn;
By Earth, and Sea, and Heaven, it is sworn,
That never again this hand shall fling
Its feeble tremors to the string,
Till thou, MATILDA! bidst the measure pour,
Till then, THY DELLA CRUSCA WRITES no MORE.
DELLA CRUSCA.
March 16, 1789.
TO DELLA CRUSCA.
AMBIGUOUS NATURE formed the female heart
So proud, capricious, cold and warm,
That much she feared her FIRST COMMAND
Inert would prove, throughout the land;
So gave the counteracting charm --
On favored Man bestowed sagacious ART.
Thus whilst my keen resentment flowed,
Thy Vow upon my bosom glowed;
Sage anger instant took her flight,
And from thy muse a joy so bright
Dissus'd itself through all my veins,
That hanging over thy charming strains,
My lips spontaneously unclose,
And thus the proud petition rose: --
"O! MONARCH of the Heaven-given lyre!
Thou, who the Theban Peasant did inspire
With radiant knowledge, and poetic taste,
To spread thy numbers over the flinty waste --
In my yet darker mind thy beam infuse,
And let me feel the high-inspiring muse:
Give me one spark of DELLA CRUSCA's light,
Teach me like him to think -- to paint -- to write!
Pour on my pen his rich abounding lay,
Which EARTH and HEAVEN sublimely can display.
Mark! how his varying touch makes ever new
Objects grown flat, on long accustomed view; --
Even TRUTH itself his pencil can command --
IMMUTABLE! she bends beneath his hand;
In differing characters she starts from rust,
Decked in OPPOSING colors; yet opposing, JUST,"
Thus as I prayed, unwelcome slumbers came,
But lively, wakeful thought remained the same --
And to APOLLO's Temple led my feet,
The same ambitious wishes to repeat.
With downcast eyes I near the Altar kneel,
And sacred fervours on my bosom steal;
My folded hair devoutly I unbound,
And dashed my once-proud laurels on the ground.
My robes, more white than the soft down which flies
Over thistled deserts, through autumnal skies,
Wide, over the tesselated pavement flowed;
And round, the everlasting tapers glowed:
Again I utter forth my fond desire,
But 'midst the incense my proud hopes expire.
The Paean'd GOD now shook his beamy throne,
And through the dome indignant radiance shone;
" Presumptuous ANNA!" was the stern reply
From HIM, who rolls day's orbit through the sky,
"The mighty boon thou'st asked shall never be thine;
PARNASSUS hear! record the oath divine!
Yet more -- to punish thy aspiriring hope
Which led thee with MY CHOSEN SON to cope,
The small -- small portion of celestial flame
Thou stol'st from him of the immortal name,
Hence MOULDERS! -- fades upon thy darkened soul,
Nor leaves one spark, through the chill void to roll."
Shocked at my fate, my ready lids unclose,
And the harsh vision from my pillow rose!
Oh, barbarous vision! which I live to rue --
For though a dream thou were -- my doom is true;
APOLLO's just decree too sure I feel,
And on my spirit torpid languors steal.
Hah! what avails my DELLA CRUSCA's vow?
Poetic ardors fly me now!
What! though the ROSE's morning blush
Rivals the Western clouds, which rush
To mix their crimson with the gold
That round the SINKING SUN is rolled; --
What! though MAY's Zephyrs in the groves,
Attentive to the harmonious loves
Of the bewitching feathered race,
Forget to breathe on EARTH's moist face; --
What! though the blossoms in the mead,
Beneath the heifer's fragrant tread,
Exude soft balm upon the wind,
And all their mingled sweets unbind;
Yet shall sad ANNA never know
The boundless sweets which round her flow.
Whether the MOUNTAIN's breath I drink,
Or midst the Vale's embroid'ry sink, --
FANCY no more will aid the scene,
Nor flutter over me on the Green.
With liquid step when the pure stream
Dancing, shall through its borders gleam;
When FLORA from her rainbow wing
Shall shake the tints which from the spring,
When music wanders 'midst the shade,
When perfumes AIR's blue sea pervade,
A WINTER over my mind will spread,
Nor tints, nor scents, nor liquid streams be read.
HAPLESS MY FATE! unoccupy'd, unblest
Sickening with ease -- hating the tasteless rest --
Whilst LAURA still may dress the lay
In all the luster of the day;
With such sweet pensiveness complain,
That mortals are in love with pain;
For, ah! it falls like APRIL's snow
Upon the Crocus' purple glow;
Soft, as the flutt'rings of the fainting gale,
Oppressed by LEO, flaming over the vale!
But shall not DELLA CRUSCA sue
For her who to HIS MUSE is true?
For ONE who round her heart has wreathed
All the rich strains he ever breathed; --
Will HE not strive to break the avenging rod? --
Oh fly, thou Poet blessed, AND STRUGGLE WITH THE GOD!
ANNA MATILDA.
PARIS March 29, 1789.
THE INTERVIEW.
O WE HAVE MET, and now I call
On you dark clouds that as they fall,
Sweep their long showers across the plain,
Or mingle with the clamorous main.
Alas! I call them here, to pour
Around my head that gathered store,
While the loud gales which speed away
To the far edge of weeping day,
Mid the tumultuous gloom shall bear
On their wet wings my sighed despair.
OF LATE -- where confluent torrens crash,
I paused to view the mazy dash
Of waters, shattering in the twilight beam;
While often my wandering eye would trace
The distant forest's solemn grace.
As over its black robe hung the tawny gleam.
Nor then on joys gone by, my Memory dwelt,
Nor all the pangs which wounded Friendship felt;
But ANNA, though unknown, usurped my mind,
Alone she claimed the tributary tear,
For every solace, every charm combined
In the sweet madd'nings of her song sincere.
Sudden I turn -- for from a young grove's shade,
Whose infant boughs but mock the expecting glade,
Sweet sounds stole forth -- upborne upon the gale,
Pressed through the air, and broke amidst the vale.
Then silent walked the breezes of the plain,
Or lightly wantoned where the corn-flow'r blows,
Or amongst the odorous wild-thyme sought repose,
Or soared aloft and seized the hovering strain.
As the fond Lark, whose clear and piercing shake
Bids Morning on her crimson bed awake,
Hears from the greensward seat his fav'rite's cry,
Drops through the heavens, and scorns the glowing sky:
So I, soul-touch'd, the impetuous Cat'ract leave,
And almost seem the etherial waste to cleave,
Allured entranced, I rush amidst the wood,
AND THERE THE SOFT MUSICIAN CONSCIOUS STOOD:
Ah! 'twas no visionary Fair,
Imagination's bodied air
That now with strong illusion caught,
Mental creations fled my thought,
A living Angel blessed my sight,
Strung every nerve to new delight,
With joy's full tide bedewed my cheek,
'Twas ANNA's self I saw, NOR HAD I POWER TO SPEAK.
O then I led her to the woven bower,
Where slept the Woodbine's sheltered flower,
Where bending over the Violet's bed
The Rose its liquid blushes shed;
While near the feathered Mourner flung
Such plaints from his enamored tongue,
That all subdued at my MATILDA's feet
I sunk, but with an agony more sweet,
Than favored mortal ever before had proved,
Or ever yet conceived unless like me he loved.
SHE SPOKE, but O! no sound was heard
Of the wanton, rapturous bird,
That climbs the morning's upmost sky,
When first the golden vapors fly;
But fainter was the moving measure,
Than the Linnet's noontide leisure
Lets the sultry breezes steal --
Dare thou, my tongue! the tale reveal?
"ILL-FATED BARD!" she cried, "whose lengthening grief
Had won the pathos of my lyre's relief,
For whom, full often, I Have loiter'd to rehearse
In phrenzied mood the deep impassioned verse,
Ill-fated Bard! from each frail hope remove,
And shun the certain Suicide of Love:
Lean not to me, the impassioned verse is over,
Which chained thy heart, and forced thee to adore:
For O! observe where haughty Duty stands,
Her form in radiance dressed, her eye severe,
Eternal Scorpions writhing in her hands
To urge the offender's unavailing tear!
Dread Goddess, I obey!
Ah! smooth thy awful terror-striking brow,
Hear and record MATILDA's sacred vow!
Never will I quit the undeviating LINE,
Whose SOURCE THOU art, and THOU the LAW DIVINE.
The Sun shall be subdued, his system fade,
Ere I forsake the path thy FIAT made;
Yet grant one soft regretful tear to flow,
Prompted by pity for a Lover's woe,
O grant, without REVENGE, one bursting sigh,
Ere from his desolating grief I fly. --
It Is past, -- Farewell! ANOTHER claims my heart,
Then wing thy sinking steps, for here we part,
WE PART! and listen, for the word is MINE,
ANNA MATILDA NEVER CAN BE THINE!"
She ceased, and sudden like an evening wind
Rushing, some imprisoned tempest to unbind,
And all regardless of the scenes it leaves,
Skimming over bending blooms, and russet sheaves,
MATILDA fled! the closing Night pursued,
And the cold INGRATE scarce I longer viewed;
Her form grew indistinct -- each step more dim,
And now a distant vapor seems to swim,
Her white robe glistens on my eye no more,
Its strainings are all in vain -- THE FOND DELUSION'S OVER. All the lines in
this Poem printed in Italics, are from the pen of ANNA MATILDA.

MY SONG SUBSIDES, yet ere I close
The lingering lay that feeds my woes,
Ere yet forgotten DELLA CRUSCA runs
To torrid gales, or petrifying suns,
Ere bowed to earth my latest feeling flies,
And the big passion settles on my eyes;
O may this sacred sentiment be known,
That my adoring heart is ANNA'S OWN;
YES, ALL HER OWN, and though ANOTHER claim
Her mind's rich treasure, still I love the same;
And though ANOTHER, O how blessed! has felt
Her softened soul in dear delirium melt,
While from her gaze the welcome meaning sprung,
As on her neck in frantic joy he hung,
Yet I will bear it, and though Hell deride,
My pangs shall sooth, my curse shall be my pride.
Nor can HE boast like me; O no, HE found
The tranquillizing balm that cures the wound;
HE never knew the loftier bliss, to rave,
Without a power to aid, a chance to save;
HE never bathed him in the Nightshade's dew,
Nor drank the poisonous meteors as they flew,
Nor told his rending story to the Moon,
Linked with the demons of her direct noon;
HE never smiled Distraction's ills to share,
Nor gained the exalted glory of despair.
Then be it HIS, for many a year to enfold
Those charms, and wanton in her curls of gold,
Drain the sweet fountain of her eye's fond stream,
And fancy suff'rance but the wretch's dream;
While I will prove that I deserve my fate,
Was born for anguish, and was formed for hate,
With such transcendent woe will breathe my sigh,
That envying fiends shall think it ECSTACY,
And with fierce taunts my cherished griefs invade,
Till on my pow'rless tongue the last "MATILDA" fade.
DELLA CRUSCA.
June 16, 1789.
TO PHILANDER, This Poem was, in the former Editions, addressed to DELLA CRUSCA.
Who said, "WHEN I AM DEAD, WRITE MY ELEGY"
-- ibimus, ibimus,
Utcunque praecedes, supremum
Carpere iter comites parati.

YES, I would write; the sad command
Lives in each melancholy throb
Which lifts my heart. Thy ANNA's hand,
When death that melting eye shall rob
Of the blue flames which flashing there,
Thy burning soul so well declare --
Thy ANNA's hand that soul shall then disclose,
And by indulging, charm her weary woes.
Forth would I rush, whilst Night's dim orb
The blackest vapors of the sky absorb;
And should a lingering Star with glittering beam,
Send through the air its silvery stream,
I Would tell it that PHILANDER WAS NO MORE --
Strait would its glittering beam be sad;
And the wide heavens in darkness clad
Would join to mourn, WHOM I should then deplore.
Quick to the cypress forest I would hie,
Whose thick gloom never drank the healthful sky,
And from its deepest central spot,
Where misery had raised her flinty grot,
A bough I Would tear;
Whilst shrieking through the ebon air
The Night Bird's voice would dismal echo wake,
And with its lorn complaints the resting valleys shake.
Then would I find where yew-trees wave,
Over some unhappy Lover's grave,
Their desolated shade;
And from their baleful branches brush
The poisonous dews! -- or madly crush
The juices from the riven rind
That never again the naked trunk should bind.
My chosen cypress reed I Would then immerse,
And calling on the Muse of melancholy verse,
With the YEW'S TEARS I Would story all my woe,
Nor should a mingling TEAR of MINE presume to flow.
No! I would scorn to weep. The glorious grief
Should gorge upon my heart, and spurn relief.
How I would write of dear PHILANDER dead!
O! I would weave such verse, that round my hea!
The Demons of the Night,
Arrested in their wheeling slight,
Should learn to pity and to mourn,
And curse their bounded power,
Which would not let them say RETURN! RETURN!
I Would paint his form, and every varying grace
Impressed by FEELING on his manly face,
Then should forever live his SAPPHIRE EYE,
And though his sensate heart in earth dissolves,
As Time, obliterating, round revolves,
THAT BEAM at least should never, never die!
But O! how should I paint his mind,
A taste so true, and so refined!
How should I speak of his IMMORTAL MUSE
That now can such delight diffuse?
A Muse which forms a NATION'S TASTE!
And over the weedy waste
Of long-neglected Poetry had thrown
A vivid light, which so sublimely shone.
That to its source ten thousand poets flew,
And formed their songs, and tuned their harps anew.
But yes! even of HIS MUSE I Would speak;
And though I know the swelling theme
Would shake my soul, till in the extreme
Of strong sensation every nerve would break;
Yet having then fulfilled my task,
Done, what last night's soft shadows heard him ask,
What could I next but die?
Yes, I would court HIM vainly famed
THE KING OF TERRORS! Oh, how lightly named!
Would he not be my bosom's friend?
Would not the sighs his agonies would rend
From my torn heart, be passports bright
To wing me to the fields of living light;
Where, from the rapt seraphic throng
My own PHILANDER's powerful song
Would be the first to seize my ear,
And make me feel that HEAVEN WAS NEAR?
Come then, pale King! feed on my feeble breath;
O! come, thou stay'st too long -- too long ENCHANTING DEATH.
ANNA MATILDA.
June 19, 1789.
TO A -- E B -- N.
THINK not, TRANSCENDENT MAID! my woe
Shall ever trouble thy repose;
The mind no lasting pang can know,
Which lets the tongue that pang disclose.
Sorrow is sacred when it is true,
In deep concealment proudly dwells,
And seems its passion to subdue,
When most the impulsive throb compels.
For HE who dares assert his grief,
Who boasts the anguish he may prove,
Obtains, perhaps, the wished relief,
BUT O! THE TRAITOR DOES NOT LOVE,
The LOVER is a Man afraid,
Has neither grace, nor ease, nor art,
Embarras'd, comfortless dimay'd,
He sinks the VICTIM OF HIS HEART.
He feels his own demerits most,
When he should most aspire to gain,
And is at length completely lost,
Because he cannot urge his pain.
But though he be so much subdued,
And every scene of spirit leave
As if he mourned for all he viewed,
As if he only lived to grieve.
Yet let his FAIR-ONE's wrongs be told,
Sudden he rushes forth to save,
The Forest's King is not so bold!
O! IF HE LOVES HE MUST BE BRAVE.
And if, alas! her hand should bless
Some more attractive youth than HE;
HE never would adore the less,
But glory in his agony.
He Would see her to the altar led,
And still command his struggling sigh,
Nor would he let one tear be shed,
He Would triumph then; -- FOR THEN HE WOULD DIE. A FURIOUS modern SATIRIST, who cannot
in any manner moderate his rage at the success which Mr. MERRY's poetry has met
with, under the signature of DELLA CRUSCA, falls soul on him in DESPERATION,
and ACTUALLY charges him with the HEINOUS OFFENSE of POETICAL INCONSTANCY, for
having addressed LOVE-VERSES to a VARIETY of WOMEN. The justice of the
accusation cannot seriously be denied!! All we can say is, that we hope Mr.
MERRY's MUSE will behave with more fidelity in future!

DELLA CRUSCA.
June 30, 1791.
THE END.
CONTENTS.
THE Adieu and Recall to Love Page 1 To Della Crusca 3 To Anna Matilda 5 To
Della Crusca 8 To Anna Matilda 10 Elegy, written on the plain of Fontenoy 13
Stanzas to Della Crusca 17 To Anna Matilda 22 To Della Crusca 26 Ode to
Prudence 29 Ode to Death 32 Elegy on the Thirty-first of December 35 Invocation
to Horror 39 To Anna Matilda 43 To Reuben 44 Ode to Mrs. Siddons 49 Ode to
Simplicity 52 Ode to Miss Farren 55 The Slaves, an Elegy 58 Monody 63 Ode to
Indifference 67 Ode to Anna Matilda 71 Ode to Della Crusca 76 To Anna Matilda
79 To Della Crusca 82 To Anna Matilda 89 To Della Crusca 94 A Tale for Jealousy
99 Ambitious Vengeance. A Tragic Drama. 113 Stanzas on Friendship 163 Verses to
a young Lady at Bath 166 The Complaint 168 Ode. To ***** 172 Prayer to Venus
174 Complimentary Verses 176 Stanzas on Lady Craven's Children 177 The
Retrospect 179 Stanzas to Ill Nature 183 The Confession 187 Prologue to the
Comedy of the Provoked Husband 189 The Invitation 191 Stanzas on a young Lady's
Birth Day 195 Lines sent to a Friend with a Watch 197 Song, addressed to a
young Lady 199 Ballad, founded on Fact 201 To Laura 208 Elegy 211 Love renewed.
A Sonnet 215 Characteristic Song 217 The Repentance of Passion 219 Diversity, a
Poem 224 Sonnet. To the Muse 241 Sonnet. To Melissa's Lips 242 Sonnet. The
Valentine of Hopeless Love 243 Sonnet. Melissa's Retirement 244 Sonnet. To May
245 Sonnet. To Melissa 246 Sonnet. To Do. 247 Sonnet. The Invitation 248
Sonnet. Melissa 249 Sonnet. To the River Usk 250 Sonnet. To General Elliott 251
Parting address to Della Crusca 252 The African Boy 254 To Miss Farren 257 The
Voice we love 258 Henry deceived 261 To Emma 267 Monologue 270 A Fragment 273
On Miss Farren's Portrait 275 General Conway's Elegy on Miss C. Campbell 276
Epitaph on Do. 279 Marquis Townshend's verses on Miss Gardener 281 To Anna
Matilda 283 To Him who will understand it 287 To Laura 291 To Della Crusca 294
Laura to Anna Matilda 299 To Anna Matilda 303 To Della Crusca 308 The Interview
313 To Philander 319 To A -- e B -- n 323

